
     _Dear Senbot Drosmig:_

     _I represent the Dzoglian Publishing Company, Inc., of which I know
     you have heard, since your paper has seen fit to give our books
     some of the most unjust reviews on record. However, be that as it
     may, I have opened an office on Earth with the laudable purpose of
     effecting an interchange of respective literatures, to see which
     Terrestrial books might most profitably be translated into Fizbian,
     and which of the authors on our own list might have potential
     appeal for the Earth reader._

     _Dealing with authors is, of course, a nerve-racking business and I
     soon found myself in dire need of mental treatment. What was my
     horror to find that this primitive, although charming, planet had
     no neurotones, no psychoscopes, not even any cerebrophones--in
     fact, no psychiatric machines at all! The very knowledge of this
     brought me several degrees closer to a breakdown._

     _Perhaps I should have consulted you at this juncture, but I admit
     I was a bit of a snob. "What sort of advice can a mere journalist
     give me," I thought, "that I could not give myself?" So, more for
     amusement than anything else, I determined to consult a native
     practitioner. "After all," I said to myself, "a good laugh is a
     step forward on the road to recovery."_

     _Accordingly, I went to see this native fellow. They work entirely
     without machines, I understand, using something like witchcraft. At
     the same time, I thought I might pick up some material for a jolly
     little book on primitive customs which I could get some unknown
     writer to throw together inexpensively. Strong human interest items
     like that always have great reader-appeal._

     _The native chap--doctor, he calls himself--was most cordial,
     which he should have been at the price I was paying him. One thing
     I must say about these natives--backward they may be, but they have
     a very shrewd commercial sense. You can't even imagine the trouble
     I had getting those authors to sign even remotely reasonable
     contracts ... which in part accounts for my mental disturbance,
     I suppose._

     _Well, anyway, I handed the native a privacy waiver carefully
     filled out in Terran. He took it, smiled and said, "We'll discuss
     this afterward. My contact lenses have disappeared; I suppose one
     of my patients has stolen them again. Can't see a thing without
     them."_

     _So we sat down and had a bit of a chat. He seemed remarkably
     intelligent for a native; never interrupted me once._

     _"You are definitely in great trouble," he told me when I'd
     finished. "You need to be psycho-analyzed."_

     _"Good, good," I said. "I see I've come to the right shop."_

     _"Now just lie down and make yourself comfortable."_

     _"Lie down?" I repeated, puzzled. I have an excellent command of
     Terran, but every now and then an idiom will throw me. "I tell the
     truth, sir, and when I am required by force of circumstances to
     lie, I lie up."_

     _"No," he said, "not that kind of lying. You know, the kind you do
     at night when you go to sleep."_

     _"Oh, I get you," I said idiomatically. Without further ado, I
     flung off my ulster and flew up to a thingummy hanging from the
     ceiling--chandelier, I believe, is the native term--flipped upside
     down, and hung from it by my toes. Wasn't the Presidential Perch,
     by any means, but it wasn't bad at all. "What do I do next?" I
     inquired affably._

     _"My dear fellow," the chap said, whipping out a notebook from the
     recesses of his costume, "how long have you had this delusion that
     you are a bird--or is it a bat?"_

     _"Sir," I said as haughtily as my position permitted, "I am neither
     a bird nor a bat. I am a Fizbian. Surely you have heard of
     Fizbians?"_

     _"Yes, yes, of course. They come from another country or planet or
     something. Frankly, politics is a bit outside my sphere. All I'm
     interested in is people--and Fizbians are people, aren't they?"_

     _"Yes, certainly. If anything, it's you who.... Yes, they are
     people."_

     _"Well, tell me then, Mr. Liznig, when was it you first started
     thinking you were a bat or a bird?"_

     _I tried to control myself. "I am neither a bird nor a bat! I am a
     Fizbian! I have wings! See?" I fluttered them._

     _He peered at me. "I wish I could," he said regretfully. "Without
     my glasses, though, I'm as blind as a bat--or a bird."_

     _Well, the long and the short of it is that the natives are
     planning to certify me as insane and incarcerate me, pending the
     doctor's decision as to whether my delusion is that I am a bird or
     a bat. They are using my privacy waiver as commitment papers._

     _Save me, Senbot Drosmig, for I feel that if I have to wait for the
     doctor's glasses to be delivered, I shall indeed go mad._

     _Distractedly yours,_

     _Tgos Liznig_

"I'll handle this myself," Stet said crisply. "I'll tell the consul to
advise the Terran State Department that this man should be deported as
an undesirable alien. That'll solve the problem neatly. We can't have
this contaminating the pure stream of Terrestrial literature with--"

"But aren't you going to explain to them that he's perfectly sane?" Tarb
gasped.

"No need to bother. He'll be grateful enough to get off the planet.
Besides, how do I know he is perfectly sane?"

"Stet Zarnon, you're perfectly horrid!"

"And you, Tarb Morfatch, are disgustingly drunk. Now you go right home
and sleep it off. I know I was too harsh with you--my fault for letting
you go out alone with Griblo in the first place when you've been here
only a few months. Might have known those Terran journalists would lead
you astray. Nice fellows, but irresponsible." He flicked out his tongue.
"There, I've apologized. Now will you go home?"

"Home!" Tarb shrieked. "Home when there's work to be done and--"

"--and you're not going to be the one to do it. Tarb," he said,
attempting to seize her foot, which she pulled away, "I was going to
tell you tomorrow, but you might as well know tonight. I've taken you
off the column for good. I have a better job for you."

She looked at him. "A better job? Are you being sarcastic? What as?"

"As my wife." He got up and came over to her. She stood still, almost
stunned. "That solves the whole problem tidily. An office is no place
for you, darling--you're really a simple home-girl at heart. Newspaper
work is too strenuous for you; it upsets you and makes you nervous and
irritable. I want you to stay home and take care of our house and hatch
our eggs--unostentatiously, of course."

"Why, you--" she spluttered.

He put his foot over her mouth. "Don't give me your answer now. You're
in no condition to think. Tell me tomorrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

It rained all night and continued on into the morning. Tarb's head
ached, but she had to make an appearance at the office. First she vizzed
an acquaintance she had made the day before; then she took her umbrella
and set forth.

As she kicked open the door to the newsroom, all sound ceased. Voices
stopped abruptly. Typewriters halted in mid-click. Even the roar of the
presses downstairs suddenly seemed to mute. Every head turned to look at
Tarb.

_Humph_, she thought, removing her plastic oversocks, _so suppose I was
a little oblique yesterday. They needn't stare at me. They never stare
at Drosmig. Just because I'm a woman, I suppose!_ The gate crashed
loudly behind her.

"Oh, Miss Morfatch," Miss Snow called. "Mr. Zarnon said he wanted to
see you as soon as you came in. It's urgent." And she giggled.

"Really?" Tarb said. "Well, he'll just have to wait until I've wrung out
my wings." Sooner or later, she would have to face Stet, but she wanted
to put it off as long as possible.

She opened the door to her office and halted in amazement. For, seated
on a stool behind the desk, haggard but vertical, was Senbot Drosmig,
busily reading letters and blue-penciling comments on them with his
feet.

"Good morning, my dear," he said, giving her a wan smile. "Surprised to
see me functioning again, eh?"

"Well--yes." She opened her dripping umbrella mechanically and stood it
in a corner. "How--"

"I realized last night that all that happened to you was my fault. You
were my responsibility and I failed you."

"Oh, don't be melodramatic, Senbot. I wasn't your responsibility and you
didn't fail me. Not that I'm not glad to see you up and doing again,
but--"

"But I did fail you!" the aged journalist insisted. "And, in the same
way, I failed my people. I shouldn't have given in. I should have fought
Zarnon as you, my dear, tried to do. But it isn't too late!" The fire of
the crusader lit up in his watery old eyes. "I can still fight him and
his sacred crows--his Earthlings! If I have to, I can go over his head
to Grupe. Grupe may not understand Stet's moral failings, but he
certainly will comprehend his commercial ones. Grupe owns stock in other
Fizbian enterprises besides the _Times_. Autofax, for example."

"Oh, Senbot!" Tarb wailed. "The whole thing's such an awful mess!"

"I don't think it'll be necessary to threaten that far," he comforted
her. "Stet is no fool. He knows which side of his breadnut is peeled."

"I'm sure you'll do a wonderful job," she exclaimed, impulsively giving
a ritual _entrechat_. "And I wish I could stay and help you, but...."

"I know, my dear."

"You do?" She was puzzled. "But how did the news get around so quickly?"

He shrugged. "The Terrestrial grapevine is almost as efficient as the
Fizbian. Didn't you notice any change in the--ah--atmosphere when you
came in?"

"Oh, was that the reason?" Tarb laughed merrily. "Somehow it never
occurred to me that they could have heard so soon."

"But the morning editions have been out for hours."

The door to the office was flung open. Stet stormed in, bristling with a
most unloverlike rage.

"Miss Morfatch--" he waved a crumpled copy of the _Terrestrial Tribune_
at her--"when I give an order, I expect to be obeyed! Didn't Miss Snow
tell you to report directly to my office the instant you came in?
Although that's a question I don't have to ask; I know Miss Snow, at
least, is someone I can trust."

