
      *      *      *      *      *

For several minutes the sea-beast continued its frantic attempt to reach
the two humans, and then its attacks became desultory. During one
respite Ken managed to get up his flashlight and send its beam out over
the floor--and what he discovered was the essence of irony. Directly
opposite, on the floor by the wall, lay a familiar long slim shape, its
stern tipped by rudder-planes and propeller, its metal flanks gleaming
in the white ray. The torpoon. And utterly useless--a heartbreaking
jest--unless they could reach it.

But a slight hope grew in the men at its discovery. They had come to the
right trap, after all. Probably the whale had dislodged the shell from
the wall with fluke-blows--possibly, too, the blows had sprung its seams
and opened the engine-compartment to water....

Ken occupied himself with the problem of how to get to it. It held their
only hope. But with all his racking his brains he could think of no way
but to make a rush for it. If he could get inside, the torp, lying flat
on the ground, would be reasonably safe from the killer until he could
get it running.

Through the face-shields, he met his companion's eyes. The same decision
had come to both.

There was a tiny space of muddy floor between them. Kent doused it with
light from the flash. In the mud, with a forefinger he slowly traced
these words one at a time, rubbing each one out to make room for the
next:

"I get torp. Kill whale with gun. Only way. I go. I senior. If fail, you
try."

He looked at the other inquiringly. Vigorously, Chanley Beddoes shook
his head.

He smoothed over the last word Ken had marked and in its place, in the
same fashion, began:

"No. Draw lots. Only fair."

Yes, it was fair, and Ken knew it. He wrote:

"How?"

The second torpooner scrabbled around with his fingers. Presently he
unearthed something, and apparently satisfied showed them to Ken. They
were two pebbles, of different sizes. Beddoes pointed to the larger. He
wrote:

"Large makes attempt."

Again Ken nodded. He marked:

"Other try keep killer's attention."

From time to time a long sleek body slid down to them and edged back and
forth, striving its best to dislodge them with its blunt shout. After
each failure it would return to a position just over the outer entrance.
At the proper moment Chanley Beddoes jumbled the pebbles in his cupped
hands and laid two fists down on the pad.

Unhesitatingly, Ken placed a finger on the left one.

Beddoes turned and opened it. It was the smaller pebble.

      *      *      *      *      *

Close as was his face-shield to Beddoes', Ken could not see what his
reaction was. Ken stretched forth his hand and clumsily touched his
companion's shoulder.

"Good hunting!" he said; but Chan never heard that....

The marked man peered out into the trap. The killer was circling slowly.
In the escape hole, the faces of three or four blubber-men were dimly
visible. They seemed to be watching with interest.

There came a good moment when the killer paused at the three bars of its
cell, its head turned in exactly the opposite direction from the two
torpooners. Beddoes seized the opportunity at once. Almost before Ken
knew it, he had rolled out of the niche.

Quickly he worked to his feet and started pushing for his goal. The
whale had not seen him. Arms and legs straining, he floundered slowly
ahead. He nearly made it.

But the killer, restlessly turning, saw him--and Kenneth Torrance winced
and cried out.

The black monster struck. With horrible, beautiful grace it curved down.
Its snout caught Chanley Beddoes square in the side and butted him up
and around, and both disappeared in a swirl of water into the inky
shadows of the trap's ceiling.

Ken closed his eyes. He knew what was happening. He could not move. But
it came to him, as he lay there sick with horror, that he would never
have a better chance than now, while the killer was occupied.

Recklessly he forced himself out of the niche. Up above there was
commotion, a whirlpool of churning water. The current helped him: he got
caught in it and was swept sprawling right over to the torpoon's side.

He clutched at the port, expecting each instant the tear of monster
fangs; but he made the interior and clicked shut the port. No matter the
water that had come into the main compartment with his entrance. He
pulled the starter over, and heard the familiar drone of electric
engines, safe inside their water-tight division. He felt no relief at
this. There was only the same sick horror.

He raised the torpoon a little. There was one thing to do. Perhaps it
was mad to try to destroy that killer whale in so narrow a space, but he
was going to attempt it. It would not be so bad to join Chan, if he
failed....

A terrific blow struck the stern of the torpoon and spun it around
dizzily. Ken made out the killer lifting its flukes for a second blow.
Quickly he sped the torp ahead, and turned as best he could. Flashing on
his powerful bow-beam, he found the killer to his left, slightly above.
Carefully he maneuvered into firing position: then coldly, with deadly
accuracy, he centered the sights of his nitro-shell gun on the vital
spot behind the eyes. He pressed the trigger: again, and yet again. The
projectiles hurtled out.

The monster started; its beady eyes settled on the torpoon; with a lunge
it darted forward, jaws gaping wide. And as it came another shell sped
true into the tooth-rimmed mouth.

It halted then, and doubled in the water. Shock after shock shook the
torpoon as the shells exploded in the whale. For a little while the
sea-beast flurried, and once or twice the torp shivered from chance
fluke-blows. But then at last came peace. The body rolled over, showing
its white belly, and drifted towards the trap's ceiling....

The brown-skinned heads had disappeared from the inner entrance. Kenneth
Torrance glanced in that direction for a last time, then looked sadly
around.

"So long, Chan," he murmured. "So long."

The torpoon squeezed through the bars of the outer entrance and sped
forth into the open sea.

      *      *      *      *      *

So it was that, perhaps an hour later, the light-beams of the whaling
submarine _Narwhal_, doggedly scouring the region where last her first
torpooner had been heard from, fell across a slim shape of steel that
was beating its way at full speed through the foggy murk of the Arctic
sea.

Right up to the _Narwhal_ she came, swerving at the last moment and
hovering outside the starboard torpoon catapult; while, aboard the
submarine, an officer whose voice quivered with excitement roused
Captain Henry Streight from his bunk, and the men off duty gathered
around the inner catapult entrance-port.

Quickly the outer port swung open. And the lone torpoon slid in--slid
home.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Seed of the Arctic Ice, by H. G. Winter

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEED OF THE ARCTIC ICE ***

***** This file should be named 32029.txt or 32029.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/2/32029/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
