"Anything else?"

"Internal injuries."

"You didn't get down when the bomb went off."

Hendricks said nothing. He watched Tasso pour the coffee from the cup
into a flat metal pan. She brought it over to him.

"Thanks." He struggled up enough to drink. It was hard to swallow. His
insides turned over and he pushed the pan away. "That's all I can
drink now."

Tasso drank the rest. Time passed. The clouds of ash moved across the
dark sky above them. Hendricks rested, his mind blank. After awhile he
became aware that Tasso was standing over him, gazing down at him.

"What is it?" he murmured.

"Do you feel any better?"

"Some."

"You know, Major, if I hadn't dragged you away they would have got
you. You would be dead. Like Rudi."

"I know."

"Do you want to know why I brought you out? I could have left you. I
could have left you there."

"Why did you bring me out?"

"Because we have to get away from here." Tasso stirred the fire with a
stick, peering calmly down into it. "No human being can live here.
When their reinforcements come we won't have a chance. I've pondered
about it while you were unconscious. We have perhaps three hours
before they come."

"And you expect me to get us away?"

"That's right. I expect you to get us out of here."

"Why me?"

"Because I don't know any way." Her eyes shone at him in the
half-light, bright and steady. "If you can't get us out of here
they'll kill us within three hours. I see nothing else ahead. Well,
Major? What are you going to do? I've been waiting all night. While
you were unconscious I sat here, waiting and listening. It's almost
dawn. The night is almost over."

       *       *       *       *       *

Hendricks considered. "It's curious," he said at last.

"Curious?"

"That you should think I can get us out of here. I wonder what you
think I can do."

"Can you get us to the Moon Base?"

"The Moon Base? How?"

"There must be some way."

Hendricks shook his head. "No. There's no way that I know of."

Tasso said nothing. For a moment her steady gaze wavered. She ducked
her head, turning abruptly away. She scrambled to her feet. "More
coffee?"

"No."

"Suit yourself." Tasso drank silently. He could not see her face. He
lay back against the ground, deep in thought, trying to concentrate.
It was hard to think. His head still hurt. And the numbing daze still
hung over him.

"There might be one way," he said suddenly.

"Oh?"

"How soon is dawn?"

"Two hours. The sun will be coming up shortly."

"There's supposed to be a ship near here. I've never seen it. But I
know it exists."

"What kind of a ship?" Her voice was sharp.

"A rocket cruiser."

"Will it take us off? To the Moon Base?"

"It's supposed to. In case of emergency." He rubbed his forehead.

"What's wrong?"

"My head. It's hard to think. I can hardly--hardly concentrate. The
bomb."

"Is the ship near here?" Tasso slid over beside him, settling down on
her haunches. "How far is it? Where is it?"

"I'm trying to think."

Her fingers dug into his arm. "Nearby?" Her voice was like iron.
"Where would it be? Would they store it underground? Hidden
underground?"

"Yes. In a storage locker."

"How do we find it? Is it marked? Is there a code marker to identify
it?"

Hendricks concentrated. "No. No markings. No code symbol."

"What, then?"

"A sign."

"What sort of sign?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Hendricks did not answer. In the flickering light his eyes were
glazed, two sightless orbs. Tasso's fingers dug into his arm.

"What sort of sign? What is it?"

"I--I can't think. Let me rest."

"All right." She let go and stood up. Hendricks lay back against the
ground, his eyes closed. Tasso walked away from him, her hands in her
pockets. She kicked a rock out of her way and stood staring up at the
sky. The night blackness was already beginning to fade into gray.
Morning was coming.

Tasso gripped her pistol and walked around the fire in a circle, back
and forth. On the ground Major Hendricks lay, his eyes closed,
unmoving. The grayness rose in the sky, higher and higher. The
landscape became visible, fields of ash stretching out in all
directions. Ash and ruins of buildings, a wall here and there, heaps
of concrete, the naked trunk of a tree.

The air was cold and sharp. Somewhere a long way off a bird made a few
bleak sounds.

Hendricks stirred. He opened his eyes. "Is it dawn? Already?"

"Yes."

Hendricks sat up a little. "You wanted to know something. You were
asking me."

"Do you remember now?"

"Yes."

"What is it?" She tensed. "What?" she repeated sharply.

"A well. A ruined well. It's in a storage locker under a well."

"A well." Tasso relaxed. "Then we'll find a well." She looked at her
watch. "We have about an hour, Major. Do you think we can find it in
an hour?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Give me a hand up," Hendricks said.

Tasso put her pistol away and helped him to his feet. "This is going
to be difficult."

"Yes it is." Hendricks set his lips tightly. "I don't think we're
going to go very far."

They began to walk. The early sun cast a little warmth down on them.
The land was flat and barren, stretching out gray and lifeless as far
as they could see. A few birds sailed silently, far above them,
circling slowly.

"See anything?" Hendricks said. "Any claws?"

"No. Not yet."

They passed through some ruins, upright concrete and bricks. A cement
foundation. Rats scuttled away. Tasso jumped back warily.

"This used to be a town," Hendricks said. "A village. Provincial
village. This was all grape country, once. Where we are now."

They came onto a ruined street, weeds and cracks criss-crossing it.
Over to the right a stone chimney stuck up.

"Be careful," he warned her.

A pit yawned, an open basement. Ragged ends of pipes jutted up,
twisted and bent. They passed part of a house, a bathtub turned on its
side. A broken chair. A few spoons and bits of china dishes. In the
center of the street the ground had sunk away. The depression was
filled with weeds and debris and bones.

"Over here," Hendricks murmured.

"This way?"

"To the right."

They passed the remains of a heavy duty tank. Hendricks' belt counter
clicked ominously. The tank had been radiation blasted. A few feet
from the tank a mummified body lay sprawled out, mouth open. Beyond
the road was a flat field. Stones and weeds, and bits of broken glass.

"There," Hendricks said.

       *       *       *       *       *

A stone well jutted up, sagging and broken. A few boards lay across
it. Most of the well had sunk into rubble. Hendricks walked unsteadily
toward it, Tasso beside him.

"Are you certain about this?" Tasso said. "This doesn't look like
anything."

"I'm sure." Hendricks sat down at the edge of the well, his teeth
locked. His breath came quickly. He wiped perspiration from his face.
"This was arranged so the senior command officer could get away. If
anything happened. If the bunker fell."

"That was you?"

"Yes."

"Where is the ship? Is it here?"

"We're standing on it." Hendricks ran his hands over the surface of
the well stones. "The eye-lock responds to me, not to anybody else.
It's my ship. Or it was supposed to be."

There was a sharp click. Presently they heard a low grating sound from
below them.

"Step back," Hendricks said. He and Tasso moved away from the well.

A section of the ground slid back. A metal frame pushed slowly up
through the ash, shoving bricks and weeds out of the way. The action
ceased, as the ship nosed into view.

"There it is," Hendricks said.

The ship was small. It rested quietly, suspended in its mesh frame,
like a blunt needle. A rain of ash sifted down into the dark cavity
from which the ship had been raised. Hendricks made his way over to
it. He mounted the mesh and unscrewed the hatch, pulling it back.
Inside the ship the control banks and the pressure seat were visible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tasso came and stood beside him, gazing into the ship. "I'm not
accustomed to rocket piloting," she said, after awhile.

Hendricks glanced at her. "I'll do the piloting."

"Will you? There's only one seat, Major. I can see it's built to carry
only a single person."

Hendricks' breathing changed. He studied the interior of the ship
intently. Tasso was right. There was only one seat. The ship was built
to carry only one person. "I see," he said slowly. "And the one person
is you."

She nodded.

"Of course."

"Why?"

"_You_ can't go. You might not live through the trip. You're injured.
You probably wouldn't get there."

"An interesting point. But you see, I know where the Moon Base is. And
you don't. You might fly around for months and not find it. It's well
hidden. Without knowing what to look for--"

"I'll have to take my chances. Maybe I won't find it. Not by myself.
But I think you'll give me all the information I need. Your life
depends on it."

"How?"

"If I find the Moon Base in time, perhaps I can get them to send a
ship back to pick you up. _If_ I find the Base in time. If not, then
you haven't a chance. I imagine there are supplies on the ship. They
