of line. I don't think anything more will be necessary." Kron's voice
was flat. "It goes against the grain to do this, but we are left no
choice." He turned and left the room without a farewell, which was a
measure of his agitation.

I sat there behind my desk wondering what the Niobians could do. Like my
ex-boss Alvord Sims, I had a healthy respect for them. It just could be
that they could do plenty.

They could.

       *       *       *       *       *

Organization! Man, you've never seen anything like what the Niobians
tossed at our startled heads! We always thought the Planetary Council
was a loose and ineffective sort of thing, but what happened within the
next twenty hours had to be seen to be believed. I saw it. But it was
days before I believed it.

Within a day the natives had whipped up an organization, agreed on a
plan of action and put it into effect. By noon of the next day Niobe was
a closed planet. A message was sent to the Confederation informing them
that Niobe was withdrawing until the emergency was over. An embargo was
placed on all movement of shipping.

And everything stopped.

No factories operated. The big starfreighters stood idle and empty at
the polar bases. Not one ounce of gerontin or its concentrate precursor
left Niobe. Smiling groups of Niobians, using subsonics to enforce their
demands, paralyzed everything the Confederation had operated on the
planet. No one was hurt. The natives were still polite and friendly. But
Confederation business came to an abrupt halt, and stayed halted.

It was utterly amazing! I had never heard of a planet-wide boycott
before. But Niobe was entirely within her rights. The Confederation had
to accept it.

And, of course, the Confederation capitulated. If the Niobians were
fools enough to want pests as a condition of resuming viscaya
shipments--well, it was their affair. The Confederation needed viscaya.
It was willing to do almost anything to assure its continued supply.

With the full power of the Confederation turned to giving Niobe what she
wanted, it wasn't long before the oysters were under control. We
established a systematic seeding procedure for the starfish that kept
arriving by the freighter load. In a few months Bergdorf reported that
an ecological balance had been achieved.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But didn't the starfish create another pest problem?" Perkins asked.

"Not at all," Lanceford said. "I told you that the Niobians had an odd
sense of taste. Starfish proved to be quite acceptable to the Niobian
palate. They merely added another item to Niobe's food supply."

Perkins shuddered delicately. "I wouldn't eat one of those things in a
million years."

"You're going to have to eat vorkum if you expect to survive on this
world. Compared to vorkum, a starfish is sheer pleasure! But that wasn't
the end of it," Lanceford added with a smile. "You see, shortly after
things had simmered down to normal Kron dropped into my office.

"'I think, friend Lanceford,' he said, 'that we are going to have to
create a permanent organization to keep unwanted visitors out. This
little affair has been a needed lesson. I have been reading about your
planetary organization, and I think a thing like your Customs Service is
vitally needed on our world to prevent future undesirable biological
importations.'

"'I agree,' I replied. 'Anything that would prevent a repetition of this
business would be advisable.'

"So that was how the Customs Service started. The insigne you will
recognize as a starfish opening an oyster. Unfortunately the Niobians
are quite literal minded. When they say any biological importation will
be quarantined and examined, they mean Confederation citizens too!

"And that, of course, was the entering wedge. You'll find things quite
homelike once you get out of here. The natives have developed an
organization that's a virtual copy of our Administrative Branch.
Customs, as you know, is a triumph of the bureaucratic system, and
naturally the idea spread. Once the natives got used to a permanent
government organization that was available at all times, it was only a
question of time before the haphazard tribal organization became
replaced by a planetary union. You could almost say that it was an
inevitable consequence."

Lanceford grinned. "The Niobians didn't realize that the importation of
foreign Customs was almost as bad as the importation of foreign
animals!" He chuckled at the unconscious pun.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO CHOKE AN OCEAN***


******* This file should be named 32124.txt or 32124.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/1/2/32124



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
