This image--it had been that of a great bird--had suddenly vanished.

"The Jezbro was destroyed!" she whispered. "The core of it was struck.
When that happens, the complete projection is torn to pieces!" Her face
was white with strain.

Parker took his eyes off the screen where he had been watching something
that he did not pretend to understand.

"Sometimes they are very difficult to control," Effra continued, her
voice a whisper. "Once set in motion, they seem almost to achieve life
of their own. I did not send the Jezbro against the men on the ground, I
sent it against the man on the ledge, against this Retch. But--" her
voice faltered.

"I saw it get away," Parker said. There was turmoil in his mind,
confusion. He was in a place where miracles came to life. The secret of
the ability to walk on the water lay here in this room. Effra, in swift
sentences had explained to him that the men who walked on the water
carried little pieces of metal in their pockets; pieces of metal which
increased tremendously the surface tension of the water where they
stepped on it. She had also told him that Ulnar, working this equipment,
had _vondeled_ his helicopter, had sent out a tiny Jezbro that had
struck at the ship, wrecking it. The Jezbro, the secret of the men
walking on the water, had come from this room. The striking of the
Jezbro was to Ulnar the act of _vondel_. Even the veil that surrounded
the island was generated here; in the power being generated in the
slowly circling pool of mercury; power that was changed and modified by
the other equipment.

Here was the heart and the secret of the magic of this island; here even
time was set aside.

Ulnar poked at Effra, grunted harshly. "I know," the girl said quickly.
"In just a minute."

Ulnar grunted again. He hovered over her like some massive brooding
spirit. He was eager to get his hands on the control board but his old
fingers were no longer sufficiently flexible to play on that key board
the tune that had to be played.

"_Pater noster_--Our Father--" In the silence came Rozeno's voice as he
knelt in prayer. Bewildered and hurt and horrified, Rozeno and Ulnar had
come back into the room to find Parker and Effra and Mercedes already
there. Mercedes knelt beside him.

Pedro thrust his head through the opening behind them. "Him two more
men, him man that kill Jezbro, him still coming up ledge."

"That's Johnny Retch," Parker said. "He's still coming. And there are
probably others already inside here, looking for us in the rooms and
corridors. We've got to move, Effra."

"I know, Bill." Her fingers started toward the control board, drew back.
"I called you Bill. Is that your name?"

"Yes."

"It's a nice name."

"But now we must hurry," Parker said. As he spoke, Ulnar grunted a
single sound that set the girl into motion.

Her fingers went to one of the little statuettes, an eagle, a perfect
thing in its way, a marvelous representation of the bird of prey. Effra
had told Parker, in hasty sentences, how these images were made, deep
down in the mountain, of a particular kind of metal that was almost
weightless. He watched her slip the eagle into a slot, held his breath
as her fingers darted across the key board.

A soft hum sounded--currents moving--a glow sprang into existence
surrounding the little image. Slowly, the statuette began to glow with a
silver light. The glow played over it, it shifted, changed, was one
thing this instant, was something else the next instant. It looked like
a moth emerging from a cocoon and becoming a butterfly. The tiny wings
came free, the head moved.

The cheeping of a sleepy bird was in the room.

At the sound, a wave of cold from the deepest depths of space seemed to
sweep over Parker. Here was magic beyond the comprehension of the mind.
Only it wasn't magic, it was a scientific achievement of the highest
caliber.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the cheeping sound, Effra's fingers moved swiftly on the control
board, playing a symphony that only she understood. The little eagle
moved out of the slot, it spread its wings, they fluttered, it moved
upward into the air of the room.

With each circling of the room, it grew larger. The cheeping sound
became louder, there was a touch of harp music in it now. Effra's
fingers moved like lightning over the control panel. The growing eagle
seemed to pick up its controls, it swirled, circled, went through the
open slot, went out of the room, and into the air outside. It was now
the Jezbro.

Its image appeared on the screen. It shot high into the air, still
growing. The scene on the screen revealed in miniature the whole island,
the sea lapping its shores, the boat lying at anchor. Effra's fingers
moved frantically over the controls. "This is one of the hardest things
to do. They seem to be attracted to the sun, when first released. They
struggle desperately to escape into space--There! I've got it under
control."

The scene changed, became a group of men climbing the ledge. Parker saw
these men suddenly jerk their heads toward the sky as they became aware
of the Jezbro. He could imagine the fear that was shooting through them.
They had seen Johnny Retch destroy the Jezbro, only here the Jezbro was
again.

From their viewpoint, it had miraculously come back to life and was
diving again upon them from the sky. Guns were fired upward. But these
men did not have the cool, hard nerves of Johnny Retch, did not have his
shooting eye. They missed. The Jezbro dived among them.

They scattered, screaming. Two went off the ledge, three raced down it.
One mounted to the sky to the triumphant harping of the Jezbro.

Parker felt a wave of relief flow through him. Here in the Jezbro was
actually a most potent weapon, the means of stopping an attack. "Girl!
You've done it!"

A second later he caught himself. "But Johnny Retch wasn't in that
bunch. He must already be inside the cliff."

A gun roared three times inside the mountain. Footsteps faltered in the
corridor outside. Pedro stumbled into the room. His face was a bloody
mask.

"Him men inside." As he coughed out the words, he coughed out blood--and
his life. He stumbled, caught himself, stumbled again, went down the way
a dead man goes down, never to rise again.

"_Qui est in Coelis_--who are in Heaven--" Rozeno's voice whispered
through the room. The only sound.

Ulnar moved slowly, stood beside Pedro. They had been master and servant
but in the old days they had come up out of Mexico together, guarding a
treasure. Ulnar moved to the wall, took down a heavy battle axe that
hung there. "Time come for me," he said. "Me go meet men as my chief
went to meet Cortez!" His eyes glinted.

"Wait!" Rozeno called. The priest was on his feet. "I have resolved the
conflict in my soul. There comes a time when men, even good men, must
fight against the forces of evil." From the wall he took a spear.

"I'll go with you two," Parker said. "In just a moment." From his
jacket, he took one of the two pistols. Silently he passed it to Effra.
"As a last resort, use it."

"But, Bill, there is still time--"

Parker didn't hear her. He was moving with Rozeno and Ulnar through
another opening. "At least," Rozeno was saying. "We have this advantage.
We know our way around here."

They moved silently, by side passages, through the rooms. "Find Retch,"
Parker whispered over and over again. "He's the heart and the core of
this business. With him out of the way, we can handle the others."

"Do you see anybody, Pfluger?" Retch's voice came from somewhere.

"Naw. I think I got the old gink but he ducked out of sight somewhere."

"Retch is on the other side of the corridor," Rozeno whispered. "The man
who spoke last is in the next room."

They slipped to the opening, peering into the next room. A man in there
was crouching against the wall and watching the opening into the
corridor. At the sight of the man, Ulnar went berserk. This was the man
who had killed Pedro.

A shrill battle cry pealing from his lips, massive axe uplifted, Ulnar
charged through the door.

The crouching man whirled. Smoke and thunder rolled from the gun in his
hand. Ulnar had taken death wounds before he was halfway across the
room. But death wounds or not, he kept going.

The heavy axe came down on the head of the man who was desperately
trying to fend it off. The man went down. For an instant, Ulnar's
battle cry of triumph, wild and savage and fierce, roared through the
honeycomb of passages, then went into silence with Ulnar, forever.

"Hey, Pfluger, what the hell happened?" Retch's startled voice came.

"We've got to cross the corridor to get at him," Parker whispered. "And
there are other men in here somewhere."

"Listen!" Rozeno whispered.

Voices, a babble of sound, were coming from behind them.

"The men from the village," Rozeno whispered. "When they ceased fearing
the Jezbro, they found the courage to come up here."

       *       *       *       *       *

The babble grew stronger. Running feet moved along the corridor. Retch
shouted somewhere, but the words were lost.

Rising above the other sounds was the cry of a woman--Effra.

Parker cursed beneath his breath as he ran. At the side entrance to the
big room where the pool of mercury turned, he stopped, appalled.

The room seemed full of men. Some of them he recognized as coming from
the village, others he had never seen before. From their appearance he
judged they had come in the boat. Retch was coming through the door that
led into the main corridor. The gun in his hands was centered on Effra,
who crouched at the key board of the vast machine. There was a smile on
Retch's face.

"Parker!" Retch's voice lifted in a yell. "Parker! I've got your girl.
Come on out and give yourself up or I'll let her have it."

This was his moment of triumph, this was the moment when he won his
victory. Parker, peering around the edge of the doorway, knew now that
he had no way to go. If he moved into the room, and tried to shoot
Retch, the man would certainly kill Effra in one wild burst of slugs as
he turned the gun on the pilot.

"Parker!" Retch yelled again. A smile on his face, he waited for an
answer.

Effra's fingers moved on the control panel. Mercedes got slowly to her
feet. The men in the room were silent, waiting for an answer to Retch's
command. Parker stood just outside the door, hesitant. No matter what he
did, it seemed to him that there was only one answer.

Behind Retch, coming from the corridor, something moved. At the sight of
it, Parker felt a flood of biting cold surge through him.

It was a puma--a gigantic puma. In its jaws, as it swung its head from
side to side, dangled the body of a man it had killed in the corridor.

It was a Jezbro puma.

Once it had been a little image in a niche beside the machine from the
old time. Then life had flowed into it, its own kind of life, now it
walked as a huge ravening beast through the room where once it had been
a tiny image.

The first man who saw it went dead white and slumped downward in a
faint. The others saw it in almost the same instant. Pandemonium swept
through the room. No man's nerves were proof against such a sight as
this. Screaming men were suddenly trying to fight their way out of a
place that had suddenly become haunted.

The puma flowed into the room. Like Retch, it had yellow eyes. They
glared now, with a burning light. There was a vague mistiness about this
