got to blow up their hangar, destroy their planes, first of all. Then--"

A plan was maturing in his mind. He slipped out of the temple, watched
his chances and darted across the open space when no sentry was near,
rejoined Guru.

The dawn man was frantic with excitement. "See monster?" he questioned.

"There is no monster," Craig said grimly. "Guru, where cave where Ogrum
keep riding birds?"

To Guru, the planes were merely large birds that the Ogrum rode. Craig
was asking the dawn man where the hangar was located. Guru led him
around the temple, pointed to a projecting wing. "Birds kept there," he
said.

The hangar was open. In line with their ignorance of doors, the Ogrum
had never devised a method of closing the entrance of the building where
they kept--and no doubt built--their planes. An open space leading down
to the edge of the bay apparently was the runway where the planes
landed. Inside the hangar Craig could glimpse the strange airships of
the Ogrum. Except for the regular sentries that circled the whole
immense temple, the hangar was unguarded.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Twenty men with grenades will hit the hangar first!" Craig thought.
"They'll smash the planes and then they will appear to retreat. The
Ogrum will follow. Meanwhile across the city, another twenty men will
suddenly appear and start firing the thatch huts. The Ogrum will be
confused. Before they can organize themselves, I'll take a hundred men
and hit the temple. By God, it will work!

"Then," Craig thought, "we'll die one at a time as we try to make our
getaway. The Ogrum, even without planes, will hunt us through the jungle
forever." He paused, seeking a solution to that difficulty. To free the
prisoners only to have everybody perish from the relentless attack of
the Ogrum would be no gain.

"The only way to keep the Ogrum from pursuing us is to destroy
them--utterly!" Craig thought grimly. He had no qualms about destroying
the Ogrum, if he could. The only problem was how! He had not enough men
and not enough strength to meet them in open battle. Yet they had to be
destroyed.

"Return to others," he told Guru.

The dawn man returned by a different route, passing through the other
edge of the city of the Ogrum. Here they found a heavy stone wall, like
the retaining dike of a river.

"Why wall, Guru?" Craig questioned.

"Keep earth-shakers out of Ogrum squatting place," the dawn man
answered. "Earth-shakers" was Guru's name for the dinosaurs and
"squatting place" was his word for city. Beyond the wall was the vast
swamp. The Ogrum had erected the wall to keep the dinosaurs out of their
city.

"Well, I'm damned," said Craig thoughtfully. "I wonder. Hurry, Guru.
Must get back before sun rise."

At a swift trot, the dawn man led him up the mountain.

       *       *       *       *       *

"This is what we're going to do," Craig said excitedly to Michaelson.
The sailors, listening closely, squatted around him in the darkness.
Dawn was not far off. Already the sky in the east was beginning to turn
gray.

Swiftly he outlined his plan of attack, submitted it to the scientist.
"I am no military strategist," Michaelson said slowly. "I am not
competent to criticize your suggestions."

"I am," a voice spoke. "I've studied military strategy. Your plan hasn't
got a chance in a thousand to succeed. You are just getting us all
killed for nothing."

It was Voronoff who spoke.

"That may be true," Craig admitted. "If you have a better plan, I'm
willing to listen."

"I've told you all along the only thing to do is to clear out of here as
fast as we can."

"That is the one thing we're not going to do," Craig said icily. "If you
have nothing constructive to offer, keep your damned mouth shut."

Voronoff sullenly walked away.

Craig selected a group to charge the hangar where the planes were kept,
a second group to provide a diversionary attack across the city, and a
third group to hit the temple and release the prisoners. The attack was
to start just after darkness fell the next night. At that time, so Guru
said, all the Ogrum would be gathered in the temple to watch the
sacrifice.

"And after that," Michaelson said slowly. "What is to happen?"

"Ah," said Craig. "There is the heart of the affair. What happens next
will determine whether any of us ever get out of here alive. And," he
looked steadily at the scientist, "that is where you come in."

"I? What am I to do?"

"You and Guru are going to take a dozen men and round up as many of
Guru's people as you can find. Here is what you and Guru are going to
do."

In great detail Craig outlined the part the scientist and the dawn man
were to play in the attack on the Ogrum. They made an odd pair.
Michaelson, almost a physical weakling but possessed of one of the
keenest minds of the Twentieth Century; Guru, a splendidly muscled giant
but almost a child mentally.

"Do--do you think our part in the attack will really work?" the
scientist hesitantly asked.

"It's got to work," Craig said bluntly. "If it doesn't work, we are all
dead men."




CHAPTER VII

The Attack


At dusk a drum began to boom in the temple of the Ogrum. The sun was
just on the edge of the horizon. It hung in the sky as if it hesitated
to take the plunge below the rim of the world. Crouched hidden on the
mountainside as near the city as he dared take his men, Craig could see
the Ogrum, at the signal of the drum, start hurrying toward the temple
as if they were eagerly anticipating the hellish sacrifice soon to take
place.

To one side, beyond the notch in the mountains, was the swamp where the
dinosaurs fed. Already the sound of the great beasts fighting and
screaming could be heard.

All day long the Americans had remained in hiding near the city.
Fortunately none of the Ogrum had ventured to climb the mountain. Craig
had spent the day mercilessly rehearsing his men in the part they were
to play until they were perfect in their parts, or as perfect as they
could become in the short time available. The whole plan of attack
depended on split-second timing. If everything worked right, if
everybody did his job at the proper time, there was a chance that the
attack would be successful. If anything went wrong--Craig preferred not
to think about that. Around him, he could feel a tenseness creep over
his men as the zero hour approached.

The Ogrum, as if driven by the quickening beat of the drum, disappeared
within the temple.

The sun, making up its mind at last, plunged below the line of the sky.

Zero hour!

Craig could not see them but he knew that men had leaped from hiding and
were running toward the projecting wing of the temple that formed the
plane hangar. His fingers gripped the stock of the tommy-gun so tightly
the knuckles showed white. They had to get that hangar, first. The
planes had to be destroyed. Several times during the day he had seen
planes take off. All had returned by night.

The vultures were in their nest.

Boom, boom-boom, BOOM, boom.

Craig almost sobbed at the sound. Grenades exploding! Grenades flung
into the hangar by the attacking group. Grenades blasting among the
mystery planes of the Ogrum!

Boom, boom, boom-boom-boom! Grenades exploding like a chain of giant
firecrackers. In the hot darkness Craig caught glimpses of flashes of
light as the grenades detonated.

Boom, boom, boom, boom-boom!

The flat sullen thuds echoed up the side of the mountain. From the
darkness where the sailors crouched a low cheer arose. The men there in
the night knew the meaning of those explosions.

Craig held his breath, waiting. The attack was on. Now, no matter what
happened, it was too late to withdraw. Now it was kill or be killed,
fight or be struck down, destroy or be destroyed. With the knowledge of
the savage sacrifice about to take place within the temple, there was no
question of the urge of the men to destroy. The Ogrum were beyond the
meaning of mercy. Blast them, mow them down, kill them, destroy them
utterly!

Craig waited. Tommy-guns chattered in the darkness. Grenades thundered.
Then he saw what he had been waiting for. A tongue of flame licked out
of the hangar.

Fire in the nest of the vultures!

The flames grew in violence.

"Withdraw!" Craig said huskily. "Get back. Draw them away with you."

He was talking to himself. The men attacking the hangar could not hear
him. Their retreat was the next phase of the attack. Retreat and draw
the Ogrum after them.

       *       *       *       *       *

They began to retreat. Flames were roaring from the hangar. It was
constructed of stone and the walls would not burn. Leaping tongues of
fire poured out of the open door.

For a few minutes after the attack began, the drum-beat continued from
the temple. The instant the first explosion had sounded, the drum-beat
had faltered. Then it had caught itself and continued. But the continued
explosions were unsteadying the hand of the drummer.

The drum stopped beating. The Ogrum poured from the temple. The moon had
not yet risen. The burning hangar provided the only illumination. By its
light, Craig could see streams of startled beast-men rushing from every
entrance.

For a few minutes, they milled in confusion. Something had happened that
was not on their schedule. They did not in the least understand the
explosions they had heard and they could not grasp what had happened to
their hangar.

Eventually they seemed to understand that they had been attacked and
that the enemy was retreating. Stabbing flashes of fire from the
sub-machine guns showed where the enemy was retreating.

Angry Ogrum charged the enemy.

Simultaneously, across the city, puffs of light began to appear. Spots
of dancing illumination leaped from thatched hut to thatched hut,
leaving behind them bright knots of light.

The knots of light grew. They spread. The spots of dancing illumination
ran on ahead of them, leaving new knots of light.

On the far side of the city the sky grew bright.

Masses of Ogrum, bewildered by this new spectacle, paused in confusion.
Their city was on fire. They did not understand it. They began to hurry
toward the fire.

"Phases one and two of the attack are now complete," Craig said to his
waiting men. "The third phase begins. Come on. It's our turn now."

The attack on the hangar, the subsequent retreat, and the firing of the
city had been carried out perfectly. On the far side of the city the
torch squad was still firing the thatched huts. This squad was beginning
to withdraw also, pulling the Ogrum after them.

"The attack is a success!" Craig thought exultantly. "We've burned their
planes and set their city on fire. Before they know what has happened,
we will have rescued the prisoners. We've won!" The thought was burning
in his mind. "We've won! Stinky and Margy and the lads from the Idaho
will be free again!"

With him at their head, the sailors formed a wedge that drove straight
at that part of the temple where the prisoners were held. To effect a
rescue, they would have to enter the heart of the big building.

The old Roman phalanx, that fearsome mass of men that struck such terror
to the hearts of the barbarians, must have looked something like the
wedge of men that drove through the Ogrum city. The Romans were armed
with spears, swords and shields whereas the sailors carried tommy-guns
and grenades, but the effect was the same--a hard-driving body of men
that stops at nothing.

The Ogrum were not expecting this charge. They were busy trying to put
out the fires raging in their city. Meeting no organized opposition of
any kind, and smashing down the Ogrum who accidentally got in their way,
the sailors drove straight to the temple--and into it! Like a perfectly
trained team executing a long-practiced maneuver, a strong rear guard
slipped into place at the entrance. Craig, driving into the temple, was
not going to leave his rear unprotected, to leave his line of retreat
open to the chance of being cut.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the vast arena there was a handful of yellow-clad guards surrounding
the pool of boiling lava. All the other Ogrum had left the temple.

"Blast them!" Craig grimly ordered.

Machine guns thundered in what was probably the first temple of the sun
ever built on earth! Hot lead screamed down at the guards around the
lava pool. When the sailors saw the human, bound, ready to be offered as
a living sacrifice to the hideous white beast that was always hungry,
the priests of the temple lost what little chance they ever had of being
taken alive.

The sacrifice had been prepared. The sailors had arrived at the last
possible moment.

Two minutes after the sailors had entered the temple, there was not a
yellow-clad priest left alive in the vast open arena in the center of
the building. Craig was knocking bars from the cage where the prisoners
were penned. Captain Stinky Higgins was standing behind those bars.
Margy Sharp was standing beside the captain. Higgins had a strange look
on his face.

"By the Lord, Craig--" was all he said when the bars went down. Craig
felt his knuckles pop as the captain shook his hand.

The girl's face was paste white but she had her nerves under control.
"Dr. Livingstone, I presume?" she said, looking at Craig. Then, as
silently as a falling shadow, she collapsed.

"No, no, she's all right," Higgins said, in answer to Craig's frantic
questions. "She has only fainted. She--all of us--have been through
hell. Those damned beasts came in here and grabbed one of the men. We
watched them--get ready to toss him into that pool of lava. Craig, how
did you get here?"

Captain Higgins was dazed. Behind him the captives were pouring out of
their prison cell.

"No time to talk," Craig said hastily. "We've got to get the hell out of
here. Each of us brought an extra gun and as many grenades as we could
carry. We'll have to fight our way back to the mountains--"

Already the sailors were tossing guns to their comrades who had been
held prisoner. The look on the men's faces as they eagerly grabbed the
weapons boded no good for any Ogrum who tried to stop them from
escaping. Meanwhile Craig and Higgins revived Margy Sharp. The man who
had been prepared for the Ogrum sacrifice was released.

"Everybody out!" Craig yelled.

In a long line the sailors trotted toward the passage through the temple
that led to the exit. Once outside, they would reform their phalanx and
fight their way through any opposition that might develop. No sound had
come from the rear-guard they had left at the exit, proving that the
Ogrum had not yet discovered that their prisoners had been released.

"We've won!" Craig said huskily. "We've tricked those devils and beaten
them to the punch."

"You've worked a miracle," Captain Higgins said. "If we were back home,
you would get a Congressional Medal for this."

"Thanks!" the big man grinned. Then the grin vanished from his face.
"What's that?" he said sharply.

From the passage ahead of them came the metallic rattle of machine gun
fire.

"It's the rear guard at the exit!" a sailor said. "They're shooting at
something."

       *       *       *       *       *

Craig ordered the file to halt and he and Higgins slipped forward to the
exit. Through the hole that served as a doorway came a dull glow of
light. The guard had taken refuge in the passage itself. An ensign came
stumbling down the passage.

"It's a trap!" he shouted. "The whole place is surrounded. There are
thousands of Ogrum out there. They deliberately let us enter the temple,
then they closed up behind us."

"Impossible!" Craig whispered.

"So help me, it's the truth," the ensign insisted. "They deliberately
trapped us. They must have known all along what we were going to try.
They let us try it. We're caught, like rats in a trap."

There was no mistaking the implication of the man's words. Although he
didn't say it, his tone indicated that Craig had led them into the worst
possible booby-trap.

The machine guns were still firing. Dimly audible from outside came a
chorus of shouting--the battle cries of the Ogrum. Craig slipped forward
to the entrance, looked out. His heart climbed up into his throat.

The temple was completely surrounded. Or, as far as he could see, it was
surrounded. From the number of Ogrum he could see in front, he did not
doubt that the whole structure was circled. The Ogrum had stopped
fighting the fires. It became apparent that they had never made any real
effort to fight them but had only pretended to extinguish the blazes,
meanwhile waiting for Craig to lead his group into the temple.

It _was_ a trap.

But how had the Ogrum been able to set such a trap? Had they known all
the time of the presence of the humans on the mountain above them? They
had known something. Otherwise they would not have been able to set the
trap. How had they learned of the attack? How had they known the exact
way the attack would come?

"Yah!" a voice shrilled from outside. "How do you like it now, you big
fat-head?"

Voronoff's voice! Voronoff was out there! Craig's first dazed thought
was that Voronoff's presence outside, among the Ogrum, was impossible.
