himself. We should set up a scientific foundation for you, where you'll
have the equipment you need and where your experiments won't do the rest
of us any harm. But, if I'm to convince anybody, I'm going to have to do
some tall talking. If you had one of the capsules left--"

"No, Mr. Elvin; they're all gone." David was not looking at him, and
Elvin knew he was lying; but this was not the occasion to make an issue
of it. Above everything else, he had to see to it that they had complete
faith in his motives.

"Then one of your machines," he suggested. "I have to make them
understand I'm not a crank."

"That sounds sensible. Which one, Mr. Elvin? The Degravitational Unit is
the smallest, and it would do the least harm if--" David looked away
again. "--if it got out of your hands."

"It isn't sensational enough. I rather wanted to show them this thing
you used to transpose the bank and a square of jungle."

"Oh, no!" Marilyn broke in. "We couldn't--"

"Why that, Mr. Elvin?"

"I've already told you. It's the sort of thing that would attract the
attention of the important officials immediately, because it could be
converted so readily to a weapon of inestimable value."

There was a long silence, while the thirty youngsters looked from one to
the other. It lengthened. Elvin felt a creeping edge of fear. David
spoke at last,

"I think you're right, Mr. Elvin. We could show the world how to build a
society adjusted to the needs of man; we could develop techniques for
wiping out disease and mental disorders; we could show you how to
conserve our resources, how to build material things for the mutual
happiness of all people; how to create instead of destroying. But of
course you're right. The only thing that would really interest any of us
would be a new weapon, wouldn't it? All right; we'll give it to you."

Marilyn sprang up. "But, David--"

"I know what I'm doing!" he snapped at her in a tense whisper. Turning
back to Elvin he added smoothly, "But we'll want something from you
first, Mr. Elvin."

"Anything, my boy; anything to promote the welfare of mankind. But no
more of your tricks, mind."

"This is far from a trick, Mr. Elvin."

"So long as that's understood--"

"We're working on a machine--a new one. We have everything we need
except tungsten. They use that in building television sets, among other
things. I want you to drive down to one of the plants in Los Angeles and
get us a pound of tungsten. They won't sell it to you; you'll have to
steal it."

"Now, David! Only a thick-skulled schoolboy would take such an unsocial
attitude! I'm a teacher, a responsible citizen, proud--"

"Do you want the machine for transposing matter?"

"Yes; for the good of the nation. But--"

"Then you'll have to take this risk. We'll give you a Degravitational
Unit. That'll help you get away. When you bring us the tungsten, we'll
deliver the transportation machine."

Elvin made the drive to Los Angeles in record time. The highway was
jammed with traffic, but all of it was moving in the opposite direction,
toward San Benedicto. He refused to think of the consequences if he were
caught. The glittering dream was still blazing on the horizon of his
mind. If they refused him the learning capsule, it was unfortunate, but
there was nothing he could do about it. The important machine was the
one that transposed matter through time. With that one device alone,
Elvin could sway the world. Placed in the scales against such a reward,
the moral issue of theft counted not at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

Los Angeles whirled chaotically in the monetary crisis. The streets were
jammed with people, buying everything they could before prices jumped
again. In the confusion, Elvin had no difficulty breaking into a
television plant. He didn't trip a burglar alarm until he was leaving
the factory, but the Degravitational Unit made his escape easy. Within
four hours he was back in San Benedicto. He hurried to the workshop. But
when he pounded on the door, there was no response. He tried the latch
and the door swung open.

The room was empty, but on the table was a large envelope addressed to
him. A thin thread of wire was fastened to it; as he picked it up, the
wire broke and somewhere in the distance a motor began to hum.

"Dear Mr. Elvin," he read. "It was unkind of us to play another trick on
you, but we're sure you'll be clever enough to steal the tungsten
without getting caught. When you came to talk to us, we realized that
the conclusion we had reached was right. Children--adolescent
minds--have wrecked our world. You know all about that, Mr. Elvin;
teachers always do. And you've told us so often in class about the
unstable emotions of adolescents, their tantrums, their
unpredictability, their unsocial behavior, their egocentricity and all
the rest. We'd like to help, but there isn't much we can do, not really;
you just want the machines we know how to make, not the ideas we've
learned. We grew up, you see, on the day we turned the desert to gold.
We found out what happens when you give children dangerous toys to play
with.

"We made our mistake, and we know how to straighten it out. We've only
waited for you to read this so that you would understand, at least for a
moment. We have isolated ourselves in suspended time; we're right here
in the workshop with you, but you can't see us, naturally, because we
started standing still in time more than an hour ago. When you opened
your envelope, you tripped the motor of a matter transposition machine
which will throw all time backward to last Friday night. None of this
will have happened then. That should straighten everything out, don't
you think?

"You'll find the rocket again, and you'll open it, just as you did
before. But this time there'll be only a jar of bubble gum inside,
because we've already consumed the learning capsules. There won't be any
memory left for anyone--except ours. We've learned how to work with a
planet of adolescents. We think we can help you mature in spite of
yourselves; but this time no one will ever know how it is being done."

Elvin looked up, but before the anger and frustration could crystalize
in his mind, the yellow lamp dimmed, the walls of the workshop faded and
vanished. He fought for a moment against the blackness rising in his
mind. The light paled and paled and finally it was nothing more than a
red streak in the sky.

It moved closer and he saw that it was a falling object followed by a
long plume of red flame. It flashed momentarily overhead and Elvin heard
a dull thud as it fell in a field beyond the ranch house. He sprang up
from the couch and moved off in the darkness. It had been a meteorite,
of course; if it had survived the friction of the atmosphere, it would
make an interesting exhibit for the science classroom....





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Adolescents Only, by Irving E. Cox

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADOLESCENTS ONLY ***

***** This file should be named 32651.txt or 32651.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/5/32651/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
