
"Possibly. Desk jobs. Desk officers don't get killed in action--or even
wounded. Why, perhaps, with the children all grown up and married, we
won't even have to be separated."

"Another angle--financial."

"Pooh! Who cares about that? Besides, for a man out of a job...."

"From you, I'll let that one pass. Thanks, Eunie--you're an ace. I'll
shoot 'em a wire."

The telegram was sent. The Kinnisons waited. And waited. Until, about
the middle of January, beautifully-phrased and beautifully-mimeographed
letters began to arrive.

"The War Department recognizes the value of your previous military
experience and appreciates your willingness once again to take up arms
in defense of the country ... Veteran Officer's Questionnaire ... please
fill out completely ... Form 191A ... Form 170 in duplicate ... Form
315.... Impossible to forecast the extent to which the War Department
may ultimately utilize the services which you and thousands of others
have so generously offered ... Form ... Form.... Not to be construed as
meaning that you have been permanently rejected ... Form ... Advise you
that while at the present time the War Department is unable to use
you...."

"Wouldn't that fry you to a crisp?" Kinnison demanded. "What in hell
have they got in their heads--sawdust? They think that because I'm fifty
one years old I've got one foot in the grave--I'll bet four dollars that
I'm in better shape than that cursed Major General and his whole damned
staff!"

"I don't doubt it, dear." Eunice's smile was, however, mostly of
relief. "But here's an ad--it's been running for a week."

"CHEMICAL ENGINEERS ... shell loading plant ... within seventy-five
miles of Townville ... over five years experience ... organic chemistry
... technology ... explosives...."

"They want _you_," Eunice declared, soberly.

"Well, I'm a Ph.D. in Organic. I've had more than five years experience
in both organic chemistry and technology. If I don't know something
about explosives I did a smart job of fooling Dean Montrose, back at
Gosh Whatta University. I'll write 'em a letter."

He wrote. He filled out a form. The telephone rang.

"Kinnison speaking ... yes ... Dr. Sumner? Oh, yes, Chief Chemist....
That's it--one year over age, so I thought.... Oh, that's a minor
matter. We won't starve. If you can't pay a hundred and fifty I'll come
for a hundred, or seventy five, or fifty.... That's all right, too. I'm
well enough known in my own field so that a title of Junior Chemical
Engineer wouldn't hurt me a bit ... O.K., I'll see you about one o'clock
... Stoner and Black, Inc., Operators, Entwhistle Ordnance Plant,
Entwhistle, Missikota.... What! Well, maybe I could, at that....
Goodbye."

He turned to his wife. "You know what? They want me to come down right
away and go to work. Hot Dog! _Am_ I glad that I told that louse
Hendricks exactly where he could stick that job of mine!"

"He must have known that you wouldn't sign a straight-salary contract
after getting a share of the profits so long. Maybe he believed what you
always say just before or just after kicking somebody's teeth down their
throats; that you're so meek and mild--a regular Milquetoast. Do you
really think that they'll want you back, after the war?" It was clear
that Eunice was somewhat concerned concerning Kinnison's joblessness;
but Kinnison was not.

"Probably. That's the gossip. And I'll come back--when hell freezes
over." His square jaw tightened. "I've heard of outfits stupid enough to
let their technical brains go because they could sell--for a
while--anything they produced, but I didn't know that I was working for
one. Maybe I'm not exactly a Timid Soul, but you'll have to admit that I
never kicked anybody's teeth out unless they tried to kick mine out
first."

       *       *       *       *       *

Entwhistle Ordnance Plant covered twenty-odd square miles of more or
less level land. Ninety-nine percent of its area was "Inside the fence."
Most of the buildings within that restricted area, while in reality
enormous, were dwarfed by the vast spaces separating them; for
safety-distances are not small when TNT and tetryl by the ton are
involved. Those structures were built of concrete, steel, glass,
transite, and tile.

"Outside the Fence" was different. This was the Administration Area. Its
buildings were tremendous wooden barracks, relatively close together,
packed with the executive, clerical, and professional personnel
appropriate to an organization employing over twenty thousand men and
women.

Well inside the fence, but a safety-distance short of the One Line--Loading
Line Number One--was a long, low building, quite inadequately named the
Chemical Laboratory. "Inadequately" in that the Chief Chemist, a highly
capable--if more than a little cantankerous--Explosives Engineer, had
already gathered into his Chemical Section most of Development, most
of Engineering, and all of Physics, Weights and Measures, and Weather.

One room of the Chemical Laboratory--in the corner most distant from
Administration--was separated from the rest of the building by a
sixteen-inch wall of concrete and steel extending from foundation to
roof without a door, window, or other opening. This was the laboratory
of the Chemical Engineers, the boys who played with explosives high and
low; any explosion occurring therein could not affect the Chemical
Laboratory proper or its personnel.

Entwhistle's main roads were paved; but in February of 1942, such minor
items as sidewalks existed only on the blue-prints. Entwhistle's soil
contained much clay, and at that time the mud was approximately six
inches deep. Hence, since there were neither inside doors nor sidewalks,
it was only natural that the technologists did not visit at all
frequently the polished-tile cleanliness of the Laboratory. It was also
natural enough for the far larger group to refer to the segregated ones
as exiles and outcasts; and that some witty chemist applied to that
isolated place the name "Siberia."

The name stuck. More, the Engineers seized it and acclaimed it. They
were Siberians, and proud of it, and Siberians they remained; long after
Entwhistle's mud turned into dust. And within the year the Siberians
were to become well and favorably known in every ordnance plant in the
country, to many high executives who had no idea of how the name
originated.

Kinnison became a Siberian as enthusiastically as the youngest man
there. The term "youngest" is used in its exact sense, for not one of
them was a recent graduate. Each had had at least five years of
responsible experience, and "Cappy" Sumner kept on building. He hired
extravagantly and fired ruthlessly--to the minds of some, senselessly.
But he knew what he was doing. He knew explosives, and he knew men. He
was not liked, but he was respected. His building was good.

Being one of the only two "old" men there--and the other did not stay
long--Kinnison, as a Junior Chemical Engineer, was not at first accepted
without reserve. Apparently he did not notice that fact, but went
quietly about his assigned duties. He was meticulously careful with, but
very evidently not in any fear of, the materials with which he worked.
He pelleted and tested tracer, igniter, and incendiary compositions; he
took his turn at burning out rejects. Whenever asked, he went out on the
lines with any one of them.

His experimental tetryls always "miked" to size, his TNT
melt-pours--introductory to loading forty-millimeter on the Three
Line--came out solid, free from checks and cavitations. It became
evident to those young but keen minds that he, alone of them all, was on
familiar ground. They began to discuss their problems with him. Out of
his years of technological experience, and by bringing everyone present
into the discussion, he either helped them directly or helped them to
help themselves. His stature grew.

Black-haired, black-eyed "Tug" Tugwell, two hundred pounds of
ex-football-player in charge of tracer on the Seven Line, called him
"Uncle" Ralph, and the habit spread. And in a couple of weeks--at about
the same time that "Injun" Abernathy was slightly injured by being blown
through a door by a minor explosion of his igniter on the Eight line--he
was promoted to full Chemical Engineer; a promotion which went
unnoticed, since it involved only changes in title and salary.

Three weeks later, however, he was made Senior Chemical Engineer, in
charge of Melt-Pour. At this there was a celebration, led by "Blondie"
Wanacek, a sulphuric-acid expert handling tetryl on the Two. Kinnison
searched minutely for signs of jealousy or antagonism, but could find
none. He went blithely to work on the Six line, where they wanted to
start pouring twenty-pound fragmentation bombs, ably assisted by Tug and
by two new men. One of these was "Doc" or "Bart" Barton, who, the
grapevine said, had been hired by Cappy to be his Assistant. His motto,
like that of Rikki-Tikki-Tavi, was to run and find out, and he did so
with glee and abandon. He was a good egg. So was the other newcomer,
"Charley" Charlevoix, a prematurely gray paint-and-lacquer expert who
had also made the Siberian grade.

A few months later, Sumner called Kinnison into the office. The latter
went, wondering what the old hard-shell was going to cry about now; for
to be called into that office meant only one thing--censure.

"Kinnison, I like your work," the Chief Chemist began, gruffly, and
Kinnison's mouth almost dropped open. "Anybody who ever got a Ph.D.
under Montrose would have to know explosives, and the F.B.I. report on
you showed that you had brains, ability, and guts. But none of that
explains how you can get along so well with those damned Siberians. I
want to make you Assistant Chief and put you in charge of Siberia.
Formally, I mean--actually, you have been for months."

"Why, no ... I didn't.... Besides, how about Barton? He's too good a man
to kick in the teeth that way."

"Admitted." This _did_ surprise Kinnison. He had never thought that the
irascible and tempestuous Chief would ever confess to a mistake. This
was a Cappy he had never known. "I discussed it with him yesterday. He's
a damned good man--but it's decidedly questionable whether he has got
whatever it is that made Tugwell, Wanacek and Charlevoix work straight
through for seventy two hours, napping now and then on benches and
grabbing coffee and sandwiches when they could, until they got that frag
bomb straightened out."

Sumner did not mention the fact that Kinnison had worked straight
through, too. That was taken for granted.

"Well, I don't know." Kinnison's head was spinning. "I'd like to check
with Barton first. O.K.?"

"I expected that. O.K."

Kinnison found Barton and led him out behind the testing shed.

"Bart, Cappy tells me that he figures on kicking you in the face by
making me Assistant and that you O.K.'d it. One word and I'll tell the
old buzzard just where to stick the job and exactly where to go to do
it."

"Reaction, perfect. Yield, one hundred percent." Barton stuck out his
hand. "Otherwise, I would tell him all that myself and more. As it is,
Uncle Ralph, smooth out the ruffled plumage. They'd go to hell for you,
wading in standing straight up--they might do the same with me in the
driver's seat, and they might not. Why take a chance? You're IT. Some
things about the deal I don't like, of course--but at that, it makes me
about the only man working for Stoner and Black who can get a release
any time a good permanent job breaks. I'll stick until then. O.K.?" It
was unnecessary for Barton to add that as long as he was there he would
really work.

"I'll say it's O.K.!" and Kinnison reported to Sumner.

"All right, Chief, I'll try it--if you can square it with the
Siberians."

"That will not be too difficult."

Nor was it. The Siberians' reaction brought a lump to Kinnison's throat.

"Ralph the First, Czar of Siberia!" they yelled. "Long live the Czar!
Kowtow, serfs and vassals, to Czar Ralph the First!"

Kinnison was still glowing when he got home that night, to the
Government Housing Project and to the three-room "mansionette" in which
he and Eunice lived. He would never forget the events of that day.

"What a gang! _What_ a gang! But listen, ace--they work under their own
power--you couldn't _keep_ those kids from working. Why should I get the
credit for what they do?"

"I haven't the foggiest." Eunice wrinkled her forehead--and her
nose--but the corners of her mouth quirked up. "Are you quite sure that
you haven't had _anything_ to do with it? But supper is ready--let's
eat."

More months passed. Work went on. Absorbing work, and highly varied; the
details of which are of no importance here. Paul Jones, a big, hard,
top-drawer chicle technologist, set up the Four line to pour demolition
blocks. Frederick Hinton came in, qualified as a Siberian, and went to
work on Anti-Personnel mines.

Kinnison was promoted again: to Chief Chemist. He and Sumner had never
been friendly; he made no effort to find out why Cappy had quit, or had
been terminated, whichever it was. This promotion made no difference.
Barton, now Assistant, ran the whole Chemical Section save for one
unit--Siberia--and did a superlative job. The Chief Chemist's secretary
worked for Barton, not for Kinnison. Kinnison was the Czar of Siberia.

The Anti-Personnel mines had been giving trouble. Too many men were
being killed by prematures, and nobody could find out why. The problem
was handed to Siberia. Hinton tackled it, missed, and called for help.
The Siberians rallied round. Kinnison loaded and tested mines. So did
Paul and Tug and Blondie. Kinnison was testing, out in the Firing Area,
when he was called to Administration to attend a Staff Meeting. Hinton
relieved him. He had not reached the gate, however, when a guard car
flagged him down.

"Sorry, sir, but there has been an accident at Pit Five and you are
needed out there."

"Accident! Fred Hinton! Is he...?"

"I'm afraid so, sir."

It is a harrowing thing to have to help gather up what fragments can be
found of one of your best friends. Kinnison was white and sick as he got
back to the firing station, just in time to hear the Chief Safety
Officer say:

"Must have been carelessness--rank carelessness. I warned this man
Hinton myself, on one occasion."

"Carelessness, hell!" Kinnison blazed. "You had the guts to warn _me_
once, too, and I've forgotten more about safety in explosives than you
ever will know. Fred Hinton was _not_ careless--if I hadn't been called
in, that would have been me."

"What is it, then?"

"I don't know--yet. I tell you now, though, Major Moulton, that I _will_
know, and the minute I find out I'll talk to you again."

He went back to Siberia, where he found Tug and Paul, faces still
tear-streaked, staring at something that looked like a small piece of
wire.

"This is it, Uncle Ralph," Tug said, brokenly. "Don't see how it could
be, but it is."

"What is what?" Kinnison demanded.

"Firing pin. Brittle. When you pull the safety, the force of the spring
must break it off at this constricted section here."

"But damn it, Tug, it doesn't make sense. It's tension ... but
wait--there'd be some horizontal component, at that. But they'd have to
be brittle as glass."

"I know it. It doesn't seem to make much sense. But we were there, you
know--and I assembled every one of those God damned mines myself.
Nothing else could possibly have made that mine go off just when it
did."

"O.K., Tug. We'll test 'em. Call Bart in--he can have the scale-lab boys
rig us up a gadget by the time we can get some more of those pins in off
the line."

They tested a hundred, under the normal tension of the spring, and three
of them broke. They tested another hundred. Five broke. They stared at
each other.

"That's it." Kinnison declared. "But this will stink to high
Heaven--have Inspection break out a new lot and we'll test a thousand."

Of that thousand pins, thirty two broke.

"Bart, will you dictate a one-page preliminary report to Vera and rush
it over to Building One as fast as you can? I'll go over and tell
Moulton a few things."

Major Moulton was, as usual, "in conference," but Kinnison was in no
mood to wait.

"Tell him," he instructed the Major's private secretary, who had barred
his way, "that either he will talk to me right now or I will call
District Safety over his head. I'll give him sixty seconds to decide
which."

Moulton decided to see him. "I'm very busy, Doctor Kinnison, but...."

"I don't give a swivel-eyed tinker's damn how busy you are. I told you
that the minute I found out what was the matter with the M2 mine I'd
talk to you again. Here I am. Brittle firing pins. Three and two-tenths
percent defective. So I'm...."

"Very irregular, Doctor. The matter will have to go through
channels...."

"Not this one. The formal report is going through channels, but as I
started to tell you, this is an emergency report to you as Chief of
Safety. Since the defect is not covered by specs, neither Process nor
Ordnance can reject except by test, and whoever does the testing will
very probably be killed. Therefore, as every employee of Stoner and
Black is not only authorized but positively instructed to do upon
discovering an unsafe condition, I am reporting it direct to Safety.
Since my whiskers are a trifle longer than an operator's, I am reporting
it direct to the Head of the Safety Division; and I am telling you that
if you don't do something about it damned quick--stop production and
