22. FISH.--The part of fish that is eaten is the muscle, just as in the
case of the meats and poultry. It closely resembles flesh in its
composition, but is more watery. Some varieties are very easy of digestion,
such as salmon, trout, and cod; others are quite indigestible, especially
lobsters, clams, and shell-fish generally. A diet in which fish enters as
the chief article, is ill adapted to strengthen mind or body, while its
continued use is said to be the fertile source of nearly every form of
disease of the skin. Some persons are so constituted that they can eat no
kind of fish without experiencing unpleasant results.

[Sidenote: 23. List of vegetable articles? Usefulness of the different
vegetables? Strychnia? What further is said in relation to the nourishing
and other qualities of vegetables?]

23. VEGETABLE FOOD.--The list of vegetable articles of diet is a very long
one, including the grains from which our bread-stuffs are made, the
vegetables from the garden, and the fruits. All the products of the
vegetable kingdom are not alike useful. Some are positively hurtful;
indeed, the most virulent poisons, as strychnia and prussic acid, are
obtained from certain vegetables. Again, of such {72} articles as have been
found good for food, some are more nourishing than others: some require
very little preparation for use, while others are hard and indigestible,
and can only be used after undergoing many preparatory processes. Great
care must therefore be exercised, and many experiments made, before we can
arrive at a complete knowledge in reference to these articles of diet. Tea,
coffee, and other substances from which drinks are made, are of vegetable
origin.

[Sidenote: 24. Wheat? "Staff of life?" White flour? Hard-grain wheats?
Bolting? Graham bread?]

24. BREAD.--Wheat is the principal and most valuable kind of grain for the
service of man. Bread made from wheat-flour has been in use for many
hundreds of years, and on this account, as well as because of its highly
nourishing properties, has been aptly called "the staff of life." We never
become tired of good bread as an article of daily food.

The white kinds of flour contain more starch and less gluten than the
darker, and are therefore less nutritious. The hard-grain wheat yields the
best flour. In grinding wheat, the chaff or bran is separated by a process
called "bolting." Unbolted flour is used for making brown or Graham bread.

[Sidenote: 25. Leavened bread? Unleavened? Hot bread?]

25. The form of bread most easily digested is that which has been
"leavened," or rendered porous by the use of yeast, or by some similar
method. Unleavened bread requires much more mastication. Hot bread is
unwholesome, because it is not firm enough to be thoroughly masticated, but
is converted into a pasty, heavy mass that is not easily digested.

[Sidenote: 26. Wheaten bread? Bread and butter? Experiment on the dog?]

26. Wheaten bread contains nearly every principle requisite for sustaining
life, except fat. This is commonly added in other articles of diet,
especially in butter,--"bread and butter," consequently, forming an almost
perfect article of {73} food. The following experiment is recorded: "A dog
eating _ad libitum_ of white bread, made of pure wheat, and freely supplied
with water, did not live beyond fifty days. He died at the end of that time
with all the signs of gradual exhaustion." Death took place, not because
there was anything hurtful in the bread, but because of the absence of one
or more of the food-principles.

[Sidenote: 27. State what is said of the Irish potato?]

27. THE POTATO.--The common or Irish potato is the vegetable most
extensively used in this country and Great Britain. Among the poorer
classes in Ireland it is the main article of food. While it is not so rich
in nutritious substances as many others, it has some very useful qualities.
It keeps well from season to season, and men do not weary of its continuous
use. It is more than two-thirds water, the balance being chiefly starch,
with a little albumen.

[Sidenote: 28. Sweet potato? Nightshades? Potatoes when germinating?]

28. The sweet potato differs from the white or common, in containing more
water and a small proportion of sugar. The common potato and the tomato
belong to the same botanical order as the "nightshades," but do not possess
their poisonous qualities, unless we except potatoes that are in the
process of germination or sprouting, when they are found injurious as food.

[Sidenote: 29. Fruits? Use of ripe fruit? Nutriment they contain? Starch in
unripe fruits? Cooking of unripe fruits?]

29. FRUITS.--These are produced, in this country, in great abundance, and
are remarkable alike for their variety and delicious flavor; consequently
they are consumed in large quantities, especially during the warmer months.
The moderate use of ripe fruits, in their season, is beneficial, because
they offer a pleasant substitute for the more concentrated diet that is
used in cold weather. The amount of solid nutriment they contain is,
however, small. The percentage of water in cherries is seventy-five, in
grapes eighty-one, in apples eighty-two. Unripe fruits contain starch,
which, during the process of ripening, {74} is converted into sugar. Such
fruits are indigestible and should be avoided: cooking, however, in part
removes the objections to them.

[Sidenote: 30. How should drinking-water be as regards color and smell?
Chemically pure water? How obtained? Agreeableness of perfectly pure
water?]

30. PURE WATER.--It is important that the water we drink and use in the
preparation of food should be pure. It should be clear and colorless, with
little or no taste or smell, and free from any great amount of foreign
ingredients. Chemically pure water does not occur in nature: it is only
obtained by the condensation of steam, carefully conducted, and is not as
agreeable for drinking purposes as the water furnished by springs and
streams. Rain-water is the purest occurring in nature; but even this
contains certain impurities, especially the portion which falls in the
early part of a shower; for in its descent from the clouds, the particles
floating in the air are caught by the falling drops.

[Sidenote: 31. Spring and well water? Whence the sparkle, or life? The
water supply of cities? Croton water? Ridgewood?]

31. Water from springs and wells always contains more or less foreign
matter of mineral origin. This imparts to the drink its pleasant taste--the
sparkle, or "life," coming from the gases absorbed by the water during its
passage under ground. The ordinary supply of cities is from some pure
stream or pond conveyed from a distance through pipes, the limpid fluid
containing generally only a small amount of impurity. Croton water, the
supply of New York City, is very pure, and contains only four and a half
grains to a gallon: the Ridgewood water of Brooklyn holds even less foreign
matter.

[Sidenote: 32. Impurities in drinking-water? Mineral springs?]

32. Drinking-water may contain as large a proportion as sixty to seventy
grains per gallon of impurity, but a much larger quantity renders it
unwholesome. The mineral spring waters, used popularly as medicines, are
highly charged with mineral substances. Some of them, such as {75} the
waters at Saratoga, contain three hundred grains and more to the gallon.

[Sidenote: 33. What is stated of the action of water upon lead?]

33. ACTION OF WATER UPON LEAD.--The danger of using water that has been in
contact with certain metals is well known. Lead is one of the most readily
soluble, and probably the most poisonous of these substances in common use.
When pure water and an untarnished surface of lead come in contact, the
water gradually corrodes the metal, and soon holds an appreciable quantity
of it in solution. When this takes place the water becomes highly
injurious: the purer the water, and the more recent the use of the metal,
the greater will be the danger.

[Sidenote: 34. Lead in pipes and other things? Advice? What takes place
after the articles of lead have been used much? What is wise?]

34. In cities, lead pipes are commonly used to convey water through the
houses; lead being also used in the construction of roofs, cisterns, and
vessels for keeping water and other liquids. After the articles of lead
have been in use several months, the danger of lead-poisoning diminishes.
An insoluble coating of the sulphate of lead forms upon the exposed
surface, thus protecting it from further corrosion. It is, however, a wise
precaution, at all times to reject the water or other fluid that has been
in contact with leaden vessels over night, or for a number of hours. Allow
the water in pipes to run freely before using.

[Sidenote: 35. Coffee as an article of diet? Of what does it consist? How
does the water affect the coffee? The peculiar stimulant? How does it
affect most persons?]

35. COFFEE.--This is an important addition to diet, and if moderately used
is beneficial to persons of adult age. As commonly employed, it consists of
an infusion in boiling water of the roasted and ground berry. The water
extracts certain flavoring and coloring matters, but that which gives it
its peculiar stimulant qualities is the alkaloid _caffein_. With most
persons its action is that of a gentle stimulant, without any injurious
reaction. It produces a restful feeling after exhausting efforts of mind or
{76} body; it tranquilizes, but does not disqualify for labor; and hence it
is highly esteemed by persons of literary pursuits.

[Sidenote: 36. Another property of coffee? Miners of Belgium? The Caravans?
Among armies? Taken with meals?]

36. Another property of coffee is, that it diminishes the waste of the
tissues, and consequently permits the performance of excessive labor upon
an economical and inadequate diet. This has been tested among the miners of
Belgium. Their allowance of solid food was below that found necessary in
prisons and elsewhere; but, with the addition of about four pints of coffee
daily, they were enabled to undergo severe labor without reducing their
muscular strength. The caravans which traverse the deserts are supported by
coffee during long journeys and lengthened privation of food. Among armies
it is indispensable in supplementing their imperfect rations, and in
relieving the sense of fatigue after great exposure and long marches. When
taken with meals, coffee is also thought to promote digestion.

[Sidenote: 37. Effects of tea-drinking? Peculiar principle? The tea
beverage, how made? Black and green tea? Excessive use of tea or coffee?]

37. TEA.--The effects of tea-drinking are very similar to those of coffee,
and are due to a peculiar principle called _thein_. This principle is
probably the same as that found in coffee, _caffein_, since the chemical
composition of both is precisely alike. Tea, as a beverage, is made from
the dried leaves of the plant by the addition of hot water; if the tea is
boiled, the oil which gives it its agreeable flavor is driven off with the
steam. There are two kinds of tea--the black and the green: the latter is
sometimes injurious, producing wakefulness and other nervous symptoms. The
excessive use of either coffee or tea will cause wakefulness.

[Sidenote: 38. Experiments made during Kane's expedition?]

38. During Dr. Kane's expedition in the Arctic regions, the effects of
these articles were compared. "After {77} repeated trials, the men took
most kindly to coffee in the morning and tea in the evening. The coffee
seemed to continue its influence throughout the day, and they seemed to
grow hungry less rapidly than after drinking tea, while tea soothed them
after a day's hard labor, and the better enabled them to sleep. They both
operated upon fatigued men like a charm, and their superiority over
alcoholic stimulants was very decided."

[Sidenote: 39. State what is said of chocolate.]

39. Chocolate is made from the seeds of the cocoa-tree, a native of
tropical America. Its effects resemble somewhat those of tea and coffee,
but it is very rich in nutriment. Linnaeus, the botanist, was so fond of
this beverage, that he gave to the cocoa-tree the name, _Theobroma_--"the
Food of the Gods." Its active principle is _theobromin_.

[Sidenote: 40. Use of alcoholic drinks, how general? The rule given?]

40. ALCOHOL.--The list of beverages that are consumed for the sake of the
alcohol they contain is a very long one. Their use is almost universally
prevalent, every civilized nation, and nearly every barbarous one, having
its favorite alcoholic drink; and, as a general rule, the nations which
stand the highest in civilization have the greatest varieties of these
beverages,--at the same time using them the most intelligently and wisely.

[Sidenote: 41. The beverages produced by fermentation? The ardent spirits?
Grains and fruits employed? Long use of wine? Of distilled liquors?]

41. The wines and malt liquors that contain a small amount of alcohol are
produced by fermentation. The beverages that hold a large proportion of
alcohol, the "ardent spirits," are made by distillation. Enormous
quantities of grains and fruits are thus yearly diverted from their proper
uses as food; some of these being corn, wheat, rye, barley, potatoes, and
rice; also the grape, apple, pear, peach, sugar-cane, cherry, fig, and
orange. Wine, the fermented juice of the grape, has been in use from time
immemorial, while the introduction of distilled liquors dates from a
comparatively recent period. {78}

[Sidenote: 42. Describe the action of alcohol upon the human system?
Experience of Dr. Hayes and others?]

42. What is the physiological action of alcohol? Its first and most evident
action is stimulation: this effect is transient, and is followed by a
variable degree of depression. At first it sharpens the appetite and
quickens digestion, but its habitual use impairs both. This stimulation is
efficient in giving the system an artificial strength during some temporary
derangement, and in enabling the endurance of unusual fatigue or exposure.
The experience of Dr. Hayes, and other explorers of the polar regions, is
that alcohol does not enable the body to resist the influence of cold, but,
on the contrary, is always injurious.

[Sidenote: 43. Another property of alcohol? How do we explain the
restorative influence of wines and liquors?]

43. Another property it has in common with tea and coffee. It supports the
powers of life, economizes food, and retards the waste of tissues; in other
words, it "banks the fires," and prevents their burning wastefully. On this
principle we explain the restorative influence of wines or liquors during
exhausting diseases, in convalescence, and after excessive labors of mind
or body.

[Sidenote: 44. Alcohol, a poison? Moderate stimulants? Prevailing opinion?
Hence?]

44. Pure alcohol, or an excessive quantity of ardent spirits, is an
undoubted poison, and has been frequently known to produce fatal results.
Stimulants in moderate quantities have been thought to increase strength,
and in this view they have been called "alcoholic foods." This is not now
conceded by scientific men. The prevailing opinion is, that they serve no
useful purpose as an article of diet, and that their beneficial influence
is limited to cases where the system is enfeebled, where some unnatural
demand is made upon the vital powers, or where the supply of food is
insufficient. Hence, while alcohol has not the power to build up, it may
obstruct the process of pulling down. {79}

QUESTIONS FOR TOPICAL REVIEW.

                                                                       PAGE
  1. How is the necessity for food shown?                                64
  2. To what process of waste and repair is the body constantly
        subjected?                                                       64
  3. How do you account for the sensations of hunger and thirst?         65
  4. What further can you state having relation to the subject?          65
  5. What can you state in regard to the quantity of food required
        for the support of life?                                     65, 66
  6. What circumstances change the needs of persons, old and young,
        as regards food and drink?                                   65, 67
  7. What becomes of all the food and drink we consume?                  66
  8. What further can you state in relation to the process of
         renovation through which the body passes?                       66
  9. What can you state of the habits of nations in respect to
         diet?                                                   66, 67, 69
  10. What in relation to the selection of articles for food?            67
  11. What as respects the necessity for changing or varying the diet?   67
  12. What has been proved as regards animal food?                       67
  13. Of what importance is milk as an article of food?              67, 68
  14. What are the constituents of milk?                                 68
  15. What can you state of eggs as an article of food?                  68
  16. Of the meats, so called, as an article of food?                68, 69
  17. What effect does cold have upon meats?                             69
  18. In what other way may beef and pork be preserved?                  69
  19. What can you state of salted meat as food, and of its
        continued use?                                                   69
  20. What change does meat undergo in the cooking?                  70, 71
  21. What directions are given for boiling meat?                        70
  22. What for roasting, and with what results?                      70, 71
  23. What is said about the frying of meats?                            71
  24. Give the statement in relation to trichina.                        71
  25. State what is said in relation to fish.                            71
  26. What is stated of the usefulness and other properties of the
         products of the vegetable kingdom?                          71, 72
  27. What further is said of vegetable food?                        71, 72
  28. Why is bread made of wheat flour so important as an article
        of food?                                                         72
  29. State whatever else you can in relation to bread.              72, 73
  30. Give the statement respecting the potato.                          73
  31. What is stated of fruits, the use of them, their nutritious
        qualities, etc.?                                             73, 74
  32. How general is the existence of perfectly pure water?              74
  33. What is stated in relation to drinking water?                  74, 75
  34. How does the action of water upon lead affect lead?                75
  35. What further can you state on the subject?                         75
  36. What properties has coffee as an article of diet?              75, 76
  37. In what circumstances has coffee been found peculiarly
        beneficial?                                                      76
  38. What comparison is made between coffee, tea, and chocolate?        76
  39. How are the wines, and malt and other alcoholic beverages
        produced?                                                        77
  40. What articles are employed in their production?                    77
  41. Describe the physiological action of alcohol.                      78
  42. What comparison is made between tea, coffee, and alcohol?          78
  43. What can you state of alcohol, as a poison, a stimulant, and
        article of diet?                                                 78
  44. What, then, can be said of alcohol as a recommendation?            78

       *       *       *       *       *


{80}

CHAPTER VI.

