relinquish this condemned proposition, "nec eam de caetero, quovis
modo, teneat, doceat aut defendat, verbo aut scriptis," and that
Galileo promised to obey.[249] Rumors evidently were rife in Rome at
the time as to what had happened at this secret interview, for Galileo
wrote to the Cardinal in May asking for a statement of what actually
had occurred so that he might silence his enemies. The Cardinal
replied:

     "We, Robert Cardinal Bellarmin, having heard that Signor
     Galileo was calumniated and charged with having abjured in
     our hand, and also of being punished by salutary penance,
     and being requested to give the truth, state that the
     aforesaid Signor Galileo has not abjured in our hand nor in
     the hand of any other person in Rome, still less in any
     other place, so far as we know, any of his opinions and
     teachings, nor has he received salutary penance nor any
     other kind; but only was he informed of the declaration made
     by his Holiness and published by the Sacred Congregation of
     the Index, in which it is stated that the doctrine
     attributed to Copernicus,--that the earth moves around the
     sun and that the sun stands in the center of the world
     without moving from the east to the west, is contrary to the
     Holy Scriptures and therefore cannot be defended nor held
     (non si possa difendere ne tenere). And in witness of this
     we have written and signed these presents with our own hand,
     this 26th day of May, 1616.

     ROBERT CARDINAL BELLARMIN."[250]

[Footnote 248: Ibid: 61.]

[Footnote 249: Doc. in Favaro: 61-62.]

[Footnote 250: Ibid: 88.]

Galileo's defense sixteen years later[251] was that he had obeyed the
order as given him by the Cardinal and that he had not "defended nor
held" the doctrine in his _Dialoghi_ but had refuted it. The
Congregation answered that he had been ordered not only not to hold
nor defend, but also not to treat in any way (quovis modo) this
condemned subject. When Galileo disclaimed all recollection of that
phrase and produced the Cardinal's statement in support of his
position, he was told that this document, far from lightening his
guilt, greatly aggravated it since he had dared to deal with a subject
that he had been informed was contrary to the Holy Scriptures.[252]

[Footnote 251: Ibid: 80-86.]

[Footnote 252: Ibid: 145.]

To return to 1616. On the third of March the Cardinal reported to the
Congregation in the presence of the Pope that he had warned Galileo
and that Galileo had acquiesced.[253] The Congregation then reported
its decree suspending "until corrected" "Nicolai Copernici De
Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium, et Didaci Astunica in Job," and
prohibiting "Epistola Fratris Pauli Antonii Foscarini Carmelitae,"
together with all other books dealing with this condemned and
prohibited doctrine. The Pope ordered this decree to be published by
the Master of the Sacred Palace, which was done two days later.[254]
But this prohibition could not have been widely known for two or three
years; the next year Mulier published his edition of the _De
Revolutionibus_ at Amsterdam without a word of reference to it; in
1618 Thomas Feyens, professor at Louvain, heard vague rumors of the
condemnation and wondered if it could be true;[255] and the following
spring Fromundus, also at Louvain and later a noted antagonist of the
new doctrine, wrote to Feyens asking:

     "What did I hear lately from you about the Copernicans? That
     they have been condemned a year or two ago by our Holy
     Father, Pope Paul V? Until now I have known nothing about
     it; no more have this crowd of German and Italian scholars,
     very learned and, as I think, very Catholic, who admit with
     Copernicus that the earth is turned. Is it possible that
     after a lapse of time as considerable as this, we have
     nothing more than a rumor of such an event? I find it hard
     to believe, since nothing more definite has come from Italy.
     Definitions of this sort ought above all to be published in
     the universities where the learned men are to whom the
     danger of such an opinion is very great."[256]

[Footnote 253: Ibid: 16.]

[Footnote 254: Doc. in Favaro: 16.]

[Footnote 255: Monchamp: 46.]

[Footnote 256: Fromundus: _De Cometa Anni_ 1618: chap. VII, p. 68.
(From the private library of Dr. E.E. Slosson. A rare book which Lecky
could not find. _History of Rationalism in Europe_, I, 280, note.)]

Galileo meanwhile had retired to Florence and devoted himself to
mechanical science, (of which his work is the foundation) though
constantly harassed by much ill health and many family perplexities.
At the advice of his friends, he allowed the attacks on the Copernican
doctrine to go unanswered,[257] till with the accession to the
papacy in 1623 of Cardinal Barberini, as Urban VIII, a warm admirer
and supporter of his, he thought relief was in sight. He was further
cheered by a conversation Cardinal di Zollern reported having had with
Pope Urban, in which his Holiness had reminded the Cardinal how he
(the Pope) had defended Copernicus in the time of Paul V, and asserted
that out of just respect owed to the memory of Copernicus, if he had
been pope then, he would not have permitted his opinion to be declared
heretical.[258] Feeling that he now had friends in power, Galileo
began his great work, _Dialogo sopra i Due Sistemi Massimi del Mondo_,
a dialogue in four "days" in which three interlocutors discuss the
arguments for and against the Copernican theory, though coming to no
definite conclusion. Sagredo was an avowed Copernican and Galileo's
spokesman, Salviati was openminded, and the peripatetic was Simplicio,
appropriately named for the famous Sicilian sixth century commentator
on Aristotle.[259]

[Footnote 257: In 1620 the Congregation issued the changes it required
to have made in the _De Revolutionibus_. They are nine in all, and
consist mainly in changing assertion of the earth's movement to
hypothetical statement and in striking out a reference to the earth as
a planet. Doc. in Favaro: 140-141. See illustration, p. 61.]

[Footnote 258: Doc. in Favaro: 149.]

[Footnote 259: Galileo: _Dialogo_: To the Reader.]

[Illustration: A "CORRECTED" PAGE FROM THE _De Revolutionibus_.

A photographic facsimile (reduced) of a page from Mulier's edition
(1617) of the _De Revolutionibus_ as "corrected" according to the
_Monitum_ of the Congregations in 1620. The first writer underlined
the passages to be deleted or altered with marginal notes indicating
the changes ordered; the second writer scratched out these passages,
and wrote out in full the changes the other had given in abbreviated
form. The _Notae_ are Mulier's own, and so were not affected by the
order. The effect of the page is therefore somewhat contradictory!]

In 1630 he brought the completed manuscript to Riccardi, Master of the
Sacred Palace, for permission to print it in Rome. After much reading
and re-reading of it both by Riccardi and his associate, Father
Visconti, permission was at length granted on condition that he insert
a preface and a conclusion practically dictated by Riccardi,
emphasizing its hypothetical character.[260] The Pope's own argument
was to be used: "God is all-powerful; all things are therefore
possible to Him; ergo, the tides cannot be adduced as a necessary
proof of the double motion of the earth without limiting God's
omnipotence--which is absurd."[261] Galileo returned to Florence in
June with the permission to print his book in Rome. Meanwhile the
plague broke out. He decided to print it in Florence instead, and on
writing to Riccardi for that permission, the latter asked for the book
to review it again. The times were too troublesome to risk sending it,
so a compromise was finally effected: Galileo was to send the preface
and conclusion to Rome and Riccardi agreed to instruct the Inquisitor
at Florence as to his requirements and to authorize him to license the
book.[262] The parts were not returned from Rome till July, 1631, and
the book did not appear till February of the following year, when it
was published at Florence with all these licenses, both the Roman and
the Florentine ones.

[Footnote 260: Doc. in Favaro: 70.]

[Footnote 261: Fahie: 230.]

[Footnote 262: Ibid: 240.]

The _Dialogo_ was in Italian so that all could read it. It begins with
an outline of the Aristotelian system, then points out the
resemblances between the earth and the planets. The second "day"
demonstrates the daily rotation of the earth on its axis. The next
claims that the necessary stellar parallax is too minute to be
observed and discusses the earth's annual rotation. The last seeks to
prove this rotation by the ebb and flow of the tides. It is a
brilliant book and received a great reception.

The authorities of the Inquisition at once examined it and denounced
Galileo (April 17, 1633) because in it he not merely taught and
defended the "condemned doctrine but was gravely suspected of firm
adherence to this opinion."[263] Other charges made against him were
that he had printed the Roman licenses without the permission of the
Congregation, that he had printed the preface in different type so
alienating it from the body of the book, and had put the required
conclusion into the mouth of a fool (Simplicio), that in many places
he had abandoned the hypothetical treatment and asserted the forbidden
doctrine, and that he had dealt indecisively with the matter though
the Congregation had specifically condemned the Copernican doctrine as
contrary to the express words of the Scripture.[264]

[Footnote 263: Doc. in Favaro: 88-89. [Transcriber's Note: Missing
footnote reference in original text has been added above in a logical
place.]]

[Footnote 264: Ibid: 66.]

The Pope became convinced that Galileo had ridiculed him in the
character of Simplicio to whom Galileo had naturally enough assigned
the Pope's syllogistic argument. On the 23rd of September, he ordered
the Inquisitor of Florence to notify Galileo (in the presence of
concealed notary and witnesses in case he were "recusant") to come to
Rome and appear before the Sacred Congregation before the end of the
next month;[265] the publication and sale of the _Dialogo_ meanwhile
being stopped at great financial loss to the printer.[266] Galileo
promised to obey; but he was nearly seventy years old and so much
broken in health that a long difficult journey in the approaching
winter seemed a great and unnecessary hardship, especially as he was
loath to believe that the Church authorities were really hostile to
him. Delays were granted him till the Pope in December finally ordered
him to be in Rome within a month.[267] The Florentine Inquisitor
replied that Galileo was in bed so sick that three doctors had
certified that he could not travel except at serious risk to his life.
This certificate declared that he suffered from an intermittent pulse,
from enfeebled vital faculties, from frequent dizziness, from
melancholia, weakness of the stomach, insomnia, shooting pains and
serious hernia.[268] The answer the Pope made to this was to order the
Inquisitor to send at Galileo's expense a commissary and a doctor out
to his villa to see if he were feigning illness; if he were, he was to
be sent bound and in chains to Rome at once; if [Transcriber's Note:
'he' missing] were really too ill to travel, then he was to be sent in
chains as soon as he was convalescent and could travel safely.[269]
Galileo did not delay after that any longer than he could help, and
set out for Rome in January in a litter supplied by the Tuscan Grand
Duke.[270] The journey was prolonged by quarantine, but upon his
arrival (February 13, 1633), he was welcomed into the palace of
Niccolini, the warm-hearted ambassador of the Grand Duke.

[Footnote 265: Ibid: 17-18.]

[Footnote 266: Galileo: _Opere_, XV, 26.]

[Footnote 267: Doc. in Favaro: 74.]

[Footnote 268: Ibid: 75.]

[Footnote 269: Ibid: 76.]

[Footnote 270: Ibid: 80-81.]

Four times was the old man summoned into the presence of the Holy
Office, though never when the Pope was presiding. In his first
examination held on the 12th of April, he told how he thought he had
obeyed the decree of 1616 as his _Dialogo_ did not defend the
Copernican doctrine but rather confuted it, and that in his desire to
do the right, he had personally submitted the book while in manuscript
to the censorship of the Master of the Sacred Palace, and had accepted
all the changes he and the Florentine Inquisitor had required. He had
not mentioned the affair of 1616 because he thought that order did not
apply to this book in which he proved the lack of validity and of
conclusiveness of the Copernican arguments.[271] With remarkable, in
fact unique, consideration, the Holy Office then assigned Galileo to a
suite of rooms within the prisons of the Holy Office, allowed him to
have his servant with him and to have his meals sent in by the
ambassador. On the 30th after his examination, they even assigned as
his prison, the Ambassador's palace, out of consideration for his age
and ill-health.

[Footnote 271: Ibid: 80-81.]

In his second appearance (April 30), Galileo declared he had been
thinking matters over after re-reading his book (which he had not read
for three years), and freely confessed that there were several
passages which would mislead a reader unaware of his real intentions,
into believing the worse arguments were the better, and he blamed
these slips upon his vain ambition and delight in his own skill in
debate.[272] He thereupon offered to write another "day" or two more
for the _Dialogo_ in which he would completely refute the two "strong"
Copernican arguments based on the sun's spots and on the tides.[273]
Ten days later, at his third appearance, he presented a written
statement of his defence in which he claimed that the phrase _vel
quovis modo docere_ was wholly new to him, and that he had obeyed the
order given him by Cardinal Bellarmin over the latter's own signature.
However he would make what amends he could and begged the Cardinals to
"consider his miserable bodily health and his incessant mental trouble
for the past ten months, the discomforts of a long hard journey at the
worst season, when 70 years old, together with the loss of the greater
part of the year, and that therefore such suffering might be adequate
punishment for his faults which they might condone to failing old age.
Also he commended to them his honor and reputation against the
calumnies of his ill-wishers who seek to detract from his good
name."[274] To such a plight was the great man brought! But the end
was not yet.

[Footnote 272: Doc. in Favaro: 83.]

[Footnote 273: Ibid: 84.]

[Footnote 274: Ibid: 85-87.]

Nearly a month later (June 16), by order of the Pope, Galileo was once
again interrogated, this time under threat of torture.[275] Once again
he declared the opinion of Ptolemy true and indubitable and said he
did not hold and had not held this doctrine of Copernicus after he had
been informed of the order to abandon it. "As for the rest," he added,
"I am in your hands, do with me as you please." "I am here to
obey."[276] Then by the order of the Pope, ensued Galileo's complete
abjuration on his knees in the presence of the full Congregation,
coupled with his promise to denounce other heretics (i.e.,
Copernicans).[277] In addition, because he was guilty of the heresy of
having held and believed a doctrine declared and defined as contrary
to the Scriptures, he was sentenced to "formal imprisonment" at the
will of the Congregation, and to repeat the seven penitential Psalms
every week for three years.[278]

[Footnote 275: Ibid: 101.]

[Footnote 276: Doc. in Favaro: 101.]

[Footnote 277: Doc. in Favaro: 146.]

[Footnote 278: Ibid: 145.]

At Galileo's earnest request, his sentence was commuted almost at
once, to imprisonment first in the archiepiscopal palace in Siena
(from June 30-December 1), then in his own villa at Arcetri, outside
Florence, though under strict orders not to receive visitors but to
live in solitude.[279] In the spring his increasing illness occasioned
another request for greater liberty in order to have the necessary
visits from the doctor; but on March 23, 1634, this was denied him
with a stern command from the Pope to refrain from further petitions
lest the Sacred Congregation be compelled to recall him to their
prisons in Rome.[280]

[Footnote 279: Ibid: 103, 129.]

[Footnote 280: Ibid: 134.]

The rule forbidding visitors seems not to have been rigidly enforced
all the time, for Milton visited him, "a prisoner of the Inquisition"
in 1638;[281] yet Father Castelli had to write to Rome for permission
to visit him to learn his newly invented method of finding longitude
at sea.[282] When in Florence on a very brief stay to see his doctor,
Galileo had to have the especial consent of the Inquisitor in order to
attend mass at Easter. He won approval from the Holy Congregation,
however, by refusing to receive some gifts and letters brought him by
some German merchants from the Low Countries.[283] He was then totally
blind, but he dragged out his existence until January 8, 1642 (the
year of Newton's birth), when he died. As the Pope objected to a
public funeral for a man sentenced by the Holy Office, he was buried
without even an epitaph.[284] The first inscription was made 31 years
later, and in 1737, his remains were removed to Santa Croce after the
Congregation had first been asked if such action would be
unobjectionable.[285]

[Footnote 281: Milton: _Areopagitica_: 35.]

[Footnote 282: Doc. in Favaro: 135.]

[Footnote 283: Ibid: 137.]

[Footnote 284: Fahie: 402.]

[Footnote 285: Doc. in Favaro: 138; and Fahie: 402.]

