with reference to each other on the concave surface of the celestial
vault, and do not, as far as the unaided eye can judge, change their
relative positions as the planets do. Many stars have, however, what is
technically called a "proper motion," which, though of course very minute,
and only to be detected by the aid of refined and accurate instruments,
yet accumulate in the course of ages, and sensibly alter their position in
the sky. The largest "proper motion" hitherto detected (about seven
seconds of arc per annum) is that of a small star in the constellation
Ursa Major, known to astronomers as No. 1830 of Groonbridge's catalogue.
It has been calculated that this star is rushing through space with the
amazing and almost inconceivable velocity of 200 miles per second!--a
velocity which would carry it from the earth to the sun in about 5-1/2 days
and to the moon in 20 minutes! The well-known double star 61 Cygni has a
proper motion of about five seconds of arc per annum, both components
moving through space together. This is, as far as yet known, the nearest
star to the earth in the northern hemisphere. Its parallax, as determined
by Sir R. S. Ball, is 0.4676 of a second of arc, and by Prof. Pritchard
(by photography) 0.43 of a second. Taking the mean of these values, its
distance from the earth would be about 460,000 times the earth's mean
distance from the sun, and its actual velocity about 33 miles per second.
This is, of course, the motion at right angles to the line of sight, but
as it may also have a motion _in_ the line of sight, either to or from the
eye, its real velocity is probably greater than this. The remarkable
triple star 40 Eridani has a proper motion of four seconds annually. The
components are a fourth magnitude star accompanied by a distant double
companion which is a binary (or revolving double star), and accompanies
the bright star in its flight through space. There are two other faint and
distant companions which do not partake in the motion of the ternary star.
In the year 1864 the bright star was situated to the east of a line
joining these faint companions, but owing to its large proper motion it is
now to the west of them. In the case of the triple star Struve 1516, one
of the companions, which was to the west of the primary star in 1831, is,
owing to the proper motion of the bright star, now to the east of it.
Prof. Asaph Hall has found a parallax for 40 Eridani of 0.223 of a second.
This, combined with the observed proper motion, indicates an actual
velocity of about 54 miles per second. The star Mu Cassiopeiae has also a
large proper motion. This star, about 4,000 years ago, must have been
close to Alpha Cassiopeiae, and might have been so seen by the ancient
astronomers. The proper motion of the bright star Arcturus is so
considerable that in the course of about 30,000 years it will be near the
equator, and about 10 deg. to the north of the bright star Spica, from which
it is at present separated by over 30 deg. These motions are of course those
which take place across the face of the sky. There are, however, motions
in the line of sight--both toward and from the eye--which have of late
years been revealed to us by the spectroscope, that wonderful instrument
of modern scientific research, by the aid of which several new metals have
been discovered, and which has been found so useful in chemical analysis,
and even in the manufacture of steel by the Bessemer process. Some years
since, Dr. Huggins, the eminent spectroscopist, found that the bright star
Sirius, "the monarch of the skies," was receding from the earth at the
rate of about 20 miles a second. Later observations at Greenwich
Observatory showed that this motion was gradually diminishing, and within
the last few years it has been found that the motion of recession has been
actually changed into a motion of approach, showing that this giant sun is
probably traveling in a mighty orbit round some as yet unknown center of
gravity.

From a consideration of stellar proper motions, it has been concluded that
the sun--and therefore the whole solar system--is moving through space.
Recent investigations make the velocity of translation about 19 miles per
second (30 kilometers). The Greenwich observations place the "apex of the
solar motion" (as the point toward which the sun is moving is called)
between Rho and Sigma Cygni, while Dr. Huggins' results fix a point near
Beta Cephei. Both these points are near the Milky Way.

There are other startling changes which have occasionally taken place
among the stars, and which must be looked upon almost in the light of
catastrophes. At rare intervals in the history of astronomy "temporary" or
"new" stars have suddenly blazed out in the heavens which were previously
either unknown to astronomers, or else were invisible, except in the
telescope. Some of these were of great brilliancy. In A.D. 173 a bright
star is recorded in the Chinese annals as having appeared between Alpha
and Beta Centauri (two bright stars in the southern hemisphere). It
remained visible for seven or eight months, and is described as resembling
"a large bamboo mat" (!)--a not very lucid description. It is worthy of
remark that there exists at the present time, close to the spot indicated,
an interesting variable star, which may possibly be identical with the
bright star of the second century. Perhaps the most remarkable of these
wonderful objects was that observed by the famous Tycho Brahe in 1572, in
Cassiopeia, and called the "Pilgrim." It was so brilliant that it rivaled
the planet Venus at its brightest, and was visible at noonday. It remained
visible for over a year and then disappeared.

A small star close to its recorded position has been observed in recent
years, and as it is thought to be slightly variable in its light, it may
possibly be identical with the long lost star of Tycho Brahe. Another new
star of almost equal brilliancy was observed in October, 1604, in
Ophiuchus, a few degrees southeast of the star Eta Ophiuchi. The planets
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn were close together in this vicinity, and one
evening Mostlin, a pupil of Kepler's, remarked that a new and very
brilliant star had joined the group. When first seen it was white, and
exceeded in brightness Mars and Jupiter, and was even thought to rival
Venus in splendor! It gradually diminished, however, and in six months was
not equal in luster to Saturn; in March, 1606, it had entirely
disappeared. In 1670 a star of the third magnitude was observed by Anthelm
near Beta Cygni. It remained visible for about two years, and increased
and diminished several times before it finally disappeared. Flamsteed's
star, No. 11 of Vulpecula, has been supposed to be identical with
Anthelm's star, but Baily could not find that such a star exists. A small
star has, however, been observed at Greenwich within one minute of arc of
the place assigned to the temporary star by Picard's observations.

Variability has been suspected in this faint star, and according to Hind
it has a hazy, ill-defined appearance about it, which may perhaps suggest
that it may be a small planetary nebula, similar to Schmidt's new star of
1876 in Cygnus. A small new star was observed by Hind in Ophiuchus on
April 28, 1848. When first noticed it was about the fifth magnitude. It
afterward rose to about fourth magnitude, but very soon faded away, and,
although still visible in the telescope, has become very faint in recent
years. A new star of seventh magnitude was found by Pogson on May 28,
1860, in the well-known star cluster known as 80 Messier in Scorpio. The
light of the star when first seen obscured the light of the nebula. On
June 10 the star had nearly disappeared, and the nebula was again seen
shining with great brilliancy.

A very interesting temporary star--known as the "Blaze Star"--suddenly
appeared in Corona Borealis in May, 1866. It was first seen by the late
Mr. Birmingham, of Tuam, Ireland, on the night of May 12, when it was of
the second magnitude and equal in brightness to Alphecca, the brightest
star in the well-known "Coronet." It must have made its appearance very
suddenly, for Dr. Schmidt, the director of the Athens observatory, stated
that he was observing this region of the heavens a few hours previously,
and noticed nothing unusual. It rapidly diminished in brightness, and on
May 24 of the same year was reduced to nearly the ninth magnitude. It was
soon discovered that the star had been previously observed, and its place
registered by the great German astronomer, Argelander, as of magnitude 9-1/2,
so that it is possibly a variable star of irregular period and fitful
variability. When near its maximum brilliancy, its light was examined by
Dr. Huggins with the spectroscope, which showed the bright lines of
incandescent hydrogen gas in addition to the ordinary stellar spectrum.
This implies that the great increase in its light was due to a sudden
outburst of hydrogen in the star's atmosphere. Some observers remarked
that when viewed with the naked eye it decidedly twinkled more than other
stars in the neighborhood, which rendered a correct estimate of its
relative brightness somewhat difficult. During the years 1866 to 1876,
Schmidt detected variations of light which seemed to show a period of
about 94 days, and these observations were confirmed by Schonfeld.

On the evening of November 24, 1876, the late Dr. Schmidt, of Athens,
discovered a new star of the third magnitude, near Rho Cygni, in a spot
where he was certain that no bright star was visible four nights
previously. When first seen, it was somewhat brighter than Eta Pegasi. It
did not, however, remain long at this degree of brightness, but rapidly
decreased, and on November 30 had faded to fifth magnitude. It afterward
diminished very regularly, and in September, 1885, was estimated only
fifteenth magnitude with the 15-1/2 inch refractor of Mr. Wigglesworth's
observatory. The star was examined with the spectroscope a few days after
its discovery, and showed bright lines similar to the "Blaze Star" in the
Northern Crown. One of these bright lines was believed to be identical
with Kirchhoff's No. 1474, which has been observed in the spectrum of the
solar corona during total eclipses of the sun. This star would seem to be
quite new, as there is no star in any of the catalogues in its position.
In September, 1877, it was examined with the spectroscope at Lord
Crawford's observatory, and its light was found to be almost entirely
monochromatic (of only one color), showing that the star "had changed into
a planetary nebula of small angular diameter" (!)

In August, 1885, a star of about seventh magnitude made its appearance
close to the nucleus of the Great Nebula in Andromeda--a well-known object
visible to the naked eye, and which has been well called "the Queen of the
Nebulae." The new star was independently discovered by several observers
toward the end of August, but seems to have been first certainly seen by
Mr. T. W. Ward, of Belfast, on August 19, at 11 P.M. At Greenwich
observatory the spectrum of the new star was found "of precisely the same
character as that of the nebula, _i. e._, it was perfectly continuous, no
lines, either bright or dark, being visible, and the red end was wanting."
Dr. Huggins, however, on September 9, thought he could see from three to
five bright lines in its spectrum. The star gradually faded away, and on
February 7, 1886, was estimated only sixteenth magnitude in the 26 inch
refractor of the naval observatory at Washington. From a series of
measures by Prof. Asaph Hall he found "no certain indications of any
parallax," so that evidently the star and the nebula, in which it probably
lies, are situated at an immense distance from the earth. Prof. Seeliger
has investigated the decrease in light of the star on the hypothesis that
it was a cooling body, which had been suddenly raised to an intense heat
by the shock of a collision, and finds a fair agreement between theory and
observation. Anwers points out the similarity between this outburst and
the new star of 1860 in the cluster 80 Messier, and thinks it very
probable that both phenomena were due to physical changes in the nebulae in
which they occurred.

With reference to the colors of the stars, some of the red stars have been
suspected to vary in color. The bright star Sirius is supposed--from the
description of it by ancient astronomers--to have been originally red, but
this seems very doubtful. The Persian astronomer Al Sufi, in his
"Description of the Heavens," written in the tenth century, describes the
well-known variable star Algol distinctly as a red star. It is now white,
and this is perhaps the best attested instance on record of change of
color in a bright star.--_Naturalists' Monthly._




                          THE COMMON DANDELION.

                      By FREDERICK LEROY SARGENT.


In the various names which the dandelion has received, we see expressed,
for the most part, either a reference to the tooth-like recurved lobes of
the leaves, Fig. 1, or an allusion to the medicinal properties of the
plant. Thus, our English name is a modified form of the French _dent de
lion_, meaning lion's tooth, and in German we have the same idea expressed
in _Loewenzahn_. Fifty years ago this plant appeared in the botanies as
_Leontodon taraxicum_, the generic name being derived from the Greek
_leon_, lion, and _odons_, tooth, and the specific from the Greek
_tarasso_, to stir up, in reference to the effect of a dose. In later
works we find the genus _Leontodon_, including the "fall dandelion" (_L.
autumnale_), but not the true dandelion, which now appears in a genus by
itself under the name _Taraxicum Densleonis_. Here the specific name is
merely "lion's tooth" again, in Latin.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

Finally, in the latest works our plant is given as _Taraxicum officinale_,
since this has been found to be the name which, according to the rules of
botanical nomenclature, takes precedence of all others. An allusion to the
teeth is thus no longer retained, the only reference remaining being to
the plant's officinal use.

To the majority of people the mention of the dandelion calls to mind not
so much its medicinal properties as its use for food. Although its
cultivation, either as a spring pot herb or as a salad with blanched
leaves, is comparatively modern, the wild plant seems to have been long
valued as a vegetable. There is reason to believe that the Romans made use
of it as a pot herb, and Chinese writers of the fourteenth century mention
its being eaten in their country, although there is no evidence of
cultivation at that time.

There are but few of our flowering plants that grow so widespread over the
world. It occurs in North America from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast,
in Europe, in Asia, and in the Arctic regions. This extensive range may in
part be accounted for by the fact that our plant belongs to the large and
aggressive family of the _Compositae_, and is thus related to such invaders
as daisies, burdocks, and thistles. Still, the dandelion has more to
recommend it than mere family connection; for, despite its lowly aspect,
it is no poor relation, but, as we shall hope to show in the present
article, it has many virtues of its own which entitle it to respect.

Prominent among these is its adaptability to the different conditions
under which it grows. It seems to make the best of everything. If by
chance a seed falls upon poor, thin soil, the young plant sends forth, as
rapidly as possible, a rosette of leaves pressed close to the earth. And
thus, on the principle that "possession is nine points of the law," it
secures for its roots the use of a certain amount of territory quite safe
from the encroachments of other plants. In rich ground the case is quite
different, for here there is so much nutriment in a small quantity of
earth, that the struggle for soil is not such a life and death matter as
in the less favored localities. Consequently we find a large number of
plants crowded together as close as they can stand; and it is obvious that
if, under these circumstances, the dandelion should develop a flat rosette
of leaves, the grass and other plants growing around would soon overshadow
it, and it would have small chance for life.

Our plant, therefore, extends its leaves upward, and does its best to
elongate them so as to keep pace with the growth of its rivals. But as
these are for the most part grasses and plants which grow by elongation of
the stem, the race for sunshine is rather in favor of these other plants,
for the reason that a given amount of material put into a stem makes a
stiffer organ than when put into a leaf. Still, even with these odds
against it, the dandelion seems well able to hold its own, for it probably
derives more or less advantage from the recurved lobes, or teeth, which
give the plant its name. These are admirably fitted to act in much the
same manner as a ratchet; and when the neighboring grasses are blown
against the dandelion, a blade may slide along the margin of the leaf
toward the base; but, as it springs back from its own elasticity, it
cannot slide in the opposite direction, for a tooth will catch it, and
thus force it to help support the leaf, and hold it up to the sunshine. We
need not stop to consider how the dandelion behaves in soil which is
neither very rich nor very poor, for enough has been said to show that it
has not much to fear from any rivals it may meet under ordinary
circumstances.

It is not only against the aggressions of neighboring plants, however,
that our dandelion needs to be prepared. It is at least equally important
for its welfare that it have some means of protection against herbivorous
animals--not only such as might eat its leaves, but also the more stealthy
ones that live upon the food which plants store underground. All such foes
it thwarts by a means as simple as it is efficient. Every part of the
plant contains a milky juice which is intensely bitter, and a first taste
is quite enough to convince the most stupid animal that raw dandelion is
not good eating, and most animals know enough to let it severely alone.
Curiously enough, however, in this, as in many other cases, it happens
that what in nature acts to deter animals from eating the plant, with man
offers the chief attraction, for it is this very bitter principle
(_taraxacin_) which gives to dandelion greens their peculiar flavor, and
affords the essential element in the extract which physicians prescribe.

The store of food, referred to above, which the dandelion accumulates in
its root, not infrequently enables it to pass, almost unharmed, through
dangers that with less provident plants would surely prove fatal. For
example, it must often happen that from drought or from being trampled
upon by animals, the leaves become wholly or in part destroyed. Now, if
there were no reserve store of food, the plant would have no chance of
rallying; but as it is, this food supplies the material for new growth,
and upon the return of favorable conditions, fresh leaves are developed,
and the plant lives on as before. Primarily, of course, the purpose of
this storage of food is to enable the plant to live on from year to year,
resting in the winter, and in the spring beginning work again with a good
start.

In comparing the higher with the lower plants, the superiority of the
former is most beautifully shown in the better provision which is made for
the welfare of offspring; and in this regard our dandelion stands among
the highest. Before we can understand the ways in which our little plant
performs this part of its life work, we must briefly consider the
structure of the blossom.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

If with a sharp knife we cut a blossom in halves, from the stem upward,
the parts represented in Fig. 2 will be disclosed. Surmounting the stalk
is a cushion-like receptacle, R, from the top of which arise a number of
tiny flowers, F, while from the side grow out a series of green scales, S,
forming an involucre around the whole. A single one of these florets, Fig.
3, exhibits the following parts: First, a bright yellow corolla, C O,
tubular below, but strap-shaped above, as if a tube had been split for
part of the way on one side, and the upper part flattened. Second, five
stamens, S K, attached by slender filaments, F M, to the tubular part of
the corolla, and with their anthers or pollen sacs, A N, joined together
by the edges to form a tube. Third, a single pistil having a long style, S
Y, which, above, passes through the anther tube, and bears at its end two
diverging stigmas, S G, and below connects by a short neck, N, with the
small ovary, O, which contains a solitary ovule. Fourth, a calyx, C X,
composed of numerous slender bristles.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The purpose of these complex structures is, of course, in one way or
another to secure the development of the ovule into a seed fitted to
produce a new plant. This development will proceed only after the ovule
has been influenced (_i. e._, fertilized) by pollen placed upon the
stigma; but when once the mysterious process of fertilization has taken
place, then there follows immediately those wonderful changes in the
blossom which culminate in the ripening of the fruit.

There are but two possible ways in which fertilization may be secured;
either the pollen which affects the ovule must come from the same flower
(then called close fertilization), or the pollen must come from another
flower of the same kind (cross fertilization). Now, while either of these
methods will insure the production of a seed, numerous experiments go to
show that those offspring which result from cross fertilization are in
many ways superior to those which are produced from close fertilization;
and it is to the advantages of cross fertilization that we have to look
for an explanation of the significance of many peculiar structures, not
only of the dandelion, but of flowers in general.

It is obvious that, to secure cross fertilization, there must be some
agent to transfer the pollen from one plant to another. Most commonly,
either the wind is taken advantage of for this purpose, as with elms,
pines, grasses, etc., or else flying insects are induced to perform the
office, as is the case with the majority of our familiar flowers. The wind
is a very wasteful carrier, so that for every grain that is properly
placed, thousands, or even millions, may be lost. Insects, on the
contrary, waste but little; and, moreover, as Aristotle so shrewdly
observed, they habitually confine their visits, for a number of trips,
exclusively to the flowers of one species.

The dandelion seems to fully appreciate the great advantages of securing
the services of insects, for it appeals most strongly to their love of
bright colors and their passion for sweets. As the flowers open, each tiny
golden cup is filled to the brim with purest nectar, and he must be a very
dull insect, indeed, that cannot see the brilliant head of flowers as far
as he can see anything. At any rate, it is not the dandelion's fault if he
does not, for the blossom is placed where it will be as conspicuous as
possible. If the surrounding herbage is tall, the flower stalk is
elongated, so that the crown of flowers may not be obscured. If the plants
around are low-lying, it would be wasteful to have a long stalk, so it has
a short one, sometimes so short that the blossom looks like a button in
the center of the leaf rosette. Economy of material is furthermore shown
in the fact that the stalk is always hollow, for it is a principle well
known to builders that, when there is required a pillar of a given
strength, less material is needed for the tubular form than for the solid
cylinder.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

But to return to our flower. We have next to consider how the visits of
insects are utilized to secure cross fertilization. If we examine the
anther tube of a flower that has just opened, Fig. 4, we shall see that
the style has not yet protruded, but fills the entire cavity, except such
space as is occupied by a quantity of pollen which the anthers have shed.
So much of the style as is within the tube is thickly beset with hairs
that point upward; and when the lower portion elongates, this hairy part
brushes the pollen out of the tube, and protrudes, covered with the yellow
dust, Fig. 5. At this stage, an insect coming for nectar must rub against
the style, and so become more or less covered with pollen. None of it,
however, can get upon the stigmas, for they are not yet exposed. After a
short time has elapsed, during which much of the pollen has probably been
rubbed off, the style is seen to split at the top; and as the halves
separate and roll back, Fig. 3, their inner faces (the stigmas) are
exposed. If, now, the flower be visited by an insect which has previously
been to a younger flower, the pollen he brings will be deposited upon the
stigmas as he rubs against them, and cross fertilization will be effected.

Let us suppose, however, that no insect visits the blossom--and this must
often happen to such as appear very early in the spring or late in the
fall, when hardly any insects are around. In such cases we find that seeds
are produced, and therefore we must infer that fertilization has in some
way or other been secured. An examination of a flower still older than any
we have considered, Fig. 6, will show us what takes place. Here it will be
seen that, after the stigmas have diverged, they continue to roll back,
until a coil of one or more turns has been made; and as a result of this
the stigmatic surface comes in contact with the hairs on the style, and
touches the pollen grains entangled by them. Still, the close
fertilization thus accomplished is only a last resort, and it can only
occur in the event of insects' visits having failed; for when pollen from
another flower has once fallen on the stigma, no pollen coming afterward
can have the least effect. Thus, we have another instance of the
dandelion's ability to make the best of its surroundings.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

It even adapts itself to the weather; for when the sun shines, the scales
of the involucre bend back, and the blossom is expanded to its fullest
extent; but in dull weather, or at night, the scales bend inward, and the
blossom is tightly closed. The advantages of this remarkable movement,
with its implied sensitiveness, is obvious when we consider that insects
are abroad only in sunshine, while at other times there is danger of dew
or rain getting into the nectar, and so spoiling it for the insects.

After fertilization has been accomplished throughout the blossom, the
involucre closes, and remains closed during the ripening of the fruit. The
changes which now take place are as follows: In each flower the corolla,
stamens, and style, being of no further use, wither, and sever their
connection with the ovary; the ovule develops into a seed containing a
tiny plantlet well provided with food for its use during germination; the
ovary grows to keep pace with the seed, its tissues become hardened, and a
number of spine-like projections develop near the upper part; and finally
the short neck which bears the calyx bristles elongates, pushing upward
the withered parts of the flower. At this stage the involucral scales bend
back through an arc of about 180 deg., the cushion-like receptacle becomes
almost spherically convex, the fruits radiate in all directions, the
bristles spread, and a beautiful cluster of little parachutes is presented
to the wind.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Even a glance at one of these fruits, Fig. 7, is sufficient to discover a
wonderful fitness for transportation by wind, and more careful study shows
that this fitness pervades every detail. For example, on examining the
bristles microscopically, Fig. 8, it is shown that they are not simple
threads, but each is hollow and has numerous projections extending on
either side, all of which serves to increase the buoyancy in a very
effective way.

The experience of aeronauts has shown that a highly important part in the
equipment of a balloon, after the attainment of buoyancy, is the provision
of some means of arresting the balloon's progress when the destination has
been reached. One of the most successful means which they employ is the
grappling hook; and as we find the base of our diminutive parachute
provided with a number of upwardly directed spines, it seems fair to
conclude that these serve to arrest the fruit upon favorable soil. If it
comes to rest upon a smooth surface--which, of course, would be
barren--the next breeze would easily blow it away; but if it chance to
fall on soil or among other plants, the effect of the spines would be to
retain it against the power of even a strong wind. Thus, we may leave it
safely landed upon good soil, ready to begin under favorable conditions
the cycle of its wonderful life.--_Popular Science News._




  SYSTEMATIC RELATIONS OF PLATYPSYLLUS, AS DETERMINED BY THE LARVA.[12]

                          By DR. C. V. RILEY.


There is always a great deal of interest attaching to organisms which are
unique in character and which systematists find difficulty in placing in
any of their schemes of classification. A number of instances will occur
to every working naturalist, and I need only refer to Limulus, and the
extensive literature devoted, during the past decade, to the discussion of
its true position, as a marked and well-known illustration. In hexapods
the common earwig and flea are familiar illustrations. These osculant or
aberrant forms occur most among parasitic groups, as the Stylopidae,
Hippoboscidae, Pulicidae, Mallophaga, etc. Probably no hexapod, however, has
more interested entomologists than _Platypsyllus castoris_ Ritsema, a
parasite of the beaver. I cannot better illustrate the diversity of
opinion respecting its true position in zoology than by giving an epitome
of the more important literature upon it.

[12] Read at the meeting of the National Academy of Sciences, April 20,
