fact, the operation of annealing must be repeated every time the glass
is melted. When cooled, it is again examined for veins, of which great
numbers are sure to be found. The problem now is to remove these by
cutting and grinding without either breaking the glass in two or
cutting a hole through it. If the parts of the glass are once
separated, they can never be joined without producing a bad scar at the
point of junction. So long, however, as the surface is unbroken, the
interior parts of the glass can be changed in form to any extent.
Having ground out the veins as far as possible, the glass is to be
again melted, and moulded into proper shape. In this mould great care
must be taken to have no folding of the surface. Imagining the latter
to be a sort of skin enclosing the melted glass inside, it must be
raised up wherever the glass is thinnest, and the latter allowed to
slowly run together beneath it.

[Illustration with caption: THE GLASS DISK.]

If the disk is of flint, all the veins must be ground out on the first
or second trial, because after two or three mouldings the glass will
lose its transparency. A crown disk may, however, be melted a number of
times without serious injury. In many cases--perhaps the majority--the
artisan finds that after all his months of labor he cannot perfectly
clear his glass of the noxious veins, and he has to break it up into
smaller pieces. When he finally succeeds, the disk has the form of a
thin grindstone two feet or upward in diameter, according to the size
of the telescope to be made, and from two to three inches in thickness.
The glass is then ready for the optician.

[Illustration with caption: THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL.]

The first process to be performed by the optician is to grind the glass
into the shape of a lens with perfectly spherical surfaces. The convex
surface must be ground in a saucer-shaped tool of corresponding form.
It is impossible to make a tool perfectly spherical in the first place,
but success may be secured on the geometrical principle that two
surfaces cannot fit each other in all positions unless both are
perfectly spherical. The tool of the optician is a very simple affair,
being nothing more than a plate of iron somewhat larger, perhaps a
fourth, than the lens to be ground to the corresponding curvature. In
order to insure its changing to fit the glass, it is covered on the
interior with a coating of pitch from an eighth to a quarter of an inch
thick. This material is admirably adapted to the purpose because it
gives way certainly, though very slowly, to the pressure of the glass.
In order that it may have room to change its form, grooves are cut
through it in both directions, so as to leave it in the form of
squares, like those on a chess-board.

[Illustration with caption: THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL.]

It is then sprinkled over with rouge, moistened with water, and gently
warmed. The roughly ground lens is then placed upon it, and moved from
side to side. The direction of the motion is slightly changed with
every stroke, so that after a dozen or so of strokes the lines of
motion will lie in every direction on the tool. This change of
direction is most readily and easily effected by the operator slowly
walking around as he polishes, at the same time the lens is to be
slowly turned around either in the opposite direction or more rapidly
yet in the same direction, so that the strokes of the polisher shall
cross the lens in all directions. This double motion insures every part
of the lens coming into contact with every part of the polisher, and
moving over it in every direction.

Then whatever parts either of the lens or of the polisher may be too
high to form a spherical surface will be gradually worn down, thus
securing the perfect sphericity of both.

[Illustration with caption: GRINDING A LARGE LENS.]

When the polishing is done by machinery, which is the custom in Europe,
with large lenses, the polisher is slid back and forth over the lens by
means of a crank attached to a revolving wheel. The polisher is at the
same time slowly revolving around a pivot at its centre, which pivot
the crank works into, and the glass below it is slowly turned in an
opposite direction. Thus the same effect is produced as in the other
system. Those who practice this method claim that by thus using
machinery the conditions of a uniform polish for every part of the
surface can be more perfectly fulfilled than by a hand motion. The
results, however, do not support this view. No European optician will
claim to do better than the American firm of Alvan Clark & Sons in
producing uniformly good object-glasses, and this firm always does the
work by hand, moving the glass over the polisher, and not the polisher
over the glass.

Having brought both flint and crown glasses into proper figure by this
process, they are joined together, and tested by observations either
upon a star in the heavens, or some illuminated point at a little
distance on the ground. The reflection of the sun from a drop of
quicksilver, a thermometer bulb, or even a piece of broken bottle,
makes an excellent artificial star. The very best optician will always
find that on a first trial his glass is not perfect. He will find that
he has not given exactly the proper curves to secure achromatism. He
must then change the figure of one or both the glasses by polishing it
upon a tool of slightly different curvature. He may also find that
there is some spherical aberration outstanding. He must then alter his
curve so as to correct this. The correction of these little
imperfections in the figures of the lenses so as to secure perfect
vision through them is the most difficult branch of the art of the
optician, and upon his skill in practising it will depend more than
upon anything else his ultimate success and reputation. The shaping of
a pair of lenses in the way we have described is not beyond the power
of any person of ordinary mechanical ingenuity, possessing the
necessary delicacy of touch and appreciation of the problem he is
attacking. But to make a perfect objective of considerable size, which
shall satisfy all the wants of the astronomer, is an undertaking
requiring such accuracy of eyesight, and judgment in determining where
the error lies, and such skill in manipulating so as to remove the
defects, that the successful men in any one generation can be counted
on one's fingers.

In order that the telescope may finally perform satisfactorily it is
not sufficient that the lenses should both be of proper figure; they
must also both be properly centred in their cells. If either lens is
tipped aside, or slid out from its proper central line, the definition
will be injured. As this is liable to happen with almost any telescope,
we shall explain how the proper adjustment is to be made.

The easiest way to test this adjustment is to set the cell with the two
glasses of the objective in it against a wall at night, and going to a
short distance, observe the reflection in the glass of the flame of a
candle held in the hand. Three or four reflections will be seen from
the different surfaces. The observer, holding the candle before his
eye, and having his line of sight as close as possible to the flame,
must then move until the different images of the flame coincide with
each other. If he cannot bring them into coincidence, owing to
different pairs coinciding on different sides of the flame, the glasses
are not perfectly centred upon each other. When the centring is
perfect, the observer having the light in the line of the axes of the
lenses, and (if it were possible to do so) looking through the centre
of the flame, would see the three or four images all in coincidence. As
he cannot see through the flame itself, he must look first on one side
and then on the other, and see if the arrangement of the images seen in
the lenses is symmetrical. If, going to different distances, he finds
no deviation from symmetry, in this respect the adjustment is near
enough for all practical purposes.

A more artistic instrument than a simple candle is a small concave
reflector pierced through its centre, such as is used by physicians in
examining the throat.

[Illustration with caption: IMAGE OF CANDLE-FLAME IN OBJECT-GLASS.]

[Illustration with caption: TESTING ADJUSTMENT OF OBJECT-GLASS.]

Place this reflector in the prolongation of the optical axis, set the
candle so that the light from the reflector shall be shown through the
glass, and look through the opening. Images of the reflector itself
will then be seen in the object-glass, and if the adjustment is
perfect, the reflector can be moved so that they will all come into
coincidence together.

When the objective is in the tube of the telescope, it is always well
to examine this adjustment from time to time, holding the candle so
that its light shall shine through the opening perpendicularly upon the
object-glass. The observer looks upon one side of the flame, and then
upon the other, to see if the images are symmetrical in the different
positions. If in order to see them in this way the candle has to be
moved to one side of the central line of the tube, the whole objective
must be adjusted. If two images coincide in one position of the
candle-flame, and two in another position, so that they cannot all be
brought together in any position, it shows that the glasses are not
properly adjusted in their cell. It may be remarked that this last
adjustment is the proper work of the optician, since it is so difficult
that the user of the telescope cannot ordinarily effect it. But the
perpendicularity of the whole objective to the tube of the telescope is
liable to be deranged in use, and every one who uses such an instrument
should be able to rectify an error of this kind.

The question may be asked, How much of a telescope can an amateur
observer, under any circumstances, make for himself? As a general rule,
his work in this direction must be confined to the tube and the
mounting. We should not, it is true, dare to assert that any ingenious
young man, with a clear appreciation of optical principles, could not
soon learn to grind and polish an object-glass for himself by the
method we have described, and thus obtain a much better instrument than
Galileo ever had at his command. But it would be a wonderful success if
his home-made telescope was equal to the most indifferent one which can
be bought at an optician's. The objective, complete in itself, can be
purchased at prices depending upon the size.

[Footnote: The following is a rough rule for getting an idea of the
price of an achromatic objective, made to order, of the finest quality.
Take the cube of the diameter in inches, or, which is the same thing,
calculate the contents of a cubical box which would hold a sphere of
the same diameter as the clear aperture of the glass. The price of the
glass will then range from $1 to $1.75 for each cubic inch in this box.
For example, the price of a four-inch objective will probably range
from $64 to $112. Very small object-glasses of one or two inches may be
a little higher than would be given by this rule. Instruments which are
not first-class, but will answer most of the purposes of the amateur,
are much cheaper.]

[Illustration with caption: A VERY PRIMITIVE MOUNTING FOR A TELESCOPE.]

The tube for the telescope may be made of paper, by pasting a great
number of thicknesses around a long wooden cylinder. A yet better tube
is made of a simple wooden box. The best material, however, is metal,
because wood and pasteboard are liable both to get out of shape, and to
swell under the influence of moisture. Tin, if it be of sufficient
thickness, would be a very good material. The brighter it is kept, the
better. The work of fitting the objective into one end of a tin tube of
double thickness, and properly adjusting it, will probably be quite
within the powers of the ordinary amateur. The fitting of the eye-piece
into the other end of the tube will require some skill and care both on
his own part and that of his tinsmith.

Although the construction of the eye-piece is much easier than that of
the objective, since the same accuracy in adjusting the curves is not
necessary, yet the price is lower in a yet greater degree, so that the
amateur will find it better to buy than to make his eye-piece, unless
he is anxious to test his mechanical powers. For a telescope which has
no micrometer, the Huyghenian or negative eye-piece, as it is commonly
called, is the best. As made by Huyghens, it consists of two
plano-convex lenses, with their plane sides next the eye, as shown in
the figure.

[Illustration with caption: THE HUYGHENIAN EYE-PIECE.]

So far as we have yet described our telescope it is optically complete.
If it could be used as a spy-glass by simply holding it in the hand,
and pointing at the object we wish to observe, there would be little
need of any very elaborate support. But if a telescope, even of the
smallest size, is to be used with regularity, a proper "mounting" is as
essential as a good instrument. Persons unpractised in the use of such
instruments are very apt to underrate the importance of those
accessories which merely enable us to point the telescope. An idea of
what is wanted in the mounting may readily be formed if the reader will
try to look at a star with an ordinary good-sized spy-glass held in the
hand, and then imagine the difficulties he meets with multiplied by
fifty.

The smaller and cheaper telescopes, as commonly sold, are mounted on a
simple little stand, on which the instrument admits of a horizontal and
vertical motion. If one only wants to get a few glimpses of a celestial
object, this mounting will answer his purpose. But to make anything
like a study of a celestial body, the mounting must be an equatorial
one; that is, one of the axes around which the telescope moves must be
inclined so as to point towards the pole of the heavens, which is near
the polar star. This axis will then make an angle with the horizon
equal to the latitude of the place. The telescope cannot, however, be
mounted directly on this axis, but must be attached to a second one,
itself fastened to this one.

[Illustration with caption: SECTION OF THE PRIMITIVE MOUNTING. P P.
Polar axis, bearing a fork at the upper end A. Declination axis passing
through the fork E. Section of telescope tube C. Weight to balance the
tube.]

When mounted in this way, an object can be followed in its diurnal
motion from east to west by turning on the polar axis alone. But if the
greatest facility in use is required, this motion must be performed by
clock-work. A telescope with this appendage will commonly cost one
thousand dollars and upward, so that it is not usually applied to very
small ones.

We will now suppose that the reader wishes to purchase a telescope or
an object-glass for himself, and to be able to judge of its
performance. He must have the object-glass properly adjusted in its
tube, and must use the highest power; that is, the smallest eye-piece,
which he intends to use in the instrument. Of course he understands
that in looking directly at a star or a celestial object it must appear
sharp in outline and well defined. But without long practice with good
instruments, this will not give him a very definite idea. If the person
who selects the telescope is quite unpractised, it is possible that he
can make the best test by ascertaining at what distance he can read
ordinary print. To do this he should have an eye-piece magnifying about
fifty times for each inch of aperture of the telescope. For instance,
if his telescope is three inches clear aperture, then his eye-piece
should magnify one hundred and fifty times; if the aperture is four
inches, one magnifying two hundred times may be used. This magnifying
power is, as a general rule, about the highest that can be
advantageously used with any telescope. Supposing this magnifying power
to be used, this page should be legible at a distance of four feet for
every unit of magnifying power of the telescope. For example, with a
power of 100, it should be legible at a distance of 400 feet; with a
power of 200, at 800 feet, and so on. To put the condition into another
shape: if the telescope will read the print at a distance of 150 feet
for each inch of aperture with the best magnifying power, its
performance is at least not very bad. If the magnifying power is less
than would be given by this rule, the telescope should perform a little
better; for instance, a three-inch telescope with a power of 60 should
make this page legible at a distance of 300 feet, or four feet for each
unit of power.

The test applied by the optician is much more exact, and also more
easy. He points the instrument at a star, or at the reflection of the
sun's rays from a small round piece of glass or a globule of
quicksilver several hundred yards away, and ascertains whether the rays
are all brought to a focus. This is not done by simply looking at the
star, but by alternately pushing the eye-piece in beyond the point of
distinct vision and drawing it out past the point. In this way the
image of the star will appear, not as a point, but as a round disk of
light. If the telescope is perfect, this disk will appear round and of
uniform brightness in either position of the eye-piece. But if there is
any spherical aberration or differences of density in different parts
of the glass, the image will appear distorted in various ways. If the
spherical aberration is not correct, the outer rim of the disk will be
brighter than the centre when the eye-piece is pushed in, and the
centre will be the brighter when it is drawn out. If the curves of the
glass are not even all around, the image will appear oval in one or the
other position. If there are large veins of unequal density, wings or
notches will be seen on the image. If the atmosphere is steady, the
image, when the eye-piece is pushed in, will be formed of a great
number of minute rings of light. If the glass is good, these rings will
be round, unbroken, and equally bright. We present several figures
showing how these spectral images, as they are sometimes called, will
appear; first, when the eye-piece is pushed in, and secondly, when it
is drawn out, with telescopes of different qualities.

We have thus far spoken only of the refracting telescope, because it is
the kind with which an observer would naturally seek to supply himself.
At the same time there is little doubt that the construction of a
reflector of moderate size is easier than that of a corresponding
refractor. The essential part of the reflector is a slightly concave
mirror of any metal which will bear a high polish. This mirror may be
ground and polished in the same way as a lens, only the tool must be
convex.

[Illustration with caption: SPECTRAL IMAGES OF STARS; THE UPPER LINE
SHOWING HOW THEY APPEAR WITH THE EYE-PIECE PUSHED IN, THE LOWER WITH
THE EYE-PIECE DRAWN OUT.

A The telescope is all right B Spherical aberration shown by the light
and dark centre C The objective is not spherical but elliptical D The
