silent slave.

With a deep bow he gave into her hands a small leathern bag, and drew
about her shoulders a silken cloak. Her manner had subtly changed when
she beckoned Conan to follow her out of the chamber.

In an arch that opened on the street, she turned to him, drawing herself
up with a new regality.

'I must now tell you the truth,' she said. 'I am not Zabibi. I am
Nafertari. And _he_ is not Alafdhal, a poor captain of the guardsmen. He
is Jungir Khan, satrap of Zamboula.'

Conan made no comment; his scarred dark countenance was immobile.

'I lied to you because I dared not divulge the truth to anyone,' she
said. 'We were alone when Jungir Khan went mad. None knew of it but
myself. Had it been known that the satrap of Zamboula was a madman,
there would have been instant revolt and rioting, even as Totrasmek
planned, who plotted our destruction.

'You see now how impossible is the reward for which you hoped. The
satrap's mistress is not--cannot be for you. But you shall not go
unrewarded. Here is a sack of gold.'

She gave him the bag she had received from the slave.

'Go, now, and when the sun is come up to the palace, I will have Jungir
Khan make you captain of his guard. But you will take your orders from
me, secretly. Your first duty will be to march a squad to the shrine of
Hanuman, ostensibly to search for clues of the priest's slayer; in
reality to search for the Star of Khorala. It must be hidden there
somewhere. When you find it, bring it to me. You have my leave to go
now.'

He nodded, still silent, and strode away. The girl, watching the swing
of his broad shoulders, was piqued to note that there was nothing in his
bearing to show that he was in any way chagrined or abashed.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he had rounded a corner, he glanced back, and then changed his
direction and quickened his pace. A few moments later he was in the
quarter of the city containing the Horse Market. There he smote on a
door until from the window above a bearded head was thrust to demand the
reason for the disturbance.

'A horse,' demanded Conan. 'The swiftest steed you have.'

'I open no gates at this time of night,' grumbled the horse-trader.

Conan rattled his coins.

'Dog's son knave! Don't you see I'm white, and alone? Come down, before
I smash your door!'

Presently, on a bay stallion, Conan was riding toward the house of Aram
Baksh.

He turned off the road into the alley that lay between the tavern
compound and the date-palm garden, but he did not pause at the gate. He
rode on to the northeast corner of the wall, then turned and rode along
the north wall, to halt within a few paces of the northwest angle. No
trees grew near the wall, but there were some low bushes. To one of
these he tied his horse, and was about to climb into the saddle again,
when he heard a low muttering of voices beyond the corner of the wall.

Drawing his foot from the stirrup he stole to the angle and peered
around it. Three men were moving down the road toward the palm groves,
and from their slouching gait he knew they were negroes. They halted at
his low call, bunching themselves as he strode toward them, his sword in
his hand. Their eyes gleamed whitely in the starlight. Their brutish
lust shone in their ebony faces, but they knew their three cudgels could
not prevail against his sword, just as he knew it.

'Where are you going?' he challenged.

'To bid our brothers put out the fire in the pit beyond the groves,' was
the sullen, guttural reply. 'Aram Baksh promised us a man, but he lied.
We found one of our brothers dead in the trap-chamber. We go hungry this
night.'

'I think not,' smiled Conan. 'Aram Baksh will give you a man. Do you see
that door?'

He pointed to a small, iron-bound portal set in the midst of the western
wall.

'Wait there. Aram Baksh will give you a man.'

Backing warily away until he was out of reach of a sudden bludgeon blow,
he turned and melted around the northwest angle of the wall. Reaching
his horse he paused to ascertain that the blacks were not sneaking after
him, and then he climbed into the saddle and stood upright on it,
quieting the uneasy steed with a low word. He reached up, grasped the
coping of the wall and drew himself up and over. There he studied the
grounds for an instant. The tavern was built in the southwest corner of
the enclosure, the remaining space of which was occupied by groves and
gardens. He saw no one in the grounds. The tavern was dark and silent,
and he knew all the doors and windows were barred and bolted.

Conan knew that Aram Baksh slept in a chamber that opened into a
cypress-bordered path that led to the door in the western wall. Like a
shadow he glided among the trees and a few moments later he rapped
lightly on the chamber door.

'What is it?' asked a rumbling voice within.

'Aram Baksh!' hissed Conan. 'The blacks are stealing over the wall!'

Almost instantly the door opened, framing the tavern-keeper, naked but
for his shirt, with a dagger in his hand.

He craned his neck to stare into the Cimmerian's face.

'What tale is this--_you!_'

Conan's vengeful fingers strangled the yell in his throat. They went to
the floor together and Conan wrenched the dagger from his enemy's hand.
The blade glinted in the starlight, and blood spurted. Aram Baksh made
hideous noises, gasping and gagging on a mouthful of blood. Conan
dragged him to his feet and again the dagger slashed, and most of the
curly beard fell to the floor.

Still gripping his captive's throat--for a man can scream incoherently
even with his tongue slit--Conan dragged him out of the dark chamber and
down the cypress-shadowed path, to the iron-bound door in the outer
wall. With one hand he lifted the bolt and threw the door open,
disclosing the three shadowy figures which waited like black vultures
outside. Into their eager arms Conan thrust the innkeeper.

A horrible, blood-choked scream rose from the Zamboulan's throat, but
there was no response from the silent tavern. The people there were used
to screams outside the wall. Aram Baksh fought like a wild man, his
distended eyes turned frantically on the Cimmerian's face. He found no
mercy there. Conan was thinking of the scores of wretches who owed their
bloody doom to this man's greed.

In glee the negroes dragged him down the road, mocking his frenzied
gibberings. How could they recognize Aram Baksh in this half-naked,
bloodstained figure, with the grotesquely shorn beard and unintelligible
babblings? The sounds of the struggle came back to Conan, standing
beside the gate, even after the clump of figures had vanished among the
palms.

Closing the door behind him, Conan returned to his horse, mounted and
turned westward, toward the open desert, swinging wide to skirt the
sinister belt of palm groves. As he rode, he drew from his belt a ring
in which gleamed a jewel that snared the starlight in a shimmering
iridescence. He held it up to admire it, turning it this way and that.
The compact bag of gold pieces clinked gently at his saddle-bow, like a
promise of the greater riches to come.

'I wonder what she'd say if she knew I recognized her as Nafertari and
him as Jungir Khan the instant I saw them,' he mused. 'I knew the Star
of Khorala, too. There'll be a fine scene if she ever guesses that I
slipped it off his finger while I was tying him with his sword-belt. But
they'll never catch me, with the start I'm getting.'

He glanced back at the shadowy palm groves, among which a red glare was
mounting. A chanting rose to the night, vibrating with savage
exultation. And another sound mingled with it, a mad, incoherent
screaming, a frenzied gibbering in which no words could be
distinguished. The noise followed Conan as he rode westward beneath the
paling stars.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shadows in Zamboula, by Robert E. Howard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHADOWS IN ZAMBOULA ***

***** This file should be named 42196.txt or 42196.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
