Octavia sensed that grim peril lurked in those leafy fastnesses. Her
breath came pantingly and she pressed close to her protector. But the
forest was silent now, and they saw no shape of menace until they
emerged from the trees and glimpsed a figure standing on the edge of the
cliffs.

Jehungir Agha had escaped the doom that had overtaken his warriors when
an iron giant sallied suddenly from the gate and battered and crushed
them into bits of shredded flesh and splintered bone. When he saw the
swords of his archers break on that man-like juggernaut, he had known it
was no human foe they faced, and he had fled, hiding in the deep woods
until the sounds of slaughter ceased. Then he crept back to the stair,
but his boatmen were not waiting for him.

They had heard the screams, and presently, waiting nervously, had seen,
on the cliff above them, a blood-smeared monster waving gigantic arms in
awful triumph. They had waited for no more. When Jehungir came upon the
cliffs they were just vanishing among the reeds beyond ear-shot.
Khosatral was gone--had either returned to the city or was prowling the
forest in search of the man who had escaped him outside the walls.

Jehungir was just preparing to descend the stairs and depart in Conan's
boat, when he saw the _hetman_ and the girl emerge from the trees. The
experience which had congealed his blood and almost blasted his reason
had not altered Jehungir's intentions toward the _kozak_ chief. The
sight of the man he had come to kill filled him with gratification. He
was astonished to see the girl he had given to Jelal Khan, but he wasted
no time on her. Lifting his bow he drew the shaft to its head and
loosed. Conan crouched and the arrow splintered on a tree, and Conan
laughed.

'Dog!' he taunted. 'You can't hit me! I was not born to die on Hyrkanian
steel! Try again, pig of Turan!'

Jehungir did not try again. That was his last arrow. He drew his
scimitar and advanced, confident in his spired helmet and close-meshed
mail. Conan met him half-way in a blinding whirl of swords. The curved
blades ground together, sprang apart, circled in glittering arcs that
blurred the sight which tried to follow them. Octavia, watching, did not
see the stroke, but she heard its chopping impact, and saw Jehungir
fall, blood spurting from his side where the Cimmerian's steel had
sundered his mail and bitten to his spine.

But Octavia's scream was not caused by the death of her former master.
With a crash of bending boughs Khosatral Khel was upon them. The girl
could not flee; a moaning cry escaped her as her knees gave way and
pitched her grovelling to the sward.

Conan, stooping above the body of the Agha, made no move to escape.
Shifting his reddened scimitar to his left hand, he drew the great
half-blade of the Yuetshi. Khosatral Khel was towering above him, his
arms lifted like mauls, but as the blade caught the sheen of the sun,
the giant gave back suddenly.

But Conan's blood was up. He rushed in, slashing with the crescent
blade. And it did not splinter. Under its edge the dusky metal of
Khosatral's body gave way like common flesh beneath a cleaver. From the
deep gash flowed a strange ichor, and Khosatral cried out like the
dirging of a great bell. His terrible arms flailed down, but Conan,
quicker than the archers who had died beneath those awful flails,
avoided their strokes and struck again and yet again. Khosatral reeled
and tottered; his cries were awful to hear, as if metal were given a
tongue of pain, as if iron shrieked and bellowed under torment.

Then wheeling away he staggered into the forest; he reeled in his gait,
crashed through bushes and caromed off trees. Yet though Conan followed
him with the speed of hot passion, the walls and towers of Dagon loomed
through the trees before the man came within dagger-reach of the giant.

Then Khosatral turned again, flailing the air with desperate blows, but
Conan, fired to berserk fury, was not to be denied. As a panther strikes
down a bull moose at bay, so he plunged under the bludgeoning arms and
drove the crescent blade to the hilt under the spot where a human's
heart would be.

Khosatral reeled and fell. In the shape of a man he reeled, but it was
not the shape of a man that struck the loam. Where there had been the
likeness of a human face, there was no face at all, and the metal limbs
melted and changed.... Conan, who had not shrunk from Khosatral living,
recoiled blenching from Khosatral dead, for he had witnessed an awful
transmutation; in his dying throes Khosatral Khel had become again the
_thing_ that had crawled up from the Abyss millenniums gone. Gagging
with intolerable repugnance, Conan turned to flee the sight; and he was
suddenly aware that the pinnacles of Dagon no longer glimmered through
the trees. They had faded like smoke--the battlements, the crenellated
towers, the great bronze gates, the velvets, the gold, the ivory, and
the dark-haired women, and the men with their shaven skulls. With the
passing of the inhuman intellect which had given them rebirth, they had
faded back into the dust which they had been for ages uncounted. Only
the stumps of broken columns rose above crumbling walls and broken paves
and shattered dome. Conan again looked upon the ruins of Xapur as he
remembered them.

The wild _hetman_ stood like a statue for a space, dimly grasping
something of the cosmic tragedy of the fitful ephemera called mankind
and the hooded shapes of darkness which prey upon it. Then as he heard
his name called in accents of fear, he started, as one awaking from a
dream, glanced again at the thing on the ground, shuddered and turned
away toward the cliffs and the girl that waited there.

She was peering fearfully under the trees, and she greeted him with a
half-stifled cry of relief. He had shaken off the dim monstrous visions
which had momentarily haunted him, and was his exuberant self again.

'Where is _he_?' she shuddered.

'Gone back to hell whence he crawled,' he replied cheerfully. 'Why
didn't you climb the stair and make your escape in my boat?'

'I wouldn't desert--' she began, then changed her mind, and amended
rather sulkily, 'I have nowhere to go. The Hyrkanians would enslave me
again, and the pirates would--'

'What of the _kozaks_?' he suggested.

'Are they better than the pirates?' she asked scornfully. Conan's
admiration increased to see how well she had recovered her poise after
having endured such frantic terror. Her arrogance amused him.

'You seemed to think so in the camp by Ghori,' he answered. 'You were
free enough with your smiles then.'

Her red lip curled in disdain. 'Do you think I was enamored of you? Do
you dream that I would have shamed myself before an ale-guzzling,
meat-gorging barbarian unless I had to? My master--whose body lies
there--forced me to do as I did.'

'Oh!' Conan seemed rather crestfallen. Then he laughed with undiminished
zest. 'No matter. You belong to me now. Give me a kiss.'

'You dare ask--' she began angrily, when she felt herself snatched off
her feet and crushed to the _hetman's_ muscular breast. She fought him
fiercely, with all the supple strength of her magnificent youth, but he
only laughed exuberantly, drunk with his possession of this splendid
creature writhing in his arms.

He crushed her struggles easily, drinking the nectar of her lips with
all the unrestrained passion that was his, until the arms that strained
against him melted and twined convulsively about his massive neck. Then
he laughed down into the clear eyes, and said: 'Why should not a chief
of the Free People be preferable to a city-bred dog of Turan?'

She shook back her tawny locks, still tingling in every nerve from the
fire of his kisses. She did not loosen her arms from his neck. 'Do you
deem yourself an Agha's equal?' she challenged.

He laughed and strode with her in his arms toward the stair. 'You shall
judge,' he boasted. 'I'll burn Khawarizm for a torch to light your way
to my tent.'





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Devil in Iron, by Robert E. Howard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEVIL IN IRON ***

***** This file should be named 42209.txt or 42209.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/2/0/42209/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
