biting the earth.

'Some young couple just hitting out on their own,' Conan was saying as
he wiped his sword unemotionally. 'On their way to the fort when the
Picts met them. Maybe the boy was going to enter the service; maybe take
up land on the river. Well, that's what will happen to every man, woman
and child this side of Thunder River if we don't get them into Velitrium
in a hurry.'

Balthus' knees trembled as he followed Conan. But there was no hint of
weakness in the long easy stride of the Cimmerian. There was a kinship
between him and the great gaunt brute that glided beside him. Slasher no
longer growled with his head to the trail. The way was clear before
them. The yelling on the river came faintly to them, but Balthus
believed the fort was still holding. Conan halted suddenly, with an
oath.

He showed Balthus a trail that led north from the road. It was an old
trail, partly grown with new young growth, and this growth had recently
been broken down. Balthus realized this fact more by feel than sight,
though Conan seemed to see like a cat in the dark. The Cimmerian showed
him where broad wagon tracks turned off the main trail, deeply indented
in the forest mold.

'Settlers going to the licks after salt,' he grunted. 'They're at the
edges of the marsh, about nine miles from here. Blast it! They'll be cut
off and butchered to a man! Listen! One man can warn the people on the
road. Go ahead and wake them up and herd them into Velitrium. I'll go
and get the men gathering the salt. They'll be camped by the licks. We
won't come back to the road. We'll head straight through the woods.'

With no further comment Conan turned off the trail and hurried down the
dim path, and Balthus, after staring after him for a few moments, set
out along the road. The dog had remained with him, and glided softly at
his heels. When Balthus had gone a few rods he heard the animal growl.
Whirling, he glared back the way he had come, and was startled to see a
vague ghostly glow vanishing into the forest in the direction Conan had
taken. Slasher rumbled deep in his throat, his hackles stiff and his
eyes balls of green fire. Balthus remembered the grim apparition that
had taken the head of the merchant Tiberias not far from that spot, and
he hesitated. The thing must be following Conan. But the giant Cimmerian
had repeatedly demonstrated his ability to take care of himself, and
Balthus felt his duty lay toward the helpless settlers who slumbered in
the path of the red hurricane. The horror of the fiery phantom was
overshadowed by the horror of those limp, violated bodies beside the
burning ox-wain.

He hurried down the road, crossed Scalp Creek and came in sight of the
first settler's cabin--a long, low structure of ax-hewn logs. In an
instant he was pounding on the door. A sleepy voice inquired his
pleasure.

'Get up! The Picts are over the river!'

That brought instant response. A low cry echoed his words and then the
door was thrown open by a woman in a scanty shift. Her hair hung over
her bare shoulders in disorder; she held a candle in one hand and an ax
in the other. Her face was colorless, her eyes wide with terror.

'Come in!' she begged. 'We'll hold the cabin.'

'No. We must make for Velitrium. The fort can't hold them back. It may
have fallen already. Don't stop to dress. Get your children and come
on.'

'But my man's gone with the others after salt!' she wailed, wringing her
hands. Behind her peered three tousled youngsters, blinking and
bewildered.

'Conan's gone after them. He'll fetch them through safe. We must hurry
up the road to warn the other cabins.'

Relief flooded her countenance.

'Mitra be thanked!' she cried. 'If the Cimmerian's gone after them,
they're safe if mortal man can save them!'

In a whirlwind of activity she snatched up the smallest child and herded
the others through the door ahead of her. Balthus took the candle and
ground it out under his heel. He listened an instant. No sound came up
the dark road.

'Have you got a horse?'

'In the stable,' she groaned. 'Oh, hurry!'

He pushed her aside as she fumbled with shaking hands at the bars. He
led the horse out and lifted the children on its back, telling them to
hold to its mane and to one another. They stared at him seriously,
making no outcry. The woman took the horse's halter and set out up the
road. She still gripped her ax and Balthus knew that if cornered she
would fight with the desperate courage of a she-panther.

He held behind, listening. He was oppressed by the belief that the fort
had been stormed and taken; that the dark-skinned hordes were already
streaming up the road toward Velitrium, drunken on slaughter and mad for
blood. They would come with the speed of starving wolves.

Presently they saw another cabin looming ahead. The woman started to
shriek a warning, but Balthus stopped her. He hurried to the door and
knocked. A woman's voice answered him. He repeated his warning, and soon
the cabin disgorged its occupants--an old woman, two young women and
four children. Like the other woman's husband, their men had gone to the
salt licks the day before, unsuspecting of any danger. One of the young
women seemed dazed, the other prone to hysteria. But the old woman, a
stern old veteran of the frontier, quieted them harshly; she helped
Balthus get out the two horses that were stabled in a pen behind the
cabin and put the children on them. Balthus urged that she herself mount
with them, but she shook her head and made one of the younger women
ride.

'She's with child,' grunted the old woman. 'I can walk--and fight, too,
if it comes to that.'

As they set out, one of the women said: 'A young couple passed along the
road about dusk; we advised them to spend the night at our cabin, but
they were anxious to make the fort tonight. Did--did--'.

'They met the Picts,' answered Balthus briefly, and the woman sobbed in
horror.

They were scarcely out of sight of the cabin when some distance behind
them quavered a long high-pitched yell.

'A wolf!' exclaimed one of the women.

'A painted wolf with an ax in his hand,' muttered Balthus. 'Go! Rouse
the other settlers along the road and take them with you. I'll scout
along behind.'

Without a word the old woman herded her charges ahead of her. As they
faded into the darkness, Balthus could see the pale ovals that were the
faces of the children twisted back over their shoulders to stare toward
him. He remembered his own people on the Tauran and a moment's giddy
sickness swam over him. With momentary weakness he groaned and sank down
in the road; his muscular arm fell over Slasher's massive neck and he
felt the dog's warm moist tongue touch his face.

He lifted his head and grinned with a painful effort.

'Come on, boy,' he mumbled, rising. 'We've got work to do.'

A red glow suddenly became evident through the trees. The Picts had
fired the last hut. He grinned. How Zogar Sag would froth if he knew his
warriors had let their destructive natures get the better of them. The
fire would warn the people farther up the road. They would be awake and
alert when the fugitives reached them. But his face grew grim. The women
were traveling slowly, on foot and on the overloaded horses. The
swift-footed Picts would run them down within a mile, unless--he took
his position behind a tangle of fallen logs beside the trail. The road
west of him was lighted by the burning cabin, and when the Picts came he
saw them first--black furtive figures etched against the distant glare.

Drawing a shaft to the head, he loosed and one of the figures crumpled.
The rest melted into the woods on either side of the road. Slasher
whimpered with the killing lust beside him. Suddenly a figure appeared
on the fringe of the trail, under the trees, and began gliding toward
the fallen timbers. Balthus' bow-string twanged and the Pict yelped,
staggered and fell into the shadows with the arrow through his thigh.
Slasher cleared the timbers with a bound and leaped into the bushes.
They were violently shaken and then the dog slunk back to Balthus' side,
his jaws crimson.

No more appeared in the trail; Balthus began to fear they were stealing
past his position through the woods, and when he heard a faint sound to
his left he loosed blindly. He cursed as he heard the shaft splinter
against a tree, but Slasher glided away as silently as a phantom, and
presently Balthus heard a thrashing and a gurgling; then Slasher came
like a ghost through the bushes, snuggling his great, crimson-stained
head against Balthus' arm. Blood oozed from a gash in his shoulder, but
the sounds in the wood had ceased for ever.

The men lurking on the edges of the road evidently sensed the fate of
their companion, and decided that an open charge was preferable to being
dragged down in the dark by a devil-beast they could neither see nor
hear. Perhaps they realized that only one man lay behind the logs. They
came with a sudden rush, breaking cover from both sides of the trail.
Three dropped with arrows through them--and the remaining pair
hesitated. One turned and ran back down the road, but the other lunged
over the breastwork, his eyes and teeth gleaming in the dim light, his
ax lifted. Balthus' foot slipped as he sprang up, but the slip saved his
life. The descending ax shaved a lock of hair from his head, and the
Pict rolled down the logs from the force of his wasted blow. Before he
could regain his feet Slasher tore his throat out.

Then followed a tense period of waiting, in which time Balthus wondered
if the man who had fled had been the only survivor of the party.
Obviously it had been a small band that had either left the fighting at
the fort, or was scouting ahead of the main body. Each moment that
passed increased the chances for safety of the women and children
hurrying toward Velitrium.

Then without warning a shower of arrows whistled over his retreat. A
wild howling rose from the woods along the trail. Either the survivor
had gone after aid, or another party had joined the first. The burning
cabin still smoldered, lending a little light. Then they were after him,
gliding through the trees beside the trail. He shot three arrows and
threw the bow away. As if sensing his plight, they came on, not yelling
now, but in deadly silence except for a swift pad of many feet.

He fiercely hugged the head of the great dog growling at his side,
muttered: 'All right, boy, give 'em hell!' and sprang to his feet,
drawing his ax. Then the dark figures flooded over the breastworks and
closed in a storm of flailing axes, stabbing knives and ripping fangs.




7 The Devil in the Fire


When Conan turned from the Velitrium road he expected a run of some nine
miles and set himself to the task. But he had not gone four when he
heard the sounds of a party of men ahead of him. From the noise they
were making in their progress he knew they were not Picts. He hailed
them.

'Who's there?' challenged a harsh voice. 'Stand where you are until we
know you, or you'll get an arrow through you.'

'You couldn't hit an elephant in this darkness,' answered Conan
impatiently. 'Come on, fool; it's I--Conan. The Picts are over the
river.'

'We suspected as much,' answered the leader of the men, as they strode
forward--tall, rangy men, stern-faced, with bows in their hands. 'One of
our party wounded an antelope and tracked it nearly to Black River. He
heard them yelling down the river and ran back to our camp. We left the
salt and the wagons, turned the oxen loose and came as swiftly as we
could. If the Picts are besieging the fort, war-parties will be ranging
up the road toward our cabins.'

'Your families are safe,' grunted Conan. 'My companion went ahead to
take them to Velitrium. If we go back to the main road we may run into
the whole horde. We'll strike southeast, through the timber. Go ahead.
I'll scout behind.'

A few moments later the whole band was hurrying southeastward. Conan
followed more slowly, keeping just within ear-shot. He cursed the noise
they were making; that many Picts or Cimmerians would have moved through
the woods with no more noise than the wind makes as it blows through the
black branches.

He had just crossed a small glade when he wheeled answering the
conviction of his primitive instincts that he was being followed.
Standing motionless among the bushes he heard the sounds of the
retreating settlers fade away. Then a voice called faintly back along
the way he had come: 'Conan! Conan! Wait for me, Conan!'

'Balthus!' he swore bewilderedly. Cautiously he called: 'Here I am.'

'Wait for me, Conan!' the voice came more distinctly.

Conan moved out of the shadows, scowling. 'What the devil are you doing
here?--Crom!'

He half crouched, the flesh prickling along his spine. It was not
Balthus who was emerging from the other side of the glade. A weird glow
burned through the trees. It moved toward him, shimmering weirdly--a
green witch-fire that moved with purpose and intent.

It halted some feet away and Conan glared at it, trying to distinguish
its fire-misted outlines. The quivering flame had a solid core; the
flame was but a green garment that masked some animate and evil entity;
but the Cimmerian was unable to make out its shape or likeness. Then,
shockingly, a voice spoke to him from amidst the fiery column.

'Why do you stand like a sheep waiting for the butcher, Conan?'

The voice was human but carried strange vibrations that were not human.

'Sheep?' Conan's wrath got the best of his momentary awe. 'Do you think
I'm afraid of a damned Pictish swamp devil? A friend called me.'

'I called in his voice,' answered the other. 'The men you follow belong
to my brother; I would not rob his knife of their blood. But you are
mine. Oh, fool, you have come from the far gray hills of Cimmeria to
meet your doom in the forests of Conajohara.'
