"Very likely," admitted Terry. "But the point?"

"Is that we mustn't fall into a savage's way of thinking about last
night's affair."

Terry said, "I couldn't agree with you more. But just what are you
driving at?"

"There's a dredge being made for me in Barca. I'm afraid you may suspect
that I'm trying to--stir up something with it. To poke something we
_know_ is somewhere but can't identify. I didn't want you to try the
fish-paddle in deep water, that's true. But...."

"You're explaining," said Terry, "that you didn't want me to whack a
fish-driving paddle overside in deep water."

Davis hesitated, and then nodded.

"The phenomena you're interested in are under water?"

"Yes," said Davis. "They are in the Luzon Deep area."

"Then, to be co-operative, I'll test this contrivance in ten to fifteen
feet of water in the Barca harbor. And I will not get temperamental
about your suggestions that I should not mess up your deep-water
inquiries."

"Thanks," said Davis.

He went forward to meet Nick, just coming abovedecks with a slip of
paper in his hand. It occurred to Terry, suddenly, that somebody went
below down the forecastle hatch just about every hour on the hour. They
must be in short-wave communication with Manila. It had been mentioned
last night--a loran fix on the _Esperance's_ position. There were
apparently frequent reports to somebody somewhere.

The afternoon went by. A tree-lined shore appeared to the eastward just
when the gaudy colorings of a beautiful sunset filled all the western
sky. The _Esperance_ changed course and followed the coast line, some
miles out. Night fell. The yacht sailed with a fine smooth motion over
the ocean swells.

After dinner Davis was below, fiddling with the knobs to pick up
short-wave music from San Francisco, and the muted sound of an argument
came occasionally from the forecastle where the four crew-cuts resided.
Terry and Deirdre went on deck.

"My father," said Deirdre, "says you understand each other better, now.
He doesn't think you're going to feel offended with us, and he's really
pleased. He says your mind doesn't work like his, but you come to more
or less the same conclusions, which makes it likely the conclusions are
right."

Terry grimaced.

"My conclusion," he observed, "is that I haven't enough facts yet to
come to any conclusion."

"Of course!" said Deirdre. "Just like my father!"

They sat in silence. It was not exactly a tranquil stillness. It was
pleasant enough to be here on the slanting deck of a beautiful yacht,
driving competently through dark seas under a canopy of stars. But now
Terry realized he was constantly aware of Deirdre. He liked her. But
he'd liked other people, male and female, without being continually
conscious of their existence. Girls are usually more conscious of such
things than men. At least ninety-nine per cent of the time, a man does
not modify his behavior because of the age, sex, and marital status of
the people he comes in contact with. It isn't relevant to most of what
he says and does. But a girl frequently modifies her actions in just
such circumstances. Deirdre was well aware of the slightly uneasy,
extremely interested state of Terry's mind. There was silence for a long
time. Then a shooting star went across the sky. It went out.

"Would you like to hear something really wild?" asked Deirdre, ruefully.
"That shooting star, just then. It used to be true that more
meteorites--shooting stars--had fallen and been recovered in Kansas than
any other place in the world. But it would be ridiculous to think they
aimed for Kansas, wouldn't it?"

Terry nodded, not following at all.

"At Thrawn Island," said Deirdre, "since the satellite-tracking station
has been built, space-radars have picked up more bolides--big
meteors--coming in to fall in the Luzon Deep than ever in Kansas or
anywhere else. I think my father frets over that, simply because he's so
concerned about the Luzon Deep."

Terry heard himself saying irrelevantly, "I'd like to ask you a few
strictly personal questions, Deirdre. What's your favorite food? What
music do you like? Where would you like best to live? When...."

Deirdre turned her head to smile at him.

"I've been wondering," she said, "if you thought of me only as a fellow
researcher or whether you'd noticed that I'm a person, too. Hmmmmm.
There's a restaurant in Manila where they still cut their steaks along
the muscle instead of across it, but where they make some unheard-of
dishes. That place has some of my favorite foods. And...."

"Next time we're in Manila we'll try it," said Terry. "Now, I know a
place...."

The _Esperance_ went on. Presently, the moon rose and moonlight glinted
on the waves while the stars looked cynically down on the small yacht
upon the sea. And two people talked comfortably and absorbedly about
things nobody else would have thought very interesting.

When Terry turned in for the night he realized pleasantly that he was
very glad he'd let himself be persuaded to join the _Esperance's_
company.

Dawn came. Terry was already on deck when the _Esperance_ threaded her
way into a small harbor. There were palm trees along the shore, and
there was a Philippine town with edifices ranging from burnt brick to
stucco to mere nipa huts on its outskirts. Two-man fishing boats were
making their way out from the shore on which they'd been beached. From
somewhere came the staccato, back-firing noise of an old
automobile-engine being warmed up for the day's work. It would
undoubtedly be the bus for Manila. But it was not thinkable that Terry
should take it, now.

The yacht dropped anchor and lay indolently at rest while her crew
breakfasted and the morning deck routine was being performed. Then
Deirdre appeared in shore-going clothes of extreme femininity. Davis too
was dressed otherwise than as usual.

"We're going ashore to the shipyard," he told Terry. "If you'd like to
come--"

"I've something to do here," said Terry.

Two of the crew-cuts got a boat overside and headed it for the shore.
Terry got out the recorder and the submarine ear and horn. He set up his
apparatus for a test. Tony came from belowdecks and watched. Then he
came closer.

"If I can help," he said tentatively.

"You can," Terry told him. "But let's listen to what the fish are
saying, first."

He dropped over the submarine ear and started the recorder to play what
it picked up, but without recording it. Sounds from underwater came out
of the speakers. The slappings of tiny harbor-waves against the yacht's
planking; the chunking, rhythmic sound of oars from a fishing boat which
was rowing after the half-dozen that had gone out earlier; grunting
sounds. Those were fish.

Terry listened critically, and Tony with interest. Then Terry brought
out the fish-driving paddle. He turned on the tape, now, to have a
record of the sound the paddle made.

"Whack this on the water," he suggested, "and we'll hear how it sounds."

Tony went down the ladder and gave the water surface a few resounding
whacks. There were tiny, violent swirlings. For thirty or forty feet
from the _Esperance's_ side there were isolated, minute turmoils in the
water. Three or four fish actually leaped clear of the surface.

"Not bad!" said Tony. "Shall I whack some more?"

Terry reeled back a few feet of the tape which contained the whacking
sounds. He re-played them, listening critically as before. Tony had
returned to the deck. The whackings, as heard underwater, were not
merely impacts. There was a resonance to them. Almost a hum. Rather
grimly, Terry substituted this tape-reel with the recording he'd made
the night before. He started the instrument and found the exact spot
where the object from the depths had fallen back into the sea. He
stopped the recorder right there. He hauled up the submarine ear and
plugged in the horn to the audio-amplifier, as yet untested, which
should multiply the volume of sound from the tape. Then he put the horn
overside.

He switched on the recorder again. The tape-reel began to spin. The
sound went out underwater from the horn. Underwater it was much louder
than when it had been received by the _Esperance's_ microphone. Here it
was confined by the surface above and the harbor-bottom beneath. It must
have been the equivalent of a loud shout in a closed room--only worse.

The fish in the harbor of Barca went mad. All the harbor-surface turned
to spray. Creatures of all sizes leaped crazily above the surface, their
fins flapping, only to leap again, more frantically still, when they
fell back. A totally unsuspected school of very small flying fish
flashed upward in such frenzied haste that some tried to climb too
steeply and fell back and instantly flung themselves into the air again.

Terry turned off the playing recorder. The disorder at the top of the
water ceased immediately. But he heard shrill outcries. Children had
been wading at the edge of the shore. They stampeded for solid ground,
shrieking. Where their feet and legs had been underwater they felt as if
a million pins and needles had pricked them.

Something flapped heavily on the _Esperance's_ deck. Tony went to see.
It was a three-pound fish which had leaped clear of the water and over
the yacht's rail to the deck.

Tony threw it back into the water.

"I guess there's not much doubt," he said painfully.

"Of what?" demanded Terry.

"Of what ... I had guessed," said Tony.

"And what did you guess?"

Tony hesitated.

"I guess," he said unhappily, "that I'd better not say."

He watched with a startled, uneasy expression on his face as Tony put
the apparatus away.

Time passed. Davis and Deirdre had been ashore over an hour. Then Terry
saw the small boat leave the shore and approach. It came deftly
alongside, the two passengers climbed up to the deck, and all four
crew-cuts hauled the boat back inboard and lashed it fast.

"Our dredge isn't ready yet," said Davis. "It looks good, but there'll
be a delay of a few days."

Deirdre examined Terry's expression.

"Something's happened. What?"

Terry told her. Davis listened. Tony added what he'd seen, including the
fish that had leaped high enough out of the water to land on the
_Esperance's_ deck.

"After the fact," said Davis, "I can see how it could happen. But...."
He hesitated for a long time and then said, "This is another case where
I've been making guesses and hoping I was wrong. And like the others,
proof that my early guess was wrong makes another guess necessary. And I
dislike the later guess much more than the first."

He moved restlessly.

"I'm glad you only tried it once, here," he said unhappily. "We're due
up at Thrawn Island anyhow. You can work this trick out in the lagoon up
there. If there's no reaction to the dredge when we try it, we can try
this. But it might be a very violent poke at something we don't quite
believe in. I'd rather try a gentle poke first."

He turned away. In minutes Nick was belowdecks starting the yacht's
engine, two others of the crew-cuts were hauling up the anchor, and the
fourth was at the wheel. Without haste, but with celerity, the
_Esperance_ headed for the harbor-mouth and the open sea.

They had their midday meal heading north by west. Late in the afternoon
Deirdre found occasion to talk to Terry about Thrawn Island.

"It's the China Sea tracking station for satellites," she told him.
"Some of the staff are friends of my father's. It's right on the edge of
the Luzon Deep, and the island's actually an underwater mountain that
just barely protrudes above the surface. There are some hills, a coral
reef and a lagoon. It's also terrifically steep, and you can use the
fish-driving device as much as you please without startling any Filipino
fishermen."

"You've been there before," said Terry.

"Oh, yes! I told you a fish wearing a plastic object was caught in the
lagoon there. That was when the station was being built. The men at the
tracking station fish in the lagoon for fun, and now they're naturally
watching out for more ... oddities."

The _Esperance_ sailed on. The crew-cuts went about their various chores
and talked endlessly, among themselves and with Deirdre, when she joined
in. Terry felt useless. He trailed the submarine ear overboard and set
the recorder to work as an amplifier only. At low volume it played the
sounds of things below. He kept half an ear cocked toward it for the
mooing sound he'd picked up at the place where the ocean glittered. He
heard it again now, and again found it difficult to imagine any cause
for it. The sounds uttered by noisemaking fish are usually produced in
their swim-bladders. The purpose of fish cries is as obscure as the
reason for some insect stridulations, or the song of many birds. But a
long-continued fish noise would involve a swim-bladder of large size. At
great depths, if a considerable cavity were filled with gas, under
pressures running into tons to the square inch.... Terry could not
quite believe it.

He did not hear the mooing sound any more, as the yacht went on its way.
Other underwater sounds became commonplace, and he tended not to hear
them. From the deck around him, though, he heard arguments about wave
mechanics, prospects in the World Series, the virtues of Dixieland jazz,
ichthyology, Copeland's contribution to modern music, the possibility of
life on other planets, and kindred topics. The crew-cuts were taking
their summer vacations as able seamen on board the _Esperance_, but they
had as many and as voluble opinions as any other undergraduates. They
aired them on each other.

The afternoon passed. Night fell, and dinner was a session of learned
discussion of different subjects, always vehemently argued. Later Terry
took the yacht's wheel, Deirdre sat comfortably nearby, and they
discussed matters suitable to their more mature status. They were much
less intellectual than the crew-cuts. In a few days they developed an
interest in each other, but each of them believed this was just a very
pleasant friendship.

Eventually, the moon rose. It was close to midnight when Nick bobbed
belowdecks and came up with a report that they'd been picked up by the
Thrawn Island radar and were proceeding exactly on course. Half an hour
later a tiny light appeared at the edge of the sea. The _Esperance_
headed for it, and presently there were breakers to port and starboard,
the engine rumbled, down below, and the yacht lifted and fell more
violently than ordinary. Then once more she was in glassy-smooth water;
the air was very heavy with the smell of green vegetation. Certain
rectangles of light became visible. They were the windows of the Thrawn
Island satellite-tracking installation.

The _Esperance's_ sails were lowered and she moved toward the lights on
engine power only. There was no movement ashore, though Nick had talked
with the island on short-wave.

