    Is the Moon Inhabited?
    Description of the Recent Most Important Mechanical Inventions.
    Counterfeiting American Goods.
    The Steam Street Railways of New York City.
    Improved Piston Rod Stuffing Box. One engraving.
    Improved Automatic Fan. One engraving.
    Wandering Needles.
    Improved Step Box. One engraving.
    Heat Conductivity.
    New Volcano in Peru.
    Wood Carver of Simla. One engraving.
    Natural History Notes.
    Belgium, Holland, and England.
    Jointed Artillery.
    The Armstrong 100-ton Gun.
    The Phonograph.
    Scientific American Boat Drawings.
    Wire Tramway Worked by Water Wheels.
    Shell Polishing.
    Floating Batteries at Kertch.
    Apparatus for Administering Medicine to Horses. One engraving.
    Apprentice Shops for the Boys.
    A Boat Older than the Ark. Three figures.
    Employment of Ships against Forts.
    The Otto Bicycle. One engraving.
    A Simple Gas Generator. One engraving.
    Labor in Scotland.
    The Cattle Drives of 1878.
    Effects of Emancipation.
    A New Trouble with French Wines.
    The New Twin Steamer "Calais-Douvres." One engraving.
    Industrial Drawing and Art Studies.
    Vulcanizing Rubber.
    Strawberries and Constipation.
    Professor Langley's Papers on the Sun.
    Destruction vs. Construction of Ironclads.
    How Raisins are Prepared.
    The Sun.--A Total Eclipse. With six engravings.
    The Bishop of Manchester on British Trade Depression.
    A New Insect Pest.
    Death of a Giant.
    Edison's Phonomotor. Two engravings.
    Excavating Scoop. One engraving.
    Treatment of Acute Rheumatism.
    How a Horse Trots.
    Danger of Carbolic Acid Dressings.
    Welded Union and Rebel Bullets. One engraving.
    Indicator of a Steamboat Engine.
    A Remedy for the Effects of the Poison Ivy.
    Thymol.
    Copper Oysters.
    The Use of Antimony in Batteries.
    Photographs on Silk.
    How to Use a File. A valuable practical paper.
    Our Iron Industry.
    Two Ways of Looking at the Same Facts.
    New Screw-cutting Lathe. One engraving.
    New Cloth Measuring Apparatus. One engraving.
    Moth Remedies.
    Gampert's Wood-sole Shoe. Three engravings.
    Science and Sentiment.
    American Coal in Europe.
    An Active Volcano in the Moon.
    Tic-douloureux.
    Landing of Cleopatra's Needle. One large engraving.
    Heat Conductivity.
    The Total Eclipse of the Sun, July 29. Two figures.
    New Iron Fence. Two engravings.
    The Adjutant. One engraving.
    A New Disinfectant.
    The Curiosities of Tobacco.
    Preserving Fish by Hydraulic Pressure.

Answers to Correspondents, embodying a large quantity of valuable
information, practical recipes, and instructions in various arts.

Single numbers of the Scientific American Export Edition, 50 cents. To
be had at this office, and at all news stores.

                        MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
                                37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.

To Advertisers: =>Manufacturers and others who desire to secure foreign
trade may have large and handsomely displayed announcements published in
this edition at a very moderate cost.

The Scientific American Export Edition has a large guaranteed
circulation in all commercial places throughout the world. Address MUNN
& CO., 37 Park Row, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




                           =Advertisements.=
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  =Inside Page, each insertion      75 cents a line.
  Back Page, each insertion        $1.00 a line.=
                     (About eight words to a line.)

  _Engravings may head advertisements at the same rate per line, by
    measurement, as the letter press. Advertisements must be received at
    publication office as early as Thursday morning to appear in next
    issue._
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  SEND 30 CENTS BY MAIL AND GET

[Illustration: A KEY THAT WILL WIND ANY WATCH]
AND NOT WEAR OUT

Circulars free. Mention paper.
                J. S. BIRCH & CO., 33 Dey Street, N. Y.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GEOLOGICAL ANTIQUITY OF Flowers and Insects. By J. E. TAYLOR, F.G.S.
A plain, comprehensive review of the subject, bringing forward many
instructive facts; with six illustrations. The invariable correlation
between insects and flowers. How they are fossilized. Fossil botany.
Geological Evidences of Evolution. Correspondence in the succession of
Animal and Vegetable life. Flowers necessary to Insects, and Insects
necessary to Flowers. Insects and Plants in the Devonian, the
Switzerland Lias, the English Stonesfield Slate, the Tertiary Strata,
the Coal Measures, a Greenland, and other formations. A Peculiar Aspect
of Evolution. Contained in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. =120.=
Price 10 cents. To be had at this office and of all newsdealers.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
THE PHONOGRAPH AND ITS FUTURE. BY THOMAS A. EDISON. The instrument and
its Action. Durability, Duplication, and Postal Transmission of
Phonograph Plates. The probable great utility of the Phonograph in
Letter-writing, Business Correspondence and Dictation; Literature;
Education; Law; Music; Oratory, etc. Application to Musical Boxes, Toys,
and Clocks. Telegraphy of the Future; the Phonograph and Telephone
combined. Being a most interesting and valuable paper by the author and
inventor of the Phonograph himself. Contained in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN
SUPPLEMENT, NO. =124.= Price 10 cents. To be had at this office and of
all newsdealers.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  THE
[Illustration: "Scientific American." In Gothic script]

            =The Most Popular Scientific Paper in the World.
                          THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.=

             =Only $3.20 a Year including Postage. Weekly.
                          52 Numbers a Year.=

=This widely circulated= and splendidly illustrated paper is published
weekly. Every number contains sixteen pages of useful information, and a
large number of original engravings of new inventions and discoveries,
representing Engineering Works, Steam Machinery, New Inventions,
Novelties in Mechanics, Manufactures, Chemistry, Electricity,
Telegraphy, Photography, Architecture, Agriculture, Horticulture,
Natural History, etc.

=All Classes of Readers= find in THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN a popular
_resume_ of the best scientific information of the day; and it is the
aim of the publishers to present it in an attractive form, avoiding as
much as possible abstruse terms. To every intelligent mind, this journal
affords a constant supply of instructive reading. It is promotive of
knowledge and progress in every community where it circulates.

=Terms of Subscription.=--One copy of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN will be
sent for _one year_--52 numbers--postage prepaid, to any subscriber in
the United States or Canada, on receipt of =three dollars and twenty
cents= by the publishers; six months, $1.60; three months, $1.00.

=Clubs.=--=One extra copy= of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN will be supplied
gratis _for every club of five subscribers_ at $3.20 each; additional
copies at same proportionate rate. Postage prepaid.

One copy of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of THE SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT will be sent for one year, postage prepaid, to any
subscriber in the United States or Canada, on receipt of _seven dollars_
by the publishers.

The safest way to remit is by Postal Order, Draft, or Express. Money
carefully placed inside of envelopes, securely sealed, and correctly
addressed, seldom goes astray, but is at the sender's risk. Address all
letters and make all orders, drafts, etc., payable to

                                                      =MUNN & CO.,
                                                 37 Park Row, New York.=

=To Foreign Subscribers.=--Under the facilities of the Postal Union, the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN is now sent by post direct from New York, with
regularity, to subscribers in Great Britain, India, Australia, and all
other British colonies; to France, Austria, Belgium, Germany, Russia,
and all other European States; Japan, Brazil, Mexico, and all States of
Central and South America. Terms, when sent to foreign countries, Canada
excepted, $4, gold, for SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, 1 year; $9, gold, for both
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and SUPPLEMENT for 1 year. This includes postage,
which we pay. Remit by postal order or draft to order of Munn & Co., 37
Park Row, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                            WALTHAM WATCHES.

             _Improved in Quality, but no higher in price._

After this date, we shall sell none but =New Model Waltham Watches=,
particulars of which will be found in our New Price List.

Every one concedes that genuine WALTHAM watches are superior to all
others, and at present prices they are within the reach of all.

We continue to send single watches by mail or express to any part of the
country, no matter how remote, without any risk to the purchaser.

Price List sent free and postpaid.

  _Address_ HOWARD & CO.,
              =No. 264 Fifth Ave., New York.=

_All silver cases for the_ NEW MODEL WATCHES _are made of sterling
silver, and cases as well as movements are guaranteed by special
certificate._
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
[Illustration:

                           BEST AND CHEAPEST
                               FOOT POWER
                             SCREW CUTTING
     $85.                    ENGINE LATHES


                        SEE FULL DESCRIPTION IN
                      SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN JULY 27
                     SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE
                           GOODNOW & WIGHTMAN
                    176 WASHINGTON ST. BOSTON MASS.
]
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    The Midsummer Holiday Scribner.

                         ANOTHER ROYAL NUMBER.

            Charming Writers--New Artists--Superb Engraving.

The August number of this progressive magazine is the third "Midsummer
Holiday" issue, and the publisher is confident that in literary and
artistic excellence it will be found fully equal to, if not in advance
of, its predecessors, which met with such distinguished favor from the
press and the public.

It opens with a Frontispiece,

                      =A NEW PORTRAIT OF BRYANT,=

Drawn in crayon, from life, by WYATT EATON, and engraved by COLE, with a
sketch of the haunts and homes of Bryant, by HORATIO N. POWERS, with
numerous wood-cuts.

Among the other illustrated material is

                     "=A SEA-PORT ON THE PACIFIC,="

By MARY HALLOCK FOOTE. The drawings are also by Mrs. Foote, and are
engraved by Marsh, Cole, and others. They have not been excelled in
magazine literature for charm, picturesqueness, and fine engraving. A
paper of wide interest is

                   "=TO SOUTH AFRICA for DIAMONDS!="

By Dr. W. J. MORTON, a narrative of personal experience in the mines,
with striking illustrations of this romantic and curious life. There are
also

                      =TWO CHARMING FIELD PAPERS=:

"Sharp Eyes" by JOHN BURROUGHS, with illustrations by a new artist;
"Glimpses of New England Farm Life," by R. E. ROBINSON, a paper of rare
picturesque interest.

There are illustrated poems by Dr. HOLLAND and J. T. TROWBRIDGE; also,
poems by STEDMAN, BRET HARTE, and others.

THE ILLUSTRATIONS are by Wyatt Eaton, Mary Hallock Foote, Vanderhoof,
Waud, Frederick Dielman, R. Swain Gifford, Jervis McEntee, Henry Farrer,
Winslow Homer, J. E. Kelly, Walter Shirlaw, L. C. Tiffany, Thomas Moran,
Will H. Low, Mrs. Fanny Eliot Gifford, and others.

The shorter stories are by STOCKTON and HENRY JAMES, Jr.

DR. EGGLESTON'S STORY of WESTERN LIFE reaches its climax, and will end
in October.

A New Novel,

                      "=FALCONBERG," by BOYESEN,=

Begins in this issue. It is a story of immigrant life in America, told
by one of the most promising of the younger generation of novelists, and
will be read with interest abroad as well as at home.

The Editorial Departments include "Our Commune," "The Death of Bryant,"
"Greatness in Art," "A Rural Art Association," "Recent Improvements in
Telephony," thoughtful and suggestive Book Reviews, Humorous Sketches
and Verses by new hands, &c., &c.

The frontispiece is upon a peculiar tint of paper, manufactured by
Warren expressly for Eaton's portrait of Bryant. The printing is by De
Vinne, from the press of Francis Hart & Co., who take rank among the
foremost printers of the world.

EDITION =85,000.= Price 35 cents Sold by all News-dealers and
Book-sellers.

                      =SCRIBNER & CO., NEW YORK.=
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Baker Rotary Pressure Blower.

  [Illustration]

                            (FORCED BLAST.)

                    Warranted superior to any other.

                            WILBRAHAM BROS.
                          2318 Frankford Ave.
                                   PHILADELPHIA.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                      OUTWARD MARKS OF A GOOD COW.

  By Capt. JOHN C. MORRIS, Pa. Carelessness in Breeding. How to Select
  for Breeding. Marks of the Handsome Cow. Care and Training of the
  Heifer. Infallible Marks of Good Milkers. Distinguishing Marks and
  Characteristics of the "Bastard" and the "Bogus" Cow, etc. Contained,
  with useful Remarks on Bee Culture, in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT
  NO. =135.= Price 10 cents. To be had at this office and of all
  newsdealers.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          PATENTS AT AUCTION.

  Regular Monthly Sales the first week of each month by George W.
  Keeler, Auctioneer, at his salesrooms, 53 and 55 Liberty Street, N.
  Y. For terms, etc., address The New York Patent Exchange, 53 Liberty
  St., N. Y.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                  SPARE THE CROTON AND SAVE THE COST.

                          Driven or Tube Wells
  furnished to large consumers of Croton and
  Ridgewood Water. WM. D. ANDREWS & BRO., 414 Water St., N. Y., who
  control the patent for Green's American Driven Well
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  [Illustration]

                                 BIBB'S
                     Celebrated Original Baltimore
                           Fire Place Heaters
                         Mantels and Registers.
                           B. C. BIBB & SON,
                             Baltimore, Md.

  Best workmanship. Lowest prices guaranteed. Send for circulars.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       JAPANESE ART MANUFACTURES.

  By Christopher Dresser, Ph.D., etc. Paper read before Society of
  Arts. The Japanese Potter at Work. Curious mode of Making Scarfs. How
  the Japanese Print on Cloth. Japanese Process for Silk Ornamentation.
  Japanese Weaving. How Fine Japanese Fans are made. Japanese Method
  of Making Moulds for Ornamental Castings for Vessels, Bronzes,
  etc. Japanese Lacquer Manufacture. Curious Method of Decorating
  Lacquer Work. The Love and Pursuit of the Beautiful in Japan. A very
  entertaining, instructive, and comprehensive paper. Contained in
  SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. =115.= Price 10 cents. To be had
  at this office and of all newsdealers.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  [Illustration]

                               BURNHAM'S

                            STANDARD TURBINE

                              WATER WHEEL.

                      WARRANTED BEST AND CHEAPEST.

                        N. F. BURNHAM, YORK, PA.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                RUPTURE

  Relieved and cured, without the injury trusses inflict, by Dr. J. A.
  Sherman's method of support and curative externally applied. Office,
  251 Broadway, N. Y. His book, with photographic likenesses of bad
  cases before and after cure, mailed for 10 cents. Beware of imitators.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  =25= =NEW YEAR CARDS=, with name, 20c. 25 Extra Mixed, 10c. Geo. I.
      Reed & Co., Nassau, N. Y.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          =ARTIFICIAL LIGHT.=

  We have just introduced this important facility, which enables us to
  prosecute our work in =cloudy weather=, and to push through hurried
  orders =in the night=.

  [Illustration:
                         NEW METHOD OF ENGRAVING
                              Moss' Process.
                           Photo Engraving Co.
                         67 Park Place, New York.
  L. SMITH HOBART, President.              JOHN C. MOSS, Superintendent.
  ]

                             RELIEF PLATES

  For Newspaper, Book, and Catalogue Illustrations. Engraved in
  Type-Metal, by a new Photo-Chemical Method, from all kinds of Prints,
  Pen Drawings, Original Designs, Photographs, etc., =much cheaper
  than wood cuts=. These plates have a perfectly smooth printing
  surface, and the lines are =as deep, as even, and as sharp= as they
  could possibly be cut by hand. We guarantee that they will print
  satisfactorily, on wet or dry paper, and on any press where type or
  wood cuts can be so printed. Electrotypes may be made from them in
  the usual way.

  =Our plates are now used by the principal publishers and manufacturers
  in every State in the Union.=   _Send stamp for illustrated Circular._
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
               =State, County and Shop Rights For Sale.=

  The Patent Adjustable Die Co. invite the attention of Printers,
  Lithographers, Paper Box Makers, Leather, Cloth, and Metal Workers,
  and all who use dies of any description, or who cut by laborious
  hand work patterns of any size or shape, to their patent device for
  cutting any desired outline at a cost of a few cents, and doing
  it with exactness, cutting from one to three hundred at a single
  pressure. Among those who have purchased shop rights, the following
  are referred to: Rand, Macnally & Co.; Donnelly, Loyd & Co.; Shoeber
  & Carqueville Lithograph Co.; Wright & Leonard; Frank Roehr; Gregory
  & Staiger; Western Label Man. Co.; S. A. Grant & Co., Cincinnati.

                       PATENT ADJUSTABLE DIE CO.,
                                No. 96 Dearborn Street, Chicago, Il.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  [Illustration]

                    =BARNES' FOOT POWER MACHINERY.=

  13 Different machines with which Builders, Cabinet Makers, Wagon
  Makers, and Jobbers in miscellaneous work can compete as to QUALITY
  AND PRICE with steam power manufacturing; also Amateurs' supplies.
  MACHINES SENT ON TRIAL.

  Say where you read this, and send for catalogue and prices.

                          W. F. & JOHN BARNES,
                     Rockford, Winnebago Co., Ill.

                           Eastern Agency for

                    =Barnes' Foot Power Machinery.=

  _Full line in stock_ at factory prices. Can be seen in operation at
  CHAS. E. LITTLE'S, 59 Fulton St., N. Y. _Cast Steel Pump Log Augers
  and Reamers a specialty._
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  =$250.= HEALD, SISCO & CO.'S "=RELIABLE=" 20 Horse Power, Stationary,
  Horizontal, Double-crank Steam Engine. Complete with Judson Governor,
  Boiler-feed Pump, Water Heater, etc. Best and cheapest in the world,
  and fully guaranteed. TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY DOLLARS. Send for
  circular to
                HEALD, SISCO & CO., Baldwinsville, N. Y.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       =Wood-Working Machinery,=

  Such as Woodworth Planing, Tonguing, and Grooving Machines, Daniel's
  Planers, Richardson's Patent Improved Tenon Machines, Mortising,
  Moulding, and Re-Saw Machines, and Wood-Working Machinery generally.
  Manufactured by

                      WITHERBY, RUGG & RICHARDSON,
                                   26 Salisbury Street, Worcester, Mass.

  (Shop formerly occupied by R. BALL & CO.)
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         =PATENT MINERAL WOOL.=

  Entirely _Fireproof_, undecaying, and the best _non-conductor of heat,
  cold, or sound_. Cheaper than hair-felt.

                              =A. D. ELBERS=,
  _P. O. Box 4461._                                  26-1/2 Broadway, N. Y.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  [Illustration: WROUGHT IRON BEAMS & GIRDERS]

  THE UNION IRON MILLS, Pittsburgh, Pa., Manufacturers of improved
  wrought iron Beams and Girders (patented).

  The great fall which has taken place in the prices of Iron,
  and especially in Beams used in the construction of FIRE PROOF
  BUILDINGS, induces us to call the special attention of Engineers,
  Architects, and Builders to the undoubted advantages of now erecting
  Fire Proof structures; and by reference to pages 52 & 54 of our
  Book of Sections--which will be sent on application to those
  contemplating the erection of fire proof buildings--THE COST CAN
  BE ACCURATELY CALCULATED, the cost of Insurance avoided, and the
  serious losses and interruption to business caused by fire; these
  and like considerations fully justify any additional first cost. It
  is believed, that, were owners fully aware of the small difference
  which now exists between the use of Wood and Iron, in many cases the
  latter would be adopted. We shall be pleased to furnish estimates
  for all the Beams complete, for any specific structure, so that the
  difference in cost may at once be ascertained. Address

                                CARNEGIE, BROS. & CO., Pittsburgh, Pa.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                            =Pond's Tools=,

                 =Engine Lathes, Planers, Drills, &c.=

  Send for Catalogue. DAVID W. POND, Successor to LUCIUS W. POND.
  =Worcester, Mass.=
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  =$3 GOLD PLATED WATCHES.= Cheapest in the known world. _Sample Watch
    Free to Agents._ Address, A. COULTER & Co., Chicago.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          =EAGLE FOOT LATHES,=

  [Illustration]

  Improvement in style. Reduction in prices April 20th. Small Engine
  Lathes, Slide Rests, Tools, etc. Also Scroll and Circular Saw
  Attachments, Hand Planers, etc. Send for Catalogue of outfits for
  Amateurs or Artisans.

                          WM. L. CHASE & CO.,
                     95 & 97 Liberty St., New York.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                  =The George Place Machinery Agency=
                   =Machinery of Every Description.=
             121 Chambers and 103 Reade Streets, New York.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    CIVIL and MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

  At the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, N. Y. Next term
  begins Sept. 12. The Annual Register for 1878 contains a list of the
  graduates for the past 52 years, with their positions; also, course
  of study, requirements for admission, expenses, etc. Address Wm. H.
  Young, Treas'r.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                           =THE DRIVEN WELL.=

  Town and County privileges for making =Driven Wells= and selling
  Licenses under the established =American Driven Well Patent=, leased
  by the year to responsible parties, by

                        =WM. D. ANDREWS & BRO.,=
                                                             NEW YORK.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                              _NOW READY._

                      =The Army of the Republic:=

                       ITS SERVICES AND DESTINY.
                        =BY HENRY WARD BEECHER.=

  An Oration at the Re-union of the Army of the Potomac, at Springfield,
  Mass., June 5th, comprising Christian Union Extra No. 12.

                            Price 10 Cents.
