"We could at least chart the big hits--those large enough to damage the
rocket."

"We'll know if any hit," Larkwell prophesied grimly.

"Maybe not;" Nagel cut in. "Supposing it's pinhole size? The air could
seep out and we wouldn't know it until too late."

Crag said decisively. "That means we'll have to maintain a watch over
the pressure gauge."

"That won't help if it's a big chunk." Prochaska scraped his toe through
the ash. "The possibility's sort of disconcerting."

"Too damned many occupational hazards for me," Larkwell ventured. "I
must have had rocks in my head when I volunteered for this one."

"All brawn and no brain." Crag gave a wry smile. "That's the kind of
fodder that's needed for deep space."

Prochaska said, "We ought to let Gotch know he's just acquired a few
more acres."

"Right." Crag hesitated a moment. "Then we'll check out on Bandit."

"Why?" Larkwell asked.

"There might be some survivors."

"Let them rot," Nagel growled.

"That's for me to decide," Crag said coldly. He stared hard at the
oxygen man. "We're still human."

Nagel snapped, "They're damned murderers."

"That's no reason we should be." Crag turned back toward the ladder.
When he reached it, he paused and looked skyward. The sun was a precise
circle of intolerable white light set amid the ebony of space. The stars
seemed very close.

The space cabin was a vacuum. At Nagel's suggestion they kept pressure
to a minimum to preserve oxygen. When they were out of their suits,
Prochaska got on the radio. He had difficulty raising Alpine Base,
working for several minutes before he got an answering signal. When the
connection was made, Crag moved into Prochaska's place and switched to
his ear insert microphone. He listened to the faint slightly metallic
voice for a moment before he identified it as Gotch's. He thought: _The
Old Man must be living in the radio shack._ He adjusted his headset and
sent a lengthy report.

If Gotch were jubilant over the fruition of his dream, he carefully
concealed it. He congratulated Crag and the crew, speaking in precise
formal terms, and almost immediately launched into a barrage of
questions regarding their next step. The Colonel's reaction nettled him.
Lord, he should be jubilant ... jumping with joy ... waltzing the
telephone gal. Instead he was speaking with a business-as-usual manner.
Gotch left it up to Crag on whether or not to attempt a rescue
expedition.

"But not if it endangers the expedition in any way," he added. He
informed him that Drone Baker had been launched without mishap. "Just
be ready for her," he cautioned. "And again--congratulations,
Commander." There was a pause....

"I think Pickering Field is a fitting name." The voice in the earphones
died away and Crag found himself listening to the static of space. He
pulled the sets off and turned to Nagel.

"How much oxygen would a man need for a round trip to Bandit, assuming a
total distance of seven miles."

"It's not that far," Prochaska reminded.

"There might be detours."

Nagel calculated rapidly. "An extra cylinder would do it."

"Okay, Larkwell and I'll go. You and Prochaska stand by." Crag caught
the surprised look on the Chief's face.

"There might be communication problems," he explained. Privately, he had
decided that no man would be left alone until the mystery of the time
bomb was cleared up.

Prochaska nodded. The arrangement made sense. Nagel appeared pleased
that he didn't have to make the long trek. Larkwell, on the other hand,
seemed glad to have been chosen.




CHAPTER 9


There is no dawn on the moon, no dusk, no atmosphere to catch and spread
the light of the sun. When the lunar night ends--a night two earth weeks
long--the sun simply pops over the horizon, bringing its intolerable
heat. But the sky remains black--black and sprinkled with stars agleam
with a light unknown on earth. At night the temperature is 250 degrees
below zero; by day it is the heat of boiling water. Yet the sun is but
an intense circle of white aloft in a nigrescent sky. It was a world
such as Crag had scarcely dreamed of--alien, hostile, fantastic in its
architecture--a bizarre world spawned by a nature in revolt.

Crag stopped to adjust the temperature control on his suit. He started
to mop his brow before he remembered the helmet. Larkwell saw the
gesture, and behind his thick face plate his lips wrinkled in a grin.
"Go on, scratch it," he challenged.

"This moon's going to take a lot of getting used to." Crag swept his
eyes over the bleak plain. "And they send four men to conquer this."

"It ain't conquered yet," Larkwell spat.

Crag's answer was a sober reflection. "No, it isn't," he said quietly.
He contemplated the soot-filled sky, its magic lanterns, then looked
down again at the plain.

"Let's get moving."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was dawn--dawn in the sense that the sun had climbed above the
horizon. The landing had been planned for sunup--the line which divided
night from day--to give them the benefit of a two-week day before
another instantaneous onslaught of night.

They moved slowly across the ashy floor of the crater, occasionally
circling small knolls or jagged rock outcroppings. Despite the
cumbersome suits and the burden of the extra oxygen cylinder each
carried, they made good time. Crag led the way with Larkwell close
behind, threading his way toward the spot where the enemy rocket had
fallen from the sky. They had to stop several times to rest and regulate
their temperature controls. Despite the protective garments they were
soon sweating and panting, gasping for breath with the feeling of
suffocation. Crag felt the water trickling down his body in rivulets
and began to itch, a sensation that was almost a pain.

"It's not going to be a picnic," Larkwell complained. His voice sounded
exhausted in the earphones.

Crag grunted without answering. His feet ploughed up little spurts of
dust which fell as quickly as they rose. Like water dropping, he
thought. He wondered how long they would be able to endure the heat.
Could they possibly adapt their bodies to such an environment? What of
the cold of night? The questions bothered him. He tried to visualize
what it would be like to plunge from boiling day to the bitterly cold
night within the space of moments. Would they be able to take it? He
grinned to himself. They'd find out!

At the next halt they looked back at the Aztec.

"We don't seem to be getting anywhere," Larkwell observed. Crag
contemplated the rocket. He was right. The ship seemed almost as large
and clear as ever.

"Your eyes trick you," he said. "It's just another thing we'll have to
get used to." He let his eyes linger on the plain. It was washed with a
brilliant light which even their glare shields didn't diminish. Each
rock, each outcrop cast long black shadows--black silhouettes against
the white ash. There were no grays, no intermediate shades. Everything
was either black or white. His eyes began to ache and he turned them
from the scene. He nodded at Larkwell and resumed his trek. He was
trudging head down when he suddenly stopped. A chasm yawned at his feet.

"Mighty wide," Larkwell observed, coming up.

"Yeah," said Crag, indecisively. The rift was about twenty feet wide,
its bottom lost in black shadows.

Larkwell studied the chasm carefully. "Might be just the rill we need
for an airlock. If it's not too deep," he added. He picked up a boulder
and dropped it over the edge, waiting expectantly. Crag chuckled. The
construction man had forgotten that sound couldn't be transmitted
through a vacuum. Larkwell caught the laugh in his earphones and smiled
weakly.

He said sheepishly, "Something else to learn."

"We've plenty to learn." Crag looked both ways. To the right the chasm
seemed to narrow and, although he wasn't sure, end.

"Let's try it," he suggested. Larkwell nodded agreement. They trudged
along the edge of the fissure, walking slowly to conserve their energy.
The plain became more uneven. Small outcroppings of black glassy rock
punctured the ash, becoming more numerous as they progressed. Occasional
saw-toothed needles pierced the sky. Several times they stopped and
looked back at the Aztec. It was a black cylinder, smaller yet seemingly
close.

Crag's guess was right. The chasm narrowed abruptly and terminated at
the base of a small knoll. Both rockets were now hidden by intervening
rocks. He hesitated before striking out, keeping Backbone Ridge to his
right. The ground became progressively more uneven. They trudged onward
for over a mile before he caught sight of the Aztec again. He paused,
with the feeling something was wrong. Larkwell put it into words.

"Lost."

"Not lost, but off course." Crag took a moment to get his bearings and
then struck out again thinking their oxygen supply couldn't stand many
of these mistakes.

"How you doing, Skipper?"

Crag gave a start before remembering that Prochaska and Nagel were cut
into their intercom.

"Lousy," he told them. He gave a brief run-down.

"Just happened to think that I could help guide you. I'll work you with
the scope," Prochaska said.

"Of course," Crag exclaimed, wondering why they hadn't thought of it
before. One thing was certain: they'd have to start remembering a lot
of things. Thereafter, they checked with Prochaska every few minutes.

The ground constantly changed as they progressed. One moment it was
level, dusty with ash; the next it was broken by low rocky ridges and
interlacing chasms. Minutes extended into seeming hours and they had to
stop for rest from time to time. Crag was leading the way across a small
ravine when Larkwell's voice brought him up short:

"Commander, we're forgetting something."

"What?"

"Radcounters. Mine's whispering a tune I didn't like."

"Not a thing to worry about," Crag assured him. "The raw ores aren't
that potent." Nevertheless he unhooked his counter and studied it.
Larkwell was right. They were on hot ground but the count was low.

"Won't bother us a bit," he affirmed cheerfully.

Larkwell's answer was a grunt. Crag checked the instrument several times
thinking that before long--when they were settled--they would mark off
the boundaries of the lode. Gotch would want that. The count rose
slightly. Once he caught Larkwell nervously consulting his meter.
Clearly the construction boss wasn't too happy over their position. Crag
wanted to tell him he had been reading too many Sunday supplements but
didn't.

Prochaska broke in, "You're getting close." His voice was a faint
whisper over the phones. "Maybe you'd better make a cautious approach."

Crag remembered the fate of Drone Able and silently agreed. Thereafter
he kept his eyes peeled. They climbed a small knoll and saw Bandit. He
abruptly halted, waiting until Larkwell reached his side.

The rocket lay at the base of the slope, which fell away before them. It
was careened at a crazy angle with its base crumpled. A wide cleft
running half way to its nose was visible. Crag studied the rocket
carefully.

"Might still be oxygen in the space cabin," he ventured finally. "The
break in the hull might not reach that far."

"It does," Larkwell corrected. His eyes, trained in construction work,
had noted small cracks in the metal extending up alongside the hatch.

"No survivors in there," he grunted.

Crag said thoughtfully: "Might be, if they had on their pressure suits.
And they would have," he added.

He hesitated before striking across the clearing, then began moving down
the slope. Larkwell followed slowly. As he neared the rocket Crag saw
that it lacked any type of failing device to absorb the landing impact.
That, at least, had been one secret kept, he thought. He was wondering
how to get into the space cabin when Larkwell solved the problem. He
drew a thin hemp line from a leg pocket and began uncoiling it. Crag
smiled approval.

"Never without one in the construction business," he explained. He
studied Bandit. "Maybe I can hook it over the top of that busted tail
fin, then work my way up the break in the hull."

"Let me try," Crag offered. The climb looked hazardous.

"This is my province." Larkwell snorted. He ran his eye over the ship
before casting the line. He looked surprised when it shot high above the
intended target point.

"Keep forgetting the low gravity," he apologized. He tried again. On the
third throw he hooked the line over the torn tailfin. He rubbed his
hands against his suit then started upward, climbing clumsily, each
movement exaggerated by the bulky suit. He progressed slowly, testing
each step. Crag held his breath. Larkwell gripped the line with his body
swung outward, his feet planted against the vertical metal, reminding
Crag of a human fly. He stopped to rest just below the level of the
space cabin.

"Thought a man was supposed to be able to jump thirty feet on the moon,"
he panted.

"You can if you peel those duds off," Crag replied cheerfully. He ran
his eye over the break noting the splintered metal. "Be careful of your
suit."

Larkwell didn't answer. He was busy again trying to pull his body
upward, using the break in the hull to obtain finger grips. Only the
moon's low gravity allowed him to perform what looked like an impossible
task. He finally reached a point alongside the hatch and paused,
breathing heavily. He rested a moment, then carefully inserted his hand
into the break in the hull. After a moment he withdrew it, and fumbled
in his leg pocket withdrawing a switchblade knife.

"Got to cut through the lining," he explained. He worked the knife
around inside the break for several minutes, then closed the blade and
reinserted his hand, feeling around until he located the lockbar.

He tugged. It didn't give. He braced his body and exerted all of his
strength. This time it moved. He rested a moment then turned his
attention to the remaining doglocks. In short time he had the hatch
open. Carefully, then, he pulled his body across to the black rectangle
and disappeared inside.

"See anything?" Crag shifted his feet restlessly.

"Dead men." Larkwell's voice sounded relieved over the phones. "Smashed
face plates." There was a long moment of silence. Crag waited
impatiently.

"Just a second," he finally reported. "Looks like a live one." There was
another interval of silence while Crag stewed. Finally he appeared in
the opening with a hemp ladder.

"Knew they had to have some way of getting out of this trap," he
announced triumphantly. He knelt and secured one end to the hatch
combing and let the other end drop to the ground.

Crag climbed to meet him. Larkwell extended a hand and helped him
through the hatch. One glance at the interior of the cabin told him that
any life left was little short of a miracle. The man in the pilot's seat
lay with his faceplate smashed against the instrument panel. The top of
his fiberglass helmet had shattered and the top of his head was a bloody
mess. A second crewman was sprawled over the communication console with
his face smashed into the radarscope. His suit had been ripped from
shoulder to waist and one leg was twisted at a crazy angle. Crag turned
his eyes away.

"Here," Larkwell grunted. He was bent over the third and last crewman,
who had been strapped in a bucket seat immediately behind the pilot.
Crag moved to his side and looked down at the recumbent figure. The
man's suit seemed to have withstood the terrible impact. His helmet
looked intact, and his faceplate was clouded.

Prochaska nodded affirmatively. "Breathing," he said.

Crag knelt and checked the unconscious man as best he could before
finally getting back to his feet.

"It's going to be a helluva job getting him back."

Larkwell's eyes opened with surprise. "You mean we're going to lug that
bastard back to the Aztec?"

"We are."

Larkwell didn't reply. Crag loosened the unconscious man from his
harnessing. Larkwell watched for a while before stooping to help. When
the last straps were free they pulled him close to the edge of the hatch
opening. Crag made a mental inventory of the cabin while Larkwell
unscrewed two metal strips from a bulkhead and laced straps from the
safety harnessing between them, making a crude stretcher.

Crag opened a narrow panel built into the rear bulkhead and
involuntarily whistled into his lip mike. It contained two
short-barreled automatic rifles and a supply of ammunition. Larkwell
eyed the arms speculatively.

"Looks like they expected good hunting," he observed.

"Yeah," Crag grimly agreed. He slammed the metal panel shut and looked
distastefully at the unconscious man. "I've a damned good notion to
leave him here."
