too!"

Cal's head sagged forward on his chest. "So sleepy ... so tired ...
gotta take a nap...." His knees sagging, Cal lay down on the floor. He
cuddled his head on one arm.

The lieutenant spoke, but the grunt that came from his lips was not a
growl. Soon, he, too, was fast asleep.

Kurt and Nedra were the only two people who were able to remain
awake. The nurse was making desperate efforts to resist this strange
sleepiness. Swaying on her feet, she turned toward Zen. He caught her
in his arms.

"What's happening?" She sounded like a tired little girl.

"I don't know," Zen answered.

"Why is everybody going to sleep? Is it bedtime?"

"It must be."

"Are you sleepy, too?" Her voice was a tired whisper.

"I never was so sleepy before in my life," Kurt answered.

"Then why don't we--just take a little nap?" Nedra murmured. The way
she spoke, this was the most reasonable suggestion that had ever been
offered. Sagging into his arms, she would have fallen if he had not
caught her. Gently, he eased her to the floor. Her chest rose and fell
in a regular rhythm.

If there was one thing Kurt wanted to do it was to lie down on the
floor and go to sleep, too. Every organ in his body, every cell, every
molecule seemed to cry out that sleep was needed. He felt his knees
begin to sag, his head to droop. It seemed to him that all strength was
going out of his body, that his muscles could no longer hold him erect.

"Stay awake!" someone snarled at him. He was startled to realize it was
his own voice that had spoken the words. He was even more startled by
the fury in the tones.

His knees continued to sag. In spite of everything he could do to
prevent it, his body continued on its way to the floor. The muscles in
his long legs seemed to have turned into rubber. He went down to his
knees but caught himself on his hands.

The impulse to continue the rest of the way to the floor was like a
tidal wave. Every thought in his mind was on the desirability of sleep.
How wonderful it would be to take a nap, to rest, to dream, to wake no
more.

With a strength that was born of desperation, he fought this impulse. A
battle began inside his body, a conflict that seemed to involve every
brain cell and every nerve ending, and finally every muscle group. Pain
came up as muscle fought muscle, as nerve cell fought nerve cell, as
one part of the brain fought another part. He tried to force his body
to rise to its feet again.

All he could do was grunt.

"Stand up!" he snarled at himself.

His body quivered and twisted but did not move. He repeated the command
to himself. The effect was to increase the conflict. And the pain.
He had never known such agony. It rolled through him like a series of
tidal waves.

_Click!_

What happened took place so suddenly that it seemed to occur outside of
time.




VII


Instantly, as the click sounded, he was outside his body, looking down
at it. The pain was gone. The conflicting muscle pulls were gone. Or he
was no longer aware of them. He understood that the latter was the true
explanation.

"Stand up," he said, to his body.

His body obeyed this order. It rose from its hands and knees and stood
upon its feet.

This fact did not surprise Kurt Zen. He had known it would happen. This
was the way things were. The essence of him, the consciousness that was
above the body, was never surprised.

"Stop trembling," he said, silently, to his body.

Instantly the tremors vanished. The body knew its master.

Kurt Zen also knew that he now had a choice. He could go back into that
body. Or he could go--elsewhere. But he knew where he was needed most.

_Click!_

The way he went back into his body was like turning a switch. One
instant, he was inside, looking through his eyes, hearing through his
ears.

He moved quickly, snatching the gun from the lieutenant's grasp.
Another instant and he had the weapons of the soldiers. He flung these
into the corner. Then he grabbed Cal's gun from the floor where the
ragged man had dropped it.

At this point, he saw that Nedra was sitting up and was watching him.
The expression on her face was that of a sleepy small girl awakening in
the morning. Only this small girl did not quite succeed in looking as
if she had been asleep. Her eyes were too wide open and she looked much
too alert.

"Hello," Zen said. "So you decided to call off the sham." The thought
popped into his mind and the words out of his mouth before he could
stop them.

"Did you know?" she gasped.

"Of course I did," Zen stoutly insisted. "When you went to sleep, I
knew it was a trick designed to lure me by suggestion into the belief
that I was sleepy, too."

"Then why did you let me do it?"

"I wanted to see how far you would go," he answered. "Come on. Let's
get out of here."

"What about them? Are they shamming too?" She pointed to the bodies on
the floor.

"They're up there, watching," he said, gesturing toward the ceiling. He
laughed.

Owlishly, she stared at him. "I do believe you are out of your mind,
colonel."

"It helps," he said. "Come on. Let's make tracks."

"That's a splendid idea, colonel. Except for one thing."

"What's that?"

She pointed to the sleeping lieutenant. "He said he had left some men
with a machine gun."

"Damn! I had forgotten that. However, that is a problem that can be
solved."

"How?"

"This way." He moved to the heavy machine gun mounted at the window so
that its muzzle covered the street. He had his finger on the trigger
and was searching the street when he realized that she was pulling at
his arm and speaking to him. "What?" he said.

"No," she answered. Her voice was very firm.

"Are you out of your mind?" he demanded.

"We don't have to shoot them," she replied.

"Why not?"

"Because they are already taken care of."

"Eh? How do you know?"

"I know."

"Then you also know how these men here were put to sleep?" His voice
had the sound of steel on stone.

She faced him without fear. "Yes."

"You did it?"

"No."

"Then who did?"

"Come and I will show you."

"Hunh!" Zen grunted. He made up his mind without hesitation. Starting
toward the back door, he discovered that she was going out the front.
"But that door is probably covered," he protested.

She opened it without answering his protest. Going through it, Zen
thought the night outside was far colder than it had any right to be.
Nedra moved without hesitation. Fifty yards away from the house a
machine gun mounted on a tripod was set up in the street. Two men were
lying on the ground beside it. In the quiet night, Zen could hear them
snoring.

"All right," he said. "I have to admit you knew what you were talking
about. But if you didn't do this, who did?"

"Just a minute and you will have an answer to your question," she
replied.

A block beyond the machine gun, a tall figure lounged in the doorway of
a ruined building.

"Hi, kids," he said.

At the first sound of the deep bass voice Zen knew that this was West.
The craggy man nodded to him. West did not seem in the least surprised
to see Zen.

"What the hell are you doing here?" Zen said.

"I had business here," West said, in a tone of voice that made Zen feel
like an errant schoolboy being reproved by a kind, but firm, teacher.

"Did you make those people go to sleep?" Zen continued.

"Has somebody been sleeping?" West answered. "Hmm."

"Yes," Zen said.

"Did you run into some difficulty?" West asked Nedra. He ignored Zen.

"Sort of," the girl answered. "The fact is, I almost got raped. I was
afraid I wasn't going to reach you."

"I was busy and didn't pick you up at first," the craggy man said. His
voice was a rumble of sound in the darkness. He did not seem surprised
when she mentioned what had almost happened. "The colonel followed you,
eh?"

"Yes. I told you he would."

"How did you know I would follow you?" Zen demanded. With the
lieutenant's gun in his hands, he felt very secure.

"Any woman would know that," Nedra answered. Her laugh tinkled in the
darkness. Finding Zen's arm, she squeezed it. "He is one of the new
people," she said, to West.

Zen wished he could have sunk into the ground. The craggy man did not
seem surprised. "Hmm," he said again. "That is nice." Reserve seemed to
have appeared in the bass tones.

"Let's get inside," Nedra suggested. "It's been a hard day and I'm so
tired I feel as if I'm walking on my leg bones instead of my feet."

"Sorry," West said, without moving.

"What's wrong?" Nedra asked. Alarm suddenly appeared in her voice.
"Don't you believe he is actually one of us? I told you he was."

"I did not say I disbelieved you. But what if you are mistaken?"

"I can't be mistaken. He followed me, didn't he? That proves I'm right."

"Men have been following women since Bhumi started turning," West
replied. "What if you are wrong?"

"Oh," the nurse said, a falling inflection in her voice.

"In that case, who would shoot him?" West continued.

"Oh," the nurse said. Her voice fell lower still.

"You know the rules. We cannot have anyone except true mutants."

"Yes."

"In case someone brings in a person who is not a true mutant, it is the
duty of the person who introduced the interloper to dispose of him."

"I know," Nedra said.

"In this case, it would be up to you to shoot the colonel," West
continued. "Could you do it?"

"Well, I wouldn't want to--" The reluctance in her voice was very
strong. "But I would do it."

"I hope I don't have to hold you to your promise," West said. "But in
that case, come on, both of you. That is, if the colonel wishes."

"You can't kid me," Zen said. "Neither of you are capable of shooting
anybody." He spoke fearlessly but he felt a trace of doubt. Not one of
the new people had ever betrayed their group. This indicated something.
"Lead on. I'm following."

Nedra found Zen's arm.

"Would you cry, after you had shot me?" Zen asked.

"Y--yes."

"But that wouldn't keep you from shooting me?"

"No."

"Well, that would be nice, anyhow, though I do not see what good it
would do me."

"You sound as if you wouldn't care," the girl said.

