I had forgotten Nobs.  Like a demon of hate he sprang among those
Kro-lu fighting-men, tearing, rending, ripping with his long tusks and
his mighty jaws.  They had me down in an instant, and it goes without
saying that the six of them could have kept me there had it not been
for Nobs; but while I was struggling to throw them off, Nobs was
springing first upon one and then upon another of them until they were
so put to it to preserve their hides and their lives from him that they
could give me only a small part of their attention.  One of them was
assiduously attempting to strike me on the head with his stone hatchet;
but I caught his arm and at the same time turned over upon my belly,
after which it took but an instant to get my feet under me and rise
suddenly.

As I did so, I kept a grip upon the man's arm, carrying it over one
shoulder.  Then I leaned suddenly forward and hurled my antagonist over
my head to a hasty fall at the opposite side of the hut.  In the dim
light of the interior I saw that Nobs had already accounted for one of
the others--one who lay very quiet upon the floor--while the four
remaining upon their feet were striking at him with knives and hatchets.

Running to one side of the man I had just put out of the fighting, I
seized his hatchet and knife, and in another moment was in the thick of
the argument.  I was no match for these savage warriors with their own
weapons and would soon have gone down to ignominious defeat and death
had it not been for Nobs, who alone was a match for the four of them.
I never saw any creature so quick upon its feet as was that great
Airedale, nor such frightful ferocity as he manifested in his attacks.
It was as much the latter as the former which contributed to the
undoing of our enemies, who, accustomed though they were to the
ferocity of terrible creatures, seemed awed by the sight of this
strange beast from another world battling at the side of his equally
strange master.  Yet they were no cowards, and only by teamwork did
Nobs and I overcome them at last.  We would rush for a man,
simultaneously, and as Nobs leaped for him upon one side, I would
strike at his head with the stone hatchet from the other.

As the last man went down, I heard the running of many feet approaching
us from the direction of the plaza.  To be captured now would mean
death; yet I could not attempt to leave the village without first
ascertaining the whereabouts of Ajor and releasing her if she were held
a captive.  That I could escape the village I was not at all sure; but
of one thing I was positive; that it would do neither Ajor nor myself
any service to remain where I was and be captured; so with Nobs, bloody
but happy, following at heel, I turned down the first alley and slunk
away in the direction of the northern end of the village.

Friendless and alone, hunted through the dark labyrinths of this savage
community, I seldom have felt more helpless than at that moment; yet
far transcending any fear which I may have felt for my own safety was
my concern for that of Ajor.  What fate had befallen her?  Where was
she, and in whose power?  That I should live to learn the answers to
these queries I doubted; but that I should face death gladly in the
attempt--of that I was certain.  And why?  With all my concern for the
welfare of my friends who had accompanied me to Caprona, and of my best
friend of all, Bowen J. Tyler, Jr., I never yet had experienced the
almost paralyzing fear for the safety of any other creature which now
threw me alternately into a fever of despair and into a cold sweat of
apprehension as my mind dwelt upon the fate on one bit of half-savage
femininity of whose very existence even I had not dreamed a few short
weeks before.

What was this hold she had upon me?  Was I bewitched, that my mind
refused to function sanely, and that judgment and reason were dethroned
by some mad sentiment which I steadfastly refused to believe was love?
I had never been in love.  I was not in love now--the very thought was
preposterous.  How could I, Thomas Billings, the right-hand man of the
late Bowen J.  Tyler, Sr., one of America's foremost captains of
industry and the greatest man in California, be in love with a--a--the
word stuck in my throat; yet by my own American standards Ajor could be
nothing else; at home, for all her beauty, for all her delicately
tinted skin, little Ajor by her apparel, by the habits and customs and
manners of her people, by her life, would have been classed a squaw.
Tom Billings in love with a squaw! I shuddered at the thought.

And then there came to my mind, in a sudden, brilliant flash upon the
screen of recollection the picture of Ajor as I had last seen her, and
I lived again the delicious moment in which we had clung to one
another, lips smothering lips, as I left her to go to the council hall
of Al-tan; and I could have kicked myself for the snob and the cad that
my thoughts had proven me--me, who had always prided myself that I was
neither the one nor the other!

These things ran through my mind as Nobs and I made our way through the
dark village, the voices and footsteps of those who sought us still in
our ears.  These and many other things, nor could I escape the
incontrovertible fact that the little figure round which my
recollections and my hopes entwined themselves was that of
Ajor--beloved barbarian!  My reveries were broken in upon by a hoarse
whisper from the black interior of a hut past which we were making our
way.  My name was called in a low voice, and a man stepped out beside
me as I halted with raised knife.  It was Chal-az.

"Quick!" he warned.  "In here!  It is my hut, and they will not search
it."

I hesitated, recalled his attitude of a few minutes before; and as
though he had read my thoughts, he said quickly:  "I could not speak to
you in the plaza without danger of arousing suspicions which would
prevent me aiding you later, for word had gone out that Al-tan had
turned against you and would destroy you--this was after Du-seen the
Galu arrived."

I followed him into the hut, and with Nobs at our heels we passed
through several chambers into a remote and windowless apartment where a
small lamp sputtered in its unequal battle with the inky darkness.  A
hole in the roof permitted the smoke from burning oil egress; yet the
atmosphere was far from lucid.  Here Chal-az motioned me to a seat upon
a furry hide spread upon the earthen floor.

"I am your friend," he said.  "You saved my life; and I am no ingrate
as is the batu Al-tan.  I will serve you, and there are others here who
will serve you against Al-tan and this renegade Galu, Du-seen."

"But where is Ajor?" I asked, for I cared little for my own safety
while she was in danger.

"Ajor is safe, too," he answered.  "We learned the designs of Al-tan
and Du-seen.  The latter, learning that Ajor was here, demanded her;
and Al-tan promised that he should have her; but when the warriors went
to get her To-mar went with them.  Ajor tried to defend herself.  She
killed one of the warriors, and then To-mar picked her up in his arms
when the others had taken her weapons from her.  He told the others to
look after the wounded man, who was really already dead, and to seize
you upon your return, and that he, To-mar, would bear Ajor to Al-tan;
but instead of bearing her to Al-tan, he took her to his own hut, where
she now is with So-al, To-mar's she.  It all happened very quickly.
To-mar and I were in the council-hut when Du-seen attempted to take the
dog from you.  I was seeking To-mar for this work.  He ran out
immediately and accompanied the warriors to your hut while I remained
to watch what went on within the council-hut and to aid you if you
needed aid.  What has happened since you know."

I thanked him for his loyalty and then asked him to take me to Ajor;
but he said that it could not be done, as the village streets were
filled with searchers.  In fact, we could hear them passing to and fro
among the huts, making inquiries, and at last Chal-az thought it best
to go to the doorway of his dwelling, which consisted of many huts
joined together, lest they enter and search.

Chal-az was absent for a long time--several hours which seemed an
eternity to me.  All sounds of pursuit had long since ceased, and I was
becoming uneasy because of his protracted absence when I heard him
returning through the other apartments of his dwelling.  He was
perturbed when he entered that in which I awaited him, and I saw a
worried expression upon his face.

"What is wrong?" I asked.  "Have they found Ajor?"

"No," he replied; "but Ajor has gone.  She learned that you had escaped
them and was told that you had left the village, believing that she had
escaped too.  So-al could not detain her.  She made her way out over
the top of the palisade, armed with only her knife."

"Then I must go," I said, rising.  Nobs rose and shook himself.  He had
been dead asleep when I spoke.

"Yes," agreed Chal-az, "you must go at once.  It is almost dawn.
Du-seen leaves at daylight to search for her." He leaned close to my
ear and whispered:  "There are many to follow and help you.  Al-tan has
agreed to aid Du-seen against the Galus of Jor; but there are many of
us who have combined to rise against Al-tan and prevent this ruthless
desecration of the laws and customs of the Kro-lu and of Caspak.  We
will rise as Luata has ordained that we shall rise, and only thus.  No
batu may win to the estate of a Galu by treachery and force of arms
while Chal-az lives and may wield a heavy blow and a sharp spear with
true Kro-lus at his back!"

"I hope that I may live to aid you," I replied.  "If I had my weapons
and my ammunition, I could do much.  Do you know where they are?" "No,"
he said, "they have disappeared."  And then:  "Wait!  You cannot go
forth half armed, and garbed as you are.  You are going into the Galu
country, and you must go as a Galu.  Come!"  And without waiting for a
reply, he led me into another apartment, or to be more explicit,
another of the several huts which formed his cellular dwelling.

Here was a pile of skins, weapons, and ornaments.  "Remove your strange
apparel," said Chal-az, "and I will fit you out as a true Galu.  I have
slain several of them in the raids of my early days as a Kro-lu, and
here are their trappings."

I saw the wisdom of his suggestion, and as my clothes were by now so
ragged as to but half conceal my nakedness, I had no regrets in laying
them aside.  Stripped to the skin, I donned the red-deerskin tunic, the
leopard-tail, the golden fillet, armlets and leg-ornaments of a Galu,
with the belt, scabbard and knife, the shield, spear, bow and arrow and
the long rope which I learned now for the first time is the distinctive
weapon of the Galu warrior.  It is a rawhide rope, not dissimilar to
those of the Western plains and cow-camps of my youth.  The honda is a
golden oval and accurate weight for the throwing of the noose.  This
heavy honda, Chal-az explained, is used as a weapon, being thrown with
great force and accuracy at an enemy and then coiled in for another
cast.  In hunting and in battle, they use both the noose and the honda.
If several warriors surround a single foeman or quarry, they rope it
with the noose from several sides; but a single warrior against a lone
antagonist will attempt to brain his foe with the metal oval.

I could not have been more pleased with any weapon, short of a rifle,
which he could have found for me, since I have been adept with the rope
from early childhood; but I must confess that I was less favorably
inclined toward my apparel.  In so far as the sensation was concerned,
I might as well have been entirely naked, so short and light was the
tunic.  When I asked Chal-az for the Caspakian name for rope, he told
me ga, and for the first time I understood the derivation of the word
Galu, which means ropeman.

Entirely outfitted I would not have known myself, so strange was my
garb and my armament.  Upon my back were slung my bow, arrows, shield,
and short spear; from the center of my girdle depended my knife; at my
right hip was my stone hatchet; and at my left hung the coils of my
long rope.  By reaching my right hand over my left shoulder, I could
seize the spear or arrows; my left hand could find my bow over my right
shoulder, while a veritable contortionist-act was necessary to place my
shield in front of me and upon my left arm.  The shield, long and oval,
is utilized more as back-armor than as a defense against frontal
attack, for the close-set armlets of gold upon the left forearm are
principally depended upon to ward off knife, spear, hatchet, or arrow
from in front; but against the greater carnivora and the attacks of
several human antagonists, the shield is utilized to its best advantage
and carried by loops upon the left arm.

Fully equipped, except for a blanket, I followed Chal-az from his
domicile into the dark and deserted alleys of Kro-lu.  Silently we
crept along, Nobs silent at heel, toward the nearest portion of the
palisade.  Here Chal-az bade me farewell, telling me that he hoped to
see me soon among the Galus, as he felt that "the call soon would come"
to him.  I thanked him for his loyal assistance and promised that
whether I reached the Galu country or not, I should always stand ready
to repay his kindness to me, and that he could count on me in the
revolution against Al-tan.



Chapter 7

To run up the inclined surface of the palisade and drop to the ground
outside was the work of but a moment, or would have been but for Nobs.
I had to put my rope about him after we reached the top, lift him over
the sharpened stakes and lower him upon the outside.  To find Ajor in
the unknown country to the north seemed rather hopeless; yet I could do
no less than try, praying in the meanwhile that she would come through
unscathed and in safety to her father.

As Nobs and I swung along in the growing light of the coming day, I was
impressed by the lessening numbers of savage beasts the farther north I
traveled.  With the decrease among the carnivora, the herbivora
increased in quantity, though anywhere in Caspak they are sufficiently
plentiful to furnish ample food for the meateaters of each locality.
The wild cattle, antelope, deer, and horses I passed showed changes in
evolution from their cousins farther south.  The kine were smaller and
less shaggy, the horses larger.  North of the Kro-lu village I saw a
small band of the latter of about the size of those of our old Western
plains--such as the Indians bred in former days and to a lesser extent
even now.  They were fat and sleek, and I looked upon them with
covetous eyes and with thoughts that any old cow-puncher may well
imagine I might entertain after having hoofed it for weeks; but they
were wary, scarce permitting me to approach within bow-and-arrow range,
much less within roping-distance; yet I still had hopes which I never
discarded.

Twice before noon we were stalked and charged by man-eaters; but even
though I was without firearms, I still had ample protection in Nobs,
who evidently had learned something of Caspakian hunt rules under the
tutelage of Du-seen or some other Galu, and of course a great deal more
by experience.  He always was on the alert for dangerous foes,
invariably warning me by low growls of the approach of a large
carnivorous animal long before I could either see or hear it, and then
when the thing appeared, he would run snapping at its heels, drawing
the charge away from me until I found safety in some tree; yet never
did the wily Nobs take an unnecessary chance of a mauling.  He would
dart in and away so quickly that not even the lightning-like movements
of the great cats could reach him.  I have seen him tantalize them thus
until they fairly screamed in rage.

The greatest inconvenience the hunters caused me was the delay, for
they have a nasty habit of keeping one treed for an hour or more if
balked in their designs; but at last we came in sight of a line of
cliffs running east and west across our path as far as the eye could
see in either direction, and I knew that we reached the natural
boundary which marks the line between the Kro-lu and Galu countries.
The southern face of these cliffs loomed high and forbidding, rising to
an altitude of some two hundred feet, sheer and precipitous, without a
break that the eye could perceive.  How I was to find a crossing I
could not guess.  Whether to search to the east toward the still
loftier barrier-cliffs fronting upon the ocean, or westward in the
direction of the inland sea was a question which baffled me.  Were
there many passes or only one?  I had no way of knowing.  I could but
trust to chance.  It never occurred to me that Nobs had made the
crossing at least once, possibly a greater number of times, and that he
might lead me to the pass; and so it was with no idea of assistance
that I appealed to him as a man alone with a dumb brute so often does.

"Nobs," I said, "how the devil are we going to cross those cliffs?"

I do not say that he understood me, even though I realize that an
Airedale is a mighty intelligent dog; but I do swear that he seemed to
understand me, for he wheeled about, barking joyously and trotted off
toward the west; and when I didn't follow him, he ran back to me
barking furiously, and at last taking hold of the calf of my leg in an
effort to pull me along in the direction he wished me to go.  Now, as
my legs were naked and Nobs' jaws are much more powerful than he
realizes, I gave in and followed him, for I knew that I might as well
go west as east, as far as any knowledge I had of the correct direction
went.

We followed the base of the cliffs for a considerable distance.  The
ground was rolling and tree-dotted and covered with grazing animals,
alone, in pairs and in herds--a motley aggregation of the modern and
extinct herbivora of the world.  A huge woolly mastodon stood swaying
to and fro in the shade of a giant fern--a mighty bull with enormous
upcurving tusks.  Near him grazed an aurochs bull with a cow and a
calf, close beside a lone rhinoceros asleep in a dust-hole.  Deer,
antelope, bison, horses, sheep, and goats were all in sight at the same
time, and at a little distance a great megatherium reared up on its
huge tail and massive hind feet to tear the leaves from a tall tree.
The forgotten past rubbed flanks with the present--while Tom Billings,
modern of the moderns, passed in the garb of pre-Glacial man, and
before him trotted a creature of a breed scarce sixty years old.  Nobs
was a parvenu; but it failed to worry him.

As we neared the inland sea we saw more flying reptiles and several
great amphibians, but none of them attacked us.  As we were topping a
rise in the middle of the afternoon, I saw something that brought me to
a sudden stop.  Calling Nobs in a whisper, I cautioned him to silence
and kept him at heel while I threw myself flat and watched, from behind
a sheltering shrub, a body of warriors approaching the cliff from the
south.  I could see that they were Galus, and I guessed that Du-seen
led them.  They had taken a shorter route to the pass and so had
overhauled me.  I could see them plainly, for they were no great
distance away, and saw with relief that Ajor was not with them.

The cliffs before them were broken and ragged, those coming from the
east overlapping the cliffs from the west.  Into the defile formed by
this overlapping the party filed.  I could see them climbing upward for
a few minutes, and then they disappeared from view.  When the last of
them had passed from sight, I rose and bent my steps in the direction
of the pass--the same pass toward which Nobs had evidently been leading
me.  I went warily as I approached it, for fear the party might have
halted to rest.  If they hadn't halted, I had no fear of being
discovered, for I had seen that the Galus marched without point,
flankers or rear guard; and when I reached the pass and saw a narrow,
one-man trail leading upward at a stiff angle, I wished that I were
chief of the Galus for a few weeks.  A dozen men could hold off forever
in that narrow pass all the hordes which might be brought up from the
south; yet there it lay entirely unguarded.

The Galus might be a great people in Caspak; but they were pitifully
inefficient in even the simpler forms of military tactics.  I was
surprised that even a man of the Stone Age should be so lacking in
military perspicacity.  Du-seen dropped far below par in my estimation
as I saw the slovenly formation of his troop as it passed through an
enemy country and entered the domain of the chief against whom he had
risen in revolt; but Du-seen must have known Jor the chief and known
that Jor would not be waiting for him at the pass.  Nevertheless he
took unwarranted chances.  With one squad of a home-guard company I
could have conquered Caspak.

Nobs and I followed to the summit of the pass, and there we saw the
party defiling into the Galu country, the level of which was not, on an
average, over fifty feet below the summit of the cliffs and about a
hundred and fifty feet above the adjacent Kro-lu domain.  Immediately
the landscape changed.  The trees, the flowers and the shrubs were of a
hardier type, and I realized that at night the Galu blanket might be
almost a necessity.  Acacia and eucalyptus predominated among the
trees; yet there were ash and oak and even pine and fir and hemlock.
The tree-life was riotous.  The forests were dense and peopled by
enormous trees.  From the summit of the cliff I could see forests
rising hundreds of feet above the level upon which I stood, and even at
the distance they were from me I realized that the boles were of
gigantic size.

At last I had come to the Galu country.  Though not conceived in
Caspak, I had indeed come up cor-sva-jo--from the beginning I had come
up through the hideous horrors of the lower Caspakian spheres of
evolution, and I could not but feel something of the elation and pride
which had filled To-mar and So-al when they realized that the call had
come to them and they were about to rise from the estate of Band-lus to
that of Kro-lus.  I was glad that I was not batu.

But where was Ajor?  Though my eyes searched the wide landscape before
me, I saw nothing other than the warriors of Du-seen and the beasts of
the fields and the forests.  Surrounded by forests, I could see wide
plains dotting the country as far as the eye could reach; but nowhere
was a sign of a small Galu she--the beloved she whom I would have given
my right hand to see.

Nobs and I were hungry; we had not eaten since the preceding night, and
below us was game--deer, sheep, anything that a hungry hunter might
crave; so down the steep trail we made our way, and then upon my belly
with Nobs crouching low behind me, I crawled toward a small herd of red
deer feeding at the edge of a plain close beside a forest.  There was
ample cover, what with solitary trees and dotting bushes so that I
found no difficulty in stalking up wind to within fifty feet of my
quarry--a large, sleek doe unaccompanied by a fawn.  Greatly then did I
regret my rifle.  Never in my life had I shot an arrow, but I knew how
it was done, and fitting the shaft to my string, I aimed carefully and
let drive.  At the same instant I called to Nobs and leaped to my feet.

