"What is it, Dave?" inquired Hiram, tracing a sudden seriousness in
the manner of his comrade.

Dave did not reply.  With a thoughtful air he passed the telegram to
Hiram.

"Wonder what's up?" queried the latter.

"I can't imagine," said Dave.

"They tell you to cancel your dates," went on Hiram, looking very
much worried.

"Yes, that's what bothers me," replied Dave.

"And to come on to the factory at once."

"Perhaps they want to pay me off and let me go," suggested Dave,
pretending to smile.

"Don't take any trouble on your mind on that score," cried Hiram.
"They'd search a long time before they'd find a better demonstrator
than you are."

"Thank you Hiram," said Dave.  "The telegram is plain."

"Yes, cancel all dates."

"That's easy, I have nothing on the programme for the rest of the
week."

"There's the aero-hydroplane stunt."

"But the machine hasn't arrived."

"That's so."

"Let's go down and see Grimshaw.  I want to talk to him about this,"
said Dave.

They found the airman at the Aegis hangar.  Dave read him the
telegram.  Grimshaw looked bothered.

"Too bad, when things are going so finely for you," he remarked.

"I wish Mr. King was here," said Dave, "but he probably won't be
until tomorrow."

"Hardly, I should judge, from what he said," replied Grimshaw.

"I had better start right off for the Interstate plant."

"Yes.  I would do that if I were you," advised Grimshaw.

"I wish you would see the managers and explain about this,"
continued Dave.

"Suppose the Drifter comes Dave?" asked Hiram.

The Drifter was the name of the new model aero-hydroplane concerning
which Dave had received a letter from the Interstate people that
day, but written the day previous.

"I'll see that it is handled all right," promised Grimshaw.

"Tell Mr. King I will wire him just as soon as I learn what's up,"
said Dave.  "You'll look after the Racer and the hydroplane, won't
you, Hiram?"

"Surely I will," pledged Hiram.

Dave returned to his own quarters and packed a small hand bag.  Hiram
went to the railroad depot with him.  They had to wait two hours for a
south-bound train.

The factory of the Interstate Aero Company was located at a city in
Ohio.  It was over three hundred miles from Columbus.  The train
Dave was on arrived at a junction about daylight the next morning.
There he had to wait for a train on another road.

He had slept a few hours and got his breakfast at the depot
restaurant.  According to schedule he would reach the Interstate
plant about ten O'clock in the morning.

Dave had been looking out of the car window enjoying the scenery and
thinking over affairs in general, when he chanced to direct his gaze
at a newspaper the man in the forward seat was reading.  A glaring
head line had caught his eye: "A Burglar In The Clouds."

Anything suggestive of the air was of interest to the young aviator.
He wondered what the item might refer to.  Dave leaned over to try
to scan the body matter of the article, when the locomotive whistled
and the train slowed up for a station.  The man in front of him
shoved the newspaper into his pocket to leave the train.  Then the
incident drifted from the youth's mind.

Dave reached Bolton on schedule time.  An inquiry directed him to
the extensive works of the Interstate Aeroplane Company.  He found
it to be a very large plant.  The company, besides manufacturing
aircraft, also turned out automobiles.

Past the entrance gates of the big establishment, Dave became at
once interested in a large building bearing the sign "Aerodrome."
He could not resist the impulse to enter it.  Then he found himself
going from section to section, viewing the splendid assortment of
aircraft on exhibition and for sale.

To a devotee of aeronautics the display was most fascinating.  There
were monoplanes, biplanes, and hydroplanes.  In one section were
samples of the various accessories of the craft.  Dave was looking
over a splendid passenger monoplane when some one hailed him.

"Dashaway--say, we've been expecting you."

Dave turned to face the man who had been sent on by the Interstate
people to drill him in the use of the hydroplane at Columbus.

"Yes," nodded Dave, "I got a hurry call wire, and came on at once."

"Seen the manager?"

"Not yet.  I drifted in here and lost myself among so many beauties.
I don't see the new hydro-aeroplane."

A quick shade came over the face of Dave's companion.

"No," he hesitatingly replied.

"Has it been shipped to Columbus yet?" inquired Dave.

"Why--that is, I guess I had better let the manager tell you about
the machine."

Dave noticed a singular constraint in the manner of his companion.

"Come along, I'll introduce you," volunteered the latter.

Dave accompanied his guide from the aerodrome.  They passed several
large factory buildings.  In their center was a small one story
brick structure labeled "Office."

Dave had never met the manager of the Interstate Company.  He had
transacted all his business with the agent of the company and the
hydroplane expert.  His companion led him past a row of desks
occupied by clerks and stenographers and into a neatly furnished
office.

"Here is Dashaway, Mr. Randolph," he said.

A fine looking man writing at a desk wheeled quickly in his chair.
He arose to his feet with a pleasant smile and shook Dave's hand in
a welcoming way.

"I am glad to meet you," he spoke.  "You received our telegram?"

"Yes, sir, and came on at once."

"I suppose you know why we sent for you?" questioned the manager.

"Why, no, sir," replied Dave.

"We tried to keep our loss a secret," proceeded the manager, "but
the newspapers got hold of it."

Dave recalled the newspaper heading he had glanced at, "A Burglar In
The Clouds," and wondered if that had anything to do with the case.

"I have not read a newspaper since leaving Columbus last night,"
said Dave.

"Well," explained the manager of the Interstate Company, "our new
model aero-hydroplane his been stolen."





CHAPTER XI

"N. A. L."


"Stolen!" exclaimed Dave, in dismay.

"It startles you?" spoke the manager of the Interstate Aeroplane
concern.  "So it did us."

"But--"

"You are mystified--unusual occurrence rather.  You can follow the
track of a stolen automobile.  But when it comes to pursuing an
airship, you won't find many familiar roads in the clouds."

"How did it happen?" inquired Dave.

"Why, we had tested the machine and it was to have been shipped to
you yesterday.  The day before, our expert made a very fine and
satisfactory demonstration.  The tanks were full, everything in
perfect shape for another spurt early yesterday morning.  During the
night some one scaled the fence, evaded the watchman, and broke into
the aerodrome."

"It must have been some one familiar with the place here," suggested
Dave.

"We don't know that.  It is certain, though, that they knew all
about airships."

"Why so?"

"Because from the trail they left we could trace where they ran the
machine outside.  They gauged its ground run just right.  They must
have put on the muffler, for the watchman heard no sounds.  Then
they flew away."

"Do you suspect anybody?" questioned Dave.

"No."

"Could it have been a business rival?"

"Scarcely.  We have some hard competitors, but we have canvassed the
situation and do not believe they could afford to mix up in a
deliberate steal."

"It is strange," commented Dave, in a musing tone.

"Our belief is that the Drifter was selected as the nearest and
highest type of aircraft in existence.  The people who stole it did
so with some definite purpose in view."

"What could that purpose be?" asked Dave.

"We cannot as yet decide.  One thing is certain--they will not
venture to use it at any of the aero meets."

"Then they must design to take it to a distance."

"Of course."

"You have no trace of it?" asked Dave.

"None whatever.  We can account for that, however.  The night was
dark, they started out when everybody was asleep, and they could
have gone in one certain direction and struck a positive wilderness
in a few hours time."

"You mean north?"

"Among the pineries, yes."

"Or over the Canadian border?"

"Exactly."

Dave sat silent and thoughtful for some moments.  The situation was
a novel one.  He had never heard of any one stealing an airship
before.  The Interstate manager aroused him from his reverie with
the words:

"We sent for you, Dashaway, because you are our most active man in
the field."

"That sounds pretty grand for a young fellow like me," returned Dave
with a smile, and flushing up, too.

"We gage out men by what they do," replied Mr. Randolph in a
matter-of-fact tone.  "We have found blood the best in our business.
You have made good, Dashaway."

"Thank you, sir."

"Mr. King said you were the most promising aviator in the field."

"Oh, he is always saying something good about me."

"You proved it in your ideal work with the Baby Racer."

"Who wouldn't, with any pride and that perfect machine?" challenged
Dave.

"That dash of yours after that Lyon order when you outwitted the
Star people was simply brilliant.  It showed your loyalty to us.
The newspapers have given your hydroplane work so far the biggest
kind of a send off."

Dave was silent.  He looked modest and embarrassed at all this
praise.  He could not, however, feel otherwise than pleased at all
these eulogies bestowed upon him.

"The Drifter has got to be found," resumed the manager.  "It is our
first perfected model, and we can hardly build its counterpart in
time for full seasonal exhibitions.  We think you are the man to
find it, Dashaway."

"Oh, Mr. Randolph," said Dave with a slight start.

"I am expressing the opinion of the head men in the company here,
who knew your good record.  You are young, ambitious, a capable
airman, and above all you are loyal to the interest of your
employers."

"I should hope it," exclaimed Dave, roused up to genuine emotion.
"Just think--you picked me out, a mere boy, and trusted me.  And see
what you helped me do, already!"

"Exactly," interrupted Mr. Randolph quickly.  "That is just the
point--you've outdone some of the veterans in the service and jumped
to a high place in a bound.  That's why we trust you."

"I don't know about what you propose, though," said Dave, sobering
down.

"Yes, it's a pretty hard task to set.  We're all at sea."

"So am I," admitted Dave.

"Put those keen wits of yours at work, Dashaway," urged the manager
encouragingly.  "I know after thinking this affair over you'll be
ready to suggest something."

"Well, all airmen should know of the theft of the Drifter, and be on
the lookout."

"We notified every association and meet in the country after we
found that the newspapers had got onto the theft.  That advertises
it widely.  The persons, however, who stole the Drifter knew that
