especially strange if I could not read her. I do not think that you need
to be afraid of her answer. I shall not urge her by a word; but if she is
willing to be your wife, it will be by far the best way her future could
be provided for. Then, however soon I might die, she would not miss me."

Paul had heard distinctly only her first words, in which she had stated
her belief that Ida loved him and would probably be his wife. This
intimation had set up such a turmoil in his brain that he had not been
able to follow what she had subsequently said. There was a roaring in his
ears. Her voice seemed to come from very far away, nor did he remember
how long afterwards it was that he left her.

As he went downstairs the door of the sitting-room stood open, and he
looked in. Ida sat there reading.

The weather was very warm, and her dress was some gauzy stuff of a
pale-green tint which set off her yellow hair and bare arms and throat
with sumptuous effect. She was a ravishing symphony in white, pale green,
and gold.

She had not heard his approach, and was unconscious of his gaze. As he
thought of her as the woman who might be his wife, he grew so faint with
love, so intimidated with a sense of his presumption in hoping to possess
this glorious creature, that, not daring to enter, he fled out into the
darkness to compose himself.

No experience of miscellaneous flirtations, or more or less innocent
dalliance, had ever weakened the witchery of woman's charms to him, or
dulled the keenness of his sensibility to the heaven she can bestow. For
an hour he wandered about the dark and silent village street, waiting for
the tumult of his emotions to subside sufficiently to leave him in some
degree master of himself. When at last he returned to the house, his
nerves strung with the resolution to put his fortune to the test, Ida was
still in the sitting-room where he had left her.

Miss Ludington's conversation with Paul had left her in a mood
scarcely less  agitated than his. The sensation with which she had
watched his devotion to Ida during the past weeks had been a sort of
double-consciousness as if it were herself whom Paul was wooing, although
at the same time she was a spectator. The thoughts and emotions which she
ascribed to Ida agitated her almost as if they had been experienced in
her proper person.

It was a fancy of hers that between herself and Ida there existed a
species of clairvoyance, which enabled her to know what was passing in
the latter's mind--a completeness of rapport never realized between any
other two minds, but nothing more than might be expected to attend such a
relationship as theirs, being a foretaste of the tie that joins the
several souls of an individual in heaven. She had never had a serious
love affair in her life, but now, in her old age, she was passing through
a genuine experience of the tender passion through her sympathetic
identification with Ida.

As she sat in her chamber after Paul had gone, fancying herself in Ida's
place, imagining what she would hear him say, what would be her feelings,
and what she would answer, her cheeks flushed, her breath came quickly,
and there was a dew like that of dreaming girlhood in her faded eyes.

She was still flushing and trembling when there came a soft knock on her
door, and Paul and Ida stood before her.

Ida was blushing deeply, with downcast face, and the long lashes hid her
eyes. She stood slightly bending forward, her long beautifully moulded
arms hanging straight down before her. She looked like a beautiful
captive, and Paul, as he clasped her waist with his arm, and held one of
her hands in his, looked the proudest of conquerors.

"I did not know but I might be dreaming it," he said, "and so I brought
her for you to see. She says she will be my wife"




CHAPTER XIII.



Paul's courtship of Ida really began the night when he took her in his
arms as his promised wife, for although she had called him her lover
before, his devotion, while impassioned enough, had been too distant and
wholly reverential to be called a wooing. But the night of their
betrothal his love had caught from her lips a fire that was of earth, and
it was no longer as a semi-spiritual being that he worshipped her, but as
a woman whom it was no sacrilege to kiss a thousand times a day, not upon
her hand, her sleeve, or the hem of her dress, but full upon the soft
warm mouth.

This transformation of the devotee into the lover on his part was
attended by a corresponding change in Ida's manner toward him. A model
relieved from a strained pose could not show more evident relief than she
did in stepping down from the pedestal of a tutelary saint, where he had
placed her, to be loved and caressed like an ordinary woman, for if the
love had at first been all on his side, it certainly was not now.

"I'm so glad," she said one day, "that you have done with worshipping me.
Think of your humbling yourself before me, you who are a hundred thousand
times better, and wiser, and greater than I. Oh, Paul it is I who ought
to worship you, and who am not good enough to kiss you," and before he
could prevent her she had caught his hand, and, bowing her face over it,
had kissed it. As he drew it away he felt that there were tears upon it.
It was evening, and he could not see her face distinctly.

"Darling," he exclaimed, "what is the trouble?"

"Oh, nothing at all!" she replied. "It is because I am in love, I
suppose."

Whether it was because she was in love or not it is certain that she took
to crying very often during these days. Her manner with her lover, too,
was often strangely moody. Sometimes she would display a gaiety that was
almost feverish, and shortly after, perhaps, he would surprise her in
tears. But she always declared that she was not unhappy; and, unable to
conceive of any reason why she should be, Paul was fain to conceive that
she was merely nervous.

The absorption of the lovers in each other's society naturally left Miss
Ludington more often alone than before; but Ida was very far from
neglecting her for her lover. Her care for her since her sickness was
such as a daughter might give to a beloved and invalid mother. It was an
attention such as the lonely old lady had never enjoyed in her life, or
looked for, and would have been most grateful to have had from any one,
but how much more from Ida!

The village street was a rarely romantic promenade on moonlight evenings,
and the twanging of Paul's guitar was often heard till after midnight
from the meeting-house steps, which were a favourite resort with the
lovers. Those steps, in the Hilton of Miss Ludington's girlhood, had been
a very popular locality with sentimental couples, and she well remembered
certain short-lived romances of Ida's first life on earth with which they
had been associated. One night, when the young people had lingered there
later than usual, Miss Ludington put on her shawl and stepped across the
green to warn them that it was time for even lovers to be abed.

As she approached, Paul was seated on the lower step, touching his
guitar, and facing Ida, who sat on the step above leaning back against a
pillar. A blotch of moonlight fell upon her dreamy, upturned face. One
hand lay in her lap, and the fingers of the other were idly playing with
a tress of hair that had fallen over her bosom. How well Miss Ludington
remembered that attitude, and even the habit of playing with her hair
which Ida had in the days so long gone by.

She stood in the shadow watching her till Paul ceased playing. Then she
advanced and spoke to them.

"I have been standing here looking at you, my sister," she said. "I have
been trying to imagine how strangely it must come over you that forty
years ago you sat here as you sit here now, just as young and beautiful
then as now, and Paul not then born, even his parents children at that
time."

Ida bent down her head and replied, in scarcely audible tones, "I do not
like to think of those days."

"And I don't like to think of them," echoed Paul, with a curious
sensation of jealousy, not the first of the kind that he had experienced
in imagining the former life of his darling. "I do not like to think who
may have sat at her feet then. I, too, would like to forget these days."

Ida bent her head still lower and said nothing. It was Miss Ludington who
spoke.

"You have no ground to feel so," she said. "I can bear her witness--and
what better witness could you have?--that till now she never knew what it
is to love. It is true she sat here then as now, and there were others at
her feet, drawn by the same beauty that has drawn you, but their voices
never touched her heart. She had to come back again to earth to learn
what love is."

Paul bent contritely, and kissed Ida's feet as she sat above him,
murmuring, "Forgive me!" Her hand sought his and pressed it with
convulsive strength.

They walked home in silence, gentle Miss Ludington inwardly reproaching
herself for the embarrassment her words had seemed to cause Ida. She
examined her memory afresh. It was very long ago; she was growing old,
and it was natural to suppose that her memory might be losing in
distinctness. Perhaps some, of the sweethearts of that far away time had
been a little nearer, a little dearer, to Ida than to her own fading
memory they seemed to have been. Perhaps she had done a stupid thing in
referring to those days.

Meanwhile, despite of circumstances that would seem peculiarly favourable
to a young girl's happiness, Ida's tendency to melancholy was increasing
upon her at a rate which began to cause Miss Ludington as well as Paul
serious anxiety. She had indeed been pensive from the first, but the
expression of her face, when in repose, had of late become one of
profound dejection. The shadow which they had never been able to banish
from her eyes had deepened into a look of habitual sadness. Coming upon
her unexpectedly, both Miss Ludington and Paul had several times found
her in tears, which she would not or could not explain. Not infrequently,
when she was alone with her lover, and they had been silent awhile, he
had looked up to find her eyes fixed upon him and brimming with tears,
and at other times, when he was in the very act of caressing her, she
would burst out crying, and sob in his arms.

But her unaccountable reluctance to consent to any definite arrangement
for her marriage with the man she tenderly loved, and had promised to
wed, was the most marked symptom of something hysterical in her
condition.

Some three weeks had elapsed since she had given her word to be Paul's
wife, but though he had repeatedly begged her to name a day for their
wedding, he had entirely failed to obtain any satisfactory reply. When he
grew importunate, the only effect was to set her to crying, as if her
heart would break. He was completely perplexed. If she did not love him
her conduct would be readily explainable; but that she was in love with
him, and very much in love with him, he had increasing evidence every
day.

She gave nothing that could be called a reason for refusing to say when
she would marry him, though she talked feebly of its being so soon, and
of not being ready; but when he reminded her of the special
considerations that made delay inexpedient, of her own peculiarly
unprotected condition, and of Miss Ludington's uncertain health, and
desire to see them married as soon as possible, she attempted no reply,
but took refuge in tears, leaving him no choice but to relinquish the
question, and devote himself to soothing her.

When, finally, Miss Ludington asked Paul what were their plans, and he
told her of Ida's strange behaviour, they took troubled counsel together
concerning her.

It was evident that she was in a state of high nervous tension, and her
conduct must be attributed to that. Nor was it strange that the
experiences through which she had passed in the last month or two,
supplemented by the agitations of so extraordinary a love affair, should
have left her in a condition of abnormal excitability.

"She must not be hurried," said Miss Ludington. "She has promised to be
your wife, and you know that she loves you; that ought to be enough to
give you patience to wait. Why, Paul, you loved her all your life up to
the last month without even seeing her, and did not think the time long."

"You forget," he replied, "that it is seeing her which makes it so hard
to wait."

A day or two later, when she chanced to be sitting alone with her in the
afternoon, Miss Ludington said: "When are you and Paul to be married?"

"It is not decided yet," Ida replied, falteringly.

"Has not Paul spoken to you about it?"

"Oh, yes!"

"I had hoped that you would have been married before this," said Miss
Ludington, after a pause. "You know why I am so anxious that there should
be no delay in assuring your position. The time is short I know, but the
reasons against postponement are strong, and if you love him I cannot
see why you should hesitate. Perhaps you are not quite sure that you do
love him. A girl ought to be sure of that."

"Oh, I am quite sure of that! I love him with all my heart," exclaimed
Ida, and began to cry.

Miss Ludington sat down beside her, and, drawing the girl's head to her
shoulder, tried to soothe her; but her gentleness only made Ida sob more
vehemently.

Presently the elder lady said, "You are nervous, my little sister, don't
cry, now. We won't talk about it any more. I did not intend to say a word
to urge you against your wishes, but only to find out what they were. You
shall wait as long as you please before marrying him, and he shall not
tease you. Meanwhile I will see to it that, if I should die, you will be
left secure and well provided for, even if you never marry any one."

"What do you mean?" asked Ida, raising her head and manifesting a sudden
interest.

"I will adopt you as my daughter," said Miss Ludington, cheerily. "Won't
it be odd, pretending that you are my daughter, and that instead of
coming into the world before me you came in after me? But it is the only
way by which I can give you a legal title to the name of Ida Ludington,
although it is yours already by a claim prior to mine. I would rather see
you Paul's wife, and under his protection, but this arrangement will
secure your safety. You see, until you have a legal name I cannot make
you my heir, or even leave you a dollar."

"Do you mean that you want to make me your heir?" exclaimed Ida.

"Of course," said Miss Ludington. "What else could I think of doing? Even
if you had married Paul, do you suppose I would have wished to have you
dependent on him? I should then have left you a fortune under the name of
Mrs. De Riemer. As it is, I shall leave it to my adopted daughter, Ida
Ludington. That is the only difference."

"But, Paul?"

"Don't fret about Paul," replied Miss Ludington. "I shall not neglect
him. I have a great deal of money, and am able to provide abundantly for
you both."

"Oh, do not do this thing! I beg you will not," cried Ida, seizing Miss
Ludington's hands, and looking into her face with an almost frenzied
expression of appeal. "I do not want your money. Don't give it to me. I
can't bear to have you. You have given me so much, and you are so good to
me!--and that I should rob Paul, too! Oh, no I you must not do it; I will
never let you."

"But, my darling," said Miss Ludington, soothingly, "think what you are
to me, and what I am to you. Of course you cannot be conscious of our
relation, in the absolute way I am; through the memory I have of you. I
can only prove what I am to you by argument and evidence, but surely I
have fully proved it, and you must not let yourself doubt it; that would
be most cruel. To whom should I leave my money if not to you? Are we not
nearer kin than two persons ever were on earth before? What have been the
claims of all other heirs since property was inherited compared with
yours? Have I not inherited from you all I am--my very personality--and
should not you be my heir?

"And remember," she went on, "it is not only as my heir that you have a
claim on me; your claim would be almost as great if you were neither near
nor dear to me. It was through my action that you were called back,
without any will of your own, to resume the life which you had once
finished on earth. I did not intend or anticipate that result, to be
sure, but I am not the less responsible for it and being thus
responsible, though you had been a stranger to me instead of my other
self, I should be under the most solemn obligation to guard and protect
the life I had imposed on you."

While Miss Ludington was speaking Ida's tears had ceased to flow, and she
had become quite calm. She seemed to have been impressed by what Miss
Ludington had said. At least she offered no further opposition to the
plan proposed.

"I am very anxious to lose no time," said Miss Ludington, presently, "and
I think we had better drive into Brooklyn the first thing to-morrow
morning, and see my lawyer about the necessary legal proceedings."

"Just as you please," said Ida, and presently, pleading a nervous
headache, she went to her room and remained there the rest of the
afternoon.

Meanwhile Paul had seen Miss Ludington, and she had told him of her talk
with Ida, and its result. The young man was beside himself with chagrin,
humiliation, and baffled love. The fact that Ida had consented to the
plan of adoption showed beyond doubt that she had given up all idea of
being his wife, at least for the present, and possibly of ever marrying
him at all.

Why had she dealt with him so strangely? Why had she used him with such
cruel caprice? Was ever a man treated so perversely by a woman who loved
him? Miss Ludington could only shake her head as he poured out his
complaints to her. Ida's contradictory behaviour was as much a puzzle to
her as to him, and she deplored it scarcely less. But she insisted that
he should not trouble the girl by demanding explanations of her, as that,
by vexing her, would only make matters worse.

If, indeed, Paul had any disposition to take the attitude of an aggrieved
person, it vanished when he met Ida at the tea-table. The sight of her
swollen eyes and red lids, and the piteous looks, of deprecating
tenderness which from time to time she bent on him, left room for nothing
in his heart but a great love and compassion. Whatever might be the
secret of this strange caprice it was evidently no mere piece of
wantonness. She was suffering from it as much as he.

He tried to get a chance to talk with her; but Miss Ludington, feeling
slightly ill, went to her room directly after tea, and Ida accompanied
her to see that she was properly cared for, and got comfortably to bed.
After waiting a long while for her to come downstairs, Paul concluded
that she did not intend to appear again, and went off for a walk, in the
hope thereby of regaining something of his equanimity.

It was about ten o'clock when he returned home. As he came in sight of
the house he saw by the light reflected from the sitting-room windows
that there was some one upon the piazza. As he came nearer he perceived
that it was Ida. She was sitting sidewise upon a long, cane-bottomed
settee, and her arms were thrown upon the back of it to form a sort of
pillow on which her head rested. His tread upon the turf was inaudible,
and she neither saw nor heard him as he approached, nor when, softly
mounting the steps, he stood over her.

She was indeed sobbing with such violence that she could not have been
easily sensible of anything external. Paul had never heard such piteous
weeping. He had never seen much of women's crying, and he did not know
what abandonment of grief their tender frames can sustain--grief that
seemingly would kill a man if he could feel it. Long, gurgling sobs
followed one another as the waves of the sea sweep over the head of a
straggling swimmer. Every now and then they were interrupted by sharp
cries of exquisite anguish, such as might be wrung out by the sudden
twist of a rack, and then would come a low, shrill crooning sound, almost
musical, beyond which it seemed grief could not go.

The violence of the paroxysm would pass, and she would grow calmer,
drawing long, shuddering breaths as she struggled back to self-control.
Then a quick panting would begin and grow faster and faster, till another
burst of sobs shook her like a leaf in the storm.

In very awe of such great grief Paul stood awhile silently over her, the
tears filling his own eyes and running down his cheeks unheeded. She had
wept something like this, though nothing like so long or so bitterly, on
former occasions, when he had urged her with special vehemence to fix a
day when she would fulfil her promise to be his wife.

Now, as he pondered the piteous spectacle before him, the thought came
over him that his first reverential instinct concerning her, that despite
her resumption of a mortal form she was something more than mortal, was
true, and that he had done wrong in so far forgetting it as to urge her
to be his wife as if she were merely a woman like others. She herself did
not know it, but surely this exceeding cruel crying was nothing else but
the conflict between the love of the woman which went out to her earthly
lover, and would fain make him happy, and the nature of the inhabitant of
heaven, where there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage. This was
the key to her inexplicable sorrow during the past weeks. This explained
why, though she loved him so tenderly, the thought of becoming his wife
was so intolerable to her.

So be it. Her nature could not sink to his, but his should rise to hers.
This brief dream of earthly passion must pass. Better a thousand times
that he should be disappointed in all that is dear to the heart of a man,
than that he should grieve her thus. In that moment it did not seem hard
to him to sacrifice the hopes of the man to the devotion of the lover. By
one great effort he rose again to the level of the ascetic passion that
had glorified his life up to these last delirious weeks. She had brought
heaven to earth for him, but it should still be heaven, since her
happiness demanded it.

And having reasoned thus, at last, for there seemed no end of her
weeping, or any diminution of its bitterness, he touched her. She
started, and turned her streaming eyes to him, then, seeing who it was,
threw her arms around his neck, and, as he sat beside her, laid her head
on his shoulder clinging to him convulsively.

"You don't believe I love you, Paul; and I can't blame you for it, I
can't blame you," she sobbed; "but I do, oh, I do!"

"I do believe it. I know it," he said. "Don't think that I doubt it, and
don't cry now, for after this your love shall be enough for me. I will
not trouble you any more with importunings to be my wife. I have been
very cruel to you."

"It is because I love you that I will not marry you," she sobbed.
"Promise me you will never doubt that. Don't ask me to explain to you why
it is; only believe me."

"I think I understand why it is already," he replied, gently. "I was very
dull not to know before. If I had known, I should not have caused you so
much grief."

She raised her head from his shoulder.

"What is it that you know?" she asked, quickly.

He thereupon proceeded to tell her, in tenderest words of reverence,
what, in his opinion, was the mystical cause, unsuspected, perhaps, even
by herself, of her unconquerable repugnance to the idea of being his
wife, truly as he knew she loved him. He blamed himself that he had not
recognized the sacred instinct which had held her back, but in his
selfish blindness had gone on urging her to do violence to her nature.
Now that his eyes were opened he would not grieve her any more. Her love
alone should satisfy and bless him. Earthly passion should no more vex
her serenity.

When he first began to speak she had regarded him with evident
astonishment. As the meaning of his words became clear to her she had
turned her face away from him and covered it with both her hands, as a
person does under an overpowering sense of shame. She did not remove them
until he had finished, when she rose abruptly.

Light enough came from the windows behind them for him to see that her
cheeks and forehead were crimson.

"I think I may as well go now," she said. "Good-bye." And in another
moment he found himself alone, not a little astonished at the suddenness
of her departure.




CHAPTER XIV.



Ida passed with a quick step through the sitting-room and upstairs to her
bedroom, where she locked the door and threw herself upon the bed in a
paroxysm of tearless sobbing.

"I believe I have no more tears left," she whispered, as at last she
raised herself and arranged her dishevelled hair.

She sat awhile in woful reverie upon the edge of the bed, and then
crossed the room to a beautiful writing-desk which Miss Ludington had
given her. She opened it, and, taking out several sheets of paper,
prepared to write. "If I had not run upstairs that moment," she murmured,
"I must have told him the whole horrible story. But it is better this
way. I believe it would have killed me to see the look on his face. Oh,
my darling, my darling! what will you think of me when you know?" and
then she sat down to write.

She stopped so many times to cry over it that it was midnight when the
