service by Wolf, they have been caught every year in shoals. It is
like the difference between sea fishing with the line and using a
steam trawler. In the 1908 almanacs nearly seven hundred asteroids are
included. The computation of their perturbations and ephemerides by
Euler's and Lagrange's method of variable elements became so laborious
that Encke devised a special process for these, which can be applied
to many other disturbed orbits. [8]

When a photograph is taken of a region of the heavens including an
asteroid, the stars are photographed as points because the telescope
is made to follow their motion; but the asteroids, by their proper
motion, appear as short lines.

The discovery of Eros and the photographic attack upon its path have
been described in their relation to finding the sun's distance.

A group of four asteroids has lately been found, with a mean distance
and period equal to that of Jupiter. To three of these masculine names
have been given--Hector, Patroclus, Achilles; the other has not yet
been named.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Langrenus (van Langren), F. Selenographia sive lumina austriae
philippica; Bruxelles, 1645.

[2] _Astr. Nach._, 2,944.

[3] _Acad. des Sc._, Paris; _C.R._, lxxxiii., 1876.

[4] _Mem. Spettr. Ital._, xi., p. 28.

[5] _R. S. Phil. Trans_., No. 1.

[6] Grant's _Hist. Ph. Ast_., p. 267.

[7] _Nature_, November 12th, 1908.

[8] _Ast. Nach_., Nos. 791, 792, 814, translated by G. B. Airy.
_Naut. Alm_., Appendix, 1856.



14. COMETS AND METEORS.


Ever since Halley discovered that the comet of 1682 was a member of
the solar system, these wonderful objects have had a new interest for
astronomers; and a comparison of orbits has often identified the
return of a comet, and led to the detection of an elliptic orbit where
the difference from a parabola was imperceptible in the small portion
of the orbit visible to us. A remarkable case in point was the comet
of 1556, of whose identity with the comet of 1264 there could be
little doubt.  Hind wanted to compute the orbit more exactly than
Halley had done. He knew that observations had been made, but they
were lost. Having expressed his desire for a search, all the
observations of Fabricius and of Heller, and also a map of the comet's
path among the stars, were eventually unearthed in the most unlikely
manner, after being lost nearly three hundred years.  Hind and others
were certain that this comet would return between 1844 and 1848, but
it never appeared.

When the spectroscope was first applied to finding the composition of
the heavenly bodies, there was a great desire to find out what comets
are made of. The first opportunity came in 1864, when Donati observed
the spectrum of a comet, and saw three bright bands, thus proving that
it was a gas and at least partly self-luminous.  In 1868 Huggins
compared the spectrum of Winnecke's comet with that of a Geissler tube
containing olefiant gas, and found exact agreement. Nearly all comets
have shown the same spectrum.[1] A very few comets have given bright
band spectra differing from the normal type. Also a certain kind of
continuous spectrum, as well as reflected solar light showing
Frauenhofer lines, have been seen.

[Illustration: COPY OF THE DRAWING MADE BY PAUL FABRICIUS.  To define
the path of comet 1556. After being lost for 300 years, this drawing
was recovered by the prolonged efforts of Mr. Hind and Professor
Littrow in 1856.]

When Wells's comet, in 1882, approached very close indeed to the sun,
the spectrum changed to a mono-chromatic yellow colour, due to sodium.

For a full account of the wonders of the cometary world the reader is
referred to books on descriptive astronomy, or to monographs on
comets.[2] Nor can the very uncertain speculations about the structure
of comets' tails be given here. A new explanation has been proposed
almost every time that a great discovery has been made in the theory
of light, heat, chemistry, or electricity.

Halley's comet remained the only one of which a prediction of the
return had been confirmed, until the orbit of the small, ill-defined
comet found by Pons in 1819 was computed by Encke, and found to have a
period of 3 1/3 years. It was predicted to return in 1822, and was
recognised by him as identical with many previous comets. This comet,
called after Encke, has showed in each of its returns an inexplicable
reduction of mean distance, which led to the assertion of a resisting
medium in space until a better explanation could be found.[3]

Since that date fourteen comets have been found with elliptic orbits,
whose aphelion distances are all about the same as Jupiter's mean
distance; and six have an aphelion distance about ten per cent,
greater than Neptune's mean distance. Other comets are similarly
associated with the planets Saturn and Uranus.

The physical transformations of comets are among the most wonderful of
unexplained phenomena in the heavens. But, for physical astronomers,
the greatest interest attaches to the reduction of radius vector of
Encke's comet, the splitting of Biela's comet into two comets in 1846,
and the somewhat similar behaviour of other comets. It must be noted,
however, that comets have a sensible size, that all their parts cannot
travel in exactly the same orbit under the sun's gravitation, and that
their mass is not sufficient to retain the parts together very
forcibly; also that the inevitable collision of particles, or else
fluid friction, is absorbing energy, and so reducing the comet's
velocity.

In 1770 Lexell discovered a comet which, as was afterwards proved by
investigations of Lexell, Burchardt, and Laplace, had in 1767 been
deflected by Jupiter out of an orbit in which it was invisible from
the earth into an orbit with a period of 51/2 years, enabling it to be
seen. In 1779 it again approached Jupiter closer than some of his
satellites, and was sent off in another orbit, never to be again
recognised.

But our interest in cometary orbits has been added to by the discovery
that, owing to the causes just cited, a comet, if it does not separate
into discrete parts like Biela's, must in time have its parts spread
out so as to cover a sensible part of the orbit, and that, when the
earth passes through such part of a comet's orbit, a meteor shower is
the result.

A magnificent meteor shower was seen in America on November 12th-13th,
1833, when the paths of the meteors all seemed to radiate from a point
in the constellation Leo. A similar display had been witnessed in
Mexico by Humboldt and Bonpland on November 12th, 1799. H. A. Newton
traced such records back to October 13th, A.D. 902. The orbital motion
of a cloud or stream of small particles was indicated. The period
favoured by H. A. Newton was 3541/2 days; another suggestion was 3751/2
days, and another 331/4 years.  He noticed that the advance of the date
of the shower between 902 and 1833, at the rate of one day in seventy
years, meant a progression of the node of the orbit.  Adams undertook
to calculate what the amount would be on all the five suppositions
that had been made about the period. After a laborious work, he found
that none gave one day in seventy years except the 331/4-year period,
which did so exactly. H. A. Newton predicted a return of the shower on
the night of November 13th-14th, 1866. He is now dead; but many of us
are alive to recall the wonder and enthusiasm with which we saw this
prediction being fulfilled by the grandest display of meteors ever
seen by anyone now alive.

The _progression_ of the nodes proved the path of the meteor
stream to be retrograde. The _radiant_ had almost the exact
longitude of the point towards which the earth was moving. This proved
that the meteor cluster was at perihelion. The period being known, the
eccentricity of the orbit was obtainable, also the orbital velocity of
the meteors in perihelion; and, by comparing this with the earth's
velocity, the latitude of the radiant enabled the inclination to be
determined, while the longitude of the earth that night was the
longitude of the node. In such a way Schiaparelli was able to find
first the elements of the orbit of the August meteor shower
(Perseids), and to show its identity with the orbit of Tuttle's comet
1862.iii. Then, in January 1867, Le Verrier gave the elements of the
November meteor shower (Leonids); and Peters, of Altona, identified
these with Oppolzer's elements for Tempel's comet 1866--Schiaparelli
having independently attained both of these results. Subsequently
Weiss, of Vienna, identified the meteor shower of April 20th (Lyrids)
with comet 1861. Finally, that indefatigable worker on meteors,
A. S. Herschel, added to the number, and in 1878 gave a list of
seventy-six coincidences between cometary and meteoric orbits.

Cometary astronomy is now largely indebted to photography, not merely
for accurate delineations of shape, but actually for the discovery of
most of them.  The art has also been applied to the observation of
comets at distances from their perihelia so great as to prevent their
visual observation. Thus has Wolf, of Heidelburg, found upon old
plates the position of comet 1905.v., as a star of the 15.5 magnitude,
783 days before the date of its discovery. From the point of view of
the importance of finding out the divergence of a cometary orbit from
a parabola, its period, and its aphelion distance, this increase of
range attains the very highest value.

The present Astronomer Royal, appreciating this possibility, has been
searching by photography for Halley's comet since November, 1907,
although its perihelion passage will not take place until April, 1910.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] In 1874, when the writer was crossing the Pacific Ocean in
H.M.S. "Scout," Coggia's comet unexpectedly appeared, and (while
Colonel Tupman got its positions with the sextant) he tried to use the
prism out of a portable direct-vision spectroscope, without success
until it was put in front of the object-glass of a binocular, when, to
his great joy, the three band images were clearly seen.

[2] Such as _The World of Comets_, by A. Guillemin; _History of
Comets_, by G. R. Hind, London, 1859; _Theatrum Cometicum_, by S. de
Lubienietz, 1667; _Cometographie_, by Pingre, Paris, 1783; _Donati's
Comet_, by Bond.

[3] The investigations by Von Asten (of St. Petersburg) seem to
support, and later ones, especially those by Backlund (also of
St. Petersburg), seem to discredit, the idea of a resisting medium.



15. THE FIXED STARS AND NEBULAE.


Passing now from our solar system, which appears to be subject to the
action of the same forces as those we experience on our globe, there
remains an innumerable host of fixed stars, nebulas, and nebulous
clusters of stars. To these the attention of astronomers has been more
earnestly directed since telescopes have been so much enlarged.
Photography also has enabled a vast amount of work to be covered in a
comparatively short period, and the spectroscope has given them the
means, not only of studying the chemistry of the heavens, but also of
detecting any motion in the line of sight from less than a mile a
second and upwards in any star, however distant, provided it be bright
enough.

[Illustration: SIR WILLIAM HERSCHEL, F.R.S.--1738-1822.  Painted by
Lemuel F. Abbott; National Portrait Gallery, Room XX.]

In the field of telescopic discovery beyond our solar system there is
no one who has enlarged our knowledge so much as Sir William Herschel,
to whom we owe the greatest discovery in dynamical astronomy among the
stars--viz., that the law of gravitation extends to the most distant
stars, and that many of them describe elliptic orbits about each
other. W. Herschel was born at Hanover in 1738, came to England in
1758 as a trained musician, and died in 1822. He studied science when
he could, and hired a telescope, until he learnt to make his own
specula and telescopes. He made 430 parabolic specula in twenty-one
years. He discovered 2,500 nebulae and 806 double stars, counted the
stars in 3,400 guage-fields, and compared the principal stars
photometrically.

Some of the things for which he is best known were results of those
accidents that happen only to the indefatigable enthusiast. Such was
the discovery of Uranus, which led to funds being provided for
constructing his 40-feet telescope, after which, in 1786, he settled
at Slough. In the same way, while trying to detect the annual parallax
of the stars, he failed in that quest, but discovered binary systems
of stars revolving in ellipses round each other; just as Bradley's
attack on stellar parallax failed, but led to the discovery of
aberration, nutation, and the true velocity of light.

_Parallax_.--The absence of stellar parallax was the great
objection to any theory of the earth's motion prior to Kepler's
time. It is true that Kepler's theory itself could have been
geometrically expressed equally well with the earth or any other point
fixed. But in Kepler's case the obviously implied physical theory of
the planetary motions, even before Newton explained the simplicity of
conception involved, made astronomers quite ready to waive the claim
for a rigid proof of the earth's motion by measurement of an annual
parallax of stars, which they had insisted on in respect of
Copernicus's revival of the idea of the earth's orbital motion.

Still, the desire to measure this parallax was only intensified by the
practical certainty of its existence, and by repeated failures. The
attempts of Bradley failed. The attempts of Piazzi and Brinkley,[1]
early in the nineteenth century, also failed. The first successes,
afterwards confirmed, were by Bessel and Henderson.  Both used stars
whose proper motion had been found to be large, as this argued
proximity. Henderson, at the Cape of Good Hope, observed alpha
Centauri, whose annual proper motion he found to amount to 3".6, in
1832-3; and a few years later deduced its parallax 1".16.  His
successor at the Cape, Maclear, reduced this to 0".92.

In 1835 Struve assigned a doubtful parallax of 0".261 to Vega (alpha
Lyrae). But Bessel's observations, between 1837 and 1840, of 61 Cygni,
a star with the large proper motion of over 5", established its annual
parallax to be 0".3483; and this was confirmed by Peters, who found
the value 0".349.

Later determinations for alpha2 Centauri, by Gill,[2] make its parallax
0".75--This is the nearest known fixed star; and its light takes 4 1/3
years to reach us. The light year is taken as the unit of measurement
in the starry heavens, as the earth's mean distance is "the
astronomical unit" for the solar system.[3] The proper motions and
parallaxes combined tell us the velocity of the motion of these stars
across the line of sight: alpha Centauri 14.4 miles a second=4.2
astronomical units a year; 61 Cygni 37.9 miles a second=11.2
astronomical units a year. These successes led to renewed zeal, and
now the distances of many stars are known more or less accurately.

Several of the brightest stars, which might be expected to be the
nearest, have not shown a parallax amounting to a twentieth of a
second of arc. Among these are Canopus, alpha Orionis, alpha Cygni, beta
Centauri, and gamma Cassiopeia. Oudemans has published a list of
parallaxes observed.[4]

_Proper Motion._--In 1718 Halley[5] detected the proper motions
of Arcturus and Sirius. In 1738 J. Cassinis[6] showed that the former
had moved five minutes of arc since Tycho Brahe fixed its position. In
1792 Piazzi noted the motion of 61 Cygni as given above. For a long
time the greatest observed proper motion was that of a small star 1830
Groombridge, nearly 7" a year; but others have since been found
reaching as much as 10".

Now the spectroscope enables the motion of stars to be detected at a
single observation, but only that part of the motion that is in the
line of sight. For a complete knowledge of a star's motion the proper
motion and parallax must also be known.

When Huggins first applied the Doppler principle to measure velocities
in the line of sight,[7] the faintness of star spectra diminished the
accuracy; but Voegel, in 1888, overcame this to a great extent by long
exposures of photographic plates.

It has often been noticed that stars which seem to belong to a group
of nearly uniform magnitude have the same proper motion. The
spectroscope has shown that these have also often the same velocity in
the line of sight. Thus in the Great Bear, beta, gamma, delta,
epsilon, zeta, all agree as to angular proper motion. delta was too
faint for a spectroscopic measurement, but all the others have been
shown to be approaching us at a rate of twelve to twenty miles a
second. The same has been proved for proper motion, and line of sight
motion, in the case of Pleiades and other groups.

Maskelyne measured many proper motions of stars, from which W.
Herschel[8] came to the conclusion that these apparent motions are for
the most part due to a motion of the solar system in space towards a
point in the constellation Hercules, R.A. 257 deg.; N. Decl. 25 deg.  This
grand discovery has been amply confirmed, and, though opinions differ
as to the exact direction, it happens that the point first indicated
by Herschel, from totally insufficient data, agrees well with modern
estimates.

Comparing the proper motions and parallaxes to get the actual velocity
of each star relative to our system, C.L. Struve found the probable
velocity of the solar system in space to be fifteen miles a second, or
five astronomical units a year.

The work of Herschel in this matter has been checked by comparing
spectroscopic velocities in the line of sight which, so far as the
sun's motion is concerned, would give a maximum rate of approach for
stars near Hercules, a maximum rate of recession for stars in the
opposite part of the heavens, and no effect for stars half-way
between. In this way the spectroscope has confirmed generally
Herschel's view of the direction, and makes the velocity eleven miles
a second, or nearly four astronomical units a year.

The average proper motion of a first magnitude star has been found to
be 0".25 annually, and of a sixth magnitude star 0".04. But that all
bright stars are nearer than all small stars, or that they show
greater proper motion for that reason, is found to be far from the
truth. Many statistical studies have been made in this connection, and
interesting results may be expected from this treatment in the hands
of Kapteyn of Groningen, and others.[9]

On analysis of the directions of proper motions of stars in all parts
of the heavens, Kapteyn has shown[10] that these indicate, besides the
solar motion towards Hercules, two general drifts of stars in nearly
opposite directions, which can be detected in any part of the
heavens. This result has been confirmed from independent data by
Eddington (_R.A.S., M.N._) and Dyson (_R.S.E. Proc._).

Photography promises to assist in the measurement of parallax and
proper motions. Herr Pulfrich, of the firm of Carl Zeiss, has vastly
extended the applications of stereoscopic vision to astronomy--a
subject which De la Rue took up in the early days of photography.  He
has made a stereo-comparator of great beauty and convenience for
comparing stereoscopically two star photographs taken at different
dates. Wolf of Heidelberg has used this for many purposes. His
investigations depending on the solar motion in space are remarkable.
He photographs stars in a direction at right angles to the line of the
sun's motion. He has taken photographs of the same region fourteen
years apart, the two positions of his camera being at the two ends of
a base-line over 5,000,000,000 miles apart, or fifty-six astronomical
units. On examining these stereoscopically, some of the stars rise out
of the general plane of the stars, and seem to be much nearer. Many of
the stars are thus seen to be suspended in space at different
distances corresponding exactly to their real distances from our solar
system, except when their proper motion interferes. The effect is most
striking; the accuracy of measurement exceeds that of any other method
of measuring such displacements, and it seems that with a long
interval of time the advantage of the method increases.

_Double Stars._--The large class of double stars has always been much
studied by amateurs, partly for their beauty and colour, and partly as
a test for telescopic definition. Among the many unexplained stellar
problems there is one noticed in double stars that is thought by some
to be likely to throw light on stellar evolution. It is this: There
are many instances where one star of the pair is comparatively faint,
and the two stars are contrasted in colour; and in every single case
the general colour of the faint companion is invariably to be classed
with colours more near to the blue end of the spectrum than that of
the principal star.

_Binary Stars._--Sir William Herschel began his observations of double
stars in the hope of discovering an annual parallax of the stars. In
this he was following a suggestion of Galileo's. The presumption is
that, if there be no physical connection between the stars of a pair,
the largest is the nearest, and has the greatest parallax. So, by
noting the distance between the pair at different times of the year, a
delicate test of parallax is provided, unaffected by major
instrumental errors.

Herschel did, indeed, discover changes of distance, but not of the
character to indicate parallax. Following this by further observation,
he found that the motions were not uniform nor rectilinear, and by a
clear analysis of the movements he established the remarkable and
wholly unexpected fact that in all these cases the motion is due to a
revolution about their common centre of gravity.[11] He gave the
approximate period of revolution of some of these: Castor, 342 years;
delta Serpentis, 375 years; gamma Leonis, 1,200 years; epsilon Bootis,
1,681 years.

Twenty years later Sir John Herschel and Sir James South, after
re-examination of these stars, confirmed[12] and extended the results,
one pair of Coronae having in the interval completed more than a whole
revolution.

It is, then, to Sir William Herschel that we owe the extension of the
law of gravitation, beyond the limits of the solar system, to the
whole universe. His observations were confirmed by F.G.W. Struve (born
1793, died 1864), who carried on the work at Dorpat. But it was first
to Savary,[13] and later to Encke and Sir John Herschel, that we owe
the computation of the elliptic elements of these stars; also the
resulting identification of their law of force with Newton's force of
gravitation applied to the solar system, and the force that makes an
apple fall to the ground. As Grant well says in his _History_:
"This may be justly asserted to be one of the most sublime truths
which astronomical science has hitherto disclosed to the researches of
the human mind."

Latterly the best work on double stars has been done by
S. W. Burnham,[14] at the Lick Observatory. The shortest period he
found was eleven years (kappa Pegasi).  In the case of some of
these binaries the parallax has been measured, from which it appears
that in four of the surest cases the orbits are about the size of the
orbit of Uranus, these being probably among the smallest stellar
orbits.

The law of gravitation having been proved to extend to the stars, a
discovery (like that of Neptune in its origin, though unlike it in the
labour and originality involved in the calculation) that entrances the
imagination became possible, and was realised by Bessel--the discovery
of an unknown body by its gravitational disturbance on one that was
visible. In 1834 and 1840 he began to suspect a want of uniformity in
the proper motion of Sirius and Procyon respectively. In 1844, in a
letter to Sir John Herschel,[15] he attributed these irregularities in
each case to the attraction of an invisible companion, the period of
revolution of Sirius being about half a century. Later he said: "I
adhere to the conviction that Procyon and Sirius form real binary
systems, consisting of a visible and an invisible star.  There is no
reason to suppose luminosity an essential quality of cosmical
bodies. The visibility of countless stars is no argument against the
invisibility of countless others." This grand conception led Peters to
compute more accurately the orbit, and to assign the place of the
invisible companion of Sirius. In 1862 Alvan G. Clark was testing a
new 18-inch object-glass (now at Chicago) upon Sirius, and, knowing
nothing of these predictions, actually found the companion in the very
place assigned to it. In 1896 the companion of Procyon was discovered
by Professor Schaeberle at the Lick Observatory.

Now, by the refined parallax determinations of Gill at the Cape, we
know that of Sirius to be 0".38. From this it has been calculated that
the mass of Sirius equals two of our suns, and its intrinsic
brightness equals twenty suns; but the companion, having a mass equal
to our sun, has only a five-hundredth part of the sun's brightness.

_Spectroscopic Binaries_.--On measuring the velocity of a star in the
line of sight at frequent intervals, periodic variations have been
found, leading to a belief in motion round an invisible
companion. Vogel, in 1889, discovered this in the case of Spica (alpha
Virginis), whose period is 4d. 0h. 19m., and the diameter of whose
orbit is six million miles. Great numbers of binaries of this type
have since then been discovered, all of short period.

Also, in 1889, Pickering found that at regular intervals of fifty-two
days the lines in the spectrum of zeta of the Great Bear are
duplicated, indicating a relative velocity, equal to one hundred miles
a second, of two components revolving round each other, of which that
apparently single star must be composed.

It would be interesting, no doubt, to follow in detail the
accumulating knowledge about the distances, proper motions, and orbits
of the stars; but this must be done elsewhere. Enough has been said to
show how results are accumulating which must in time unfold to us the
various stellar systems and their mutual relationships.

_Variable Stars._--It has often happened in the history of different
branches of physical science that observation and experiment were so
far ahead of theory that hopeless confusion appeared to reign; and
then one chance result has given a clue, and from that time all
differences and difficulties in the previous researches have stood
forth as natural consequences, explaining one another in a rational
sequence. So we find parallax, proper motion, double stars, binary
systems, variable stars, and new stars all bound together.

The logical and necessary explanation given of the cause of ordinary
spectroscopic binaries, and of irregular proper motions of Sirius and
Procyon, leads to the inference that if ever the plane of such a
binary orbit were edge-on to us there ought to be an eclipse of the
luminous partner whenever the non-luminous one is interposed between
us. This should give rise either to intermittence in the star's light
or else to variability.  It was by supposing the existence of a dark
companion to Algol that its discoverer, Goodricke of York,[16] in
1783, explained variable stars of this type. Algol (beta Persei)
completes the period of variable brightness in 68.8 hours. It loses
three-fifths of its light, and regains it in twelve hours. In 1889
Vogel,[17] with the Potsdam spectrograph, actually found that the
luminous star is receding before each eclipse, and approaching us
after each eclipse; thus entirely supporting Goodricke's opinion.
There are many variables of the Algol type, and information is
steadily accumulating. But all variable stars do not suffer the sudden
variations of Algol. There are many types, and the explanations of
others have not proved so easy.

The Harvard College photographs have disclosed the very great
prevalence of variability, and this is certainly one of the lines in
which modern discovery must progress.

Roberts, in South Africa, has done splendid work on the periods of
variables of the Algol type.

_New Stars_.--Extreme instances of variable stars are the new stars
such as those detected by Hipparchus, Tycho Brahe, and Kepler, of
which many have been found in the last half-century. One of the latest
great "Novae" was discovered in Auriga by a Scotsman, Dr. Anderson, on
February 1st, 1892, and, with the modesty of his race, he communicated
the fact to His Majesty's Astronomer for Scotland on an unsigned
post-card.[18] Its spectrum was observed and photographed by Huggins
and many others. It was full of bright lines of hydrogen, calcium,
helium, and others not identified. The astounding fact was that lines
were shown in pairs, bright and dark, on a faint continuous spectrum,
indicating apparently that a dark body approaching us at the rate of
550 miles a second[19] was traversing a cold nebulous atmosphere, and
was heated to incandescence by friction, like a meteor in our
