71,985.--APPARATUS FOR ELEVATING WATER.--J.R. Cole, Keaton Station,
Tenn.

I claim, 1st, The combination of the chamber, F, provided with the short
pipes, p p', and the pipes, p", with the pumps, G H, and the chambers, C
D E, substantially as and for the purposes described.

2d, The combination and arrangement, for the purpose described, of the
chambers, C D E F, pipes, p p' p", P P' P", and pumps, G H, the latter
working alternately, so as to maintain a constant pressure upon the
water in the chambers, substantially in the manner specified.


71,986.--TACK HAMMER.--Thomas A. Conklin, New Britain. Conn.

I claim, as a new article of manufacture, a tack hammer, constructed
in the manner and With the characteristics herein specified, for the
purposes set forth.


71,987.--FLOOR CLAMP.--Wm. Conner and C. W. Mitchell, Wilmington, Del.

We claim the combination of the frame, a, with the screws, b and d d,
with the wedge blocks, e e, wedges, f f, and plates i i, constructed and
arranged, as herein described, to operate as a clamp for clamping ship
timber, flooring, and other carpenters' work.


71,988.--BUTTON.--Geo. Cooke, Winchester, Mass.

I claim a button or stud, its shank attached by means of a disk formed
concave, and subsequently compressed, substantially as described.


71,989.--HARVESTER.--Francis C. Coppage, Terre Haute, Ind.

I claim 1st, The combination of the double or alternate step wheel, E,
having the inclined steps, e e e, with the two stepping-dogs, D D',
and the springs, x x, when the said parts are constructed and arrange
substantially in the manner and for the purposes described.

2d, The combination and arrangement of the adjusting rod, n o", with the
cylindrical sleeve, O', the sleeve or slide, O"', the post, P, and the
reel, O"', in such a manner that while the post P, supports the reel,
the elevation of the latter is adjusted by the compound rod, n o",
substantially as and for the purposes specified.

3d, The rod, H, having the crank, h, and the worm, h', in combination
with the worm segment, i, the shaft, I, the winding arm or segment, i',
and the chain, K, substantially as and for the purpose specified.


71,990.--MACHINE FOR STRETCHING CLOTH.--A.C. Corpe, Stafford, Conn.

I claim, 1st, The two gear clamps, B B, composed each of two wheels, a
a', one placed above the other, and the upper wheels arranged so as to
be capable of adjustment, both vertically and laterally, substantially
as shown and described.

2d, The arrangement of gearing, as shown, in connection with the gear
clamps, B B, and roller, C, whereby an equal movement of the clamps is
insured, substantially as shown and described.

3d, The supplemental frame, E, provided with the roller, D, upon which
the cloth is wound, in connection with the gearing, k u, clutch, o,
driving pulley, m, and shaft, l, all arranged substantially as shown and
described.


71,991.--ROLLER FOR DRESSING.--Benjamin R. Cotton, Lewiston, Me.

I claim as an improved dresser roll, a stone roll covered with the
surfacing metal, or metal composition, substantially as set forth.

Also, the method of surfacing a roll by placing around or over a central
roll a metal frame as a base upon which to cement the surface metal, and
the surfacing such frame, substantially as set forth.


71,992.--WAGON LOCK.--James A. Counts, Indianapolis, Iowa. I claim the
catch, g, the bands, h h, the spring, the bar, e, lever, k, for the
purposes set forth and described.


71,993.--HAME TUG.--Jas. C. Covert, Townsendville, N. Y.

I claim, 1st, The metallic hames tug, A, provided with the V-shaped
openings, C, having inclined sides, and the tongues, D, adapted to
receive the V-shaped block, O, formed upon the block, N, of the trace
strap and block, O, held in place by means of the pin upon the spring
lever stop, Q, fitting in the groove, P, in the end of tongue, D, of the
hame tug, as herein described for the purpose specified.

2d, The hame clip, fastened by bolts to the hame tug, substantially as
herein described and for the purpose specified.

3d, The block, N, upon the trace strap, when provided with the V-shaped
block, C, and the spring lever, Q, as herein described for the purpose
specified.


71,994.--HARVESTER RAKE.--James. S. Crump, Williamsburg, Mo.

I claim, 1st, The curved eccentric arm, I, applied to the rock shaft, E,
and operated in the manner and for the purpose described.

2d, The swinging lever, M, or its equivalent, in combination with the
curved eccentric arm for operating the platform, as described.

3d, The arrangement of one or more springs in combination with the
curved eccentric arm, I, for the purpose set forth.

4th, The manner of adjusting the hight of the swinging platform upon the
supporting arms and uprights, as described.

5th, The adjustable cant or deflecting boards, C, in combination with
the swinging platform, as described.


71,995.--WASHING MACHINE.--S.W. Curtiss, Sugar Grove, Pa.

I claim an improved washing machine, consisting box, A, provided with
blocks, H, and roller, E, the hinged frame, B, having rollers, C D,
and handle, G, all constructed, arranged and operating as and for the
purpose set forth.


71,998.--MACHINE FOR FORMING HAT BODIES.--Francis Degen, Newark. N.J.

I claim, 1st, A hat body formed partly of common and partly of fine
stock, by first blowing on the cone a belt of fine stock, then over the
whole cone a quantity of common stock, and finally a quantity of fine
stock, substantially as set forth.

2d, The close fitting cap, B, in combination with the perforated cone,
A, of a machine for forming hat bodies, substantially as and for the
purpose described.

3d, The slide, D, in combination with the trunk, C, cap, B, and
perforated cone, A, substantially as and for the purpose set forth.


71,997.--MAIL-BAG FASTENER.--S. Denison, Portlandville, N.Y.

I claim the hooks, C, constructed substantially as herein shown and
described, in combination with the straps, D and F, with the bag, B, and
staples, A, as and for the purpose set forth.


71,998.--SAWBUCK.--Henry J. Dill, Cummington, Mass.

I claim the clamps, D, the treadle, E', the arms, E, springs, F', and
rods, F, constructed, arranged, and operating, in combination with the
stationary part, A, substantially as shown and described for the purpose
set forth.


71,999.--CARRIAGE FOR ROCK DRILL.--Thomas Doane, Boston, Mass. I claim
the arrangement of the round bars, E F G and H, of a rock drill carriage
into a frame, for the reception of rock drilling machines which shall be
able to reach therefrom any point where it is desirable to bore a hole,
substantially as and for the purpose described.

2d, The position of the horizontal round bars, E and F, under an acute
(more or less) angle, d, to the side frame of a rock drill carriage, or
to the alignment of the tunnel, substantially as and for the purpose set
forth.

3d, The construction of a rock drill carriage for driving a tunnel or
mine so as to swing in a vertical direction on the forward wheels and
axle, substantially as and for the purpose specified.


72,000.--RAILWAY CHAIR.--John H. Downing, Salem, Mass.

I claim the single-headed chair, A, in combination with a sectional
railroad rail, arranged as and for the purpose shown and described.


72,001.--ROTARY PUMP.--John Doyle, Hoboken, N. J., and Timothy A.
Martin, New York city.

We claim the two drums, A C, placed concentrically one within the other,
the chamber, D, air passages, E E', valves, F G, and tubular journals,
B B', all arranged and combined to operate in connection with water or
other liquid placed in the space or spaces between the two drums, A C,
substantially in the manner as and for the purpose specified.


72,002.--GRINDING MILL.--James F. Drummond, New York city.

I claim the tubular inlet-journal, b, having its interior contracted
around the feed pipe at one point, and thence flaring toward the
cylinder and the blast pipe, substantially as and for the purpose
specified.


72,003.--PIVOT GEARING.--Joseph J. Duchesne, Lacon, Ill.

I claim the circular bed plate, A, in combination with the pinion
plate, B, and coupling plate, C, secured by the set screw, S, the whole
arranged and operating substantially as and for the purposes set forth.


72,004.--CULTIVATOR.--William Duffner, Petersburg, Ind.

I claim the cultivator composed of the elements, A B B' C D E F H I J N,
and the device for regulating the depth of the shovels, composed of the
elements, G K L M P, constructed and arranged as set forth.


72,005.--WOVEN FABRIC.--J. Renshaw, East Greenwhich, R.I.

I claim the fabric, herein described, as a new article of manufacture.


72,006.--HORSE RAKE.--Edward A. Field, Sidney, Me.

I claim, 1st, The application of each tooth, E, to its arm, D, by means
of a round tenon arranged at an obtuse angle with the axis of the tooth,
and going into the arm, the same being substantially as and for the
purpose described.

2d, Also, the combination as well as the arrangement of the adjustable
brace d, and the staple or clasping wire, f, with the arm and the tooth,
when applid by means substantially as specified, viz., a cylindrical
tenon arranged at an obtuse angle with the axis of the tooth, and going
into a corresponding hole made in the arm.

3d, Also, the combination of the damping screw, h, with the arm, and the
tooth applied to such arm by a tenon arranged at an obtuse angle with
the axis of the tooth as specified.

4th, Also, the arrangement of the rope, or its equivalent, with the
several arms and their teeth, and the braces thereof, the said rope
being to operate as and for the purpose specified.


72,007.--PUNCH FOR FORMING CLASP.--Charles D. Flesche, New York city.

I claim the sliding punch, B, in combination with the plates, A A',
cutters, b b, an spring, e, substantially as and for the purpose herein
shown and described.


72,008.--SELF-FASTENING SPRING FOR WEBBING.--John Flinn, Philadelphia,
Pa., assignor to Archer Steel, same place.

I claim a spiral spring, for webbing, having the wire at one end of the
spiral coils, A A, bent in the manner described and shown by B C D E,
for the purpose specified.


72,009.--CARVING KNIFE AND FORK HOLDER.--Alden T. Foster, Albany, N.Y.

I claim, as an article of manufacture, the dish or stand, A, constructed
substantially as described, with notches, a a and c c, as and for the
purpose set forth.


72,010.--LAMP CHIMNEY.--Sam'l W. Fowler, Brooklyn, N.Y.

I claim the construction of the glass chimney, with its concave and
convex deflectors, J and E, on each side, and collar, B, beneath, with
its projections, C C, as herein described and for the purposes set
forth.


72,011.--CARTRIDGE BOX.--William Freeborn, Tivoli, N.Y.

I claim the square box, A, made of leather or any suitable material,
when constructed with a series of round, fluted, or ruffled holders,
B, on the inside, made of any firm or flexible material, a series of
holders, B, being attached to each flap, C, in front, and the flaps
buttoning to the sides of the box, A, as herein described and for the
purpose set forth.


72,012.--DEVICE FOR HITCHING HORSES.--Samuel Galbraith, New Orleans, La.

I claim the device above described, consisting of the rings, A and B,
and the pivoted curved jaws, C C, meeting at one extremity at e' e',
and connected at the other by means of the rods, r r, and springs, s,
working in the tube, substantially as and for the purpose specified.


72,013.--CAPPING SCREWS.--J. Gardner, New Haven, Conn.

I claim, 1st, Cutting away or depressing the cap at the point where it
meets the nick in the screw head, substantially as described, so that
such cut away or depressed portion, while connected with and forming
part of the cap shall lie within outline the nick in the screw head, as
set forth.

2d, A capped screw in which the slot or depression in the cap
corresponding to the nick in the screw head is forced, substantially in
the manner and for the purposes herein shown and described.


72,014.--TIGHT AND LOOSE PULLEY.--Joseph P. Gates, Lincoln, Ill.

I claim the construction of the pulley, e, in two sections, with the
arrangement and combination of the ram spring, F, the rebound guard, G,
the stop flange, I, the case dog, J, and spring, K, the case dog ram,
L, the shuttle key, P, and stands, Z, and arm, b, with cam, a, when
constructed, arranged, and operated as herein described and for the
purposes set forth.


72,015.--BRICK MACHINE.--Samuel Gissinger, Allegheny City, Pa.

I claim, 1st, The device for moving the mold on to the roller way, G,
consisting of the arm, l, held by a spring, m', lever, m, pin, n, on the
gear wheel, o, and block, j, moving in the slot, h, substantially as
described.

2d, The device for moving the molds under the hopper, consisting of the
gear wheel, p, operated by the gear wheel, c, arm, k', and block, k,
moving the slot, l, substantially as described.

3d, In combination with the above, the gear wheel, o, shaft, B, grinding
