Echinocactus.  The woolly groove of the Coryphantha extends from
the spine-bearing areola to the axil of the tubercle, where it
expands into the flower-bearing areola.  In C. macromeris the
groove extends only about half way down the tubercle and gives
origin to the flower-bearing areola on the side of the tubercle;
while in Echinocactus the flower-bearing areola becomes adjacent
to the spine-bearing areola and the flower appears at the summit
of the tubercle.

ARTIFICIAL KEY TO THE SPECIES.

It seems impossible to make a simple artificial key that will
serve as a useful guide to each individual species and variety.
Our knowledge of so many of the species is imperfect, that no set
of characters can be applied throughout.  However, as no plants
are collected in such fragmentary condition, it will be useful to
construct a key based upon such characters as are always likely
to be present, even if specific distinctions are not always
reached.  In many cases, species are so closely and differently
related to each other that the complete descriptions will have to
be consulted to determine the differences, and in such cases the
artificial key can only indicate the group.  Even the full
descriptions are very compact, all characters not necessary for
discrimination having been eliminated.  No attempt need be made
to determine any species by means of the flowers alone.  In most
cases more or less of the plant body will be available,
presenting spine and tubercle characters, and these are used in
the following key.  The distinction between Eumamillaria and
Coryphantha, on the basis of grooveless and grooved tubercles
should always be made out easily.  It may be useful to suggest as
a caution, however, that often tubercles in drying develop folds
which simulate grooves, and especially is this true in
quadrangular tubercles.  In such cases it is necessary to restore
the original plumpness of the tubercle by boiling, before the
presence or absence of the groove can be definitely determined.
The species and varieties are indicated only by their specific or
varietal names in the following key, and the numbers refer to the
serial numbers of the synoptical presentation.  Forms occurring
within the United States are marked with an "*":

                   I. Tubercles never grooved.

                     * Central spines none.

Radials 5 to 9, stout.
   meiacanthus* (7).

Radials 20 to 40.
   micromeris* (12), greggii (13).

Radials 40 to 80.
   lasiacanthus* (10), denudatus* (11).


             ** Central spine solitary and not hooked.

              + Central spine longer than the radials.

Radials 7 or 8: tubercles very long (40 to 50 mm.).
   longimamma (36).

Radials 15 to 20: tubercles 6 to 8 mm. long.
   eschanzieri (21).

            ++ Central spine shorter than the radials.

Radials 5 to 9, stout.
   meiacanthus* (7).

Radials 9 to 22.
   heyderi* (5), hemisphaericus* (6), gummiferus (8), gabbii
(34),
   sphaericus (35).

             *** Central spine solitary and hooked.

          + Stems slender cylindric: Lower Californian.

Centrals 1, 20 to 30 mm. long.
   roseanus (23).

Centrals 1 to 4, 20 to 50 mm. long.
   setispinus (24).

            ++ Stems depressed-globose to ovate.

Radials 4 to 6, rigid.
   uncinatus (9).

Radials 8 to 12.
   wrightii* (15).

Radials 15 to 30.
   grahami* (19), eschanzieri (21).

Radials 50 to 60.
   barbatus (18).

   **** Central spines more than one, and none of them hooked.

   + Slender or sometimes stout cylindrical plants, branching at
     base: Lower Californian.

   brandegei (3), setispinus (24), halei (25).

       ++ Depressed-globose to ovate and stout cylindrical.

         ++ Radials few (3 to 12) and rigid: Mexican.

Radials 3: centrals 3.
   alternatus (1)

Radials 7 or 8: tubercles 40 to 50 mm. long.
   longimamma (36).

Radials 10 to 12: tubercles 12 to 15 mm. long.
   gummiferus (8).


   ++++ Radials numerous (16 to 60), capillary or bristle-like.

Radials 15 to 30, slender but rigid (bristly).
   acanthophlegmus(2), densispinus (4), bispinus (14),
   rhodanthus (26), sulphureospinus (27), palmeri (29),
   pringlei (32).

Radials 30 to 60 or more, mostly capillary.
   tetrancistrus* (22), capillaris (28), texanus* (31),
   spaerotrichus (33).

   ***** Central spines more than one and but one of them hooked.

Radials 10 to 15.
   goodrichii* (16), setispinus (24).

Radials 15 to 30.
   pondii (17), grahami* (19), bocasanus (20).

Radials 30 to 60.
   tetrancistrus (22).

  ****** Central spines more than one, and more then one of them
         hooked.

Radials 8 to 12.
   wrightii* (15).

Radials 30 to 60.
   tetrancistrus (22).

      II. Tubercles with a more or less prominent groove.

                * Central spines none.

       + Radials whitish and rigid, oppressed (pectinate) and
         interwoven with adjacent clusters.

Depressed-globose and simple.
   compactus (44).

Globose and simple.
   radians* (45), corniferus (47).

Cespitose.
   pectenoides (46), sulcatus* (49).

            ++ Radials more slender and spreading.

Radials 10 to 17.
   missouriensis* (37), similis* (38), macromeris* (64).

Radials 30 to 50, capillary.
   dasyacanthus* (51).

             ** Central spine solitary, not hooked.

                  + Central spine porrect.

Radials 6 to 17.
   missouriensis* (37), robustior* (39), scheerii* (40).

Radials 30 to 50, white and capillary.
   dasyacanthus* (51).

             ++ Central spine curved downwards.

Radials 8 to 12.
   sulcatus* (49).

Radials 12 to 26.
   robustispinus (41), recurvatus (42), corniferus (47),
   scolymoides* (48).

            +++ Central spine erect: Mexican.

Radials 7 or 8: central 50 mm. long.
   salm-dyckianus (43).

Radials 10 or 11: central 25 to 35 mm. long.
   maculatus (52).

Radials 13 to 16.
   compactus (44).

         *** Central spine solitary and hooked.

brunneus (53).

   **** Central spines more than one and none of them hooked.

Centrals 2: radials 6 to 20.
   scheerii* (40), robustispinus (41), recurvatus (42),
   scolymoides* (48).

Centrals 3: radials 6 to 40.
   scheerii* (40), scolymoides* (48), echinus* (50),
   conoideus (54), neo-mexicanus* (59), arizonicus* (60).

Centrals 4 or 5: radials 6 to 40.
   scheerii* (40), scolymoides* (48), echinus* (50),
   conoideus (54), tuberculosus* (56), viviparus* (57),
   radiosus* (58), neo-mexicanus* (59). arizonicus* (60),
   macromeris* (64).

Centrals 6 or 7: radials 12 to 40.
   potsii* (55), tuberculosus*(56), viviparus* (57),
   neo-mexicanus* (59), arizonicus* (60), chloranthus (62).

Centrals 8 to 14: radials 12 to 40 or more.
   potsii* (55), tuberculosus* (56), viviparus* (57),
   neo-mexicanus* (59), deserti* (61), chloranthus* (62),
   alversoni* (63).

               GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION

It is only possible to deal with the forms that occur within the
borders of the United States, as even individual stations of
common Mexican forms are little if at all known.  These United
States forms represent a northern extension of an abundant
Mexican display.  The group EUMAMILLARIA, containing twelve of
the thirty-one forms defined as occurring north of the Rio
Grande, makes the feeblest extension northward, at no place being
found far from the boundary, and all the twelve are Mexican forms
which extend but slightly into the United States.  Only five of
the forms are found east of the Pecos: heyderi, the most widely
distributed EUMAMILLARIA, extending from the southeastern border
of Texas westward along the whole Mexican boundary except in
California; hemisphaericus, extending through southern Texas and
southern New Mexico; meiacanthus, also along the Mexican border
of Texas and New Mexico; texanus, a low ground form of the Rio
Grande Valley, extending from the mouth of the river to El Paso,
and suggesting a connection with the West Indian stellatus; and
sphaericus, another low ground valley form of similar range, but
apparently only extending up the Rio Grande to the region of
Eagle Pass.

The Pecos forms the eastern boundary of five other EUMAMILLARIA
forms: micromeris, extending northward from Coahuila and
Chihuahua, apparently only in the mountains between the Pecos and
El Paso; wrightii, of similar narrow northward extension, but
ranging further northward on the high plains of the Upper Pecos
in New Mexico; denudatus, also with a narrow northward extension
west of the Pecos; lasiacanthus, extending from Chihuahua with a
northern limit between the Pecos and Arizona; and grahami, a
Sonoran type which has spread between the Pecos and southeastern
California.

The ten preceding forms have evidently entered our borders from
the highlands of Sonora and Chihuahua, with the exception of the
Rio Grande Valley forms, texanus and sphaericus.  Another
species, tetrancistrus, is also a Sonoran type which has reached
the eastern slopes of the mountains of southeastern California,
and extended through western Arizona to southern Nevada and
southern Utah, the most extended northern range of any
EUMAMILLARIA.  The twelfth form, goodrichii, is Lower
Californian, and extends into California only in San Diego
County.  A summarized statement of the distribution of our twelve
EUMAMILLARIA would be that two of them have extended from the low
grounds of Coahuila and Chihuahua and spread along the valley of
the Rio Grande; nine have come from the high grounds of Chihuahua
and Sonora, four of which have extended eastward to the low
levels of southeastern Texas; four have kept to the highlands
west of the Pecos, and one has kept to the Colorado Valley and
its tributaries, while one has a short northern extension from
Lower California.

The nineteen forms of CORYPHANTHA are decidedly more northern in
their distribution, and are our characteristic representatives of
