
It was a duel of strategy now--the great, hairy man maneuvering to get
inside my guard where he could bring those giant thews to play, while
my wits were directed to the task of keeping him at arm's length.
Thrice he rushed me, and thrice I caught his knife blow upon my shield.
Each time my sword found his body--once penetrating to his lung.  He
was covered with blood by this time, and the internal hemorrhage
induced paroxysms of coughing that brought the red stream through the
hideous mouth and nose, covering his face and breast with bloody froth.
He was a most unlovely spectacle, but he was far from dead.

As the duel continued I began to gain confidence, for, to be perfectly
candid, I had not expected to survive the first rush of that monstrous
engine of ungoverned rage and hatred.  And I think that Jubal, from
utter contempt of me, began to change to a feeling of respect, and then
in his primitive mind there evidently loomed the thought that perhaps
at last he had met his master, and was facing his end.

At any rate it is only upon this hypothesis that I can account for his
next act, which was in the nature of a last resort--a sort of forlorn
hope, which could only have been born of the belief that if he did not
kill me quickly I should kill him.  It happened on the occasion of his
fourth charge, when, instead of striking at me with his knife, he
dropped that weapon, and seizing my sword blade in both his hands
wrenched the weapon from my grasp as easily as from a babe.

Flinging it far to one side he stood motionless for just an instant
glaring into my face with such a horrid leer of malignant triumph as to
almost unnerve me--then he sprang for me with his bare hands.  But it
was Jubal's day to learn new methods of warfare.  For the first time he
had seen a bow and arrows, never before that duel had he beheld a
sword, and now he learned what a man who knows may do with his bare
fists.

As he came for me, like a great bear, I ducked again beneath his
outstretched arm, and as I came up planted as clean a blow upon his jaw
as ever you have seen.  Down went that great mountain of flesh
sprawling upon the ground.  He was so surprised and dazed that he lay
there for several seconds before he made any attempt to rise, and I
stood over him with another dose ready when he should gain his knees.

Up he came at last, almost roaring in his rage and mortification; but
he didn't stay up--I let him have a left fair on the point of the jaw
that sent him tumbling over on his back.  By this time I think Jubal
had gone mad with hate, for no sane man would have come back for more
as many times as he did.  Time after time I bowled him over as fast as
he could stagger up, until toward the last he lay longer on the ground
between blows, and each time came up weaker than before.

He was bleeding very profusely now from the wound in his lungs, and
presently a terrific blow over the heart sent him reeling heavily to
the ground, where he lay very still, and somehow I knew at once that
Jubal the Ugly One would never get up again.  But even as I looked upon
that massive body lying there so grim and terrible in death, I could
not believe that I, single-handed, had bested this slayer of fearful
beasts--this gigantic ogre of the Stone Age.

Picking up my sword I leaned upon it, looking down on the dead body of
my foeman, and as I thought of the battle I had just fought and won a
great idea was born in my brain--the outcome of this and the suggestion
that Perry had made within the city of Phutra.  If skill and science
could render a comparative pygmy the master of this mighty brute, what
could not the brute's fellows accomplish with the same skill and
science.  Why all Pellucidar would be at their feet--and I would be
their king and Dian their queen.

Dian!  A little wave of doubt swept over me.  It was quite within the
possibilities of Dian to look down upon me even were I king.  She was
quite the most superior person I ever had met--with the most convincing
way of letting you know that she was superior.  Well, I could go to the
cave, and tell her that I had killed Jubal, and then she might feel
more kindly toward me, since I had freed her of her tormentor.  I hoped
that she had found the cave easily--it would be terrible had I lost her
again, and I turned to gather up my shield and bow to hurry after her,
when to my astonishment I found her standing not ten paces behind me.

"Girl!" I cried, "what are you doing here?  I thought that you had gone
to the cave, as I told you to do."

Up went her head, and the look that she gave me took all the majesty
out of me, and left me feeling more like the palace janitor--if palaces
have janitors.

"As you told me to do!" she cried, stamping her little foot.  "I do as
I please.  I am the daughter of a king, and furthermore, I hate you."

I was dumbfounded--this was my thanks for saving her from Jubal!  I
turned and looked at the corpse.  "May be that I saved you from a worse
fate, old man," I said, but I guess it was lost on Dian, for she never
seemed to notice it at all.

"Let us go to my cave," I said, "I am tired and hungry."

She followed along a pace behind me, neither of us speaking.  I was too
angry, and she evidently didn't care to converse with the lower orders.
I was mad all the way through, as I had certainly felt that at least a
word of thanks should have rewarded me, for I knew that even by her own
standards, I must have done a very wonderful thing to have killed the
redoubtable Jubal in a hand-to-hand encounter.

We had no difficulty in finding my lair, and then I went down into the
valley and bowled over a small antelope, which I dragged up the steep
ascent to the ledge before the door.  Here we ate in silence.
Occasionally I glanced at her, thinking that the sight of her tearing
at raw flesh with her hands and teeth like some wild animal would cause
a revulsion of my sentiments toward her; but to my surprise I found
that she ate quite as daintily as the most civilized woman of my
acquaintance, and finally I found myself gazing in foolish rapture at
the beauties of her strong, white teeth.  Such is love.

After our repast we went down to the river together and bathed our
hands and faces, and then after drinking our fill went back to the
cave.  Without a word I crawled into the farthest corner and, curling
up, was soon asleep.

When I awoke I found Dian sitting in the doorway looking out across the
valley.  As I came out she moved to one side to let me pass, but she
had no word for me.  I wanted to hate her, but I couldn't.  Every time
I looked at her something came up in my throat, so that I nearly
choked.  I had never been in love before, but I did not need any aid in
diagnosing my case--I certainly had it and had it bad.  God, how I
loved that beautiful, disdainful, tantalizing, prehistoric girl!

After we had eaten again I asked Dian if she intended returning to her
tribe now that Jubal was dead, but she shook her head sadly, and said
that she did not dare, for there was still Jubal's brother to be
considered--his oldest brother.

"What has he to do with it?" I asked.  "Does he too want you, or has
the option on you become a family heirloom, to be passed on down from
generation to generation?"

She was not quite sure as to what I meant.

"It is probable," she said, "that they all will want revenge for the
death of Jubal--there are seven of them--seven terrible men.  Someone
may have to kill them all, if I am to return to my people."

It began to look as though I had assumed a contract much too large for
me--about seven sizes, in fact.

"Had Jubal any cousins?" I asked.  It was just as well to know the
worst at once.

"Yes," replied Dian, "but they don't count--they all have mates.
Jubal's brothers have no mates because Jubal could get none for
himself.  He was so ugly that women ran away from him--some have even
thrown themselves from the cliffs of Amoz into the Darel Az rather than
mate with the Ugly One."

"But what had that to do with his brothers?" I asked.

"I forget that you are not of Pellucidar," said Dian, with a look of
pity mixed with contempt, and the contempt seemed to be laid on a
little thicker than the circumstance warranted--as though to make quite
certain that I shouldn't overlook it.  "You see," she continued, "a
younger brother may not take a mate until all his older brothers have
done so, unless the older brother waives his prerogative, which Jubal
would not do, knowing that as long as he kept them single they would be
all the keener in aiding him to secure a mate."

Noticing that Dian was becoming more communicative I began to entertain
hopes that she might be warming up toward me a bit, although upon what
slender thread I hung my hopes I soon discovered.

"As you dare not return to Amoz," I ventured, "what is to become of you
since you cannot be happy here with me, hating me as you do?"

"I shall have to put up with you," she replied coldly, "until you see
fit to go elsewhere and leave me in peace, then I shall get along very
well alone."

I looked at her in utter amazement.  It seemed incredible that even a
prehistoric woman could be so cold and heartless and ungrateful.  Then
I arose.

"I shall leave you NOW," I said haughtily, "I have had quite enough of
your ingratitude and your insults," and then I turned and strode
majestically down toward the valley.  I had taken a hundred steps in
absolute silence, and then Dian spoke.

"I hate you!" she shouted, and her voice broke--in rage, I thought.

I was absolutely miserable, but I hadn't gone too far when I began to
realize that I couldn't leave her alone there without protection, to
hunt her own food amid the dangers of that savage world.  She might
hate me, and revile me, and heap indignity after indignity upon me, as
she already had, until I should have hated her; but the pitiful fact
remained that I loved her, and I couldn't leave her there alone.

The more I thought about it the madder I got, so that by the time I
reached the valley I was furious, and the result of it was that I
turned right around and went up that cliff again as fast as I had come
down.  I saw that Dian had left the ledge and gone within the cave, but
I bolted right in after her.  She was lying upon her face on the pile
of grasses I had gathered for her bed.  When she heard me enter she
sprang to her feet like a tigress.

"I hate you!" she cried.

Coming from the brilliant light of the noonday sun into the
semidarkness of the cave I could not see her features, and I was rather
glad, for I disliked to think of the hate that I should have read there.

I never said a word to her at first.  I just strode across the cave and
grasped her by the wrists, and when she struggled, I put my arm around
her so as to pinion her hands to her sides.  She fought like a tigress,
but I took my free hand and pushed her head back--I imagine that I had
suddenly turned brute, that I had gone back a thousand million years,
and was again a veritable cave man taking my mate by force--and then I
kissed that beautiful mouth again and again.

"Dian," I cried, shaking her roughly, "I love you.  Can't you
understand that I love you?  That I love you better than all else in
this world or my own?  That I am going to have you?  That love like
mine cannot be denied?"

I noticed that she lay very still in my arms now, and as my eyes became
accustomed to the light I saw that she was smiling--a very contented,
happy smile.  I was thunderstruck.  Then I realized that, very gently,
she was trying to disengage her arms, and I loosened my grip upon them
so that she could do so.  Slowly they came up and stole about my neck,
and then she drew my lips down to hers once more and held them there
for a long time.  At last she spoke.

"Why didn't you do this at first, David?  I have been waiting so long."

"What!" I cried.  "You said that you hated me!"

"Did you expect me to run into your arms, and say that I loved you
before I knew that you loved me?" she asked.

"But I have told you right along that I love you," I said.  "Love
speaks in acts," she replied.  "You could have made your mouth say what
you wished it to say, but just now when you came and took me in your
arms your heart spoke to mine in the language that a woman's heart
understands.  What a silly man you are, David."

"Then you haven't hated me at all, Dian?" I asked.

"I have loved you always," she whispered, "from the first moment that I
saw you, although I did not know it until that time you struck down
Hooja the Sly One, and then spurned me."

"But I didn't spurn you, dear," I cried.  "I didn't know your ways--I
doubt if I do now.  It seems incredible that you could have reviled me
so, and yet have cared for me all the time."

"You might have known," she said, "when I did not run away from you
that it was not hate which chained me to you.  While you were battling
with Jubal, I could have run to the edge of the forest, and when I
learned the outcome of the combat it would have been a simple thing to
have eluded you and returned to my own people."

"But Jubal's brothers--and cousins--" I reminded her, "how about them?"

She smiled, and hid her face on my shoulder.

"I had to tell you SOMETHING, David," she whispered.  "I must needs
have SOME excuse for remaining near you."

"You little sinner!" I exclaimed.  "And you have caused me all this
anguish for nothing!"

"I have suffered even more," she answered simply, "for I thought that
you did not love me, and I was helpless.  I couldn't come to you and
demand that my love be returned, as you have just come to me.  Just now
when you went away hope went with you.  I was wretched, terrified,
miserable, and my heart was breaking.  I wept, and I have not done that
before since my mother died," and now I saw that there was the moisture
of tears about her eyes.  It was near to making me cry myself when I
thought of all that poor child had been through.  Motherless and
unprotected; hunted across a savage, primeval world by that hideous
brute of a man; exposed to the attacks of the countless fearsome
denizens of its mountains, its plains, and its jungles--it was a
miracle that she had survived it all.

To me it was a revelation of the things my early forebears must have
endured that the human race of the outer crust might survive.  It made
me very proud to think that I had won the love of such a woman.  Of
course she couldn't read or write; there was nothing cultured or
refined about her as you judge culture and refinement; but she was the
essence of all that is best in woman, for she was good, and brave, and
noble, and virtuous.  And she was all these things in spite of the fact
that their observance entailed suffering and danger and possible death.

How much easier it would have been to have gone to Jubal in the first
place!  She would have been his lawful mate.  She would have been queen
in her own land--and it meant just as much to the cave woman to be a
queen in the Stone Age as it does to the woman of today to be a queen
now; it's all comparative glory any way you look at it, and if there
were only half-naked savages on the outer crust today, you'd find that
it would be considerable glory to be the wife of a Dahomey chief.

I couldn't help but compare Dian's action with that of a splendid young
woman I had known in New York--I mean splendid to look at and to talk
to.  She had been head over heels in love with a chum of mine--a clean,
manly chap--but she had married a broken-down, disreputable old
debauchee because he was a count in some dinky little European
principality that was not even accorded a distinctive color by Rand
McNally.

Yes, I was mighty proud of Dian.

After a time we decided to set out for Sari, as I was anxious to see
Perry, and to know that all was right with him.  I had told Dian about
our plan of emancipating the human race of Pellucidar, and she was
fairly wild over it.  She said that if Dacor, her brother, would only
return he could easily be king of Amoz, and that then he and Ghak could
form an alliance.  That would give us a flying start, for the Sarians
and the Amozites were both very powerful tribes.  Once they had been
armed with swords, and bows and arrows, and trained in their use we
were confident that they could overcome any tribe that seemed
disinclined to join the great army of federated states with which we
were planning to march upon the Mahars.

I explained the various destructive engines of war which Perry and I
could construct after a little experimentation--gunpowder, rifles,
cannon, and the like, and Dian would clap her hands, and throw her arms
about my neck, and tell me what a wonderful thing I was.  She was
beginning to think that I was omnipotent although I really hadn't done
anything but talk--but that is the way with women when they love.
Perry used to say that if a fellow was one-tenth as remarkable as his
wife or mother thought him, he would have the world by the tail with a
down-hill drag.

The first time we started for Sari I stepped into a nest of poisonous
vipers before we reached the valley.  A little fellow stung me on the
ankle, and Dian made me come back to the cave.  She said that I mustn't
exercise, or it might prove fatal--if it had been a full-grown snake
that struck me she said, I wouldn't have moved a single pace from the
nest--I'd have died in my tracks, so virulent is the poison.  As it was
I must have been laid up for quite a while, though Dian's poultices of
herbs and leaves finally reduced the swelling and drew out the poison.

The episode proved most fortunate, however, as it gave me an idea which
added a thousand-fold to the value of my arrows as missiles of offense
and defense.  As soon as I was able to be about again, I sought out
some adult vipers of the species which had stung me, and having killed
them, I extracted their virus, smearing it upon the tips of several
arrows.  Later I shot a hyaenodon with one of these, and though my
arrow inflicted but a superficial flesh wound the beast crumpled in
death almost immediately after he was hit.

We now set out once more for the land of the Sarians, and it was with
feelings of sincere regret that we bade good-bye to our beautiful
Garden of Eden, in the comparative peace and harmony of which we had
lived the happiest moments of our lives.  How long we had been there I
did not know, for as I have told you, time had ceased to exist for me
beneath that eternal noonday sun--it may have been an hour, or a month
of earthly time; I do not know.



XV

BACK TO EARTH


WE CROSSED THE RIVER AND PASSED THROUGH THE mountains beyond, and
finally we came out upon a great level plain which stretched away as
far as the eye could reach.  I cannot tell you in what direction it
stretched even if you would care to know, for all the while that I was
within Pellucidar I never discovered any but local methods of
indicating direction--there is no north, no south, no east, no west.
UP is about the only direction which is well defined, and that, of
course, is DOWN to you of the outer crust.  Since the sun neither rises
nor sets there is no method of indicating direction beyond visible
objects such as high mountains, forests, lakes, and seas.

The plain which lies beyond the white cliffs which flank the Darel Az
upon the shore nearest the Mountains of the Clouds is about as near to
any direction as any Pellucidarian can come.  If you happen not to have
heard of the Darel Az, or the white cliffs, or the Mountains of the
Clouds you feel that there is something lacking, and long for the good
old understandable northeast and southwest of the outer world.

We had barely entered the great plain when we discovered two enormous
animals approaching us from a great distance.  So far were they that we
could not distinguish what manner of beasts they might be, but as they
came closer, I saw that they were enormous quadrupeds, eighty or a
hundred feet long, with tiny heads perched at the top of very long
necks.  Their heads must have been quite forty feet from the ground.
The beasts moved very slowly--that is their action was slow--but their
strides covered such a great distance that in reality they traveled
considerably faster than a man walks.

As they drew still nearer we discovered that upon the back of each sat
a human being.  Then Dian knew what they were, though she never before
had seen one.

"They are lidis from the land of the Thorians," she cried.  "Thoria
lies at the outer verge of the Land of Awful Shadow.  The Thorians
alone of all the races of Pellucidar ride the lidi, for nowhere else
than beside the dark country are they found."

"What is the Land of Awful Shadow?" I asked.

"It is the land which lies beneath the Dead World," replied Dian; "the
Dead World which hangs forever between the sun and Pellucidar above the
Land of Awful Shadow.  It is the Dead World which makes the great
shadow upon this portion of Pellucidar."

I did not fully understand what she meant, nor am I sure that I do yet,
for I have never been to that part of Pellucidar from which the Dead
World is visible; but Perry says that it is the moon of Pellucidar--a
tiny planet within a planet--and that it revolves around the earth's
axis coincidently with the earth, and thus is always above the same
spot within Pellucidar.

I remember that Perry was very much excited when I told him about this
Dead World, for he seemed to think that it explained the hitherto
inexplicable phenomena of nutation and the precession of the equinoxes.

When the two upon the lidis had come quite close to us we saw that one
was a man and the other a woman.  The former had held up his two hands,
palms toward us, in sign of peace, and I had answered him in kind, when
he suddenly gave a cry of astonishment and pleasure, and slipping from
his enormous mount ran forward toward Dian, throwing his arms about her.

In an instant I was white with jealousy, but only for an instant; since
Dian quickly drew the man toward me, telling him that I was David, her
mate.

"And this is my brother, Dacor the Strong One, David," she said to me.

It appeared that the woman was Dacor's mate.  He had found none to his
liking among the Sari, nor farther on until he had come to the land of
the Thoria, and there he had found and fought for this very lovely
Thorian maiden whom he was bringing back to his own people.

When they had heard our story and our plans they decided to accompany
us to Sari, that Dacor and Ghak might come to an agreement relative to
an alliance, as Dacor was quite as enthusiastic about the proposed
annihilation of the Mahars and Sagoths as either Dian or I.

After a journey which was, for Pellucidar, quite uneventful, we came to
the first of the Sarian villages which consists of between one and two
hundred artificial caves cut into the face of a great cliff.  Here to
our immense delight, we found both Perry and Ghak.  The old man was
quite overcome at sight of me for he had long since given me up as dead.

When I introduced Dian as my wife, he didn't quite know what to say,
but he afterward remarked that with the pick of two worlds I could not
have done better.

Ghak and Dacor reached a very amicable arrangement, and it was at a
council of the head men of the various tribes of the Sari that the
eventual form of government was tentatively agreed upon.  Roughly, the
various kingdoms were to remain virtually independent, but there was to
be one great overlord, or emperor.  It was decided that I should be the
first of the dynasty of the emperors of Pellucidar.

We set about teaching the women how to make bows and arrows, and poison
pouches.  The young men hunted the vipers which provided the virus, and
it was they who mined the iron ore, and fashioned the swords under
Perry's direction.  Rapidly the fever spread from one tribe to another
until representatives from nations so far distant that the Sarians had
never even heard of them came in to take the oath of allegiance which
we required, and to learn the art of making the new weapons and using
them.

We sent our young men out as instructors to every nation of the
federation, and the movement had reached colossal proportions before
the Mahars discovered it.  The first intimation they had was when three
of their great slave caravans were annihilated in rapid succession.
They could not comprehend that the lower orders had suddenly developed
a power which rendered them really formidable.

In one of the skirmishes with slave caravans some of our Sarians took a
number of Sagoth prisoners, and among them were two who had been
members of the guards within the building where we had been confined at
Phutra.  They told us that the Mahars were frantic with rage when they
discovered what had taken place in the cellars of the buildings.  The
Sagoths knew that something very terrible had befallen their masters,
but the Mahars had been most careful to see that no inkling of the true
nature of their vital affliction reached beyond their own race.  How
long it would take for the race to become extinct it was impossible
even to guess; but that this must eventually happen seemed inevitable.

The Mahars had offered fabulous rewards for the capture of any one of
us alive, and at the same time had threatened to inflict the direst
punishment upon whomever should harm us.  The Sagoths could not
understand these seemingly paradoxical instructions, though their
purpose was quite evident to me.  The Mahars wanted the Great Secret,
and they knew that we alone could deliver it to them.

Perry's experiments in the manufacture of gunpowder and the fashioning
of rifles had not progressed as rapidly as we had hoped--there was a
whole lot about these two arts which Perry didn't know.  We were both
assured that the solution of these problems would advance the cause of
civilization within Pellucidar thousands of years at a single stroke.
Then there were various other arts and sciences which we wished to
introduce, but our combined knowledge of them did not embrace the
mechanical details which alone could render them of commercial, or
practical value.

"David," said Perry, immediately after his latest failure to produce
gunpowder that would even burn, "one of us must return to the outer
world and bring back the information we lack.  Here we have all the
labor and materials for reproducing anything that ever has been
produced above--what we lack is knowledge.  Let us go back and get that
knowledge in the shape of books--then this world will indeed be at our
feet."

And so it was decided that I should return in the prospector, which
still lay upon the edge of the forest at the point where we had first
penetrated to the surface of the inner world.  Dian would not listen to
any arrangement for my going which did not include her, and I was not
sorry that she wished to accompany me, for I wanted her to see my
world, and I wanted my world to see her.

With a large force of men we marched to the great iron mole, which
Perry soon had hoisted into position with its nose pointed back toward
the outer crust.  He went over all the machinery carefully.  He
replenished the air tanks, and manufactured oil for the engine.  At
last everything was ready, and we were about to set out when our
pickets, a long, thin line of which had surrounded our camp at all
times, reported that a great body of what appeared to be Sagoths and
Mahars were approaching from the direction of Phutra.

Dian and I were ready to embark, but I was anxious to witness the first
clash between two fair-sized armies of the opposing races of
Pellucidar.  I realized that this was to mark the historic beginning of
a mighty struggle for possession of a world, and as the first emperor
of Pellucidar I felt that it was not alone my duty, but my right, to be
in the thick of that momentous struggle.

As the opposing army approached we saw that there were many Mahars with
the Sagoth troops--an indication of the vast importance which the
dominant race placed upon the outcome of this campaign, for it was not
customary with them to take active part in the sorties which their
creatures made for slaves--the only form of warfare which they waged
upon the lower orders.

Ghak and Dacor were both with us, having come primarily to view the
prospector.  I placed Ghak with some of his Sarians on the right of our
battle line.  Dacor took the left, while I commanded the center.
Behind us I stationed a sufficient reserve under one of Ghak's head
men.  The Sagoths advanced steadily with menacing spears, and I let
them come until they were within easy bowshot before I gave the word to
fire.

At the first volley of poison-tipped arrows the front ranks of the
gorilla-men crumpled to the ground; but those behind charged over the
prostrate forms of their comrades in a wild, mad rush to be upon us
with their spears.  A second volley stopped them for an instant, and
then my reserve sprang through the openings in the firing line to
engage them with sword and shield.  The clumsy spears of the Sagoths
were no match for the swords of the Sarian and Amozite, who turned the
spear thrusts aside with their shields and leaped to close quarters
with their lighter, handier weapons.

