France uses the kirmess oak, which grows in the south of that country
and in northern Africa. Two grades are made, viz., root and trunk.

Tyrol has the evergreen oak--12 to 13 per cent. tannin.

Sardinia possesses a cork oak, which yields 13 to 14 per cent.

White oak is found throughout Europe, yielding 10 per cent. The price
of oak bark varies a great deal. The assortment is much more strict
than in the United States. In Austria it brings 4 to 5 fl., equal to
$1.60 to $2 per kilo. (224 lb.); in Germany, 11 to 16 marks per 100
kilos.[1]

[Footnote 1: In the principal districts in America, removed from the
cities, the price of oak bark is about $4 to $6 per cord or per ton
of 2,240 lb. The hemlock bark, which gives a sole leather just as
thoroughly tanned, but of a darker and reddish color, costs the
larger tanners from $3 to $4 a cord.]

The above mentioned varieties are all used for both upper and sole
leather. In Germany a great deal of upper leather is pure oak tannage,
but one seldom finds a pure oak tanned sole leather; it is almost
always in combination with other tannics.


_Pine Bark_--Is well distributed and is a very important tanning
material. It bears the same relation to oak bark here as does hemlock
in America, but its effects are quite different from hemlock. The best
Austrian sorts are those of Styria and Bohemia, but that of Karuthen
is also of good quality. The German pine comes from Thuringia to a
great extent. The countries that consume the greatest amount of pine
bark are Austria, Germany, Russia and Italy. The tannin contained
varies from 5 to 16 per cent. Its use is almost wholly confined to the
handlers, as its weight returns are not so satisfactory as oak or
valonia. In case it should be used for layers it is always in
combination with some better weight-giving tannic. For upper leather
its use is limited.

The bark is always peeled from the felled tree, and often the woodman
accepts the bark in part payment for his labor; he then sells the bark
to the tanner or agents who go about the country collecting bark. It
is generally very nicely cleaned. I would here like to correct a
mistake which tanners often make in their estimations of the value of
barks. A tanner usually buys the bark of southern-grown trees in
preference to that of trees grown in northern countries, as it is a
common idea that southern vegetation contains more tannin than that of
the north. This is a fallacy, as has not only been proved by careful
analyses, but may also be found to be an incorrect conclusion after a
moments' thought. Those trees which flourish in southern countries
grow very rapidly, and as tannin is necessary to the development of
leaf structure, etc., it is absorbed to a greater extent than is the
case with the slower-growing tree of the north. The tannin contained
in the sap does not increase in the same ratio as does the rapid
growth, and it follows that the remainder in the bark is less than in
the tree of slower growth.


_Birch Bark_--Is at home in Russia, Norway, and Sweden. It is used for
both upper and sole leather, but seldom alone. The bark is usually
peeled from the full grown tree, and contains 4 to 9 per cent. tannin.


_Willow Bark_--May also be found in the above mentioned countries and
also in Germany. This material is used for both upper and sole
leather, and contains 6 to 9 per cent. tannin. It is a very delicate
material to use, as its tannin decomposes rapidly.


_Erlen Rinde_--Is also a native of Germany, but is not used to any
great extent. The same may be said of the larch, although this variety
is also to be met with in Russia.


_Mimosa Bark_--Is obtained from the acacia of Australia. It is a
favorite in England. The varieties are as follows: Gold wattle, silver
wattle (blackwood, lightwood), black wattle, green wattle. The gold
wattle is a native of Victoria. Its cultivation was tried as an
experiment in Algeria and met with some success. The trees are always
grown from seeds. These seeds are laid in warm water for a few hours
before sowing. The acacia may be peeled at eight years' growth and
carries seeds. The Tasmania bark is very good; that from Adelaide
likewise good.

Sydney does not produce so good an article, but Queensland better. The
bark is marketed in the stick, ground or chopped.

Madagascar and the Reunion Islands have also a mimosa bark.

The mimosa barks give a reddish colored leather, pump well and contain
a high tannin percentage, 10 to 35 per cent.


Now we will consider the fruit tanning materials.

Valonia may truly be called one of the most generally used tanning
agents at present employed in Europe. All countries consume it more or
less. Valonia was first used in England about the beginning of this
century. A few years later Germany began using it, and still later
Austria introduced it. It is the fruit of the oak tree and is
obtainable in Asia Minor and the adjacent islands. In form it
resembles the American acorn, but in size it nearly trebles it. The
fruit may be divided into two parts, namely, the cup and acorn, and
the cup again divided into trillor and inner cup. The acorn only
contains 10 per cent. tannin, whereas the cup contains from 25 to 40
per cent.

The percentage depends altogether upon the time of harvesting and the
place of growth. The best valonia is derived from Smyrna, and is
naturally the highest priced article. Valonia is worth from 22 to 28
florins ($9 to $11) per 100 kilos. (224 pounds) at present. The other
provinces and islands from which it is obtainable are Demergick,
Govalia, Idem, Ivalzick, Troy (this is the best); Metelino Island, the
vicinity of Smyrna. The material sold in three grades--prime, mazzano;
seconds, una aqua; thirds, skart.

The product of Smyrna generally averages:

                       Tons.           Price.
    Prime.        2,000 to  3,000      28 florins.
    Seconds.      5,000 to 10,000      25    "
    Thirds.      20,000 to 30,000      22    "

The _Metilino_ valonia is a product of a neighboring island, and is a
very good article. It may be easily distinguished by its thin cup. It
is harvested in September.

The _Candia_ valonia is nearly as long as it is wide, in contrast to
the Smyrna, which is much wider than long. The recent harvest showed a
return of 800 to 1,000 tons, but no assortment is made. A grade called
the Erstlige is sold, this being the first which has fallen to the
ground before maturing.

A peculiarity of the valonia is that it often strikes out a sort of
sugar sweat, which gives the cup a less attractive appearance, but
denotes the presence of large quantities of tannin.

Valonia is used almost wholly for sole leather, either alone or in
combination with pine or oak bark or knoppern and myrabolams. The
union of valonia and knoppern is that in most general use. Valonia
gives the leather a yellowish appearance, as it deposits a great deal
of yellow bloom. The leather is very firm and of good wearing
qualities. The weight results are also excellent, as will be seen
below. To sole leather there are usually given from one to three
layers of valonia. The demand for valonia is increasing more and more
every year, and the present outlook does not indicate any relaxation
of its popularity. Its use for upper leather is very limited.

Myrabolams are mainly used in England and Austria, and give a nice
light-colored leather, both upper and sole, although rarely used
alone. Their main use is for dyeing purposes. They are indigenous to
the East Indies.

Sumac is so well known that treating of it is superfluous. Its use is
very extensive, and it is a general favorite for light, fine leather,
which is mostly used for colors.

_Gambier_--Is in general use in England and to some extent in Germany.

_Catechu_.--Obtained from India, resembles gambier greatly. Its use is
almost wholly confined to England. It is also consumed by the silk
manufacturers in preference to gambier, for weighting purposes.


PATHOLOGICAL.

We now leave the physiological class and take up those tanning
materials included in the pathological class, or those of abnormal
growth.


_Galls_.--These are not consumed to any great extent at the present
period, but formerly they were used quite extensively. The galls are
found upon the leaves of the oak or sumac, etc. The direct cause of
their growth is that a certain wasp (cynips galles) stings into the
leaf and after depositing its egg, flies away. The egg develops into a
larva and then into a full-fledged wasp, boring its way out of the
gall which has served as a protection and nourisher. This accounts for
the hole noticed in almost every gall. The different varieties include
Aleppo. It is found upon the same trees as the valonia and contains 60
to 75 per cent. tannin; Istrian galls, 32 per cent. tannin; Persian,
28 to 29 per cent. tannin. Chinese galls, giving 80 to 82 per cent.
tannin, are the results of the sting of a louse, and make a very
light-colored leather. The dyers also use this material for coloring.


_Knoppern_--Belongs to the family of galls, and is a most important
factor of commerce in Austria. The knopper is generally found on the
acorn or leaf of the oak tree. The greatest quantity is derived from
the steel oak of Hungary. The tannin contained varies from 27 to 33
per cent. Knoppern are not being used so much now as formerly, and
consequently the amount harvested lessens from year to year. Its main
use was and is in combination with valonia as layers for sole leather.
Valonia gives better weight results than knoppern, and is replacing
knoppern more and more every year. The combination of knoppern,
valonia and myrabolams is also quite popular, and gives good results.
Knoppern are seldom used alone, being generally combined with some
other tannin. Austria is almost the only consumer at present, but
Germany used it extensively formerly.


_Bark and Wood Extracts_--Are becoming general favorites throughout
Europe, partly because of their weight-giving qualities and partly as
the transportation costs so little; they can be used to strengthen
weak bark liquors.

_Oak Extracts_--Are well liked, both wood and bark, and are used
extensively. Slavonia furnishes a great deal of it.

_Chestnut Oak Wood Extract_--Is manufactured in quantities, and easily
finds purchasers.

_Pine Bark Extract_--Is also consumed in goodly amounts.

_Quebracho Wood Extract_.--The wood is shipped from Brazil to Hamburg
and other ports, and the tannin extracted there. Hamburg furnishes
quantities of it.

_Hemlock Extract_--Is used in Russia, and seems to have taken a hold
on the shoe buyers' fancies, as they now make imitations of it in
color. The hemlock that is consumed is imported from America.


As most leather is sold by weight in Europe, the leather manufacturers
aim to obtain as good weight results as possible, and often, I am
sorry to say, do so at the sacrifice of quality. This is common to
both upper and sole leather. Sole leather is nine times out of ten
given false weight by forcing entirely foreign substances into the
leather, such as glucose, barium chloride, magnesium chloride, resins,
etc. Glucose and resin are also used for weighting upper leather.
Leather is also weighted with extracts by overtanning. Leather buyers
have become very wary of late and do not purchase large quantities
before an analysis is made of a fair sample.

One more word before I close. The governments and private individuals
in Europe cultivate and raise trees for both lumber and bark purposes.
The forests are excellently cared for by efficient foresters, and the
result is that the tanners obtain much cleaner and better bark, and of
a very even quality. Would it not be a good idea if some individual,
who would certainly earn the everlasting gratefulness of the tanners,
would look into this matter, and see that not only the lumber side of
our forest cultivation is not neglected, but that the bark also is
preserved and cared for? Of course, we can obtain all the bark
necessary at present and for some time to come, but the time will come
when we shall certainly regret not having taken these steps, if the
lumbermen and bark peelers go on devastating magnificent forests.
Below will be found a table of weight results. Sole leather tanned
with these materials gives for every 100 lb. green hide the following
quantities of finished leather:

                                     lb.
  Oak bark                          48 to 54
  "   extract                       55 to 56
  Pine bark                         44 to 46
  "   extract                       48 to 50
  Willow                            45 to 46
  Birch bark and oak extract        49 to 51
  Quebracho wood and extract        48 to 49
  Valonia                           52 to 56
  Knoppern                          51 to 53
  Myrabolams                        50
  Knoppern, myrabolams and valonia  52 to 53
  Hemlock                           55

Specification of tanning materials used in different countries:

_France_.
Oak bark (kirmess).
Sumac.
Chestnut wood extract.
Quebracho "     "
Some gambier.

_Italy_.
Oak bark.
Pine "
Sumac.
Valonia.

_England_.
Oak bark.
Divi divi.
Myrabolams.
Valonia.
Mimosa.
Extracts { Oak bark and wood hemlock.
Gambier.
Cutch.

_Germany and Austria_.
Oak bark.
Pine "
Willow bark.
Valonia.
Knoppern.
Myrabolams.
         { Oak bark and wood.
Extracts { Pine bark and wood.

_Russia._
Birch bark.
Willow "
Oak    "
Pine   "
Hemlock extract.


_Norway and Sweden_.
Birch bark.
Willow "
Oak    "

                                      WALTER J. SALOMON.
--_Shoe and Leather Reporter_.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN APPARATUS FOR HEATING SUBSTANCES IN GLASS TUBES UNDER PRESSURE.[1]

[Footnote 1: Read at the meeting of the Chemical Section of the
Franklin Institute held March 17, 1891.]

By H. PEMBERTON, Jr.


Chemists who do not happen to have in their laboratories oil or air
baths for heating closed tubes can make an air bath at short notice
from materials furnished by all dealers in steam fittings.

_Order_:

(1) One four-inch wrought iron pipe, eighteen inches out to out, with
usual thread on each end. At about nine inches from either end this
pipe is drilled and tapped for a one-inch nipple, in such a manner
that a pipe introduced would pass, not on a line with the radius, but
about half way between the axis of the four-inch pipe and its walls;
in other words, it would be on a line with a chord of the circle.

(2) One one-inch wrought iron nipple, two inches long, one-inch thread
on one end.

(3) Two four-inch malleable iron caps, drilled and tapped for a
one-inch pipe.

(4) One one-inch wrought iron pipe, twenty-four inches out to out,
with a three-inch straight thread on each end.

(5) Two one-inch iron caps. A hole, one-eighth of an inch in diameter,
is drilled in the end of one of these caps.

The above order can be given _literatim_, and will be understood by
the dealer, who will furnish, at a trifling cost, the materials, cut
and tapped as ordered.

Fig. 1 shows how the whole is put together. The numbers on the figure
correspond also to the numbers of the paragraphs of the order as given
above.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Fig. 2 is an end section. A cork is inserted in 2 and through it a
thermometer, the bulb of which is on a level with the interior pipe.
The whole is supported on a few bricks at either end, and is kept
steady and in place by a couple of weights or half bricks. It is
heated by one or two Bunsen burners, according to the temperature
desired.--_Jour. Fr. Institute_.

       *       *       *       *       *




TESTING CEMENT.


An improved method of testing Portland cement has been adopted by M.
Deval, Chief Superintendent of Bridges and Roads, who has charge,
under M. Saele, of the Public Works Laboratory of the City of Paris.
The principal difference in M. Deval's method consists in the use of
hot water for the period of hardening. The briquettes are made in the
usual way, and of the ordinary size; and the cement to be tested is
gauged with three times its weight of normal sand, and the smallest
quantity of water possible. After preparation, the briquettes are
allowed to harden in air for a period ranging from 24 hours for
Portland cement to 30 days for certain slow-setting hydraulic limes.
After this period, the samples are immersed in water kept at a
temperature of 80 deg. C., in which they remain for from two to seven
days. The briquettes are then broken in the ordinary way. After
careful comparisons of many varieties of cement hardened hot and cold,
M. Deval finds that cold tests are fallacious, inasmuch as they may
fail to detect bad material. Portland cement of good quality will not
only stand water at 80 deg. C., but will attain in seven days about the
same strength as is reached in the cold after 28 days. The hot test
therefore saves time. The hot test is an unfailing proof for free
lime; cements containing this constituent betraying weakness, and
cracking, swelling, and disintegrating in a very significant manner.
This last result is regarded as a valuable quality of the new method
of testing cement, the general effect of which appears to be to
enhance the test value of really good cements, while depreciating
those of an inferior character.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Architects and Builders Edition

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.


This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid Magazine of
Architecture, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building
or improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before
them in this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best
examples_ from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have
won for it the Largest Circulation of any Architectural publication
in the world.

A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of
charge, sent to any address.

MUNN & CO., Publishers, 361 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUILDING PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.


In connection with the publication of the BUILDING EDITION of the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. Munn & Co. furnish plans and
specifications for buildings of every kind, including Churches,
