engaged in the study of the quicksilver districts of California. The
other, under charge of Mr. S.F. Emmons, with headquarters at Denver,
Colorado, is engaged in studying various mining districts in that State,
including silver, gold, iron, and coal areas. Each division has a corps of
assistants. The lignite coals of the upper Missouri, also, are under
investigation by Mr. Bailey Willis, with a corps of assistants.


EMPLOYES.

The employes on the Geological Survey at the close of September, 1884,
were as follows:

Appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate (Director), 1.

Appointed by the Secretary of the Interior, on the recommendation of the
Director of the Survey, 134.

Employed by the chiefs of parties in the field, 148.


APPOINTMENTS.

Three classes of appointments are made on the Survey. The statute provides
that "the scientific employes of the Geological Survey shall be selected
by the Director, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior,
exclusively for their qualifications as professional experts." The
provisions of this statute apply to all those cases where scientific men
are employed who have established a reputation, and in asking for their
appointment the Director specifically states his reasons, setting forth
the work in which the person is to be employed, together with his
qualifications, especially enumerating and characterizing his published
works. On such recommendations appointments are invariably made. Young men
who have not established a reputation in scientific research are selected
through the agency of the Civil Service Commission on special examination,
the papers for which are prepared in the Geological Survey. About one-half
of the employes, however, are temporary, being engaged for services
lasting for a few days or a few months only, largely in the field, and
coming under two classes: Skilled laborers and common laborers. Such
persons are employed by the Director or by the heads of divisions, and are
discharged from the service when no longer needed. It will be seen that
the Director is responsible for the selection of the employes, directly
for those whom he recommends for appointment, and indirectly for those
selected by the Civil Service Commission, as he permanently retains in the
work. If, then, improper persons are employed, it is wholly the Director's
fault.

The appropriations made for the Geological Survey for the fiscal year
ending June 30, 1885, aggregate the sum of $504,040. This sum does not
include the amount appropriated for ethnologic researches--$40,000. Nor
are the expenses for engraving and printing paid for from the above
appropriations, but from appropriations made for the work under the
direction of the public printer. It is estimated that the amount needed
for engraving and printing for the same fiscal year will exceed $200,000.


THE RELATION OF THE GOVERNMENT SURVEY TO STATE SURVEYS.

The United States Geological Survey is on friendly relations with the
various State Surveys. Between the Government Survey and the State Survey
of New York, there is direct co-operation. The State Survey of
Pennsylvania has rendered valuable assistance to the Government Survey,
and negotiations have been entered into for closer relations and more
thorough co-operation. The State Surveys of North Carolina, Kentucky, and
Alabama are also co-operating with the Government Survey, and the director
of the Government Survey is doing all within his power to revive State
Surveys. The field for geologic research in the United States is of great
magnitude, and the best results can be accomplished only by the labors of
many scientific men engaged for a long term of years. For this reason it
is believed that surveys should be established in all of the States and
Territories. There is work enough for all, and the establishment of local
surveys would greatly assist the general work prosecuted under the
auspices of the government, and prevent it from falling into perfunctory
channels. Its vigor and health will doubtless be promoted by all thorough
local research.

It may be of interest to scientific men to know that the Director finds
that in presenting the general results, interests, and needs of the Survey
to Congress, and to Committees of Congress, a thorough appreciation of the
value of scientific research is shown by the statesmen of the country.
Questions relating to immediately economic values are asked, as they
should be; but questions relating to sound administration, wise methods of
investigation, and important scientific results are vigorously urged, and
the principle is recognized that all sound scientific research conduces to
the welfare of the people, not only by increasing knowledge, but
ultimately by affecting all the industries of the people.

       *       *       *       *       *




[THE GARDEN.]

THE SUNFLOWERS.


[Illustration: FLOWER OF HELIANTHUS ARGOPHYLLUS.]

The genus Helianthus is almost entirely North-American, and for the
distinction and limitation of its species we are indebted to the labor of
Dr. Asa Gray, now universally recognized as the highest authority on North
American plants. In the recently published second part of his "Synoptical
Flora of North America" he has described thirty-nine species, six of which
are annual. The synonyms and cross-naming adopted by previous authors have
led to much confusion, which probably will not now be altogether cleared
up, for Dr. Gray warns us that the characters of some of the species are
variable, especially in cultivation. It may be added that some at least of
the species readily form hybrids. There is always more or less difficulty
with a variable genus in making garden plants fit wild specific types, but
in the following notes I have described no kinds which I have not myself
cultivated, selecting the best forms and giving them the names assigned
severally by Dr. Gray to the species to which our garden plants seem to
come nearest.

[Illustration: HELIANTHUS ARGOPHYLLUS, SHOWING HABIT OF GROWTH.]

_Helianthus multiflorus_, or, according to Asa Gray, speaking botanically,
H. decapetalus hort. var. multiflorus, is mentioned first, because it is
the subject of the colored illustration. The name multiflorus is
established by long usage, and perhaps was originally given in contrast to
the few-flowered habit of H. annuus, for the type of the species is more
floriferous than the variety of which Asa Gray says that it is "known only
in cultivation from early times, must have been derived from
decapetalus," a statement which gardeners would hardly have accepted on
less indisputable authority, as they will all think the habit and
appearance of the two plants widely different. The variety multiflorus has
several forms; the commonest form is double, the disk being filled with
ligules much shorter than those of the ray flowers, after the form of many
daisy-like composites. In this double form the day flowers are often
wanting. It is common also on old plants in poor soils to see double and
single flowers from the same root. In the single forms the size of the
flowers varies, the difference being due to cultivation as often as to
kind. I have obtained by far the finest flowers by the following
treatment: In early spring, when the young shoots are about an inch high,
cut some off, each with a portion of young root, and plant them singly in
deep rich soil, and a sheltered but not shaded situation. By August each
will have made a large bush, branching out from one stalk at the base,
with from thirty to forty flowers open at a time, each 5 inches across.
The same plants if well dressed produce good flowers the second season,
but after that the stalks become crowded, and the flowers degenerate. The
same treatment suits most of the perennial sunflowers. The following kinds
are mentioned in the order in which they occur in Asa Gray's book:

[Illustration: HELIANTHUS MULTIFLORUS, SHOWING HABIT OF GROWTH.]


ANNUALS.

_H. argophyllus_ (white-leaved, not argyrophyllus, silver-leaved, as
written in some catalogues).--An annual with woolly leaves, neater and
less coarse than H. annuus, with which it is said soon to degenerate in
gardens if grown together with it.

_H. annuus._--The well known sunflower in endless varieties, one of the
most elegant having pale lemon-colored flowers; these, too, liable to pass
into the common type if grown in the same garden.

[Illustration: HELIANTHUS ORGYALIS, SHOWING HABIT OF GROWTH IN
AUTUMN.]

_H. debilis var. cucumerifolius._--I have never seen the typical species,
but the variety was introduced a few years ago by Mr. W. Thompson, of
Ipswich, from whose seed I have grown it. It becomes 4 feet or 5 feet
high, with irregularly toothed deltoid leaves and spotted stalks, making a
widely branched bush and bearing well-shaped golden flowers more than 3
inches across, with black disks. It crosses with any perennial sunflower
that grows near it, simulating their flowers in an annual form. I had a
very fine cross with it and H. annuus, but the flowers of this produced no
good seed.

[Illustration: JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE (HELIANTHUS TUBEROSUS).]


PERENNIALS.

_H. orgyalis_ (the fathom-high sunflower).--The name is far within the
true measure, which is often 9 feet or 10 feet. A very distinct species,
increasing very slowly at the root and throwing all its growing efforts
upward. The long linear ribbon leaves, often exceeding a foot, spreading
in wavy masses round the tall stem, which has a palm-like tuft of them at
the summit, are a more ornamental feature than the flowers, which are
moderate in size and come late in the axils of the upper leaves.

[Illustration: HELIANTHUS ANNUUS GLOBULUS FISTULOSUS.]

_H. angustifolius._--A neat and elegant species, which I first raised from
seed sent by Mr. W. Thompson, of Ipswich. It has a very branching habit
quite from the base like a well-grown bush of the common wallflower. The
flowers are abundant, about 21/2 inches across, with a black disk. The
plant, though a true herb, never comes up in my garden with more than one
stalk each year.

[Illustration: HELIANTHUS RIGIDUS (SYN. HARPALIUM RIGIDUM).]

_H. rigidus_ is well known as the best of the perennial sunflowers, and
has many synonyms, the commonest Harpalium rigidum. It need not be
described, but one or two things about it may be noted. The shoots, which
come up a yard or more from last year's stalk, may be transplanted as soon
as they appear without injury to the flowering, but if put back to the old
center, the soil, which should be deep and light, ought to be enriched.
The species is variable, and improved forms may be expected, as it
produces seed in England. The number of ray flowers is often very large. I
have one form which has several rows of them, nearly hiding the disk. A
variety is figured in _Botanical Magazine_, tab. 2,668, under the name of
H. atro-rubens. Another comes in the same series, tab. 2,020, as H.
diffusus. Other synonyms are H. missuricus and H. missouriensis. Its
native range extends across North America in longitude, and covers many
degrees of latitude. It likes a dry soil. In wet soil and wet seasons the
flower-stalk is apt to wither in the middle, and the bud falls over and
perishes prematurely.

[Illustration: COMMON SUNFLOWER (H. ANNUUS) SHOWING HABIT OF GROWTH.]

_H. Laetiflorus._--Under this name we grow in England a tall,
much-branched, late flowering kind, with smooth and very stout and stiff
stalks, sometimes black, sometimes green. It increases at the base of the
stalks; it makes close growth, and shows little disposition to run at the
root. The flowers are rather small, not more than 9 inches across, but so
durable and so well displayed by the numerous spreading branches as to
make the plant very useful for late decoration. I own that I cannot
identify this plant with the laetiflorus of Asa Gray, which he tells us
resembles tall forms of H. rigidus, with rough stalks, and bears flowers
with numerous rays 11/2 inches long.

[Illustration: FLOWER OF HELIANTHUS ANNUUS.]

_H. occidentalis._--Recently introduced by Mr. W. Thompson, of Ipswich,
who gave me the plant two years ago. It is a neat species, growing about 2
feet high, well branched, and producing at the end of July abundance of
flowers about 2 inches across. The lower leaves are small and broad, with
long stalks, ovate in form.

[Illustration: HELIANTHUS MULTIFLORUS FL-PL.]

_H. mollis_, so called from the soft white down with which the leaves are
covered, grows about 4 feet high. Leaves large, ovate, and sessile; growth
of the plant upright, with hardly any branches; flowers pale yellow, about
3 inches across, not very ornamental. Cultivated at Kew, whence I had it.

_H. giganteus_ grows 10 feet high; stem much branched and disposed to
curve. Flowers about 21/2 inches across, produced abundantly in August; rays
narrow and pointed, cupped, with the ends turning outward; leaves
lanceolate and sessile; rootstock creeping, forming tuberous thickenings
at the base of the stems, which Asa Gray tells us were "the Indian potato
of the Assiniboine tribe," mentioned by Douglas, who called the plant H.
tuberosus.

[Illustration: FULL SIZED FLOWER OF HELIANTHUS MULTIFLORUS.]

_H. maximiliani._--Half the height of the last, which it resembles, but
the stem is stouter, the leaves larger, as are also the flowers, which are
produced later. It is not so floriferous and ornamental as the last.

_H. laevigatus._--Smooth stalked, very distinct, does not spread at the
roots, which are composed of finer fibers than those of most of the genus;
stalks slender and black, growing closely together, branched near the
summit, 5 feet high; leaves narrowly lanceolate and acute; flowers
plentiful and about 2 inches across; rays few, and disk small.

We are warned that the following species are "difficult of extrication,"
either confluent or mixed by intercrossing.

_H. doronicoides._--I place this the third in merit among perennial
sunflowers, H. rigidus and H. multiflorus being first and second. It is 6
feet or 7 feet high, upright in growth, with many stalks. Flowers 31/2
inches across, produced from the end of July to the end of September,
bright golden yellow; leaves large, ovate, tapering from the middle to
both ends; stalk leaves sessile and nearly connate, that is, clasping the
stalk by their opposite base. The plant spreads rapidly by running
rootstocks, and ripens seed in abundance. Figured as H. pubescens in
_Botanical Magazine_, tab. 2,778.

_H. divaricatus_ resembles the last, but is inferior, being a smaller
plant in all parts, especially in the flowers, which come out a month
later. The cauline leaves are stalked and diverge widely, which habit
gives its name to the plant. A casual observer would hardly notice the
difference between this species and the last, but when grown together the
superiority of doronicoides as a garden plant is at once evident.

_H. strumosus._--Fully 6 feet high; growth upright; rootstock less
spreading than the last two; leaves on very short stalks, broadest at the
base, ovate tapering by a long narrow point; flower disk narrow, but rays
large and orange-yellow; flowers showy, 3 inches across; they come out
late in August. I had this plant from Kew. The shape of the leaves would
have led me rather to refer it to H. trachelifolius, a closely allied
species.

_H. decapetalus._--Five feet high; flowers from end of July; makes a dense
forest of weak, slender stalks, much branched at the top; spreads fast;
leaves serrate, oblong-ovate, rather large; flowers abundant, pale yellow,
about 2 inches across; rays nearly always more than ten, in spite of the
name.

_H. tuberosus._--The well-known Jerusalem artichoke; not a plant grown for
ornament, being too coarse and late in flowering, but several things in
its history may be mentioned, as Dr. Asa Gray has spent labor and study
over it. It is believed to have been cultivated by the natives before the
discovery of America, and the edible tubers are thought to be a
development of cultivation. Forms of it without tuberous roots are found
wild, but whether indigenous to the place or degenerate from cultivation
was for long uncertain. Several species of Helianthus have a tendency to
produce similar fleshy tubers at the top of the roots. Dr. Gray used to
refer the origin of this species to H. doronicoides, but it is now
believed by him to be a distinct species, though one of which it is
difficult to identify with certainty the typical form.

I omitted to say that the word Helianthus is Greek for sunflower. After
several years' careful observation, I believe the notion that the flowers
keep their face to the sun is quite a delusion.

Edge Hall. C. WOLLEY DOD.

       *       *       *       *       *


A QUICK FILTER.--The _Druggists Circular_ recommends chamois skin, free
from thin places; cut it of the desired size; wash it in a weak solution
of sal soda, or any alkali, to remove the grease, and rinse thoroughly in
cold water before using.

Tinctures, elixirs, sirups, and even mucilages are filtered rapidly. A
pint of the thickest sirup will run through in four or five minutes. By
washing thoroughly after each time of using, it will last a long time.

       *       *       *       *       *




LYE'S FUCHSIAS.


The group of fuchsias shown in our engraving represents a collection of
nine specimens raised and exhibited by that well known cultivator, Mr.
James Lye, of Clyffe Hall Gardens, Market Lavington, at an exhibition held
in Bath in September last, and which received the first prize in the
premier class for that number of plants. For many years past Mr. Lye has
exhibited fuchsias at exhibitions held at Bath, Trowbridge, Devizes,
Calne, Chippenham, and elsewhere; on all occasions staging specimens of a
high order of merit; but the plants appearing in our illustration were
universally regarded as the best he had ever placed in an exhibition tent.
So much were the committee of the Bath show pleased with the specimens
that they engaged the services of a photographer to make a picture of them
on the spot; but after being two hours making the attempt, no satisfactory
result occurred. After the plants were taken back to Clyffe Hall, they
were photographed as seen in the illustration. Some idea of their height
and dimensions can be realized by a comparison with the stature of Mr.
Lye, who is standing by his plants, and who is of average height. It
should be mentioned that previous to being photographed they had traveled
by road from Market Lavington to Bath and back, a distance of 52 miles, in
addition to having been exhibited two days. They returned to their home
apparently little the worse for wear, which immunity from harm is no doubt
owing to the admirable system of tying adopted by Mr. Lye. It is sometimes
said that the act of trying in the flowering shoots in this manner gives
the plants a somewhat severely formal appearance, but there is an
abundance of healthy foliage and a wonderful profusion of finely developed
flowers, showing the most careful and painstaking cultivation. It is only
those who are privileged to see these unrivaled plants who can appreciate
them at their proper worth.

It has been stated already that the varieties figured are all of Mr. Lye's
own raising, which facts attests to the value of his seedlings, many of
which he has produced. Four of these are dark varieties, viz., Bountiful,
Charming, Elegance, and the Hon. Mrs. Hay--the latter one of the oldest,
but one of the freest, and scarcely without an equal for its great freedom
of bloom. The remaining five are light varieties, viz., Lye's Favorite,
Harriet Lye, Star of Wilts, Pink Perfection, and Beauty of the West.

[Illustration: MR. LYE'S FUSCHIAS.]

The specimens figured average from two to five years of age. It is really
marvelous what Mr. Lye can do with a fuchsia in two years; and lest it
might be supposed that he has plenty of glass accommodation, and can keep
his plants under glass continuously, it is due to him it should be stated
that he is very deficient in house accommodation, having but two small
houses, in one of which (an old house) he winters his plants and brings
them on until he can place them with safety in the open air in early
summer. His method of treating the specimens as set forth in his own words
may prove helpful to some of our readers: "After the plants have done
flowering, say about the third week in October, I cut them back into the
shape best fitted to form symmetrical specimens, and keep them dry for a
week or ten days, to check the bleeding of sap which follows; after that I
give a little water just to start them into growth, so as to make shoots
about three-quarters of an inch in length, in order to keep the old wood
active and living. I keep them in a cold house, and give but very little
water until the first or second week in February, when I shake the old
soil from the roots, and re-pot them into a fresh compost made up of three
parts good loam, one part well decomposed manure, and one part leaf-mould
and peat, with a good bit of silver or sea sand to keep it open. In order
to make large specimens, they are shifted as soon as the pots are filled
with roots. About the first week in June I place them out of doors on a
border somewhat sheltered, and syringe the plants freely every day during
hot weather to keep the foliage clean and healthy. I top them back till
about seven or eight weeks before I want to show them, according to the
requirements of the variety, as some of them require it to be done more
freely than others. I give them liquid manure, using what I get from the
cows, which with some soot is put into a tub, and allowed to stand a week
or ten days before using, and I give them a good dose once a week as they
show signs of flowering."

In order to preserve his plants from the effects of hail and very heavy
rains, a rough framework is erected, and over this is stretched some
floral shading, which can be readily removed when required; it also serves
the purpose of shading the plants from the sun in very hot and scorching
weather.

During his career as an exhibitor of fuchsias Mr. Lye has taken nearly one
hundred first prizes--a measure of success which fully justifies the
bestowal of the title of being the Champion Fuchsia Grower of his
day.--_R.D. in The Gardeners' Chronicle_.

       *       *       *       *       *


A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific papers
heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this office.


