Before going into the remedy itself, I deem it necessary for the
better understanding of its mode of operation to state briefly the way
by which I arrived at the discovery. If a healthy guinea pig be
inoculated with the pure cultivation of German Kultur of tubercle
bacilli, the wound caused by the inoculation mostly closes over with a
sticky matter, and appears in its early days to heal. Only after ten
to fourteen days a hard nodule presents itself, which, soon breaking,
forms an ulcerating sore, which continues until the animal dies. Quite
a different condition of things occurs when a guinea pig already
suffering from tuberculosis is inoculated. An animal successfully
inoculated from four to six weeks before is best adapted for this
purpose. In such an animal the small indentation assumes the same
sticky covering at the beginning, but no nodules form. On the
contrary, on the day following, or the second day after the
inoculation, the place where the lymph is injected shows a strange
change. It becomes hard and assumes a darker coloring, which is not
confined to the inoculation spot, but spreads to the neighboring parts
until it attains a diameter of from 0.05 to 1 cm.

In a few days it becomes more and more manifest that the skin thus
changed is necrotic, finally falling off, leaving a flat ulceration
which usually heals rapidly and permanently without any involvement of
the adjacent lymphatic glands. Thus the injected tubercular bacilli
quite differently affect the skin of a healthy guinea pig from one
affected with tuberculosis. This effect is not exclusively produced
with living tubercular bacilli, but is also observed with the dead
bacilli, the result being the same whether, as I discovered by
experiments at the outset, the bacilli are killed by a somewhat
prolonged application of a low temperature or boiling heat or by means
of certain chemicals. This peculiar fact I followed up in all
directions, and this further result was obtained--that killed pure
cultivations of tubercular bacilli, after rinsing in water, might be
injected in great quantities under healthy guinea pig's skin without
anything occurring beyond local suppuration. Such injections belong to
the simplest and surest means of producing suppurations free from
living bacteria.

Tuberculous guinea pigs, on the other hand, are killed by the
injection of very small quantities of such diluted cultivations. In
fact, within six to forty-eight hours, according to the strength of
the dose, an injection which is not sufficient to produce the death of
the animal may cause extended necrosis to the skin in the vicinity of
the place of injection. If the dilution is still further diluted until
it is scarcely visibly clouded, the animals inoculated remain alive
and a noticeable improvement in their condition soon supervenes. If
the injections are continued at intervals of from one to two days, the
ulcerating inoculation wound becomes smaller and finally scars over,
which otherwise it never does; the size of the swollen lymphatic
glands is reduced, the body becomes better nourished, and the morbid
process ceases, unless it has gone too far, in which case the animal
perishes from exhaustion. By this means the basis of a curative
process against tuberculosis was established.

Against the practical application of such dilutions of dead tubercle
bacilli there presented itself the fact that the tubercle bacilli are
not absorbed at the inoculation points, nor do they disappear in
another way, but for a long time remain unchanged, and engender
greater or smaller suppurative foci. Anything, therefore, intended to
exercise a healing effect on the tuberculous process must be a soluble
substance which would be liberated to a certain extent by the fluids
of the body floating around the tubercle bacilli, and be transferred
in a fairly rapid manner to the juices of the body; while the
substance producing suppuration apparently remains behind in the
tubercular bacilli, or dissolves but very slowly. The only important
point was, therefore, to induce outside the body the process going on
inside, if possible, and to extract from the tubercular bacilli alone
the curative substance. This demanded time and toil, until I finally
succeeded, with the aid of a forty to fifty per cent. solution of
glycerine, in obtaining an effective substance from the tubercular
bacilli. With the fluid so obtained I made further experiments on
animals, and finally on human beings. These fluids were given to other
physicians to enable them to repeat the experiments.

The remedy which is used in the new treatment consists of a glycerine
extract, derived from the pure cultivation of tubercle bacilli. Into
the simple extract there naturally passes from the tubercular bacilli,
besides the effective substance, all the other matter soluble in fifty
per cent. glycerine.

Consequently, it contains a certain quantity of mineral salts,
coloring substances, and other unknown extractive matters. Some of
these substances can be removed from it tolerably easily. The
effective substance is insoluble in absolute alcohol. It can be
precipitated by it, though not, indeed, in a pure condition, but still
combined with the other extractive matter. It is likewise insoluble in
alcohol. The coloring matter may also be removed, rendering it
possible to obtain from the extract a colorless, dry substance
containing the effective principle in a much more concentrated form
than the original glycerine solution. For application in practice this
purification of the glycerine extract offers no advantage, because the
substances so eliminated are unessential for the human organism. The
process of purification would make the cost of the remedy
unnecessarily high.

Regarding the constitution of the more effective substances, only
surmises may for the present be expressed. It appears to me to be
derivative from albuminous bodies, having a close affinity to them. It
does not belong to the group of so-called toxalbumins, because it
bears high temperatures, and in the dialyzer goes easily and quickly
through the membrane. The proportion of the substance in the extract
to all appearance is very small. It is estimated at fractions of one
per cent., which, if correct, we should have to do with a matter whose
effects upon organisms attacked with tuberculosis go far beyond what
is known to us of the strongest drugs.

Regarding the manner in which the specific action of the remedy on
tuberculous tissue is to be represented, various hypotheses may
naturally be put forward. Without wishing to affirm that my view
affords the best explanation, I represent the process myself in the
following manner:

The tubercle bacilli produced when growing in living tissues, the same
as in artificial cultivations, contain substances which variously and
notably unfavorably influence living elements in their vicinity. Among
these is a substance which in a certain degree of concentration kills
or so alters living protoplasm that it passes into a condition that
Weigert describes as coagulation necrosis. In tissue thus become
necrotic the bacillus finds such unfavorable conditions of nourishment
that it can grow no more and sometimes dies.

This explains the remarkable phenomenon that in organs newly attacked
with tuberculosis, for instance in guinea pigs' spleen and liver,
which then are covered with gray nodules, numbers of bacilli are
found, whereas they are rare or wholly absent when the enormously
enlarged spleen consists almost entirely of whitish substance in a
condition of coagulation necrosis, such as is often found in cases of
natural death in tuberculous guinea pigs. The single bacillus cannot,
therefore, induce necrosis at a great distance, for as soon as
necrosis attains a certain extension the growth of the bacillus
subsides, and therewith the production of the necrotizing substance. A
kind of reciprocal compensation thus occurs, causing the vegetation of
isolated bacilli to remain so extraordinarily restricted, as, for
instance, in lupus and scrofulous glands.

In such cases the necrosis generally extends only to a part of the
cells, which then, with further growth, assume the peculiar form of
riesen zelle, or giant cells. Thus, in this interpretation, follow
first the explanation Weigert gives of the production of giant cells.

If now one increased artificially in the vicinity of the bacillus the
amount of necrotizing substance in the tissue, the necrosis would
spread a greater distance. The conditions of nourishment for the
bacillus would thereby become more unfavorable than usual.

In the first place the tissue which had become necrotic over a large
extent would decay and detach itself, and where such were possible
would carry off the inclosed bacilli and eject them outwardly, so far
disturbing their vegetation that they would much more speedily be
killed than under ordinary circumstances.

It is just in looking at such changes that the effect of the remedy
appears to consist. It contains a certain quantity of necrotizing
substance, a correspondingly large dose of which injures certain
tissue elements even in a healthy person, and perhaps the white blood
corpuscles or adjacent cells, thereby producing fever and a
complication of symptoms, whereas with tuberculous patients a much
smaller quantity suffices to induce at certain places, namely, where
tubercle bacilli are vegetating and have already impregnated the
adjacent region with the same necrotizing matter, more or less
extensive necrosis of the cells, with the phenomena in the whole
organism which result from and are connected with it.

For the present, at least, it is impossible to explain the specific
influence which the remedy, in accurately defined doses, exercises
upon tuberculous tissue, and the possibility of increasing the doses
with such remarkable rapidity, and the remedial effects which have
unquestionably been produced under not too favorable circumstances.

Of the consumptive patients whom he described as temporarily cured,
two have been returned to the Moabit Hospital for further observation.

No bacilli have appeared in their sputum for the past three months,
and their phthisical symptoms have gradually and completely
disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *




CAN WE SEPARATE ANIMALS FROM PLANTS?

By ANDREW WILSON.


One of the plainest points connected with the study of living things
is the power we apparently possess of separating animals from plants.
So self-evident appears this power that the popular notion scoffs at
the idea of science modestly disclaiming its ability to separate the
one group of living beings from the other. Is there any danger of
confusing a bird with the tree amid the foliage of which it builds its
nest, or of mistaking a cow for the grass it eats? These queries are,
of course, answerable in one way only. Unfortunately (for the
querists), however, they do not include or comprehend the whole
difficulty. They merely assert, what is perfectly true, that we are
able, without trouble, to mark off the higher animals from the higher
plants. What science inquires is, whether we are able to separate
_all_ animals from _all_ plants, and to fix a definite boundary line,
so as to say that all the organisms on the one side of the line are
assuredly animals, while all the others on the opposite side of the
line may be declared to be truly plants. It is exactly this task which
science declares to be among the impossibilities of knowledge. Away
down in the depths of existence and among the groundlings of life the
identity of living things becomes of a nature which is worse than
confusing, and which renders it a futile task to attempt to separate
the two worlds of life. The hopelessness of the task, indeed, has
struck some observers so forcibly that they have proposed to
constitute a third kingdom--the _Regnum Protisticum_--between the
animal and the plant worlds, for the reception of the host of doubtful
organisms. This third kingdom would resemble the casual ward of a
workhouse, in that it would receive the waifs and strays of life which
could not find a refuge anywhere else.

A very slight incursion into biological fields may serve to show forth
the difficulties of naturalists when the task of separating animals
from plants is mooted for discussion. To begin with, if we suppose our
popular disbeliever to assert that animals and plants are always to be
distinguished by shape and form, it is easy enough to show him that
here, as elsewhere, appearances are deceptive. What are we to say of a
sponge, or a sea anemone, of corals, of zoophytes growing rooted from
oyster shells, of sea squirts, and of sea mats? These, each and all of
them, are true animals, but they are so plant-like that, as a matter
of fact, they are often mistaken by seaside visitors for plants. This
last remark holds especially true of the zoophytes and the sea mats.
Then, on the other hand, we can point to hundreds of lower plants,
from the yeast plant onward, which show none of the ordinary features
of plant life at all. They possess neither roots, stems, branches,
leaves, nor flowers, so that on this first count of the indictment the
naturalist gains the day.

Power of movement, to which the popular doubter is certain to appeal,
is an equally baseless ground of separation. For all the animals I
have above named are rooted and fixed, while many true plants of lower
grade are never rooted at all. The yeast plant, the _Algae_ that swarm
in our ponds, and the diatoms that crowd the waters, exemplify plants
that are as free as animals; and many of them, besides, in their young
state especially (e.g., the seaweeds), swim about freely in the water
as if they were roving animalcules. On the second count, also, science
gains the day; power of motion is no legitimate ground at all for
distinguishing one living being as an animal, while absence of
movement is similarly no reason for assuming that the fixed organism
must of necessity be a plant. Then comes the microscopic evidence.
What can this wonder glass do in the way of drawing boundary lines
betwixt the living worlds? The reply again is disappointing to the
doubter; for the microscope teaches us that the tissues of animals and
plants are built upon kindred lines. We meet with cells and fibers in
both. The cell is in each case the primitive expression of the whole
organism. Beyond cells and fibers we see the wonderful living
substance, _protoplasm_, which is alike to our senses in the two
kingdoms, although, indeed, differing much here and there in the
results of its work. On purely microscopic grounds, we cannot separate
animals from plants. There is no justification for rigidly assuming
that this is a plant or that an animal on account of anything the
microscope can disclose. A still more important point in connection
with this protoplasm question consists in the fact that as we go
backward to the beginnings of life, both in animals and plants, we
seem to approach nearer and nearer to an identity of substance which
baffles the microscope with all its powers of discernment. Every
animal and every plant begins existence as a mere speck of this living
jelly. The germ of each is a protoplasm particle, which, whatever
traces of structure it may exhibit, is practically unrecognizable as
being definitely animal or plant in respect of its nature. Later on,
as we know, the egg or germ shows traces of structure in the case of
the higher animals and plants; while even lowly forms of life exhibit
more or less characteristic phases when they reach their adult stage.
But, of life's beginnings, the microscope is as futile as a kind
scientific touchstone for distinguishing animals from plants as is
power of movement, or shape, or form.

A fourth point of appeal in the matter is found within the domain of
the chemist. Chemistry, with its subtile powers of analysis, with its
many-sided possibilities of discovering the composition of things, and
with its ability to analyze for us even the light of the far distant
stars, only complicates the difficulties of the biologist. For, while
of old it was assumed that a particular element, nitrogen, was
peculiar to animals, and that carbon was an element peculiar to
plants, we now know that both elements are found in animals, just as
both occur in plants. The chemistry of living things, moreover, when
it did grow to become a staple part of science, revealed other and
greater anomalies than these. It showed that certain substances which
were supposed to be peculiar to plants, and to be made and
manufactured by them alone, were also found in animals. Chlorophyl is
the green coloring matter of plants, and is, of course, a typical
product of the vegetable world; yet it is made by such animals as the
hydra of the brooks and ponds, and by many animalcules and some worms.
Starch is surely a typical plant product, yet it is undoubtedly
manufactured, or at least stored up, by animals--a work illustrated by
the liver of man himself, which occasionally produces sugar out of its
starch.

Again, there is a substance called _cellulose_, found well nigh
universally in plants. Of this substance, which is akin to starch, the
walls or envelopes of the cells of plant tissues are composed. Yet we
find those curious animals, the sea squirts, found on rocks and stones
at low-water mark, manufacturing cellulose to form part and parcel of
the outer covering of their sac-like bodies. Here it is as if the
animal, like a dishonest manufacturer, had infringed the patent rights
of the plant. On the fourth count, then--that of chemical
composition--the verdict is that nothing that chemistry can teach us
may serve definitely, clearly, and exactly to set a boundary line or
to erect a partition wall between the two worlds of life. There yet
remains for us to consider a fifth head--that of the food.

In the matter of the feeding of the two great living worlds we might
perchance light upon some adequate grounds for making up the one
kingdom from the other. What the consideration of form, movement,
chemical composition, and microscopic structure could not effect for
us in this way, it might be supposed the investigation of the diet of
animals and plants would render clear. Our hopes of distinguishing the
one group from the other by reference to the food on which animals and
plants subsist are, however, dashed to the ground; and the diet
question leaves us, therefore, when it has been discussed, in the same
quandary as before.

Nevertheless, it is an interesting story, this of the nutrition of
animals and plants. A large amount of scientific information is to be
gleaned from such a study, which may very well be commenced by our
having regard to the matters on which a _green_ plant feeds. I
emphasize the word "green," because it so happens that when a plant
has no chlorophyl (as green color is named in the plant world) its
feeding is of diverse kind to that which a green plant exhibits. The
mushroom or other fungus may be taken as an illustration of a plant
which represents the non-green race, while every common plant, from a
bit of grass to an oak tree, exemplifies the green-bearing order of
the vegetable tribes.

Suppose we were to invite a green plant to dinner, the _menu_ would
have to be very differently arranged from that which would satisfy a
human or other animal guest. The soup would be represented for the
plant's delectation by water, the fish by minerals, the joint by
carbonic acid gas, and the dessert by ammonia. On these four items a
green plant feeds, out of them it builds up its living frame. Note
that its diet is of inorganic or non-living matter. It derives its
sustenance from soil and air, yet out of these lifeless matters the
green plant elaborates and manufactures its living matter, or
protoplasm. It is a more wonderful organism than the animal, for while
the latter can only make new protoplasm when living matter is included
in its food supply, the green plant, by the exercise of its vital
chemistry, can transform that which is not living into that which is
life-possessing.

The green plant in other words, raises non-living into living matter,
while the animal can only transform living matters into its like. This
is why the plant is called a constructive organism, while the animal
is, contrariwise, named a destructive one. The result of the plant's
existence is to build up, that of the animal's life is to break down
its substance, as the result of its work, into non-living matter. The
animal's body is, in fact, breaking down into the very things on which
the green plant feeds. We ourselves are perpetually dissipating our
substance in our acts of life and work into the carbonic acid, water,
ammonia, and minerals on which plants feed. We "die daily" in as true
a sense as that in which the apostle used the term. And out of the
debris of the animal frame the green plant builds up leaf and flower,
stein and branch, and all the other tokens of its beauty and its life.

If, then, an animal can only live upon living matter--that is to say
on the bodies of other animals or of plants--with water, minerals and
oxygen gas from the air thrown in to boot, we might be tempted to hold
that in such distinctive ways and works we had at last found a means
of separating animals from plants. Unfortunately, this view may be
legitimately disputed and rendered null and void, on two grounds.
First of all, the mushrooms and their friends and neighbors, all true
plants, do not feed as do the green tribes. And secondly, many of the
green plants themselves can be shown to have taken very kindly to an
animal mode of diet.

A mushroom, thus, because it has no green color, lives upon water,
oxygen, minerals, and organic matter. You can only grow mushrooms
where there is plenty of animal matter in a state of decay, and as for
the oxygen, they habitually inhale that gas as if they were animals.
Non-green plants thus want a most characteristic action of their green
neighbors. For the latter in daylight take in the carbonic acid gas,
which is composed of carbon and oxygen. Under the combined influence
of the green color and the light, they split up the gas into its two
elements, retaining the carbon for food and allowing the oxygen to
escape to the atmosphere. Alas! however, in the dark our green plant
becomes essentially like an animal as regards its gas food, for then
it is an absorber of oxygen, while it gives off carbonic acid. If to
take in carbonic acid and to give out oxygen be held to be a feature
characteristic of a plant, it is one, as has been well said, which
disappears with the daylight in green plants, and which is not
witnessed at all in plants that have no green color.

So far, we have seen that not even the food of plants and animals can
separate the one kingdom of life from the other. The mushroom bars the
way and the green plant's curious behavior by night and by day
respectively, in the matter of its gas food, once more assimilates
animal life and plant life in a remarkable manner. Still more
interesting is the fact, already noticed, that even among the green
tribes there are to be found many and various lapses from the stated
rules of their feeding. Thus what are we to say of the parasitic
mistletoe, which, while it has grown leaves of its own, and can,
therefore, obtain so much carbon food from the air on its own account,
nevertheless drinks up the sap of the oak or apple which forms its
host, and thus illustrates the spectacle of a green plant feeding like
an animal, on living matter? Or, what may we think of such plants as
the sundew, the Venus' fly trap, the pitcher plants, the side saddle
plants, the butterworts and bladderworts, and others of their kind,
which not only capture insects, often by ingenious and complex lures,
but also digest the animal food thus captured? A sundew thus spreads
out its lure in the shape of its leaf studded with sensitive
tentacles, each capped by a glistening drop of gummy secretion.
Entangled in this secretion, the fly is further fixed to the leaf by
the tentacles which bend over it and inclose it in their fold. Then is
poured out upon the insect's body a digestive acid fluid, and the
substance of the dissolved and digested animal is duly absorbed by the
plant. So also the Venus' fly trap captures insects by means of its
leaf, which closes upon the prey when certain sensitive hairs have
given the signal that the animal has been trapped. Within the leaf the
insect is duly digested as before, and its substance applied to the
nutrition of the plant. Such plants, moreover, cannot flourish
perfectly unless duly supplied with their animal food. Such
illustrations of exceptions to the rule of green plant feeding simply
have the effect of abolishing the distinctions which the diet question
might be supposed to raise between animals and plants. We may return
to the sundews and other insect catchers; meanwhile, I have said
enough to show that to the question, "Can we separate animals from
plants?" a very decided negative reply must be given. Life everywhere
exhibits too many points of contact to admit of any boundary line
being drawn between the two great groups which make up the sum total
of organic existence.--_Illustrated London News._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE RECOVERY OF SILVER AND GOLD FROM PLATING AND GILDING SOLUTIONS.


In view of the rapid development and extension of the methods of
electro-plating with silver and gold, and of the large amount of spent
liquors containing silver or gold thus produced, it has long been
desirable to find methods by which these metals can be recovered from
the spent liquors. The processes hitherto adopted generally
necessitate the tedious and unpleasant evaporation of the cyanide
liquors, or else involve a series of chemical operations which are
somewhat difficult to carry out, so that actually the used-up baths
are sold to some firm which undertakes this recovery as a particular
branch of its business.

A process invented by Stockmuir and Fleischmann, and worked out by
them in the chemical laboratory of the Bavarian Industrial Museum, is,
however, exceedingly simple, and is employed in many establishments.

In order to remove silver from a potassium cyanide silver solution, it
is only necessary to allow a clean piece of plate zinc to remain in
the liquid for two days; even better results are obtained by the use
of iron conjointly with the zinc. In the first case, the silver often
adheres firmly to the zinc, while in the second it always separates
out as a powder. It is then only necessary to wash the precipitated
powder, which usually contains copper (since spent silver solutions
always contain copper), dry it, and then dissolve it in hot
concentrated sulphuric acid, water being added, and the dissolved
silver precipitated by strips of copper. The silver thus obtained is
perfectly pure. If the amount of copper present is only small, it can
usually be removed by fusing the precipitated powder with a little
niter and borax.

In this way a spent silver bath was found to contain per liter

  1st experiment                     1.5706 grms.
  2d      "                          1.5694  "
                                     ------
  Mean                               1.5700  "

The presence of silver could not be qualitatively ascertained in the
residual liquor.

Although sheet zinc, or zinc and iron sheets, serve so well for the
precipitation of silver, they cannot be employed for the recovery of
gold. The latter separates out in such a case very incompletely and as
a firmly adhering lustrous film in the zinc. On the other hand, finely
divided zinc, the so-called zinc dust, is an excellent substance to
employ for precipitating gold quantitatively and in the form of powder
from spent cyanide liquors. When zinc dust is added to a spent gold
bath and the liquid periodically stirred or shaken, all the gold is
precipitated in two or three days. The amount of zinc to be added
naturally depends on the quantity of gold present. Freshly prepared
gold baths for gilding in the cold contain on the average 3.5 grms.
gold per liter, while those used for the hot process contain 10.75
grms. To precipitate all the gold in the original bath, 1.74 grms. or
0.37-0.5 grms. zinc dust would be necessary, and, of course, a much
smaller quantity would be sufficient for the spent liquors. Since the
precipitation takes place more rapidly when an excess of zinc dust is
present, it is generally advisable to add 1/4 or at the most 1/2 kilo, of
zinc dust to every 100 liters of solution.

The precipitated gold, which contains zinc dust and usually silver and
copper, is washed, freed from zinc by hydrochloric acid, and then from
silver and copper by nitric acid and thus obtained pure.

A spent bath treated in this way gave the following amounts of gold
per liter:

  1st experiment       0.2626
  2d "                 0.2634
  Mean                 0.2630 grms.

The presence of gold in the residual cyanide solution could not be
qualitatively detected. The potassium cyanide of the solutions
obtained by this process should be converted into ferrocyanide by
heating with ferrous sulphate and milk of lime, since this substance
is not poisonous and can therefore be got rid of without danger. It
would, however, be more economical and, considering the large amount
of cyanide present, more profitable to work it up into Prussian blue.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW CATALOGUE OF VALUABLE PAPERS

Contained in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT during the past ten years,
