syne; in places its channel lies to the west, but for the greater
extent it is to the eastward.[4]

[Footnote 4: "The bed of the river is so broad that the channel
meanders from side to side within the bed, just as the bed itself
meanders from bluff to bluff; and, as by erosions and deposits, the
river, in long periods of time, traverses the valley, so the channel
traverses the bed from bank to bank, justifying the remark often
heard, that 'not a square rod of the bed could be pointed out that had
not, at some time, been covered by the track of steamboats.'"--J.H.
SIMPSON, _Col. Eng., Brevet Brig.-Gen., U.S.A._]


PHYSICAL.

The lower Mississippi is among the muddiest streams in the world.
During the average year it brings down 7,500,000,000 cubic yards of
sediment, discharging it along the lower course, or pushing it into
the Gulf. As one thinks of the small amount of sediment held in a
gallon or two of river water, a comprehension of this vast amount of
silt is impossible. It is enough to cover a square mile in area to a
depth of 268 feet. In five hundred years it would build above the sea
level a State as large and as high as Rhode Island. Thus, by means of
this sediment, the river has pushed its mouths fifty miles into the
sea, confining its flow within narrow strips of land--natural levees
made by the river itself.

The Mississippi is notable for its varying length. Within the memory
of the oldest pilot the length of the river between St. Louis and New
Orleans has varied more than one hundred and fifty miles, being
sometimes longer and sometimes shorter, as the year may be one of
drought or of excessive rainfall. Occasionally the river will shorten
itself a score of miles at a single leap. The shortening invariably
takes place at one of its long sinuous curves for which it is so
remarkable. At a season when the volume of water begins to increase,
the narrow neck of the loop gives way little by little under the
continuous impact of the strengthening current. Narrower and narrower
it grows as the water ceaselessly cuts away the bank. Finally the
barrier is broken; there is a tumultuous meeting of waters; the next
steamboat that comes along goes through a new cut; and a moat or
ox-bow lake is the only reminder of the former channel.[5]

[Footnote 5: One of the most noteworthy examples of these cut-offs is
Davis'. This cut-off occurred at Palmyra Bend, eighteen miles below
Vicksburg. The mid-channel distance around the bend was not far from
twenty miles; the neck was only twelve hundred feet across. The fall
of the river, measured around the bend, was about four inches per
mile; the slope, measured across the neck, was about five and one-half
feet, nearly twenty feet per mile. Inasmuch as the soil in the neck
was wholly alluvial, the current cut its new channel with exceedingly
great rapidity, soon clearing it out a mile in width and more than one
hundred feet in depth. The water rushed through the channel with such
a velocity that steamboats could not breast its flow for many weeks,
while the roaring of its flood could be heard many miles away. The
influence of the cut-off was felt both above and below Vicksburg for
several years after. The rate of erosion has been perceptibly
increased above Vicksburg: and it is not unlikely that the cut-off
which occurred a few years later at Commerce, about thirty miles below
Memphis, was a result of Davis' Cut. Other recent cut-offs have
occurred near Arkansas City, below Greenville, near Duncansby, below
Lake Providence at Vicksburg, and at Kienstra. The latter place is
below Natchez; all the others are between Natchez and Memphis. A
double cut-off is strongly threatened at Greenville.]

In 1863 the city of Vicksburg was situated on the outer curve of such
a loop. At that time General Grant and his army were on the opposite
side of the river, and the whole power of the Federal government was
directed upon devising how the army might cross it and capture the
long-beleagured city. So an army engineer conceived the idea of
turning the river around the rear of the army. Accordingly, a canal
was cut across the loop, in order to make an artificial channel
through which its current might run. But the river steadfastly refused
to accept any channel it had not itself made, and the ditch soon
silted up. Twelve years or more afterward there was trouble; for the
river, which had all this time so persistently ignored the canal, one
stormy night, when its current was considerably swollen, took a notion
to adopt the canal that it had so long refused. Next morning the good
people of Vicksburg woke to find their metropolis, not on the river
channel, but practically an inland town overlooking a stagnant mud
flat. The town of Delta, which, the night before, was three miles
below Vicksburg, was, in the morning, two miles above it. Since that
time, energy and intelligence have conspired in its behalf, and
Vicksburg is still an important river port; but the channel of the
river is persistent, and constant effort and watchfulness alone keep a
depth of water sufficient for the needs of navigation before the
wharves.

The average inhabitant of the flood plain of the Mississippi is not
surprised at this capriciousness of the river, for long experience has
taught him to look for it. During seasons of mean or of low water,
there is little or no trouble; but when floods begin to swell the
current, then it is high time to be on the alert, for no one knows
what a day or even an hour may bring forth. Perhaps a snag, loosened
from the bank above, may come floating down the stream. It strikes a
shallow place somewhere in the river, and thereupon anchors in
mid-channel. Directly it does, a small riffle or bar of silt will form
around it, and this, in turn, sends an eddying current over against
the bank. By and by the latter begins to be chipped away, little by
little. Perhaps the corrosion of the bank might not be noticed except
by a bottom land planter or a riverman. But there is no time to be
lost. If some unfortunate individual happens to possess belongings in
that vicinity, he simply lays aside his coat and works as if he were a
whole legion doing Caesar's bidding; he well knows that in a very few
hours the river will be swallowing up his real estate at the rate of
half an acre to the mouthful. It is certainly hard to see one's
earthly possessions disappear before the angry flood of the river, but
the bottom land planter does not complain, because the experience of
generations has taught him that he must expect it. A queer fortune
befell Island No. 74.

Between the States of Arkansas and Mississippi there is a large
island, which, for want of a name, is commonly known as Island No.
74.[6] This slip of insular land is probably the only territory within
the United States and not of it, for this island is without the
boundaries of either State, county or township. It is not under
control of the government, because it is in the possession of an owner
whose claim is acknowledged by the government. The anomalous position
of the island as to political situation is due to the erosion of the
river as an active and the defects of statutory law as a passive
agent. According to the enactment whereby the States of Arkansas and
Mississippi were created, the river boundary of the former extends to
_mid-stream_; that of the latter to _mid-channel_. Herein is the
difficulty. A dissipated freshet turned the current against the
Mississippi bank, and shifted the former position of mid-channel many
rods to the eastward, so that the fortunate or unfortunate owner found
his possessions lying beyond both the mid-river point of Arkansas and
the mid-channel line of Mississippi. The owner of the plantation may
be unhappy at time of election, for he is practically a non-resident
of any political division. His grief, however, is somewhat assuaged
when the tax gatherer calls, for, being outside of all political
boundaries, he has no taxes to pay.

[Footnote 6: For convenience to navigation, the islands in the lower
Mississippi, beginning at St. Louis, are numbered. Many of them,
however, have local names by which they are frequently known.]

Within a few years the town of Napoleon, which has already been
mentioned as the site which beheld the cross erected by Marquette and
the seizure of La Salle, was the scene of still another chapter in
history. Almost two hundred years from the time when Joliet and
Marquette beheld the historic ground, the river turned its current
against the banks, and in a few hours the crumbling walls of an old
stone building, half a mile or more from the river banks, were the
surviving monument that marked the former location of the town.

The Mississippi is indeed a grand study, and the people who have lived
in its valley during past ages have seen the river doing just what it
is doing to-day; and as race has succeeded race, each in turn has seen
the landmarks of its predecessors swept away by its angry flood and
buried beneath its sediment. Ever since the crests of the Appalachian
and Rocky Mountains were thrust up above the sea, the river has been
wearing them away, and bearing the scourings to the vast plain below.
In the time of its building it has made the greatest and the richest
valley on the face of the earth; next to that of the Amazon it is the
largest, covering an area of one and one-quarter million square miles.
The river and its tributaries drain twenty-eight States and
Territories--an area equal to that of all Europe except Russia. This
basin includes half the area of the United States, exclusive of
Alaska. It is five times as large as Austria-Hungary, six times the
size of France or Germany, nine times the area of Spain, and ten times
that of the British Isles. Measured by its grain-producing capacity,
this valley is capable of supporting a larger population than any
other physical region on the face of the earth. Already it is the
foremost region in the world in the production of grain, meat and
cotton. The rich soil, sedentary on the prairie and alluvial in the
bottomlands, is almost inexhaustible in its nutritious qualities. The
soil cannot be "worn out" in the bottomlands, for nature restores its
vitality by bringing fresh supplies from the highlands as fast or
faster than the seed crop exhausts it. Sixty bushels of wheat or two
bales of cotton may be harvested from an acre of bottom lands. So vast
in proportions is the yearly crop of food stuffs that more than three
hundred thousand freight cars and about two thousand vessels are
required to move the crop from farm to market. One hundred and
twenty-five thousand miles of railway, fifteen thousand miles of
navigable water, exclusive of the Great Lakes, and several thousand
miles of canals are insufficient to transport this enormous
production; thousands of miles of railway are therefore yearly built
in order to keep pace with the growth of population and the settlement
of new lands. To the natural resources of the soil add the enormous
mineral wealth hidden but a few feet below the surface, and wonder
grows to amazement. Coal fields surpassing in extent all the remaining
fields in the world; iron ore sufficient to stock the world with iron
and steel for the next thousand years; copper of the finest quality;
zinc, lead, salt, building stone and timber, all in quantities
sufficient for a population a hundred times as great. Is it strange
that wise economists point to this territory and say, "Behold the
future empire of the world"? Where in the wide world is another valley
in which climate, latitude and nature have been so liberal?

It is only a few years since the Indian and the bison divided between
them the sole possession of this region. What a change hath the hand
of destiny wrought! What a revelation, had some unseen hand lifted the
curtain that separated the past from the future! Iron, steam and
electricity have in them more of mysterious power than ever oriental
fancy accredited to the genii of the lamp, and the future of the basin
of the Mississippi will be a greater wonder than the past.

The feast of La Salle was the death warrant of the Indian, and the
Aryan has crowded out the Indian, just as the latter evicted the mound
builder--just as the mound builder overcame the people whose monuments
of burned brick and cut stone now lie fifty feet below the surface.
Only a few centuries have gone by since these happenings; can we
number the years hence when rapacious hordes from another land shall
drive out the effete descendants of the now sturdy Aryan?

(_To be continued_.)

       *       *       *       *       *




FREEZING MIXTURES.


The following selection of mixtures causing various degrees of cold,
the starting point of the cooling being indicated in the first column,
will probably serve many purposes. It should be stated that the amount
of depression in temperature will practically be the same, even if the
temperature to start from is higher. Of course in the case of snow it
cannot be higher than 0 deg. C. (32 deg. F.) But in some cases it is necessary
to start at a temperature below 0 deg. C. For instance, the temperature of
-49 deg. C. may be reached by mixing 1 part of snow with 1/2 part of dilute
nitric acid. But then the snow must have the temperature -23 deg. C. If it
were only at 0 deg. C., the depression would be only to about -26 deg. C.:

  _________________________________________________________________
                                         |
                                         |  The temperature sinks
    Substances to be mixed in parts by   |-------------------------
                 weight.                 |    from    |     to
  _______________________________________|____________|____________
                                         |            |
  1.  Water.                       1     |   +10 deg. C.  |   -15.5 deg. C.
       Ammonium nitrate.           1     |            |
  2.  Dil. hydrochloric acid.     10     |   +10      |   -17.8
       Sodium sulphate.           16     |            |
  3.  Dil. hydrochloric acid.      1     |   +10      |   -16
       Sodium sulphate.            11/2    |            |
  4.  Snow.                        1     |   + 0      |   -32.5
       Sulphuric acid.             4     |            |
       Water.                      1     |            |
  5.  Snow.                        1     |   - 7      |   -51
       Dil. sulphuric acid.        1     |            |
  6.  Snow.                        1     |   -23      |   -49
       Dil. nitric acid.            1/2    |            |
  7.  Snow.                        1     |     0      |   -17.8
       Sodium chloride.            1     |            |
  8.  Snow.                        1     |     0      |   -49
       Calcium chloride.           1.3   |            |
  9.  Snow.                        1     |     0      |   -33
       Hydrochloric acid.          0.625 |            |
  10. Snow.                        1     |     0      |   -24
       Sodium chloride.            0.4   |            |
       Ammon. chloride.            0.2   |            |
  11. Snow.                        1     |     0      |   -31
       Sodium chloride.            0.416 |            |
       Ammon. nitrate.             0.416 |            |
  _______________________________________|____________|____________

       *       *       *       *       *




THE APPLICATION OF ELECTROLYSIS TO QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS.

By CHARLES A. KOHN, B.Sc., Ph.D., Assistant Lecturer in Chemistry,
University College, Liverpool.


The first application of electrolysis to chemical analysis was made by
Gaultier de Claubry, in 1850, who employed the electric current for
the detection of metals when in solution. Other early workers followed
in this direction, and in 1861 Bloxam published two papers (J. Chem.
Soc., 13, 12 and 338) on "The application of electrolysis to the
detection of poisonous metals in mixtures containing organic matters."
In these papers a description is given of means for detecting small
quantities of arsenic and of antimony by subjecting their acidulated
solutions to electrolysis. The arsenic was evolved as hydride and
recognized by the usual reactions, while the antimony was mainly
deposited as metal upon the cathode. The electrolytic method for the
detection of arsenic, in which all fear of contamination from impure
zinc is overcome, has since been elaborated by Wolff, who has
succeeded in detecting as little as 0.00001 grm. arsenious oxide by
this means (this Journal, 1887, 147).

In a somewhat different manner the voltaic current is made use of in
ordinary qualitative analysis for the detection of tin, antimony,
silver, lead, arsenic, etc., by employing a more electro-positive
metal to precipitate a less electro-positive one from its solution.

The quantitative electrolytic methods of analysis, some of which I had
the honor of bringing before the notice of the Society some time back
(this Journal, 1889, 256), have placed a number of methods of
determination and separation of metals in the hands of chemists, which
can be employed with advantage in qualitative analysis, especially in
case of medical and medico-legal inquiry. These methods are not
supposed to supersede in any way the ordinary methods of qualitative
analysis, but to serve as a final and crucial means of identification,
and thus to render it possible to detect very small quantities of the
substances in question with very great certainty. As such they fulfill
the required conditions admirably, being readily carried out,
comparatively free from contamination with impure reagents, and
capable of being rendered quantitative whenever desired.

In conjunction with Mr. E.V. Ellis, B.Sc., I have examined the
applicability of the electrolytic methods for the detection of the
chief mineral poisons (with the exception of arsenic, an electrolytic
process for the detection of which has already been devised, as
described), viz., antimony, mercury, lead, and copper.

_Antimony_.--The method employed in the case of antimony is that
adopted in its quantitative estimation by means of electrolysis, a
method which insures a complete separation from those metals with
which it is precipitated in the ordinary course of analysis--arsenic
and tin. This fact is of considerable importance in reference to the
special objects for which these methods have been worked out.

The precipitated sulphide is dissolved in potassium sulphide, and the
resultant solution, after warming with a little hydrogen peroxide to
discolorize any poly-sulphides that may be present, electrolyzed with
a current of 1.5-2 c.c. of electrolytic gas per minute (10.436 c.c. at
0 deg. and 760 mm. = 1 ampere), when the antimony is deposited as metal
upon the negative electrode. One part of antimony (as metal) in
1,500,000 parts of solution may be thus detected, a reaction thirty
times more delicate than the deposition by means of zinc and
potassium. The stain on the cathode, which latter is best used in the
form of a piece of platinum foil about 1 sq. cm. in diameter, is
distinct even with a solution containing 1/28 mgrm. of antimony; and
by carefully evaporating a little ammonium sulphide on the foil, or
by dissolving the stain in hot hydrochloric acid and then passing a
few bubbles of sulphureted hydrogen gas into the solution, the orange
colored sulphide is obtained as a satisfactory confirmatory test. The
detection of 0.0001 grm. of metal can be fully relied on under all
conditions, and one hour is sufficient to completely precipitate such
small quantities.

_Mercury_.--Mercury is best separated from its nitric acid solution on
a small closely wound spiral of platinum wire. The solution to be
tested is acidified with nitric acid and electrolyzed with a current
of 4-5 c.c. (c.c. refer to c.c. of electrolytic gas per minute). The
deposition is effected in half an hour. The deposited metal is removed
from the spiral by heating the latter gently in a test tube, when the
mercury forms in characteristic globules on the upper portion of the
tube. As a confirmatory and very characteristic test, a crystal of
iodine is dropped into the tube, and the whole allowed to stand for a
short time, when the presence of mercury is indicated by the formation
of the red iodide. 0.0001 grm. of mercury in 150 c.c. of solution can
be clearly detected.

Wolff has applied this test under similar conditions, using a special
form of apparatus and a silver-coated iron anode (this Journal, 1888,
454).

_Lead_.--Lead is precipitated either as PbO_{2} at the anode from a
nitric acid solution or as metal at the cathode from an ammonium
oxalate solution. In both cases a current of 2-3 c.c. suffices to
effect the deposition in one hour.

Here, again, 0.0001 grm. of metal in 150 c.c. of solution can be
easily detected. With both solutions this amount gives a distinct
discoloration to the platinum spiral, on which the deposition is best
effected. As a confirmatory test the deposited metal is dissolved in
nitric acid and tested with sulphureted hydrogen, or the spiral may be
placed in a test tube and warmed with a crystal of iodine, when the
yellow iodide is formed. This latter reaction is very distinct,
especially in the case of the peroxide.

Of the above two methods, that in which an ammonium oxalate solution
is used is the more delicate, although it cannot be employed
quantitatively, owing to the oxidation of the metal that takes place.

An addition of 1 grm. of ammonium oxalate to the suspected solution is
sufficient.

_Copper_.--0.00005 grm. of copper can be very readily detected by
electrolyzing an acid solution in the usual way. A spiral of platinum
wire is employed as the cathode, and the presence of the metal
confirmed for by dissolving it in a little nitric acid, diluting with
water and adding potassium ferrocyanide.

To detect these metals in cases of poisoning, the organic matter with
which they are associated must first be destroyed in the usual way by
means of hydrochloric acid and potassium chlorate, and the
precipitates obtained in the ordinary course of analysis, then
subjected, at suitable stages, to electrolysis. As the solutions thus
obtained will be still contaminated by some organic matter, it is
necessary to pass the current for a longer time than indicated above.
On the other hand, _urine_ can be tested directly for these poisons.

The presence of mercury or of copper may be detected by acidifying the
urine with 2-3 c.c. of nitric acid (conc.), and electrolyzing as
described. 0.0001 grm. of metal in 30 c.c. of urine can be detected
thus, or 1 part in 300,000 of urine.

Lead does not separate well as peroxide from urine, but if ammonium
oxalate be added, and the lead deposited as metal, the reaction is
quite as delicate as in aqueous solution, and 0.0001 grm. of lead can
be thus detected.

With antimony it is advisable to precipitate it first as sulphide, but
it can be detected directly, though not so satisfactorily, by
acidifying the urine with 2-3 c.c. of sulphuric acid (dil.), and
electrolyzing with a current of 1-5 to 2 c.c. In this case also it is
precipitated as metal upon the cathode (cp. Chittenden, Proceedings
Connecticut Acad. Science, Vol. 8).

In the presence of urine it is advisable to continue the passage of
the current for about twice the time required in the case of aqueous
solutions.

That an approximately quantitative result can be obtained under the
above conditions was shown in several cases in which deposition of
0.001 grm. of metal was confirmed with considerable accuracy, the
spiral or foil being weighed before and after the experiment.

A comparison of the delicacy of these tests with the ordinary
qualitative tests for antimony, mercury, lead, and copper by means of
sulphureted hydrogen, showed that the two were equally delicate in the
case of antimony and of copper, but that in that of mercury and of
lead the electrolytic test was at least eight times the more delicate.
These comparisons were made in aqueous solutions. In testing urine the
value of the electrolytic method is still more evident, for here the
color of the liquid interferes materially with the reliability of the
ordinary qualitative tests when only very small quantities of the
metals referred to are present.

Beyond the detection of mineral poisons, qualitative electrolysis can
only offer attraction to analysts in special cases, and the data on
the subject are to be found in the many electrolytic methods already
published. Beyond testing for gold and silver in this manner, I have
not therefore examined the applicability of these methods further.

The detection of small quantities of gold and silver is of
considerable importance, and advantage can be taken of the ease with
which they are separated from potassium cyanide solution by the
electric current for this purpose.

_Silver_.--Silver is obtained as chloride in the course of analysis.
To confirm for the metal electrolytically, this precipitate is
dissolved in potassium cyanide and the resulting solution electrolyzed
with a current of 1-1.5 c.c. A spiral of platinum wire is employed as
the anode, from which the silver may be dissolved by means of nitric
acid, and tested for by hydrochloric acid or by sulphureted hydrogen.
0.0001 grm. of silver in 150 c.c. of solution can be detected thus,
and one hour is sufficient for the deposition.

_Gold_.--Gold is deposited under similar conditions to silver from
cyanide solutions. The deposit, which is rather dark colored, can be
dissolved in aqua regia and confirmed for by the Cassius' purple test.
Here again 0.0001 grm. of metal in 150 c.c. of solution can be
detected without any difficulty.

As gold and silver are both extracted from quartziferous ores by
treatment with potassium cyanide solution according to the
MacArthur-Forrest process of gold extraction (this Journal, 1890,
267), this electrolytic method should prove very useful. By
electrolyzing the resulting solution a mixture of gold and silver will
be deposited upon the cathode, which can then be parted by nitric acid
and tested for as described.


DISCUSSION.

The chairman said that there was little doubt but that further
investigation into electrolytic methods of chemical analysis would
give even more valuable results than those already obtained.
Systematic investigations of the subject, such as have been given by
Dr. Kohn, would go far to prove the adaptability of this method as a
substitute for or aid in ordinary qualitative examinations. The
remarks of Dr. Kohn respecting quantitative examinations were very
interesting, and well worth following up by other practical work.

Professor Campbell Brown said that Dr. Kohn had shown that electricity
brought the same kind of elegance, neatness, and simplicity into
analysis that it did into lighting and silver plating.

In its applications to the detection of poisons, he understood Dr.
Kohn to say that the poisons must first be extracted by chemical
means. That would not be sufficient, and he had no doubt that if the
subject was pursued farther they would have a paper from him (Dr.
Kohn) some day, indicating that he had obtained arsenic and such
poisons without the previous separation of the metal from organic
matter. It was a very great desideratum to have a method for detecting
arsenic and separating it from the contents of the stomach and food
directly without previous destruction of the organic matter, and he
hoped Dr. Kohn would pursue his work in that direction.

Dr. Hurter said he was about to construct a new laboratory, and he
would assure them that one of its arrangements would be the
installation of electricity, by which to carry out researches similar
to those described. He was very glad to learn that the presence of
arsenic, etc., could be readily proved by means of electrolysis.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW CATALOGUE OF VALUABLE PAPERS


Contained in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT during the past ten years,
sent _free of charge_ to any address. MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New
York.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION.

$2.50 A YEAR. SINGLE COPIES, 25 CTS.


This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first, day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
