
ACTION OF FLUORINE UPON A FEW ORGANIC COMPOUNDS.

_Chloroform._--When chloroform is saturated with fluorine, and
subsequently boiled, carbon tetrafluoride, hydrofluoric acid and
chlorine are evolved. If a drop of chloroform is agitated in a glass
tube with excess of fluorine, a violent explosion suddenly occurs,
accompanied by a flash of flame, and the tube is shattered to pieces.
The reaction is very lively when fluorine is evolved in the midst of a
quantity of chloroform, a persistent flame burns beneath the surface
of the liquid, carbon is deposited, and fluorides of hydrogen and
carbon are evolved together with chlorine.

_Methyl chloride_ is decomposed by fluorine, even at -23 deg., with
production of a yellow flame, deposition of carbon, and liberation of
fluorides of hydrogen and carbon and free chlorine. With the vapor of
methyl chloride, as pointed out in the description of the
electrolysis, violent explosions occur.

_Ethyl alcohol_ vapor at once takes fire in fluorine gas, and the
liquid is decomposed with explosive violence without deposition of
carbon. Aldehyde is formed to a considerable extent during the
reaction.

_Acetic acid_ and _benzene_ are both decomposed with violence, their
cold vapors burn in fluorine, and when the latter is bubbled through
the liquids themselves, flashes of flame, and often most dangerous
explosions, occur. In the case of benzene, carbon is deposited, and
with both liquids fluorides of hydrogen and carbon are evolved.
_Aniline_ likewise takes fire in fluorine, and deposits a large
quantity of carbon, which, however, if the fluorine is in excess,
burns away completely to carbon tetrafluoride.

Such are the main outlines of these later researches of M. Moissan,
and they cannot fail to impress those who read them with the
prodigious nature of the forces associated with those minutest of
entities, the chemical atoms, as exhibited at their maximum, in so far
as our knowledge at present goes, in the case of the element
fluorine.--_Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR THE ESTIMATION OF FAT IN MILK.

By E. MOLISABI.


[Illustration]

The author, after criticising the various methods for estimating fat
in milk which have been proposed from time to time, agrees with Stokes
(_Analyst_, 1885, p. 48), Eustace Hill (_Analyst_, 1891, p. 67), and
Bondzynsky (_Landwirth Jahrb. der Schweiz_, 1889), that the method of
Werner Schmid is the simplest, most rapid, and convenient hitherto
introduced. The conditions tending to inaccuracy are: The employment
of ether containing alcohol; boiling the mixture of milk and acid too
long, when a caramel-like body is formed, soluble in ether; the
difficulty of reading off the volume of ether left in the tube, owing
to the gradations of the instrument being obscured by the flocculent
layer of casein; when only a portion of the ether is used, fat may be
left behind in the acid mixture, as shown by Allen (_Chem. Zeit._,
1891, p. 331). The author believes that by the invention of the simple
apparatus represented in the accompanying figure, he has rendered the
process both accurate and convenient. This consists of a flask B of
about 75 c.c. capacity, which has a glass tap fused on, with two
capillary tubes attached, the one passing upward, the other downward.
The neck of flask B is ground into the neck of flask A, which holds
about 90 c.c. Either of the flasks can be placed in communication with
the external air by the opening _a_. The ether must be previously
washed with one or two tenths of its volume of water, to remove traces
of alcohol. The operation is performed as follows: 10 c.c. of well
mixed milk are weighed in (or measured into) flask A, 10 c.c. of
hydrochloric acid added, and the mixture heated to boiling on an
asbestos sheet. The boiling must not exceed a minute and a half, the
fluid being shaken from time to time, and not allowed to become of a
deeper color than a dark brown [not black]. The flask is cooled, and
25 c.c. of ether added. The two flasks are connected as shown in the
figure, the tap closed, and the whole shaken for a few minutes, the
flask being vented two or three times by the opening _a_. The
apparatus is now inverted, allowed to stand five or six minutes, the
tap turned, and the dark acid liquid drawn off into flask B. By a
little shaking of the ether the whole of the acid liquid may be easily
got into the lower flask. The apparatus is again inverted, then
separated, 10 c.c. of ether are introduced into the flask B, the tap
closed, and the fluids well shaken. When the ether layer is distinct,
the acid liquor is run off, and the ether solution transferred to A.
The whole of the ether solution is washed in the apparatus two or
three times with a little water, the flask A removed to the water
bath, the ether driven off, the last traces of ether and water being
removed by placing the flask in a drying oven heated from 107 to 110 deg.
C., where it must remain at least twenty minutes. The usual cooling in
the exsiccator and weighing concludes the operation. Examples are
given showing its concordance with the Adams and other recognized
processes. Sour milk, which must be weighed in the flask, can be
conveniently analyzed; also cream, using 5 grammes cream and 10 c.c.
hydrochloric acid. (_Berichte Deutsch. Chem. Gesell._, 24, p.
2204).--_The Analyst._

       *       *       *       *       *




AMERICAN ASSOCIATION--NINTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDEXING
CHEMICAL LITERATURE.[1]

  [Footnote 1: From advance proof sheets of the Proceedings of the
  American Association for the Advancement of Science; Washington
  meeting, 1891.]


The Committee on Indexing Chemical Literature respectfully presents to
the Chemical Section its ninth annual report.

Since our last meeting the following bibliographies have been printed:

1. A Bibliography of Geometrical Isomerism. Accompanying an address on
this subject to the Chemical Section of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science at Indianapolis, August, 1890, by Professor
Robert B. Warder, Vice President. Proceedings A.A.A.S., vol. xxxix.
Salem, 1890. 8vo.

2. A Bibliography of the Chemical Influence of Light, by Alfred
Tuckerman. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections No. 785. Washington,
D.C., 1891. Pp. 22. 8vo.

3. A Bibliography of Analytical Chemistry for the year 1890, by H.
Carrington Bolton. J. Anal. Appl. Chem., v., No. 3. March, 1891.

We chronicle the publication of the following important bibliography:

4. A Guide to the Literature of Sugar. A book of reference for
chemists, botanists, librarians, manufacturers and planters, with
comprehensive subject index. By H. Ling Roth. London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trubner & Co. Limited. 1890. 8vo. Pp xvi-159.

This work contains more than 1,200 titles of books, pamphlets, and
papers relating to sugar. Many of the titles are supplemented with
brief abstracts. The alphabetical author catalogue is followed by a
chronological table and an analytical subject index. The compilation
extends to the beginning of the year 1885, and the author promises a
supplement and possibly an annual guide.

The ambitious work is useful but very incomplete. It does not include
glucose. The author gives a list of fifteen periodicals devoted to
sugar, and omits exactly fifteen more recorded in Bolton's _Catalogue
of Scientific and Technical Periodicals_ (1665-1882). Angelo Sala's
_Saccharologia_ is not named, though mentioned in Roscoe and
Schorlemmer and elsewhere.

Notwithstanding some blemishes, this work is indispensable to chemists
desirous of becoming familiar with the literature of sugar. It is to
be hoped that a second edition brought down to date may be issued by
the author.

5. A Bibliography of Ptomaines accompanies Professor Victor C.
Vaughan's work, Ptomaines and Leucomaines. Philadelphia, 1888. (Pages
296-814.) 8vo.

Chemists will hail with pleasure the announcement that a new
dictionary of solubilities is in progress by a competent hand.
Professor Arthur M. Comey, of Tufts College, College Hill, Mass.,
writes that the work he has undertaken will be as complete as
possible. "The very old matter which forms so large a part of Storer's
Dictionary will be referred to, and in important cases fully given.
Abbreviations will be freely used and formulae will be given instead of
the chemical names of substances, in the body of the book. This is
found to be absolutely necessary in order to bring the work into a
convenient size for use ..., The arrangement will be strictly
alphabetical. References to original papers will be given in all cases
..."

Professor Comey estimates his work will contain over
70,000 entries, and will make a volume of 1,500-1,700 pages.

The following letter from Mr. Howard L. Prince, Librarian of the
United States Patent Office, explains itself:

    WASHINGTON, D.C., February 11, 1891

    _Dr. H Carrington Bolton._
      _University Club, New York, N.Y._:

    DEAR SIR--In response to your request I take pleasure in
    giving you the following information regarding the past
    accomplishments and plans for the future of the Scientific
    Library in the matter of technological indexing.

    The work of indexing periodicals has been carried on in the
    library for some years in a somewhat desultory fashion, taking
    up one journal after another, the object being, apparently, more
    to supply clerks with work than the pursuance of any well
    defined plan. However, one important work has been substantially
    completed, viz., a general index to the whole set of the
    SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and SUPPLEMENT from 1846 to date.

    It is unnecessary for me to point out to you the importance of
    this work, embracing a collection which has held the leading
    place in the line of general information on invention and
    progress, the labor of compiling which has been so formidable
    that no movement in that direction has been attempted by the
    publishers except in regard to the SUPPLEMENT only, and that
    very imperfectly. This index embraces now 184,600 cards, not
    punched, and at present stored in shallow drawers and fastened
    by rubber bands, and of course they are at present unavailable
    for use. There is little prospect of printing this index, and
    I have been endeavoring for some time to throw the index open
    to the public by punching the cards and fastening them with
    guard rods, but as yet have made no perceptible impression
    upon the authorities, although the expense of preparation
    would be only about $70.

    There has also been completed an index to the English journal
    _Engineering_, comprising 84,000 cards, from the beginning to
    date.

    An index to Dingler's _Polytechnisches Journal_ was also
    commenced as long ago as 1878, carried on for six or seven
    years and then dropped. I hope, however, at no remote date, to
    bring this forward to the present time.

    On taking charge of the library I was at once impressed with
    the immense value of the periodical literature on our shelves
    and the great importance of making it more readily accessible,
    and have had in contemplation for some time the beginning of a
    card index to all our periodicals on the same general plan as
    that of Rieth's Repertorium. I have, however, been unable to
    obtain sufficient force to cover the whole ground, but have
    selected about one hundred and fifty journals, notably those
    upon the subjects of chemistry, electricity and engineering,
    both in English and foreign languages, the indexing of which
    has been in progress since the first of January. This number
    includes substantially all the valuable material in our
    possession in the English language, not only journals, but
    transactions of societies, all the electrical journals and
    nearly all the chemical in foreign languages. This index will
    be kept open to the public as soon as sufficient material has
    accumulated. In general plan it will be alphabetical,
    following nearly the arrangement of the periodical portion of
    the surgeon general's catalogue. I shall depart from the
    strictly alphabetical plan sufficiently to group under such
    important subjects as chemistry, electricity, engineering,
    railroads, etc., all the subdivisions of the art, so that the
    electrical investigator, for instance, will not be obliged to
    travel from one end of the alphabet to the other to find the
    divisions of generators, conductors, dynamos, telephones,
    telegraphs, etc., and in the grouping of the classes of
    applied science the office classification of inventions will,
    as a rule, be adhered to, the subdivisions being, of course,
    arranged in alphabetical order under their general head and
    the title of the several articles also arranged alphabetically
    by authors or principal words.

    With many thanks for the kind interest and valuable
    information afforded me, I remain, very truly yours,

                            HOWARD L. PRINCE,
                            Librarian Scientific Library.

The committee much prefers to record completed work than to mention
projects, as the latter sometimes fail. It is satisfactory, however,
to announce that the indefatigable indexer, Dr. Alfred Tuckerman, is
engaged on an extensive Bibliography of Mineral Waters. The chairman
of the committee expects to complete the MS. of a Select Bibliography
of Chemistry during the year, visiting the chief libraries of Europe
for the purpose this summer.

          H. CARRINGTON BOLTON, Chairman.
          F.W. CLARKE,
          ALBERT R. LEEDS,
          ALEXIS A. JULIEN,
          JOHN W. LANGLEY,
          ALBERT B. PRESCOTT.

[Dr. Alfred Tuckerman was added to the committee at the Washington
meeting to fill a vacancy.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FRENCH WINE LAW.


The French wine law (_Journ. Officiel_, July 11, 1891) includes the
following provisions:

Sect. 1. The product of fermentation of the husks of grapes from which
the must has been extracted with water, with or without the addition
of sugar, or mixed with wine in whatever proportion, may only be sold,
or offered for sale, under the name of husk wine or sugared wine.

Sect. 2. The addition of the following substances to wine, husk wine,
sugared wine, or raisin wine will be considered an adulteration:

1. Coloring matters of all descriptions.

2. Sulphuric, nitric, hydrochloric, salicylic, boric acid, or similar
substances.

3. Sodium chloride beyond one gramme per liter.

Sect. 3. The sale of plastered wines, containing more than two grammes
of potassium, or sodium sulphate, is prohibited.

Offenders are subject to a fine of 16 to 500 francs, or to
imprisonment from six days to three months, according to
circumstances.

Barrels or vessels containing plastered wine must have affixed a
notice to that effect in large letters, and the books, invoices, and
bills of lading must likewise bear such notice.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ALLOTROPIC CONDITIONS OF SILVER.


M. Berthelot recently called the attention of the Academy (Paris) to
the memoirs of Carey Lea on the allotropic states of silver, and
exhibited specimens of the color of gold and others of a purple color
sent him by the author. He explained the importance of these results,
which remind us of the work of the ancient alchemists, but he reserved
the question whether these substances are really isomeric states of
silver or complex and condensed compounds, sharing the properties of
the element which constituted the principal mass (97-98 per cent.),
conformably to the facts known in the history of the various carbons,
of the derivatives of red phosphorus, and especially of the varieties
of iron and steel. Between these condensed compounds and the pure
elements the continuous transition of the physical and chemical
properties is often effected by insensible degrees, by a mixture of
definite compounds.

The following letter appears in a recent number of the _Chemical
News_.

_Sir_: In a recently published lecture, Mr. Meldola seems to call in
question the existence of allotropic silver. This opinion does not
appear, however, to be based on any adequate study of the subject, but
to be somewhat conjectural in its nature. No experimental support of
any sort is given, and the only argument offered (if such it can be
called) is that this altered form of silver is analogous to that of
metals whose properties have been greatly changed by being _alloyed_
with small quantities of other metals. Does, then, Mr. Meldola suppose
that a silver alloy can be formed by precipitating silver in the
presence of another metal from an aqueous solution, or that one can
argue from alloys, which are solutions, to molecular compounds or
lakes? Moreover, he has overlooked the fact that allotropic silver can
be obtained in the absence of any metal with which silver is capable
of combining, as in the case of its formation by the action of soda
and dextrine. Silver cannot be alloyed with sodium.

Mr. Meldola cites Prange as having shown that allotropic silver
obtained with the aid of ferrous citrate contains traces of iron, a
fact which was published by me several years earlier, with an
analytical determination of the amount of iron found. Mr. Prange
repeated and confirmed this fact of the presence of iron (in this
particular case), and my other observations generally, and was fully
convinced of the existence of both soluble and insoluble allotropic
silver. Mr. Meldola's quotation of Mr. Prange would not convey this
impression to the reader.

Of the many forms of allotropic silver, two of the best marked are the
blue and the yellow.

Blue allotropic silver is formed in many reactions with the aid of
many wholly different reagents. To suppose that each of these many
substances is capable of uniting in minute quantity with silver to
produce in all cases an identical result, the same product with
identical color and properties, would be an absurdity.

Gold-colored allotropic silver in thin films is converted by the
slightest pressure to normal silver. A glass rod drawn over it with a
gentle pressure leaves a gray line behind it of ordinary silver. If
the film is then plunged into solution of potassium ferricyanide it
becomes red or blue, while the lines traced show by their different
reaction that they consist of ordinary silver. Heat, electricity, and
contact with strong acids produce a similar change to ordinary gray
silver.

These reactions afford the clearest proof that the silver is in an
allotropic form. To account for them on suppositions like Mr.
Meldola's would involve an exceedingly forced interpretation, such as
no one who carefully repeated my work could possibly entertain.

I am, etc.,

  M. CAREY LEA.
  Philadelphia, October 22, 1891.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

Architects and Builders Edition.

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
ARCHITECTURE, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building
or improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before
them in this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best
examples_ from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have
won for it the LARGEST CIRCULATION of any Architectural publication
in the world.

A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of
charge, sent to any address.

    MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
    361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

Cyclopedia of Receipts,

NOTES AND QUERIES.

----------------------------------------

650 PAGES. PRICE $5.

----------------------------------------

This splendid work contains a careful compilation of the most useful
Receipts and Replies given in the Notes and Queries of correspondents
as published in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN during nearly half a century
past; together with many valuable and important additions.

OVER TWELVE THOUSAND selected receipts are here collected; Nearly
every branch of the useful arts being represented. It is by far the
most comprehensive volume of the kind ever placed before the public.

The work may be regarded as the product of the studies and practical
experience of the ablest chemists and workers in all parts of the
world; the information given being of the highest value, arranged and
condensed in concise form, convenient for ready use.

Almost every inquiry that can be thought of, relating to formulae used
