  Maximum doses                        2.5

  Can eroded.

_Serial No. 569._--Sample of canned peas, bought of T.B. Vaure, July
11, 1890. Labeled: Petites Pois, P. Emillien, Bordeaux.

                                      Per Cent.
  Copper oxide                         0.0294
  Grains per pound                     2.06
  Equivalent to copper sulphate        3.95
  Tin dioxide                          0.0068
  Grains per pound                     0.48
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      0.6
  Minimum doses                        9.6
  Maximum doses                        1.2

  No visible erosion.

_Serial No. 570._--Sample of canned mushroom, bought of T.B. Vaure,
July 11, 1890. Labeled Champignons de Choix. Boston fils. Paris.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.02
  Grains per pound                     1.40
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      1.76
  Minimum doses                       28.00
  Maximum doses                        3.50

  Inner coating highly discolored.

_Serial No. 571._--Sample of canned blackberries, bought of T.B.
Vaure, July 11, 1890. Labeled: Lawton Blackberries. Curtice Bros. Co.,
Rochester, N.Y.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.0114
  Grains per pound                     0.80
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      1.01
  Minimum doses                       16.00
  Maximum doses                        2.00

  Inner coating eroded.

_Serial No. 572._--Sample of canned blueberries, bought of T.B. Vaure,
July 11, 1890. Labeled: Blueberries. Eagle Brand, packed by A. & R.
Loggie, Black Brook, N.B.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.03
  Grains per pound                     2.10
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      2.64
  Minimum doses                       42.00
  Maximum doses                        5.30

  Can badly eroded.

_Serial No. 574._--Sample of canned salmon, bought of T.B. Vaure. July
11, 1890. Labeled: Best Fresh Columbia River Salmon, Eagle Canning
Co., Astoria Clatsop Co., Oregon.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.0134
  Grains per pound                     0.94
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      1.18
  Minimum doses                       18.90
  Maximum doses                        2.30

  Inner coating eroded.

_Serial No. 578._--Sample of canned pears, received of Mr. Edward
Bethel, July 29, 1890. Labeled: Bartlett Pears. Solan's Brand, packed
in Solano Co., California.

                                      Juice.    Fruit.
                                      Per Ct.   Per Ct.
  Tin dioxide                          0.0074    0.0074
  Grains per pound                     0.5180    0.5180
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      0.65      0.65
  Minimum doses                       10.40     10.40
  Maximum doses                        1.30      1.30

  Can eroded.

_Serial No. 579._--Sample of canned peaches, received of Edward
Bethel, July 29. 1890. Labeled: Peaches, Wm. Maxwell, Baltimore,
U.S.A.

                                    Juice.    Fruit.
                                    Per Ct.   Per Ct.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0324    0.0414
  Grains per pound                   2.2680    2.8980
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    2.85      3.65
  Minimum doses                     45.60     58.40
  Maximum doses                      5.70      7.30

  Can badly eroded.


_Serial No. 580._--Sample of canned blackberries, received of Edward
Bethel, July 29, 1890. Labeled: Blackberries, Clipper Brand, Wm.
Munson & Sons, Baltimore, Md.

                                   Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.06
  Grains per pound                   4.20
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    5.28
  Minimum doses                     84.00
  Maximum doses                     10.60

  Can badly eroded.


_Serial No. 581._--Sample of canned cherries, received of Edward
Bethel, July 29, 1890. Labeled: Red Cherries, Cloverdale Brand, G.C.
Mournaw & Co., Cloverdale, Va.

                                    Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0414
  Grains per pound                   2.8980
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    3.65
  Minimum doses                     58.40
  Maximum doses                      7.30

  Can badly eroded.


_Serial No. 582._--Sample of canned pumpkin, received of Edward
Bethel, July 29, 1890. Labeled: Royal Pumpkin, Urbana Canning Co.,
Urbana, O.

                                   Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0184
  Grains per pound                   1.2990
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    1.62
  Minimum doses                     25.90
  Maximum doses.                     3.20

  Can eroded.


_Serial No. 583._--Sample of canned baked sweet potatoes, received of
Edward Bethel, July 29, 1890. Labeled: Tennessee Baked Sweet Potatoes,
Capital Canning Co., Nashville, Tenn.

                                   Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0132
  Grains per pound                   0.92
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    1.16
  Minimum doses                     18.50
  Maximum doses                      2.30

  Can eroded.


_Serial No. 584._--Sample of canned peas, received of Edward Bethel,
July 29, 1890. Labeled: Marrowfat Peas, Parson Bros., Aberdeen,
Maryland.

                                   Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0044
  Grains per pound                   0.30
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    0.38
  Minimum doses                      6.20
  Maximum doses                      0.80

  Can slightly eroded.


_Serial No. 585._--Sample of string beans, received of Edward Bethel,
July 29, 1890. Labeled: String Beans. Packed by H.P. Hemingway & Co.,
Baltimore City, Md.

                                   Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0154
  Grains per pound                   1.08
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    1.36
  Minimum doses                     21.70
  Maximum doses                      2.70

  Can eroded.


_Serial No. 586._--Sample of canned salmon, received of Edward Bethel,
July 29, 1890. Labeled: Puget Sound Fresh Salmon, Puget Sound Salmon
Co., W.T.

                                   Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0044
  Grains per pound                   0.30
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    0.38
  Minimum doses                      0.20
  Maximum doses                      0.80

  Can slightly eroded.


_Serial No. 587._--Sample of condensed milk, received of Edward
Bethel, July 29, 1890. Labeled: Borden's Condensed Milk. The Gail
Borden Eagle Brand, New York Condensed Milk Co., 71 Hudson Street, New
York.

  Tin dioxide none.

  No visible erosion.


_Serial No. 592._--Sample of canned pineapples, bought of Mr. Brown,
Fifth Avenue, August 4, 1890. Labeled: Pineapples, First Quality.
Packed by Martin Wagner & Co., Baltimore, Md.

                                    Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                         0.0098
  Grains per pound                    0.6860
  Equivalent to stannous chloride     0.8640
  Minimum doses                      13.6
  Maximum doses                       1.7

  Can eroded


_Serial No. 593._--Sample of canned pineapples, bought of Mr. Brown,
Fifth Avenue, August 4, 1890. Labeled: Florida Pineapple, Oval Brand.
Extra Quality. A Booth Packing Co., Baltimore, Md.

                                   Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                        0.0158
  Grains per pound                   1.11
  Equivalent to stannous chloride    1.40
  Minimum doses                     22.40
  Maximum doses                      2.80

  Can eroded.

--_Jour. Amer. Chem. Soc_.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW PROCESS FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF CHROMATES.

By J. MASSIGNON and E. VATEL.


The ordinary method of manufacturing the bichromates consists in
making an intimate mixture of finely pulverized chrome ore, lime in
large excess, potash or soda, or corresponding salts of these two
bases. This mixture is placed in a reverberatory furnace, and
subjected to a high temperature, while plenty of air is supplied.
During the operation the mass is constantly puddled to bring all the
particles into contact with the hot air, so that all the sesquioxide
of chromium of the ore will be oxidized. After the oxidation is
finished, the mass is taken from the furnace and cooled; the
bichromate is obtained by lixiviation, treated with sulphuric acid and
crystallized. This method of manufacture has several serious
objections.

The authors, after research and experiment, have devised a new
process, following an idea suggested by Pelouze.

The ore very finely pulverized is mixed with chloride of calcium or
lime, or carbonate of calcium, in such proportions that all the base,
proceeding from the caustic lime or the carbonate of calcium put in
the mixture, shall be in slightly greater quantity than is necessary
to transform into chromate of calcium all the sesquioxide of chromium
of the ore, when this sesquioxide will be by oxidation changed into
the chromic acid state. The chloride of calcium employed in proportion
of one equivalent for three of the total calcium is most convenient
for the formation of oxychloride of calcium. If the mixture is made
with carbonate of lime (pulverized chalk), it will not stiffen in the
air; but if lime and carbonate of calcium are employed at the same
time, the mass stiffens like cement, and can be moulded into bricks or
plates. The best way to operate is to mix first a part of the ore and
well pulverized chalk, and slake it with the necessary concentrated
chloride of calcium solution; then to make up a lime dough, and mix
the two, moulding quickly. The loaves or moulds thus formed are
partially dried in the air, then completely dried in a furnace at a
moderate temperature, and finally baked, to effect the reduction of
the carbonate of calcium into caustic lime. It is only necessary then
to expose the loaves to the air at the ordinary temperature, for the
oxidation of the sesquioxide of chromium will go on by degrees without
any manipulation, by the action of the atmospheric air, the matter
thus prepared having a sufficient porosity to allow the air free
access to the interior of the mass. Under ordinary conditions the
oxidation will be completed in a month. The division of this
work--mixing, slaking or thinning, roasting or baking, and subjection
to the air--is analogous to the work of a tile or brick works. The
advance of the oxidation can be followed by the appearance of the
matter, which after baking presents a deep green color, which passes
from olive green into yellow, according to the progress of calcium
chromate formation. When the oxidation is completed, the mass
contains: Chromate of calcium, chloride of calcium, carbonate of lime
and caustic lime in excess, sesquioxide of iron and the gangue, part
of which is united with the lime. This mass is washed with water by
the ordinary method of lixiviation, and there is obtained a
concentrated solution containing all the chloride of calcium, and a
small quantity only of chromate of calcium, the latter being about 100
times less soluble in water.

This solution can be used in the following ways:

1. It can be concentrated and used in preparing a new charge, the
small quantity of calcium chromate present being an assistance, or:

2. It can be used for making chromate of lead (chrome yellow), by
precipitating the calcium chromate with a lead salt; this being a very
economical process for the manufacture of this color.

The mass after lixiviation, being treated with a solution of sulphate
or carbonate of potash or soda, will yield chromate of potash or soda,
and by the employment of sulphuric acid, the corresponding
bichromates. The solutions are then filtered, to get rid of the
insoluble deposits, concentrated, and crystallized.

If, instead of chromate or bichromate of potash or soda, chromic acid
is sought, the mass after lixiviation is treated with sulphuric acid,
and the chromic acid is obtained directly without any intermediate
steps.

This process has the following advantages:

1. The oxidation can be effected at the ordinary temperature, thus
saving expense in fuel.

2. The heavy manual labor is avoided.

3. The loss of potash and soda by volatilization and combination with
the gangue is entirely avoided.

4. It is not actually necessary to use rich ores; silicious ores can
be used.

5. The intimate mixture of the material before treatment being made
mechanically, the puddling is avoided, and in consequence a greater
proportion of the sesquioxide of chromium in the ores is
utilized.--_Bull. Soc. Chem._ 5, 371.

       *       *       *       *       *




A VIOLET COLORING MATTER FROM MORPHINE.


A violet coloring matter is formed, together with other substances, by
boiling for 100 hours in a reflux apparatus a mixture of morphine
(seven grammes), p-nitrosodimethylaniline hydrochloride (five
grammes), and alcohol (500 c.c.). The solution gradually assumes a red
brown color, and a quantity of tetramethyldiamidoazobenzene separates
in a crystalline state. After filtering from the latter, the alcoholic
solution is evaporated to dryness, and the residue boiled with water,
a deep purple colored solution being so obtained. This solution, which
contains at least two coloring matters, is evaporated almost to
dryness, acidulated with hydrochloric acid, and then rendered alkaline
with sodium hydrate, the coloring matters being precipitated and the
unchanged morphine remaining in solution. The precipitate is collected
on a filter, washed with dilute sodium hydrate, dried, and extracted
in the cold with amyl alcohol, which dissolves out a violet coloring
matter, and leaves in the residue a blue coloring matter or mixture of
coloring matters. The violet coloring matter is obtained in a pure
state on evaporating the amyl alcohol. Its platinochloride has the
formula PtCl_{4}.C_{25}H_{29}N_{3}O_{4}.HCl, and has the
characteristic properties of the platinochlorides of the majority of
alkaloids. The coloring matter, of which the free base has the
formula--

    (C_{6}H_{4}N(CH_{3})_{2})--N==(C_{17}H_{19}NO_{4})

forms an amorphous mass with a bronze-like luster; it is sparingly
soluble in water, freely so in alcohol, its alcoholic solution being
strongly dichroic; its green colored solution in concentrated
sulphuric acid becomes successively blue and violet on dilution with
water; it dyes silk, wool, and gun cotton, but is not fast to light.

Morphine violet is the first true coloring matter obtained from the
natural alkaloids, the morphine blue of Chastaing and Barillot (Compt.
Rend., 105, 1012) not being a coloring matter properly so called.
--_P. Cazeneuve, Bull. Soc. Chim._

       *       *       *       *       *




LIQUID BLUE FOR DYEING.


The new liquid blue of M. Dornemann is intended to avoid the formation
of clots, etc., which lead to irregularity in shade, if not to the
formation of spots on the textile. In addition to accomplishing this
end, the process is accelerated by subjecting the blue to a previous
treatment.

In this preliminary treatment of the blue, the object is to remove the
sulphur which retards the solution of the color.

The liquid is prepared as follows: The pigment, previously dried at
150 deg. C., is crushed and finely ground, and contains about 47 per cent.
of coloring matter; to this is added 53 per cent. of water.

To this mixture, or slurry, the inventor adds an indefinite quantity
of glucose and glycerine of 43 deg. B., having a specific gravity of
1.425. It is then ready for use.--_Le Moniteur de la Teinture_.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW CATALOGUE OF VALUABLE PAPERS

Contained in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT during the past ten years,
sent _free of charge_ to any address. MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New
York.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION.

$2.50 A YEAR. SINGLE COPIES, 25 CTS.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
ARCHITECTURE, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building
or improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before
them in this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best
examples_ from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have
won for it the LARGEST CIRCULATION of any Architectural publication in
the world.

A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of
charge, sent to any address.

              MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
              361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUILDING PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.

In connection with the publication of the BUILDING EDITION of the
