also the residues of permanganate and oxalic acid left in the
measuring flasks, and the rinsings from these, are all brought
together in the same beaker glass. Finally, the amount of solution
No. 3 required to decompose the excess of oxalic acid is determined.
If we subtract from the amount thus found the quantity of permanganate
required to equalize solutions Nos. 1 and 2 (previously ascertained),
we shall have the amount of permanganate actually reduced by the
nitric oxide, according to the reaction:

  6KMnO_{4} + 10NO = 3K_{2}O + 6MnO + 5N_{2}O_{5};

in other words, on the basis that one molecule of potassium
permanganate will oxidize one and two-thirds molecules of nitric
oxide:

  (KMnO_{4} = 1-2/3 NO).

The method of using the apparatus is simple. The nitrate is placed in
B, and the joints made tight, except that at _f_, which is left open.
A current of carbon dioxide is passed through the apparatus until all
of the air has been displaced. Connection is then made at _f_, and
soon afterward the current of carbon dioxide is shut off at _d_.

The flask, B, is now heated as long as may be necessary in order to
produce, on cooling, the diminished pressure required for the
introduction of the ferrous chloride and hydrochloric acid. Before
removing the flame, the joint at _f_ is closed to prevent the return
of the permanganate solution.

As soon as the flask, B, has become sufficiently cool, the ferrous
chloride and hydrochloric acid are introduced through the tube, _a_
(which has been full of water from the first), in the same manner and
quantities as in the well-known Tiemann-Schulze method.

The pinch cock at _d_ is then opened, and the apparatus allowed to
fill with carbon dioxide. When the pressure has become sufficient to
force the gas through the solution of permanganate, the pinch cock at
_f_ is removed. It should be opened only slightly and with great
caution at first, unless one is certain that the pressure is
sufficient. If the pressure is insufficient, the fact will be made
apparent by a rise of the permanganate in the small internal tube.

The flow of carbon dioxide is now reduced to a very slow current, or
entirely cut off. The contents of B are slowly heated, until the
decomposition of the nitrate is complete and the greater part of the
nitric oxide has been expelled, when the apparatus is again closed at
_f_ and _d_, and allowed to cool. The tube, _a_, is then washed out,
by the introduction through it into B of a few cubic centimeters of
strong hydrochloric acid.

The process of filling the apparatus with carbon dioxide, and of
heating the contents of B, is repeated. When it becomes apparent, from
the light color of the liquid in B, that all of the nitric oxide has
been expelled from it, the current of carbon dioxide is increased and
the heating discontinued. Care must be taken, however, not to admit
too strong a current of carbon dioxide, lest some of the nitric oxide
should be forced unabsorbed through the permanganate solution. It is
also necessary, for the same reason, to avoid too rapid heating during
the decomposition of the nitrate.

When all of the nitric oxide has been forced into the solution of
permanganate, the determination is made in the manner already
described.

To test the method, nine determinations were made with quantities of
pure nitrate of potassium varying from 100 to 200 milligrammes. The
maximum difference between the volumes of permanganate actually used
and those calculated was 0.05 c.c., while the main difference was
0.036 c.c. The measurements of the permanganate were made from a
burette which had been carefully calibrated. We also made a number of
determinations, using a solution of manganous sulphate in the place of
the oxalic acid. The advantage of this method lies in the fact that it
is not necessary to dissolve the oxide which is precipitated upon the
glass within the tubes, E, E, since, in the presence of an excess of
permanganate, the reduction by nitric oxide extends only to the
formation of MnO_{2}; also in the fact that the solution of manganous
sulphate is more stable than that of oxalic acid. A solution of the
sulphate having been once carefully standardized, can be used for a
long time to determine the value of permanganate solutions.

The details of the method are as follows: A solution of manganous
sulphate slightly stronger than No. 1 is prepared.

The difference between 100 c.c. of it and 100 c.c. of No. 1 is
ascertained, according to the method of Volhard, by means of solution
No. 3.

The contents of E, E, together with the rinsings from the tubes, are
poured into a capacious flask. 100 c.c. of the manganous sulphate and
a few drops of nitric acid are then added, and the whole boiled.
Finally, the excess of manganous sulphate is determined, in the manner
described by Volhard, by means of solution No. 3. Subtracting from the
total amount of permanganate thus used the quantity required to
equalize the 100 c.c. of solution No. 1 and the 100 c.c. of the
manganous sulphate, we shall have the quantity of permanganate reduced
by the nitric oxide.

It must, however, be remembered that the value of solution No. 3 is
now to be calculated on the basis of the equation KMnO_{2} + NO =
KNO_{3} + MnO_{2}. One molecule of permanganate equals one molecule of
nitric oxide when manganous sulphate is used, since no part of the
permanganate employed in this method is reduced below the superoxide
condition. In other words, solution No. 3 now represents only
three-fifths as much nitric acid as it does when oxalic acid is used.

The results obtained by this method were moderately satisfactory, but
not quite so exact as those obtained when oxalic acid was used. A
series of four determinations gave differences, between the volumes of
permanganate calculated and used, of 0.05 to 0.15 c.c.

The principal objection to the method lies in the difficulty of
determining, in the presence of the brown oxide of manganese, the
exact point at which the oxidation is complete.

The carbon dioxide generator, A, was devised by us to take the place
of the ordinary generators, in which marble is used. We have found
that a submersion of twenty hours in boiling water does not suffice to
completely remove the air which, as is well known, is contained in
ordinary marble; hence some other substance must be employed as a
source of the gas. In the apparatus which we are about to describe,
the acid carbonate of sodium is used.

It consists of a long, narrow cylinder (450 x 60 mm.); a tightly
fitting rubber stopper, through which three tubes pass, as shown in
the figure; a small cylinder, F, containing mercury; and a sulphuric
acid reservoir, G.

The tube, _g_, is drawn out to a fine point at the end and curved, so
that the acid which is delivered into A falls upon and runs down the
outside of the tube. The tube, h, dips under the mercury in F. G and
_g_ are connected by means of a long piece of rubber tubing which is
supplied with a screw pinch cock.

The apparatus is made to give any required pressure by raising or
lowering G and F; but the elevation of G, as compared with that of F,
should always be such that the gas will force its way through h rather
than g. The upper part of the cylinder, F, is filled with cotton wool
to prevent loss of mercury by spattering.

The material placed in A consists of a saturated solution of acid
carbonate of sodium, to which an excess of the solid salt has been
added. The sulphuric acid is the ordinary dilute. The apparatus, if
properly regulated, serves its purpose very well. The principal
precaution to be observed in using it is to avoid a too sudden
relieving of the pressure, which would, of course, result in the
introduction of an unnecessarily large quantity of sulphuric acid into
A.

       *       *       *       *       *




WATER OF CRYSTALLIZATION.

By W.W.J. NICOL, M.A., D.Sc.


When a hydrated salt is dissolved, does it retain its water of
crystallization, or does this latter cease to be distinguishable from
the solvent water? Both views have found advocates among chemists who
have looked at the question of solution, and both have been supported
by arguments more or less to the point. But among the possible means
of solving this question there is one which has entirely escaped the
notice of those interested in the subject. And those who hold that
water of crystallization exists in solution have been entirely
oblivious of the fact that, while they are ready to accept the results
of the modern science of thermo-chemistry, and to employ them to
support their views on hydration, yet these very results, if correct,
prove without a shadow of a doubt that water of crystallization does
not exist in solution.

The proof is so clear and self-evident when once one's attention is
directed to it, that, though I intend to develop it more fully on
another occasion, I feel that it is better to publish an outline of it
at once.

Thomsen has found that the heat of neutralization of the soluble bases
of the alkalies and alkaline earths with sulphuric acid has a mean
value of 31.150 c. within very narrow limits. When hydrochloric or
nitric acid is employed, the value is 27.640 c., also within very
narrow limits. Now, this agreement of the six bases in their behavior
with sulphuric acid, much more of the seven bases with both HNO_{3}
and HCl, is so close that it cannot be regarded as accidental, but, in
the words of Meyer, the heat of formation of a salt in aqueous
solution is a quantity made up of two parts, one a constant for the
base, the other for the acid. But of the twenty salts thus formed,
some are anhydrous in the solid state, others have water of
crystallization, up to ten molecules in the case of Na_{2}SO_{4}. If
water of crystallization exists in solution, it will be necessary to
suppose that this agreement is accidental, which is absurd, as a
glance at the probabilities will show. Thomsen himself expressly
states that he regards the dissolved state as one in which the
conditions are comparable for all substances; this would be impossible
if water of crystallization were present.

A still stronger proof is afforded by the "_avidity_" of Thomsen or
the "_affinity_" of Ostwald; both have worked on the subject, taking
no account of water of crystallization, and the results, e.g., for
H_{2}SO_{4} and HCl with NaHO, where water of crystallization _may_
come in, are entirely confirmed by Ostwald's results on inversion and
etherification, where there can be no water of crystallization.

The proof is complete, water of crystallization cannot be attached to
the salt in solution, or if it is, no heat is evolved on union more
than with solvent water. The alternative is to suppose that the whole
of the above thermo-chemical results are coincidences.

       *       *       *       *       *




ALPINE FLOWERS IN THE PYRENEES.


Bagneres De Luchon, in the department of the Haute Garonne, is a gay
town of some 5,000 inhabitants. A friend told me that he once suffered
so much from the heat there in June, that he determined never to go to
the Pyrenees again. We were there the second week in June, and we
suffered more from rain and cold, and were very glad of a fire in the
evening.

Except to the south, in the direction of the Porte de Venasque, one of
the chief mule passes into Spain during summer, where there are fine
snow-capped mountains, the scenery from the town is not grand, but it
is within easy reach of the wildest parts of the Pyrenees.

It is the nearest town to the Maladetta, their highest point, in which
the Garonne rises, and among whose rocks is one of the last
strongholds of the ibex or bouquetin, the "wild goat" mentioned by
Homer. Eagles and vultures are to be seen sailing about the sky near
Luchon nearly every day, and bears, which in the Pyrenees are neither
mythical nor formidable, descend to within a few miles of the town
after wild strawberries, which abound there.

We heard of two female peasants lately gathering wild strawberries who
were suddenly confronted with competitors for the spoil in the shape
of a she bear and two cubs. It was doubtful whether man or beast was
the more surprised. The cubs began to growl, but their dam gave both
of them a box on the ears for their bad manners, and led them away. As
for flowers, the neighborhood of Luchon has the reputation, perhaps
not undeserved, of being the most flowery part of the Pyrenees.

We went the usual expeditions from the town, in spite of the weather,
and I will try to remember what plants we noticed in each of them. The
first trip was to the Vallee du Lys. In spite of the spelling, the
name suggests lilies of the valley, but we are told that lys is an old
word meaning water, and that the valley took its name from the number
of cataracts, not from lilies, there.

However this may be, a lily grows there in great profusion, and was
just coming into flower toward the middle of June. It is the Lis de
St. Bruno (Anthericum liliastrum), a plant worthy of giving its name
to a valley of which it is a characteristic feature. Still more
conspicuous at the time when we were there were the Narcissus
poeticus, abundant all round Luchon, but already past in the low
meadows near the town, but higher up, at an elevation of about 4,000
ft., it was quite at its best, and whitened the ground over many
acres.

I looked about for varieties, but failed to detect any special
character by which it could be referred to any of the varietal names
given in catalogues, and concluded that it was N. poeticus pure and
simple. Pulmonarias were abundant along the road, as also in the whole
region of the Pyrenees, the character of the leaves varying greatly,
some being spotless, some full of irregular white patches, others with
well defined round spots. They varied, too, from broad heart-shaped to
narrow lanceolate, and I soon concluded that it was hopeless to
attempt any division of the class founded upon the leaves.

Besides the beautiful flowers of Scabious mentioned before, a new
feature in the meadows here was the abundance of Astrantia major. A
pure white Hesperis matronalis was also common, but I saw no purple
forms of it. Geranium phaeum also grew everywhere in the fields, the
color of the flower varying a good deal. Hepaticas were not so common
by the roadside here as at Eaux Bonnes, but are generally distributed.
Many of them have their leaves beautifully marbled, and I selected and
brought away a few of the best, in hopes that they may keep this
character. I was struck everywhere by the one-crowned appearance of
the Hepaticas, as if in their second year from seed.

On the mountains, where they were still in flower, I did not find the
colors mixed, but on one mountain they would be all white, on another
all blue. I do not recollect to have seen any pink. Meconopsis
cambrica is common in the Pyrenees. I observe that in Grenier's
"French Flora" the color of the flower is given as "jaune orange," but
I never saw it either in England or in France with orange flowers till
I saw it covering a bank by the side of the road to the Vallee du Lys.
I was too much struck by it to delay securing a plant or two, which
was lucky, for when we returned every flower had been gathered by some
rival admirers.

Another expedition from Luchon is to the Lac d'Oo. This, too, is
famous for flowers; but especially so is a high valley called Val
d'Esquierry, 2,000 ft. or 3,000 ft. above the village d'Oo, at which
the carriage road ends. Botanists call this the garden of the
Pyrenees, and, of course, I was most anxious to see it.

The landlord of our hotel was quite enthusiastic in his description of
the treat in store for me, enumerating a long catalogue of colors, and
indicating with his hand, palm downward, the height from the ground at
which I was to expect to see each color. I was afterward told that he
had never been to the famous valley, being by no means addicted to
climbing mountains.

During the first part of the drive from Luchon we saw hanging from the
rocks by the roadside large masses of Saponaria ocymoides, varying
much in the shade of color of the flowers. This is a plant which I
find it better to grow from cuttings than from seed. The best shades
of color are in this way preserved, and the plants are more flowery
and less straggling. As we got near the end of the carriage road, the
meadows became more crowded with flowers known in England only in
gardens.

Besides such plants as Geranium pyrenaicum growing everywhere on the
banks, the fields were full of a light purple geranium--I think
sylvaticum. Here, too, I noticed Meconopsis cambrica with orange
flowers. Narcissus poeticus was also there, and so were some splendid
thistles, large and rich in color. But the most remarkable part of the
coloring in the meadows was produced by different shades of Viola
cornuta carpeting the ground. We noticed this plant in many parts of
the Pyrenees, but here especially.

From the end of the road I started with a guide for the promised
garden of the Val d'Esquierry. By the side of the steep and winding
path I noticed Ramondia pyrenaica--the only place I saw it in the
Luchon district. Other notable plants were a quantity of Anemone
alpina of dwarf growth and very large flowers, covering a green knoll
near a stream. A little beyond, Aster alpinus was in flower, of a
bright color, which I can never get it to show in gardens. These, with
the exception of a few saxifrages and daffodils of the variety
muticus, were about the last flowers I saw there.

[Illustration: GROUP OF ALPINE FLOWERS]

Promise of flowers there was in abundance. Aconites, I suppose
napellus, and also that form of A. lycoctonum with the large leaves
known as pyrenaicum, were just enough grown to recognize. The large
white Asphodel, called by French botanists A. albus, but better known
in gardens as A. ramosus, which grows everywhere in the Pyrenees, and
the coarse shoots of Gentiana lutea were just showing.

Further on the daffodils were only just putting their noses through
the yellow dead grass, which the snow had hardly left and was again
beginning to whiten, for the rain, which had been coming down in
torrents ever since I left the carriage and had wet me through, had
now changed to snow. Still I went on, in spite of the bitter cold,
hoping that I should come to some hyperborean region where the flowers
would be all bright; but my guide at last undeceived me, and convinced
me that we were far too early, so we went down again, wiser and
sadder, and I advise my friends who wish to see the Val d'Esquierry in
its beauty not to visit it before July at the earliest.

I have still one mountain walk to describe, a far more successful one,
but it must be deferred till another week.--_C. Wolley Dod, in the
Garden._

       *       *       *       *       *


Turtle shells may be softened by hot water, and if compressed in this
state by screws in iron or brass moulds, may be bent into any shape,
the moulds being then plunged into cold water.

       *       *       *       *       *




A CENTURY PLANT IN BLOOM.


A huge agave, or century plant, is now blooming at Auburn, N.Y. A few
days ago the great plant became tinged with a delicate yellowish-white
color, as its 4,000 buds began to develop into the full-blown flowers,
whose penetrating fragrance, not unlike that of the pond lily, now
attracts swarms of bees and other insects. The plant was purchased in
1837 by the owner, and was then twelve years old. For half a century
the agave has lain around his greenhouses in company with several
others, and no special care has been taken of it, except to protect it
somehow in winter, that it might be fresh for the next summer's
growth. The plant has always been a hardy specimen, and required
little care. Its whole life, now speedily approaching a termination in
the fulfillment of the end of its existence--flowering--has been a
sluggish course. Its growth has been steady and its development
gradual. Occasionally it has thrust out a spiked leaf until, in size,
it became greater than its fellow plants and took on the likeness of
an enormous cabbage which had been arrested in its development and
failed to attain perfection. Early last April its appearance began to
undergo a decided change. Its resemblance to a cabbage lessened, and
it began to look like a giant asparagus plant. On April 12, the great
fleshy leaves, massed together so as to impress the imprint of their
spines upon one another, began to unfold, and a thick, succulent bud
burst up amid the leaves. Slowly the stalk developed from the bud and
assumed gigantic proportions. Green scales appeared in regular
arrangement about the stalk, marking the points from which lateral
branches were to spring. The thick stalk, tender and brittle at first
as new asparagus, became tough and hard enough to resist a knife, and
its surface assumed the gritty character of the leaves of the plant.
The low roof of the hothouse became an obstruction to further growth,
and had to be removed. Lateral limbs were, at a later period, thrust
out in great numbers, each of them bearing small branches, as do
strawberry plants, on which hang sprays of buds in bunches of from
three to ten, making in all many hundreds, all waiting for the
completion and blooming of the topmost buds. The inflorescence of the
century plant is peculiar, and the appearance of flowers on the lower
branches may be simultaneous with, or consecutive to, the blossoming
on the upper limbs. With the appearance of the lateral outshoots the
great aloe lost its likeness to asparagus, and at present bears
resemblance to an immense candelabra. The plant is now fully matured,
and has a height of twenty-seven feet. There are thirty-three branches
on the main stem, and, by actual count, one of the lateral limbs was
found to bear 273 perfect buds, some of whose green sepals have
spread, revealing the yellowish-white petals and essential parts of
the plant. The ample panicles crowded with curious blossoms are, as,
indeed, the Greek name of the plant--agave--signifies, wonderful.

There is a pathetic view to be taken of the great plant's present
condition. For years it has been preparing to flower, and the shoot it
has sent up is the dying effort. The blossoms carry in them the life
of new plants, and the old plant dies in giving them birth. It is
commonly supposed that this plant, the _Agave Americana_, or American
aloe, blooms only at the end of 100 years, hence the common name
century plant.

Only two plants are on record among the floriculturists as having
bloomed in New York State. Thirty years ago, a century plant, of which
the Casey aloe was a slip, flowered in the greenhouses of the Van
Rensselaer family at Albany. In 1869, a second plant blossomed at
Rochester. At present, two aloes, one at Albany, the other at
Brooklyn, are reported as giving evidences of approaching maturity.
They are pronounced not American aloes, or century plants, but _Agave
Virginica_, a plant of the same family commonly found in sterile soil
from Virginia to Illinois and south, and blossoming much more
frequently. In Mexico the century plant is turned to practical account
and made a profitable investment to its owners. After the scape has
reached its full growth it is hewn down, and the sap, which fills the
hollow at its base, is ladled out and converted by fermentation into
"agave wine," or "pulque," the favorite drink of the Mexicans. This
pulque, or octli, has an acid resembling that of cider, and a very
disagreeable odor, but the taste is cooling and refreshing. A brandy
distilled from pulque is called "aquardiente," or "mexical." The
plant, by tapping, can be made to yield a quart of sap daily. The
fibers of the leaves when dried furnish a coarse thread known as Pita
flax, and when green are used in Mexico as fodder for cattle. Razor
strops or hones are also made from the leaves, which contain an
abundance of silica and give rise to a very sharp edge on a knife
applied with friction across the surface of the dried leaf.

       *       *       *       *       *




CREOSOTE A SPECIFIC FOR ERYSIPELAS.


Time was when the advocate of a specific was laughed at by the
scientific world, but since it is known that so many forms of disease
are the direct result of some kind of germ life, it is no longer a
misnomer to call a medicine which will certainly and always destroy
the germ which produces so many forms of disease a specific.

In the light of this definition, founded upon the experience of forty
years' successful practice in treating this form of disease with
creosote, the writer is prepared to indorse the heading of this
article. Having used all the different remedies ordinarily prescribed,
they have long since been laid aside, and this one used in all forms
of the disease exclusively, and with uniform success.

In 1863 it was the writer's fortune to spend several weeks in a
military hospital in Memphis as a volunteer surgeon, under the
direction of Dr. Lord. In conversation with him, the use of this
article was mentioned, which appeared new to him, and a case was put
under treatment with it, with such prompt favorable results as to
elicit his hearty commendation, and, at his suggestion,
Surgeon-General Hammond was informed of it.

All injuries, of whatever kind, have been treated with dressings of
this remedy, and where this has been done from the first to last, in
no instance has there been an attack of erysipelas.

The usual manner of application was in solution of six to twenty drops
to the ounce of water, keeping the parts covered with cloths
constantly wet with it. In ulcers or wounds it may be used in the form
of a poultice, by stirring ground elm into the solution, the strength
to be regulated according to the virulence of the attack. Ordinarily,
ten drops to the ounce is strong enough for the cutaneous form of the
disease and in dressings for wounds or recent injuries. If the
inflammation threatens to spread rapidly, it should be increased to
twenty or more drops to the ounce of water.

The antiseptic properties of this remedy render it of additional
value, as it will certainly destroy the tendency to unhealthy
suppuration, and thus prevent septicaemia.

In the treatment of hundreds of cases of erysipelas but one fatal case
has occurred, and that one in an old and depraved system. In the less
violent attacks no other remedy was used, but where constitutional
treatment was indicated, the usual appropriate tonics were prescribed.

There is no question in my mind but that creosote is as much a
specific in erysipelas as quinine is in intermittent fever, and may be
used with as much confidence.--_St. Louis Med. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW APPARATUS FOR THE STUDY OF CARDIAC DRUGS.

By WILLIAM GILMAN THOMPSON, M.D., New York.


The apparatus was devised by Mr. R.D. Gray (the inventor of the
ingenious "vest camera" and other photographic improvements) and by
myself. I described what was required and suggested various
modifications and improvements, but the mechanical details were worked
out exclusively by him. To test the rapidity of the camera, we
photographed a "horse-timer" clock, with a dial marking quarter
seconds, and succeeded in taking five distinct photographs in half a
second with _one_ lens, which has never before been accomplished
excepting by Professor Marey,[1] at the College de France, who has
taken successive views of flying birds, falling balls, etc., with one
lens at a very rapid rate. His camera was unknown to me until after
mine was constructed, so that as a success in photography alone the
