race had ever used exclusively that best of bases, 12. But it has recently
been announced[226] that the discovery of such a tribe had actually been
made, and that the Aphos of Benue, an African tribe, count to 12 by simple
words, and then for 13 say 12-1, for 14, 12-2, etc. This report has yet to
be verified, but if true it will constitute a most interesting addition to
anthropological knowledge.





CHAPTER VI.

THE QUINARY SYSTEM.


The origin of the quinary mode of counting has been discussed with some
fulness in a preceding chapter, and upon that question but little more need
be said. It is the first of the natural systems. When the savage has
finished his count of the fingers of a single hand, he has reached this
natural number base. At this point he ceases to use simple numbers, and
begins the process of compounding. By some one of the numerous methods
illustrated in earlier chapters, he passes from 5 to 10, using here the
fingers of his second hand. He now has two fives; and, just as we say
"twenty," _i.e._ two tens, he says "two hands," "the second hand finished,"
"all the fingers," "the fingers of both hands," "all the fingers come to an
end," or, much more rarely, "one man." That is, he is, in one of the many
ways at his command, saying "two fives." At 15 he has "three hands" or "one
foot"; and at 20 he pauses with "four hands," "hands and feet," "both
feet," "all the fingers of hands and feet," "hands and feet finished," or,
more probably, "one man." All these modes of expression are strictly
natural, and all have been found in the number scales which were, and in
many cases still are, in daily use among the uncivilized races of mankind.

In its structure the quinary is the simplest, the most primitive, of the
natural systems. Its base is almost always expressed by a word meaning
"hand," or by some equivalent circumlocution, and its digital origin is
usually traced without difficulty. A consistent formation would require the
expression of 10 by some phrase meaning "two fives," 15 by "three fives,"
etc. Such a scale is the one obtained from the Betoya language, already
mentioned in Chapter III., where the formation of the numerals is purely
quinary, as the following indicate:[227]

   5.  teente = 1 hand.
  10.  cayaente, or caya huena = 2 hands.
  15.  toazumba-ente = 3 hands.
  20.  caesa-ente    = 4 hands.

The same formation appears, with greater or less distinctness, in many of
the quinary scales already quoted, and in many more of which mention might
be made. Collecting the significant numerals from a few such scales, and
tabulating them for the sake of convenience of comparison, we see this
point clearly illustrated by the following:


  TAMANAC.

   5.  amnaitone = 1 hand.
  10.  amna atse ponare = 2 hands.


  ARAWAK, GUIANA.

   5.  abba tekkabe  = 1 hand.
  10.  biamantekkabe = 2 hands.


  JIVIRO.

   5.  alacoetegladu = 1 hand.
  10.  catoegladu    = 2 hands.


  NIAM NIAM

   5.  biswe
  10.  bauwe = 2d 5.


  NENGONES

   5.  se dono       = the end (of the fingers of 1 hand).
  10.  rewe tubenine = 2 series (of fingers).


  SESAKE.[228]

   5.  lima     = hand.
  10.  dua lima = 2 hands.


  AMBRYM.[229]

   5.  lim    = hand.
  10.  ra-lim = 2 hands.


  PAMA.[229]

   5.  e-lime     = hand.
  10.  ha-lua-lim = the 2 hands.


  DINKA.[230]

   5.  wdyets.
  10.  wtyer, or wtyar = 5 x 2.


  BARI

   5.  kanat
  10.  puoek = 5 + 5?


  KANURI

   5.  ugu.
  10.  megu = 2 x 5.


  RIO NORTE AND SAN ANTONIO.[231]

   5.  juyopamauj.
  10.  juyopamauj ajte = 5 x 2.


  API.[232]

   5.  lima.
  10.  lua-lima = 2 x 5.


  ERROMANGO

   5.  suku-rim.
  10.  nduru-lim = 2 x 5.


  TLINGIT, BRITISH COLUMBIA.[233]

   5.  kedjin (from djin = hand).
  10.  djinkat = both hands?

Thus far the quinary formation is simple and regular; and in view of the
evidence with which these and similar illustrations furnish us, it is most
surprising to find an eminent authority making the unequivocal statement
that the number 10 is nowhere expressed by 2 fives[234]--that all tribes
which begin their count on a quinary base express 10 by a simple word. It
is a fact, as will be fully illustrated in the following pages, that
quinary number systems, when extended, usually merge into either the
decimal or the vigesimal. The result is, of course, a compound of two, and
sometimes of three, systems in one scale. A pure quinary or vigesimal
number system is exceedingly rare; but quinary scales certainly do exist in
which, as far as we possess the numerals, no trace of any other influence
appears. It is also to be noticed that some tribes, like the Eskimos of
Point Barrow, though their systems may properly be classed as mixed
systems, exhibit a decided preference for 5 as a base, and in counting
objects, divided into groups of 5, obtaining the sum in this way.[235]

But the savage, after counting up to 10, often finds himself unconsciously
impelled to depart from his strict reckoning by fives, and to assume a new
basis of reference. Take, for example, the Zuni system, in which the first
2 fives are:

   5.  oepte = the notched off.
  10.  astem'thla = all the fingers.

It will be noticed that the Zuni does not say "two hands," or "the fingers
of both hands," but simply "all the fingers." The 5 is no longer prominent,
but instead the mere notion of one entire count of the fingers has taken
its place. The division of the fingers into two sets of five each is still
in his mind, but it is no longer the leading idea. As the count proceeds
further, the quinary base may be retained, or it may be supplanted by a
decimal or a vigesimal base. How readily the one or the other may
predominate is seen by a glance at the following numerals:


  GALIBI.[236]

   5.  atoneigne oietonai = 1 hand.
  10.  oia batoue = the other hand.
  20.  poupoupatoret oupoume = feet and hands.
  40.  opoupoume = twice the feet and hands.


  GUARANI.[237]

   5.  ace popetei    = 1 hand.
  10.  ace pomocoi    = 2 hands.
  20.  acepo acepiabe = hands and feet.


  FATE.[238]

   5.  lima       = hand.
  10.  relima     = 2 hands.
  20.  relima rua = (2 x 5) x 2.


  KIRIRI

   5.  mibika misa      = 1 hand.
  10.  mikriba misa sai = both hands.
  20.  mikriba nusa ideko ibi sai = both hands together with the feet.


  ZAMUCO

   5.  tsuena yimana-ite = ended 1 hand.
  10.  tsuena yimana-die = ended both hands.
  20.  tsuena yiri-die   = ended both feet.


  PIKUMBUL

   5.  mulanbu.
  10.  bularin murra = belonging to the two hands.
  15.  mulanba dinna = 5 toes added on (to the 10 fingers).
  20.  bularin dinna = belonging to the 2 feet.


  YARUROS.[239]

   5.  kani-iktsi-mo = 1 hand alone.
  10.  yowa-iktsi-bo = all the hands.
  15.  kani-tao-mo   = 1 foot alone.
  20.  kani-pume     = 1 man.

By the time 20 is reached the savage has probably allowed his conception of
any aggregate to be so far modified that this number does not present
itself to his mind as 4 fives. It may find expression in some phraseology
such as the Kiriris employ--"both hands together with the feet"--or in the
shorter "ended both feet" of the Zamucos, in which case we may presume that
he is conscious that his count has been completed by means of the four sets
of fives which are furnished by his hands and feet. But it is at least
equally probable that he instinctively divides his total into 2 tens, and
thus passes unconsciously from the quinary into the decimal scale. Again,
the summing up of the 10 fingers and 10 toes often results in the concept
of a single whole, a lump sum, so to speak, and the savage then says "one
man," or something that gives utterance to this thought of a new unit. This
leads the quinary into the vigesimal scale, and produces the combination so
often found in certain parts of the world. Thus the inevitable tendency of
any number system of quinary origin is toward the establishment of another
and larger base, and the formation of a number system in which both are
used. Wherever this is done, the greater of the two bases is always to be
regarded as the principal number base of the language, and the 5 as
entirely subordinate to it. It is hardly correct to say that, as a number
system is extended, the quinary element disappears and gives place to the
decimal or vigesimal, but rather that it becomes a factor of quite
secondary importance in the development of the scale. If, for example, 8 is
expressed by 5-3 in a quinary decimal system, 98 will be 9 x 10 + 5-3. The
quinary element does not disappear, but merely sinks into a relatively
unimportant position.

One of the purest examples of quinary numeration is that furnished by the
Betoya scale, already given in full in Chapter III., and briefly mentioned
at the beginning of this chapter. In the simplicity and regularity of its
construction it is so noteworthy that it is worth repeating, as the first
of the long list of quinary systems given in the following pages. No
further comment is needed on it than that already made in connection with
its digital significance. As far as given by Dr. Brinton the scale is:

   1.  tey.
   2.  cayapa.
   3.  toazumba.
   4.  cajezea     = 2 with plural termination.
   5.  teente      = hand.
   6.  teyente tey = hand 1.
   7.  teyente cayapa    = hand 2.
   8.  teyente toazumba  = hand 3.
   9.  teyente caesea    = hand 4.
  10.  caya ente, or caya huena = 2 hands.
  11.  caya ente-tey     = 2 hands 1.
  15.  toazumba-ente     = 3 hands.
  16.  toazumba-ente-tey = 3 hands 1.
  20.  caesea ente       = 4 hands.

A far more common method of progression is furnished by languages which
interrupt the quinary formation at 10, and express that number by a single
word. Any scale in which this takes place can, from this point onward, be
quinary only in the subordinate sense to which allusion has just been made.
Examples of this are furnished in a more or less perfect manner by nearly
all so-called quinary-vigesimal and quinary-decimal scales. As fairly
representing this phase of number-system structure, I have selected the
first 20 numerals from the following languages:


  WELSH.[240]

   1.  un.
   2.  dau.
   3.  tri.
   4.  pedwar.
   5.  pump.
   6.  chwech.
   7.  saith.
   8.  wyth.
   9.  naw.
  10.  deg.
  11.  un ar ddeg     = 1 + 10.
  12.  deuddeg        = 2 + 10.
  13.  tri ar ddeg    = 3 + 10.
  14.  pedwar ar ddeg = 4 + 10.
  15.  pymtheg        = 5 + 10.
  16.  un ar bymtheg  = 1 + 5 + 10.
  17.  dau ar bymtheg = 2 + 5 + 10.
  18.  tri ar bymtheg = 3 + 5 + 10.
  19.  pedwar ar bymtheg = 4 + 5 + 10.
  20.  ugain.


  NAHUATL.[241]

   1.  ce.
   2.  ome.
   3.  yei.
   4.  naui.
   5.  macuilli.
   6.  chiquacen = [5] + 1.
   7.  chicome   = [5] + 2.
   8.  chicuey   = [5] + 3.
   9.  chiucnaui = [5] + 4.
  10.  matlactli.
  11.  matlactli oce    = 10 + 1.
  12.  matlactli omome  = 10 + 2.
  13.  matlactli omey   = 10 + 3.
  14.  matlactli onnaui = 10 + 4.
  15.  caxtolli.
  16.  caxtolli oce    = 15 + 1.
  17.  caxtolli omome  = 15 + 2.
  18.  caxtolli omey   = 15 + 3.
  19.  caxtolli onnaui = 15 + 4.
  20.  cempualli = 1 account.


  CANAQUE[242] NEW CALEDONIA.

   1.  chaguin.
   2.  carou.
   3.  careri.
   4.  caboue
   5.  cani.
   6.  cani-mon-chaguin = 5 + 1.
   7.  cani-mon-carou   = 5 + 2.
   8.  cani-mon-careri  = 5 + 3.
   9.  cani-mon-caboue  = 5 + 4.
  10.  panrere.
  11.  panrere-mon-chaguin = 10 + 1.
  12.  panrere-mon-carou   = 10 + 2.
  13.  panrere-mon-careri  = 10 + 3.
  14.  panrere-mon-caboue  = 10 + 4.
  15.  panrere-mon-cani    = 10 + 5.
  16.  panrere-mon-cani-mon-chaguin = 10 + 5 + 1.
  17.  panrere-mon-cani-mon-carou   = 10 + 5 + 2.
  18.  panrere-mon-cani-mon-careri  = 10 + 5 + 3.
  19.  panrere-mon-cani-mon-caboue  = 10 + 5 + 4.
  20.  jaquemo = 1 person.


  GUATO.[243]

   1.  cenai.
   2.  dououni.
   3.  coum.
   4.  dekai.
   5.  quinoui.
   6.  cenai-caicaira   = 1 on the other?
   7.  dououni-caicaira = 2 on the other?
   8.  coum-caicaira    = 3 on the other?
   9.  dekai-caicaira   = 4 on the other?
  10.  quinoi-da        = 5 x 2.
  11.  cenai-ai-caibo   = 1 + (the) hands.
  12.  dououni-ai-caibo = 2 + 10.
  13.  coum-ai-caibo    = 3 + 10.
  14.  dekai-ai-caibo   = 4 + 10.
  15.  quin-oibo        = 5 x 3.
  16.  cenai-ai-quacoibo = 1 + 15.
  17.  dououni-ai-quacoibo = 2 + 15.
  18.  coum-ai-quacoibo = 3 + 15.
  19.  dekai-ai-quacoibo = 4 + 15.
  20.  quinoui-ai-quacoibo = 5 + 15.

The meanings assigned to the numerals 6 to 9 are entirely conjectural. They
obviously mean 1, 2, 3, 4, taken a second time, and as the meanings I have
given are often found in primitive systems, they have, at a venture, been
given here.


  LIFU, LOYALTY ISLANDS.[244]

   1.  ca.
   2.  lue.
   3.  koeni.
   4.  eke.
   5.  tji pi.
   6.  ca ngemen    = 1 above.
   7.  lue ngemen   = 2 above.
   8.  koeni ngemen = 3 above.
   9.  eke ngemen   = 4 above.
  10.  lue pi       = 2 x 5.
  11.  ca ko.
  12.  lue ko.
  13.  koeni ko.
  14.  eke ko.
  15.  koeni pi = 3 x 5.
  16.  ca huai ano.
  17.  lua huai ano.
  18.  koeni huai ano.
  19.  eke huai ano.
  20.  ca atj = 1 man.


  BONGO.[245]

   1.  kotu.
   2.  ngorr.
   3.  motta.
   4.  neheo.
   5.  mui.
   6.  dokotu  = [5] + 1.
   7.  dongorr = [5] + 2.
   8.  domotta = [5] + 3.
   9.  doheo   = [5] + 4.
  10.  kih.
  11.  ki dokpo kotu  = 10 + 1.
  12.  ki dokpo ngorr = 10 + 2.
  13.  ki dokpo motta = 10 + 3.
  14.  ki dokpo neheo = 10 + 4.
  15.  ki dokpo mui   = 10 + 5.
  16.  ki dokpo mui do mui okpo kotu  = 10 + 5 more, to 5, 1 more.
  17.  ki dokpo mui do mui okpo ngorr = 10 + 5 more, to 5, 2 more.
  18.  ki dokpo mui do mui okpo motta = 10 + 5 more, to 5, 3 more.
  19.  ki dokpo mui do mui okpo nehea = 10 + 5 more, to 5, 4 more.
  20.  mbaba kotu.

Above 20, the Lufu and the Bongo systems are vigesimal, so that they are,
as a whole, mixed systems.

The Welsh scale begins as though it were to present a pure decimal
structure, and no hint of the quinary element appears until it has passed
15. The Nahuatl, on the other hand, counts from 5 to 10 by the ordinary
quinary method, and then appears to pass into the decimal form. But when 16
is reached, we find the quinary influence still persistent; and from this
point to 20, the numeral words in both scales are such as to show that the
notion of counting by fives is quite as prominent as the notion of
referring to 10 as a base. Above 20 the systems become vigesimal, with a
quinary or decimal structure appearing in all numerals except multiples of
