northwesterly direction, to the township of Sarnia, and in a
southeasterly direction to Oil Springs, but in the latter direction
there is a break of about four and a quarter miles, commencing at a
point about two miles from Petrolia. At Oil Springs there appears to
be a pool about two miles square. The extension of the belt then
continues in the same direction, with another break of about nine
miles, to the new oil field of Euphemia, the average width of the oil
belt being about two miles. In all, about 15,000 wells are believed to
have been drilled in the Canadian oil fields, and of these about 2,500
are now producing, the average yield being about three quarters of a
barrel per well per day. The aggregate production is probably about
700,000 barrels per annum, the greater part of which is obtained in
the Petrolia district, and the stocks were at the time of our visit
stated to amount to from 400,000 to 450,000 barrels.

In the Canadian oil fields the drilling contractor usually employs his
own derrick, engine, boiler, and tools, furnishes wood and water,
cases the well, and fixes the pump; the well owner providing the
casing and pump, and subsequently erecting the permanent derrick.

The wells in the Oil Springs field were formerly from 200 ft. to 300
ft. in depth, but the oil stratum then worked became waterlogged, and
the wells are now sunk to a depth of about 375 ft., and are cased to a
depth of about 275 ft. to shut off the water. The contract price for
drilling a 4-5/8 in. hole to a depth of about 375 ft. under the
conditions mentioned is 150 dols. (L30), and the time occupied in
drilling is usually about a week when the work is continued night and
day. The wells in the Petrolia field have a depth of 480 ft., the
contract price, including the cost of 100 ft. of wooden conductor,
being 175 dols. (L35), and the time occupied in drilling being from
six to twelve days. Pole tools are used in drilling, the poles being
of white ash, 37 ft. in length. The derrick is about 48 ft. in height.
An auger some 4 ft. in length, and about a foot in diameter, is used
to bore through the earth to the bed rock, the auger being rotated by
horse power.

The drilling tools commonly consist of a bit, 21/2 ft. in length by
4-5/8 in. in diameter, weighing about 60 lb.; a sinker bar, into which
the bit is screwed, 30 ft. in length by 3 in. in diameter, weighing
about 1,040 lb.; and the jars, inserted between the sinker bar and the
poles about 6 ft. in length, and weighing 150 lb. The tools are
suspended by a chain, which passes three times round the end of the
walking beam and thence to the windlass, with ratchet wheel fixed on
the walking beam, by means of which the tools are gradually lowered as
the drilling proceeds. The cable is thus only employed in raising the
tools from the well and lowering them into it.

The sand pump or bailer is frequently as much as 37 ft. in length, and
is about 4 in. in diameter. The casing (4-5/8 in diameter) costs about
45 cents (1s. 101/2d.) per foot, and the 11/4 in. pump, with piping, costs
from 65 dols. (L13) to 85 dols. (L17), according to the length of
pipe required. An ordinary square frame derrick costs, with mud sill,
from 22 dols. (L4 8s.) to 27 dols. (L5 8s.), and the walking beam
about 8 dols. (L1 12s.) In many cases, however, a three-pole derrick,
which can be erected at an expense of about 10 dols. (L2), is
employed. A 100 barrel wooden tank costs, erected, 50 dols. (L10).


THE CANADIAN TORPEDO.

The wells are torpedoed on completion with from 8 to 10 quarts of
nitroglycerine, at a cost of 4 dols. (16s.) per quart. The torpedoes
employed in the Canadian oil field are much smaller than those used
for a similar purpose in the United States, the tin shell being only 6
ft. in length by 3 in. in diameter. We were enabled to witness the
operation of torpedoing a well, and the following particulars, based
on notes taken at the time, may be of interest: The torpedo case,
which was furnished with a tube or "anchor" at the lower end, 8 ft. in
length, was placed in the mouth of the well and suspended so that its
upper end was level with the surface of the ground. Eight quarts of
nitroglycerine, which was in a tin can, was then poured into the
torpedo case, and the torpedo was carefully lowered into the well,
which contained at the time about 250 ft. of water, until the end of
the anchor rested on the bottom of the well. A traveling primer or
"go-devil squib" was then prepared as follows: A tin cone, 14 in. in
length by 2 in. in diameter at the open end, was partially filled with
sand to give it the necessary weight. A piece of double tape fuse, 2
ft. long, was inserted into a Nobel's treble detonator, and over the
detonator and a portion of the fuse a perforated tin tube or sheath
was passed. This tube was then inserted through a hole in a strip of
tin fixed across the mouth of the conical cup into the sand, so that
the detonator was embedded. The sand was then saturated with
nitroglycerine, the fuse lighted, and the primer dropped into the
well. In about 45 seconds there was a perceptible tremor of the
ground, immediately followed by a slight sound of the explosion. After
an interval of a second or two there was a gurgling noise, and a
magnificent black fountain shot up twice as high as the derrick, upon
which all the spectators ran for shelter from the impending shower of
oil and water. The well not being a flowing one, the outrush was only
of momentary duration, and within a few minutes the drillers were at
work removing from the well, by means of the sand pump, the fragments
of rock which had been detached by the explosion. On the table are
specimens of this rock, which I obtained at the time.

The maximum yield per well is ten barrels per day, and the minimum
yield for which it is considered profitable to pump is a quarter of a
barrel per day. The yield being in some cases so small, it is usual to
pump a number of wells through the agency of one engine, the various
pumps being connected with the motor by means of wooden rods. In one
instance I saw as many as eighty wells being thus pumped from one
center. The motive power was a 70 h.p. engine, which communicated
motion, similar to that of the balance wheel of a watch, to a large
horizontal wheel. From this wheel six main rod lines radiated, the
length of stroke of the main lines being 16 in., and the rate of
movement 32 strokes per minute. Some of the wells being pumped from
this center were from one-half to three-quarters of a mile distant,
and altogether about eight miles of rods were employed in the pumping
of the eighty wells.

The pipe line system in Canada has not been fully developed, and
accordingly the well owner has to convey his oil by road to the
nearest receiving station. Thus from the Euphemia oil field the oil
has to be "teamed" 17 miles, to Bothwell. For the conveyance of the
oil by road a long and slightly conical wooden tank or barrel, resting
horizontally on a wagon, is employed. These vessels hold from eight to
ten barrels of oil. The Petrolia Crude Oil and Tanking Company is the
principal transporting and storing company. The storage charge is one
cent (1/2d.) per barrel per month, and the delivery charge two cents
per barrel. The petroleum produced in the Oil Springs field is stored
separately from that obtained in the Petrolia field.

The storage takes place for the most part in large underground tanks
excavated in the retentive clay. These remarkable tanks are often as
much as 30 ft. in diameter by 60 ft. in depth, and hold from 5,000 to
8,000 barrels. In the construction of the tanks the alluvial soil, of
which there is about 18 ft. or 20 ft. above the clay, is curbed with
wood and thoroughly puddled with clay. On the completion of the
excavation, the entire vertical surface is then lined with rings of
pine wood, so that the upper part down to the solid clay is doubly
lined. The bottom is not lined. The roof of the tank is of wood,
covered with clay. The cost of such a tank is about 22 cents (11d.)
per barrel, or 1,760 dols. (L363) for an 8,000 barrel tank, and the
time occupied in making such a tank is about six weeks.

The crude petroleum from the Petrolia field usually has a specific
gravity ranging from 0.859 to 0.877, while the specific gravity of the
petroleum from the Oil Springs field ranges from 0.844 to 0.854.

The oil occurs in the corniferous limestone, and buildings constructed
of this stone frequently exude petroleum in hot weather.

Canadian crude petroleum is of a black color, and possesses a very
disagreeable odor, due to the presence of sulphur compounds. These
characteristics are shown by the samples on the table, for some of
which I am indebted to Mr. James Kerr, secretary of the Petrolia Oil
Exchange.

The stills used in the process of refining the crude oil are
horizontal two-flued cylinders, 30 ft. in length by 10 ft. in
diameter, provided with six 2 in. vapor pipes. The charge is 260
barrels, and the following is an outline of the method of working.
Assuming the still to be charged on Monday morning, heating is
commenced about 7 A.M., and the naphtha begins to come over about 8
A.M. Of this product about six barrels is obtained in the case of
Petrolia crude, or 71/2 barrels in the case of Oil Springs crude. The
distillation of the naphtha takes from 2 to 3 hours, say till 10:30
A.M. The heat is then increased, and the distillation of the kerosene
commences about noon, and continues till about 10 P.M. Of the kerosene
distillate about 80 barrels are obtained. The first portion of the
kerosene distillate is usually collected separately, is steamed to
drive off the more volatile hydrocarbons, and is then mixed with the
remainder of the kerosene distillate. The product which then commences
to distill is known as tailings. This is collected separately and is
redistilled. The distillation of the tailings continues till about 5
A.M. on Wednesday, by which time about 80 barrels has been obtained.
Steam is then passed into the still through a perforated pipe
extending to the bottom, and about 21 barrels of "gas oil" is
distilled over. The additional quantity of kerosene obtained on
redistilling the tailings brings up the total yield of this product to
about 42 per cent. of the crude oil. The gas oil is sold for the
manufacture of illuminating gas. The residue is distilled for
lubricating oils and paraffin.

The agitator in which the kerosene distillate is treated commonly
takes a charge of 465 barrels. To this quantity of distillate two
carboys of oil of vitriol is added, and the oil and acid are agitated
together for 20 minutes. The tarry acid having been allowed to settle
is drawn off, and seven carboys more of acid is added. Agitation
having been effected for 30 or 40 minutes, the tarry acid is removed
as before. Another similar treatment with seven carboys of acid
follows, and occasionally a fourth addition of acid is made. The oil
is next allowed to remain at rest for an hour, any acid which settles
out being drawn off, and cold (or, in winter, slightly warmed) water
is allowed to pass down through the oil in fine streams, this
treatment being continued, without agitation of the oil, for half an
hour, or until the dark color which the oil assumed on treatment with
acid is removed. The water is then drawn off, 10 barrels of solution
of caustic soda (sp. gr. 15 deg. B.) is added, and agitation conducted for
15 minutes. The caustic soda solution having been drawn off, 30
barrels of a solution of litharge in caustic soda is added. This
solution is made by dissolving caustic soda in water to a density of
18 deg. B. and then adding the litharge. Agitation with this solution is
continued for about six hours, or until the oil is thoroughly
deodorized. About 100 lb. of sublimed sulphur is then added, and the
agitation is continued for another two hours. The oil having been
allowed to settle all night, the litharge solution is drawn off, and
the oil run into a shallow tank or "bleacher," where it is exposed to
the light to improve its color, and is, if necessary, steamed to drive
off the lighter hydrocarbons and raise the flashing point to the legal
minimum of 95 deg. F. To raise the flashing point from 73 deg. F. to 95 deg. F.
(Abel test) is stated to involve in practice a loss of 10 per cent.,
the burning quality of the oil being at the same time seriously
impaired, and upon this ground the Ontario refiners in 1886 petitioned
for a reduction of the test standard.

The average percentage yield of the various products is given in the
following table:

    Naphtha.                   5
    Kerosene.                 42
    Gas oil.                   8
    Tar.                      25
    Coke.                     10
    Loss (including water).   10
                             ---
                             100

There are a dozen petroleum refineries in Canada, and the annual
outturn of kerosene is about 200,000 barrels of 45 imperial gallons
per annum. The total consumption of kerosene in Canada is about
300,000 barrels, one-third of which is manufactured in the United
States. The United States oil is subject to a duty of 40 cents on the
package and 7-1/5 cents per imperial gallon on the contents, besides
which there is an inspection fee of 30 cents per package. Of
lubricating oils the outturn is from 75,000 to 100,000 barrels per
annum.

The quality of Canadian kerosene has been greatly improved of late
years, but notwithstanding the elaborate process of refining, the oil,
though thoroughly deodorized and of good color, contains sulphur, and
of course evolves sulphur compounds in its combustion.

The rules of the Petrolia Oil Exchange provide that refined kerosene
shall be of the odor "locally known as inoffensive," and shall
"absolutely stand the test of oxide of lead in a strong solution of
caustic soda without change of color."

The "burning percentage" in the case of "Extra Refined Oil," "Water
White" in color, and of specific gravity not exceeding 0.800, is
required to be not less than 70; in the case of "No. 1 Refined Oil,"
"Prime White" in color, not less than 60; and in the case of "No. 2
Refined Oil," "Standard White" in color, to be not less than 55.

The "burning percentage" is determined by the use of a lamp thus
described: "The bowl of the lamp is cylindrical, 4 in. in diameter and
23/4 in. deep, with a neck placed thereon of such a height that the top
of the wick tube is 3 in. above the bowl. A sun-hinge burner is used,
taking a wick 7/8 in. wide and 1/8 in. thick, and a chimney about 8
in. long." The test is conducted as follows: "The lamp bowl is filled
with the oil and weighed, then lighted and turned up full flame just
below the smoking point, and burned without interference till 12 oz.
of the oil is consumed. The quantity consumed during the first hour
and the last hour is noted." The ratio of the two quantities is the
measure of the burning quality, and the percentage that the latter
quantity is of the former is the "burning percentage" referred to.

       *       *       *       *       *




TREES FROM A SANITARY ASPECT.

BY CHARLES ROBERTS, F.R.C.S., ETC.


As this is the usual time of the year for planting, pruning, and
removing forest trees and shrubs, it is a fit time for considering the
influence which trees exert on the sanitary surroundings of dwelling
places. The recent parliamentary report on forestry shows that trees
are now of little commercial value in this country. And we may
conclude, therefore, that they are chiefly grown for picturesque
effect, and for the shelter from the sun and winds which they afford.

The relation of forests to rainfall has been studied by
meteorologists, but little attention has been given by medical
climatologists to the share which trees take in determining local
variations of climate and the sanitary condition of dwellings,
notwithstanding they play as important a part as differences of soil,
of which so much is said and written nowadays. This remark does not
apply to large towns, where trees grow with difficulty and are
comparatively few in number, and where they afford a grateful relief
to the eye, shade from the sun, and to a very slight extent temper the
too dry atmosphere, but to suburban and country districts, where it is
the custom to bury houses in masses of foliage--a condition of things
which is deemed the chief attraction, and often a necessary
accompaniment, of country life.

Trees of all kinds exercise a cooling and moistening influence on the
atmosphere and soil in which they grow. The extent of these conditions
depends on the number of trees and whether they stand alone, in belts,
or in forests; on their size, whether tall trees with branchless stems
or thickets of underwood: on their species, whether deciduous or
evergreen; and on the season of the year. The cooling of the air and
soil is due to the evaporation of water by the leaves, which is
chiefly drawn from the subsoil--not the surface--by the roots, and to
the exclusion of the sun's rays from the ground, trees themselves
being little susceptible of receiving and radiating heat. The moisture
of the atmosphere and ground about trees is due to the collection by
the leaves and branches of a considerable portion of the rainfall, the
condensation of aqueous vapor by the leaves, and the obstruction
offered by the foliage to evaporation from the ground beneath the
trees.

The experiments of M. Fautrat show that the leafage of leaf bearing
trees intercepts one-third, and that of pine trees the half, of the
rainfall, which is afterward returned to the atmosphere by
evaporation. On the other hand, these same leaves and branches
restrain the evaporation of the water which reaches the ground, and
that evaporation is nearly four times less under a mass of foliage in
a forest, and two and one-third times under a mass of pines, than in
the open. Moreover, trees prevent the circulation of the air by
lateral wind currents and produce stagnation. Hence, as Mr. E.J.
Symons has truly observed, "a lovely spot embowered in trees and
embraced by hills is usually characterized by a damp, misty, cold, and
stagnant atmosphere," a condition of climate which is obviously
unfavorable to good health and especially favorable to the development
of consumption and rheumatism, our two most prevalent diseases.

Now, if we examine the surroundings of many of our suburban villas and
country houses of the better sort, we shall find them embowered in
trees, and subject to all the insanitary climatic conditions just
mentioned. The custom almost everywhere prevails of blocking out of
view other houses, roads, etc., by belts of trees, often planted on
raised mounds of earth, and surrounded by high close walls or palings,
from a foolish ambition of seeming to live "quite in the country."

This is a most unwise proceeding from a sanitary point of view, and
should be protested against as strongly by medical men as defective
drainage and bad water supply. Many houses stand under the very drip
and shadow of trees, and "the grounds" of others are inclosed by dense
belts of trees and shrubs, which convert them into veritable
reservoirs of damp, stagnant air, often loaded with the effluvia of
decaying leaves and other garden refuse, a condition of atmosphere
very injurious to health, and answerable for much of the neuralgia of
a malarious kind, of which we have heard so much lately. A very slight
belt of trees suffices to obstruct the lateral circulation of the air,
and if the sun be also excluded the natural upward currents are also
prevented.

As far back as 1695 Lancisi recognized the influence of slight belts
of trees in preventing the spread of malaria in Rome, and the cold,
damp, stagnant air of spaces inclosed by trees is easily demonstrated
by the wet and dry bulb thermometer, or even by the ordinary
sensations of the body. A dry garden, on gravel, of three acres in
extent in Surrey, surrounded by trees, is generally three or four
degrees colder than the open common beyond the trees; and a large pond
in a pine wood twenty miles from London afforded skating for ninety
consecutive days in the winter of 1885-86, while during the greater
part of the time the lakes in the London parks were free from ice.

The speculative builder has more sins to answer for than the faulty
construction of houses. He generally begins his operations by cutting
down all the fine old trees which occupy the ground, and which from
their size and isolation are more beautiful than young ones and are
little likely to be injurious to health, and ends them by raising
mounds and sticking into them dense belts of quick-growing trees like
poplars to hide as speedily as possible the desolation of bricks and
mortar he has created. It is this senseless outdoor work of the
builder and his nurseryman which stands most in need of revision from
time to time in suburban residences, but which rarely receives it from
a silly notion, amounting to tree worship, which prohibits the cutting
down of trees, no matter how injudicious may have been the planting of
them in the first instance from a sanitary or picturesque point of
view.

The following hints for planting and removing trees may be useful to
those persons who have given little attention to the subject. A tree
should not stand so near a house that, if it were to fall, it would
fall on the house; or, in other words, the root should be as far from
the house as the height of the tree. Belts of trees may be planted on
the north and east aspects of houses, but on the east side the trees
should not be so near, nor so high, as to keep the morning sun from
the bedroom windows in the shorter days of the year. On the south and
west aspects of houses isolated trees only should be permitted, so
that there may be free access of the sunshine and the west winds to
the house and grounds.

High walls and palings on these aspects are also objectionable, and
should be replaced by fences, or better still open palings, especially
about houses which are occupied during the fall of the leaf, and in
the winter. Trees for planting near houses should be chosen in the
following order: Conifers, birch, acacia, beech, oak, elm, lime, and
poplar. Pine trees are the best of all trees for this purpose, as they
collect the greatest amount of rainfall and permit the freest
evaporation from the ground, while their branchless stems offer the
least resistance to the lateral circulation of the air.

Acacias, oaks, and birches are late to burst into leaf, and therefore
allow the ground to be warmed by the sun's rays in the early spring.
The elm, lime, and chestnut are the least desirable kinds of trees to
plant near houses, although they are the most common. They come into
leaf early and cast their leaves early, so that they exclude the
spring sun and do not afford much shade in the hot autumn months,
when it is most required. The lime and the elm are, however, beautiful
trees, and will doubtless on this account often be tolerated nearer
houses than is desirable from a purely sanitary point of view.

Trees are often useful guides to the selection of residences. Numerous
trees with rich foliage and a rank undergrowth of ferns or moss
indicate a damp, stagnant atmosphere; while abundance of flowers and
fruit imply a dry, sunny climate. Children will be healthiest where
most flowers grow, and old people will live longest where our common
fruits ripen best, as these conditions of vegetation indicate a
climate which is least favorable to bronchitis and rheumatism. Pines
and their companions, the birches, indicate a dry, rocky, sandy, or
gravel soil; beeches, a dryish, chalky, or gravel soil; elms and
limes, a rich and somewhat damp soil; oaks and ashes, a heavy clay
soil; and poplars and willows, a low, damp, or marshy soil. Many of
these are found growing together, and it is only when one species
predominates in number and vigor that it is truly characteristic of
the soil and that portion of the atmosphere in connection with it.

Curzon Street, Mayfair, W.--_Lancet._

       *       *       *       *       *


SOLIDIFICATION BY PRESSURE.

M. Amagat has succeeded in solidifying various liquids, by compressing
them in cylinders of bronze and steel. He has also photographed the
crystals after crystallization, by means of a ray of electric light
traversing the interior of the vessel by glass cones serving as panes.
The stages of crystallization can be observed in this way with
chloride of carbon, and it is seen that the process varies with the
rapidity with which the pressure is produced. If rapidly, a sudden
circlet of crystals gathers round the edge of the luminous field, and
grows to the center. The pressure being continued, the field becomes
obscure, then transparent. As the pressure is diminished the reverse
takes place, and the liquid state is reproduced. M. Amagat finds that
chloride of carbon solidifies at 19.5 deg. Cent., under a pressure of 210
atmospheres. At 22 deg. Cent., benzine crystallizes with a pressure of
about 900 atmospheres.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

Terms of Subscription, $5 a year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the
United States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any
foreign country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50 stitched in
paper, or $3.50 bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES.--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

