contemporaries, Chasles, Brianchon, Hachette, Dupin, Gergonne, and others,
the anharmonic ratio enjoyed a fundamental role. It is made also the basis
of the great work of Steiner,(20) who was the first to treat of the conic,
not as the projection of a circle, but as the locus of intersection of
corresponding rays of two projective pencils. Steiner not only related to
each other, in one-to-one correspondence, point-rows and pencils and all
the other fundamental forms, but he set into correspondence even curves
and surfaces of higher degrees. This new and fertile conception gave him
an easy and direct route into the most abstract and difficult regions of
pure geometry. Much of his work was given without any indication of the
methods by which he had arrived at it, and many of his results have only
recently been verified.




*185. Von Staudt and his work.*  To complete the theory of geometry as we
have it to-day it only remained to free it from its dependence on the
semimetrical basis of the anharmonic ratio. This work was accomplished by
Von Staudt,(21) who applied himself to the restatement of the theory of
geometry in a form independent of analytic and metrical notions. The
method which has been used in Chapter II to develop the notion of four
harmonic points by means of the complete quadrilateral is due to Von
Staudt. His work is characterized by a most remarkable generality, in that
he is able to discuss real and imaginary forms with equal ease. Thus he
assumes a one-to-one correspondence between the points and lines of a
plane, and defines a conic as the locus of points which lie on their
corresponding lines, and a pencil of rays of the second order as the
system of lines which pass through their corresponding points. The
point-row and pencil of the second order may be real or imaginary, but his
theorems still apply. An illustration of a correspondence of this sort,
where the conic is imaginary, is given in § 15 of the first chapter. In
defining conjugate imaginary points on a line, Von Staudt made use of an
involution of points having no double points. His methods, while elegant
and powerful, are hardly adapted to an elementary course, but Reye(22) and
others have done much toward simplifying his presentation.




*186. Recent developments.*  It would be only confusing to the student to
attempt to trace here the later developments of the science of protective
geometry. It is concerned for the most part with curves and surfaces of a
higher degree than the second. Purely synthetic methods have been used
with marked success in the study of the straight line in space. The
struggle between analysis and pure geometry has long since come to an end.
Each has its distinct advantages, and the mathematician who cultivates one
at the expense of the other will never attain the results that he would
attain if both methods were equally ready to his hand. Pure geometry has
to its credit some of the finest discoveries in mathematics, and need not
apologize for having been born. The day of its usefulness has not passed
with the invention of abridged notation and of short methods in analysis.
While we may be certain that any geometrical problem may always be stated
in analytic form, it does not follow that that statement will be simple or
easily interpreted. For many mathematicians the geometric intuitions are
weak, and for such the method will have little attraction. On the other
hand, there will always be those for whom the subject will have a peculiar
glamor--who will follow with delight the curious and unexpected relations
between the forms of space. There is a corresponding pleasure, doubtless,
for the analyst in tracing the marvelous connections between the various
fields in which he wanders, and it is as absurd to shut one's eyes to the
beauties in one as it is to ignore those in the other. "Let us cultivate
geometry, then," says Darboux,(23) "without wishing in all points to equal
it to its rival. Besides, if we were tempted to neglect it, it would not
be long in finding in the applications of mathematics, as once it has
already done, the means of renewing its life and of developing itself
anew. It is like the Giant Antaeus, who renewed, his strength by touching
the earth."





INDEX


                  (The numbers refer to the paragraphs)

Abel (1802-1829), 179

Analogy, 24

Analytic geometry, 21, 118, 119, 120, 146, 176, 180

Anharmonic ratio, 46, 161, 184, 185

Apollonius (second half of third century B.C.), 70

Archimedes (287-212 B.C.), 176

Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), 169

Asymptotes, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 148

Axes of a conic, 148

Axial pencil, 7, 8, 23, 50, 54

Axis of perspectivity, 8, 47

Bacon (1561-1626), 162

Bisection, 41, 109

Brianchon (1785-1864), 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 95, 105, 113, 174, 184

Calculus, 176

Carnot (1796-1832), 179

Cauchy (1789-1857), 179, 181

Cavalieri (1598-1647), 162

Center of a conic, 107, 112, 148

Center of involution, 141, 142

Center of perspectivity, 8

Central conic, 120

Chasles (1793-1880), 168, 179, 180, 184

Circle, 21, 73, 80, 145, 146, 147

Circular involution, 147, 149, 150, 151

Circular points, 146

Class of a curve, 183

Classification of conics, 110

Collineation, 175

Concentric pencils, 50

Cone of the second order, 59

Conic, 73, 81

Conjugate diameters, 114, 148

Conjugate normal, 151

Conjugate points and lines, 100, 109, 138, 139, 140

Constants in an equation, 21

Contingent relations, 180, 181

Continuity, 180, 181

Continuous correspondence, 9, 10, 21, 49

Corresponding elements, 64

Counting, 1, 4

Cross ratio, 46

Darboux, 176, 186

De Beaugrand, 170

Degenerate pencil of rays of the second order, 58, 93

Degenerate point-row of the second order, 56, 78

De la Hire (1640-1718), 168, 171, 175

Desargues (1593-1662), 25, 26, 40, 121, 125, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167,
168, 169, 170, 171, 174, 175

Descartes (1596-1650), 162, 170, 171, 174, 176

Descriptive geometry, 179

Diameter, 107

Directrix, 157, 158, 159, 160

Double correspondence, 128, 130

Double points of an involution, 124

Double rays of an involution, 133, 134

Duality, 94, 104, 161, 180, 182

Dupin (1784-1873), 174, 184

Eccentricity of conic, 159

Ellipse, 110, 111, 162

Equation of conic, 118, 119, 120

Euclid (ca. 300 B.C.), 6, 22, 104

Euler (1707-1783), 166

Fermat (1601-1665), 162, 171

Foci of a conic, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162

Fourier (1768-1830), 179

Fourth harmonic, 29

Fundamental form, 7, 16, 23, 36, 47, 60, 184

Galileo (1564-1642), 162, 169, 170, 176

Gauss (1777-1855), 179

Gergonne (1771-1859), 182, 184

Greek geometry, 161

Hachette (1769-1834), 179, 184

Harmonic conjugates, 29, 30, 39

Harmonic elements, 86, 49, 91, 163, 185

Harmonic lines, 33, 34, 35, 66, 67

Harmonic planes, 34, 35

Harmonic points, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 43, 71, 161

Harmonic tangents to a conic, 91, 92

Harvey (1578-1657), 169

Homology, 180, 182

Huygens (1629-1695), 162

Hyperbola, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 162

Imaginary elements, 146, 180, 181, 182, 185

Infinitely distant elements, 6, 9, 22, 39, 40, 41, 104, 107, 110

Infinity, 4, 5, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 41

Involution, 37, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133,
134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 161, 163, 170

Kepler (1571-1630), 162

Lagrange (1736-1813), 176, 179

Laplace (1749-1827), 179

Legendre (1752-1833), 179

Leibniz (1646-1716), 173

Linear construction, 40, 41, 42

Maclaurin (1698-1746), 177, 178

Measurements, 23, 40, 41, 104

Mersenne (1588-1648), 168, 171

Metrical theorems, 40, 104, 106, 107, 141

Middle point, 39, 41

Moebius (1790-1868), 179

Monge (1746-1818), 179, 180

Napier (1550-1617), 162

Newton (1642-1727), 177

Numbers, 4, 21, 43

Numerical computations, 43, 44, 46

One-to-one correspondence, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 24, 36, 87, 43,
60, 104, 106, 184

Opposite sides of a hexagon, 70

Opposite sides of a quadrilateral, 28, 29

Order of a form, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21

Pappus (fourth century A.D.), 161

Parabola, 110, 111, 112, 119, 162

Parallel lines, 39, 41, 162

Pascal (1623-1662), 69, 70, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 95, 105, 125, 162, 169,
171, 172, 173

Pencil of planes of the second order, 59

Pencil of rays, 6, 7, 8, 23; of the second order, 57, 60, 79, 81

Perspective position, 6, 8, 35, 37, 51, 53, 71

Plane system, 16, 23

Planes on space, 17

Point of contact, 87, 88, 89, 90

Point system, 16, 23

Point-row, 6, 7, 8, 9, 23; of the second order, 55, 60, 61, 66, 67, 72

Points in space, 18

Pole and polar, 98, 99, 100, 101, 138, 164, 166

Poncelet (1788-1867), 177, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184

Principal axis of a conic, 157

Projection, 161

Protective axial pencils, 59

Projective correspondence, 9, 35, 36, 37, 47, 71, 92, 104

Projective pencils, 53, 64, 68

Projective point-rows, 51, 79

Projective properties, 24

Projective theorems, 40, 104

Quadrangle, 26, 27, 28, 29

Quadric cone, 59

Quadrilateral, 88, 95, 96

Roberval (1602-1675), 168

Ruler construction, 40

Scheiner, 169

Self-corresponding elements, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51

Self-dual, 105

Self-polar triangle, 102

Separation of elements in involution, 148

Separation of harmonic conjugates, 38

Sequence of points, 49

Sign of segment, 44, 45

Similarity, 106

Skew lines, 12

Space system, 19, 23

Sphere, 21

Steiner (1796-1863), 129, 130, 131, 177, 179, 184

Steiner's construction, 129, 130, 131

Superposed point-rows, 47, 48, 49

Surfaces of the second degree, 166

System of lines in space, 20, 23

Systems of conics, 125

Tangent line, 61, 80, 81, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92

Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), 162

Verner, 161

Vertex of conic, 157, 159

Von Staudt (1798-1867), 179, 185

Wallis (1616-1703), 162






FOOTNOTES


    1 The more general notion of _anharmonic ratio_, which includes the
      harmonic ratio as a special case, was also known to the ancients.
      While we have not found it necessary to make use of the anharmonic
      ratio in building up our theory, it is so frequently met with in
      treatises on geometry that some account of it should be given.

      Consider any four points, _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_, on a line, and join
      them to any point _S_ not on that line. Then the triangles _ASB_,
      _GSD_, _ASD_, _CSB_, having all the same altitude, are to each other
      as their bases. Also, since the area of any triangle is one half the
      product of any two of its sides by the sine of the angle included
      between them, we have

                                   [formula]

      Now the fraction on the right would be unchanged if instead of the
      points _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_ we should take any other four points _A'_,
      _B'_, _C'_, _D'_ lying on any other line cutting across _SA_, _SB_,
      _SC_, _SD_. In other words, _the fraction on the left is unaltered
      in value if the points __A__, __B__, __C__, __D__ are replaced by
      any other four points perspective to them._ Again, the fraction on
      the left is unchanged if some other point were taken instead of _S_.
      In other words, _the fraction on the right is unaltered if we
      replace the four lines __SA__, __SB__, __SC__, __SD__ by any other
      four lines perspective to them._ The fraction on the left is called
      the _anharmonic ratio_ of the four points _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_; the
      fraction on the right is called the _anharmonic ratio_  of the four
      lines _SA_, _SB_, _SC_, _SD_. The anharmonic ratio of four points is
      sometimes written (_ABCD_), so that

                                   [formula]

      If we take the points in different order, the value of the
      anharmonic ratio will not necessarily remain the same. The
      twenty-four different ways of writing them will, however, give not
      more than six different values for the anharmonic ratio, for by
      writing out the fractions which define them we can find that _(ABCD)
      = (BADC) = (CDAB) = (DCBA)_. If we write _(ABCD) = a_, it is not
      difficult to show that the six values are

                                   [formula]

      The proof of this we leave to the student.

      If _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_ are four harmonic points (see Fig. 6, p. *22),
      and a quadrilateral _KLMN_ is constructed such that _KL_ and _MN_
      pass through _A_, _KN_ and _LM_ through _C_, _LN_ through _B_, and
      _KM_ through _D_, then, projecting _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_ from _L_ upon
      _KM_, we have _(ABCD) = (KOMD)_, where _O_ is the intersection of
      _KM_ with _LN_. But, projecting again the points _K_, _O_, _M_, _D_
      from _N_ back upon the line _AB_, we have _(KOMD) = (CBAD)_. From
      this we have

                               _(ABCD) = (CBAD),_

      or

                                   [formula]

      whence _a = 0_ or _a = 2_. But it is easy to see that _a = 0_
      implies that two of the four points coincide. For four harmonic
      points, therefore, the six values of the anharmonic ratio reduce to
      three, namely, 2, [formula], and -1. Incidentally we see that if an
      interchange of any two points in an anharmonic ratio does not change
      its value, then the four points are harmonic.

                                  [Figure 49]

                                    FIG. 49


      Many theorems of projective geometry are succinctly stated in terms
      of anharmonic ratios. Thus, the _anharmonic ratio of any four
      elements of a form is equal to the anharmonic ratio of the
      corresponding four elements in any form projectively related to it.
      The anharmonic ratio of the lines joining any four fixed points on a
      conic to a variable fifthpoint on the conic is constant. The locus
      of points from which four points in a plane are seen along four rays
      of constant anharmonic ratio is a conic through the four points._ We
      leave these theorems for the student, who may also justify the
      following solution of the problem: _Given three points and a certain
      anharmonic ratio, to find a fourth point which shall have with the
      given three the given anharmonic ratio._ Let _A_, _B_, _D_ be the
      three given points (Fig. 49). On any convenient line through _A_
      take two points _B'_ and _D'_ such that _AB'/AD'_ is equal to the
      given anharmonic ratio. Join _BB'_ and _DD'_ and let the two lines
      meet in _S_. Draw through _S_ a parallel to _AB'_. This line will
      meet _AB_ in the required point _C_.

    2 Pappus, Mathematicae Collectiones, vii, 129.

    3 J. Verneri, Libellus super vigintiduobus elementis conicis, etc.
      1522.

    4 Kepler, Ad Vitellionem paralipomena quibus astronomiae pars optica
      traditur. 1604.

    5 Desargues, Bruillon-project d'une atteinte aux evenements des
      rencontres d'un cone avec un plan. 1639. Edited and analyzed by
      Poudra, 1864.

    6 The term 'pole' was first introduced, in the sense in which we have
      used it, in 1810, by a French mathematician named Servois (Gergonne,
      _Annales des Matheematiques_, I, 337), and the corresponding term
      'polar' by the editor, Gergonne, of this same journal three years
      later.

    7 Euler, Introductio in analysin infinitorum, Appendix, cap. V. 1748.

    8 OEuvres de Desargues, t. II, 132.
