undiscernible. The two comets into which Biela's divided, in 1846, were
watched long enough to show that had their separate existence continued
(visibly), they would have been found, in the fullness of time,
traveling at distances very far apart, though on nearly the same orbit.
The distance between them, which in 1846 had increased only to about a
quarter of a million of miles, had in 1852 increased to five times that
space.

Probably a few thousands of years would have sufficed to set these
comets so far apart (owing to some slight difference of velocity,
initiated at the moment of their separation) that when one would have
been at its nearest to the sun, the other would have been at its
farthest from him. If we could now discern the separate fragments of the
comet, we should doubtless recognize a process in progress by which, in
the course of many centuries, the separate cometic bodies will be
disseminated all round the common orbit. We know, further, that already
such a process has been at work on portions removed from the comet many
centuries ago, for as our earth passes through the track of this comet
she encounters millions of meteoric bodies which are traveling in the
comet's orbit, and once formed part of the substance of a comet
doubtless much more distinguished in appearance than Biela's.

There can be little doubt that this is the true explanation of the
origin of that family of comets, five of whose members returned to the
neighborhood of the sun (possibly their parent) in the years 1668, 1843,
1880, 1882, and 1887.[1]

   [Footnote 1: It may be interesting to compare the orbital elements
   of the five comets above dealt with. They may be presented as
   follows; but it should be noticed that the determinations must be
   regarded as rough in the case of Comets I. and V., as the
   observations were insufficient for exact determination of the
   elements:

   ----------------+---------+------------+------------+------------+-------
                   |    I.   |     II.    |    III.    |    IV.     |  V.
                   +---------+------------+------------+------------+-------
                   |  1668.  |    1843.   |    1880.   |   1882.    | 1887.
    Perih. Passage.| Feb. 29 |  Feb. 27   |  Jan. 27   |  Sep. 17   |Jan. 11
    Log. Per. Dist.|  7.6721 |   7.8395   |   7.7714   |   7.8895   | 8.1644
    Long. Per.     | 80 deg. 15' | 73 deg. 30' 46"| 74 deg. 11' 13"| 55 deg. 37' 29"| 89 deg. 41'
    Long. Node.    | 357 deg. 17'|355 deg. 46' 48"|356 deg. 17'  4"|346 deg.  1' 27"|359 deg. 41'
    Inclination.   | 125 deg. 58'|143 deg.  1' 31"|143 deg.  7' 31"|141 deg. 59' 40"|141 deg. 16'
    Eccentricity.  | 0.9999  |   0.9991   |   0.9995   |   0.999    | ......
    Calculator.    |Henderson| Plantamour |   Meyer    |   Kreutz   | Finlay
   ----------------+---------+------------+------------+------------+-------
   ]

But it is not merely as thus explaining what had been a most perplexing
problem that I have dealt with the evidence supplied by the practical
identity of these five comets' orbits. When once we recognize that this,
and this only, can be the explanation of the associated group of five
comets, we perceive that very interesting and important light has been
thrown on the subject of comets generally. To begin with: what an
amazing comet that must have been from which these five, and we know not
how many more, were formed by disaggregative processes--probably by the
divellent action of repulsive forces exerted by the sun! Those who
remember the comets of 1843 and 1882 as they appeared when at their full
splendor will be able to imagine how noble an appearance a comet would
present which was formed of these combined together in one. But the
comet of 1880 was described by all who saw it in the southern hemisphere
as most remarkable in appearance, despite the faintness of its head. The
great southern comet of the present year was a striking object in the
skies, though it showed the same weakness about the head. That of 1668
was probably as remarkable in appearance as even the comet of 1882. A
comet formed by combining all these together would certainly surpass in
magnificence all the comets ever observed by astronomers.

And then, what enormous periods of time must have been required to
distribute the fragments of a single comet so widely that one would be
found returning to its perihelion more than two centuries after another!
When I spoke of one member of the Biela group being in aphelion when
another would be in perihelion, I was speaking of a difference of only
three and one-third years in time; and even that would require thousands
of years. But the scattered cometic bodies which returned to the sun's
neighborhood in 1668 and 1887 speak probably of millions of years which
have passed since first this comet was formed. It would be a matter of
curious inquiry to determine what may have been the condition of our
sun, what even his volume, at that remote epoch in history.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ISOLATION OF FLUORINE.


The element fluorine has at last been successfully isolated, and its
chief chemical and physical properties determined. Many chemists,
notably Faraday, Gore, Pflaunder, and Brauner, have endeavored to
prepare this element in the free state, but all attempts have hitherto
proved futile. M. Moissau, after a long series of researches with the
fluorides of phosphorus, and the highly poisonous arsenic trifluoride,
has finally been able to liberate fluorine in the gaseous state from
anhydrous hydrofluoric acid by electrolysis. This acid in the pure state
is not an electrolyte, but when potassium fluoride is dissolved in it, a
current from ninety Bunsen elements decomposes it, evolving hydrogen
from the negative and fluoride from the positive electrode.

[Illustration:


                 (+)                 (-)
                  |                   |
                  |                   |
              __/_|_\_A           __/_|_\_A
             |    |    |         |    |    |
             |____|____|         |____|____|
              |   |   |           |   |   |
         _____|   |   |           |   |   |_____
        / ----    |   |           |   |    -----\
       //     |   |   |           |   |   |     \\
      || F    |===|===|           |===|===|    H ||
      ||      |- -|- -|           |- -|- -|      ||
      ||      | - | - |           | - | - |      ||
      ||      |- -|- - \_________/ - -|- -|      ||
      ||      | - | - - - - - - - - - | - |      ||
     //       \___________________________/      \\

]

The apparatus employed in this process is constructed of platinum, and
is made in the form of a U tube, as shown in the accompanying
illustration, with fluorspar stoppers, through which the battery
terminals, made of platinum iridium alloy, are led. The gas is liberated
at about the rate of two liters per hour, and has very powerful chemical
properties. It smells somewhat like hypochlorous acid, etches dry glass,
and decomposes water, liberating ozone, and forming hydrofluoric acid.
The non-metallic elements, with the exception of chlorine, oxygen,
nitrogen, and carbon, combine directly with it, evolving in most cases
both light and heat. It combines with hydrogen, even in the dark,
without the addition of any external energy, and converts most metals
into their fluorides. Gold and platinum are not attacked in the cold,
but when gently heated are easily corroded. Mercury readily dissolves
the gas, forming the protochloride; iron wire also completely absorbs
the gas, while powdered antimony and lead take fire in it. It is
necessary in the electrolysis of the liquid hydrofluoric acid to cool
the electrolytic cell by means of methyl chloride to -50 deg. C. Fluorine
appears to thus fully confirm the predictions which have been made by
chemists concerning its properties. It is by far the, most energetic of
all the known elements, and its position in the halogen series is
established by its property of not liberating iodine from the iodides of
potassium, mercury, and lead, and also of setting free chlorine from
potassium chloride. With iodine it appears to form a fluoride. No
compound with oxygen has yet been obtained.--_Industries._

       *       *       *       *       *




AN APPARATUS FOR PREPARING SULPHUROUS, CARBONIC, AND PHOSPHORIC
ANHYDRIDES.

BY H.N. WARREN, RESEARCH ANALYST.


Having had occasion to prepare a quantity of sulphurous anhydride, for
the purpose of reducing chromates previous to their analysis, I made use
of the following apparatus, as represented in the accompanying figure.
It consists of a glass vessel, A, provided with three tubulars,
otherwise resembling a large Wolff bottle, the large tube, B, being
provided with a stopper for the purpose of introducing pieces of sulphur
from time to time into the small dish, C, intended for its reception,
and fed with air by means of the delivery tube, D, thus allowing the
stream of gas caused by the consumption of the sulphur to escape by
means of the exit tube, E, to the vessel desired to receive it.

[Illustration]

In using the apparatus the sulphur is first kindled by introducing a red
hot wire through the tube, B, and replacing the stopper that has been
momentarily removed for the introduction of the same. A slight blast is
now maintained from the bellows that are in connection with the pipe, D,
until the whole of the sulphur is thoroughly kindled, when a somewhat
more powerful blast may be applied. When the apparatus above described
is in full working order, from 2 to 3 lb. of sodium carbonate may be
converted into sodium sulphite in less than half an hour, or several
gallons of water saturated. I have also on connecting the apparatus with
a powerful refrigerator obtained in a short time a large quantity of
liquid SO2. It will be found advantageous, however, during the
preparation of sulphurous anhydride, to employ a layer of water covering
the bottom of the vessel to about 1 inch in depth. Carbonic anhydride
and phosphoric anhydride may also be readily obtained in any desired
quantity by slight alteration; but in case of phosphorus the air must be
allowed to enter only gently, since a rapid current would at all times
determine the fracture of the vessel.--_Chem. News_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ARRANGEMENT OF ATOMS IN SPACE IN ORGANIC MOLECULES.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Ueber die raumliche Anordnung der Atome in
   organischen Molekulen, and ihre Bestimmung in
   geometrisch-isomeren ungesattigten Verbindungen. Von Johannes
   Wislicenus.--Abhandlungen der mathemalisch-physischen Klasse der
   Konigl. Sachsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenechaften. Band XIV.,
   No. 1.]

The expression "chemical structure," as commonly used by chemists, has,
as is well known, nothing to do with the arrangement of atoms in space.
The structural formula does not profess to represent spatial relations,
but simply the connections which, after a careful study of the
transformations and modes of formation of the compound represented, are
believed to exist between the atoms. Nevertheless, although we do not
commonly consider the question of space relations, it is clear that
atoms must have some definite positions in space in the molecules, and
the only reason why we do not represent these positions is because we
know practically nothing about them. The most definite suggestion
concerning space relations of atoms which has been made is that of Le
Bel and Van't Hoff. The well known hypothesis of these authors was put
forward to account for a certain kind of so-called physical isomerism
which shows itself in the action of substances upon polarized light.
Since this hypothesis was proposed, the number of cases of "abnormal
isomerism," that is to say, of cases of isomerism which cannot be
accounted for by the commonly accepted method of explaining structure,
has increased to a considerable extent, and the necessity for some new
hypothesis, or for some modification of the old ones, has come to be
pretty generally recognized. Among the cases of isomerism which it is at
least difficult to explain by the aid of the prevailing views are those
of maleic and fumaric acids; citraconic and mesaconic acids; certain
halogen derivatives of crotonic acid and of cinnamic acid; and coumaric
and coumarinic acids.

More than one hypothesis has been proposed to account for these cases of
isomerism, but no one has shown itself to be entirely satisfactory.
Quite recently Johannes Wislicenus, Professor of Chemistry in the
University of Liepsic, has made what has the appearance of being an
important contribution toward the solution of the problem referred to.
The author shows that many of the facts known in regard to the relations
between maleic and fumaric acids, and the other substances which
furnish examples of "abnormal isomerism," may be explained by the aid of
an extension of the Le Bel-Van't Hoff hypothesis. It is difficult
without the aid of models to give a clear idea concerning the hypothesis
of Wislicenus, but some idea of it may be gained from the following. If
we suppose a carbon atom to exert its affinities in the directions of
the solid angles of a tetrahedron, as is done in the Le Bel-Van't Hoff
hypothesis, then, when two carbon atoms unite, as in ethane, the union
will be between two solid angles of two tetrahedrons. If the two carbon
atoms unite by the ethylene kind of union, the union will be along a
line corresponding to one of the edges of each tetrahedron. In the
former case, in which single union exists, the two parts of the molecule
represented by the two tetrahedrons can be supposed to be capable of
revolving around an axis either in the same direction or in opposite
directions. This axis corresponds to the straight line joining the two
carbon atoms. In the case in which double union exists no such
revolution is possible. Again, if, by addition to an unsaturated
compound like ethylene, a saturated compound is formed, the kind of
union between the carbon atoms is changed, and the possibility of
revolution of the two parts of the compound is given. Whether such
revolution take place or not will be determined largely by the structure
of the compound. The tendency will be for those parts of the molecule
which have the greatest specific affinity for one another to take those
positions in which they are nearest to one another. Thus, suppose that
chlorine is added to ethylene. By following the change on the model, it
is seen that in the resulting figure the two chlorine atoms in ethylene
chloride are situated at angles of the two tetrahedrons which are
nearest each other. But chlorine has a stronger affinity for hydrogen
than it has for chlorine, and therefore each chlorine atom would tend to
get as near a hydrogen atom as possible. This involves a partial
revolution of the two tetrahedrons in opposite directions around their
common axis. So also hydrogen would tend to take a position as near as
possible to hydroxyl and to carboxyl, while hydroxyl would avoid
hydroxyl, and carboxyl would avoid carboxyl. These views are suggested
as a result of a careful application of the original Le Bel-Van't Hoff
hypothesis, and are, of course, of little value unless they can be shown
to be in accordance with the facts.

The chief merit of the work of Wislicenus consists in the fact that he
has shown that a large number of phenomena which have been observed in
the study of such cases of isomerism as were mentioned above find a
ready explanation in terms of the new hypothesis, whereas for most of
these phenomena no explanation whatever has thus far been presented. The
most marked case presented is that of maleic and fumaric acids. One by
one, the author discusses the transformations of these acids and their
substitution products, and becomes to this conclusion: "There is not to
my knowledge a single fact known in regard to the relations between
fumaric and maleic acids which is not explained by the aid of the above
geometrical considerations, not one which does not clearly support the
new hypothesis." Among the facts which he discusses in the light of the
hypothesis are these: The formation of fumaric and maleic acids from
malic acid; the quantitative transformation of maleic into fumaric acid
by contact with strong acids; the transformation of the ethereal salts
of maleic acid into those of fumaric acid by the action of a minute
quantity of free iodine; the formation of brommaleic acid and
hydrobromic acid from the dibromsuccinic acid formed by the addition of
two bromine atoms to fumaric acid; the formation of dibromsuccinic acid
from brommaleic acid and of isodibromsuccinic acid from bromfumaric acid
by the action of fuming hydrobromic acid; the conversion of brommaleic
acid into fumaric and then into succinic acid by the action of sodium
amalgam; the formation of one and the same tribromsuccinic acid by the
action of bromine on brommaleic and on bromfumaric acid; and finally,
the conversion of maleic into inactive tartaric acid, and of fumaric
into racemic acid by potassium permanganate. All these facts are shown
to find a ready explanation by the aid of the new hypothesis. Further,
it is shown that the decompositions of the salts of certain halogen
derivatives of organic acids, which give up halogen salt and carbon
dioxide, as well as the formation of lactones and of anhydrides of
dibasic acids, are in perfect harmony with the hypothesis. But the only
way to get a clear conception in regard to the mass of material which
the author has brought together and which he has shown to support his
hypothesis is by a careful study of the original paper, and the object
of this notice is mainly to call the attention of American chemists to
it.

As to the question what value to attach to the speculations which
Wislicenus has brought to our notice, it is difficult to give any but a
general answer. No one can well have a greater fear of mere speculation,
which is indulged in independently of the facts, than the writer of this
notice. Great harm has been done chemistry, and probably every other
branch of knowledge, by unwarranted speculation, and every one who has
looked into the matter knows how extremely difficult it is to emancipate
one's self from the influence of a plausible hypothesis, even when it
can be shown that it is not in accordance with the facts. It behooves
every one, therefore, before accepting a new hypothesis, no matter how
fascinating it may appear at first sight, to look carefully into the
facts, and to endeavor to determine independently whether it is well
founded or not. On the other hand, there is some danger to be
apprehended from a tendency, sometimes observed, to denounce everything
speculative, no matter how broad the basis of facts upon which it rests
may be. Without legitimate speculation, it is clear that there could be
no great progress in any subject. As far as the hypothesis under
consideration is concerned, the writer is firmly of the opinion that it
is likely to prove of great value in dealing with a large number of
chemical facts, and that, as it suggests many lines of research, it will
undoubtedly in the course of a few years exert a profound influence on
chemistry. Whether the evidence which will be accumulated will or will
not confirm the view that the tetrahedron form is characteristic of the
simplest molecules of carbon compounds is not the most important
question to be asked under the circumstances. We should rather ask
whether the testing of the hypothesis is or is not likely to bring us
nearer to the truth. It is a proposition that admits of no denial that a
hypothesis which can be tested by experiment, and which suggests lines
of work and stimulates workers to follow them, is a gain to science, no
matter what the ultimate fate of the hypothesis may be.--_Amer. Chem.
Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




GREAT WARMTH IN PAPER.


It should be thoroughly understood by all that any common paper, coarse
wrapping paper, new or old newspapers, etc., are admirable to keep out
cold or keep in warmth. The blood of _all_ domestic animals, as well as
of human beings, _must_ be always kept very near 98 degrees, just as
much in winter as in summer. And this heat always comes from _within_
the body, whenever the atmosphere is not above 98 degrees temperature.
So long as the air is cooler than this, the heat produced inside the
body is escaping. Heat seeks a level. If there is more in one of two
bodies or substances side by side, the heat will pass from the warmer
into the colder, until they are both of the same temperature.

Moving air carries away vastly more heat than still air. The thin film
of air next to the body soon gets warm from it. But if that air is moved
along, slowly or swiftly, by a breeze, be it ever so gentle, new cooler
air takes its place, and abstracts more heat from the body. Anything
that keeps the air next to the bodies of men and of animals from moving,
checks the escape of heat.

The thinnest paper serves to keep the air quiet. A newspaper laid on a
bed acts much as a coverlid to keep a film or layer of air quiet, and
thus less heat escapes from the bodies of the sleepers. If paper is
pasted up over the cracks of a house, or of a barn or stable, or under
the joists of a house floor, it has just the same effect. Every person
who keeps animals will find it a wonderful and paying protection to
them, to put against the walls one, two, three, or more layers of
newspapers during cold weather. If a person in riding finds his garments
too cool, a newspaper placed under the coat or vest, or under or over
the trousers, even if only on the side next the wind, will do a great
deal to check the outflow of heat, and keep him warm. Two or three
thicknesses of newspaper crumpled a little, and put under the coat or
overcoat, are almost as effective in keeping in warmth as an extra
garment. A slight crumpling keeps them a little separate, and makes
additional thin layers of air.

Further: Heat does not pass through films of _still_ air. Fibrous
woolens, furs, loosely woven cotton, down, and the like, contain a great
deal of air _confined_ in the meshes, and are therefore excellent
conservers of heat. Double walls of stone, brick, or wood, or even of
wall or roofing paper, double glass, double layers of anything that will
have thin layers of still air between them, prevent the escape of heat
greatly.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION.

$2.50 A Year. Single Copies, 25 Cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about forty
large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book pages,
forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF ARCHITECTURE,
richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with fine engravings,
illustrating the most interesting examples of modern Architectural
Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of the
latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans we
have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building or
improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before them in
this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best examples_
from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have won
for it the LARGEST CIRCULATION of any Architectural publication in the
world.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.


A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of charge,
