
On Dara, while Calhoun journeyed placidly back to it, grain was
distributed lavishly, and everybody on the planet had their cereal
ration almost doubled. It was still not a comfortable ration, but the
relief was great. There was considerable gratitude felt for Calhoun,
which as usual included a lively anticipation of further favors to
come. Maril was interviewed repeatedly, as the person best able to
discuss him, and she did his reputation no harm. That was all that
happened on Dara....

No. There was something else. A very curious thing, too. There was a
spread of mild symptoms which nobody could exactly call a disease.
They lasted only a few hours. A person felt slightly feverish, and ran
a temperature which peaked at 30.9 deg. centigrade, and drank more water
than usual. Then his temperature went back to normal and he forgot all
about it. There have always been such trivial epidemics. They are
rarely recorded, because few people think to go to a doctor. That was
the case here.

Calhoun looked ahead a little, too. Presently the fleet of grain ships
would arrive and unload and lift again for Orede, and this time they
would make an infinity of slaughter among wild cattle herds, and bring
back incredible quantities of fresh-slaughtered frozen beef. Almost
everybody would get to taste meat again, which would be most
gratifying.

Then, the industries of Dara would labor at government-required tasks.
An astonishing amount of fissionable material would be fashioned into
bombs--a concession by Calhoun--and plastic factories would make an
astonishing number of plastic sag-suits. And large shipments of heavy
metals in ingots would be made to the planet's capital city and there
would be some guns and minor items.

Perhaps somebody could have predicted any of these items in advance,
but it was unlikely that anyone did. Nobody but Calhoun, however,
would ever have put them together and hoped very urgently that things
would work out. He could see a promising total result. In fact, in the
Med Ship hurtling through space, on the fourth day of his journey, he
thought of an improvement that could be made in the sum of all those
happenings when they got mixed together.

He got back to Dara. Maril came to the Med Ship. Murgatroyd greeted
her with enthusiasm.

"Something strange has happened," said Maril, very much subdued. "I
told you that sometimes blueskin markings fade out on children, and
then neither they nor their children ever have markings again."

"Yes," said Calhoun. "I remember that you told me."

"And you were reminded of a group of viruses on Tralee. You said they
only took hold of people in terribly bad physical condition, but then
they could be passed on from mother to child, until sometimes they
died out."

Calhoun blinked.

"Yes?"

"Korvan," said Maril very carefully. "Has worked out an idea that
that's what happens to the blueskin markings on Darians. He thinks
that people almost dead of the plague could get the virus, and if they
recovered from the plague pass the virus on and be blueskins."

"Interesting," said Calhoun, noncommittally.

"And when we went to Weald," said Maril very carefully indeed, "you
were working with some culture material. You wrote quite a lot about
it in the ship's log. You gave yourself an injection. Remember? And
Murgatroyd? You wrote down your temperature, and Murgatroyd's?" She
moistened her lips. "You said that if infection passed between us,
something would be very infectious indeed?"

"This is a long discussion," said Calhoun. "Does it arrive at a
point?"

"It does," said Maril. "Thousands of people are having their
pigment-spots fade away. Not only children but grownups. And Korvan
has found out that it always seems to happen after a day when they
felt feverish and very thirsty, and then felt all right again. You
tried out something that made you feverish and thirsty. I had it too,
in the ship. Korvan thinks there's been an epidemic of something that
is obliterating the blue spots on everybody that catches it. There are
always trivial epidemics that nobody notices. Korvan's found evidence
of one that's making _blueskin_ no longer a word with any meaning."

"Remarkable!" said Calhoun.

"Did you do it?" asked Maril. "Did you start a harmless epidemic that
wipes out the virus that makes blueskins?"

Calhoun said in feigned astonishment, "How can you think such a thing,
Maril?"

"Because I was there," said Maril. She said, somehow desperately, "I
know you did it! But the question is, are you going to tell? When
people find they're not blueskins any longer, when there's no such
thing as a blueskin any longer, will you tell them why?"

"Naturally not," said Calhoun. "Why?" Then he guessed. "Has Korvan--"

"He thinks," said Maril, "that he thought it up all by himself. He's
found the proof. He's very proud. I'd have to tell him how the ideas
got into his head if you were going to tell. And he'd be ashamed and
angry."

Calhoun considered, staring at her.

"How it happened doesn't matter," he said at last. "The idea of
anybody doing it deliberately would be disturbing, too. It shouldn't
get about. So it seems much the best thing for Korvan to discover
what's happened to the blueskin pigment, and how it happened. But not
why."

She read his face carefully.

"You aren't doing it as a favor to me," she decided. "You'd rather it
was that way."

She looked at him for a long time, until he squirmed. Then she nodded
and went away.

An hour later the Wealdian space fleet was reported massed in space
and driving for Dara.

       *       *       *       *       *




8


There were small scout ships which came on ahead of the main fleet.
They'd originally been guard boats, intended for solar system duty
only and quite incapable of overdrive. They'd come from Weald in the
cargo holds of the liners now transformed into fighting ships. The
scouts swept low, transmitting fine-screen images back to the fleet,
of all they might see before they were shot down. They found the
landing-grid. It contained nothing larger than Calhoun's Med Ship,
_Aesclipus Twenty_.

They searched here and there. They flittered to and fro, scanning wide
bands of the surface of Dara. The planet's cities and highways and
industrial centers were wholly open to inspection from the sky. It
looked as if the scouts hunted most busily for the fleet of former
grain ships which Calhoun had said the blueskins had seized and rushed
away. If the scouts looked for them, they did not find them.

Dara offered no opposition to the ships. Nothing rose to space to
oppose or to resist their search. They went darting over every portion
of the hungry planet, land and seas alike, and there was no sign of
military preparedness against their coming. The huge ships of the main
fleet waited while the scouts reported monotonously that they saw no
sign of the stolen fleet. But the stolen fleet was the only means by
which the planet could be defended. There could be no point in a
pitched battle in emptiness. But a fleet with a planet to back it
might be dangerous.

Hours passed. The Wealdian main fleet waited. There was no offensive
movement by the fleet. There was no defensive action from the ground.
With fusion-bombs certain to be involved in any actual conflict, there
was something like an embarrassed pause. The Wealdian ships were ready
to bomb. They were less anxious to be vaporized by possible suicide
dashes of defending ships which might blow themselves up near contact
with their enemies.

But a fleet cannot travel some light-years through space to make a
mere threat. And the Wealdian fleet was furnished with the material
for total devastation. It could drop bombs from hundreds, or
thousands, or even tens of thousands of miles away. It could cover the
world of Dara with mushroom clouds springing up and spreading to make
a continuous pall of atomic-fusion products. And they could settle
down and kill every living thing not destroyed by the explosions
themselves. Even the creatures of the deepest oceans would die of
deadly, purposely-contrived fallout particles.

The Wealdian fleet contemplated its own destructiveness. It found no
capacity for defense on Dara. It moved forward.

But then a message went out from the capital city of Dara. It said
that a ship in overdrive had carried word to a Darian fleet in space.
The Darian fleet now hurtled toward Weald. It was a fleet of
thirty-seven giant ships. They carried such-and-such bombs in
such-and-such quantities. Unless its orders were countermanded, it
would deliver those bombs on Weald, set to explode. If Weald bombed
Dara, the orders could not be withdrawn. So Weald could bomb Dara. It
could destroy all life on the pariah planet. But Weald would die with
it.

The fleet ceased its advance. The situation was a stalemate with pure
desperation on one side and pure frustration on the other. This was no
way to end the war. Neither planet could trust the other, even for
minutes. If they did not destroy each other simultaneously, as now was
possible, each would expect the other to launch an unwarned attack at
some other moment. Ultimately one or the other must perish, and the
survivor would be the one most skilled in treachery.

But then the pariah planet made a new proposal. It would send a
messenger ship to stop its own fleet's bombardment if Weald would
accept payment of the grain ships and their cargos. It would pay in
ingots of irridium and uranium and tungsten, and gold if Weald wished
it, for all damages Weald might claim.

It would even pay indemnity for the miners of Orede, who had died by
accident but perhaps in some sense through its fault. It would pay.
But if it were bombed, Weald must spout atomic fire and the fleet of
Weald would have no home planet to return to.

This proposal seemed both craven and foolish. It would allow the fleet
of Weald to loot and then betray Dara. But it was Calhoun's idea. It
seemed plausible to the admirals of Weald. They felt only contempt for
blueskins. Contemptuously, they accepted the semi-surrender.

The broadcast waves of Dara told of agreement, and wild and fierce
resentment filled the pariah planet's people. There was almost
revolution to insist upon resistance, however hopeless and however
fatal. But not all of Dara realized that a vital change had come about
in the state of things on Dara. The enemy fleet had not a hint of it.

In menacing array, the invading fleet spread itself about the skies of
Dara, well beyond the atmosphere. Harsh voices talked with increasing
arrogance to the landing-grid staff. A monster ship of Weald came
heavily down, riding the landing-grid's force-fields. It touched
gently. Its occupants were apprehensive, but hungry for the loot they
had been assured was theirs. The ship's outer hull would be sterilized
before it returned to Weald, of course. And there was adequate
protection for the landing-party.

Men came out of the ship's ports. They wore the double, transparent
sag-suits Calhoun had suggested, which had been painstakingly tested,
and which were perfect protection against contagion. They were double
garments of plastic, with air tanks inside the inner flexible
envelope.

Men wearing such sag-suits could walk about on Dara. They could work
on Dara. They could loot with impunity and all contamination must
remain outside the suits, and on their return to their ships they
would simply stand in the airlocks while corrosive gases swirled
around them, killing any possible organism of disease. Then, for extra
assurance, when air from Weald filled the airlock again, the men would
burn the outer plastic covering and step into the ship without ever
having come within two layers of plastic of infection.

What loot they gathered, obviously, could be decontaminated before it
was returned to Weald. Metals could be melted, if necessary. Gems
could be sterilized. It was a most satisfactory discovery, to realize
that blueskins could be not only scorned but robbed. There was only
one bit of irrelevant information the space fleet of Weald did not
have.

That information was that the people of Dara weren't blueskins any
longer. There'd been a trivial epidemic....

The sag-suited men of Weald went zestfully about their business. They
took over the landing-grid's operation, driving the Darian operators
away. For the first time in history the operators of a landing-grid
wore make-up to look like they did have blue pigment in their skins.
They didn't. The Wealdian landing-party tested the grid's operation.
They brought down another giant ship. Then another. And another.

Parties in the shiny sag-suits spread through the city. There were the
huge stockpiles of precious metals, brought in readiness to be
surrendered and carried away. Some men set to work to load these into
the holds of the ships of Weald. Some went forthrightly after personal
loot.

They came upon very few Darians. Those they saw kept sullenly away
from them. They entered shops and took what they fancied. They
zestfully removed the treasure of banks.

Triumphant and scornful reports went up to the hovering great ships.
The blueskins, said the reports, were spiritless and cowardly. They
permitted themselves to be robbed. They kept out of the way. It had
been observed that the population was streaming out of the city,
fleeing because they feared the ships' landing-parties. The blueskins
had abjectly produced all they'd promised of precious metals, but
there was more to be taken.

More ships came down, and more. Some of the first, heavily loaded,
were lifted to emptiness again and the process of decontamination of
their hulls began. There was jealousy among the ships in space for
those upon the ground. The first-landed ships had had their choice of
loot. There were squabblings about priorities, now that the navy of
Weald plainly had a license to steal. There was confusion among the
members of the landing-parties. Discipline disappeared. Men in plastic
sag-suits roved about as individuals, seeking what they might loot.

There were armed and alerted landing-parties around the grid itself,
of course, but the capital city of Dara lay open. Men coming back with
loot found their ships already lifted off to make room for others.
They were pushed into re-embarking-parties of other ships. There were
more and more men to be found on ships where they did not belong, and
more and more not to be found where they did.

By the time half the fleet had been aground, there was no longer any
pretense of holding a ship down until all its crew returned. There
were too many other ships' companies clamoring for their turn to loot.
The rosters of many ships, indeed, bore no particular relationship to
the men actually on board.

There were less than fifteen ships whose to-be-fumigated holds were
still emptied, when the watchful government of Dara broadcast a new
message to the invaders. It requested that the looting stop. No matter
what payment Weald claimed, it had taken payment five times over. Now
was time to stop.

It was amusing. The space admiral of Weald ordered his ships alerted
for action. The message ship, ordering the Darian fleet away from
Weald, had been sent off long since. No other ship could get away now!
The Darians could take their choice: accept the consequences of
surrender, or the fleet would rise to throw down bombs.

Calhoun was asking politely to be taken to the Wealdian admiral when
the trouble began. It wasn't on the ground, at all. Everything was
under splendid control where a landing force occupied the grid and all
the ground immediately about it. The space admiral had headquarters in
the landing-grid office. Reports came in, orders were issued,
admirably crisp salutes were exchanged among sag-suited men.
Everything was in perfect shape there.

But there was panic among the ships in space. Communicators gave off
horrified, panic-stricken yells. There were screamings. Intelligible
communications ceased. Ships plunged crazily this way and that. Some
vanished in overdrive. At least one plunged at full power into a
Darian ocean.

The space admiral found himself in command of fifteen ships only out
of all his former force. The rest of the fleet went through a period
of hysterical madness. In some ships it lasted for minutes only. In
others it went on for half an hour or more. Then they hung overhead,
but did not reply to calls.

Calhoun arrived at the spaceport with Murgatroyd riding on his
shoulder. A bewildered officer in a sag-suit halted him.

"I've come," said Calhoun, "to speak to the admiral. My name is
Calhoun and I'm Med Service, and I think I met the admiral at a
banquet a few weeks ago. He'll remember me."

"You'll have to wait," protested the officer. "There's some trouble--"

"Yes," said Calhoun. "I know about it. I helped design it. I want to
explain it to the admiral. He needs to know what's happened, if he's
to take appropriate measures."

There were jitterings. Many men in sag-suits had still no idea that
anything had gone wrong. Some appeared, brightly carrying loot. Some
hung eagerly around the airlocks of ships on the grid tarmac, waiting
their turns to stand in corrosive gases for the decontamination of
their suits, when they would burn the outer layers and step, aseptic
and happy, into a Wealdian ship again. There they could think how rich
they were going to be back on Weald.

But the situation aloft was bewildering and very, very ominous. There
was strident argument. Presently Calhoun stood before the Wealdian
admiral.

"I came to explain something," said Calhoun pleasantly. "The situation
has changed. You've noticed it, I'm sure."

The admiral glared at him through two layers of plastic, which covered
him almost like a gift-wrapped parcel.

"Be quick!" he rasped.

"First," said Calhoun, "there are no more blueskins. An epidemic of
something or other has made the blue patches on the skins of Darians
fade out. There have always been some who didn't have blue patches.
Now nobody has them."

"Nonsense!" rasped the admiral. "And what has that got to do with this
situation?"

"Why, everything," said Calhoun mildly. "It seems that Darians can
pass for Wealdians whenever they please. That they _are_ passing for
Wealdians. That they've been mixing with your men, wearing sag-suits
exactly like the one you're wearing now. They've been going aboard
your ships in the confusion of returning looters. There's not a ship
now aloft, which has been aground today, which hasn't from one to
fifteen Darians--no longer blueskins--on board."

The admiral roared. Then his face turned gray.

"You can't take your fleet back to Weald," said Calhoun gently, "if
you believe its crews have been exposed to carriers of the Dara
plague. You wouldn't be allowed to land, anyhow."

The admiral said through stiff lips, "I'll blast--"

"No," said Calhoun, again gently. "When you ordered all ships alerted
for action, the Darians on each ship released panic gas. They only
needed tiny, pocket-sized containers of the gas for the job. They had
them. They only needed to use air tanks from their sag-suits to
protect themselves against the gas. They kept them handy.

"On nearly all your ships aloft your crews are crazy from panic gas.
They'll stay that way until the air is changed. Darians have
barricaded themselves in the control rooms of most if not all your
ships. You haven't got a fleet. The few ships who will obey your
orders--if they drop one bomb, our fleet off Weald will drop fifty.

"I don't think you'd better order offensive action. Instead, I think
you'd better have your fleet medical officers come and learn some of
the facts of life. There's no need for war between Dara and Weald, but
if you insist...."

The admiral made a choking noise. He could have ordered Calhoun
killed, but there was a certain appalling fact. The men aground from
the fleet were breathing Wealdian air from tanks. It would last so
long only. If they were taken on board the still obedient ships
overhead, Darians would unquestionably be mixed with them. There was
no way to take off the parties now aground without exposing them to
contact with Darians, on the ground or in the ships. There was no way
to sort out the Darians.

"I--I will give the orders," said the admiral thickly. "I do not know
what you devils plan, but--I do not know how to stop you."

"All that's necessary," said Calhoun warmly, "is an open mind. There's
a misunderstanding to be cleared up, and some principles of planetary
health practises to be explained, and a certain amount of prejudice
that has to be thrown away. But nobody need die of changing their
minds. The Interstellar Medical Service has proved that over and
over!"

Murgatroyd, perched on his shoulder, felt that it was time to take
part in the conversation. He said, "_Chee-chee!_"

"Yes," agreed Calhoun. "We do want to get the job done. We're behind
schedule now."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was not, of course, possible for Calhoun to leave immediately. He
had to preside at various meetings of the medical officers of the
fleet and the health officials of Dara. He had to make explanations,
and correct misapprehensions, and delicately suggest such biological
experiments as would prove to the doctors of Weald that there was no
longer a plague on Dara, whatever had been the case three generations
before.

He had to sit by while an extremely self-confident young Darian
doctor--one of his names was Korvan--rather condescendingly
demonstrated that the former blue pigmentation was a viral product
quite unconnected with the plague, and that it had been wiped out by a
very trivial epidemic of such and such.

Calhoun regarded that young man with a detached interest. Maril
thought him wonderful, even if she had to give him the material for
his work. He agreed with her that he was wonderful. Calhoun shrugged
and went on with his own work.

The return of loot, mutual, full, and complete agreement that Darians
were no longer carriers of plague, if they had ever been--unless Weald
convinced other worlds of this, Weald itself would join Dara in
isolation from neighboring worlds. A messenger ship had to recall the
twenty-seven ships once floating in orbit about Weald. Most of them
would be used for some time, to bring beef from Orede. Some would haul
more grain from Weald. It would be paid for. There would be a need for
commercial missions to be exchanged between Weald and Dara. There
would have to be....

It was a full week before he could go to the little Med Ship and
prepare for departure. Even then there were matters to be attended to.
All the food-supplies that had been removed could not be replaced.
There were biological samples to be replaced and some to be destroyed.

Maril came to the Med Ship again when he was almost ready to leave.
She did not seem comfortable.

"I wanted you to meet Korvan," she said regretfully.

"I met him," said Calhoun. "I think he will be a most prominent
citizen, in time. He has all the talents for it."

Maril smiled very faintly.

"But you don't admire him."

"I wouldn't say that," protested Calhoun. "After all, he is desirable
to you, which is something I couldn't manage."

"You didn't try," said Maril. "Just as I didn't try to be fascinating
to you. Why?"

Calhoun spread out his hands. But he looked at Maril with respect. Not
every woman could have faced the fact that a man did not feel impelled
to make passes at her. It is simply a fact that has nothing to do with
desirability or charm or anything else.

"You're going to marry him," he said. "I hope you'll be very happy."

"He's the man I want," said Maril frankly. "And I doubt he'll ever
look at another woman. He looks forward to splendid discoveries. I
wish he didn't."

Calhoun did not ask the obvious question. Instead, he said
thoughtfully, "There's something you could do. It needs to be done.
The Med Service in this sector has been badly handled. There are a
number of discoveries that need to be made. I don't think your Korvan
would relish having things handed to him on a visible silver platter.
But they should be known...."

Maril said, "I can guess what you mean. I dropped hints about the way
the blueskin markings went away, yes. You've got books for me?"

Calhoun nodded. He found them.

