
Being carried on its own center, and not, as is usual, on the rudder
stock, and with its rim supported on rollers, the quadrant does not
impose upon the rudder pintles any of its own weight, thus diminishing
the wear on these parts. This arrangement also keeps the quadrant
always in good gear with its pinion, thereby allowing the teeth of
both to be strengthened by shrouding, and rendering them exempt from
the effects of sinking and slogger of the rudder stock as the pintles
wear. The rack and pinions are of cast steel, as is also the tiller
crosshead. The spring buffers, which, as has been said, form an
essential part of the quadrant, are fitted with steel rollers at the
point of contact with the crosshead, thereby reducing the friction to
a minimum. The springs, by their compression, absorb any shock coming
on the rudder, and greatly reduce the vibration when struck by a sea.
They are made adjustable, and can be either steel or rubber.

Our illustrations show the arrangement of the gear as worked by hand
at the rudder head, but of course gears are made having a steam
steering engine as the major portion of the arrangement--the two
cylinders being placed directly over the quadrant--thus securing the
well known advantages attaching to a direct rudder head steering
engine as compared with the engine situated amidship, with all the
friction of parts, liability to breakage, etc., thereby entailed.

Whether with engine amidship or directly over the rudderhead, ample
provision is made for putting the hand power into gear by means of a
friction clutch within the standard upon which the hand wheels are
mounted. The clutch is of large diameter and lined with hard wood,
power and ready facility being provided by the hand lever--seen at the
top of standard--and the screw which it operates, for shifting to in
and out of gear.

The patentees and makers of this type of gear are Messrs. Croom &
Arthur, Victoria Dock, Leith, who, in addition to fitting it to the
three North German Lloyd steamers named in the title--which are each
of 3,200 tons, having an 8-inch rudder-stock--have applied it to the
Hamburg and Australian liner Meissen of 5,200 tons and 10-inch rudder
stock, and to the steamer Carisbrook of 1,724 tons, owned in Leith. On
the latter vessel, which was the first fitted with it, the gear has
been working for over two years, giving, we are told, entire
satisfaction to the owners, who say the spring buffers undoubtedly
reduce the vibration when the rudder is struck by a sea, and the
arrangement of quadrant and tiller appears to give increase of power.
Of the installation of this gear on board the three North German Lloyd
vessels, the agents of that company say: "It has been working to our
entire satisfaction. This system, on the whole, proves to have
answered its purpose." Considering the advantages claimed for the
gear, this is satisfactory testimony. We are indebted to The London
Engineer for the cuts and description.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMBINED STEAM PUMPING AND MOTIVE POWER ENGINE.


We give herewith an illustration of a compact engine, designed by
Messrs. Merryweather & Sons, of London, particularly for mining work,
and already supplied to the Burma ruby mines, the Salamanca tin mines,
and several mining companies in Brazil and other parts of South
America. It is an arrangement of the Valiant steam pumping engine with
a flywheel arranged to take a belt, and is so constructed that the
pump can be readily thrown out of gear and the engine used to drive
light machinery. The smaller size weighs only 7 cwt., including
boiler, engine and pump complete, and can be run on its own wheels, or
these can be detached and the machine carried by eight or ten men on
shoulder poles passed through rings fitted on top of the boiler. Thus
it can be easily transported up country, and has for this reason been
found most useful for prospecting. For alluvial mining it will throw a
powerful jet at 100 lb. to 120 lb. pressure, or by means of a belt
will drive an experimental quartz crusher or stamp mill. The power
developed is six horses, and the boiler will burn wood or other
inferior fuel when coal is not obtainable. The pump will deliver 100
gallons per minute, on a short length of hose or piping, and will
force water through three or four miles of piping on the level, or, on
a short length, 35 gallons per minute against a head of 210 feet. The
pump is made entirely of gun metal, with rubber valves, and has large
suction and delivery branches. Air vessels are fitted, and the motion
work is simple and strong. The boiler is Merryweather's water tube
type, and raises steam rapidly, while the fittings include feed pump,
injector, safety valve, steam blast and an arrangement for feeding the
boiler from the main pump in case of necessity.

[Illustration: MERRYWEATHER'S PUMPING ENGINE.]

We are indebted to The London Engineer for the engraving and
description.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some romances and exaggerations of which the Pitch Lake, at
Trinidad, has been the subject, are corrected by Mr. Albert Cronise,
of Rochester, N.Y. Its area, height and distance from the sea have
been overestimated, and a volcanic action has been ascribed to it
which does not really exist. It is one mile from the landing place, is
138 feet above the sea level, is irregular, approximately round, and
has an area of 109 acres. Its surface is a few feet higher than the
ground immediately around it, having been lifted up by the pressure
from below. The material of the lake is solid to a depth of several
feet, except in a few spots in the center, where it remains soft, but
usually not hot or boiling. But as the condition of the softest part
varies, it may be that it boils sometimes. The surface of the lake is
marked by fissures two or three feet wide and slightly depressed
spots, all of which are filled with rainwater. In going about one has
to pick his way among the larger puddles and jump many of the smaller
connecting streams. Each of the hundreds of irregular portions
separated by this network of fissures is said to have a slow revolving
motion upon a horizontal axis at right angles to a line from the
center of the lake, the surface moving toward the circumference. This
motion is supposed to be caused by the great daily change in
temperature, often amounting to 80 deg., and an unequal upward motion of
the mass below, increasing toward the center of the lake. A few
patches of shallow earth lying on the pitch, and covered with bushes
and small trees, are scattered over the surface of the lake.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Gardeners' Chronicle announces that Mr. Fetisoff, an amateur
horticulturist at Voronezh, Russia, has achieved what was believed to
be impossible, the production of jet black roses. No details of the
process have been received.

       *       *       *       *       *




Recent Books.

       *       *       *       *       *


ELECTRO-METALLURGY. Electric Smelting and Refining: The Extraction
and Treatment of Metals by means of the Electric Current. Being the
second edition of Elektro-Metallurgie by Dr. W. Borchers. Translated,
with additions, by Walter G. McMillan. With 3 plates and numerous
illustrations in the text. 8vo, cloth. 416 pages. London and New York,
1897 $6.50

ELECTRO-TECHNICAL SERIES. By Edwin J. Houston, Ph.D., and A.E.
Kennelly, D.Sc. Ten volumes: Alternating Electric Currents, Electric
Heating, Electro-Magnetism, Electricity in Electro-Therapeutics,
Electric Arc Lighting, Electric Incandescent Lighting, Electric
Motors, Electric Street Railways, Electric Telephony, Electric
Telegraphy. Each $1.00

ENGINEERS. The Practical Management of Engines and Boilers,
including Boiler Setting, Pumps, Injectors, Feed Water Heaters, Steam
Engine Economy, Condensers, Indicators, Slide Valves, Safety Valves,
Governors, Steam Gages, Incrustation and Corrosion, etc. A Practical
Guide for Engineers and Firemen and Steam Users generally. By William
B. Le Van. 12mo, cloth. 267 pages. 49 illustrations. 1897 $2.00

EXPERIMENTAL SCIENCE. By George M. Hopkins. This book treats on the
various topics of Physics in a popular and practical way. It describes
the apparatus in detail, and explains the experiments in full, so that
teachers, students and others interested in Physics may readily make
the apparatus without expense and perform the experiments without
difficulty. The aim of the writer has been to render physical
experimentation so simple and attractive as to induce both old and
young to engage in it for pleasure and profit. A few simple
arithmetical problems comprise all of the mathamatics of the book.
Many new experiments are here described for the first time. It is the
most thoroughly illustrated work over published on Experimental
Physics. 840 pages. Over 790 illustrations. Seventeenth edition.
Revised and enlarged. 8vo, cloth $4.00

EXPLOSIVES. Lectures on Explosives. A course of Lectures prepared
especially as a Manual and Guide in the Laboratory of the United
States Artillery School. By Willoughby Walke, First Lieut. Fifth
United States Artillery. Second edition. Revised and enlarged. 8vo,
cloth. 435 pages. New York, 1897 $4.00

FEEDS AND FEEDING. A Handbook for the Student and Stockman. By W.A.
Henry. 8vo, cloth. 657 pages. 1898 $2.00

       *       *       *       *       *

Our large Catalogue of American and Foreign Scientific and Technical
Books, embracing more than Fifty different subjects, and containing
116 pages, will be mailed, free, to any address in the world.

Any of the foregoing Books mailed, on receipt of price, to any
address. Remit by Draft, Postal Note, Check, or Money Order, to order
of

MUNN & CO.,
361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


A COMPLETE
ELECTRICAL LIBRARY

BY PROF. T. O'CONOR SLOANE,

Comprising five books, as follows:

  Arithmetic of Electricity, 138 pages            $1.00
  Electric Toy Making, 140 pages                   1.00
  How to Become a Successful Electrician, 189 pp.  1.00
  Standard Electrical Dictionary, 682 pages        3.00
  Electricity Simplified, 158 pages                1.00

--The above five books by Prof. Sloane may be purchased singly at the
published prices, or the set complete, put up in a neat folding box,
will be furnished to Scientific American readers at the special
reduced price of FIVE DOLLARS. You save $2 by ordering the complete
set. FIVE VOLUMES, 1,300 PAGES, AND OVER 450 ILLUSTRATIONS.

--Send for full table of contents of each of the books.

--Our complete book catalogue of 116 pages, containing reference to
works of a scientific and technical character, will be sent free to
any address on application.

_We cannot permit the receipt of Sloane's Electrical Library to pass
by without complimenting you upon the same. It is a most admirable
work. Should be in the hands of all those who are interested in
electricity._

_PHILLIPS, ORMONDE & CO., Engineers._
_Melbourne, Victoria._

_I was highly pleased with the copy of Sloane's Electrical Library,
which arrived in good condition. It is one of the most valuable works
I possess in my library. The use of the Roentgen Rays in my profession
has stimulated my desire for electrical knowledge greatly, and I
consider Sloane's "Electrical Dictionary" a first-class book of
reference. I shall be pleased to recommend it to my colleagues in
search of such a work. Yours truly,_

_P.J. CLENDINNIN, M.D.,_
_Hon. Medical Electrician to the Melbourne Hospital._

MUNN & CO., Publishers, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


_JUST PUBLISHED._

Second Edition, Revised and much Enlarged.

Gas, Gasoline and Oil Engines

By GARDNER D. HISCOX, M.E.

The only American Book on the Subject.

This is a book designed for the general information of every one
interested in this new and popular motive power, and its adaptation to
the increasing demand for a cheap and easily managed motor requiring
no licensed engineer.

The book treats of the theory and practice of Gas, Gasoline and Oil
Engines, as designed and manufactured in the United States. It also
contains chapters on Horseless Vehicles, Electric Lighting, Marine
Propulsion, etc. Second Edition. Illustrated by 270 engravings.
Revised and enlarged.

LARGE OCTAVO. 365 PAGES. PRICE $2.50.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

Chapter I.--Introductory, Historical. Chapter II.--Theory of the Gas
and Gasoline Engine. Chapter III.--Utilization of Heat and Efficiency
in Gas Engines. Chapter IV.--Heat Efficiencies. Chapter V.--Retarded
Combustion and Wall Cooling. Chapter VI.--Causes of Loss and
Inefficiency in Explosive Motors. Chapter VII.--Economy of the Gas
Engine for Electric Lighting. Chapter VIII.--The Material of Power in
Explosive Engines, Gas, Petroleum Products and Acetylene Gas. Chapter
IX.--Carbureters and Vapor Gas for Explosive Motors. Chapter
X.--Cylinder Capacity of Gas and Gasoline Engines, Mufflers on Gas
Engines. Chapter XI--Governors and Valve Gear. Chapter XII.--Igniters
and Exploders, Hot, Tube and Electric. Chapter XIII.--Cylinder
Lubrication. Chapter XIV--On the Management of Explosive Motors.
Chapter XV.--The Measurement of Power by Prony Brakes, Dynamometers
and Indicators, The Measurement of Speed, The Indicator and its Work,
Vibrations of Buildings and Floors by the Running of Explosive Motors.
Chapter XVI.--Explosive Engine Testing. Chapter XVII.--Various Types
of Gas and Oil Engines, Marine and Vehicle Motors.--Chapter
XVIII.--Various Types of Gas and Oil Engines. Marine and Vehicle
Motors--Continued. Chapter XIX--United States Patents on Gas, Gasoline
and Oil Engines and their Adjuncts--1875 to 1897 inclusive--List of
the Manufacturers of Gas, Gasoline and Oil Engines in the United
States, with their addresses.

       *       *       *       *       *

A FEW EXTRACTS OF NOTICES FROM THE PRESS.

It is a very comprehensive and thoroughly up-to-date work.--_American
Machinist._

The subjects treated in this book are timely and interesting, as there
is no doubt as to the increasing use of Gas, Gasoline and Oil Engines,
particularly for small powers. It gives such general information on
the construction, operation and care of these engines that should
prove valuable to any one in need of such motors, as well as those
already having them in use.--_Machinery._

_What an engineer says_:

_I beg to acknowledge receipt of your book on Gas, Gasoline and Oil
Engines, by Hiscox, by registered mail. I am highly pleased with the
book. It is the best on Oil Engines I have ever seen, is not intricate
in the calculations, and the illustrations are excellent. Yours
truly,_

_S. DALRYMPLE, Chief-engineer S.S. "Talune."_
_Melbourne, Victoria._

MUNN & CO., Publishers,
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN OFFICE,
361 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


The
Scientific American Supplement.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the
United States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any
foreign country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50 stitched in
paper, or $3.50 bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES.--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., Publishers,
361 Broadway, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPECIAL NAVAL SUPPLEMENT, No. 1165,

contains a historical review of the modern United States navy, the
classification of the various forms of war vessels and nearly one
hundred illustrations, including details of construction of such
vessels not found in any other publication. A map of Cuba printed in
five colors accompanies it. Price, 25 cents. Single copies sent by
mail in United States, Canada and Mexico. Foreign countries, 8 cents
extra.

MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


1897 Supplement Catalogue Ready!

The publishers of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN announce that an entirely
new 48 page SUPPLEMENT Catalogue is now ready for distribution, and
will be sent free to all on application.

MUNN & CO., Publishers,
361 Broadway, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUILDING EDITION

OF THE

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

Those who contemplate building should not fail to subscribe.

ONLY $2.50 A YEAR.

Semi-annual bound volumes $2.00 each, yearly bound volumes $3.50 each,
prepaid by mail.

Each number contains elevations and plans of a variety of country
houses; also a handsome COLORED PLATE.

MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New York.

