
*Exercises.*--1. How does oxidation at the cells make necessary the
introduction of new materials into the body?

2. What different purposes are served by the foods?

3. What is a nutrient? Name the important classes.

4. What are food materials? From what sources are they obtained?

5. Name the different kinds of proteids; the different kinds of
carbohydrates. Why are proteids called nitrogenous foods and fats and
carbohydrates non-nitrogenous foods?

6. Show why life cannot be carried on without proteids; without water.

7. What per cents of proteid, fat, and carbohydrate are found in wheat
flour, oatmeal, rice, butter, potatoes, round beef, eggs, and peanuts?

8. State the objection to a meal consisting of beef, eggs, beans, bread,
and butter; to one consisting of potatoes, rice, bread, and butter. Which
is the more objectionable of these meals and why?

9. State the general plan of digestion.

10. Show that digestion is not a simple process like that of dissolving
salt in water.



PRACTICAL WORK


*Elements supplied by the Foods.*--The following brief study will enable
the pupil to identify most of the elements present in the body and which
have, therefore, to be supplied by the foods.

_Carbon._--Examine pieces of charred wood, coke, or coal, and also the
"lead" in lead pencils. Show that the charred wood and the coal will burn.
Recall experiment (page 114) showing that carbon in burning forms carbon
dioxide.

_Hydrogen._--Fill a test tube one third full of strong hydrochloric acid
and drop into it several small scraps of zinc. The gas which is evolved is
hydrogen. When the hydrogen is coming off rapidly, bring a lighted
splinter to the mouth of the tube. The gas should burn. Hold a cold piece
of glass over the flame and observe the deposit of moisture. Hydrogen in
burning forms water. Extinguish the flame by covering the top of the tube
with a piece of cardboard. Now let the escaping gas collect in a tumbler
inverted over the tube. After holding the tumbler in this position for two
or three minutes, remove and, keeping inverted, thrust a lighted splinter
into it. (The gas should either burn or explode.) What does this
experiment show relative to the weight of hydrogen as compared with that
of air?

_Nitrogen._--Nitrogen forms about four fifths of the atmosphere, where,
like oxygen, it exists in a free state. It may be separated from the
oxygen of an inclosed portion of air by causing that gas to unite with
phosphorus. Place a piece of phosphorus the size of a pea in a depression
in a flat piece of cork. (Handle phosphorus with wet fingers or with
forceps.) Place the cork on water and have ready a glass fruit jar holding
not more than a quart. Ignite the phosphorus with a hot wire and invert
the jar over it, pushing the mouth below the surface of the water. The
phosphorus uniting with the oxygen fills the jar with white fumes of
phosphoric oxide. These soon dissolve in the water, leaving a clear gas
above. This is nitrogen. Place a cardboard under the mouth of the jar and
turn it right side up, leaving in the water and keeping the top covered.
Light a splinter and, slipping the cover to one side, thrust the flame
into the jar of nitrogen, noting the effect. (Flame is extinguished.)
Compare nitrogen with oxygen in its relation to combustion. What purpose
is served by each in the atmosphere?

_Oxygen._--Review experiments (page 114) showing the properties of oxygen.

_Phosphorus._--Examine a small piece of phosphorus, noting that it has to
be kept under water. Lay a small piece on the table and observe the tiny
stream of white smoke rising from it, formed by slow oxidation. Dissolve a
piece as large as a pea in a teaspoonful of carbon disulphide in a test
tube, pour this on a piece of porous paper, and lay the paper on an iron
support. When the carbon disulphide evaporates the phosphorus takes fire
spontaneously. (The heat from the slow oxidation is sufficient to ignite
the phosphorus in the finely divided condition.) What is the most striking
property of phosphorus? What purpose does it serve in the match?

_Sulphur._--Examine some sulphur, noting its color and the absence of odor
or taste. (Impure sulphur may have an odor and a taste.) Burn a little
sulphur in an iron spoon, noting that the compound which it forms with
oxygen by burning has a decided odor.

_Other Elements._--_Magnesium._ Examine and burn a piece of magnesium
ribbon, noting the white compound of magnesium oxide which is formed.
_Iron._ Examine pieces of the metal and also some of its compounds, as
ferrous sulphate, ferric chloride, and ferric oxide or iron rust.
_Sodium._ Drop a piece of the metal on water and observe results. Sodium
decomposes water. It has to be kept under some liquid, such as kerosene,
which contains no oxygen. (It should not be touched except with the
fingers wet with kerosene.) _Chlorine._ Pour strong hydrochloric acid on a
little manganese dioxide in a test tube, and warm gently over a low flame.
The escaping gas is chlorine. Avoid breathing much of it.

*Composition of the Nutrients.*--The simplest way of determining what
elements make up the different nutrients is by heating them and studying
the products of decomposition, as follows:

_To show that Carbohydrates contain Carbon, Hydrogen, and Oxygen._--Place
one half teaspoonful of powdered starch in a test tube and heat strongly.
Observe that _water_ condenses on the sides of the tube and that a black,
charred mass remains behind. The black mass consists mainly of _carbon_.
The water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen. These three elements are
thus shown to be present in the starch. The experiment may be repeated,
using sugar instead of starch.

_To show that Proteids contain Carbon, Hydrogen, Oxygen, Nitrogen, and
Sulphur._--Place in a test tube some finely divided proteid which has been
thoroughly dried (dried beef or the lean of hard cured bacon). Heat
strongly in the hood of a chemical laboratory or some other place where
the odors do not get into the room. First hold in the escaping gases a wet
strip of red litmus paper. This will be turned blue, showing _ammonia_
(NH3) to be escaping. Next hold in the mouth of the tube a strip of a
paper wet with a solution of lead nitrate. This is turned black or brown
on account of _hydrogen sulphide_(H2S) which is being driven off. Observe
also that _water_ condenses in the upper part of the tube and that a
black, charred mass remains behind. Since the products of decomposition
(H2O, NH3, H2S, and the charred mass) contain hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
sulphur, and carbon, these elements are of course present in the proteid
tested.

_To show the Presence of Mineral Matter._--Burn a piece of dry bread by
holding it in a clear, hot flame, and observe the ash that is left behind.
This is the mineral matter present in the bread.

*Tests for Nutrients.* _Proteids._--Cover the substance to be tested with
strong nitric acid and heat gradually to boiling. If proteid is present it
turns yellow and partly dissolves in the acid, forming a yellow solution.
Let cool and then add ammonia. The yellow solid and the solution are
turned a deep orange color. Apply this test to foods containing proteid
such as white of egg, cheese, lean meat, etc.

_Starch._--_(a)_ Place a small lump of starch in one fourth of a pint of
water and heat gradually to boiling, stirring well. Then add enough water
to form a thin liquid and fill a test tube half full. Add to this a few
drops of a solution of iodine. (Prepare by dissolving a crystal of iodine
in 25 cubic centimeters (1/20 pint) of a solution of potassium iodide in
water and add water to this until it is a light amber color.) The starch
solution is turned blue, _(b)_ Cut with a razor a thin slice from a
potato. Place this in a weak solution of iodine for a few minutes and then
examine with the microscope, using first a low and then a high power.
Numerous starch grains inclosed in cellulose walls will be seen (Fig. 60).

_Dextrose, or Grape Sugar._--Place a solution of the substance supposed to
contain grape sugar in a test tube and add a few drops of a dilute
solution of copper sulphate. Then add sodium hydroxide solution until the
precipitate which first forms is redissolved and a clear blue liquid
obtained. Heat the upper portion of the liquid slowly to near the boiling
point. A little below the boiling point the blue color disappears and a
yellow-red precipitate is formed. If the upper layer of the liquid is now
boiled, the color deepens and this may be contrasted with the blue color
below. Apply this test to the sugar in raisins and in honey.

_Fat._--Fat is recognized by its effect on paper, making a greasy stain
which does not disappear on heating and which renders the paper
translucent. Try butter, lard, or olive oil. Also show the presence of fat
in peanuts by crushing them in a mortar and rubbing the powder on thin
paper. If the substance to be tested contains but little fat, this may be
dissolved out with ether. If a drop of ether containing the fat is placed
on paper, it evaporates, leaving the fat, which then forms the stain.

*To show the Effect of Alcohol upon Proteid.*--Place some of the white of a
raw egg in a glass vessel and cover it with a small amount of alcohol. As
the albumin (proteid) hardens, or coagulates, observe that the quantity of
clear liquid increases. This is due to the _withdrawal_ of water from the
albumin by the alcohol. Since the tissues are made up chiefly of proteids,
a piece of muscle or of liver may be used in the experiment, instead of
the egg, with similar results.

*To illustrate the Digestive Process.*--To a tumbler two thirds full of
water add a little salt. Stir and observe that the salt is dissolved.
Taste the solution to see that the salt has not been changed chemically.
Now add a little powdered limestone to the water and stir as before.
Observe that the limestone does not dissolve. Then add some hydrochloric
acid and observe the result. State the part played by the acid and by the
water in dissolving the limestone. Apply to the digestion of the different
classes of foods.




CHAPTER X - ORGANS AND PROCESSES OF DIGESTION


The organs of digestion are adapted to the work of dissolving the foods by
both their structure and arrangement. Most of them consist either of tubes
or cavities and these are so connected, one with the other, as to form a
continuous passageway entirely through the body. This passageway is known
as

*The Alimentary Canal. *--The alimentary canal has a length of about thirty
feet and, while it begins at the mouth, all but about eighteen inches of
it is found in the abdominal cavity. On account of its length it lies for
the most part in coils, the two largest ones being known as the small
intestine and the large intestine. Connected with the alimentary canal are
the glands that supply the liquids for acting on the food. The divisions
of the canal and most of the glands that empty liquids into it are shown
in Fig. 63 and named in the table below:

                                 [Table]

*Coats of the Alimentary Canal.*--The walls of the alimentary canal, except
at the mouth, are distinct from the surrounding tissues and consist in
most places of at least three layers, or coats, as follows:

                                [Fig. 63]


 Fig. 63--*Diagram of the digestive system.* 1. Mouth. 2. Soft palate. 3.
Pharynx. 4. Parotid gland. 5. Sublingual gland. 6. Submaxillary gland. 7.
Esophagus. 8. Stomach. 9. Pancreas. 10. Vermiform appendix. 11. Caecum. 12.
 Ascending colon. 13. Transverse colon. 14. Descending colon. 15. Sigmoid
    flexure. 16. Rectum. 17. Ileo-caecal valve. 18. Duct from liver and
                          pancreas. 19. Liver.

     Diagram does not show comparative length of the small intestine.


1. An _inner coat_, or lining, known as the mucous membrane. This membrane
is not confined to the alimentary canal, but lines, as we have seen, the
different air passages. It covers, in fact, all those internal surfaces of
the body that connect with the external surface. It derives its name from
the substance which it secretes, called _mucus_. In structure it resembles
the skin, being continuous with the skin where cavities open to the
surface. It is made up of two layers--a thick underlayer which contains
blood vessels, nerves, and glands, and a thin surface layer, called the
_epithelium._ The epithelium, like the cuticle, is without blood vessels,
nerves, or glands.

2. A _middle coat_, which is muscular and which forms a continuous layer
throughout the canal, except at the mouth. (Here its place is taken by the
strong muscles of mastication which are separate and distinct from each
other.) As a rule the muscles of this coat are involuntary. They surround
the canal as thin sheets and at most places form two distinct layers. In
the inner layer the fibers encircle the canal, but in the outer layer they
run longitudinally, or lengthwise, along the canal.(57)

3. An _outer_ or _serous coat_, which is limited to those portions of the
canal that occupy the abdominal cavity. This coat is not found above the
diaphragm. It is a part of the lining membrane of the cavity of the
abdomen, called

                                [Fig. 64]


Fig. 64--*Diagram of the peritoneum.* 1. Transverse colon. 2. Duodenum. 3.
                      Small intestine. 4. Pancreas.


*The Peritoneum.*--The peritoneum is to the abdominal cavity what the
pleura is to the thoracic cavity. It forms the outer covering for the
alimentary canal and other abdominal organs and supplies the inner lining
of the cavity itself. It is also the means of holding these organs in
place, some of them being suspended by it from the abdominal walls (Fig.
64). By the secretion of a small amount of liquid, it prevents friction of
the parts upon one another.

*Digestive Glands.*--The glands which provide the different fluids for
acting on the foods derive their constituents from the blood. They are
situated either in the mucous membrane or at convenient places outside of
the canal and pass their liquids into it by means of small tubes, called
ducts. In the canal the food and the digestive fluids come in direct
contact--a condition which the dissolving processes require. Each kind of
fluid is secreted by a special kind of gland and is emptied into the canal
at the place where it is needed.

*The Digestive Processes.*--Digestion is accomplished by acting upon the
food in different ways, as it is passed along the canal, with the final
result of reducing it to the form of a solution. Several distinct
processes are necessary and they occur in such an order that those
preceding are preparatory to those that follow. These processes are known
as _mastication, insalivation, deglutition, stomach digestion_, and
_intestinal_ digestion. As the different materials become liquefied they
are transferred to the blood, and substances not reduced to the liquid
state are passed on through the canal as waste. The first two of the
digestive processes occur in

*The Mouth.*--This is an oval-shaped cavity situated at the very beginning
of the canal. It is surrounded by the lips in front, by the cheeks on the
sides, by the hard palate above and the soft palate behind, and by the
tissues of the lower jaw below. The mucous membrane lining the mouth is,
soft and smooth, being covered with flat epithelial cells. The external
opening of the mouth is guarded by the lips, and the soft palate forms a
_movable_ partition between the mouth and the pharynx. In a condition of
repose the mouth space is practically filled by the teeth and the tongue,
but the cavity may be enlarged and room provided for food by depressing
the lower jaw.

The mouth by its construction is well adapted to carrying on the processes
of mastication and insalivation. By the first process the solid food is
reduced, by the cutting and grinding action of the teeth, to a finely
divided condition. By the second, the saliva becomes mixed with the food
and is made to act upon it.

                                [Fig. 65]


Fig. 65--*The teeth.* _A._ Section of a single molar. 1. Pulp. 2. Dentine.
  3. Enamel. 4. Crown. 5. Neck. 6. Root. _B._ Teeth in position in lower
  jaw. 1. Incisors. 2. Canine. 3. Biscuspids. 4. Molars. _C._ Upper and
   lower teeth on one side. 1. Incisors. 2. Canines. 3. Biscuspids. 4.
Molars. 5. Wisdom. _D._ Upper and lower incisor, to show gliding contact.


*Accessory Organs of the Mouth.*--The work of mastication and insalivation
is accomplished through organs situated in and around the mouth cavity.
These comprise:

1. _The Teeth._--The teeth are set in the upper and lower jaws, one row
directly over the other, with their hardened surfaces facing. In reducing
the food, the teeth of the lower jaw move against those of the upper,
while the food is held by the tongue and cheeks between the grinding
surfaces. The front teeth are thin and chisel-shaped. They do not meet so
squarely as do the back ones, but their edges glide over each other, like
the blades of scissors--a condition that adapts them to cutting off and
separating the food (_D_, Fig. 65). The back teeth are broad and
irregular, having surfaces that are adapted to crushing and grinding.

Each tooth is composed mainly of a bone-like substance, called _dentine_,
which surrounds a central space, containing blood vessels and nerves,
known as the _pulp cavity_. It is set in a depression in the jaw where it
is held firmly in place by a bony substance, known as _cement_. The part
of the tooth exposed above the gum is the _crown_, the part surrounded by
the gum is the _neck_, and the part which penetrates into the jaw is the
_root_ (_A_, Fig. 65). A hard, protective material, called _enamel_,
covers the exposed surface of the tooth.

The teeth which first appear are known as the _temporary_, or milk, teeth
and are twenty in number, ten in each jaw. They usually begin to appear
about the sixth month, and they disappear from the mouth at intervals from
the sixth to the thirteenth year. As they leave, teeth of the second, or
_permanent_, set take their place. This set has thirty-two teeth of four
different kinds arranged in the two jaws as follows:

In front, above and below, are four chisel-shaped teeth, known as the
_incisors_. Next to these on either side is a tooth longer and thicker
than the incisors, called the _canine_. Back of these are two short,
rounded and double pointed teeth, the _bicuspids_, and back of the
bicuspids are three heavy teeth with irregular grinding surfaces, called
the _molars_ (_B_ and _C_, Fig. 65). Since the molar farthest back in each
jaw is usually not cut until maturity, it is called a _wisdom_ tooth. The
molars are known as the superadded permanent teeth because they do not
take the place of milk teeth, but form farther back as the jaw grows in
length.

                                [Fig. 66]


    Fig. 66--*Diagram* showing directions of muscular fibers in tongue.


2. _The Tongue._--The tongue is a muscular organ whose fibers extend
through it in several directions (Fig. 66). Its structure adapts it to a
variety of movements. During mastication the tongue transfers the food
from one part of the mouth to another, and, with the aid of the cheeks,
holds the food between the rows of teeth. (By an outward pressure from the
tongue and an inward pressure from the cheek the food is kept between the
grinding surfaces.) The tongue has functions in addition to these and is a
most useful organ.

3. _The Muscles of Mastication._--These are attached to the lower jaw and
bring about its different movements. The _masseter_ muscles, which are the
heavy muscles in the cheeks, and the _temporal_ muscles, located in the
region of the temples, raise the lower jaw and supply the force for
grinding the food. Small muscles situated below the chin depress the jaw
and open the mouth.

                                [Fig. 67]


 Fig. 67--*Salivary glands* and the ducts connecting them with the mouth.


4. _The Salivary Glands._--These glands are situated in the tissues
surrounding the mouth, and communicate with it by means of ducts (Fig.
67). They secrete the saliva. The salivary glands are six in number and
are arranged in three pairs. The largest, called the _parotid_ glands,
lie, one on either side, in front of and below the ears. A duct from each
gland passes forward along the cheek until it opens in the interior of the
mouth, opposite the second molar tooth in the upper jaw. Next in size to
the parotids are the _submaxillary_ glands. These are located, one on
either side, just below and in front of the triangular bend in the lower
jaw. The smallest of the salivary glands are the _sublingual_. They are
situated in the floor of the mouth, on either side, at the front and base
of the tongue. Ducts from the submaxillary and sublingual glands open into
the mouth below the tip of the tongue.

*The Saliva and its Uses.*--The saliva is a transparent and somewhat slimy
liquid which is slightly alkaline. It consists chiefly of water (about 99
per cent), but in this are dissolved certain salts and an active chemical
agent, or enzyme, called _ptyalin_, which acts on the starch. The ptyalin
changes starch into a form of sugar (maltose), while the water in the
saliva dissolves the soluble portions of the food. In addition to this the
saliva moistens and lubricates the food which it does not dissolve, and
prepares it in this way for its passage to the stomach. The last is
considered the most important use of the saliva, and dry substances, such
as crackers, which require a considerable amount of this liquid, cannot be
eaten rapidly without choking. Slow mastication favors the secretion and
action of the saliva.

*Deglutition.*--Deglutition, or swallowing, is the process by which food is
transferred from the mouth to the stomach. Though this is not, strictly
speaking, a digestive process, it is, nevertheless, necessary for the
further digestion of the food. Mastication and insalivation, which are
largely mechanical, prepare the food for certain chemical processes by
which it is dissolved. The first of these occurs in the stomach and to
this organ the food is transferred from the mouth. The chief organs
concerned in deglutition are the tongue, the pharynx, and the esophagus.

*The Pharynx* is a round and somewhat cone-shaped cavity, about four and
one half inches in length, which lies just back of the nostrils, mouth,
and larynx. It is remarkable for its openings, seven in number, by means
of which it communicates with other cavities and tubes of the body. One of
these openings is into the mouth, one into the esophagus, one into the
larynx, and one into each of the nostrils, while two small tubes (the
eustachian) pass from the upper part of the pharynx to the middle ears.

The pharynx is the part of the food canal that is crossed by the
passageway for the air. To keep the food from passing out of its natural
channel, the openings into the air passages have to be carefully guarded.
This is accomplished through the soft palate and epiglottis, which are
operated somewhat as valves. The muscular coat of the pharynx is made up
of a series of overlapping muscles which, by their contractions, draw the
sides together and diminish the cavity. The mucous membrane lining the
pharynx is smooth, like that of the mouth, being covered with a layer of
flat epithelial cells.

*The Esophagus*, or gullet, is a tube eight or nine inches long,
connecting the pharynx with the stomach. It lies for the most part in the
thoracic cavity and consists chiefly of a thick mucous lining surrounded
by a heavy coat of muscle. The muscular coat is composed of two layers--an
inner layer whose fibers encircle the tube and an outer layer whose fibers
run lengthwise.

*Steps in Deglutition.*--The process of deglutition varies with the kind of
food. With bulky food it consists of three steps, or stages, as follows:
1. By the contraction of the muscles of the cheeks, the food ball, or
bolus, is pressed into the center of the mouth and upon the upper surface
of the tongue. Then the tongue, by an upward and backward movement, pushes
the food under the soft palate and into the pharynx.

2. As the food passes from the mouth, the pharynx is drawn up to receive
it. At the same time the soft palate is pushed upward and backward,
closing the opening into the upper pharynx, while the epiglottis is made
to close the opening into the larynx. By this means all communication
between the food canal and the air passages is temporarily closed. The
upper muscles of the pharynx now contract upon the food, forcing it
downward and into the esophagus.

3. In the esophagus the food is forced along by the successive
contractions of muscles, starting at the upper end of the tube, until the
stomach is reached.

Swallowing is doubtless aided to some extent by the force of gravity. That
it is independent of this force, however, is shown by the fact that one
may swallow with the esophagus in a horizontal position, as in lying down.

                                [Fig. 68]


   Fig. 68--*Gastric Glands.* _A._ Single gland showing the two kinds of
secreting cells and the duct where the gland opens on to the surface. _B._
 Inner surface of stomach magnified. The small pits are the openings from
                               the glands.


*The Stomach.*--The stomach is the largest dilatation of the alimentary
canal. It is situated in the abdominal cavity, immediately below the
diaphragm, with the larger portion toward the left side. Its connection
with the esophagus is known as the _cardiac orifice_ and its opening into
the small intestine is called the _pyloric orifice_. It varies greatly in
size in different individuals, being on the average from ten to twelve
inches at its greatest length, from four to five inches at its greatest
width, and holding from three to five pints. It has the coats common to
the canal, but these are modified somewhat to adapt them to its work.

_The mucous membrane_ of the stomach is thick and highly developed. It
contains great numbers of minute tube-shaped bodies, known as the _gastric
glands_ (Fig. 68). These are of two general kinds and secrete large
quantities of a liquid called the gastric juice. When the stomach is
empty, the mucous membrane is thrown into folds which run lengthwise over
the inner surface. These disappear, however, when the walls of the stomach
are distended with food.

_The muscular coat_ consists of _three_ separate layers which are named,
from the direction of the fibers, the circular layer, the longitudinal
layer, and the oblique layer (Fig. 69). The circular layer becomes quite
thick at the pyloric orifice, forming a distinct band which serves as a
valve.

                                [Fig. 69]


Fig. 69--*Muscles of the stomach* (from Morris' _Human Anatomy_). The layer
                     of Longitudinal fibers removed.


The outer coat of the stomach, called the _serous coat_, is a continuation
of the peritoneum, the membrane lining the abdominal cavity.

*Stomach Digestion.*--In the stomach begins the definite work of dissolving
those foods which are insoluble in water. This, as already stated, is a
double process. There is first a chemical action in which the insoluble
are changed into soluble substances, and this is followed immediately by
the dissolving action of water. The chief substances digested in the
stomach are the proteids. These, in dissolving, are changed into two
soluble substances, known as _peptones_ and _proteoses_. The digestion of
the proteids is, of course, due to the

*Gastric Juice.*--The gastric juice is a thin, colorless liquid composed of
about 99 per cent of water and about 1 per cent of other substances. The
latter are dissolved in the water and include, besides several salts,
three active chemical agents--hydrochloric acid, pepsin, and rennin.
_Pepsin_ is the enzyme which acts upon proteids, but it is able to act
only in an acid medium--a condition which is supplied by the _hydrochloric
acid_. Mixed with the hydrochloric acid it converts the proteids into
peptones and proteoses.

*Other Effects of the Gastric Juice.*--In addition to digesting proteids,
the gastric juice brings about several minor effects, as follows:

1. It checks, after a time, the digestion of the starch which was begun in
the mouth by the saliva.(58) This is due to the presence of the
hydrochloric acid, the ptyalin being unable to act in an acid medium.

2. While there is no appreciable action on the fat itself, the proteid
layers that inclose the fat particles are dissolved away (Fig. 79), and
the fat is set free. By this means the fat is broken up and prepared for a
special digestive action in the small intestine.

3. Dissolved albumin, like that in milk, is curded, or coagulated, in the
stomach. This action is due to the _rennin_. The curded mass is then acted
upon by the pepsin and hydrochloric acid in the same manner as the other
proteids.

4. The hydrochloric acid acts on certain of the insoluble mineral salts
found in the foods and reduces them to a soluble condition.
