nothingness.

The twilight zone of Earth's shadow reached the Platform. It glowed
redly, glowed crimson, glowed the deepest possible color that could be
seen, and winked out. The ships climbed on, using their tiny steering
rockets.

Nothing happened. The ships drew away from each other for safety. They
were 50, then 60 miles apart. One glowed red and vanished in the shadow
of the Earth. The other was extinguished in the same way. Then they went
hurtling through the blackness of the night side of Earth. Microwaves
from the ground played upon them--radar used by friend and foe
alike--and the friendly radar guided tight-beam communicator waves to
them with comforting assurance that their joint course and height and
speed were exactly the calculated optimum. But they could not be seen at
all.

When they appeared again they were still farther out from Earth than the
Platform's orbit, but no farther from each other. And they were
descending. The centers of their orbits had been displaced very, very
far indeed.

Going out, naturally, the ships had lost angular speed as they gained
in height. Descending, they gained in angular velocity as they lost
height. They were not quite 30 miles apart as they sped with increasing,
headlong speed and rushed toward the edge of the world's disk. When they
were only 2,000 miles high, the Earth's surface under them moved much
faster than it had on the way up. When they were only 1,000 miles high,
the seas and continents seemed to flow past like a rushing river. At 500
miles, mountains and plains were just distinguishable as they raced past
underneath. At 200 miles there was merely a churning, hurtling surface
on which one could not focus one's eyes because of the speed of its
movement.

They missed the solid surface of Earth by barely 40 miles. They were
moving at a completely impossible speed. The energy of their position
4,000 miles high had been transformed into kinetic energy of motion. And
at 40 miles there is something very close to a vacuum, compared to
sea-level. But compared to true emptiness, and at the speed of meteors,
the thin air had a violent effect.

A thin humming sound began. It grew louder. The substance of the ship
was responding to the impact of the thin air upon it. The sound rose to
a roar, to a bellow, to a thunderous tumult. The ship quivered and
trembled. It shook. A violent vibration set up and grew more and more
savage. The whole ship shook with a dreadful persistence, each vibration
more monstrous, more straining, more ominous than before.

The four in the space ship cabin knew torture. Weight returned to them,
weight more violent than the six gravities they had known for a bare
fourteen seconds at take-off. But that, at least, had been smoothly
applied. This was deceleration at a higher figure yet, and accompanied
by the shaking of bodies which weighed seven times as much as ever
before--and bodies, too, which for weeks past had been subject to no
weight at all.

They endured. Nothing at all could be done. At so many miles per second
no possible human action could be determined upon and attempted in time
to have any effect upon the course of the ship. Joe could see out a
quartzite port. The ground 40 miles below was merely a blur. There was
a black sky overhead, which did not seem to stir. But cloud-masses
rushed at express-train speed below him, and his body weighed more than
half a ton, and the ship made the sound of innumerable thunders and
shook, and shook and shook....

And then, when it seemed that it must fly utterly to pieces, the thunder
diminished gradually to a bellow, and the bellow to a roar, and the
roaring.... And the unthinkable weight oppressing him grew less.

The Earth was farther away and moving farther still. They were 100 miles
high. They were 200 miles high....

There was no longer any sound at all, except their gaspings for breath.
Their muscles had refused to lift their chests at all during the most
brutal of the deceleration period.

Presently Joe croaked a question. He looked at the hull-temperature
indicators. They were very, very high. He found that he was bruised
where he had strapped himself in. The places where each strap had held
his heavy body against the ship's vibrations were deeply black-and-blue.

The Chief said thickly: "Joe, somehow I don't think this is going to
work. When do we hit again?"

"Three hours plus or minus something," said Joe, dry-throated. "We'll
hear from the ground."

Mike said in a cracked voice: "Radar reports we went a little bit too
low. They think we weren't tilted up far enough. We didn't bounce as
soon as we should."

Joe unstrapped himself.

"How about the other ship?"

"It did better than we did," said Mike. "It's a good 200 miles ahead.
Down at the Shed, they're recalculating for us. We'll have to land with
six grazes instead of eight. We lost too much speed."

Joe went staggering, again weightless, to look out a port for the other
ship. He should have known better. One does not spot an eighty-foot
space ship with the naked eye when it is 200 miles away.

But he saw something, though for seconds he didn't know what it was.

Now the little ship was 300 miles high and still rising. Joe was dazed
and battered by the vibration of the ship in the graze just past. The
sister space ship hadn't lost speed so fast. It would be traveling
faster. It would be leaving him farther behind every second. It was
rising more sharply. It would rise higher.

Joe stared numbly out of a port, thinking confusedly that his hull would
be dull red on its outer surface, though the heating had been so fast
that the inner surfaces of the plating might still be cold. He saw the
vast area which was the curve of the edge of the world. He saw the
sunlight upon clouds below and glimpses of the surface of the Earth
itself.

And he saw something rising out of the mists at the far horizon. It was
a thread of white vapor. The other rocketship was a speck, a mote,
invisible because of its size and distance. This thread of vapor was
already 100 miles long, and it expanded to a column of whiteness half a
mile across before it seemed to dissipate. It rose and rose, as if
following something which sped upward. It was a rocket trail. The
violence of its writhings proved the fury with which the rocket climbed.

It was on its way to meet the other space ship.

It did. Joe saw the thread of vapor extend and grow until it was higher
than he was. He never saw the other ship, which was too small. But he
saw the burst of flame, bright as the sun itself, which was the
explosion of a proximity fuse bomb. He knew, then, that nothing but
incandescent, radioactive gas remained of the other ship and its crew.

Then he saw the trail of the second rocket. It was rising to meet him.




5


The four of them watched through the ports as the thread of vapor sped
upward. They hated the rocket and the people who had built it. Joe said
between his teeth, "We could spend our landing-rockets and make it
chase us, but it'll have fuel for that!"

The Chief muttered in Mohawk. The words sounded as if they ought to have
blue fire at their edges and smell of sulphur. Mike the midget said
crackling things in his small voice. Haney stared, his eyes burning.

Their ship was a little over 400 miles up, now. The rocket was 100 or
better. The rendezvous would be probably 200 miles ahead and
correspondingly higher. The rocket was accelerating furiously. It had
farther to travel, but its rate of climb was already enormous and it
increased every second.

The ship could swing to right or left on steering rockets, but the war
rocket could swerve also. It was controlled from the ground. It did not
need to crash the small ship from space. Within a limited number of
miles the blast of its atomic warhead would vaporize any substance that
could exist. And of course the ship could not turn back. Even the
expenditure of all its landing-rockets could not bring twenty tons of
ship to a halt. They could speed it up, so it would pass the calculated
meeting place ahead of the war rocket. But the bomb would simply follow
in a stern chase. In any case, the ship could not stop.

But neither could the rocket.

Joe never knew how he saw the significance of that fact. On land or sea,
of course, an automobile or a ship moves in the direction in which it is
pointed. Even an airplane needs to make only minor corrections for air
currents which affect it. But an object in space moves on a course which
is the sum of all its previous speeds and courses. Joe's ship was moving
eastward above the Earth at so many miles per second. If he drove
north--at a right angle to his present course--the ship would not cease
to move to the east. It would simply move northward in addition to
moving east. If the rocket from Earth turned north or east it would
continue to move up and merely add the other motion to its vertical
rise.

Joe stared at the uncoiling thread of vapor which was the murder
rocket's trail. He hated it so fiercely that he wanted to escape it
even at the cost of destruction, merely to foil its makers. At one
moment, he was hardly aware of anything but his own fury and the frantic
desire to frustrate the rocket at any cost. The next instant, somehow,
he was not angry at all. Because somehow his brain had dredged up the
fact that the war rocket could no more turn back than he could--and he
saw its meaning.

"Mike!" he snapped sharply. "Get set! Report what we do! Everybody set
for acceleration! Steering rockets ready, Chief! Get set to help, Haney!
I don't know whether we'll get out of this alive, but we'd better get
into our space suits."

Then he literally dived back to his acceleration chair and strapped in
in feverish haste. The ship was then a quarter of the way to the meeting
place and the rocket had very much farther to go. But it was rising
faster.

The ship's gyros whined and squealed as Joe jammed on their controls.
The little ship spun in emptiness. Its bow turned and pointed down. The
steering rockets made their roarings.

Joe found himself panting. "The--rocket's rising faster--than we are.
It's been gaining--altitude maybe--two minutes. It's lighter than
when--it started but--it can't stop--less than a minute, anyhow so we
duck under it----"

He did not make computations. There was no time. The war rocket might
have started at four or five gravities acceleration, but it would speed
up as its fuel burned. It might be accelerating at fifteen gravities
now, and have an attained velocity of four miles a second and still
increasing. If the little ship ducked under it, it could not kill that
rate-of-climb in time to follow in a stern chase.

"Haney!" panted Joe. "Watch out the port! Are we going to make it?"

Haney crawled forward. Joe had forgotten the radar because he'd seen the
rocket with his own eyes. It seemed to need eyes to watch it. Mike spoke
curtly into the microphone broadcasting to ground. He was reporting each
action and order as it took place and was given. There was no time to
explain anything. But Mike thought of the radar. He watched it.

It showed the vast curve of Earth's surface, 400 miles down. It showed a
moving pip, much too much nearer, which was the war rocket. Mike made a
dot on the screen with a grease pencil where the pip showed. It moved.
He made another dot. The pip continued to move. He made other dots.

They formed a curving line--curved because the rocket was
accelerating--which moved inexorably toward the center of the radar
screen. The curve would cut the screen's exact center. That meant
collision.

"Too close, Joe!" said Mike shrilly. "We may miss it, but not enough!"

"Then hold fast," yelled Joe. "Landing rockets firing, three--two--one!"

The bellowing of the landing-rockets smote their ears. Weight seized
upon them, three gravities of acceleration toward the rushing flood of
clouds and solidity which was the Earth. The ship plunged downward with
all its power. It was intolerable--and ten times worse because they had
been weightless so long and were still shaken and sore and bruised from
the air-graze only minutes back.

Mike took acceleration better than the others, but his voice was thin
when he gasped, "Looks--like this does it, Joe!" Seconds later he gasped
again, "Right! The rocket's above us and still going away!"

The gyros squealed again. The ship plunged into vapor which was the
trail of the enemy rocket. For an instant the flowing confusion which
was Earth was blotted out. Then it was visible again. The ship was
plunging downward, but its sidewise speed was undiminished and much
greater than its rate of fall.

"Mike," panted Joe. "Get the news out. What we did--and why. I'm--going
to turn the ship's head back on our--course. We can't slow enough
but--I'd rather crash on Earth than let them blast us----"

The ship turned again. It pointed back in the direction from which it
had come. With the brutal sternward pressure produced by the
landing-rockets, it felt as if it were speeding madly back where it had
come from. It was the sensation they'd felt when the ship took off from
Earth, so long before. But then the cloud masses and the earth beneath
had flowed toward the ship and under it. Now they flowed away. The
appearance was that of an unthinkably swift wake left behind by a ship
at sea. The Earth's surface fled away and fled away from them.

"Crazy, this!" Joe muttered thickly. "If the ship were lighter--or we
had more power--we could land! I'm sorry, but I'd rather----"

Haney turned his head from where he clung near the bow-ports. His
features changed slowly as he talked because of acceleration-driven
blood engorging his lips and bloating his cheeks. After one instant he
closed his eyes fiercely. They felt as if they would pop out of his
head. He gasped, "Yes! Get down to air-resistance. A chance--not good
but a chance--ejection seats--with space suits--might make it...."

He began to let himself back toward his acceleration chair. He could not
possibly have climbed forward. It was a horrible task to let himself
down, with triple his normal weight pulling at him and after the beating
taken a little while ago.

Sweat stood out on his skin as he lowered himself sternward. Once his
grip on a hand-line slipped and he had to sustain the drag of nearly six
hundred pounds by a single hand and arm. It would not be a good idea to
fall at three gravities.

The landing rockets roared and roared, and Joe tilted the bow down a
little farther, so that the streaming flood of clouds drew nearer.

Haney got to his acceleration chair. He let himself into it and his eyes
closed.

Mike's sharp voice barked: "What's the chance, Haney?"

Haney's mouth opened, and closed, and opened again. "Rocket flames," he
gasped, "pushed back--wind--splash on hull--may melt--lighten
weight--hundred to one against----"

The odds were worse than that. The ship couldn't land because its
momentum was too great for the landing rockets to cancel out. If it had
weighed five tons instead of twenty, landing might have been possible.
Haney was saying that if the ship were to be lowered into air while
rushing irresistibly sternward despite its rockets, that the rocket
flames might be splashed out by the wind. Instead of streaking astern in
a lance-like shape, they might be pushed out like a rocket blast when it
hits the earth in a guided missile take-off. Such a blast spreads out
flat in all directions. Here the rocket flames might be spread by wind
until they played upon the hull of the ship. If they did, they might
melt it as they melted their own steel cases in firing. And
three-fourths or more of the hull might be torn loose from the cabin bow
section. So much was unlikely, but it was possible.

The impossible odds were that the four could survive even if the cabin
were detached. They were decelerating at three gravities now. If part of
the ship burned or melted or was torn away, the rocket thrust might
speed the cabin up to almost any figure. And there is a limit to the
number of gravities a man can take, even in an acceleration chair.

Nevertheless, that was what Haney proposed. They were due to be killed
anyhow. Joe tried it.

He dived into atmosphere. At 60 miles altitude a thin wailing seemed to
develop without reason. At 40 miles, the ship had lost more than two
miles per second of its speed since the landing-rockets were ignited,
and there was a shuddering in all its fabric--though because of the loss
of speed it was not as bad as the atmosphere-graze. At 30 it began to
shake and tremble. At 25 miles high there was as horrible a vibration
and as deadly a deceleration as at the air-graze. At 12 miles above the
surface of the Earth the hull temperature indicators showed the hind
part of the hull at red heat. The ship happened to be traveling backward
at several times the speed of sound, and air could not move away from
before it. It was compressed to white heat at the entering surface, and
the metal plating went to bright red heat at that point. But the hull
just aft of the rocket mouths was hotter still. There the splashing
rocket flames bathed it in intolerable incandescence. Hull plates,
braces and beams glared white----

The tip of the tail caved in. The ship's empty cargo space was
instantly filled with air at intolerable pressure and heat.
