and sharp cracking reports of the pistols and rifles, from the doorway
of the gun room. He wondered, for a split second, if it might be one
of the fowling pieces he had seen there, and then something whizzed
past his head and exploded with a soft _plop_ behind him. Turning, he
saw a pool of gray vapor beginning to spread in the middle of the
room. Dalla must have got a breath of it, for she was slumped over the
chair from which she had just risen.

Dropping the submachine-gun and gulping a lungful of fresh air from
outside, Verkan Vall rushed to her, caught her by the heels, and
dragged her into Prince Jirzyn's bedroom, beyond. Leaving her in the
middle of the floor, he took another deep breath and returned to the
drawing room, where Sarnax was already overcome by the sleep-gas.

He saw the serving table from which he had got the brandy, and dragged
it over to the bedroom door, overturning it and laying it across the
doorway, its legs in the air. Like most Akor-Neb serving tables, it
had a gravity-counteraction unit under it; he set this for double
minus-gravitation and snapped it on. As it was now above the inverted
table, the table did not rise, but a tendril, of sleep-gas, curling
toward it, bent upward and drifted away from the doorway. Satisfied
that he had made a temporary barrier against the sleep-gas, Verkan
Vall secured Dalla's hunting pistol and spare magazines and lay down
at the bedroom door.

For some time, there was silence outside. Then the besiegers evidently
decided that the sleep-gas attack had been a success. An Assassin,
wearing a gas mask and carrying a submachine-gun, appeared in the
doorway, and behind him came a tall man in a tan tunic, similarly
masked. They stepped into the room and looked around.

Knowing that he would be shooting over a two hundred percent negative
gravitation-field, Verkan Vall aimed for the Assassin's belt-buckle
and squeezed. The bullet caught him in the throat. Evidently the
bullet had not only been lifted in the negative gravitation, but
lifted point-first and deflected upward. He held his front sight just
above the other man's knee, and hit him in the chest.

As he fired, he saw a wisp of gas come sliding around the edge of the
inverted table. There was silence outside, and for an instant, he was
tempted to abandon his post and go to the bathroom, back of the
bedroom, for wet towels to improvise a mask. Then, when he tried to
crawl backward, he could not. There was an impression of distant
shouting which turned to a roaring sound in his head. He tried to lift
his pistol, but it slipped from his fingers.

       *       *       *       *       *

When consciousness returned, he was lying on his back, and something
cold and rubbery was pressing into his face. He raised his arms to
fight off whatever it was, and opened his eyes, to find that he was
staring directly at the red oval and winged bullet of the Society of
Assassins. A hand caught his wrist as he reached for the small pistol
under his arm. The pressure on his face eased.

"It's all right, Lord Virzal," a voice came to him. "Assassins'
Truce!"

He nodded stupidly and repeated the words. "Assassins' Truce; I won't
shoot. What happened?"

Then he sat up and looked around. Prince Jirzyn's bedchamber was full
of Assassins. Dalla, recovering from her touch of sleep-gas, was
sitting groggily in a chair, while five or six of them fussed around
her, getting in each others' way, handing her drinks, chaffing her
wrists, holding damp cloths on her brow. That was standard procedure,
when any group of males thought Dalla needed any help. Another
Assassin, beside the bed, was putting away an oxygen-mask outfit, and
the Assassin who had prevented Verkan Vall from drawing his pistol was
his own follower, Marnik. And Klarnood, the Assassin-President, was
sitting on the foot of the bed, smoking one of Prince Jirzyn's
monogrammed and crested cigarettes critically.

Verkan Vall looked at Marnik, and then at Klarnood, and back to
Marnik.

"You got through," he said. "Good work, Marnik; I thought they'd
downed you."

"They did; I had to crash-land in the woods. I went about a mile on
foot, and then I found a man and woman and two children, hiding in one
of these little log rain shelters. They had an airboat, a good one. It
seemed that rioting had broken out in the city unit where they lived,
and they'd taken to the woods till things quieted down again. I
offered them Assassins' protection if they'd take me to Assassins'
Hall, and they did."

"By luck, I was in when Marnik arrived," Klarnood took over. "We
brought three boatloads of men, and came here at once. Just as we got
here, two boatloads of Starpha dependents arrived; they tried to give
us an argument, and we discarnated the lot of them. Then we came down
here, crying Assassins' Truce. One of the Starpha Assassins, Kirzol,
was still carnate; he told us what had been going on." The
President-General's face-became grim. "You know, I take a rather poor
view of Prince Jirzyn's procedure in this matter, not to mention that
of his underlings. I'll have to speak to him about this. Now, how
about you and the Lady Dallona? What do you intend doing?"

"We're getting out of here," Verkan Vall said. "I'd like air transport
and protection as far as Ghamma, to the establishment of the family of
Zorda. Brarnend of Zorda has a private space yacht; he'll get us to
Venus."

Klarnood gave a sigh of obvious relief. "I'll have you and the Lady
Dallona airborne and off for Ghamma as soon as you wish," he promised.
"I will, frankly, be delighted to see the last of both of you. The
Lady Dallona has started a fire here at Darsh that won't burn out in a
half-century, and who knows what it may consume." He was interrupted
by a heaving shock that made the underground dome dwelling shake like
a light airboat in turbulence. Even eighty feet under the ground, they
could hear a continued crashing roar. It was an appreciable interval
before the sound and the shock ceased.

For an instant, there was silence, and then an excited bedlam of
shouting broke from the Assassins in the room: Klarnood's face was
frozen in horror.

"That was a fission bomb!" he exclaimed. "The first one that has been
exploded on this planet in hostility in a thousand years!" He turned
to Verkan Vall. "If you feel well enough to walk, Lord Virzal, come
with us. I must see what's happened."

They hurried from the room and went streaming up the ascent tube to
the top of the dome. About forty miles away, to the south, Verkan Vall
saw the sinister thing that he had seen on so many other time-lines,
in so many other paratime sectors--a great pillar of varicolored
fire-shot smoke, rising to a mushroom head fifty thousand feet above.

"Well, that's it," Klarnood said sadly. "That is civil war."

"May I make a suggestion, Assassin-President?" Verkan Vall asked. "I
understand that Assassins' Truce is binding even upon non-Assassins;
is that correct?"

"Well, not exactly; it's generally kept by such non-Assassins as want
to remain in their present reincarnations, though."

"That's what I meant. Well, suppose you declare a general, planet-wide
Assassins' Truce in this political war, and make the leaders of both
parties responsible for keeping it. Publish lists of the top two or
three thousand Statisticalists and Volitionalists, starting with
Mirzark of Bashad and Prince Jirzyn of Starpha, and inform them that
they will be assassinated, in order, if the fighting doesn't cease."

"Well!" A smile grew on Klarnood's face. "Lord Virzal, my thanks; a
good suggestion. I'll try it. And furthermore, I'll withdraw all
Assassin protection permanently from anybody involved in political
activity, and forbid any Assassin to accept any retainer connected
with political factionalism. It's about time our members stopped
discarnating each other in these political squabbles." He pointed to
the three airboats drawn up on the top of the dome; speedy black
craft, bearing the red oval and winged bullet. "Take your choice, Lord
Virzal. I'll lend you a couple of my men, and you'll be in Ghamma in
three hours." He hooked fingers and clapped shoulders with Verkan
Vall, bent over Dalla's hand. "I still like you, Lord Virzal, and I
have seldom met a more charming lady than you, Lady Dallona. But I
sincerely hope I never see either of you again."

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship for Dhergabar was driving north and west; at seventy thousand
feet, it was still daylight, but the world below was wrapping itself
in darkness. In the big visiscreens, which served in lieu of the
windows which could never have withstood the pressure and friction
heat of the ship's speed, the sun was sliding out of sight over the
horizon to port. Verkan Vall and Dalla sat together, watching the
blazing western sky--the sky of their own First Level time-line.

"I blame myself terribly, Vall," Dalla was saying. "And I didn't mean
any of them the least harm. All I was interested in was learning the
facts. I know, that sounds like 'I didn't know it was loaded,' but--"

"It sounds to me like those Fourth Level Europo-American Sector
physicists who are giving themselves guilt-complexes because they
designed an atomic bomb," Verkan Vall replied. "All you were
interested in was learning the facts. Well, as a scientist, that's all
you're supposed to be interested in. You don't have to worry about any
social or political implications. People have to learn to live with
newly-discovered facts; if they don't, they die of them."

"But, Vall; that sounds dreadfully irresponsible--"

"Does it? You're worrying about the results of your reincarnation
memory-recall discoveries, the shootings and riotings and the bombing
we saw." He touched the pommel of Olirzon's knife, which he still
wore. "You're no more guilty of that than the man who forged this
blade is guilty of the death of Marnark of Bashad; if he'd never
lived, I'd have killed Marnark with some other knife somebody else
made. And what's more, you can't know the results of your discoveries.
All you can see is a thin film of events on the surface of an
immediate situation, so you can't say whether the long-term results
will be beneficial or calamitous.

"Take this Fourth Level Europo-American atomic bomb, for example. I
choose that because we both know that sector, but I could think of a
hundred other examples in other paratime areas. Those people, because
of deforestation, bad agricultural methods and general mismanagement,
are eroding away their arable soil at an alarming rate. At the same
time, they are breeding like rabbits. In other words, each successive
generation has less and less food to divide among more and more
people, and, for inherited traditional and superstitious reasons, they
refuse to adopt any rational program of birth-control and
population-limitation.

"But, fortunately, they now have the atomic bomb, and they are
developing radioactive poisons, weapons of mass-effect. And their
racial, nationalistic and ideological conflicts are rapidly reaching
the explosion point. A series of all-out atomic wars is just what that
sector needs, to bring their population down to their world's carrying
capacity; in a century or so, the inventors of the atomic bomb will be
hailed as the saviors of their species."

"But how about my work on the Akor-Neb Sector?" Dalla asked. "It seems
that my memory-recall technique is more explosive than any fission
bomb. I've laid the train for a century-long reign of anarchy!"

"I doubt that; I think Klarnood will take hold, now that he has
committed himself to it. You know, in spite of his sanguinary
profession, he's the nearest thing to a real man of good will I've
found on that sector. And here's something else you haven't
considered. Our own First Level life expectancy is from four to five
hundred years. That's the main reason why we've accomplished as much
as we have. We have, individually, time to accomplish things. On the
Akor-Neb Sector, a scientist or artist or scholar or statesman will
grow senile and die before he's as old as either of us. But now, a
young student of twenty or so can take one of your auto-recall
treatments and immediately have available all the knowledge and
experience gained in four or five previous lives. He can start where
he left off in his last reincarnation. In other words, you've made
those people time-binders, individually as well as racially. Isn't
that worth the temporary discarnation of a lot of ward-heelers and
plug-uglies, or even a few decent types like Dirzed and Olirzon? If it
isn't, I don't know what scales of values you're using."

"Vall!" Dalla's eyes glowed with enthusiasm. "I never thought of that!
And you said, 'temporary discarnation.' That's just what it is. Dirzed
and Olirzon and the others aren't dead; they're just waiting,
discarnate, between physical lives. You know, in the sacred writings
of one of the Fourth Level peoples it is stated: 'Death is the last
enemy.' By proving that death is just a cyclic condition of continued
individual existence, these people have conquered their last enemy."

"Last enemy but one," Verkan Vall corrected. "They still have one
enemy to go, an enemy within themselves. Call it semantic confusion,
or illogic, or incomprehension, or just plain stupidity. Like
Klarnood, stymied by verbal objections to something labeled 'political
intervention.' He'd never have consented to use the power of his
Society if he hadn't been shocked out of his inhibitions by that
nuclear bomb. Or the Statisticalists, trying to create a classless
order of society through a political program which would only result
in universal servitude to an omnipotent government. Or the
Volitionalist nobles, trying to preserve their hereditary feudal
privileges, and now they can't even agree on a definition of the term
'hereditary.' Might they not recover all the silly prejudices of their
past lives, along with the knowledge and wisdom?"

"But ... I thought you said--" Dalla was puzzled, a little hurt.

Verkan Vall's arm squeezed around her waist, and he laughed
comfortingly.

"You see? Any sort of result is possible, good or bad. So don't blame
yourself in advance for something you can't possibly estimate." An
idea occurred to him, and he straightened in the seat. "Tell you what;
if you people at Rhogom Foundation get the problem of discarnate
paratime transposition licked by then, let's you and I go back to the
Akor-Neb Sector in about a hundred years and see what sort of a mess
those people have made of things."

"A hundred years: that would be Year Twenty-Two of the next
millennium. It's a date, Vall; we'll do it."

They bent to light their cigarettes together at his lighter. When
they raised their heads again and got the flame glare out of their
eyes, the sky was purple-black, dusted with stars, and dead ahead,
spilling up over the horizon, was a golden glow--the lights of
Dhergabar and home.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAST ENEMY***


******* This file should be named 18800.txt or 18800.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/8/0/18800



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
