
Vye laughed shortly. "Loan premium? That's a true fantasy if you've
been job hopping. None of the companies will take a chance on a man
with an in and out record. Oh, I tried...." That memory arose to the
surface, clear and very chilling. Yes, he had tried to break out of
the net the law and custom had put around him from the day he had
been made a state child. "No--it was conditioning, or port-drift."

"And you chose port-drift?"

"I was still me--as long as I stayed away from conditioning."

"Then you became Rynch Brodie in spite of your flight."

"No--well, maybe, for a while. But I'm still Vye Lansor here."

"Yes, here. And I don't think you'll have to worry about raising a
premium to get a new start. You can claim victim compensation, you
know."

Vye was silent, but Hume did not let him remain so.

"When the Patrol arrives, you put in your claim. I'll back you."

"You can't."

"That's where you're mistaken," Hume told him crisply. "I've already
taped a full story back at the spacer--it's on record now."

Vye frowned. The Hunter seemed determined to ask for the worst the
Patrol--or the planet police back on Nahuatl--could deal out. A case
of illegal conditioning was about as serious as you could get.

They shot along the diagonal of the triangle made by three points, the
mountain valley, Wass' camp, and the safari headquarters, heading to
the slopes up which the men must be herded if the beasts were
shepherding them to the mountain valley. Vye, surveying the forest
thick below, began to doubt they would ever be able to pick them up
before they reached the valley gate.

Hume took a weaving course, zigzagging back and forth, while they both
watched intently for a glint from one of the globes, any movement
which would betray that trail. And it was on one of the upper slopes
that the flitter passed over two of the blue beasts lumbering along.
Neither of the creatures paid any attention to the flyer, they moved
with purpose on some mission of their own.

"Maybe the tail end of the hunting pack," Hume commented.

He sent the flyer hovering over a stunted line of trees and brush.
Beyond that was bare rock. But though they hung for moments, nothing
moved into that open.

"Wrong scent somehow." Hume brought the flitter around. He had it on
manual control now, keeping it answering to the quick changes of his
will.

A longer sweep supplied the answer--a vegetation roofed slit running
back into the uplands, in a way resembling the crevice through which
they had originally found their way into this country. Hume brought
the flyer along that. But if the men they sought were pushing their
way through below they could not be sighted from the air. At last,
with evening drawing in, Hume was forced to admit failure.

"Wait by the gap?" Vye asked.

"Have to now." Hume glanced about. "I'd say maybe
tomorrow--mid-morning before they make it that far--_if_ they are
here. We'll have plenty of time."

Time for what? To make ready for a pitched battle with Wass--or with
the beasts herding him? To try in the space of hours to solve the
mystery of the lake?

"Do you think we could blast that thing in the lake?" Vye asked.

"We might be able to, just might. But that must be the last resort. We
want that in working order for the X-Tee men to study. No, we'd better
plan to hold Wass at the gate, wait for the Patrol to come in."

Less than an hour later after a soaring approach, Hume brought the
flitter down with neat skill on the top of one of the cliffs which
helped to form the portal of the gap. There was no difference in the
scene below, save that where the two bodies of the blue beasts had
lain there were now only clean and shining bones.

Darkness spread out from the lake woods like a growing stain of evil
promise as the sun fell behind the peaks. Night came earlier here than
in the plains.

"Watch!" Vye had been gazing down the gap; he was the first to note
that movement in the cloaking bush.

Out of the cover trotted a four-footed, antlered animal he had not
seen before.

"Syken deer," Hume identified. "But why in the mountains? It's a long
way from its home range."

The deer did not pause, but headed directly for the gap and, as it
neared, Vye saw that its brown coat was roughed with patches of white
froth, while more dripped from the pale pink tongue protruding from
its open jaws, and its shrunken sides heaved.

"Driven!" Hume picked up a stone, hurled it to strike the ground ahead
of the deer.

The creature did not start, nor show any sign of seeing the rock fall.
It trotted on at the same wearied pace, passed the portal rocks into
the valley. Then it stood still, wedge-shaped head up, black horns
displayed, while the nose flaps expanded, testing the air, until it
bounded toward the lake, disappearing in the woods.

Though they shared watches during the night there were no other signs
of life, nor did the deer reappear from the woods. With the
mid-morning there was a sudden sound to warn them--a wild cry which
must have come from a human throat. Hume tossed one of the needlers to
Vye, took the other, and they scrambled down to the floor of the gap
passage.

Wass did not lead his men, he came behind the reeling trio as if he
had joined the blasts as driver. And while his men wavered, staggered,
gave the appearance of nearly complete exhaustion, he still walked
with a steady tread, in command of his wits, his fears, and the
company.

As the first of the men blundered on, a fresh trickle of red running
down his bruised face, Hume called:

"Wass!"

The Veep stopped short. He made no move to unsling the needler he
carried, its barrel pointing skyward over his shoulder, but his round
head with its upstanding comb of hair swung slightly from side to
side.

"Stop--Wass--this is a trap!"

His three men kept on. Vye moved, for Peake leading that wavering
group, stumbled, would have fallen had not the younger man advanced
from the shadows to steady him.

"Vye!" Hume made his name a warning.

He had only time to glance around. Wass, his broad face impassive
except for the eyes--those burning madman's eyes--was aiming a ray
tube.

Broken free of his hold, Peake fell to the right, came up against
Hume. As Vye went down he saw Wass dart forward at a speed he wouldn't
have believed a driven man could summon. The Veep lunged, escaping the
shot the Hunter had no time to aim, rolled, and came up with the
needler Vye had dropped.

Then Hume, hampered by Peake's feeble clawing, met head on the
swinging barrel of that weapon. He gave a startled grunt and smashed
back against the cliff, a wave of scarlet blood streaming down the
side of his head.

The momentum of Wass' charge carried him on. He collided with his men,
and the last thing Vye saw, was the huddle of all four of them,
flailing arms and legs, spinning on through the gate into the valley
with Wass' hoarse, wordless shouting, bringing echoes from the cliffs.




13


He lay against a rock, and it was quiet again, except for a small
whimpering sound which hurt, joined with the eating pain in his side.
Vye turned his head, smelled burned cloth and flesh. Cautiously he
tried to move, bring his hand across his body to the belt at his
waist. One small part of his mind was very clear--if he could get his
fingers to the packet there, and the contents of that packet to his
mouth, the pain would go away, and maybe he could slip back into the
darkness again.

Somehow he did it, pulled the packet out of its container pouch,
worked the fingers of his one usable hand until he shredded open the
end of the covering. The tablets inside, spilled out. But he had three
or four of them in his grasp. Laboriously he brought his hand up,
mouthed them all together, chewing their bitterness, swallowing them
as best he could without water.

Water--the lake! For a moment he was back in time, feeling for the
water bulbs he should be carrying. Then the incautious movement of his
questing fingers brought a sudden stab of raw, red agony and he
moaned.

The tablets worked. But he did not slide back into unconsciousness
again as the throbbing torture became something remote and
untroubling. With his good arm he braced himself against the cliff,
managed to sit up.

Sun flashed on the metal barrel of a needler which lay in the trampled
dust between him and another figure, still very still, with a pool of
blood about the head. Vye waited for a steadying breath or two, then
started the infinitely long journey of several feet which separated
him from Hume.

He was panting heavily when he crawled close enough to touch the
Hunter. Hume's face, cheek down in the now sodden dust, was dabbled
with congealing blood. As Vye turned the hunter's head, it rolled
limply. The other side was a mass of blood and dust, too thick to
afford Vye any idea of how serious a hurt Hume had taken. But he was
still alive.

With his good hand Vye thrust his numb and useless left one into the
front of his belt. Then, awkwardly he tried to tend Hume. After a
close inspection he thought that the mass of blood had come from a
ragged tear in the scalp above the temple and the bone beneath had
escaped damage. From Hume's own first-aid pack he crushed tablets into
the other's slack mouth, hoping they would dissolve if the Hunter
could not swallow. Then he relaxed against the cliff to wait--for what
he could not have said.

Wass' party had gone on into the valley. When Vye turned his head to
look down the slope he could see nothing of them. They must have tried
to push on to the lake. The flitter was at the top of the cliff, as
far out of his reach now as if it were in planetary orbit. There was
only the hope that a rescue party from the safari camp might come.
Hume had set the directional beam on the flyer, when he had brought
her down, to serve as a beacon for the Patrol, if and when Starns was
lucky enough to contact a cruiser.

"Hmmm...." Hume's mouth moved, cracked the drying bloody mask on his
lips and chin. His eyes blinked open and he lay staring up at the sky.

"Hume--" Vye was startled at the sound of his own voice, so thready
and weak, and by the fact that he found it difficult to speak at all.

The other's head turned; now the eyes were on him and there was a
spark of awareness in them.

"Wass?" The whisper was as strained as his own had been.

"In there." Vye's hand lifted from Hume's chest indicating the
valley.

"Not good." Hume blinked again. "How bad?" His attention was not for
his own hurt; his eyes searched Vye. And the latter glanced down at
his side.

By some chance, perhaps because of his struggle with Peake, Wass' beam
had not struck true, the main core of the bolt passing between his arm
and his side, burning both. How deeply he could not tell, in fact he
did not want to find out. It was enough that the tablets had banished
the pain now.

"Seared a little," he said. "You've a bad cut on your head."

Hume frowned. "Can we make the flitter?"

Vye moved, then relaxed quickly into his former position. "Not now,"
he evaded, knowing that neither of them would be able to take that
climb.

"Beam on?" Hume repeated Vye's thoughts of moments before. "Patrol
coming?"

Yes, eventually the Patrol would come--but when? Hours--days? Time was
their enemy now. He did not have to say any of that, they both knew.

"Needler--" Hume's head had turned in the other direction; now his
hand pointed waveringly to the weapon in the dust.

"They won't be back," Vye stated the obvious. Those others had been
caught in the trap, the odds on their return without aid were very
high.

"Needler!" Hume repeated more firmly, and tried to sit up, falling
back with a sharp intake of breath.

Vye edged around, stretched out his leg and scraped the toe of his
boot into the loop of the carrying sling, drawing the weapon up to
where he could get his hand on it. As he steadied it across his knee
Hume spoke again:

"Watch for trouble!"

"They all went in," Vye protested.

But Hume's eyes had closed again. "Trouble--maybe...." His voice
trailed off. Vye rested his hand on the stock of the needler.

"Hoooooo!"

That beast wail--as they had heard it in the valley! Somewhere from
the wood. Vye brought the needler around, so that the sights pointed
in that direction. There death might be hunting, but there was nothing
he could do.

A scream, filled with all the agony of a man in torment, caught up on
the echoes of that other cry. Vye sighted a wild waving of bushes. A
figure, very small and far away, crawled into the open on hands and
knees and then crumpled into only a shadowy blot on the moss. Again
the beast's cry, and a shouting!

Vye watched a second man back out of the trees, still facing whatever
pursued him. He caught the glint of sun on what must be a ray tube.
Leaves crisped into a black hole, curls of smoke arose along the path
of that blast.

The man kept on backing, passed the inert body of his companion,
glancing now and then over his shoulder at the slope up which he was
making a slow but steady way. He no longer rayed the bush, but there
was the crackle of a small fire outlining the ragged hole his beam had
cut.

Back two strides, three. Then he turned, made a quick dash, again
facing around after he had gained some yards in the open. Vye saw now
it was Wass.

Another dash and an about face. But this time to confront the enemy.
There were three of them, as monstrous as those Vye and Hume had
fought in the same place. And one of them was wounded, swinging a
charred forepaw before it, and giving voice to a wild frenzy of roars.

Wass leveled the ray tube, centered sights on the beast nearest to
him. The man hammered at the firing button with the flat of his other
hand, and almost paid for that second of distraction with his life,
for the creature made one of those lightning swift dashes Vye had so
luckily escaped. The clawed forepaw tore a strip from the shoulder of
Wass' tunic, left sprouting red furrows behind. But the man had thrown
the useless tube into its face, was now running for the gap.

Vye held the needler braced against his knee to fire. He saw the dart
quiver in the upper arm of the beast, and it halted to pull out that
sliver of dangerously poisoned metal, crumpled it into a tight twist.
Vye continued to fire, never sure of his aim, but seeing those slivers
go home in thick legs, in outstretched forelimbs, in wide, pendulous
bellies. Then there were three blue shapes lying on the slope behind
the man running straight for the gap.

Wass hit the invisible barrier full force, was hurled back, to lie
gasping on the turf, but already raising himself to crawl again to the
gateway he saw and could not believe was barred. Vye closed his eyes.
He was very tired now--tired and sleepy--maybe the pain pills were
bringing the secondary form of relief. But he could hear, just beyond,
the man who beat at that unseen curtain, first in anger and fear, and
then just in fear, until the fear was a lonesome crying that went on
and on until even that last feeble assault on the barrier failed.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We have here the tape report of Ras Hume, Out-Hunter of the Guild."

Vye watched the officer in the black and silver of the Patrol, a black
and silver modified with the small, green, eye badge of X-Tee, with
level and hostile gaze.

"Then you know the story." He was going to make no additions nor
explanations. Maybe Hume had cleared him. All right, that was all he
would ask, to be free to go his way and forget about Jumala--and Ras
Hume.

He had not seen the Hunter since they had both been loaded into the
Patrol flitter in the gap. Wass had come out of the valley a witless,
dazed creature, still under the mental influence of whoever, or
whatever, had set that trap. As far as Vye knew the Veep had not yet
recovered his full senses, he might never do so. And if Hume had not
dictated that confession to damn himself before the Patrol, he might
have escaped. They could suspect--but they would have had no proof.

"You continue to refuse to tape?" The officer favored him with one of
the closed-jaw looks Vye had often seen on the face of authority.

"I have my rights."

"You have the right to claim victim compensation--a good compensation,
Lansor."

Vye shrugged and then winced at a warning from the tender skin over
ribs.

"I make no claim, and no tape," he repeated. And he intended to go on
saying that as long as they asked him. This was the second visit in
two days and he was getting a little tired of it all. Perhaps he
should do as prudence dictated and demand to be returned to Nahuatl.
Only his odd, unexplainable desire to at least see Hume kept him from
making the request they would have to honor.

"You had better reconsider." Authority resumed.

"Rights of person--" Vye almost grinned as he recited that. For the
first time in his pushed-around life he could use that particular
phrase and make it stick. He thought there was a sour twist to the
officer's mouth, but the other still retained his impersonal tone as
he spoke into the intership com:

"He refused to make a tape."

Vye waited for the other's next move. This should mark the end of
their interview. But instead the officer appeared to relax the
restraint of his official manner. He brought a viv-root case from an
inner pocket, offered a choice of contents to Vye, who gave an instant
and suspicious refusal by shake of head. The officer selected one of
the small tubes, snapped off the protecto-nib, and set it between his
lips for a satisfying and lengthy pull. Then the panel of the cabin
door pushed open, and Vye sat up with a jerk as Ras Hume, his head
banded with a skin-core covering, entered.

The officer waved his hand at Vye with the air of one turning over a
problem. "You were entirely right. And he's all yours, Hume."

Vye looked from one to the other. With Hume's tape in official hands
why wasn't the Hunter under restraint? Unless, because they were
aboard the Patrol cruiser, the officers didn't think a closer
confinement was necessary. Yet the Hunter wasn't acting the role of
prisoner very well. In fact he perched on a wall-flip seat with the
ease of one completely at home, accepted the viv-root Vye had refused.

"So you won't make a tape," he asked cheerfully.

"You act as if you want me to!" Vye was so completely baffled by this
odd turn of action that his voice came out almost plaintively.

"Seeing as how a great deal of time and effort went into placing you
in the position where you _could_ give us that tape, I must admit some
disappointment."

"Give _us_?" Vye echoed.

The officer removed the viv-root from between his lips. "Tell him the
whole sad story, Hume."

But Vye began to guess. Life in the Starfall, or as port-drift, either
sharpened the wits or deadened them. Vye's had suffered the burnishing
process. "A set-up?"

"A set-up," Hume agreed. Then he glanced at the Patrol officer a
little defensively. "I might as well tell the whole truth--this
didn't quite begin on the right side of the law. I had my reasons for
wanting to make trouble for the Kogan estate, only not because of the
credits involved." He moved his plasta-flesh hand. "When I found that
L-B from the Largo Drift and saw the possibilities, did a little day
dreaming--I worked out this scheme. But I'm a Guild man and as it
happens, I want to stay one. So I reported to one of the Masters and
told him the whole story--why I hadn't taped on the records my
discovery on Jumala.

"When he passed along the news of the L-B to the Patrol, he also
suggested that there might be room for fraud along the way I had
thought it out. That started a chain reaction. It happened that the
Patrol wanted Wass. But he was too big and slick to be caught in a
case which couldn't be broken in court. They thought that here was
just the bait he might snap at, and I was the one to offer it to him.
He could check on me, learn that I had excellent reason to do what I
said I was doing. So I went to him with my story and he liked it. We
made the plan work just as I had outlined it. And he planted Rovald on
me as a check. But I didn't know Yactisi was a plant, also."

The Patrol officer smiled. "Insurance," he waved the viv-root, "just
insurance."

"What we didn't foresee was this complicating alien trouble. You were
to be collected as the castaway, brought back to the Center and then,
once Wass was firmly enmeshed, the Patrol would blow the thing wide
open. Now we do have Wass, with your tape we'll have him for good,
subject to complete reconditioning. But we also have an X-Tee puzzle
which will keep the services busy for some time. And we would like
your tape."

Vye watched Hume narrowly. "Then you're an agent?"

Hume shook his head. "No, just what I said I am, an Out-Hunter who
