Ring proper.

"It's all right--to-day," said the man hesitatingly. "I fixed--the
air-lock--yesterday, sir. The leak--was here--at the hinge--but it's
quite tight--now." He pointed at the door.

"Good," remarked Bennie. "I'll look around and see how things are."

This seemed to him to be eminently safe--and allowing for a program of
investigation absolutely essential at the moment. Once he could master
the secret of the Ring and be sure that the part of the fellow's brain
which controlled the performance of his customary duties had not been
injured by the shock of the night before, it might be possible to carry
out the daring project which had suggested itself.

Passing through the inner door of the air-lock he entered the chart room
of the Ring, followed stumblingly by his companion. It was warm and
cozy; the first warmth Hooker had experienced for nearly a month. It
made him feel faint, and he dropped into an armchair and pulled off his
Glengarry. The survivor of the explosion, standing awkwardly at his
side, fumbled with his cap. Ever and anon he rubbed his head.

Bennie sank back into the cushions and looked about him. On the opposite
wall hung a map of the world on Mercator's Projection, and from a spot
in Northern Labrador red lines radiated in all directions, which formed
great curved loops, returning to the starting-point.

"The flights of the Ring," thought Bennie. "There's the one where they
busted the Atlas Mountains," following with his eyes the crimson thread
which ran diagonally across the Atlantic, traversed Spain and the
Mediterranean, and circling in a narrow loop over the coast of Northern
Africa turned back into its original track. Visions came to him of
guiding the car for an afternoon jaunt across the Sahara, the gloomy
forests of the Congo, into the Antarctic, and thence home in time for
afternoon tea, via the Easter Islands, Hawaii, and Alaska. But why stop
there? What was to prevent a trip to the moon? Or Mars? Or for that
matter into the unknown realms outside the solar system--the fourth
dimension, perhaps--or even the fifth dimension----

"Excuse me," said the machinist suddenly, "I just forgot--whether you
take--cigars or cigarettes. You see I only acted as--table
orderly--once--when Smith had that sprain." His hands moved uncertainly
on the shelves, beyond the map. The heart of Professor Hooker leaped.

"Cigars!" he almost shouted.

The man found a box of Havanas and struck a match.

The bliss of it! And if there was tobacco there must be food and drink
as well. He began to feel strangely exhilarated. But how to handle the
man beside him? Pax would certainly never ask the questions that he
wished to ask. He smoked rapidly, thinking hard. Of course he might
pretend that he, too, had forgotten things. And at first this seemed to
be the only way out of the difficulty. Then he had an inspiration.

"Look here," he remarked, rather severely. "Something's happened to you.
You say you've forgotten what occurred yesterday? How do I know but you
have forgotten everything you ever knew? You remember your name?"

"My name, sir?" The man laughed in a foolish fashion. "Why--of course I
remember--my name. I wouldn't--be likely--to forget--that:
Atterbury--I'm Atterbury--electrician of the _Chimaera_." And he drew
himself up.

"That's all right," said Bennie, "but what were we doing yesterday? What
is the very last thing that you can go back to?"

The man wrinkled his forehead. "The last thing? Why, sir, you told us
you were going--to turn over the pole a bit--and freeze up Europe. I was
up here--loading the condenser--when you cut me off from the alternator.
I opened the switch--and put on the electrometer to see--if we had
enough. Next--everything was clouded, and I went--over to the window to
see--what was going on."

"Yes," commented Bennie approvingly, "all right so far. What happened
then?"

"Why, after that, sir, after that, there was the Ray of course, and
er--I don't seem to remember--oh, yes, a short circuit--and I ran--out
on the platform--forgot all about the danger! After that, everything's
confused. It's like a dream. Your coming up--the ladder--seemed--to wake
me up." The machinist smiled sheepishly.

The plan was working well. Professor Hooker was learning things fast.

"Do you think that the two of us can fly the _Chimaera_ south again?" he
asked, inspecting the map.

"Why not?" answered Atterbury. "The balancer is working--better
now--and--doesn't take--much attention--and you can lay the course--and
manage--the landing. I was going to put a fresh uranium cylinder in the
tractor this morning--but I--forgot."

"There you go, forgetting again!" growled Bennie, realizing that his
only excuse for asking questions hung on this fiction. And there were
many, many more questions that he must ask before he would be able to
fly. "You don't seem quite right in your coco this morning, Atterbury,"
he said. "I think we'll look things over a bit--the condenser first."

"Very well, sir." Atterbury turned and groped his way through a doorway,
and they passed first into what appeared to be a storage-battery room.
Huge glass tanks filled with amber-coloured fluid, in which numerous
parallel plates were supported, lined the walls from floor to ceiling.

An ammeter on the wall caught Bennie's attention. "Weston Direct Reading
A. C. Ammeter," he read on the dial. Alternate current! What were they
doing with an alternating current in the storage-battery room? His eyes
followed the wires along the wall. Yes, they ran to the terminals of the
battery. It dawned upon him that there might be something here undreamed
of in electrical engineering--a storage battery for an alternating
current!

The electrician closed a row of switches, brought the two polished brass
spheres of the discharger within striking distance, and instantly a
blinding current of sparks roared between the terminals. He had been
right. This battery not only was charged by an alternating current, but
delivered one of high potential. He peered into the cells, racking his
brain for an explanation.

"Atterbury," said he meditatively, "did I ever tell you why they do
that?"

"Yes," answered the man. "You--told me--once. The two metals--in the
electrolyte--come down--on the plates--in alternate films--as--the
current changes direction. But you never told me--what the electrolyte
was--I don't suppose--you--would be willing to now, would you?"

"H'm," said Bennie, "some time, maybe."

But this cue was all that he required. A clever scheme! Pax had formed
layers of molecular thickness of two different metals in alternation by
the to-and-fro swing of his charging current. When the battery
discharged the metals went into solution, each plate becoming
alternately positive and negative. He wondered what Pax had used for an
electrolyte that enabled him to get a metallic deposit at each
electrode. And he wondered also why the metals did not alloy. But it
would not do for him to linger too long over a mere detail of equipment.
And he turned away to continue his tour of inspection, a tour which
occupied most of the morning, and during which he found a well-stocked
gallery and made himself a cup of coffee.[5]

[Footnote 5: He even climbed with Atterbury to the very summit of the
tractor, where he discovered that his original guess had been correct
and that the car rose from the earth rocket fashion, due to the back
pressure of the radiant discharge from a massive cylinder of uranium
contained in the tractor. Against this block played a disintegrating ray
from a small thermic inductor, the inner construction of which he was
not able to determine, although it was obviously different from his own,
and the coils were wound in a curious manner which he did not
understand. There might be something in Hiroshito's theory after all.
The cylinder of the tractor pointed directly downward so that the blast
was discharged through the very centre of the Ring, but it could be
swung through a small angle in any direction, and by means of this
slight deflection the horizontal motion of the machine secured. Perhaps
the most interesting feature of the mechanism was that the Ring appeared
to have automatic stability, for the angle of the direction in which the
tractor was pointed was controlled not only by a pair of gyroscopes
which kept the Ring on an even keel, but also by a manometric valve
causing it to fly at a fixed height above the earth's surface. Should it
start to rise, the diminished pressure of the atmosphere operating on
the valve swung the tractor more to one side, and the horizontal
acceleration was thus increased at the expense of the vertical.]

But the more he learned about the mechanism of the Ring the greater
became his misgivings about undertaking the return journey alone with
Atterbury through the air. If they were to go, the start must be made
within a few days, for the condenser held its charge but a comparatively
short time, and its energy was necessary for starting the Ring. When
freshly charged it supplied current for the thermic inductor for nearly
three minutes, but the metallic films, deposited on the plates,
dissolved slowly in the fluid, and after three or four days there
remained only enough for a thirty-second run, hardly enough to lift the
Ring from the earth. Once in the air, the downward blast from the
tractor operated a turbine alternator mounted on a skeleton framework at
the centre of the Ring, and the current supplied by this machine enabled
the Ring to continue its flight indefinitely, or until the cylinder of
uranium was completely disintegrated.

Yet to trek back over the route by which he had come appeared to be
equally impossible. There was little likelihood that the two Indians
would return; they were probably already thirty miles on their way back
to the coast. If only he could get word to Thornton or some of those
chaps at Washington they might send a relief expedition! But a ship
would be weeks in getting to the coast, and how could he live in the
meantime? There were provisions for only a few days in the Ring, and the
storehouse in the valley had been wiped out of existence. Only an
aeroplane could do the trick. And then he thought of Burke, his
classmate--Burke who had devoted his life to heavier-than-air machines,
and who, since his memorable flight across the Atlantic in the _Stormy
Petrol_, had been a national hero. Burke could reach him in ten hours,
but how could _he_ reach Burke? In the heart of the frozen wilderness of
Labrador he might as well be on another planet, as far as communication
with the civilized world was concerned.

A burst of sunlight shot through the window and formed an oval patch on
the floor at his feet. The weather was clearing. He went out upon the
platform. Patches of blue sky appeared overhead. As he gazed
disconsolately across the valley toward the tower, his eye caught the
glisten of something high in the air. From the top of the wreckage five
thin shining lines ran parallel across the sky and disappeared in a
small cloud which hung low over the face of the cliff.

"The antennae!" exclaimed Bennie. "A wireless to Burke." Burke would
come; he knew Burke. A thousand miles overland was nothing to him.
Hadn't he wagered five thousand dollars at the club that he would fly to
the pole and bring back Peary's flag--with no takers? Why, Burke would
take him home with as little trouble as a taxicab. And then, aghast, he
remembered the complete destruction in the valley. The wireless plant
had gone with the rest. He ran back into the chart room and called
Atterbury.

"Can we get off a message to Washington?" he demanded. "The wires are
still up, and we have the condenser."

"We might, sir, if it's not--a long one, though you've always said there
was danger in running the engine with the car bolted down. We did it the
time the big machine burnt out a coil. I can throw--a wire--over the
antennae with a rocket--and join up--with the turbine machine. It will
increase--our wave length, but they ought to pick us up."

"We'll try it, anyway," announced Bennie.

He inspected the chart and measured the distance in an airline from
Boston to the point where the red lines converged. It was a trifle less
than the distance between Boston and Chicago. Burke had done that in
nine hours on the trial trip of his trans-Atlantic monoplane. If the
machine was in order and Burke started in the morning he would be with
them by sunset, if he didn't get lost. But Bennie knew that Burke could
drive his machine by dead reckoning and strike within a few leagues of a
target a thousand miles away.

A muffled roar outside interrupted his musings, and running out on the
platform again he found Atterbury attaching the cord of the aluminum
ribbon, which the rocket had carried up and over the antennae, to one of
the brush bars of the alternator.

"Nearly ready, sir," he said. "We'd best--lock the storm bolts--to hold
her down--in case we have--to crowd on the power. We've got to
use--pretty near the full lift--to get the alternator up--to the proper
speed."

A chill ran down Bennie's spine. They were going to start the engine! In
a moment he would be within twenty feet of a blast of disintegration
products capable of lifting the whole machine into the air, and it was
to be started at his command, after he had worked and pottered for two
years with a thermic inductor the size of a thimble! He felt as he used
to feel before taking a high dive, or as he imagined a soldier feels
when about to go under fire for the first time. How would it turn out?
Was he taking too much responsibility, and was Atterbury counting on him
for the management of details? He felt singularly helpless as he
reentered the chart room to compose his message.

He turned on the electric lamp which hung over the desk, for in the
fast-gathering dusk the interior of the Ring was in almost total
darkness. How should his message read? It must be brief: it must tell
the story, and, above all, it must be compelling.

He was joined by the electrician.

"I think--we are all--ready now," stammered the latter. "What will you
send, sir?"

Bennie handed him a scrap of yellow paper, and Atterbury put on a pair
of dark amber glasses, to protect his eyes from the light of the spark.

     "_Thornton, Naval Observatory, Washington:_

     "Stranded fifty-four thirty-eight north, seventy-four eighteen
     west. Have the Ring machine. Ask Burke come immediately. Life and
     death matter.

     "B. HOOKER."

Atterbury read the message and then gazed blankly at Hooker.

"I--don't--understand," he said.

"Never mind, send it. I'll explain later." Together they went into the
condenser room.

Atterbury mechanically pushed the brass balls in contact, shoved a
bundle of iron wires halfway through the core of a great coil, and
closed a switch. A humming sound filled the air, and a few seconds later
a glow of yellow light came in through the window. A cone of luminous
vapour was shooting downward through the centre of the Ring from the
tractor. At first it was soft and nebulous, but it increased rapidly in
brilliancy, and a dull roar, like that of a waterfall, added itself to
the hum of the alternating current in the wires. And now a third sound
came to his ears, the note of the turbine, low at first, but gradually
rising like the scream of a siren, and the floor of the Ring beneath his
feet throbbed with the vibration.

Bennie forgot the dynamometer, forgot his message to Burke, was
conscious only that he had wakened a sleeping volcano. Then came the
crack of the sparks, and the room seemed filled with the glare of the
blue lightning, for Atterbury, with his telephones at his ears, staring
through his yellow glasses, was sending out the call for the Naval
Observatory.

"NAA--NAA--P--A--X."

Over and over again he sent the call, while in the meantime the
condenser built up its charge from the overflow of current from the
turbine generator. Then the electrician opened a switch, and the roar
outside diminished and finally ceased.

"We can't listen--with the tractor running," he fretted. "The
static--from the discharge--would tear--our detector--to pieces." He
threw in the receiving instrument. For a few moments the telephones
spoke only the whisperings of the arctic aurora, and then suddenly the
faint cry of the answering spark was heard. Bennie watched the words as
the electrician's pencil scrawled along on the paper.

     "Waiting for you. Why don't you send? N.A.A."

"They must have--called us before--while the discharge--was running
down," muttered Atterbury. "I think we can send--with the
condenser--now."

He picked up the scrap of yellow paper, read it over, and threw out into
space the message which he did not understand.

"O. K. Wait. Thornton," came in reply.

Two hours later came a second message:

     "P--A--X. Burke starts at daybreak. Expects reach you by nine P. M.
     Asks you to show large beacon fire if possible.

     "THORNTON, N. A. A."

"Hurrah!" cried Bennie. "Good for Burke! Atterbury, we're saved--saved,
do you hear! Go to bed now and don't ask any questions. And say, before
you go see if you can find me a glass of brandy."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was decided that Burke must land on the plateau above the cliff, and
here the material for the fire was collected. There was little enough of
it and it was hard work carrying the oil up the steep trail. At times
Bennie was almost in despair.

"It won't burn half an hour," said he, surveying the pile. "And we ought
to be able to keep it going all night. There's plenty of stuff in the
valley, but we can't have him come down there, with the tower, the
antennae, and all the rest of the mess."

"We might--show him--the big Ray," ventured Atterbury. "The thing--can
be pointed up--and I can--keep the turbine running. You can start--the
fire--as soon as you--hear his motors--and I'll shut down--as soon as I
see your fire."

"Good idea!" agreed Bennie. "Only don't run continuously. Show the Ray
for a minute every quarter of an hour, and on no account start up after
you see the fire. If he thought the vertical beam was a searchlight and
flew through it----" Bennie shuddered at the thought of Burke driving
his aeroplane through the Ray that had shattered the Atlas Mountains.

So it was arranged. Half an hour after sunset Atterbury shut himself up
in the Ring, and while Bennie climbed the trail leading to his post on
the plateau, he heard the creaking of the great inductor as it slowly
turned on its trunions.

It was pitch dark by the time he reached the pitifully small pile of
brush which they had collected, and he poured some of the oil over it
and sat down, drawing a blanket around his shoulders. He felt very much
alone. Suppose the inductor failed to work? Suppose Atterbury turned the
Ray on him? Suppose.... But his musings were shattered by a noise from
the valley, a sound like that of escaping steam, and a moment later the
Lavender Ray shot up toward the zenith. Bennie lay on his back and
watched it, mindful of the night before the last when he had watched the
Ray from the tower descending upon the cliff. He wondered if he should
see any meteorites kindle in its path, but nothing appeared and the Ray
died down, leaving everything in darkness again. Fifteen minutes passed
and again the ghostly beam shot up into the night sky. Bennie looked at
his watch. It was nearly half-past eight. The cold made him sleepy. He
drew the blanket about him....

Two hours later through his half-dreams he caught the faint sound for
which he had been listening. At first he was not sure. It might be the
turbine alternator of the Ring running by its own inertia for some time
after the discharge had ceased. But no, it was growing louder
momentarily, and appeared to come from high up in the air. Now it died
away to nothingness, and now it swelled in volume, and again died away.
But at each subsequent recurrence it was louder than before. There was
no longer any doubt. Burke was coming! It was time to start the brush
pile. He lit match after match, only for the wind to blow them out. Yet
all the time the machine in the air was coming nearer, the roar of its
twin engines beating on the stillness of the Labrador night. In despair
Bennie threw himself flat on his face by the brush pile and made a tent
of the blanket, under which he at last succeeded in starting a blaze
among the oil-soaked twigs. Then he pushed the half-empty keg into the
fire, arose and stared up at the sky.

The machine was somewhere directly above him--just where he could not
say. Presently the motors stopped. He shouted feebly, running up and
down with his eyes turned skyward, and several times nearly fell into
the fire. He wondered why it didn't appear. It seemed hours since the
motors stopped! Then unexpectedly against the black background of the
sky the great wings of the machine appeared, illuminated on their
underside by the light of the fire. Silently it swung around on its
descending spiral, instantly to be swallowed up in the darkness again, a
moment later reappearing from the opposite direction, this time low down
and headed straight for him. He jumped hastily to one side and fell
flat. The machine grounded, rose once or twice as it ran along the
ground, and came to a stop twenty yards from the fire. A man climbed
out, slowly removed his goggles, and shook himself. Bennie scrambled to
his feet and ran forward waving his hat.

"Well, Hooker!" remarked the man. "What th' hell are you doing _here_?
You sure have some searchlight!"

       *       *       *       *       *

How Hooker and Burke, under the guidance of Atterbury, who gradually
regained his normal mental status, explored and charted the valley of
the Ring is strictly no part of this tale which deals solely with the
end of War upon the Earth. But next day, after several hours of
excavation among the debris of the smelter, where Pax had extracted his
uranium from the pitch blend mined at the cliff, they uncovered eight
cylinders of the precious metal weighing about one hundred pounds
apiece--the fuel of the Flying Ring. Now they were safe. Nay, more:
universal space was theirs to traffic in.

Curious as to the reason why Pax had isolated himself in this frozen
wilderness, they next examined the high cliffs which shut in the valley
on the west and against the almost perpendicular walls of which he had
played the Lavender Ray. These cliffs proved, as Bennie had already
suspected, to be a gigantic outcrop of pitchblende or black oxide of
uranium. He estimated that nature had stored more uranium in but one of
the abutments of this cliff than in all the known mines of the entire
world. This radioactive mountain was the fulcrum by which this modern
Archimedes had moved the earth. The vast amount of matter disintegrated
by the Ray and thrown off into space with a velocity a thousandfold
greater than the blast of a siege gun produced a back pressure or recoil
against the face of the cliff, which thus became the "thrust block" of
the force which had slowed down the period of the earth's rotation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day of the start dawned with a blazing sun. From the landing stage
of the Ring Bennie could see stretching away to the east, west, and
south, the interminable plains, dotted with firs, which had formed the
natural barrier to the previous discovery of Pax's secret. Overhead the
dome of the sky fitted the horizon like an enormous shell--a shell
which, with a thrill, he realized that he could crack and escape from,
like a fledgling ready for its first flight. And yet in this moment of
triumph little Bennie Hooker felt the qualm which must inevitably come
to those who take their lives in their hands. An hour and he would be
either soaring Phoebus-like toward the south, or lying crushed and
mangled within a tangled mass of wreckage. Even here in this desolate
waste life seemed sweet, and he had much, so much to do. Wasn't it,
after all, a crazy thing to try to navigate the complicated mechanism
back to civilization? Yet something told him that unless he put his fate
to the test now he would never return. He had the utmost confidence in
Burke--he might never be able to secure his services again--no, it was
now or never. He entered the air-lock, closing and bolting the door, and
passed on into the chart room.

At all events, he thought, they were no worse off than Pax when he had
made his first trial flight, and they were working with a proven
machine, tuned to its fullest efficiency, and one which apparently
possessed automatic stability. Atterbury had gone to the condenser room
and was waiting for the order to start, while Burke was making the final
adjustment of the gyroscopes which would put the Ring on its
predetermined course. He came through the door and joined Bennie.

"Hooker," he said, "we're sure going to have some experience. If I can
keep her from turning over, I think I can manage her. The trouble will
come when we slant the tractor. I'm not sure how much depends on the
atmospheric valve, and how much on me. Things may happen quickly. If we
turn over we're done for."

He held out his hand to Bennie, who gripped it tremulously.

"Well," remarked the aviator, tossing away his cigarette, "we might as
well die now as any time!"

He walked swiftly over to the speaking-tube which communicated with the
condenser room and blew sharply into it.

"Let her go, _Gallagher_!" he directed.

"My God!" ejaculated Bennie. "Wait a second, can't you?"

But it was too late. He grabbed the rail, trembling. A humming sound
filled the air, and the gyroscopes slowly began to revolve. He looked up
through the window at the tractor, from which shot streaks of pale
vapour with a noise like escaping steam. Somehow it seemed alive.

The Ring was throbbing as if it, too, was impregnated with life. The
discharge of the tractor had risen to a muffled roar. Shaking all over,
Bennie crossed to the inside window and looked across the inner space of
the Ring. As yet the yellow glow of the discharge was scarcely visible,
but the steel sides of the Ring danced and quivered, undulating in
waves, and, as the intensity of the blast increased and the turbine
commenced to revolve, everything outside went suddenly blurred and
indistinct.

Dropping to his knees, Bennie looked down through the observation window
in the floor. A blinding cloud of yellow dust was driving out and away
from the base of the landing stage in the form of a gigantic ring. The
earth at their feet was hidden in whirls of vapour; and ripples of light
and shade chased each other outward in all directions, like shadows on
the bottom of a sandy pond rippled by a breeze. It made him dizzy to
look down there, and he arose from the window. Burke stood grimly at the
control, unmindful of his associate. Bennie crossed to the other side,
and as he passed the gyroscopes, the air from the swiftly spinning discs
blew back his hair. He could see nothing through the tumult that roared
down through the centre of the Ring, like a Niagara of hot steam shot
through with a pale yellow phosphorescent light. The floor quivered
under his feet, and ominous creaking and snapping sounds reverberated
through the outer shell, as the steel girders of the landing stage were
gradually relieved of its weight. Just as it seemed to him that
everything was going to pieces, suddenly there was silence, save for the
purr of the machinery, and Bennie felt his knees sink under him.

"We're off!" cried Burke. "Watch out!"

