trickery about it. What he did, he really did do."

"I don't pretend to be able to explain it," he replied, "but for all
that I've seen very much the same sort of thing done by the fakirs in
India, and I think it's generally admitted that that is either a matter
of trickery or hypnotism. They make you believe you see what you really
don't see at all."

"That's about it," said Merrill, with a short laugh, "Of course no one
who knows anything about the East will deny that hypnotism is a fact,
although I must say that these same fakirs have tried it with me more
than once and found me a quite hopeless subject."

Even as though he had heard him, Phadrig came towards them at the
moment, and said in his polite, impersonal tone:

"Commander Merrill, I am going to try one or two experiments now which I
should like to have very closely watched. I know that there is no keener
observer in the world than the skilled British naval officer. May I ask
for your assistance?"

There was something in his tone which made it quite impossible to
refuse, so he replied:

"You have shown us a good many wonders already, Mr Phadrig, and unless
you've hypnotised the whole of us, I haven't a notion how you have done
it; but if I can find you out I will."

"That is exactly what I wish, sir," said Phadrig, as he bowed to the
ladies and went back to the centre of the circle. Merrill followed him,
and, with the three Professors, formed a square about him.

Phadrig, turning slowly round so that his voice might reach all his
audience, said:

"Ladies and gentlemen, you have all heard of or seen the strange
performances of the Indian fakirs: the growing of the mango plant, the
so-called basket trick, and the throwing into the air of a rope up which
the performer climbs from view of the spectators. I am not going to say
whether those are tricks or not. Their knowledge may be different from
mine, therefore I do not question it. I only propose to show you the
same kind of performance without the use of any coverings or
concealment, and leave you and these four gentlemen to discover any
deception on my part if you can. I will begin by giving you a new
version of the mango trick, if trick it is, with variations. Professor
Marmion, would you have the goodness to ask one of the young ladies to
bring me one of those beautiful white roses of yours?"

Franklin Marmion was on the point of saying: "I'll bring you one myself,
and see what you can do with it," but he was a sportsman in his way,
and, seeing that his guests were so far not all inclined to be
frightened at what they had seen, he refrained from spoiling the
"entertainment," as they evidently took it to be, and so he asked his
daughter to go and get one of her nicest Marechal Niels.

She rose from her chair and went to her favourite tree; Merrill followed
her with a ready penknife. They came back with a fine half-blown rose on
a leafy twig about nine inches long. As she held it out to Phadrig he
declined it with a bow and a wave of his hand, saying:

"I thank you, Miss Marmion, but it will be better for me not to touch
it. Some one might think that I had bewitched it in some way; will you
be kind enough to give it to Commander Merrill and ask him to put the
stem into the turf: about two inches down, please."

She handed the rose to Merrill, and as he took it their eyes met for an
instant, and she flushed ever so slightly. He, with many unspoken
thoughts, knelt down, made a little hole in the turf with his knife, and
planted the rose. When he stood up again Phadrig went on in the same
quiet impersonal voice:

"Now, ladies and gentlemen, you know that this rose is of a pale cream
colour slightly tinted with red. It shall now grow into a tree bearing
both red and white roses. It will not be necessary for me to touch it."

This somehow appealed more closely to such imagination as the majority
of the spectators possessed. They had regarded the other marvels they
had seen merely as bewilderingly clever examples of legerdemain: but for
a man to make a single sprig of rose grow into a tree bearing both red
and white roses without even touching it meant something quite
unbelievable--until they had seen it. Instinctively the circle narrowed,
and Phadrig noting this, said:

"Pray, come as close as you like, ladies and gentlemen, as long as you
do not pass my guardians, for they have undertaken that you shall not be
deceived."

The result was that a smaller circle was formed round the square, at the
angles of which stood Merrill and the three men of science. Phadrig
stood at one side facing the east. Then he spread his hands out above
the rose, and said slowly:

"Earth feeds, sun warms, and air refreshes: wherefore grow, rose, that
the power of the Greater Knowledge may be manifested, and that those who
believed not before may now see and believe."

He raised his hands with a spreading movement and, to the utter
amazement of every one except Franklin Marmion, who now saw that this
man certainly had approached to within measurable distance of the
borderland which he had himself so lately crossed--wherefore in his eyes
there was nothing at all marvellous in anything he had done--the leaves
on the sprig grew rapidly out into branches as the main stem increased
in height and thickness, red and white buds appeared under the leaves
and swelled out into full blooms with a rapidity that would have been
quite incredible if a hundred keen eyes had not been watching the marvel
so closely; and within ten minutes a fine rose-bush, some three feet
high, loaded with red and white and creamy blossoms, stood where Merrill
had planted the sprig.

After the first gasps of astonishment there arose quite a chorus of
requests from the younger members of Phadrig's audience for a rose to
keep in memory of the marvel they had seen; but he shook his head, and
said with a smile of deprecation:

"I regret that it is not possible for me to grant what you ask. For your
own sakes I cannot do it. If I gave you those roses they would never
fade, and it might be that those who possessed them would never die. Far
be it from me to curse you with such a terrible gift as immortality on
earth."

The gravely, almost sadly spoken words fell upon his hearer's ears like
so many snowflakes. Instinctively they shrank back from the beautiful
bush as though it had been the fabled Upas. They had begun to fear now
for the first time. But there was one among them, a young fellow of
twenty-two, named Martin Caine, who was already known as one of the most
daring and far-sighted of the rising generation of chemical
investigators, to whom the prospect of an endless life devoted to his
darling science was anything but a curse. Intoxicated for the moment by
what he had seen, he sprang forward, exclaiming:

"I'll risk the curse if I can have the life!"

As his hand touched one of the roses, Phadrig's darted out and caught
his wrist. He was a powerful youth, but the instant Phadrig's hand
gripped him he stopped, as though he had been suddenly stricken by
paralysis. He turned a white, scared face with fear-dilated eyes upward,
and said in a half-choked voice:

"What's the matter? If what you say's true, give me eternal life, and
I'll give it to Science."

"My young friend," said Phadrig, with a slow shake of his head, "you are
grievously mistaken. You have eternal life already. You may kill your
body, or it may die of age or disease, but the life of your soul is not
yours to take or keep. Only the High Gods can dispose of that. Who am I
that I should abet you in defying their decrees? Here is my refusal of
your mad request."

He plucked the rose which Caine had touched, held it to his lips and
breathed on it. The next instant the withered leaves fell to the
ground, and lay there dry and shrivelled. The stalk was brown and dry.
As he released Caine's wrist he dropped the stalk in the middle of the
bush, and said in a loud tone:

"As thou hast lived, die--as all things must which shall live again."

As quickly as the rose-bush had grown and flowered so quickly, it
withered and died. In a few moments there was nothing left of it but a
few dry sticks lying in a little heap of dust.

The circle suddenly widened out as the people shrank back, every face
showing, not only wonder now, but actual fear; and now Franklin Marmion
felt that Phadrig had been allowed to go as far as a due consideration
for the sanity of his guests would permit. The other two Professors were
disputing in low, anxious tones, as if even their scepticism was shaken
at last: Martin Caine had drifted away through the opening press to hide
his terror and chagrin. The Adept stood impassively triumphant beside
the poor relics of the rose-bush, but obviously enjoying the
consternation that he had produced--for now the lust of power which ever
attends upon imperfect knowledge had taken hold of him, and he was
devising yet another marvel for their bewilderment. But before he had
arrived at his decision, something else happened which was quite outside
his programme.

The Prince broke the chilly silence by saying to Nitocris in a tone loud
enough for every one to hear:

"I hope, Miss Marmion, that I have justified my intrusion by the skill
which my friend Phadrig has displayed for the entertainment of your
guests?"

She turned and looked at him, and, as their glances met, he saw a change
come over her. Her eyes grew darker: her features acquired an almost
stony rigidity utterly strange to her. His eyelids lifted quickly, and
he shrank back from her as a man might do who had seen the wraith of one
long dead, but once well known.

"Nitocris!" he murmured in Russian. "Phadrig was right: it is the
Queen!"

She swept past him--Oscar Oscarovitch, the man who aspired to the throne
of the Eastern Empire of Europe--as though he had been one of his own
slaves in the old days, and faced Phadrig.

"It is enough, Anemen-Ha that was. Hast thou not learned wisdom yet,
after so many lives? Is the inmost chamber of thy soul still closed in
rebellion against the precepts of the High Gods? No more of thy poor
little mummeries for the deception of the ignorant! Go, and without
further display of the weakness which thou hast presumptuously mistaken
for strength. The Queen commands--go!"

Only Phadrig and Franklin Marmion saw that it was not Nitocris, the
daughter of the English man of science, but the daughter of the great
Rameses who stood there crowned and robed as Queen of the Two Kingdoms.

Phadrig raised the palms of his hands to his forehead, bowed before her,
and murmured:

"The Queen has but to speak to be obeyed! It is even as I feared. But the
Prince----"

"I who was and am, know what thou wouldst say. Go, or----"

"Royal Egypt, I go! But as thou art mighty, have mercy, and make the
manner of my going easy."

Nitocris turned away with a gesture of utter contempt, walked slowly
towards her father, and said in English:

"Dad, I think our friend the Adept is a little tired after his
wonder-working. I dare say most of us would be if we could do what he
has been doing. He seems quite exhausted. I think you had better ask the
Prince to let his coachman take him home."

Oscar Oscarovitch's soul was in a tumult of bewilderment, but his almost
perfect training made it possible for him to say as quietly as though he
had been taking leave of his hostess at a reception in London:

"Miss Marmion, we must thank you for your great consideration. As you
say, our friend is undoubtedly fatigued, and, as I have an appointment
at the Embassy this evening, I will ask you to allow me to take my leave
as well."

With a comprehensive bow of farewell to the company, and a somewhat limp
handshake with Professor Marmion and his daughter, he put his arm
through that of his defeated and humiliated accomplice, and led him away
through an opening which the still dazed spectators instinctively made
for them.




CHAPTER XII

CONTROVERSY AND CONFIDENCES


After this incident, the guests melted away, singly and by pairs and
families, thanking Nitocris and her father with much _empressement_ for
"the delightful afternoon," and "the extraordinary entertainment which
they had so much enjoyed," and many regrets that "the poor Adept, who
really was so very clever and had mystified them all so delightfully,"
had overdone himself and got ill, and so on, and so on, through the
endless repetitions and variations usual on such occasions.

A small party, including the Hartleys, the Van Huysmans, Merrill, and
Lord Leighton, had been asked to stay to dinner, but it happened that
they had a conversazione already included in the day's programme, and so
they took their departure soon after the others, the Professor, it must
be confessed, in a somewhat morose frame of mind. Like all men of
similar mental constitution, he hated to be mystified, and now, for the
first time in his long career of investigation into apparently abstruse
phenomena, he had been absolutely stumped by this perfect-mannered,
quiet-spoken gentleman from the East who performed wonders in broad
daylight, on a plot of grass amidst a crowd of people, and did not
deign to even touch the things he worked his miracles with. If he had
only used some sort of apparatus, or condescended to some concealment,
after the manner of others of this kind, there might have been a chance
of finding a means of exposure; but the whole performance had been so
transparently open and aboveboard that Professor Marcus Hartley, D.Sc.,
M.A., F.R.S., etc., etc., felt that, as a consistent materialist, he had
not been given a fair chance. Still, he did not despair; and by the time
he got back into his own den he had resolved that when it did come, as
of course it must do sooner or later, the exposure of Phadrig the Adept
and the vindication of Natural Law should be complete and final.

A discussion of the same marvels naturally bulked largely in the
conversation during dinner at "The Wilderness." Mrs van Huysman did not
contribute much wisdom to it beyond the assertion of her conviction that
such things were wicked and should be stopped by law, at which her
daughter was sufficiently unfilial to draw a diverting picture of a
stalwart policeman trying to arrest an elusive adept who could probably
make himself invisible at will, or call to his aid fire-breathing
dragons, just as easily as he could make a tennis ball evaporate into
thin air, or grow lovely witch-roses and wither them to ashes with a
breath.

"I do think it was a bit mean of him not to let that poor young man have
one of them, if he was willing to take the risk. Especially as he just
wanted to go on working for Science for ever. Fancy what a single man
might do if he could just keep right on with his life-work for, say, a
thousand years without having to stop it to die and be born again,
according to Niti's pet theory. What couldn't a man like that do for
human knowledge!"

"Would you have had one of those roses, Brenda, if the Prince's
miracle-worker had offered you one?" asked Nitocris, smiling, but still
with a decided note of seriousness in her tone.

"I?" laughed Brenda, leaning back in her chair. "Sakes, no, child! I've
had a pretty good time so far, and I hope it won't be over just yet;
but, after all, there must be a limit even to the combinations of human
life, and a time would have to come when you'd just be doing the same
old things over and over again. And, besides that, think of the horror
of living on and on and seeing every one you loved--husband and wife,
and children and grandchildren--grow old and die, and leave you alone in
a world of strangers. No; life's a good thing if you only have fair play
in the world; but so is death when you've lived your life. It's only
like going to bed, after all. Eternal life would be like a day with no
night to it, and that, I guess, would get a bit monotonous after a
century or two. What do you think, Professor?"

"My dear Miss van Huysman," replied her host with one of his rare but
eloquent smiles, "since I began to study the question with anything
like enlightenment, I have not been able to look upon what we call life,
by which I mean existence in this or some other world, as anything but
eternal. In its manifestations to our senses it is, I admit, merely
transitory, a brief span of time between two other states which, for
want of a better word, we may call two eternities; but I must confess
that, to me, a human existence beginning with the cradle and ending with
the grave is merely a more or less tragic riddle without an answer: in
other words, a meaningless absurdity. I find it quite impossible to
conceive any deity or presiding genius of the universe who could be
guilty of such a colossally useless tragedy as human life would be under
those circumstances."

"I can't see it, my dear Marmion," said Brenda's father a trifle
gruffly, for he had not yet quite recovered from the disquieting
experiences of the afternoon. "What does it matter whether we live again
or not as long as we live cleanly and do our work honestly while we are
alive? Surely if we leave this world a little bit better, a little bit
richer in knowledge, than we find it, these poor little lives of ours,
such as they are, and that's not much--will not have been lived in vain.
Of course, as you know, I'm just a common, low-down materialist who
can't rise to the poetry of things as you can with this gorgeous theory
of re-incarnation of yours.

"I should very much like to believe it if I could, as I once said to an
eminent revivalist on the war-path in the States; but the trouble with a
man who is honest with himself is that he can no more make himself
believe what doesn't seem true to him than he can make himself hungry
when he isn't. All the horrible history of religious persecution is just
the story of a lot of bigots in power trying to force helpless people to
do what they couldn't do honestly. The awful part of the business is
that they were most likely all wrong, and didn't know it."

"But, at least, Professor, I hope you are able to give them credit for
honest intentions, however mistaken they might have been?" interposed
Merrill, who was the son of a country parson and had so far preserved
his simple faith intact. It may be remarked here, that Nitocris was well
aware of this, and loved her strong-souled sailor all the better for it.
Franklin Marmion did not, but then he thought any creed good enough for
"a mere fighting man."

"There were schemers and scoundrels among them on both sides, sir,"
replied the American quietly. "The temptation was too big; but I am
quite willing to allow that the majority of them, even the Inquisitors,
were honest zealots who really did think it right to produce any amount
of suffering and misery here on earth in order to get matters
straightened out, as they thought, hereafter. Charles V. was the most
enlightened monarch of his age and the worst persecutor, and Torquemada,
away from his religion, was as kind-hearted a man as ever lived. Calvin
was a good man, but he watched Servetus burn, and our own Pilgrim
Fathers on the other side were just about as hard men as any when it
came to arguing out a religious question with whips and pillories and
thumbscrews, and the like. I don't want to offend any one's sentiment or
question any one's faith. To each man the belief that satisfies him, but
personally I have no use for a religion that can't get itself believed
without persecution."

"I quite agree with you there, Professor," replied Merrill, who felt a
little chilled by the perfect aloofness with which the other spoke, and
was wondering what his dear old father, living his quiet, saintly life
among the Derbyshire dales, would have thought of such cold-blooded
heresy. "I have always looked upon that sort of brutal intolerance as a
form of religious mania--sincere, but still mania, and the story of it
is the most awful chapter in human history----"

"Except, perhaps, the story of war," interrupted Professor Marmion, with
a snap in his voice. Monomania, more or less harmless, is a not
infrequent affliction of very high intelligences, and a quite
unreasoning hatred of war was his, although within the last few days he
had come to suspect disquieting misgivings on the subject, possibly in
consequence of the higher knowledge to which he was attaining.

"My dear sir," replied Merrill quite good-humouredly, and not at all
sorry for the diversion, "I am glad to say that I agree with you also.
No man who has not actually fought can have any just idea of the
appalling abominations of war, and I am sure that no men hate it more
devotedly than those who have to fight. But we have to take the world as
it is, and not as we would like it to be; and as long as we have people
in it who want to set it on fire for their own brutally selfish
purposes, we shall have to keep the fire-extinguishers in good order."

In obedience to an appealing glance from his daughter, the Professor did
not reply. His opponent in the bloodless arena of Science saved him by
interrupting:

"Yes, sir. I differ from my friend Marmion on a good many points, and
that's one of them. You have the honour to serve in the biggest
fire-extinguishing institution on earth. It was the British Navy that
put out Napoleon's bonfire that he was making of the world: you kept the
ring round us and Spain, and round Russia and Japan, and you've saved
more conflagrations than half a dozen Noah's floods would put out.
That's why the Kaiser and his tin-hatted firebrands have such a healthy
dislike for you. They'd have had the world on fire years ago if they
hadn't had to worry about you."

"I think you must admit, Professor Marmion," said Lord Leighton, who had
so far been busy with his own new thoughts and the contemplation of the
inspirer of them, "that it is people like these on whom the real guilt
of the crime of war rests. Now that the pressure of the bear's paw is
removed, Germany is the danger-spot of the world. The Maroocan business
proved that pretty clearly; and nothing but our friendship with America
and France and Japan, and the ability to strike hard and instantly at
sea, saved Europe, and perhaps the world, from something like a
repetition of the Napoleonic wars."

"With Mister William Hohenzollern a Napoleon," added Professor van
Huysman, with a half-suppressed snort. "It seems to me as though that
gentleman had been spreading himself round Europe as German War-Lord so
long that he's getting tired of playing at it, and 's just spoiling for
a real fight."

"That is very possible," said Merrill; "but happily he has
responsibilities, and even the German war party would not follow him as
far as he would like to go, to say nothing of the Liberals and the
Socialists. Personally, I must say that I think we have had a much more
dangerous person, as far as the peace of the world is concerned, on the
lawn of 'The Wilderness' this afternoon."

"Of course you mean that hateful Russian Prince who brought that equally
hateful Adept, as he calls himself, with him," said Nitocris, with an
unwonted harshness that made every one look up.

"Oh, Niti," exclaimed Brenda, "and I asked you to let me bring him!"

"I'm very sorry, dear," she replied quietly, but with a smile of
reassurance. "It was not your fault, of course. He may have been very
