improvement on Huyghens' powder engine.

[Illustration: PAPIN'S STEAM ENGINE.]

A is the boiler for the generation of the steam, provided with a
safety valve (an invention of Papin). On opening the stopcock, C, the
steam passes through B into the cylinder, D, and by its expansion
drives the plunger, E, against the water contained in the cylinder, D,
which is thus forced into the chamber, F, compressing strongly the
air, which in turn expels the water through the pipe, G, to the height
desired. K is a funnel for the fresh supply of water, and at I and H
are valves opening upwards and downwards. After the condensation of
the steam in D, a renewed supply of water, through K, forces the
plunger, E, to the top of the cylinder, ready for the next action of
steam. The strokes of such a pump could not be frequent, and it would
not compare very favorably with the wonderful machinery exhibited in
Philadelphia last summer; but it contains the germ of the idea, and is
worthy of all honor. Having often seen it stated that Papin had
invented a steamboat, I resolved during a recent visit to Germany to
investigate the matter, and especially to search for the
correspondence between Papin and Leibnitz in the library at Hanover.
It will be borne in mind that two hundred years ago, on December 4,
1676, Leibnitz was appointed to take charge of the library in Hanover,
and that he remained in this position until his death in 1716. He
bequeathed his manuscripts to the library; and as he had the habit of
writing upon all manner of loose scraps of paper, it has cost much
labor to assort and classify them.

On making my application to the librarian to be permitted to see the
correspondence between Papin and Leibnitz, my request was at once
granted; and a table having been assigned me, I was able to examine
these precious relics at my leisure. I was also shown a copy of an
original treatise on the steam engine by Papin, which contained
numerous marginal notes by Leibnitz. In one place, Leibnitz criticized
Papin's method for condensing steam, and makes a drawing on the
margin, showing a piston and valve which he thought would be more
practical. It is somewhat remarkable that the Germans have not caused
a fac-simile of this little volume to be published. After considerable
search, I found a copy of the original letter addressed by Papin to
Leibnitz in 1707, asking Leibnitz to assist him in obtaining the
consent of the Hanoverian Government to navigate the river Weser with
a sidewheel steamboat. The letter was dated July 7, 1707, and
contained among other interesting passages the following sentence:
"The new invention will enable one or two men to accomplish more
effect than several hundred oarsmen." It is evident that Leibnitz was
deeply impressed by Papin's letter, and he supported the simple and
reasonable request contained in it by the following petition addressed
to the Councillors of State. This communication from Leibnitz bears
two indorsements, one by the clerk of the council, "_pro memoria_
respectfully, in reference to the passage of a ship from the river
Fulda into the Weser;" the other is in the handwriting of Leibnitz:
"Papin's sidewheel ship." This last indorsement is of great value, as
indicating the fact that Papin proposed to apply side wheels for the
propulsion of his new invention. The following is a translation of
Leibnitz' letter, the original of which I saw in the library:

"Dionysius Papin, Councillor and Physician to his royal highness the
Elector of Cassel, also Professor of Mathematics at Marburg, is about
to dispatch a vessel of singular construction down the river Weser to
Bremen. As he learns that all ships coming from Cassel, or any point
on the Fulda, are not permitted to enter the Weser, but are required
to unload at Muenden, and as he anticipates some difficulty, although
those vessels have a different object, his own not being intended for
freight, he begs most humbly that a gracious order be granted that his
ship may be allowed to pass unmolested through the electoral domain,
which petition I most humbly support.

  G.W. LEIBNITZ.
  "Hanover, July 13, 1707."

This letter was returned to Leibnitz with the following indorsement:
"The Electoral Councillors have found serious obstacles in the way of
granting the above petition, and, without giving their reasons, have
directed me to inform you of their decision, and that in consequence
the request is not granted by his Electoral Highness.

  H. REICHE.
  "Hanover, July 25, 1707."

This failure of Papin's petition was the deathblow to his effort to
establish steam navigation. A mob of boatmen, who thought they saw in
the embryo ship the ruin of their business, attacked the vessel at
night and utterly destroyed it. Papin narrowly escaped with his life,
and fled to England, where he endured great hardships and poverty, and
all traces of him were soon lost, so that it is uncertain in what
country he finally died or where he was buried.

This remarkable man was driven out of France on account of his
Protestant faith, and found a refuge in Germany; here he was again
persecuted on account of the injury that ignorant and jealous people
believed his inventions would inflict upon the industries of the
country; and when the climax of steam engines for pumping water and
propelling ships was reached, the enlightened government of the period
"found serious obstacles" in the way of granting him protection, and,
without condescending to state what those "objections" were, secretly
instigated the mob to make an end of the trouble. It is another
instance, unfortunately too often repeated in history, of the mischief
men dressed up in a little brief authority can work upon their
generation. If Papin had been permitted to navigate the Weser with his
ship, and to carry it to London, as was his intention, it is possible
that we should have had steamboats one hundred years earlier than they
were given to us by Fulton. The plan proposed by Papin was highly
impracticable; but a knowledge of what Savery had done in the way of
steam machinery, aided by the shrewd suggestions of Leibnitz, combined
with the practical assistance of Englishmen, would, no doubt, have
enabled him to improve upon his invention until it had obtained
sufficient credit to be secure against the misfortune of being
totally forgotten. After the lapse of 100 years from the date of
Papin's invention, when the first steamboat was put upon the river
Rhine, the vessel was fired into by concealed marksmen on shore, and
navigation was more dangerous than it is now on the upper waters of
the Missouri in times of Indian hostility. It was only after
stationing troops along the banks of the river to protect the boatmen
that the government, fortunately more enlightened than in the days of
Leibnitz, was able to establish steam navigation on a secure footing.

I have thought it worth while to make this contribution to the history
of steam navigation, particularly as I have been able to authenticate
a portion of it by reference to original documents.

Columbia College, New York city, January, 1877.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SPEAKING TELEGRAPH.


We have heretofore given accounts of the wonderful success of
Professor Bell in transmitting the vibrations of the human voice by
electrical means over a telegraph wire. He has lately made
improvements in his method of transmission, by which he dispenses with
the use of the battery, and substitutes the magneto-electric plan of
producing the current. The Boston _Transcript_ describes a recent
experiment with the new apparatus, by which conversation and singing
was successfully carried on between Boston and Malden, a distance of
six miles. The telephone, in its present form, consists of a powerful
compound permanent magnet, to the poles of which are attached ordinary
telegraph coils of insulated wire. In front of the poles, surrounded
by these coils of wire, is placed a diaphragm of iron. A mouthpiece to
converge the sound upon this diaphragm substantially completes the
arrangement. As is well known, the motion of steel or iron in front of
the poles of a magnet creates a current of electricity in coils
surrounding the poles of the magnet, and the duration of this current
of electricity coincides with the duration of the motion of the steel
or iron moved or vibrated in the proximity of the magnet. When the
human voice causes the diaphragm to vibrate, electrical undulations
are induced in the coils environing the magnets, precisely analogous
to the undulations of the air produced by that voice. These coils are
connected with the line wire, which may be of any length, provided the
insulation be good. The undulations which are induced in these coils
travel through the line wire, and, passing through the coils of an
instrument of precisely similar construction at the distant station,
are again resolved into air undulations by the diaphragm of this
instrument.

The experiments were as follows: Telephones having been connected with
the private telegraphic line of the Boston Rubber Shoe Company,
conversation was at once commenced. Stationed at the Boston end of the
wire, Professor Bell requested Mr. Watson, who was at the Malden end,
to speak in loud tones, with a view of enabling the entire company at
once to distinguish the sounds.

This was so successful that a smile of mingled pleasure and surprise
played on the features of those present. That it, however, might not
be supposed that loud speaking was essential to intelligibility, Mr.
Bell explained that soft tones could be heard across the wires even
more distinctly than loud utterances, even a whisper being audible. In
confirmation of this statement, Mr. Watson commenced speaking in turn
with each member of the company; and after the efficiency of this
method had been proved to the satisfaction of all, he took up a
newspaper and informed the assemblage that gold had closed the
previous evening at New York at 105-5/8. As there were quite a number
of business men present, the effect that this practical demonstration
of the value of the telephone produced can scarcely be exaggerated.
Other passages from the daily journals were then given, and by this
time the desire for conversation having become general, Mr. Watson was
plied with questions such as: "Is it thawing or freezing at Malden?
Who will be the next President?" etc. It was remarkable that Mr.
Watson was able to distinguish between the voices at the Boston end,
he calling at least one gentleman by name as soon as the latter
commenced speaking.

This went on for some time, until a lady at the Malden end sent the
company an invitation to lunch per telephone, and an appropriate
response was made by the same medium. At length the Boston company
were requested to remain quiet while a lady at the other end conveyed
to them the sweet strains of music. The assemblage thereupon listened
with rapt attention while a young lady commenced singing "The Last
Rose of Summer." The effect was simply charming. The sound of the
voice penetrated into the Boston end of the telephone with a
distinctness equal to that attainable in the more distant parts of a
large concert room, and a unanimous vote of thanks was sent by the
handy little instrument which had procured for the assemblage so
agreeable an hour.

       *       *       *       *       *


The superb steam engine built by C.H. Brown & Co., of Fitchburg,
Mass., which was illustrated and described on page 1 of our current
volume, has been purchased by Messrs. Phineas Jones & Co., and is
being erected in their extensive carriage wheel works at Newark, N.J.

       *       *       *       *       *




CROSSING A RIVER ON A WIRE.


A reporter of the New York Sun wanted to realize the sensation of
being suspended on a wire 275 feet from the surface of the earth. He
applied to the engineer of the Brooklyn bridge for permission to cross
the East river on a wire, three quarters of an inch in diameter, which
hangs between the two towers. He was refused permission; but he
finally saw the president of the company, who granted his request.
Arriving at the appointed time, the engineer, Mr. Farrington, said:
"Well, sir; whenever you're ready, I am."

"All ready, said I, as bold as brass outside, and as nervous as the
Endorian witch on the inside. He walked on and I followed, when,
Horror of Horrors--capital H's--to both Horrors--instead of leading me
to the 'cradle,' which I called a raft, he took me to a little square
board held up by two crossed iron arms, called a 'buggy.' It was about
three feet square, and depended from the 'traveler,' a three quarter
inch wire which crosses the river, and is run from tower to tower over
apparatus, by means of a stationary engine. It was too late to back
out, but I didn't feel exactly prepared to plunge in. He did.

"He jumped in, and the little buggy swung from side to side, precisely
as a swing does when you jump on the board and try to steady it by the
ropes. I looked at him, at the scale--that's it; it's exactly like a
pair of scales, with one scale--at the deep depths below us, and at
myself. I imagined the ticklish thrill which would permeate my body
when we started. I fancied the glories of the prospective perspective
before me.

"'Come, hurry up, please,' interrupted Farrington, and with
resignation I hurried down. He stood up. I crouched down. Perhaps you
think you'd have stood up as he did. You're mistaken. I crouched down
and held on tight. Make no mistake. I held on tight and waited for my
thrill. It didn't come. Then I stood up, and Farrington gave the word
'Go.' 'Wouldn't you better take a rope along?' said one of the men.
'Yes, I think I would.' What did he want of a rope? He feared I would
be nervous. He meant to grapple me in the middle of the river, and tie
me in. I knew it. I felt it. But I didn't say a word.

"With a gentle jerk we started--slow, slow, very slow. Farrington
stood in front and watched the wire. I stood behind and watched
myself. I felt nothing. I was'n't exhilarated. I was'n't scared. I
was'n't even timid. I can't look from the top of a house without
desiring to jump off, but I looked down from the buggy and hadn't the
least desire to jump. Farrington says: 'It's because it's so high up.'
Well, we went on without any special sensation till the buggy struck
against a stay rope which reaches from one of the cables to the tower.
In the effort to free the buggy, Mr. Farrington gave a push which
swung us out some little distance and back again, at which a little
piece of indigestion seemed to be monarch of my interior, and for a
moment I was on the verge of a sensation. Having passed the middle,
the ascent was more labored. I waved my handkerchief to the people on
the ferryboats. I looked out toward the sea. I looked up at the
heavens. I even looked toward Harlem, but, like the buyer in the
Bible, I said: 'It is naught, it is naught.'

"In about eight minutes we touched the New York side--all but ten
feet. The red flag waved for the engine to stop. There we hung in
mid-air 275 feet above the level, swinging to and fro like a drunken
buggy, at an angle of forty degrees, and quite uneasy. The rope which
was to haul us on was fastened to the iron--blest be the tie that
binds--and with a few hearty pulls we were brought so near the New
York tower that without difficulty we clambered up. I had made the
trip, but I had not felt a feel. From the top of the New York tower I
saw much, but the chief point of interest was the innumerable jets of
steam which flourish in the air, and fantastically curl off into
space.

"Again the steeples, the tower, and the long, narrow, dirty river
filled the prospect, and the bright sun of a charming day lightened up
the western sky That was all, except to say 'thanks and good-bye,' and
descend the stairs. There were 417 of them stairs, and before I
reached the bottom I was dizzy, faint, seasick, and filled with a
decoction of tickle, so that I had to shut my eyes and rest from my
labors.

"Thus ends the trip which filled my anticipatory imagination as the
waters fill the sea, but which resolved itself in realization to a
simple, childlike faith in the fixtures on the wire, and in the skill
and competence of the man who guided them. MONSIEUR X."

       *       *       *       *       *




BLUE GLASS SCIENCE.

