the switch for the synthetic-gravity generator and, seconds later, felt
the familiar and reassuring sensation of the chair under him as the
generator supplied an artificial-gravity field to the ship.

As he loosened the straps in his chair, he noticed Captain Strong rising
from his position beside him and he grinned sheepishly in answer to the
twinkle in Strong's eye.

"It's all right, Tom," reassured Strong. "Happens to everyone the first
time. Carry on."

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Tom and he turned to the microphone. "Control
deck to all stations! We are in space! Observe standard cruise
procedure!"

"Power deck, aye!" was Astro's blasting answer over the loud-speaker.
"Yeeeoooww! Out where we belong at last."

"Radar bridge here," Roger's voice chimed in softly on the speaker.
"Everything under control. And, Astro, you belong in a zoo if you're
going to bellow like that!"

"Ahhh--rocket off, bubblehead!" The big Venusian's reply was
good-natured. He was too happy to let Roger get under his skin.

"All right, you two," interrupted Tom. "Knock it off. We're on a ship
now. Let's cut the kindergarten stuff!"

"Aye, aye, skipper!" Astro was irrepressible.

"Yes, _sir_!" Roger's voice was soft but Tom recognized the biting edge
to the last word.

Turning away from the controls, he faced Captain Strong who had been
watching quietly.

"_Polaris_ space-borne at nine hundred thirty-three hours, Captain
Strong. All stations operating efficiently."

"Very competent job, Corbett," nodded Strong in approval. "You handled
the ship as if you'd been doing it for years."

"Thank you, sir."

"We'll just cruise for a while on this orbit so you boys can get the
feel of the ship and of space." The Solar Guard officer took Tom's place
in the command pilot's chair. "You knock off for a while. Go up to the
radar bridge and have a look around. I'll take over here."

"Yes, sir." Tom turned and had to restrain himself from racing up the
ladder to the radar bridge. When he climbed through the hatch to Roger's
station, he found his unit-mate tilted back in his chair, staring
through the crystal blister over his head.

"Hiya, spaceboy," smiled Roger. He indicated the blister. "Take a look
at the wide, deep and high."

Tom looked up and saw the deep blackness that was space.

"It's like looking into a mirror, Roger," he breathed in awe. "Only
there isn't any other side--no reflection. It just doesn't stop, does
it?"

"Nope," commented Roger, "it just goes on and on and on. And no one
knows where it stops. And no one can even guess."

"Ah--you've got a touch of space fever," laughed Astro. "You'd better
take it easy, pal."

Tom suppressed a smile. Now, for the first time, he felt that there was
a chance to achieve unity among them. Kill him with kindness, he
thought, that's the way to do it.

"All right, boys!" Captain Strong's voice crackled over the speaker.
"Time to pull in your eyeballs and get to work again. We're heading back
to the spaceport! Take your stations for landing!"

Tom and Astro immediately jumped toward the open hatch and started
scrambling down the ladder toward their respective stations while Roger
strapped himself into his chair in front of the astrogation panel.

Within sixty seconds the ship was ready for landing procedure and at a
nod from Captain Strong, who again strapped himself into the second
pilot's chair, Tom began the delicate operation.

Entering Earth's atmosphere, Tom gave a series of rapid orders for
course changes and power adjustments, and then, depressing the master
turn control, spun the ship around so that she would settle stern first
toward her ramp at the Academy spaceport.

"Radar deck to control deck," called Roger over the intercom. "One
thousand feet to touchdown!"

"Control deck, aye," answered Tom. "Control deck to power deck. Check
in."

"Power deck, aye," replied Astro.

"Stand by to adjust thrust to maximum drive at my command," ordered Tom.

"Power deck, aye."

The great ship, balanced perfectly on the hot exhaust, slowly slipped
toward the ground.

"Five hundred feet to touchdown," warned Roger.

"Main rockets full blast," ordered Tom.

The sudden blast of the powerful jets slowed the descent of the ship,
and finally, fifty feet above the ground, Tom snapped out another order.

"Cut main rockets! Hold auxiliary!"

A moment later there was a gentle bump and the _Polaris_ rested on the
ramp, her nose pointed to the heavens.

"_Touchdown!_" yelled Tom. "Cut everything, fellas, and come up and sign
the log. We made it--our first hop into space! We're spacemen!"




CHAPTER 10


"The next event will be," Warrant Officer McKenny's voice boomed over
the loud-speaker and echoed over the Academy stadium, "the last
semifinal round of mercuryball. _Polaris_ unit versus _Arcturus_ unit."

As two thousand space cadets, crowded in the grandstands watching the
annual academy tournament, rose to their feet and cheered lustily, Tom
Corbett turned to his unit-mates Astro and Roger and called
enthusiastically, "O.K., fellas. Let's go out there and show them how to
play this game!"

During the two days of the tournament, Tom, Roger and Astro, competing
as a unit against all the other academy units, had piled up a tremendous
amount of points in all the events. But so had Unit 77-K, now known as
the _Capella_ unit. Now with the _Capella_ unit already in the finals,
the _Polaris_ crew had to win their semifinal round against the
_Arcturus_, in order to meet the _Capella_ in the final round for
Academy honors.

"This is going to be a cinch," boasted Astro. "I'm going to burn 'em
up!"

"Save it for the field," said Tom with a smile.

"Yeah, you big Venusian ape," added Roger. "Make points instead of space
gas."

Stripped to the waist, wearing shorts and soft, three-quarter-length
space boots, the three boys walked onto the sun-baked field amid the
rousing cheers from the stands. Across the field, the cadets of the
_Arcturus_ unit walked out to meet them, stopping beside McKenny at the
mid-field line. Mike waited for the six boys to form a circle around
him, while he held the mercuryball, a twelve-inch plastic sphere, filled
with air and the tricky tube of mercury.

"You all know the rules," announced McKenny abruptly. "Head, shoulders,
feet, knees, or any part of your body except your hands, can touch the
ball. _Polaris_ unit will defend the north goal," he said, pointing to a
white chalk line fifty yards away, "_Arcturus_ the south," and he
pointed to a line equally distant in the opposite direction.
"Five-minute periods, with one-minute rest between. All clear?"

As captain of the _Polaris_ unit, Tom nodded, while smiling at the
captain of the _Arcturus_ team, a tow-headed boy with short chunky legs
named Schohari.

"All clear, Mike," said Tom.

"All clear here, Mike," responded Schohari.

"All right, shake hands and take your places."

The six boys shook hands and jogged toward respective opposite lines.
Mike waited for them to reach their goal lines, and then placed the ball
in the middle of a chalk-drawn circle.

Toeing the line, Tom, Roger and Astro eyed the _Arcturus_ crew and
prepared for the dash to the ball.

"All right, fellas," urged Tom, "let's show them something!"

"Yeah," breathed Astro, "just let me get my size thirteens on that
pumpkin before it starts twisting around!"

Astro wanted the advantage of the first kick at the ball while the
mercury tube inside was still quiet. Once the mercury was agitated, the
ball would be as easy to kick as a well-greased eel.

"We'll block for you, Astro," said Tom, "and you put every ounce of
beef you've got into that first kick. If we're lucky, we might be able
to get the jump on them!"

"Cut the chatter," snapped Roger nervously. "Baldy's ready to give us
the go ahead!"

Standing on the side lines, Warrant Officer McKenny slowly raised his
hand, and the crowd in the grandstand hushed in eager anticipation. A
second passed and then there was a tremendous roar as he brought his
hand down and blew heavily on the whistle.

Running as if their lives depended on it, the six cadets of the two
units raced headlong toward the ball. Tom, just a little faster than
Roger or Astro, flashed down the field and veered off to block the
advancing Schohari. Roger, following him, charged into Swift, the second
member of the _Arcturus_ crew. Astro, a few feet in back of them,
running with surprising speed for his size, saw that it was going to be
a close race between himself and Allen, the third member of the
_Arcturus_ unit. He bowed his head and drove himself harder, the roar of
the crowd filling his ears.

" ... Go Astro!... Go Astro!..."

Pounding down for the kick, Astro gauged his stride perfectly and with
one last, mighty leap swung his right foot at the ball.

There was a loud thud drowned by a roar from the crowd as the ball
sailed off the ground with terrific force. And then almost immediately
there was another thud as Allen rose in a desperate leap to block the
ball with his shoulder. It caromed off at a crazy angle, wobbling in its
flight as the mercury within rolled from side to side. Swift, of the
_Arcturus_ crew, reached the ball first and sent it sailing at an angle
over Tom's head to bounce thirty feet away. Seeing Astro charge the
ball, Tom threw a block on Allen to knock him out of the play. The big
Venusian, judging his stride to be a little off, shortened his steps to
move in for the kick. But just as he brought his foot forward to make
contact, the ball spun away to the left. Astro's foot continued in a
perfect arc over his head, throwing him in a heap on the ground.

Two thousand voices from the stands roared in one peal of laughter.

While Astro lay on the ground with the wind knocked out of him, Schohari
and Swift converged on the ball. With Astro down and Tom out of
position, the _Arcturus_ unit seemed certain of scoring. But again the
ball rolled crazily, this time straight to Roger, the last defender. He
nudged it between his opponents toward Tom, who, in turn, kicked it
obliquely past Allen back to Roger again. Running with the grace and
speed of an antelope, the blond cadet met the ball in mid-field, and
when it dropped to the ground in front of him, sent it soaring across
the goal with one powerful kick!

As the cadets in the stands sent up a tumultuous cheer for the perfectly
executed play, the whistle blew, ending the period and the _Polaris_
unit led, one to nothing.

Breathing deeply, Astro and Roger flopped down near Tom and stretched
full length on the grass.

"That was a beautiful shot, Roger," said Tom. "Perfectly timed!"

"Yeah, hot-shot," agreed Astro, "I'm glad to see that big head of yours
is good for something!"

"Listen, fellas," said Roger eagerly, ignoring Astro, "to go into the
finals against Richards and the _Capella_ unit, we've got to beat the
_Arcturus_ crew, right?"

"Yeah," agreed Tom, "and it won't be easy. We just happened to get the
breaks."

"Then why don't we put the game on ice?" said Roger. "Freeze the ball!
We got 'em one to nothing, that's enough to beat them. When the whistle
blows and it's over, we win!"

Astro looked at Tom, who frowned and replied, "But we've still got three
periods left, Roger. It isn't fair to freeze this early in the game. If
it was the last minute or so, sure. But not so early. It just isn't
fair."

"What do you want to do?" snarled Roger. "Win, or play fair?"

"Win, of course, but I want to win the right way," said Tom.

"How about you, Astro?" asked Roger.

"I feel the same way that Tom does," said the big cadet. "We can beat
these guys easily--and on the square."

"You guys make it sound like I was cheating," snapped Roger.

"Well," said Tom, "it sure isn't giving the _Arcturus_ guys a break."

The whistle blew for them to return to the goal line.

"Well," asked Roger, "do we freeze or don't we?"

"I don't want to. But majority always rules in this unit, Roger." Tom
glanced at Astro. "How about it, Astro?"

"We can beat 'em fair and square. We play all out!" answered Astro.

Roger didn't say anything. He moved to one side and took his position
for the dash down field.

The whistle blew again and the crowd roared as the two teams charged
toward the ball. The cadets were eager to see if the _Arcturus_ crew
could tie the score or if the crew of the _Polaris_ would increase its
lead. But after a few moments of play, their cries of encouragement
subsided into rumbles of discontent. In its eagerness to score, the
_Arcturus_ unit kept making errors and lost the ball constantly but the
crew of the _Polaris_ failed to capitalize. The second period ended with
the score unchanged.

As he slumped to the ground for the rest period, Astro turned on Roger
bitterly. "What's the idea, Manning? You're dogging it!"

"You play your game, Astro," replied Roger calmly, "I'll play mine."

"We're playing this game as a team, Roger," chimed in Tom heatedly.
"You're kicking the ball all over the lot!"

"Yeah," added Astro. "In every direction except the goal!"

"I was never clear," defended Roger. "I didn't want to lose possession
of the ball!"

"You sure didn't," said Tom. "You acted as if it was your best friend
and you never wanted to be separated from it!"

[Illustration]

"We said we didn't want to freeze this game, Roger, and we meant it!"
Astro glowered at his unit-mate. "Next period you show us some action!
If you don't want to score, feed it to us and we'll save you the
trouble!"

But the third period was the same. While Tom and Astro dashed up and
down the field, blocking out the members of the _Arcturus_ crew to give
Roger a clear shot, he simply nudged the ball back and forth between the
side lines, ignoring his teammates' pleas to drive forward. As the
whistle sounded for the end of the period, boos and catcalls from the
grandstand filled the air.

Tom's face was an angry red as he faced Roger again on the side lines
during the rest period.

"You hear that, Roger?" he growled, nodding his head toward the stands.
"That's what they think of your smart playing!"

"What do I care?" replied the blond cadet arrogantly. "They're not
playing this game! I am!"

"And we are too!" Astro's voice was a low rumble as he came up behind
Manning. "If you don't give us a chance, so help me, I'll use your head
for a ball!"

[Illustration]


"If you're so interested in scoring, why don't you go after the ball
yourselves then?" said Roger.

"Because we're too busy trying to be a team!" snapped Tom. "We're trying
to clear shots for you!"

"Don't be so generous," sneered Roger.

"I'm warning you, Roger"--Astro glared at the arrogant cadet--"if you
don't straighten out and fly right--"

McKenny's whistle from the far side lines suddenly sounded, interrupting
the big cadet, and the three boys trooped back out on the field again.
Again the air was filled with boos and shouts of derision and Tom's face
flushed with shame.

This time, when McKenny's hand flashed downward, Tom streaked for the
ball, instead of Schohari, his usual opponent. He measured his stride
carefully and reached the ball in perfect kicking position.

He felt the satisfying thud against his foot, and saw the ball shoot out
high in front of him and head for the goal line. It was a beautiful
kick. But then, the ball suddenly sank, its flight altered by the action
of the mercury. Running down field, Tom saw Swift and Allen meet the
ball together. Allen blocked it with his chest and caromed it over to
Swift. Swift let the ball drop to the ground, drawing his foot back to
kick. But again, the mercury changed the ball's action, twisting it to
one side and Swift's kick caught it on the side. Instead of the ball
going down field, it veered to the left, in the path of Astro. Quickly
getting his head under it, he shifted it to Roger, who streaked in and
stopped it with his hip. But then, instead of passing ahead to Tom, who
by now was down field and in the open, Roger prepared to kick for the
goal himself.

Tom shouted a warning but it was too late. Schohari came rushing in
behind him, and at running stride, met the ball squarely with his right
foot. It sailed high in the air and over the _Polaris_ goal line just
as the whistle blew. The game was tied.

"That was some play, Manning," said Astro, when they were lined up
waiting for the next period to begin.

"You asked for it," snapped Roger, "you were yapping at me to play, and
now look what's happened!"

"Listen, you loudmouthed punk!" said Astro, advancing toward the smaller
cadet, but just then the whistle blew and the three boys ran out onto
the field.

The _Arcturus_ crew swept down the field quickly, heading for the ball
and seemingly ignoring the _Polaris_ unit. But Schohari slipped and fell
on the grass which gave Tom a clear shot at the ball. He caught it with
the side of his boot and passed it toward Roger. But Allen, at full
speed, came in and intercepted, sending the ball in a crazy succession
of twists, turns and bounces. The crowd came to its feet as all six
cadets made desperate attempts to clear the skittering ball with none of
them so much as touching it. This was the part of mercuryball that
pleased the spectator. Finally, Schohari managed to get a toe on it and
he sent it down field, but Astro had moved out to play defense. He
stopped the ball on his shoulder and dropped it to the ground. Steadying
it there, he waited until Tom was in the clear and kicked it forty yards
to the mid-field stripe.
