"Right!" Karara agreed, and he heard an assenting grunt from Loketh.

They were moving very slowly. Strong as the dolphins were, they dared
not expend all their strength on towing the skiff too fast. Ross thought
furiously. Perhaps the sea could be their way of escape if the need
arose. He had no idea why raiding ships were moving under the cover of
fog into the vicinity of the Foanna citadel. But the Terran's knowledge
of tactics led him to guess that this impending visit was not
anticipated by the Foanna, nor was it a friendly one. And, as veteran
seamen who should normally be wary of fog as thick as this, the Rovers
themselves must have a driving reason, or some safeguard which led them
here now.

But dared the three spill out of their boat, trust to their swimming
ability and that of the dolphins, and invade the Foanna sea gate so?
Could they use the coming Rover attack as a cover for their own invasion
of the hold? Ross considered that the odds in their favor were beginning
to look better.

He whispered his idea and began to prepare their gear. The boat was
still headed for the shore the three could not see. But they could hear
sounds out of the white cotton wall which told them how completely they
were boxed in by the raiders; creaks, whispers, noises, Ross could not
readily identify, carried across the waves.

Before leaving the cave and beginning this voyage they had introduced
Loketh to the use of the gill-pack, made him practice in the depths of
the cave pool with one of the extras drawn through the gate among the
supplies. Now all three were equipped with the water aid, and they could
be gone in the sea before the trap closed.

"The supply net--" Ross warned Karara. A moment or two later there was a
small bump against the skiff at his left hand. He cautiously raised the
collection of containers and eased the burden into the water, knowing
that one of the dolphins would take charge of it.

However, he was not prepared for what happened next. Under him the boat
lurched first one way and then the other in sharp jerks as if the
dolphins were trying to spill them into the sea. Ross heard Karara call
out, her voice thin and frightened:

"Taua! Tino-rau! They have gone mad! They will not listen!"

The boat raced in a zigag path. Loketh clutched at Ross, striving to
steady him, to keep the boat on an even keel.

"The Foanna--!" Just as Loketh cried out, Karara plunged over the prow
of the boat, whether by design or chance Ross did not know.

And then the craft whirled about, smashed side against side with a dark
bulk looming out of the fog. Above, Ross heard cries, knew that they had
crashed against one of the raiders. He fought to retain his balance, but
he had been knocked to the bottom of the boat against Loketh and they
struggled together, unable to move during a precious second or two.

Out of the air over their heads dropped a mass of waving strands which
enveloped both of them. The stuff was adhesive, slimy. Ross let out a
choked cry as the lines tightened about his arms and body, pinioning
him.

Those tightened, wove a net. Now he was being drawn up out of the
plunging skiff, a helpless captive. His flailing legs, still free of the
slimy cords, struck against the side of the larger ship. Then he swung
in, over the well of the deck, thudded down on that surface with
bruising force, unable to understand anything except that he had been
taken prisoner by a very effective device.

Loketh dropped beside him. But Karara was not brought in, and Ross held
to that small bit of hope. Had she made it to freedom by dropping into
the water before the Rovers netted them? He could see men gathering
about him, masked and distorted in the fog. Then he was rolled across
the deck, boosted over the edge of a hatch and knew an instant of terror
as he fell into the depth below.

How long was he unconscious? It could not have been very long, Ross
decided, as he opened his eyes on dark, heard the small sounds of the
ship. He lay very still, trying to remember, to gather his wits before
he tried to flex his arms. They were held tight to his sides by strands
which no longer seemed slimy, but were wrinkling as they dried. There
was an odor from them which gagged him. But there was no loosening of
those loops in spite of his struggles, which grew more intense as his
strength returned. And at last he lay panting, knowing there was no easy
way of escape from here.




9

Battle Test


Babble of speech, cries, sounded muffled to Ross, made a mounting clamor
on the deck. Had the raiders' ship been boarded? Was it now under
attack? He strove to hear and think through the pain in his head, the
bewilderment.

"Loketh?" He was certain that the Hawaikan had been dumped into the same
hold.

The only answer was a low moan, a mutter from the dark. Ross began to
inch his way in that direction. He was no seaman, but during that worm's
progress he realized that the ship itself had changed. The vibration
which had carried through the planks on which he lay was stilled. Some
engine shut off; one portion of his mind put that into familiar terms.
Now the vessel rocked with the waves, did not bore through them.

Ross brought up against another body.

"Loketh!"

"Ahhhhh ... the fire ... the fire--!" The half-intelligible answer held
no meaning for the Terran. "It burns in my head ... the fire--"

The rocking of the ship rolled Ross away from his fellow prisoner toward
the opposite side of the hold. There was a roar of voice, bull strong
above the noise on deck, then the sound of feet back and forth there.

"The fire ... ahhh--" Loketh's voice rose to a scream.

Ross was now wedged between two abutments he could not see and from
which his best efforts could not free him. The pitching of the ship was
more pronounced. Remembering the two vessels he had seen pounded to bits
on the reef, Ross wondered if the same doom loomed for this one. But
that disaster had occurred during a storm. And, save for the fog, this
had been a calm night, the sea untroubled.

Unless--maybe the shaking his body had received during the past few
moments had sharpened his thinking--unless the Foanna had their own
means of protection at the sea gate and this was the result. The
dolphins.... What had made Tino-rau and Taua react as they did? And if
the Rover ship was out of control, it would be a good time to attempt
escape.

"Loketh!" Ross dared to call louder. "Loketh!" He struggled against the
drying strands which bound him from shoulder to mid thigh. There was no
give in them.

More sounds from the upper deck. Now the ship was answering to direction
again. The Terran heard sounds he could not identify, and the ship no
longer rocked so violently. Loketh moaned.

As far as Ross could judge, they were heading out to sea.

"Loketh!" He wanted information; he must have it! To be so ignorant of
what was going on was unbearable frustration. If they were now prisoners
in a ship leaving the island behind.... The threat of that was enough to
set Ross struggling with his bonds until he lay panting with exhaustion.

"Rossss?" Only a Hawaikan could make that name a hiss.

"Here! Loketh?" But of course it was Loketh.

"I am here." The other's voice sounded oddly weak as if it issued from a
man drained by a long illness.

"What happened to you?" Ross demanded.

"The fire ... the fire in my head--eating ... eating...." Loketh's reply
came with long pauses between the words.

The Terran was puzzled. What fire? Loketh had certainly reacted to
something beyond the unceremonious handling they had received as
captives. This whole ship had reacted. And the dolphins.... But what
fire was Loketh talking about?

"I did not feel anything," he stated to himself as well as to the
Hawaikan.

"Nothing burning in your head? So you could not think--"

"No."

"It must have been the Foanna magic. Fire eating so that a man is
nothing, only that which fire feeds upon!"

Karara! Ross's thoughts flashed back to those few seconds when the
dolphins had seemed to go crazy. Karara had then called out something
about the Foanna. So the dolphins must have felt this, and Karara, and
Loketh. Whatever _it_ was. But why not Ross Murdock?

Karara possessed an extra, undefinable sense which gave her contact with
the dolphins. Loketh had a mind which those could read in turn. But such
communication was closed to Ross.

At first that realization carried with it a feeling of shame and loss.
That he did not have what these others possessed, a subtle power beyond
the body, a part of mind, was humbling. Just as he had felt shut out and
crippled when he had been forced to use the analyzer instead of the
sense the others had, so did he suffer now.

Then Ross laughed shortly. All right, sometimes insensitivity could be a
defense as it had at the sea gate. Suppose his lack could also be a
weapon? He had not been knocked out as the others appeared to be. But
for the bad luck of having been captured before the raiders had
succumbed, Ross could, perhaps, have been master of this ship by now. He
did not laugh now; he smiled sardonically at his own grandiose reaction.
No use thinking about what might have been, just file this fact for
future reference.

A creaking overhead heralded the opening of the hatch. Light lanced down
into the cubby, and a figure swung over and down a side ladder, coming
to stand over Ross, feet apart for balancing, accommodating to the swing
of the vessel with the ease of long practice.

Thus Ross came face to face with his first representative of the third
party in the Hawaikan tangle of power--a Rover.

The seaman was tall, with a heavier development of shoulder and upper
arms than the landsmen. Like the guards he wore supple armor, but this
had been colored or overlaid with a pearly hue in which other tints wove
opaline lines. His head was bare except for a broad, scaled band running
from the nape of his neck to the mid-point of his forehead, a band
supporting a sharply serrated crest not unlike the erect fin of some
Terran fish.

Now as he stood, fists planted on hips, the Rover presented a formidable
figure, and Ross recognized in him the air of command. This must be one
of the ship's officers.

Dark eyes surveyed Ross with interest. The light from the deck focused
directly across the raider's shoulder to catch the Terran in its full
glare, and Ross fought the need for squinting. But he tried to give back
stare for stare, confidence for self-confidence.

On Terra in the past more than one adventurer's life had been saved
simply because he had the will and nerve enough to face his captors
without any display of anxiety. Such bravado might not hold here and
now, but it was the only weapon Ross had to hand and he used it.

"You--" the Rover broke the silence first, "you are not of the Foanna--"
He paused as if waiting an answer--denial or protest. Ross provided
neither.

"No, not of the Foanna, nor of the scum of the coast either." Again a
pause.

"So, what manner of fish has come to the net of Torgul?" He called an
order aloft. "A rope here! We'll have this fish and its fellow out--"

Loketh and Ross were jerked up to the outer deck, dumped into the midst
of a crowd of seamen. The Hawaikan was left to lie but, at a gesture
from the officer, Ross was set on his feet. He could see the nature of
his bonds now, a network of dull gray strands, shriveled and stinking,
but not giving in the least when he made another try at moving his arms.

"Ho--" The officer grinned. "This fish does not like the net! You have
teeth, fish. Use them, slash yourself free."

A murmur of applause from the crew answered that mild taunt. Ross
thought it time for a countermove.

"I see you do not come too close to those teeth." He used the most
defiant words his limited Hawaikan vocabulary offered.

There was a moment of silence, and then the officer clapped his hands
together with a sharp explosion of sound.

"You would use your teeth, fish?" he asked and his tone could be a
warning.

This was going it blind with a vengeance, but Ross took the next leap in
the dark. He had the feeling, which often came to him in tight quarters,
that he was being supplied from some hard core of endurance and
determination far within him with the right words, the fortunate guess.

"On which one of you?" He drew his lips tight, displaying those same
teeth, wondering for one startled moment if he should take the Rover's
query literally.

"Vistur! Vistur!" More than one voice called.

One of the crew took a step or two forward. Like Torgul, he was tall and
heavy, his over-long arms well muscled. There were scars on his
forearms, the seam of one up his jaw. He looked what he was, a very
tough fighting man, one who was judged so by peers as seasoned and
dangerous.

"Do you choose to prove your words on Vistur, fish?" Again the officer
had a formal note in his question, as if this was all part of some
ceremony.

"If he meets with me as he stands--no other weapons." Ross flashed back.

Now he had another reaction from them. There were some jeers, a
sprinkling of threats as to Vistur's intentions. But Ross caught also
the fact that two or three of them had gone silent and were eyeing him
in a new and more searching fashion and that Torgul was one of those.

Vistur laughed. "Well said, fish. So shall it be."

Torgul's hand came out, palm up, facing Ross. In its hollow was a small
object the Terran could not see clearly. A new weapon? Only the officer
made no move to touch it to Ross, the hand merely moved in a series of
waves in mid-air. Then the Rover spoke.

"He carries no unlawful magic."

Vistur nodded. "He's no Foanna. And what need have I to fear the spells
of any coast crawler? I am Vistur!"

Again the yells of his supporters arose in hearty answer. The statement
held more complete and quiet confidence than any wordy boast.

"And I am Ross Murdock!" The Terran matched the Rover tone for tone.
"But does a fish swim with its fins bound to its sides? Or does Vistur
fear a free fish too greatly to face one?"

His taunt brought the result Ross wanted. The ties were cut from behind,
to flutter down as withered, useless strings. Ross flexed his arms.
Tight as those thongs had been they had not constricted circulation, and
he was ready to meet Vistur. The Terran did not doubt that the Rover
champion was a formidable fighter, but he had not had the advantage of
going through one of the Agent training courses. Every trick of unarmed
fighting known on his own world had been pounded into Ross long ago. His
hands and feet could be as deadly weapons as any crook-bladed sword--or
gun--provided he could get close enough to use them properly.

Vistur stripped off his weapon belt, put to one side his helmet, showing
that under it his hair was plaited into a braid coiled about the crown
of his head to provide what must be an extra padding for that strangely
narrowed helm. Then he peeled off his armor, peeled it literally indeed,
catching the lower edge of the scaled covering with his hands and
pulling it up and over his head and shoulders as one might skin off a
knitted garment. Now he stood facing Ross, wearing little more than the
Terran's swimming trunks.

Ross had dropped his belt and gill-pack. He moved into the circle the
crew had made. From above came a strong light, centering from a point on
the mainmast and giving him good sight of his opponent.

Vistur was being urged to make a quick end of the reckless challenger,
his supporters shouting directions and encouragement. But if the Rover
had confidence, he also possessed the more intelligent and valuable
trait of caution in the face of the unknown. He outweighed, apparently
outmatched Ross, but he did not rush in rashly as his backers wished him
to.

They circled, Ross studying every move of the Rover's muscles, every
slight fraction of change in the other's balance. There would be
something to telegraph an attack from the other. For he intended to
fight purely in defense.

The charge came at last as the crew grew impatient and yelled their
impatience to see the prisoner taught a lesson. But Ross did not believe
it was that which sent Vistur at him. The Hawaikan simply thought he
knew the best way to take the Terran.

Ross ducked so that a hammer blow merely grazed him. But the Terran's
stiffened hand swept sidewise in a judo chop. Vistur gave a whooping cry
and went to his knees and Ross swung again, sending the Rover flat to
the deck. It had been quick but not so vicious as it might have been.
The Terran had no desire to kill or even disable Vistur for more than a
few minutes. His victim would carry a couple of aching bruises and
perhaps a hearty respect for a new mode of fighting from this encounter.
He could have as easily been dead had either of those blows landed other
than where Ross chose to plant them.

"Ahhhh--"
