"I am a human being, sir," said Astro in the deepest voice Tom had ever
heard. It was strong and full of emotion, yet controlled. "And as long
as I am a human being, I shall consider Roger Manning one of the finest
men I'll ever know."

"Are you finished?" snapped Connel.

"No, sir, I'm not," said Astro. "I speak in defense of the man, the
_spaceman_, not the uniform, or the trust he betrayed. And I
respectfully request of the major that if his feelings for Cadet Manning
are so violent that he finds it difficult to control them, that he make
a special effort to control them"--Astro paused and stuck out his
chin--"in my presence!"

Connel stepped back. "And if I don't?" he shouted.

"Then I shall ask for a transfer from your command, sir, and if that is
not granted, then I shall resign from the Academy."

"And?" asked Connel.

"And, sir--" Astro stumbled.

"_And what_, Cadet Astro?" roared Connel.

"I have nothing more to say, sir," said Astro.

Tom, who had at first had to control an impulse to laugh at the strange
seriousness of Astro's manner and tone, now found it equally difficult
to hold back the tears that were welling up in his eyes.

Connel was not going to let the incident stand there. He had secretly
hoped that such a situation would present itself, because he wanted to
see what material the _Polaris_ unit was made of. And he was secretly
satisfied. Any cadet who would offer to resign from the Academy in
defense of his unit-mate was a true spaceman. Connel wasn't going to
allow Astro or Tom to resign over some foolish trick of Roger's, but, at
the same time, he couldn't allow them to take too many liberties with
discipline. Connel turned to Tom.

"I suppose you feel the same way, Corbett?" he asked.

"I do, sir," said Tom.

"Of course you know I could make your lives miserable now," he
threatened.

"We are aware of that, sir," said Tom quietly.

"Very well, Cadets Corbett and Astro. I shall comply with your request.
Not because of your request but out of respect for your feelings as
spacemen. I wouldn't have thought much of you if you hadn't come out in
defense of Manning. And just for your own sake, Astro," said Connel,
stepping back in front of the big cadet, "never ask to talk to a Solar
Guard officer man to man again. As long as you're still a member of the
Cadet Corps such disrespect will not be tolerated. Another man, who
might not have understood your feelings, could have used your desire for
fair play as a means of trapping you into one of the worst offenses in
the Spaceman's Code--striking a Solar Guard officer!"

"Yes, sir," mumbled Astro. "Thank you, sir."

"Report aboard the _Polaris_"--Connel glanced at his watch--"in fifteen
minutes. I'm going to put you through your paces on hyperdrive and the
operation of the transmitter."

"Then we're still going to make the trip to Tara, sir?" asked Tom.

"We certainly are, Corbett," replied Connel. "In two hours another cadet
is arriving from the Academy to replace Roger. His name's Alfie Higgins.
Perhaps you know him."

Tom smiled. "Yes, sir, we know him," he replied. "Cadet Higgins is a
friend of mine. He carries the nickname of 'The Brain.' Has the highest
I.Q. in the Academy."

"Good. I'm glad you know him, because this is going to be a rough trip.
We got off to a bad start, but it's all over now. So forget it. And
before I go, I want you to know this. In my personal opinion, Manning
had nothing to do with the crash. I think the whole trouble was caused
on the ship. I have nothing to back up my opinion, except my feelings.
But feelings can go a long way in making a man innocent until proved
guilty. Unit dis-missed!"


Alfie Higgins listened attentively to the story of the crash and Roger's
disappearance as Tom, and then Astro, described the situation in detail.

"It is a pity, of course, but Manning was always the impulsive type. Not
very definite in his attitude and emotionally unstable," commented Alfie
when the story was finished.

"Lay off that talk, you overstuffed brain!" growled Astro. "In this
outfit, Roger is just away on vacation!"

"Yes--yes, of course!" said Alfie quickly. It wasn't wise to get off on
the wrong foot in a new unit, especially when one was trying to fill the
shoes of a cadet, who, Alfie had to admit, had everything. Alfie
Higgins' mother didn't raise any stupid children, he said to himself. He
was too happy being a member of the _Polaris_ unit, the hottest crew at
the Academy, to allow anything to interfere with his success.

"I've heard a great deal about hyperdrive," he said quickly, changing
the subject. "I would appreciate it if you could describe the basis of
this new feature in space travel so that I may have at least a surface
familiarity with its operation and application."

Astro gulped and looked at Tom. "Might as well get used to that kind of
chatter, Astro," said Tom, smiling. "Alfie can't talk any other way."

"Is there something wrong with the way I speak?" asked Alfie, wrinkling
up his nose a little to see through the thick lenses of his glasses.

"You wanta know about hyperdrive?" growled Astro.

"To be sure, if you'd be so kind," said Alfie.

"Well, if you'll close your trap long enough, I'll tell you about it!"

Alfie sat back and waited, hands clasped around one knee.

"In the first place," began Astro, "hyperdrive was developed by Joan
Dale back at the Academy. And it's so blasted simple, I get mad at
myself for not thinking of it first!"

"Uhhh," snorted Alfie. "I respect your great talent on the power deck,
Astro, but I would hardly compare myself with Dale!"

"Shut up!" barked Astro. "You'll see how simple it is! Hyperdrive is
based on the idea that the thrust of the rockets acts in the exact same
way on _all_ the atoms inside the spaceship. So you can have as much
thrust as you want and no one will feel a thing. Even if the ship were
to accelerate a million times faster than the gravity of the Earth you
wouldn't feel a thing, because all the atoms inside would be pushed
along at the same time!" Astro sat back triumphantly.

"Ummmmh," commented Alfie. "That sounds all right as a principle, but
will it work out in space?"

"Listen, you--you--" snorted Astro.

"Sure it will, Alfie," said Tom. "It's been tested before."

"Still room for improvement, though," commented Alfie.

"I'll improve your head," barked Astro, "if you don't close that big
mouth! How do you like that, Tom? We get rid of one space-gassing Romeo
and now we get one even worse!"

Astro's reference to Roger made Tom draw a quick breath. In the short
while since Alfie's arrival and the week since Roger's disappearance
there hadn't been time to forget their old unit-mate and get accustomed
to a new personality. Astro sensed Tom's feelings and irritably banged
one hamlike fist into the other. Alfie was O.K., thought the big
Venusian, but by the craters of Luna, he wasn't Roger.

"Attention--attention!" The intercom crackled into life. "_Polaris_
unit--by order of Major Connel--stand by to blast off immediately. This
is first warning! Pack your gear and stand by to blast off immediately."

Tom, Astro, and Alfie got up, and with the image of Roger fresh in their
minds, made their way to the landing-port deck where the great gleaming
spaceship was slung on magnetic cradles. They were met at the hatch by
Major Connel.

"All right," he said, "we leave all thoughts of Manning right here on
the station. I know it's tough, but we've got a still tougher job to do.
This is to be a scientific expedition and we'll need every ounce of
energy and intelligence we have--_collectively_--to make a success of
this mission. Cadet Corbett!"

"Yes, sir," replied Tom.

"Stand by to blast off in five minutes!"




CHAPTER 10


"Can I speak with you a minute, spaceman?"

Roger turned from the automatic food dispenser and stared at a wizened
little man standing beside him, grinning up at him toothlessly.

"What do you want?" asked Roger.

"Just talk. Let's sit down at this table, eh?" said the little man,
taking the cadet by the arm. "Gotta little deal I think you might be
interested in."

Roger cast a quick appraising glance over the shabbily dressed man and
walked to the table. Unless someone knew Roger personally, it would have
been hard to recognize him. No longer wearing the vivid blue of the
senior Space Cadet, he was now dressed in black trousers fitting snugly
around the legs, a midnight blue pull-over jersey, and the black-billed
hat of the merchant spaceman. His once close-cropped blond hair was
beginning to grow shaggy around the edges, and with the hat pulled low
over his forehead, he might have been another person entirely.

Leaving the space station on the jet liner had been easy for Roger,
since no one suspected he would violate his trust. But once his absence
was discovered and the warrant issued for his arrest, it had been
necessary for him to assume some sort of disguise to elude the Solar
Guard MP's. Roger had wound up on Spaceman's Row in Venusport as a
matter of course. Luckily, when he left the station, he had the
foresight to take all of his money with him, so he was not yet in need.

On Spaceman's Row, Roger found the new freedom from discipline enjoyable
at first, but now the novelty had worn off. Having visited all of the
interesting places on the Row, existence there had become boring. His
one attempt to leave Spaceman's Row had nearly met with disaster.
Running into a squad of Solar Guard MP's, he had made a hurried escape
into a near-by jet taxi. Back on the Row, Roger had lounged around the
cafes, feeling the loneliness that haunts men wanted by the law. And
only because he was so lonely he had agreed to talk to the little man
who sat and stared at him from across the table.

"You a rocket pusher, astrogator, or skipper?" asked the little man.

"Who wants to know?" asked Roger cautiously.

"Look, sonny boy," was the quick retort. "I'm Mr. Shinny! I'm the fixer
of Spaceman's Row. You want something, come to me and I'll get it for
you. I don't care why you're here. That ain't none of my business. But
the fact remains that you're here, and you don't come down here unless
you're in trouble space deep!"

Roger looked at the little man more closely. "Suppose I am in something
deep? What could you do for me?" he asked.

"What would you want done?" asked Shinny slyly.

"Well," said Roger casually, "I could use a set of papers."

"What happened to your own?"

"Solar Guard picked them up," answered Roger simply.

"For what?" asked Shinny.

"Taking ice cream away from the skipper's pet monkey!" snapped Roger.

Shinny threw back his head and laughed. "That's good--very good!" He
wiped his mouth after spitting at a near-by cuspidor. He reached over
and patted Roger on the arm. "You'll do, sonny! You'll do right well on
the Row. Join me in a little acceleration sport?"

"What's that?" asked Roger.

"Rocket juice!" said Shinny. "Ain't you never heard of rocket juice?"

"I've heard about it," said Roger with a smile, "and I'm still here to
talk about it because I never drank any of it." Roger liked the little
man for some reason--he couldn't tell why. He had met several people on
the Row since his arrival, but they had all wanted to know how many
credits he had and where he was staying.

"I took a jolt of that stuff once in Luna City," said Roger. "I was
ready to blast off without a rocket ship!"

Shinny laughed again. "Good lad! Well, you won't mind if I have just a
little one?" He paused and wiped his lips. "On you, of course!"

"One"--Roger held up his finger--"on me, of course!"

"Hey, there!" yelled Shinny. "You, with the asteroid head! Gimme a short
bucket of that juice and bring a bottle of Martian fizz along with it!"
The bartender nodded, and Shinny turned back to Roger. "Martian fizz is
nothing more than a little water with sugar in it," he explained.

"Yeah, I know," replied Roger. "What about those papers?"

"I'll talk to you, spaceman to spaceman," said Shinny, "when you're
ready to talk to me, spaceman to spaceman!"

They were silent while the bartender slopped a glass full of bluish
liquid in front of Shinny and the bottle of Martian fizz and a glass in
front of Roger. Roger paid for the drinks and poured a glass of the mild
sweet water. Sipping it silently, he suddenly put the glass down again
and looked Shinny in the eye.

"You know who I am," he stated quietly.

"Yep!" replied Shinny. "You're Roger Manning, Space Cadet! Breach of
honor and violation of the Spaceman's Oath. Escaped from the Venus space
station on a jet liner. But one of the best men on a radar scanner and
astrogation prism in the whole alliance!" Shinny related the information
rapidly.

"He had known all the time," thought Roger. "He was testing me." Roger
wondered why.

"What are you going to do about it?" questioned Roger, thinking about
the one-thousand-credit reward, standard price offered by the Solar
Guard for all wanted men.

"If I had wanted to, I could have bought the finest jet liner in space
with money made on Solar Guard rewards," snapped Shinny. "We got our own
spaceman's code here on the Row. It goes something like this. What a man
wants to bring with him down here, he brings. What he don't bring, don't
exist!"

Roger smiled and stuck out his hand. "All right, Mr. Shinny! I want a
set of papers--space papers! Made out in any name, so that I can get out
into space again. I don't care where I go or on what, or how long I'm
gone. I just gotta blast off!"

"You want papers for the astrogation deck, or control, or as a power
pusher?" asked Shinny.

Roger thought a moment. "Better make them for the control deck," he
said.

"Credits," said Shinny. "You have any credits?"

"How much?" asked Roger.

"One hundred now," said Shinny, and then added, "and one hundred when I
deliver."

"Guaranteed papers?"

"Positively!" snorted Shinny. "I don't sell things that ain't good! I'm
an honest man!"

Roger reached inside his jersey and pulled out a small roll of crumpled
credit notes. He counted off one hundred and handed them over to Shinny.

"When do I get the papers?" asked Roger.

"Tomorrow, same place, same time," answered Shinny.

"What's the name of this place?" asked Roger.

"Cafe Cosmos."

Roger picked up his glass of sweet water, raising it in a toast to the
little man in front of him. "Until tomorrow, Mr. Shinny, when you come
here with the papers, or I come looking for you with bare knuckles!"

"You don't scare me!" snapped Shinny. "I'll be here!"

Roger tilted his chair back and smiled his casual smile. "I know you'll
be back, Mr. Shinny. You see, I really mean what I say. And more
important, _you_ know I mean what I say!"

Shinny got up. "Tomorrow, same time, same place," he said, hurrying out
the door.

Roger finished the bottle of Martian fizz, suddenly very depressed. He
didn't really want the false papers. He just wanted to get away from the
deadly humdrum existence on Spaceman's Row. He walked wearily back to
his scrubby little bedroom to wait for night to come. He hated to go
back to the room, because he knew he would think about Tom and Astro and
the Space Academy. Now he couldn't allow himself to think about it any
more. It was past. Finished.


"You got _who_?" asked Loring.

"I said I got the best astrogator in the deep for ya!" snapped Shinny.

Loring looked at Mason and then suddenly burst out laughing, dropping
his head on the table.
