complexity of it overcame him. To compute the movements of thousands of
stars, all moving at different speeds in different directions in the
vast swirling directionless chaos of the Universe--and yet to be sure
that every separate movement would come out to within a quarter of a
mile! It was something that no finite brain--man or Lhari--could ever
accomplish, yet their limited brains had built these computers that
_could_ do it.

Rugel watched him, laughing softly. "Well, you'll have enough time down
here. I like to have youngsters who are still in the middle of a love
affair with their work. Come along, and I'll show you your cabin."

Rugel left him in a cabin amidships; small and cramped, but tidy, two of
the oval bunks slung at opposite ends, a small table between them, and
drawers filled with pamphlets and manuals and maps. Furtively, ashamed
of himself, yet driven by necessity, Bart searched Ringg's belongings,
wanting to get some idea of what possessions he ought to own. He looked
around the shower and toilet facilities with extra care--this was
something he _couldn't_ slip up on and be considered even halfway
normal. He was afraid Ringg would come in, and see him staring curiously
at something as ordinary, to a Lhari, as a cake of soap.

He decided to go down to the port again and look around the shops. He
was not afraid of being unable to handle his work. What he feared was
something subtler--that the small items of everyday living, something as
simple as a nail file, would betray him.

On his way he looked into the Recreation Lounge, filled with comfortable
seats, vision-screens, and what looked like simple pinball machines and
mechanical games of skill. There were also stacks of tapereels and
headsets for listening, not unlike those humans used. Bart felt
fascinated, and wanted to explore, but decided he could do that later.

Somehow he took the wrong turn coming out of the Recreation Lounge, and
went through a door where the sudden dimming of lights told him he was
in Mentorian quarters. The sudden darkness made him stumble, thrust out
his hands to keep from falling, and an unmistakably human voice said,
"Ouch!"

"I'm sorry," Bart said in Universal, without thinking.

"I admit the lights are dim," said the voice tartly, and Bart found
himself looking down, as his eyes adjusted to the new light level, at a
girl.

She was small and slight, in a metallic blue cloak that swept out, like
wings, around her thin shoulders; the hood framed a small, kittenlike
face. She was a Mentorian, and she was human, and Bart's eyes rested
with comfort on her face; she, on the other hand, was looking up with
anxiety and uneasy distrust. _That's right--I'm a Lhari, a nonhuman
freak!_

"I seem to have missed my way."

"What are you looking for, sir? The medical quarters are through here."

"I'm looking for the elevator down to the crew exits."

"Through here," she said, reopening the door through which he had come,
and shading her large, lovely, long-lashed eyes with a slender hand.
"You took the wrong turn. Are you new on board? I thought all ships were
laid out exactly alike."

"I've only worked on passenger ships."

"I believe they are somewhat different," said the girl in good Lhari.
"Well, that is your way, sir."

He felt as if he had been snubbed and dismissed.

"What is your name?"

She stiffened as if about to salute. "Meta of the house of Marnay Three,
sir."

Bart realized he was doing something wholly out of character for a
Lhari--chatting casually with a Mentorian. With a wistful glance at the
pretty girl, he said a stiff "Thank you" and went down the ramp she had
indicated. He felt horribly lonely. Being a freak wasn't going to be
much fun.




CHAPTER EIGHT


He saw the girl again next day, when they checked in for blastoff. She
was seated at a small desk, triangular like so much of the Lhari
furniture, checking a register as they came out of the Decontam room,
making sure they downed their greenish solution of microorganisms.

"Papers, please?" She marked, and Bart noticed that she was using a red
pencil.

"Bartol," she said aloud. "Is that how you pronounce it?" She made small
scribbles in a sort of shorthand with the red pencil, then made other
marks with the black one in Lhari; he supposed the red marks were her
own private memoranda, unreadable by the Lhari.

"Next, please." She handed a cup of the greenish stuff to Ringg, behind
him. Bart went down toward the drive room, and to his own surprise,
found himself wishing the girl were a mathematician rather than a medic.
It would have been pleasant to watch her down there.

Old Rugel, on duty in the drive room, watched Bart strap himself in
before the computer. "Make sure you check all dials at null," he
reminded him, and Bart felt a last surge of panic.

This was his first cruise, except for practice runs at the Academy! Yet
his rating called him an experienced man on the Polaris run. He'd had
the Lhari training tape, which was supposed to condition his responses,
but would it? He tried to clench his fists, drove a claw into his palm,
winced, and commanded himself to stay calm and keep his mind on what he
was doing.

It calmed him to make the routine check of his dials.

"Strapdown check," said a Lhari with a yellowed crest and a rasping
voice. "New man, eh?" He gave Bart's straps perfunctory tugs at
shoulders and waist, tightened a buckle. "Karol son of Garin."

Bells rang in the ship, and Bart felt the odd, tonic touch of fear.
_This was it._

Vorongil strode through the door, his banded cloak sweeping behind him,
and took the control couch.

"Ready from fueling room, sir."

"Position," Vorongil snapped.

Bart heard himself reading off a string of figures in Lhari. His voice
sounded perfectly calm.

"Communication."

"Clear channels from Pylon Dispatch, sir." It was old Rugel's voice.

"Well," Vorongil said, slowly and almost reflectively, "let's take her
up then."

He touched some controls. The humming grew. Then, swift, hard and
crushing, weight mashed Bart against his couch.

"Position!" Vorongil's voice sounded harsh, and Bart fought the crushing
weight of it. Even his eyeballs ached as he struggled to turn the tiny
eye muscles from dial to dial, and his voice was a dim croak: "Fourteen
seven sidereal twelve point one one four nine...."

"Hold it to point one one four six," Vorongil said calmly.

"Point one one four six," Bart said, and his claws stabbed at dials.
Suddenly, in spite of the cold weight on his chest, the pain, the
struggle, he felt as if he were floating. He managed a long, luxurious
breath. He _could_ handle it. He knew what he was doing.

_He was an Astrogator...._

Later, when Acceleration One had reached its apex and the artificial
gravity made the ship a place of comfort again, he went down to the
dining hall with Ringg and met the crew of the _Swiftwing_. There were
twelve officers and twelve crewmen of various ratings like himself and
Ringg, but there seemed to be little social division between them, as
there would have been on a human ship; officers and crew joked and
argued without formality of any kind.

None of them gave him a second look. Later, in the Recreation Lounge,
Ringg challenged him to a game with one of the pinball machines. It
seemed fairly simple to Bart; he tried it, and to his own surprise, won.

Old Rugel touched a lever at the side of the room. With a tiny whishing
sound, shutters opened, the light of Procyon Alpha flooded them and he
looked out through a great viewport into bottomless space.

Procyon Alpha, Beta and Gamma hung at full, rings gently tilted. Beyond
them the stars burned, flaming through the shimmers of cosmic dust. The
colors, the never-ending colors of space!

And he stood here, in a room full of monsters--_he was one of the
monsters_--

"Which one of the planets was it we stopped on?" Rugel asked. "I can't
tell 'em apart from this distance."

Bartol swallowed; he had almost said _the blue one_. He pointed.
"The--the big one there, with the rings almost edge-on. I think they
call it Alpha."

"It's their planet," said Rugel. "I guess they can call it what they
want to. How about another game?"

Resolutely, Bart turned his back on the bewitching colors, and bent over
the pinball machine.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first week in space was a nightmare of strain. He welcomed the hours
on watch in the drive room; there alone he was sure of what he was
doing. Everywhere else in the ship he was perpetually scared,
perpetually on tiptoe, perpetually afraid of making some small and
stupid mistake. Once he actually called Aldebaran a red star, but Rugel
either did not hear the slip or thought he was repeating what one of the
Mentorians--there were two aboard besides the girl--had said.

The absence of color from speech and life was the hardest thing to get
used to. Every star in the manual was listed by light-frequency waves,
to be checked against a photometer for a specific reading, and it almost
drove Bart mad to go through the ritual when the Mentorians were off
duty and could not call off the color and the equivalent frequency type
for him. Yet he did not dare skip a single step, or someone might have
guessed that he could _see_ the difference between a yellow and a green
star before checking them.

The Academy ships had had the traditional human signal system of
flashing red lights. Bart was stretched taut all the time, listening for
the small codelike buzzers and ticks that warned him of filled tanks,
leads in need of servicing, answers ready. Ringg's metal-fatigues
testing kit was a bewildering muddle of boxes, meters, rods and
earphones, each buzzing and clicking its characteristic warning.

At first he felt stretched to capacity every waking moment, his memory
aching with a million details, and lay awake nights thinking his mind
would crack under the strain. Then Alpha faded to a dim bluish shimmer,
Beta was eclipsed, Gamma was gone, Procyon dimmed to a failing spark;
and suddenly Bart's memory accustomed itself to the load, the new habits
were firmly in place, and he found himself eating, sleeping and working
in a settled routine.

He belonged to the _Swiftwing_ now.

Procyon was almost lost in the viewports when a sort of upswept tempo
began to run through the ship, an undercurrent of increased activity.
Cargo was checked, inventoried and strapped in. Ringg was given four
extra men to help him, made an extra tour of the ship, and came back
buzzing like a frantic cricket. Bart's computers told him they were
forging toward the sidereal location assigned for the first of the
warp-drive shifts, which would take them some fifteen light-years toward
Aldebaran.

On the final watch before the warp-drive shift, the medical officer came
around and relieved the Mentorians from duty. Bart watched them go, with
a curious, cold, crawling apprehension. Even the Mentorians, trusted by
the Lhari--even these were put into cold-sleep! Fear grabbed his
insides.

_No human had ever survived the shift into warp-drive_, the Lhari said.
Briscoe, his father, Raynor Three--they thought they had proved that the
Lhari lied. If they were right, if it was a Lhari trick to reinforce
their stranglehold on the human worlds and keep the warp-drive for
themselves, then Bart had nothing to fear. But he was afraid.

Why did the Mentorians endure this, never quite trusted, isolated among
aliens?

Raynor Three had said, _Because I belong in space, because I'm never
happy anywhere else_. Bart looked out the viewport at the swirl and burn
of the colors there. Now that he could never speak of the colors, it
seemed he had never been so wholly and wistfully aware of them. They
symbolized the thing he could never put into words.

_So that everyone can have this. Not just the Lhari._

Rugel watched the Mentorians go, scowling. "I wish medic would find a
way to keep them alive through warp," he said. "My Mentorian assistant
could watch that frequency-shift as we got near the bottom of the arc,
and I'll bet she could _see_ it. They can see the changes in intensity
faster than I can plot them on the photometer!"

Bart felt goosebumps break out on his skin. Rugel spoke as if the
certain death of humans, Mentorians, was a fact. Didn't the Lhari
themselves know it was a farce? _Or was it?_

Vorongil himself took the controls for the surge of Acceleration Two,
which would take them past the Light Barrier. Bart, watching his
instruments to exact position and time, saw the colors of each star
shift strangely, moment by moment. The red stars seemed hard to see. The
orange-yellow ones burned suddenly like flame; the green ones seemed
golden, the blue ones almost green. Dimly, he remembered the old story
of a "red shift" in the lights of approaching stars, but here he saw it
pure, a sight no human eyes had ever seen. A sight that _no_ eyes had
seen, human or otherwise, for the Lhari could not see it....

"Time," he said briefly to Vorongil, "Fifteen seconds...."

Rugel looked across from his couch. Bart felt that the old, scarred
Lhari could read his fear. Rugel said through a wheeze, "No matter how
old you get, Bartol, you're still scared when you make a warp-shift. But
relax, computers don't make mistakes."

"Catalyst," Vorongil snapped, "Ready--_shift!_"

At first there was no change; then Bart realized that the stars, through
the viewport, had altered abruptly in size and shade and color. They
were not sparks but strange streaks, like comets, crossing and
recrossing long tails that grew, longer and longer, moment by moment.
The dark night of space was filled with a crisscrossing blaze. They were
moving faster than light, they saw the light left by the moving Universe
as each star hurled in its own invisible orbit, while they tore
incredibly through it, faster than light itself....

Bart felt a curious, tingling discomfort, deep in his flesh; almost an
itching, a stinging in his very bones.

_Lhari flesh is no different from ours...._

Space, through the viewport, was no longer space as he had come to know
