of air. I wasn't even breathing. And I felt that I didn't need to!"

"That is peculiar," she said meditatively. "Tell me, do you know a man
named Goat Hennessey?"

"You're the second person who's asked me that recently," said Dark. "I
knew him well, many years ago, but I haven't seen him in years. Why do
you ask?"

"Because the only case I've heard about of any human being able to live
without oxygen in the Martian atmosphere involved some genetic
experiments of Goat Hennessey, before the government made him stop them
and destroy the creatures he'd been experimenting with."

Dark laughed.

"I can assure you I'm not one of Goat's genetic experiments," he said.
"Goat and I were colleagues in this rebel movement twenty-five years
ago, before I was hit by a period of amnesia that I've just come out
of."

She stared at him.

"A twenty-five year period of amnesia? Impossible! You're not more than
twenty-five years old," she said positively.

"If what people tell me is correct, I'm nearer sixty," said Dark.
"Terrestrial years, of course."

"Of course. But I don't believe it."

Dark shrugged, and cut another bite of steak. He seemed to be enjoying
his meal quite as much as though he were not her prisoner and she his
captor--as, indeed, she was, too.

They chatted pleasantly throughout the meal and Maya found, somewhat to
her surprise, that she was talking about herself a great deal to this
pale-eyed man. She told him of her childhood on Mars, among the
Martians, and of going to Earth to live with her uncle, a World Senator
who had had close and profitable connections with Marscorp.

She went on to tell of her decision to become an agent of the
terrestrial government, despite her uncle's objections but as a result
of his often-expressed enthusiasm for the government's role in
developing the planetary colonies; and of her assignment to Mars to
ferret out a rebel headquarters which had eluded the best efforts of the
Martian government. She even told him how she had met Nuwell and fallen
in love with him.

Some time after the meal's conclusion, she suddenly stopped in
mid-sentence.

"What's the matter?" asked Dark.

"I just realized that you're my prisoner," she answered, smiling at him.
"Frankly, I'm not sure what to do with you. We can't just sit here in
the dining room all night."

"Why not go out and sit on the terrace?" he suggested. "They say that
Solis Lacus is a beautiful sight when Phobos is up and moving."

"And a shadowed terrace is a very convenient place from which to attempt
an escape," she countered.

"Look," he said, "there's no point in making the evening more difficult
than it is. I very definitely intend to get away from you and get out of
here during the next two days if I can, but I'm enjoying this
conversation. If I promise that I won't attempt an escape in the next
two hours, are you willing to go up on the terrace for a while?"

She studied his face carefully. It was a handsome, earnest face, full of
strength, full of wisdom, with a touch of weariness.

"All right," she said at last. "But I warn you that if my trust is
misplaced and you do attempt to escape, I'll burn you down without
compunction."

They went up together, quite as casually as might any two guests
relaxing at the resort, and found chairs in the semi-darkness
overlooking the moonlit lowland.

Deimos hung near the zenith, a tiny globe of light, virtually
stationary. Phobos, larger and brighter, was not long risen, and it
moved swiftly and smoothly across the sky, like the cold searchlight of
some giant aircraft. Touched and transformed by the shifting shadows,
Maya and Dark sat and chatted like old friends.

Dark talked now, and he told her of his past life, of his coming to
Mars, of his joining the rebel movement upon realizing how the
government was holding back man's progress toward Martian
self-sufficiency. He spoke soberly, with intense conviction, and Maya,
listening, began to realize that there was another side to this conflict
than the one she had been taught.

She began to waver and to wonder, for the grave voice of this man was
like a deep music she had never heard before but seemed to remember from
some time before there was hearing, a music that touched the depths of
her being.

Then his arm slid around her waist and he drew her gently toward him.
For an instant, she responded, turning her face upward.

And, on that instant, she remembered.

With a lightning twist, she was free, and on her feet before him. She
stepped back, and the lighter-gun was in her hand.

"I thought you said I could trust you," she said coldly. "Evidently, I
was foolish to do so."

He looked up at her, and there was nothing but surprise on his face.
Then, slowly, he smiled at her.

"It depends on your interpretation of the word," he said. "I was merely
attempting to kiss you, my dear."

She let her hand sag, feeling rather foolish.

"Well, don't," she said, her sharpness covering her confusion. "We
aren't lovers, Mr. Kensington."

"No," he said, quite seriously. "And I find that I rather regret that we
aren't."

She stood looking at him, fighting off a sneaking regret of her own that
he hadn't succeeded in his intention.

"I think this moonlight has had an unfortunate effect on us both," she
said. "We'd better go inside. Besides, if I'm to keep watch over you all
night, I want to get into something more practical than an evening
gown."

Without protest, Dark preceded her inside. They went to the manager's
office, and Maya issued instructions to Gren.

"Have a maid move my things from my third-floor room to a room on the
top floor," she ordered. "We'll wait here until it's done."

When the maid brought Maya the key to the new room, she and Dark took
the elevator to it. As soon as they were inside, she locked the door
behind them.

"I'm going into the bathroom to change clothes," she said precisely.
"The window to this room is six floors above a stone courtyard and I
don't think you can jump that far without being killed, even on Mars.
Since these windows don't open, I'll hear you if you break it to get
out, and I can burn you long before you can climb down the face of the
wall."

The lighter-gun in her hand, she went into the bathroom and closed the
door behind her.

She had just stripped off the evening gown when she heard the bathroom
door lock from the outside. A moment later, there was the crashing sound
of breaking glass.

Calmly, Maya burned off the lock of the bathroom door with the little
heatgun. She pushed it open and went out into the room in her underwear.
Dark was in the process of gingerly climbing through the broken window.

"It's a long fall, Dark," she said.

He looked back over his shoulder. He smiled ruefully, and came back into
the room.

"Well, it was worth a try," he said philosophically.

He surveyed her with frankly admiring eyes and added:

"And it was worth failing, for the view."

She turned pink. But, without taking her eyes off him, she reached back
into the bathroom, got the tunic and trousers she had laid out, and
slipped them on.

"I think it would be better if we go down and sit in the middle of the
lobby," she said, unlocking the door to the room. "That way, you'll have
farther to run if you try to get away."

They went down and found comfortable seats. They sat there, talking, to
all casual appearance two of the chateau's guests. Gradually, the
conversation moved back to its earlier informal and friendly terms.

How long they sat chatting, Maya did not know, for she was wrapped up in
her enjoyment of the things Dark said and his attitude toward life. But
after a time she realized that no more guests were sitting in the lobby
or moving through it. They were the only ones there, except for Gren,
sitting morosely behind the registration desk.

"Just how do you propose to get any sleep and watch me at the same
time?" asked Dark.

"I don't," she answered, smiling. "If you can stay awake for two nights,
so can I."

"You forget, young lady," he retorted. "I don't have to."

With that, he stretched out unceremoniously on the sofa on which he had
been sitting, clasped his hands behind his head and closed his eyes.
Within a very short time, he was obviously and genuinely sound asleep.

Maya sat and watched him, piqued and a little nonplussed. She could
hardly afford to go to sleep, too. Her only course was to stay awake, to
sit there and watch him sleeping comfortably and soundly. It was not a
pleasant prospect, for two nights.

She sat, heavy-eyed, and racked her brain for some solution, and
silently cursed Gren for refusing to give her the help she needed. Dark
slept on, and a faint smile touched his lips. Then Maya found herself
thinking pleasantly over the things they had talked about during the
long evening, and admiring this man and liking him....

She woke up.

With a start, she woke up, realizing that she had been asleep. She was
not sitting in the chair any more, but curled up comfortably on a sofa,
her head pillowed like a child's against--against what?

Against Dark's chest! He was awake, sitting up, smiling down at her, and
she was cradled in the curve of his arm. And the little lighter-gun was
no longer in her hand.

She did not react violently to the sudden realization. She sighed,
almost happily, and murmured to him:

"So you win, after all. I think I'm glad, Dark. Now you can go, if you
want to."

He shook his head.

"I'm glad you feel that way about it, Maya, but I'm afraid it's too
late. I really shouldn't have stayed around to serve as your pillow till
you awoke."

There was something in his face that caused her to sit up suddenly.

Two uniformed men stood there in the lobby before them, relaxed but
watchful, regulation heatguns dangling from their hands. As she sat up,
one of them touched his cap and spoke to her:

"We're police officers from Ophir, Miss Cara Nome. Mr. Eli called from
Mars City and directed us to drive over here and help you guard the
prisoner until his arrival."

She rose angrily.

"I didn't ask for your help, so you may go," she said, aware of Dark's
surprised gaze on her. "I made a mistake in identification."

The policeman who had spoken shook his head.

"I'm sorry," he said. "We're acting on Mr. Eli's orders, not yours.
We'll have to hold Mr. Kensington until Mr. Eli arrives."

She glared at them. The one who had spoken was big and burly and
efficient-looking. The other was sallow and silent, with a deadly cast
to his thin face.

Then she saw her lighter-gun, lying on the lobby floor beside the chair
in which she had gone to sleep.

She bent down, casually, and picked it up. She straightened, the little
instrument ready in her hand.

"This is not a cigaret lighter, but a heatgun," she said flatly. "I'm in
charge here, and I say Mr. Kensington is to be permitted to go free. If
any effort is made to stop him, I'll burn you down."

Both police heatguns swung up in short arcs and trained on her. The
burly policeman spoke gently.

"I'm sorry, Miss Cara Nome, but we're under orders from Mr. Eli, and we
intend to follow them," he said. "I'd hate to see you injured, but if
you blast either of us the other one will burn off your hand."

"No, Maya!" exclaimed Dark, getting to his feet. "Don't! There's no
point in your getting hurt for my sake."

She ignored him.

"Drop those heatguns, both of you, or I blast!" she snapped, almost
hysterically.

Then Dark hurled himself bodily at the two men.

The thin-faced man swung his heatgun around to meet Dark's charge. Maya
twisted the lighter-gun toward him, and at the same moment the burly
policeman threw himself against her. Her heat beam singed the thin-faced
one's shoulder, then she collapsed under the impact of the other's body.

As she fell, she saw the almost invisible beam of the thin-faced
policeman's heatgun strike Dark directly in the stomach, burning away
the cloth, burning a great gaping hole in his abdomen. Dark slid to the
floor, writhing, gasping, clutching his stomach.

Her lighter-gun knocked from her hand, Maya struggled, half-dazed, to
her feet. The burly policeman had swung his own gun on the prostrate
Dark, but the other one, grimacing with the pain of his wounded
shoulder, stopped him.

"Let him be," he said. "I like to watch them die."

With a wail, Maya dropped to Dark's side. She cradled his head against
her breast and sobbed as he died in her arms.




9


From the time she saw Dark Kensington die until Nuwell's arrival at the
Chateau Nectaris a day later, Maya remained in her room, half in shock,
half in an agony of sorrow and remorse.

She was so exhausted by her ordeal that she did sleep, but it was
fitfully and without genuine rest. She had her meals sent up to her
room, and ate automatically, not tasting the food.

Rationally, she could in no way blame herself for Dark's death, but that
did not prevent her feeling strongly that her insistence on tracking
down the fugitives from the Childress Barber College had made her,
directly, his slayer. Her feeling of distress was much deeper and more
personal than normal regret at having brought about the death of a
friendly enemy while in pursuit of her duty.
