going down, aren't we?"

"I'll say we are!" Belle said. "This will break the monotony, at least,"
and the others agreed.

"You won't object, I take it," Garlock said to the Inspector, "if we try
to straighten them out. We can postpone the blow-up a few years, at
least."

"No objections, of course. In fact, I can say that we Guardians of
Humanity would approve such action."

Down the _Pleiades_ went, into the air of the nation known as the
"Allied Republican Democracies of the World," and an atomic-warheaded
rocket came flaming up.

"Hm ... m ... m. Ingenious little gadget, at that," James reported,
after studying it thoroughly. "Filthy thing for fall-out, though, if it
goes off. Where'll I flip it, Clee? One of their moons?"

"Check. Third one out--no chance of any contamination from there."

The missile vanished; and had any astronomer been looking at that
world's third and outermost moon at the moment, he might have seen a
tremendous flash of light, a cloud of dust, and the formation of a new
and different crater among the hundreds already there.

"No use waiting for 'em, Jim. All three of you toss everything they've
got out onto that same moon, being sure not to hurt anybody--yet. I'll
start asking questions."

The captain who had fired the first missile appeared in the Main. He
reached for his pistol, to find that he did not have one. He tensed his
muscles to leap at Garlock, to find that he could not move.

Garlock drove his probe. "Who is your superior officer?" and before the
man could formulate a denial, that superior stood helpless beside him.

        *           *           *

Then three--and four. At the fifth:

"Oh, you are the man I want. Prime Minister--euphemism for
Dictator--Sovig. Missile launching stations and missile storage? You
don't know? Who does?"

Another man appeared, and for twenty minutes the _Pleiades_ darted about
the continent.

"Now submarines, atomic and otherwise, and all surface vessels capable
of launching missiles." Another man appeared.

This job took a little longer, since the crew of each vessel had to be
teleported back to their bases. An immense scrap-pile, probably visible
with a telescope of even moderate power, built up rapidly on the third
moon.

"Now a complete list of your uranium-refining plants, your military
reactors, heavy-water and heavy-hydrogen plants, and so on." Another man
appeared, but the starship did not move.

"Here is a list of plants," and Garlock named them, coldly. "You will
remember them. I will return you to your office, and you may--or may
not, as you please--order them evacuated. Look at your watch. We start
destroying them in exactly seventy-two of your hours from this moment.
Any and all persons on the properties will be killed; any within a
radius of ten of your miles may be killed. Our explosives are extremely
powerful, but there is no radioactivity and no danger from the fall-out.
The danger is from flash-blindness, flash-burn, sheer heat, shock-wave,
concussion, and flying debris of all kinds."

The officer vanished and Garlock turned back to the Prime Minister.

"You have an ally, a nation known as the 'Brotherhood of People's
Republics.' Where is its capital? Slide us over there, Jim. Now, Prime
Minister Sovig, you and your ally, the second and first most populous
nations of your world, are combining to destroy--a pincers movement, let
us say?--the third largest nation, or rather, group of nations--the
Nations of the North.... Oh, I see. Third only in population, but first
in productive capacity and technology. They should be destroyed because
their ideology does not agree with yours. They are too idealistic to
strike first, so you will. After you strike, they will not be able to.
Whereupon you, personally, will rule the world. I will add to that
something you are not thinking, but should: You will rule it until one
of your friends puts his pistol to the back of your neck and blows your
brains out."

        *           *           *

They were now over the ally's capitol; which launched five missiles
instead of one. Garlock collected four more men and studied them.

"Just as bad--if possible, worse. Who, Lingonor, is the leader of your
opposition, if any?" Another man, very evidently of the same race,
appeared.

"Idealistic, in a way, but spineless and corrupt," Garlock announced to
all. "His administration was one of the most corrupt ever known on this
world. We'll disarm them, too."

They did. The operation did not take very long; as this nation--or
group, it was not very clear exactly what it was--while very high in
manpower, was very low in technology.

The starship moved to a station high above the Capitol Building of the
Nations of the North and moved slowly downward until it hung poised one
scant mile over the building. Missiles, jets, and heavy guns were set
and ready, but no attack was made. Therefore Garlock introduced himself
to various personages and invited them aboard instead of snatching them;
nor did he immobilize them after they had been teleported aboard.

"The president, the chief of staff, the Chief Justice, the most eminent
scientist, the head of a church, the leaders of the legislative body and
four political bosses, the biggest business man, biggest labor leader,
and biggest gangster. Fourteen men." As Garlock studied them his face
hardened. "I thought to leave your Nations armed, to entrust this
world's future to you, but no. Only two of you are really concerned
about the welfare of your peoples, and one of those two is very weak.
Most of you are of no higher motivation than are the two dictators and
your gangster Clyden. You are much better than those we have already
disarmed, but you are not good enough."

Garlock's hard eyes swept over the group for two minutes before he went
on:

"I am opening all of your minds, friend and foe alike, to each other, so
that you may all see for yourselves what depths of rottenness exist
there and just how unfit your world is to associate with the decent
worlds of this or any other galaxy. It would take God Himself to do
anything with such material, and I am not God. Therefore, when we have
rid this world of atomics we will leave and you will start all over
again. If you really try, you can not only kill all animal life on your
planet, but make it absolutely uninhabitable for...."

"Stop it, Clee!" Lola jumped up, her eyes flashing. Garlock dropped the
tuned group, but Belle took it over. Everyone there understood every
thought. "Don't you _see_, you've done enough? That now you're going too
far? That these twenty-odd men, having had their minds opened and having
been given insight into what is possible, will go forward instead of
backward?"

"Forward? With such people as the Prime Ministers, the labor and
business leaders, the bosses and the gangsters to cope with? Do you
think they've got spines stiff enough for the job?"

"I'm sure of it. Our world did it with no better. Millions and millions
of other worlds did it. Why can't this one do it? Of course it can."

"May I ask a couple of questions?" This thought came from the tall,
trim, soldierly Chief of Staff.

"Of course, General Cordeen."

"We have all been taking it for granted that you four belong to some
super-human race; some kind or other of _Homo Superior_. Do I understand
correctly your thought that your race is _Homo Sapiens_, the same as
ours?"

"Why, of course it is," Lola answered in surprise. "The only difference
is that we are a few thousand years older than you are."

"You said also that there were 'millions and millions' of worlds that
have solved the problems facing us. Were all these worlds also peopled
by _Homo Sapiens_? It seems incredible."

"True, nevertheless. On any and every world of this type humanity is
identical physically; and the mental differences are due only to their
being in different stages of development. In fact, every planet we have
visited except this one makes a regular custom of breeding its best
blood with the best blood of other solar systems. And as to the
'millions and millions,' I meant only a very large but indefinite
number. As far as I know, not even a rough estimate has ever been
made--has there, Clee?"

"No, but it will probably turn out to be millions _of_ millions, instead
of millions _and_ millions; and squared and then cubed at that. My guess
is that it'll take another ten thousand years of preliminary surveying
such as we're doing, by all the crews the various Galaxian Societies can
put out, before even the roughest kind of an estimate can be made as to
how many planets are inhabited by mutually fertile human peoples."

        *           *           *

For a moment the group was stunned. Then:

"Do you mean to say," asked the merchant prince, "that you Galaxians are
not the only ones who have interstellar travel?"

"Far from it. In fact, yours is the only world we have seen that does
not have it, in one form or another."

"Oh? More than one way? That makes it still worse. Would you be willing
to sell us plans, or lease us ships...?"

"So that you could exploit other planets? We will not. You would get
nowhere, even if you had an interstellar drive right now. You,
personally, are a perfect example of what is wrong with this planet.
Rapacious, insatiable; you violate every concept of ethics, common
decency, and social responsibility. Your world's technology is so far
ahead of its sociology that you not only should be, but actually are
being, held in quarantine."

"_What?_"

"Exactly. One race I know of has been inspecting you regularly for
several hundreds of your years. They will not make contact with you, or
allow you to leave your own world, until you grow up to something beyond
the irresponsible-baby stage. Thus, about two and one-half of your years
ago, a starship of that race sent down a sensing element--unmanned, of
course--to check your state of development. Brother Sovig volatilized it
with an atomic missile."

"We did not do it," the dictator declared. "It was the war-mongering
capitalists."

"You brainless, mindless, contemptible idiot," Garlock sneered. "Are
even you actually stupid enough to try to lie with your mind? To minds
linked to your own and to mine?"

"We did do it, then, but it was only a flying saucer."

"Just as this ship was, to you, only a flying saucer, I suppose. So
here's something else for you to think about, Brother Sovig, with
whatever power your alleged brain is able to generate. When you shot
down that sensor, the starship did not retaliate, but went on without
taking any notice of you. When you tried to shoot _us_ down, we took
some slight action, but did not kill anyone and are now discussing the
situation. Listen carefully now, and remember--it is very possible that
the next craft you attack in such utterly idiotic fashion will, without
any more warning than you gave, blow this whole planet into a ball of
incandescent gas."

"Can that actually be done?" the scientist asked. For the first time, he
became really interested in the proceedings.

"Very easily, Doctor Cheswick," Garlock replied. "We could do it
ourselves with scarcely any effort and at very small cost. You are
familiar, I suppose, with the phenomenon of ball lightning?"

"Somewhat. Its mechanism has never been elucidated in any very
satisfactory mathematics."

"Well, we have at our disposal a field some...."

"Hold it, Clee," James warned. "Do you want to put out that kind of
stuff around here?"

"Um ... m ... m. What do you think?"

        *           *           *

James studied Cheswick's mind. "Better than I thought," he decided. "He
has made two really worthwhile intuitions--a genius type. He's been
working on what amounts almost to the Coupler Theory for ten years. He's
almost got it, but you know intuitions of that caliber can't be
scheduled. He might get it tomorrow--or never. I'd say push him over the
hump."

"Okay with me. We'll take a vote--one blackball kills it. Brownie? Just
the link, of course. A few hints, perhaps, at application, but no
technological data."

"I say give it to him. He's earned it. Besides, he isn't young and may
die before he gets it, and that would lose them two or three hundred
years."

"Belle?"

"In favor. Shall I drop the linkage? No," she answered her own question.
"No other minds here will have any idea of what it means, and it may do
some of them a bit of good to see one of their own minds firing on more
than one barrel."

"Thank you, Galaxians." The scientist's mind had been quivering with
eagerness. "I am inexpressibly glad that you have found me worthy of so
much help."

        *           *           *

Garlock entered Cheswick's mind. First he impressed, indelibly, six
symbols and their meanings. Second, a long and intricate equation; which
the scientist studied avidly.

During the ensuing pause, Garlock cut the President and Chief of Staff
out of the linkage. "We have just given Cheswick a basic formula. In a
couple of hundred years it will give you full telepathy, and then you
will begin really to go up. There's nothing secret about it--in fact,
I'd advise full publication--but even so it might be a smart idea to
give him both protection and good working conditions. Brains like his
are apt to be centuries apart on any world."

"But this is ... it could be ... it _must_ be!" Cheswick exclaimed. "I
_never_ would have formulated _that_! It isn't quite implicit, of
course, but from this there derives the existence of, and the necessity
for, electrogravitics! An entirely new field of reality and experiment
in science!"

"There does indeed," Garlock admitted, "and it is far indeed from being
implicit. You leaped a tremendous gap. And yes, the resultant is more
humanistic than technological."

Belle's ear-splitting whistle resounded throughout the Main. "How do you
like _them_ tid-bits, Clee?" she asked. "Two hundred years in
seventy-eight seconds? You folks will have telepathy by the time your
present crop of babies grows up. Clee, aren't you sorry you got mad and
blew your top and wanted to pick up your marbles and go home? _Three_
such intuitions in one man's lifetime beats par, even for the genius
course."

"It sure does," Garlock admitted, ruefully. "I should have studied these
minds--particularly his--before jumping at conclusions."

