
She was on a couch in an airy, spacious room furnished in the palest of
greens and ivory. One entire side of the room was either a window or a
solido screen. In it was a distant mountain range with many snowy peaks,
an almost cloudless blue sky. Sun at midmorning or midafternoon.

Sun and all had the look of Maccadon--they probably still were on the
planet. That was where the interview was to take place. But she also
could have been sent on a three-day space cruise, which would be a
rather good way to make sure a prisoner stayed exactly where you wanted
her. This could be a spaceliner suite with a packaged view of any one of
some hundreds of worlds, and with packaged sunlight thrown in.

There was one door to the room. It stood open, and the news viewer talk
came from there.

Trigger sat up quietly and looked down at the clothes she wore. All
white. A short-sleeved half-blouse of some soft, rather heavy, very
comfortable unfamiliar stuff. Bare midriff. White kid trousers which
flared at the thighs and were drawn in to a close fit just above the
knees and down the calves, vanishing into kid boots with thick, flexible
soles.

Sporting outfit.... That meant Maccadon!

She pulled a handful of hair forward and looked at it. They'd recolored
it--this time to a warm mahogany brown. She swung her legs off the couch
and stood up quietly. A dozen soft steps across the springy thick-napped
turf of ivory carpet took her to the window.

The news viewer clicked and went silent.

"Not bad," Trigger said. She saw a long range of woodlands and open
heath, rising gradually into the flanks of the mountains. On the far
right was the still, silver glitter of two lakes. "Where are we?"

"Byla Uplands Game Preserve. That's the game bird area before you."
Mihul appeared in the doorframe, in an outfit almost a duplicate of
Trigger's, in pearl-gray tones. "Feel all right?"

"Feeling fine," Trigger said. Byla Uplands--the southern tip of the
continent. She could make it back to Ceyce in two hours or less! She
turned and grinned at Mihul. "I also feel hungry. How long was I out?"

Mihul glanced at her wrist watch. "Eight hours, ten minutes. You woke up
on schedule. I had breakfast sent up thirty minutes ago. I've already
eaten mine--took one sniff and plunged in. It's good!" Mihul's hair,
Trigger saw, had been cropped short and a streak of gray added over the
right side; and they'd changed the color of her eyes to hazel. She
wondered what had been done to her along that line. "Want to come in?"
Mihul said. "We can talk while you eat."

Trigger nodded. "After I've freshened up."

The bathroom mirror showed they'd left her eyes alone. But there was a
very puzzling impression that she was staring at an image considerably
plumper, shorter, younger than it should be--a teen-ager around
seventeen or eighteen. Her eyes narrowed. If they'd done flesh-sculpting
on her, it could cause complications.

She stripped hurriedly and checked. They hadn't tampered with her body.
So it had to be the clothes; though it was difficult to see how even the
most cunning cut could provide such a very convincing illusion of being
more rounded out, heavier around the thighs, larger breasts--just
missing being dumpy, in fact. She dressed again, looked again, and came
out of the bathroom, still puzzled.

"Choice of three game birds for breakfast." Mihul announced. "Never
heard of any of them. All good. Plus regular stuff." She patted her flat
midriff. "Ate too much!" she admitted. "Now dig in and I'll brief you."

Trigger dug in. "I had a look at myself in the mirror," she remarked.
"What's this now-you-see-it-now-you-don't business of fifteen or so
pounds of baby fat?"

Mihul laughed. "You don't really have it."

"I know that too. How do they do it?"

"Subcolor job in the clothes. They're not really white. Anyone looking
at you gets his vision distorted a little without realizing it. Takes a
wider view of certain areas, for example. You can play it around in a
lot of ways."

"I never heard of that one," Trigger said. "You'd think it would be
sensational in fashions."

"It would be. Right now it's top secret for as long as Intelligence can
keep it that way."

Trigger chewed a savory morsel of something. "Then why did you tell me?"

"You're one of the gang, however reluctant. And you're good at keeping
the mouth shut. Your name, by the way, is now Comteen Lod, just turned
eighteen. I am your dear mama. You call me Drura. We're from
Slyth-Talgon on Evalee, here for a few days shooting."

Trigger nodded. "Do we do any shooting?"

Mihul pointed a finger at a side table. The Denton lay there, looking
like a toy beside a standard slender-barrelled sporting pistol. "Bet
your life, Comteen!" she said. "I've always been too stingy to try out a
first-class preserve on my own money. And this one is _first_ class."
She paused. "Comteen and Drura Lod really exist. We're a very fair copy
of what they look like, and they'll be kept out of sight till we're done
here. Now--"

She leaned back comfortably, tilting the chair and clasping her hands
around one knee. "Aside from the sport, we're here because you're a
convalescent. You're recovering from a rather severe attack of Dykart
Fever. Heard of it?"

Trigger reflected. "Something you pick up in some sections of the Evalee
tropics, isn't it?"

Mihul nodded. "That's what you did, child! Skipped your shots on the
last trip we took--and six months later you're still paying for it. You
were in one of those typical Dykart fever comas when we brought you in
last night."

"Very clever!" Trigger commented acidly.

"Very." Mihul pursed her lips. "The Dykart bug causes temporary
derangements, you know--spells during which convalescents talk wildly,
imagine things."

Trigger popped another fragment of meat between her teeth and chewed
thoughtfully, looking over at Mihul. "Very good duck or whatever!" she
said. "Like imagining they've been more or less kidnapped, you mean?"

"Things like that," Mihul agreed.

Trigger shook her head. "I wouldn't anyway. You types are bound to have
all the legal angles covered."

"Sure," said Mihul. "Just thought I'd mention it. Have you used the
Denton much on game?"

"Not too often." Trigger had been wondering whether they'd left the
stunner compartment loaded. "But it's a very fair gun for it."

"I know. The other one's a Yool. Good game gun, too. You'll use that."

Trigger swallowed. She met the calm eyes watching her. "I've never
handled a Yool. Why the switch?"

"They're easy to handle. The reason for the switch is that you can't
just stun someone with a Yool. It's better if we both stay armed, though
it isn't really necessary--so much money comes to play around here they
can afford to keep the Uplands very thoroughly policed, and they do. But
an ace in the hole never hurts." She considered. "Changed your mind
about that parole business yet?"

"I hadn't really thought about it," Trigger said.

"I'd let you carry your own gun then."

Trigger looked reflective, then shook her head. "I'd rather not."

"Suit yourself," Mihul said agreeably. "In that case though, there
should be something else understood."

"What's that?"

"We'll have up to three-four days to spend here together before Whatzzit
shows up."

"Whatzzit?"

"For future reference," Mihul said, "Whatzzit will be that which--or he
or she who--wishes to have that interview with you and has arranged for
it. That's in case you want to talk about it. I might as well tell you
that I'll do very little talking about Whatzzit."

"I thought," Trigger suggested, "I was one of the gang."

"I've got special instructions on the matter," Mihul said. "Anyway,
Whatzzit shows up. You have your interview. After that we do whatever
Whatzzit says we're to do. As you know."

Trigger nodded.

"Meanwhile," said Mihul, "we're here. Very pleasant place to spend
three-four days in my opinion, and I think, in yours."

"Very pleasant," Trigger agreed. "I've been suspecting it was you who
suggested it would be a good place to wait in."

"No," Mihul said. "Though I might have, if anyone had asked me. But
Whatzzit's handling all the arrangements, it seems. Now we could have
fun here--which, I suspect, would be the purpose as far as you're
concerned."

"Fun?" Trigger said.

"To put you into a good frame of mind for that interview, might be the
idea," Mihul said. "I don't know. Three days here should relax almost
anyone. Get in a little shooting. Loaf around the pools. Go for rides.
Things like that. The only trouble is I'm afraid you're nourishing dark
notions which are likely to take all the enjoyment out of it. Not to
mention the possibility of really relaxing."

"Like what?" Trigger asked.

"Oh," Mihul said, "there're all sorts of possibilities, of course." She
nodded her head at the guns. "Like yanking the Denton out of my holster
and feeding me a dose of the stunner. Or picking up that coffee pot
there and tapping me on the skull with it. It's about the right weight."

Trigger said thoughtfully, "I don't think either of those would work."

"They might," Mihul said. "They just might! You're fast. You've been
taught to improvise. And there's something eating you. You're edgy as a
cat."

"So?" Trigger said.

"So," Mihul said, "there are a number of alternatives. I'll lay them out
for you. You take your pick. For one, I could just keep you doped. Three
days in dope won't hurt you, and you'll certainly be no problem then.
Another way--I'll let you stay awake, but we stay in our rooms. I can
lock you in at night, and that window is escape-proof. I checked. It
would be sort of boring, but we can have tapes and stuff brought up. I'd
have the guns put away and I'd watch you like a hawk every minute of the
day."

She looked at Trigger inquiringly. "Like either of those?"

"Not much," Trigger said.

"They're safe," Mihul said. "Quite safe. Maybe I should.... Well, the
heat's off, and it's just a matter now of holding you for Whatzzit.
There're a couple of other choices. One of them has an angle you won't
like much either. On the other hand, it would give you a sporting chance
to take off if you're really wild about it. And it's entirely in line
with my instructions. I warned them you're tricky."

Trigger stopped eating. "Let's hear that one."

Mihul tilted the chair back a little farther and studied her a moment.
"Pretty much like I said before. Everything friendly and casual. Gun a
bit, swim a bit. Go for a ride or soar. Lie around in the sun. But
because of those notions of yours, there'd be one thing added. An
un-incentive."

"An un-incentive?" Trigger repeated.

"Exactly," said Mihul. "_That_ isn't at all in line with my
instructions. But you're a pretty dignified little character, and I
think it should work."

"Just what does this un-incentive consist of?" Trigger inquired warily.

"If you make a break and get away," Mihul said, "that's one thing.
Something's eating you, and I'm not sure I like the way this matter's
been handled. In fact, I don't like it. So I'll try to stop you from
leaving, but if it turns out I couldn't, I won't hold any grudges. Even
if I wake up with lumps."

She paused. "On the other hand," she said, "there we are--together for
three-four days. I don't want to spend them fighting off attempts to
clobber me every thirty seconds. So any time you try and miss, Comteen,
mama is going to pin you down fast, and hot up your seat with whatever
is handiest."

Trigger stared at her.

She cleared her throat.

"While I'm carrying a gun?" she said shakily. "Don't be ridiculous,
Mihul!"

"You're not going to gun me for keeps to get out of a licking," Mihul
said. "And that's all the Yool can do. How else will you stop me?"

Trigger's fingernails drummed the table top briefly. She wet her lips.
"I don't know," she admitted.

"Of course," said Mihul, "all this unpleasantness can be avoided very
easily. There's always the fourth method."

"What's that?"

"Just give parole."

"No parole," Trigger said thinly.

"All right. Which of the other ways will it be?"

Trigger didn't hesitate. "The sporting chance," she said. "The others
aren't choices."

"Fair enough," said Mihul. She stood up and went over to the wall. She
selected a holster belt from the pair hanging there and fastened it
around her. "I rather thought you'd pick it," she said. She gave Trigger
a brief grin. "Just make sure it's a good opening!"

"I will," Trigger said.

Mihul moved to the side table, took up the Denton, looked at it, and
slid it into her holster. She turned to gaze out the window. "Nice
country!" she said. "If you're done with breakfast, how about going out
right now for a first try at the birds?"

Trigger hefted the coffee pot gently. It was about the right weight at
that. But the range was a little more than she liked, considering the
un-incentive.

Besides, it might crack the monster's skull.

She set the pot gently down again.

"Great idea!" she said. "And I'm all finished eating."




10


Half an hour later there still hadn't been any decent openings. Trigger
was maintaining a somewhat brooding silence at the moment. Mihul, beside
her, in the driver's seat of the tiny sports hopper, chatted pleasantly
about this and that. But she didn't appear to expect any answers.

There weren't many half-hours left to be wasted.

Trigger stared thoughtfully out through the telescopic ground-view plate
before her, while the hopper soared at a thousand feet toward the
two-mile square of preserve area which had been assigned to them to hunt
over that morning. Dimly reflected in the view plate, she could see the
head of the gun-pup who went with that particular area lifted above the
seat-back behind her. He was gazing straight ahead between the two
humans, absorbed in canine reflections.

There was plenty of bird life down there. Some were original Terran
forms, maintained unchanged in the U-League's genetic banks. Probably
many more were inspired modifications produced on Grand Commerce game
ranches. At any other time, Trigger would have found herself enjoying
the outing almost as much as Mihul.

Not now. Other things kept running through her head. Money, for example.
They hadn't returned her own cash to her and apparently didn't intend
to--at least not until after the interview. But Mihul was carrying at
least part of their spending money in a hip pocket wallet. The rest of
it might be in a concealed room safe or deposited with the resort
hotel's cashier.

She glanced over at Mihul again. Good friend Mihul never before had
looked quite so large, lithe, alert and generally fit for a
rough-and-tumble. That un-incentive idea was fiendishly ingenious! It
was difficult to plan things through clearly and calmly while one's
self-esteem kept quailing at vivid visualizations of the results of
making a mistake.

The hopper settled down near the center of their territory, guided the
last half mile by Mihul who had fancied the looks of some
shrub-cluttered ravines ahead. Trigger opened the door on her side. The
gun-pup leaped lightly across the seat and came out behind her. He
turned to look over his huntresses and gave them a wag, a polite but
perfunctory one. Then he stood waiting for orders.

Mihul considered him. "Guess he's in charge here," she said. She waved
a hand at the pup. "Go find 'em, old boy! We'll string along."

He loped off swiftly, a lean brown houndlike creature, a Grand Commerce
development of some aristocratic Terran breed and probably a
considerable improvement on the best of his progenitors. He curved
around a thick clump of shrubs like a low-flying hawk. Two plump
feather-shapes, emerald-green and crimson, whirred up out of the near
