
He looked hurt. "You misinterpret. I will do for you anything I can. But
you must remember, Lady Elza, that my judgment is better than yours. I
would not let you lead us into disaster. You are a gentle little woman.
Your instincts are toward humane treatment of everyone--toward mercy
rather than justice. In all such things, I shall be guided by you.
Justice--tempered with mercy. A union very, very beautiful, Lady
Elza ... But, you see, beyond that--you are wrong. I am a man, and in
the big things I must dominate. It is I who guide, and you who follow.
You see that, don't you?"

The sincerity in his voice was unmistakable. And my heart sank as I
watched Elza. Her gaze fell, and a flush mantled her cheeks. Tarrano
added quietly: "We shall have no difficulty, you and I, Lady Elza. Each
of us a place, and a duty. A destiny together...."

He broke off and rose quickly to his feet. "Enough. I have been weak to
say so much as this."

He turned to leave us, and I became aware of a woman's figure standing
in the shadows of the archway across the room. She started forward as
Tarrano glanced her way. A Venus woman of the Cold Country. Yet,
obviously, one of good birth and breeding. A woman of perhaps 30 years,
beautiful in the Venus cast; dressed in the conventional bodice
breast-plates and short skirt, with grey stockings and sandals.

Within the room, she regarded Tarrano silently. There was about her a
quiet dignity; she stood with her tall, slim figure drawn to its full
height. Her pure white hair was coiled upon her head, with a rich metal
ornament to fasten it. And from it, a mantle of shimmering blue fabric
hung down her back.

Tarrano said: "What are you doing up here? I told you to wait below."

Her face showed no emotion. But there was a glitter to her eyes, a glow
in their grey depths like _alumite_ in the hydro-flame of a torch.

She said slowly: "Master, I think it would be very correct if you would
let me stay here and serve the Lady Elza. I told you that before, but
you would not listen."

Tarrano, with sudden decision, swung toward Elza. "This is the Elta[14]
Tara. She was concerned that I should allow you to dwell here alone with
this Jac Hallen, and this traitor from Mars." His tone conveyed infinite
contempt for us.

[Footnote 14: Elta--a term or title denoting rank by birth.]

The woman said quickly: "The Lady Elza would be glad of my
companionship." She shot a swift glance to Elza. What it was meant to
convey, I could not have said. Perhaps Elza understood it, or thought
she did. She spoke up.

"I would like to have you very much, indeed." She added to Tarrano, and
there was on her face a look of feminine guile:

"You, of course, could not refuse me so small a favor? After all your
protestations----"

He gestured impatiently. "Very well." And he added to Tara: "You will
serve the Lady Elza as she directs."

He stalked away into the darkened passage. In the gloom there, he
stopped and again faced us; the light from a small blue tube in there
illumined him dimly. He was smiling ironically.

"I shall maintain the instruments for you. The mirrors will show you
Georg and Maida. They are just about arriving at the Mountain Station.
Watch them! You will see how far they progress with their wonderful
speeches."

He left us. We heard his measured tread as he stalked down the tower
incline. The barrage about the tower was lifted momentarily as he went
out. Then it came on again, with its glow beyond our casements, and its
low electrical whine.

I was just turning back to the room when a sound behind me made me face
sharply about. My heart leaped into my throat. The woman Tara had
produced from about her person a weapon of some kind. She thought she
was unobserved, but from the angle at which I stood, I saw her. A
gleaming metal object was in her hand. And then she launched it--a small
flat disc of metal, thin, and with its circular edge keen as a
knife-blade.

Whirling with a very soft hum hardly audible, it left her hand and
floated upward across the room. Circling the casements up near the
ceiling, and then heading downward straight for Elza! And I saw, too,
that the woman was guiding it by a tiny radio-control.

The thing was so unexpected that I stood gaping. But only for an
instant. I saw the deadly whirling knife-disc sailing for Elza.... It
would strike her ... shear her white throat....

With a shout of horror and anger, I leaped for the woman. But Wolfgar,
too, had seen the disc and he went into action quicker than I. The divan
was beside him. He snatched up a pillow; flung it upward at the disc.
The soft pillow struck the disc; together, entangled, they fell
harmlessly to the floor.

I was upon the woman, snatching the handle of the control-wire from her
hand, wrenching its connection loose from her robe. Under my onslaught,
she fell; and I kneeled beside her, gripping her while she tore at me
and screamed with hysterical, murderous frenzy.




CHAPTER XIII

_Love--and Hate_


I did not harm this Tara, though I was sorely tempted to; and after a
moment we quieted her. She was crying and laughing by turns; but when we
seated her on the divan she controlled herself and fell into a sullen
silence. Elza, pale and frightened at her escape, faced the woman, and
waved Wolfgar and me aside. Strange little Elza! Resolute, she stood
there, and would brook no interference with her purpose. Wolfgar and I
withdrew a pace or two and stood watching them.

Tara's breast was heaving with her pent emotion. She sat drooping on the
divan, her face buried in her hands.

Elza said gently: "Why did you do that, Tara?"

There was no answer; only the woman's catching breath as she struggled
with her sobs. Across the background of my consciousness came the
thought that Tarrano or one of his guards would doubtless momentarily
appear to investigate all this turmoil. And I was vaguely conscious also
that from our instrument room the sounds of an unusual activity were
coming. But I did not heed them. Elza was insisting:

"Why did you do that, Tara? Why should you want to harm me?"

Tara looked up. "You have stolen the man I love."

"I?"

"Yes. Tarrano----"

She broke off, set her lips firmly together as though to repress further
words; and her fine grey eyes, filled with unbidden tears, were
smoldering to their depths with hate.

Impulsively Elza sank to the floor beside the woman. But Tara drew away.

Elza said: "Tarrano--he is a wonderful man, Tara. A genius--the greatest
figure of these three worlds...."

My heart sank to hear her say it!

"... a genius, Tara. You should be proud to love him...."

"You----" The woman's writhing fingers seemed about to reach for Elza. I
took a sudden step forward, then relaxed. Elza added quickly:

"But I would not steal Tarrano from you. Don't you realize that?"

"No!"

"But it's true."

"No! No! You have stolen him! With your queer Earth beauty--that colored
hair of yours--those rounded limbs--you've bewitched him! I can see it.
You can't lie to me! I made him angry once and he admitted it."

"No, I tell you!"

"I say yes. You've stolen him from me. He loves you--and he mocks and
laughs at me----"

"Tara, wait. I do not love Tarrano, I tell you. I would not have
him----" How my heart leaped to hear her say it so convincingly. She
added:

"He loves me, perhaps--but I can't help that. He has me prisoner here. I
am forced----"

"You lie! You are playing to win him! What girl would refuse? You say
yourself he is the greatest man of the ages. You lie when you tell me
you do not want him!"

Elza had taken the woman by the shoulders. "Tara, listen--you _must_
listen! Are you mated with Tarrano?"

"No! But years ago he promised me. I took his name then, as we do in the
Cold Country. They still call me Tara! Years I have waited, true to my
promise--with even my name of maidenhood relinquished. _His_ name--Tara!
And now he tosses me aside--because _you_, only an Earth woman, have
bewitched him."

"I didn't want to bewitch him, Tara." Elza's voice was very gentle; and
a whimsical smile was plucking at her lips. "You think I want him
because he is a genius--the greatest man of our time?"

"Yes!"

"Is that why _you_ want him?"

"No, I love him."

"You loved him before he was very great, didn't you?"

"Yes. Back in the Cold Country. When he was only a boy--and I was no
more than a girl half grown. I love him for himself, I tell you----"

Elza interrupted; and her voice risen to greater firmness, held a
quality of earnest pleading.

"Wait, Tara! You love Tarrano for himself--because you are a woman
capable of love. It is the man you love--not his deeds, or his fame or
his destiny. Isn't that so?"

"Yes. I----"

"Then won't you give me credit for being a woman with instincts as fine
as your own? The love of a good woman goes unbidden. You can't win it by
conquering worlds and flinging them at her feet. Tarrano thinks you can.
He thinks to dazzle me with his feats of prowess. He wants to buy my
love with thrones for me to grace as queen. He thinks my awe and fear of
him are love. He thinks a woman's love is born of respect, and
admiration, and promises of wealth. But you and I, Tara--we know it
isn't. We know it's born of a glance--born in poverty and
sickness--adversity--every ill circumstance--born without reason--for no
reason at all. Just born! And if anything else gives it birth--it is not
a true woman's love. You and I know that, Tara. Don't you see?"

Tara was sobbing unrestrainedly now, and Elza, with arms around her,
went on:

"You should be proud to love Tarrano. If I loved him, I would be proud
of him, too. But I do not----"

A step sounded near at hand. Tarrano stood in the archway, with arms
folded, regarding us sardonically.




CHAPTER XIV

_Defying Worlds_


"So?" Tarrano eyed us, evidently in no hurry to speak further, seemingly
amused at our confusion. Had he heard much of what the two women had
said? All of it, or most of it, doubtless, with his instruments as he
approached. But, even with the knowledge of Elza's vehement appraisal of
him, he seemed now quite imperturbable. His gaze touched me and Wolfgar,
then returned to the women.

"So? It would seem, Tara, that your plan to wait upon the Lady Elza was
not very successful." He dropped the irony, adding crisply: "Tara, come
here!"

She rose to her feet obediently, and stood facing him. Humble, fearful,
yet a trifle defiant. For a moment he frowned upon her thoughtfully;
then he said to Elza:

"Your policy of mercy is very embarrassing, Lady Elza." He made a
deprecating gesture, and again his eyes were twinkling. "This woman
threatened your life. My guards were lax--though I must admit they had
good excuse, with the other tasks which I thrust upon them.... Your life
was threatened--you escaped by the merest chance of fortune. You know,
of course, what justice would bid me do to this would-be murderess?"

Elza was on her feet, standing beside Tara. She did not answer.

Tarrano now was smiling. "I must let her go unpunished? Embarrassing,
this merciful policy to which you have committed me! Yet--your will is
my law as you know--though I feel that some day it will involve us in
disaster.... You, Tara, will not be punished, much as you deserve it."
He paused, then said as an afterthought: "You, Jac Hallen, I thank you
for what you tried to do in thwarting the attack. You acted in very
clumsy fashion--but, at least, you doubtless did your best." Gravely he
turned to Wolfgar. "I shall not forget, Wolfgar, that, in an emergency,
you saved the life of Lady Elza.... Enough! These are busy moments. You
chose an awkward time to raise this turmoil. Come with me--all of you."

He summoned Argo and two other guards. Unceremoniously, and with more
haste than I had ever seen in Tarrano, he led us from the building. A
hint of his purpose came to me, as he bade Elza gather up her few
personal belongings, and gave them to a guard to carry.

In a group, he herded us across the spider bridge. It was early evening,
but night had fully fallen. The city was ablaze with its colored lights.
We crossed the bridge, passed through a tunnel-arcade, and came out to a
platform which was at the base of a skeleton tower. Its naked girders
rose some seven hundred feet above us. The highest structure in the
city. A waiting lifting-car was there. We entered, and it shot us
upward.

At the top, the narrowed structure was enclosed into a single room some
thirty feet square. A many-windowed room, with a small metal balcony
surrounding it outside. Immediately above the room, at the very peak of
the tower, was a single, powerful light-beam; its silver searching ray
swept the cloudless, starry sky in a slow circle.

The room was crowded with instruments. Unlighted, save by the reflected
glow of its many image-mirrors, all of which seemed in full operation. A
dozen intent men sat at the tables; a silent room, but for the hum and
click of the instruments.

Tarrano said softly: "We have been very busy while you below were
engaged with your petty hates."

He seated himself at a table apart, upon which was a single mirror, and
he gathered us around him. The mirror was dark. He called:

"Rax--let me see Mars--you have them by relay? The Hill City?"

The mirror flashed on. From an aperture overhead, a tiny beam of the
blue helio-transformer came down to it. In the mirror I saw an image of
the familiar Hill City. A terraced slope, dotted with the cubical
buildings, spires and tunnel mouths. An empty channel[15] curved down
across the landscape from the north.

[Footnote 15: Canal, as it now is thought to be.]

A distant scene, empty and lifeless save for black puffs which rose in
the air above the city.

Tarrano called impatiently: "Closer, Rax!"

The image dissolved, blurred; turned red, violet, then white. We seemed
now upon a height close above the city. It was seething with confusion.
Fighting going on in the streets. Animals and men, fighting; a crowd of
the Little People thronging a public square, with beasts of war charging
them.

The Hairless Men; I had heard of them, with their animals trained to
fight, while they--the humans--lurked behind. A mysterious, almost
grewsome race, to us who live on Earth--these hairless dwellers of the
underground Mars. Dead-white of skin; sleek and hairless; heavily
muscled from the work of their world; and almost blind from living in
the dark.

They were swarming now into the Hill City of the ruling Little People.
The beasts, at their commands, were running wild through the
streets ... dripping jaws, tearing at the women ... the children....

I felt Elza turn away, shuddering.

Tarrano chuckled. "The revolt. It came, of course, as I planned. This
Little People government--it was annoying ... Colley!"

"Master?"

"Send the message, Colley. Fling it audibly over Mars! Tell the rulers
of the Little People that if they send up the green bomb of
surrender--Tarrano will spare them further bloodshed. Tell them that I
am not giving the Brende secret to Earth. In a moment I shall defy the
Earth Council. Promise them that the Brende secret is going to Mars.
Assure them they will have everlasting life for everyone.... Wohl!"

"Master?"

"Give me the Cave Station."

The mirror went dark. Then it turned a dazzling yellow. A cavern in the
interior of Mars. A dark scene of wavering yellow torches. Around a
table of instruments sat a score of hairless men. Tarrano snatched up a
mouthpiece--murmured slowly into it. I could see the leader of the
hairless men nod after a time, as the message reached him. And I saw him
turn away to issue swift orders as Tarrano had commanded.

Tarrano said brusquely: "Enough!... Wohl!"

The mirror went dark. A voice called: "Master, the green bomb has gone
up from the Hill City! Do you wish to see?"

"No.... Give me Venus. Olgan! Are they quiet on Venus?"

"Yes, Master."

"Congratulate them that we have conquered the Little People. Tell them
Mars is ours now! Tell them I am coming to Venus at once--with the
Brende model...."

"Master, you wish to see Venus? I have direct communication----"

Another voice interrupted. "The Earth Council, Master! They demand an
explanation of why you say the Brende model is going to Mars. You have
promised it to Earth. They demand----"

Tarrano rasped: "Tell them to wait ... I don't want Venus,
Olgan.... Megar! Give me the Earth Mountain Station."

He turned to me, and his voice dropped again to that characteristic
sardonic drawl:

"We must see how your friend Georg Brende is faring."

The mirror showed Georg, standing irresolute on the platform before the
sending discs.

Tarrano called: "The Princess Maida--can't you locate her?"

The scene blurred momentarily, then showed us the outside of the
Station. A white expanse of snow, with purple starlit sky above. From a
side door of the building, as we watched, the figures of two women
appeared. A woman leading Maida. As they came out, with Maida all
unsuspecting, from the shadows a group of men pounced upon them--dragged
Maida away.

Tarrano laughed. "Enough!... Show me Georg Brende again.... Hurry!"

We saw Georg waver and leap through the window, fall into the snow,
where, from the shadows of the building, other men rushed out upon
him ... hurried him away after the captive Maida....

Tarrano's laugh was grim and triumphant. "Ha! We win there, also!
Enough! Nunz? Nunz--now you can give me the Earth Council! Where is it
sitting? Washington, or Great London?"

"Washington, Master."

"Very well.... No, never mind connecting me. You speak for me. Tell them
I've changed my mind. The Brende model is not coming to Washington. Tell
them Georg Brende is lost to them, also. Tell them I declare war!
_Tarrano the Conqueror_ declares war on the Earth! Tell them that, with
my compliments. Tell them to come down here and overwhelm me--it ought
