Few of the Sons of God and none of the Nepthalim, save Damis, could
match the brute strength of the Viceroy. As Damis rushed, Glavour
sidestepped and caught the Nepthalim's arm in a bone-crushing grasp.
Damis made no effort to break the grip, but with his free hand he
gripped the wrist of Glavour's crippled arm. With a quick effort he
twisted it and the Viceroy gave a shriek of pain as the newly knit bone
gave way and his arm fell, dangling and useless. Damis caught his sound
arm in a powerful grip and twisted slowly on his wrist. Gradually
Glavour's fingers relaxed and Damis' arm was free. His hands shot up and
gripped Glavour about the throat just in time to shut off the cry for
help which was forming on his thick lips. The two giants strove silently
for mastery in the struggle which meant life for the victor and death
for the vanquished. The expression in Damis' eyes was one of confident
mastery, but the face of the Jovian showed something that was strangely
akin to fear. Even when he was whole, Glavour had found that his
strength was no match for the power that lay in Damis' graceful limbs.
With one of the Viceroy's arms useless, the issue was a foregone
conclusion.

Glavour's face gradually grew purple and his eyes started out of their
sockets. His tongue protruded horribly from his opened jaws. He grew
weaker until it was only Damis' grip which kept him from falling to the
ground. Then Damis broke his silence and spoke slowly and distinctly
into the dying Viceroy's ears.

                   *       *       *       *       *

"I was loyal to you, Glavour," he said, "despite your brutality and
sensuality which sickened me, until you strove to add to your already
crowded seraglio the maiden whom I had chosen. As a Nepthalim, you
thought I had no right which you need respect and I would tamely submit
to whatever you chose to do. You forgot that in my veins run the best
blood of Earth and the proudest blood of Jupiter. Hortan was a Mildash
of Jupiter, a rank to which you could never aspire. I restricted your
efforts and proved to you a thing which I long have known, that, man to
man, I am your superior.

"Even then you might have won back my loyalty had I not learned how my
father and my mother came to their death. It has always been given out
that they went to Jupiter on a summons from Tubain, but I know the
truth. They died under the knife of a cowardly assassin, under your
knife, Glavour. Then it was that I swore that it would be my hand that
would strike you down. When you raised your hand against me, you were
Viceroy of the Earth and your power was secure, for the conspiracy
against you had no hope of success. What is the situation now? You are
beleaguered in your palace, holding only the ground your few feeble
weapons cover. Even this ground you hold only on the sufferance of the
Earthmen. Listen to what I say, for I wish your last moments to be
bitter ones. On the hill east of the city sit two weapons of a type and
a power unknown to both Earth and Jupiter. They are the deadly black ray
weapons of Mars. Ah, you tremble! You have good cause. One of them is
trained on this palace while the other searches the heavens, ready to
blast into powder the fleet of Tubain when it appears. And who, think
you, brought this about, Glavour? It was I, Damis, the Nepthalim, the
'half-breed bastard' whom you despised. My only regret is that I cannot
send you to the twilight of the gods as you sent that other
arch-traitor, Havenner. Are your last moments pleasant, Glavour? I am
increasing the pressure slowly so that you will have time to think, to
think of the Earthmen you have given to sacrifice and torture, to think
of your ruler, Hortan, dying under your knife, to think of the doom
which is about to overcome your race. Think, Glavour, for your time for
thought is short."

                   *       *       *       *       *

As he finished, Damis thrust back on the Viceroy's chin with a sudden
effort. There was a dull crack as Glavour's neck broke and Damis gently
lowered the inert bulk to the floor. He felt a touch on his arm as he
straightened up. He whirled like a cat and Lura shrank back with a
frightened gesture. Damis opened his arms and in an instant the
Earth-girl was folded in them.

"Is my father safe?" was her first question.

"Safer by far than we are," exclaimed Damis with a sudden pang of
anxiety. He glanced at the time-recording device on the wall.
Three-quarters of an hour had passed since he had first entered the
Viceregal palace. If the estimates of Tubain's arrival which he had
heard were correct, the Jovian fleet should be almost most overhead.
"Come," he cried to Lura, "we have no time to lose if we escape before
the palace and all in it are destroyed. Where did Havenner land his
ship?"

"In the yard west of the palace," she replied.

"Pray that it is still there," said Damis. "We can reach it through the
path by which I entered this room. Come quickly."

With Lura at his heels, he passed through the rent in the tapestry and
entered the secret passage through the walls. The way twisted and turned
interminably, but finally he paused before a door. Before opening it he
slid back a panel which opened a peep-hole and looked out.

"The ship is there," he whispered in a voice of relief. "There is only
one guard over it that I can see. Why didn't I think to bring Glavour's
weapons? I'll have to try to catch him by surprise. When I open the
door, run straight for the space ship as though you were trying to
escape from me. Don't try to dodge the guard, keep right on for the
ship. As soon as I overpower the guard, get in the ship and hold your
hand on the starting lever. When I get on board, throw in the power at a
low rate. We don't want to rise rapidly enough to get out of easy
control. Do you understand?"

"Yes, Damis," she whispered.

                   *       *       *       *       *

He watched until a sudden shout drew the attention of the sentry
momentarily away from the ship he was guarding. A confused sound of
cheering came from the palace and the sentry looked toward the western
heavens. A moment of gazing and he raised his voice in a raucous shout
of joy. Instantly Damis swung open the door.

Lura sped out like a frightened deer with Damis in close pursuit. The
attention of the sentry was fixed on some distant object in the sky and
he did not see the oncoming pair until Lura was only a few yards from
him. The sound of her footsteps attracted his attention and he glanced
down at her. An expression of surprise came over his heavy features and
he reached for a weapon. His gesture was never finished, for Damis' fist
caught him under the ear and he dropped in his tracks. Damis looked in
the direction in which the sentry had been staring and a cry broke from
his lips.

"The fleet of Tubain!" he cried.

A thousand yards in the air and a scant five miles to the west was a
clump of half a dozen Jovian space flyers. Massed behind them were a
hundred more. They were approaching with tremendous velocity.

Damis gave a mighty bound and leaped through the airlock of the ship.
Hardly had he cleared the door than Lura pulled down the starting lever.
The ship flew up from the ground. Hardly had it left its ways than a
momentary flash came from the hill east of the palace. The air grew
black around them and a cold as of interstellar space penetrated their
very bones. In an instant the ship had flashed up into the sun above the
zone of influence of the Martian weapon. The shouting from the palace
was suddenly stilled. Damis looked down, but nothing could be seen save
a pall of intense blackness over the ground where the building stood.

"The port motor, Lura!" cried Damis. The Jovian fleet was approaching so
rapidly that a collision with the nearest flyer seemed inevitable. There
was a roar from the air as Lura threw in the port blast with its maximum
power. Damis was hurled against the side of the ship.

                   *       *       *       *       *

From the hill where the Martian weapons had been placed came a second
flash of light and a beam of jetty blackness shot through the air. An
edge of it brushed the ship for an instant and Lura stiffened. A
terrible cold bit through the flyer and the side where the Martian ray
had touched crumpled into powder. The ship sped on, and the friction of
the air and the bright rays of the sun dissipated the extreme cold.
Through the terrific storm which was raging, the black ray stabbed again
and again. Back and forth it played and ship after ship of the Jovians
was momentarily caught in the beam. When the beam passed on there was
nothing left of the ship save a cloud of dust which the terrific wind
dissipated in all directions.

Damis glanced at the Earth below him. It seemed to be flying past the
ship at a velocity which he could hardly comprehend. He made his way
against the pressure of the movement to the control levers and strove to
check the speed. As the Earth ceased to revolve beneath them, the wind
rose to a terrible force.

"What has happened, Damis?" shrieked Lura in his ear.

"I don't know," he shouted in reply. "I am trying to keep away from the
neighborhood of the palace for a while until the Jovian fleet is
destroyed. Toness and your father might not be able to tell us from one
of Tubain's ships and they might turn the ray on us."

                   *       *       *       *       *

He bent over the control levers of the ship, but they refused to obey
his touch. The stern motor still roared with enough force to keep them
three thousand feet above the ground, but none of the side motors
responded to the controls. The ship was helpless and was tossed about, a
plaything of the terrific wind which howled through the heavens. Damis
watched the ground below them.

"Look, Lura!" he cried.

They swept over the site of the palace. The black ray was no longer
playing on it, but the whole palace glistened like crystal.

"What is it?" she asked.

"Frost!" he shouted. "The Martian weapon did its work well. Everything
in that palace is frozen. In the name of Tubain!"

The Jovian ejaculation had burst from his lips, unbidden, at the sight
which met his gaze. Racing over the land was a solid wall of water,
hundreds of feet high and moving with enormous speed. On toward the
palace it swept. Below they could see the Earthmen on the hill striving
to fly, but there was no place of safety. The oncoming wall of water was
higher by a hundred feet than the top of the hill and it was the highest
bit of land for many miles.

Nearer and nearer came the water until with a roar and a crash which
they could plainly hear in the crippled space ship, it swept over the
hill and the palace, burying them under a hundred feet of brine.

"Father!" cried Lura in anguish.

Damis made his way across the ship and folded her in his arms.

"He was chosen as one of the lives needed to buy the freedom of the
Earth," he murmured to her. "It is hard, for I loved him as a father;
but it was the end which he would have chosen. He died at the head of
his followers battling for freedom."

                   *       *       *       *       *

"What happened, Damis?" asked Lura an hour later as she looked down on
the seething tumult of water under them.

"As nearly as I can figure out, the Jovian fleet approached the palace
from the west at a low elevation. In order to destroy them, we could not
use the Martian weapon normal to the Earth's surface as they commanded
us, but were forced to use it tangentially. The enormous counter
reaction to the stream of force of almost incredible intensity which was
shot at Tubain's flyers, had to be absorbed in some way. The weapon
could not take it up as it was anchored to the center of gravity of the
earth. As a result, the force was translated into one of increased
rotation. The Earth must be spinning on its axis at fully twice its
former rate. Both the air and the water had too much inertia to follow
the accelerated motion of the land, so the wind blew a gale and the
oceans left their beds and swept over the land. Everything must have
been swept to destruction before this flood."

"And all our labor and sacrifice has been useless," cried Lura. "We
have freed a world at the cost of the lives of its inhabitants."

"The world is not lost, sweetheart," he cried as he clasped her to him.
"The floods will not have overwhelmed the mountains and some men and
animals will have escaped. The waters will subside in a few weeks as
they take up the new rotation of the Earth. By His will, we are spared
for the labor of building a new world. As soon as the land again appears
above the waters, we will land and assemble those who have been spared.
The fleet of Jupiter has been destroyed and we need fear no fresh attack
for ages, perhaps never. Unhampered, we will build a new world and try
to avoid the mistakes of the old one.

"Look, Damis!" exclaimed Lura in a hushed tone.

From the spray and mist below them leaped a living bridge of colored
light. Above the sun it arced its way into the heavens in the direction
in which they knew Mars lay.

"It is His promise," whispered Damis reverently, "that henceforth the
planets will live in peace and amity and that nevermore will the Jovians
be allowed to invade us."


                               (The End.)


Transcriber's Note:

This e-text was produced from Astounding Stories December 1931 and
January 1932 issues. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.






End of Project Gutenberg's Giants on the Earth, by Sterner St. Paul Meek

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GIANTS ON THE EARTH ***

***** This file should be named 22132.txt or 22132.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/1/3/22132/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
