
For chemical work the possibility of evolution of gas from such a
cement must be taken into account, and I should certainly not trust it
for this reason in vacuum tube work, where the purity of the confined
gas could come in question.  Otherwise it is an excellent cement, and
does not in my experience tend to crack away from glass to the same
extent as paraffin or pure shellac.

This cracking away from glass, by the way, is probably an effect of
difference in rate of expansion between the glass and cement which
probably always exists, and, if the cement be not sufficiently
viscous, must, beyond certain temperature limits, either produce
cracks or cause separation.  Professor Wright of Yale has used a hard
mineral pitch as a cement in vacuum work with success.

My attention has been directed to a fusible metal cement containing
mercury, and made according to the following receipt, given by Mr. S.
G.  Rawson, Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry, vol.  ix.
(1890), P.  150:-

Bismuth         40 per cent

Lead             25 per cent

Tin             10 per cent

Cadmium         10 per cent

Mercury         15 per cent

This is practically one form of Rose's fusible metal with 15 per cent
mercury added.  It takes nearly an hour to set completely, and the
apparatus must be clean and warm before it is applied.

As the result of several trials by myself and friends, I am afraid I
must dissent from the claim of the author that such a cement will make
a really air-tight joint between glass tubes.  Indeed, the appearance
of the surface as viewed through the glass is not such as to give any
confidence, no matter what care may have been exercised in performing
all the operations and cleaning the glass;  besides which the cement
is rigid when cold, and the expansion difficulty comes in.

On the other hand, if extreme air-tightness is not an object, the
cement is strong and easily applied, and has many uses.  I have an
idea that if the joints were covered with a layer of soft wax, the
result would be satisfactory in so far as air-tightness is concerned.

This anticipation has since been verified.

In many cases one can resort to the device already mentioned of
enclosing a rubber or tape-wrapped joint between two tubes in a bath
of mercury, but in this case the glass must be clean and hot and the
mercury also warm, dry, and pure when the joint is put together,
otherwise an appreciable air film is left against the glass, and this
may creep into the joint.

Perhaps the easiest way of making such a joint is to use an outer tube
of thin clean glass, and bore a narrow hole into it from one side to
admit the mercury;  if the mercury is to be heated in vacuo, it is
better to seal on a side joint.  It is always better, if possible, to
boil the mercury in situ, which involves making the wrapping of
asbestos, but, after all, we come back to the position I began by
taking up, viz.  that the easiest and most reliable method is by
fusion of the glass--all the rest are unsuitable for work of real
precision.

I should be ungrateful, however, were I not to devote a few lines to
the great convenience and merit of so-called "centering cement." This
substance has two or three very valuable properties.  It is very tough
and strong in itself, and it remains plastic on cooling for some time
before it really sets.  If for any reason a small tube has to be
cemented into a larger one, which is a good deal larger, so that an
appreciable mass of cement is necessary, and particularly if the joint
requires to have great mechanical strength, this cement is invaluable.
I have even used a plug of it instead of a cork for making the joint
between a gas delivery tube and a calcium chloride tower.  (Why are
these affairs made with such abominable tubulures?)

The joint in question has never allowed the tube to sag though it
projects horizontally to a distance of 6 inches, and has had to
withstand nearly two years of Sydney temperature.  The cement consists
of a mixture of shellac and 10 per cent of oil of cassia.

The shellac is first melted in an iron ladle, and the oil of cassia
quickly added and stirred in, to an extent of about 10 per cent, but
the exact proportions are not of importance.  Great care must be taken
not to overheat the shellac.

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER I

ON THE PREPARATION OF VACUUM TUBES FOR THE PRODUCTION OF PROFESSOR
ROENTGEN'S RADIATION

[Footnote: Written in May 1896.]

WHEN Professor Roentgen's discovery was first announced at the end of
1895 much difficulty was experienced in obtaining radiation of the
requisite intensity for the repetition of his experiments.  The
following notes on the production of vacuum tubes of the required
quality may therefore be of use to those who desire to prepare their
own apparatus.  It appears that flint glass is much more opaque to
Roentgen's radiation than soda glass, and consequently the vacuum
tubes require to be prepared from the latter material.

Fig. 39.

A form of vacuum tube  which has proved very successful in the
author's hands is sketched in Fig.  38.  It is most easily constructed
as follows.  A bit of tubing about 2 centimetres diameter, 15
centimetres long, and 1.5 millimetre wall thickness, is drawn down to
a point.  The larger bulb, about 5 centimetres in diameter, is blown
at one end of this tube.  The thinner the bulb the better, provided
that it does not collapse under atmospheric pressure.  A very good
idea of a proper thickness may be obtained from the statement that
about 4 centimetres length of the tubing should be blown out to form
the bulb.  This would give a bulb of about the thickness of an
ordinary fractionating bulb.  Before going any further it is as well
to test the bulb by tapping on the table and by exhausting it by means
of an ordinary water-velocity pump.

The side tube is next prepared out of narrower tubing, and is provided
with a smaller bulb, a blowing-out tube, and a terminal, to be made as
will be described.  This side tube is next fused on to the main tube,
special care being taken about the annealing, and the cathode terminal
is then sealed into the main tube.  After using clean glass it is in
general only necessary to rinse the tube out with clean alcohol, after
which it may be dried and exhausted.

The success of the operation will depend primarily on the attention
given to the preparation and sealing-in of the electrode facing the
large bulb.

Preparation of Terminals.  Some platinum wire of about No.  26
B.W.G--the exact size is unimportant--must be provided, also some
sheet aluminium about 1 millimetre thick, some white enamel cement
glass, and a "cane" of flint-glass tube of a few millimetres bore.

The electrodes are prepared by cutting discs of aluminium of from 1 to
1.5 centimetres diameter.  The discs of aluminium are bored in the
centre, so as to admit the "stems" which are made of aluminium wire
of about 1 millimetre diameter.  The stems are then riveted into the
discs.  The "stems" are about I centimetre long, and are drilled to a
depth of about 3 millimetres, the drill used being about double the
diameter of the platinum wire to be used for making the connections.
The faces of the electrodes--i.e.  the free surfaces of the aluminium
discs--are then hammered flat and brought to a burnished surface by
being placed on a bit of highly polished steel and struck by a "set"
provided with a hole to allow of the "stem" escaping damage.  The
operation will be obvious after a reference to Figs.  39 and 40;  it
is referred to again on page 96.

The platinum wires may be most conveniently attached by melting one
end of the piece of platinum wire in the oxygas blow-pipe till it
forms a bead just large enough to pass into the hole drilled up the
stem of the electrode.  The junction between the stein and the
platinum wire is then made permanent by squeezing the aluminium down
upon the platinum wire with the help of a pair of pliers.  It is also
possible to fuse the aluminium round the platinum, but as I have had
several breakages of such joints, I prefer the mechanical connection
described.

Fig.  39. Sets for striking aluminium electrodes

Fig.  40.

i. Aluminium electrode.

ii. Aluminium electrode connected to platinum wire.

iii. Aluminium electrode connected to platinum wire and protected by
glass.

iv. Detail of fastening platinum wire.

The stem and platinum wire may now be protected by covering them with
a little flint glass.  For this purpose the flint-glass tube is pulled
down till it will just slip over the stem and wire, and is cut off so
as to leave about half a centimetre of platinum wire projecting.  The
flint-glass tube is then fused down upon the platinum wire, care being
taken to avoid the presence of air bubbles.  At the close of the
operation a single drop of white enamel glass is fused round the
platinum wire at a high temperature, so as to make a good joint with
the protecting flint-glass tube.

The negative electrode being nearly as large as the main tube, it must
be introduced before the latter is drawn down for sealing.  After
drawing down the main tube in the usual manner, taking care not to
make it less than a millimetre in wall-thickness, it is cut off so as
to leave a hole not quite big enough for the enamel drop to pass
through.  By heating and opening, the aperture is got just large
enough to allow the enamel drop to pass into it, and when this is the
case the joint is sealed, pulled, and blown out until the electrode
occupies the right position--viz.  in the centre of the tube and with
its face normal to the axis of the tube.

The glass walls near the negative electrode must not be less than a
millimetre thick, and may be rather more with advantage, the glass
must be even, and the joint between the flint glass and the soda
glass, or between the wire and the soda glass, must be wholly through
the enamel.  The "seal" must be well annealed.  It will be found that
the sealing-in process is much easier when the stem of the electrode
is short and when the glass coating is not too heavy.  Half a
millimetre of glass thickness round the stein is quite sufficient.

The diagram, of the tube shows that the main tube has been expanded
round the edges of the cathode.  This is to reduce the heating
consequent on the projection of cathode rays from the edges of the
disc against the glass tube.

The anode is inserted into its bulb in a quite similar manner.  If
desired it may be made considerably smaller, and does not need the
careful adjustment requisite in sealing-in the cathode, nor does the
glass near the entry wire require to be so thick.

More intense effects are often got by making the cathode slightly
concave, but in this case the risk of melting the thin glass is
considerably increased.  No doubt, Bohemian glass might be used
throughout instead of soft soda glass, and this would not melt so
easily; the difficulties of manipulating the glass are, however, more
pronounced.

It will be shown directly that the best Roentgen effects are got with
a high vacuum, and it is for this reason that the glass near the
cathode seal requires to be strong.  The potential right up to the
cathode is strongly positive inside the tube, and this causes the
glass to be exposed to a strong electric stress in the neighbourhood
of the seal.

Although the glass-blowing involved in the making of a so-called focus
tube is rather more difficult than in the case just described, there
is no reason why such a difficulty should not be overcome;  I will
therefore explain how a focus tube may be made.

Fig. 41.

A bulb about 3 inches in diameter is blown from a bit of tube of a
little more than 1 inch diameter.  Unless the walls of the tube are
about one-eighth of an inch in thickness, this will involve a
preliminary thickening up of the glass.  This is not difficult if care
be taken to avoid making the glass too hot.  The larger gas jet
described in connection with the soda-glass-blowing table must be
employed.  In blowing a bulb of this size it must not be forgotten
that draughts exercise a very injurious influence by causing the glass
to cool unequally;  this leads to bulbs of irregular shape.

In the method of construction shown in Fig.  41, the anode is put in
first.  This anode simply consists of a square bit of platinum or
platinum-iridium foil, measuring about 0.75 inch by 1 inch, and
riveted on to a bent aluminium wire stem.

As soon as the anode is fused in, and while the glass is still hot,
the side tube is put on.  The whole of the anode end is then carefully
annealed.  When the annealing is finished the side tube is bent as
shown to serve as a handle when the time comes to mount the cathode.
Before placing the cathode in position, and while the main tube is
still wide open, the anode is adjusted by means of a tool thrust in
through this open end.  This is necessary in view of the fact that the
platinum foil is occasionally bent during the operation of forcing the
anode into the bulb.

The cathode is a portion of a spherical surface of polished aluminium,
a mode of preparing which will be given directly.  The cathode having
been placed inside the bulb, the wide glass tube is carefully drawn
down and cut off at such a point that when the cathode is in position
its centre of curvature will lie slightly in front of the anode plate.
For instance, if the radius of curvature of the cathode be 1.5 inches,
the centre of curvature may lie something like an eighth of an inch or
less in front of the anode.

The cathode as shown in Fig.  41 is rather smaller than is
advantageous.  To make it much larger than is shown, however, the
opening into the bulb would require to be considerably widened, and
though this is not really a difficult operation, still it requires
more practice than my readers are likely to have had.  The difficulty
is not so much in widening out the entry as in closing it down again
neatly.

Now as to making the anode.  A disc of aluminium is cut from a sheet
which must not be too thick--one twenty-fifth of an inch is quite
thick enough.  This disc is bored at the centre to allow of the stem
being riveted in position.  The disc is then annealed in the Bunsen
flame and the stem riveted on.

The curvature is best got by striking between steel dies (see Figs.
39 and 40).  Two bits of tool steel are softened and turned on the
lathe, one convex and the other concave.  The concave die has a small
hole drilled up the centre to admit the stem. The desired radius of
curvature is easily attained by cutting out templates from sheet zinc
and using them to gauge the turning.  The two dies are slightly ground
together on the lathe with emery and oil and are then polished, or
rather the convex die is polished--the other one does not matter.
The polishing is most easily done by using graded emery and oil and
polishing with a rag.  The method of grading emery will be described
in the chapter on glass-grinding.

The aluminium disc is now struck between the dies by means of a
hammer.  If the radius of curvature is anything more than one inch and
the disc not more than one inch in diameter the cathode can be struck
at once from the flat as described.  For very deep curves no doubt it
will be better to make an intermediate pair of dies and to re-anneal
the aluminium after the first striking.

When the tube is successfully prepared so far as the glassblowing goes
it may be rinsed with strong pure alcohol both inside and out, and
dried.  The straight part of the side tube is then constricted ready
for fusing off and the whole affair is placed on the vacuum pump.

In spite of the great improvements made during recent years in the
construction of so-called Geissler vacuum pumps--i.e.  pumps in which
a Torricellian vacuum is continually reproduced--I am of opinion that
Sprengel pumps are, on the whole, more convenient for exhausting
Crooke's tubes.  A full discussion of the subject of vacuum pumps will
be found in a work by Mr. G.  S.  Ram (The Incandescent Lamp and its
Manufacture), published by the Electrician Publishing Company, and it
is not my intention to deal with the matter here; the simplest kind of
Sprengel pump will be found quite adequate for our purpose, provided
that it is well made.

Fig.  42 is intended to represent a modification of a pump based on
the model manufactured by Hicks of Hatton Garden, and arranged to suit
the amateur glass-blower.  The only point of importance is the
construction of the head of the fall tube, of which a separate and
enlarged diagram is given.  The fall tubes may have an internal
diameter up to 2 mm. (two millimetres) and an effective length of 120
cm.

Free use is made of rubber tube connections in the part of the pump
exposed to the passage of mercury.  The rubber employed should be
black and of the highest quality, having the walls strengthened by a
layer of canvas.  If such tube cannot be easily obtained, a very good
substitute may be made by placing a bit of ordinary black tube inside
another and rather larger bit and binding the outer tube with tape or
ribbon.  In any case the tubing which comes in contact with the
mercury should be boiled in strong caustic potash or soda solution for
at least ten minutes to get rid of free sulphur, which fouls the
mercury directly it comes in contact with it.  The tubing is well
washed, rinsed with alcohol, and carefully dried.

Fig.  42.

The diagram represents what is practically a system of three Sprengel
pumps, though they are all fed from the same mercury reservoir and run
down into the same mercury receiver.  It is much easier to make three
pumps, each with separate pinch cocks to regulate the mercury supply,
than it is to make three jets, each delivering exactly the proper
stream of mercury to three fall tubes.

Sprengel pumps only work at their highest efficiency when the mercury
supply is carefully regulated to suit the peculiarities of each fall
tube, and this is quite easily done in the model figured.  Since on
starting the pump the rubber connections have to stand a considerable
