consideration, as to let You see, That I am not Unmindful of the
things you would have me remember.

To talk then again according to such principles as I then made use of,
I shall represent, that if it be granted rational to suppose, as I
then did, that the Elements consisted at first of certain small and
primary Coalitions of the minute Particles of matter into Corpuscles
very numerous, and very like each other, It will not be absurd to
conceive, that such primary Clusters may be of far more sorts then
three or five; and consequently, that we need not suppose, that in
each of the compound Bodies we are treating of there should be found
just three sorts of such primitive Coalitions, as we are speaking of.

And if according to this Notion we allow a considerable number of
differing Elements, I may add, that it seems very possible, that to
the constitution of one sort of mixt Bodies two kinds of Elementary
ones may suffice (as I lately Exemplify'd to you, in that most durable
Concrete, Glass,) another sort of Mixts may be compos'd of three
Elements, another of four, another of five, and another perhaps of
many more. So that according to this Notion, there can be no
determinate number assign'd, as that of the Elements; of all sorts of
compound Bodies whatsoever, it being very probable that some Concretes
consist of fewer, some of more Elements. Nay, it does not seem
Impossible, according to these Principles, but that there may be two
sorts of Mixts, whereof the one may not have any of all the same
Elements as the other consists of; as we oftentimes see two words,
whereof the one has not any one of the Letters to be met with in the
other; or as we often meet with diverse Electuaries, in which no
Ingredient (except Sugar) is common to any two of them. I will not
here debate whether there may not be a multitude of these Corpuscles,
which by reason of their being primary and simple, might be called
Elementary, if several sorts of them should convene to compose any
Body, which are as yet free, and neither as yet contex'd and entangl'd
with primary Corpuscles of other kinds, but remains liable to be
subdu'd and fashion'd by Seminal Principles, or the like powerful and
Transmuting Agent, by whom they may be so connected among themselves,
or with the parts of one of the bodies, as to make the compound
Bodies, whose Ingredients they are, resoluble into more, or other
Elements then those that Chymists have hitherto taken notice of.

To all which I may add, that since it appears, by what I observ'd to
you of the permanency of Gold and Silver, that even Corpuscles that
are not of an Elementary but compounded Nature, may be of so durable a
Texture, as to remain indissoluble in the ordinary _Analysis_ that
Chymists make of Bodies by the Fire; 'Tis not impossible but that,
though there were but three Elements, yet there may be a greater
number of Bodies, which the wonted wayes of Anatomy will not discover
to be no Elementary Bodies.

But, sayes _Carneades_, having thus far, in compliance to you, talk't
conjecturally of the number of the Elements, 'tis now time to
consider, not of how many Elements it is possible that Nature may
compound mix'd Bodies, but (at least as farr as the ordinary
Experiments of Chymists will informe us) of how many she doth make
them up.

I say then, that it does not by these sufficiently appear to me, that
there is any one determinate number of Elements to be uniformly met
with in all the several sorts of Bodies allow'd to be perfectly mixt.

And for the more distinct proof of this Proposition, I shall in the
first place Represent, That there are divers Bodies, which I could
never see by fire divided into so many as three Elementary substances.
I would fain (as I said lately to _Philoponus_) see that fixt and
noble Metal we call Gold separated into Salt, Sulphur and Mercury: and
if any man will submit to a competent forfeiture in case of failing, I
shall willingly in case of prosperous successe pay both for the
Materials and the charges of such an Experiment. 'Tis not, that after
what I have try'd my self I dare peremptorily deny, that there may out
of Gold be extracted a certain substance, which I cannot hinder
Chymists from calling its Tincture or Sulphur; and which leaves the
remaining Body depriv'd of its wonted colour. Nor am I sure, that
there cannot be drawn out of the same Metal a real quick and running
Mercury. But for the Salt of Gold, I never could either see it, or be
satisfied that there was ever such a thing separated, _in rerum
natura_, by the relation of any credible eye witnesse. And for the
several Processes that Promise that effect, the materials that must be
wrought upon are somewhat too pretious and costly to be wasted upon so
groundlesse adventures, of which not only the successe is doubtful,
but the very possibility is not yet demonstrated. Yet that which most
deterres me from such tryalls, is not their chargeablenesse, but their
unsatisfactorinesse, though they should succeed. For the Extraction of
this golden Salt being in Chymists Processes prescribed to be effected
by corrosive _Menstruums_, or the Intervention of other Saline Bodies,
it will remain doubtful to a wary person, whether the Emergent Salt be
that of the Gold it self; or of the Saline Bodies or Spirits employ'd
to prepare it; For that such disguises of Metals do often impose upon
Artists, I am sure _Eleutherius_ is not so much a stranger to
Chymistry as to ignore. I would likewise willingly see the three
principles separated from the pure sort of Virgin-Sand, from
_Osteocolla_, from refined Silver, from Quicksilver, freed from its
adventitious Sulphur, from _Venetian_ Talk [Transcriber's Note:
Talck], which by long detention in an extreme _Reverberium_, I could
but divide into smaller Particles, (not the constituent principles,)
Nay, which, when I caused it to be kept, I know not how long, in a
Glasse-house fire, came out in the Figure it's Lumps had when put in,
though alter'd to an almost _Amethystine_ colour; and from divers
other Bodies, which it were now unnecessary to enumerate. For though I
dare not absolutely affirme it to be impossible to Analyze these
Bodies into their _Tria Prima_; yet because, neither my own
Experiments, nor any competent Testimony hath hitherto either taught
me how such an _Analysis_ may be made, or satisfy'd me, that it hath
been so, I must take the Liberty to refrain from believing it, till
the Chymists prove it, or give us intelligible and practicable
Processes to performe what they pretend. For whilst they affect that
_AEnigmatical_ obscurity with which they are wont to puzzle the Readers
of their divulg'd Processes concerning the Analyticall Preparation of
Gold or Mercury, they leave wary persons much unsatisfyed whether or
no the differing Substances, they promise to produce, be truly the
Hypostatical Principles, or only some intermixtures of the divided
Bodies with those employ'd to work upon them, as is Evident in the
seeming Crystalls of Silver, and those of Mercury; which though by
some inconsiderately supposed to be the Salts of those Metalls, are
plainly but mixtures of the Metalline Bodies, with the Saline parts of
_Aqua fortis_ or other corrosive Liquors; as is evident by their being
reducible into Silver or Quicksilver, as they were before.

I cannot but Confesse (saith _Eleutherius_) that though Chymists may
upon probable grounds affirm themselves Able to obtain their _Tria
Prima_, from Animals and Vegetables, yet I have often wondred that
they should so confidently pretend also to resolve all Metalline and
other Mineral bodies into Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. For 'tis a
saying almost Proverbial, among those Chymists themselves that are
accounted Philosophers; and our famous Countryman _Roger Bacon_ has
particularly adopted it; that _Facilius est aurum facere quam
destruere_. And I fear, with You, that Gold is not the only Mineral
from which Chymists are wont fruitlessly to attempt the separating of
their three Principles. I know indeed (continues _Eleutherius_) that
the Learned _Sennertus_, even in that book where he takes not upon him
to play the Advocate for the Chymists, but the Umpier betwixt them and
the Peripateticks, expresses himself roundly, thus;[11] _Salem omnibus
inesse (mixtis scilicet) & ex iis fieri posse omnibus in
resolutionibus Chymicis versatis notissimum est._ And in the next
Page, _Quod de sale dixi_, saies he, _Idem de Sulphure dici potest_:
but by his favour I must see very good proofs, before I believe such
general Assertions, how boldly soever made; and he that would convince
me of their truth, must first teach me some true and practicable way
of separating Salt and Sulphur from Gold, Silver, and those many
different sort of Stones, that a violent Fire does not bring to Lime,
but to Fusion; and not only I, for my own part, never saw any of those
newly nam'd Bodies so resolved; but _Helmont_, who was much better
vers'd in the Chymical Anatomizing of Bodies then either _Sennertus_
or _I_, has somewhere this resolute passage;[12] _Scio_ (saies he) _ex
arena, silicibus & saxis, non Calcariis, nunquam Sulphur aut
Mercurium trahi posse_; Nay _Quercetanus_ himself, though the grand
stickler for the _Tria Prima_, has this Confession of the
Irresolubleness of Diamonds;[13] _Adamas_ (saith he) _omnium factus
Lapidum solidissimus ac durissimus ex arctissima videlicet trium
principiorum unione ac Cohaerentia, quae nulla arte separationis in
solutionem principiorum suorum spiritualium disjungi potest._ And
indeed, pursues _Eleutherius_, I was not only glad, but somewhat
surprized to find you inclined to Admit that there may be a Sulphur
and a running Mercury drawn from Gold; for unlesse you do (as your
expression seem'd to intimate) take the word Sulphur in a very loose
sence, I must doubt whether our Chymists can separate a Sulphur from
Gold: For when I saw you make the experiment that I suppose invited
you to speak as you did, I did not judge the golden Tincture to be the
true principle of Sulphur extracted from the body, but an aggregate of
some such highly colour'd parts of the Gold, as a Chymist would have
called a _Sulphur incombustible_, which in plain English seems to be
little better than to call it a Sulphur and no Sulphur. And as for
Metalline Mercuries, I had not _wondred_ at it, though you had
expressed much more severity in speaking of them: For I remember that
having once met an old and famous Artist, who had long been (and still
is) Chymist to a great Monarch, the repute he had of a very honest man
invited me to desire him to tell me ingenuously whether or no, among
his many labours, he had ever really extracted a true and running
Mercury out of Metalls; to which question he freely replyed, that he
had never separated a true Mercury from any Metal; nor had ever seen
it really done by any man else. And though Gold is, of all Metalls,
That, whose Mercury Chymists have most endeavoured to extract, and
which they do the most brag they have extracted; yet the Experienced
_Angelus Sala_, in his _Spagyrical_ account of the seven _Terrestrial_
Planets (that is the seven metalls) affords us this memorable
Testimony, to, our present purpose; _Quanquam_ (saies he) _&c.
experientia tamen (quam stultorum Magistrum [Errata: Magistram]
vocamus) certe Comprobavit, Mercurium auri adeo fixum, maturum, &
arcte cum reliquis ejusdem corporis substantiis conjungi, ut nullo
modo retrogredi possit._ To which he sub-joynes, that he himself had
seen much Labour spent upon that Design, but could never see any such
Mercury produc'd thereby. And I easily beleeve what he annexes; _that
he had often seen Detected many tricks and Impostures of Cheating_
Alchymists. For, the most part of those that are fond of such
_Charlatans_, being unskilfull or Credulous, or both, 'tis very easie
for such as have some Skill, much craft, more boldness, and no
Conscience, to impose upon them; and therefore, though many profess'd
_Alchymists_, and divers Persons of Quality have told me that they
have made or seen the Mercury of Gold, or of this or that other Metal;
yet I have been still apt to fear that either these persons have had a
Design to deceive others; or have not had Skill and circumspection
enough to keep themselves from being deceived.

[Footnote 11: Sennert. lib. de cons. & dissens. pag. 147.]

[Footnote 12: Helmon. pag. 409.]

[Footnote 13: Quercet. apud Billich. in Thessalo redivivo. pag. 99.]

You recall to my mind (sayes _Carneades_) a certain Experiment I once
devis'd, innocently to deceive some persons, and let them and others
see how little is to be built upon the affirmation of those that are
either unskillfull or unwary, when they tell us they have seen
_Alchymists_ make the Mercury of this or that Metal; and to make this
the more evident, I made my Experiment much more Slight, Short and
Simple, than the Chymists usuall processes to Extract Metalline
Mercuries; which Operations being commonly more Elaborate and
Intricate, and requiring a much more longer time, give the
_Alchymists_ a greater opportunity to Cozen, and Consequently are more
Obnoxious to the Spectators suspicion. And that wherein I endeavour'd
to make my Experiment look the more like a True _Analysis_, was, that
I not only pretended as well as others to extract a Mercury from the
Metal I wrought upon, but likewise to separate a large proportion of
manifest and inflamable Sulphur. I take then, of the filings of
Copper, about a Drachme or two, of common sublimate, powder'd, the
like Weight, and _Sal Armoniack_ near about as much as of Sublimate;
these three being well mingl'd together I put into a small Vial with a
long neck, or, which I find better, into a Glass Urinall, which
(having first stopped it with Cotton) to avoid the Noxious Fumes, I
approach by degrees to a competent Fire of well kindled coals, or
(which looks better, but more endangers the Glass) to the Flame of a
candle; and after a while the bottom of the Glass being held Just upon
the Kindled Coals, or in the flame, You may in about a quarter of an
Hour, or perchance in halfe that time, perceive in the Bottom of the
Glass some running Mercury; and if then You take away the Glass and
break it, You shall find a Parcel of Quicksilver, Perhaps altogether,
and perhaps part of it in the pores of the Solid Mass; You shall find
too, that the remaining Lump being held to the Flame of the Candle
will readily burn with a greenish Flame, and after a little while
(perchance presently) will in the Air Acquire a Greenish Blew, which
being the Colour that is ascrib'd to Copper, when its Body is
unlocked, 'Tis easie to perswade Men that this is the True Sulphur of
_Venus_, especially since not only the Salts may be Suppos'd partly to
be Flown away, and partly to be Sublim'd to the upper part of the
Glass, whose inside (will Commonly appear Whitened by them) but the
Metal seems to be quite Destroy'd, the Copper no longer appearing in a
Metalline Forme, but almost in that of a Resinous Lump; whereas indeed
the Case is only this, That the Saline parts of the Sublimate,
together with the _Sal Armoniack_, being excited and actuated by the
Vehement heat, fall upon the Copper, (which is a Metal they can more
easily corrode, than silver) whereby the small parts of the Mercury
being freed from the Salts that kept them asunder, and being by the
heat tumbled up and down after many Occursions, they Convene into a
Conspicuous Mass of Liquor; and as for the Salts, some of the more
Volatile of them Subliming to the upper part of the Glass, the others
Corrode the Copper, and uniting themselves with it do strangely alter
and Disguise its Metallick Form, and compose with it a new kind of
Concrete inflamable like Sulphur; concerning which I shall not now say
any thing, since I can Referr You to the Diligent Observations which I
remember Mr. _Boyle_ has made concerning this Odde kind of
Verdigrease. But Continues _Carneades_ smiling, you know I was not
cut out for a Mountebank, and therefore I will hasten to resume the
person of a Sceptick, and take up my discourse where You diverted me
from prosecuting it.

In the next place, then, I consider, that, as there are some Bodies
which yield not so many as the three Principles; so there are many
others, that in their Resolution Exhibite more principles than three;
and that therefore the Ternary Number is not that of the Universal and
Adequate Principles of Bodies. If you allow of the Discourse I ately
[Errata: lately] made You, touching the primary Associations of the
small Particles of matter, You will scarce think it improbable, that
of such Elementary Corpuscles there may be more sorts then either
three, or four, or five. And if you will grant, what will scarce be
deny'd, that Corpuscles of a compounded Nature may in all the wonted
Examples of Chymists pass for Elementary, I see not, why you should
think it impossible, that as _Aqua Fortis_, or _Aqua Regis_ will make
a Separation of colliquated Silver and Gold, though the Fire cannot;
so there may be some Agent found out so subtile and so powerfull, at
least in respect of those particular compounded Corpuscles, as to be
able to resolve them into those more simple ones, whereof they
consist, and consequently encrease the number of the Distinct
Substances, whereinto the mixt Body has been hitherto thought
resoluble. And if that be true, which I recited to you a while ago out
of _Helmont_ concerning the Operations of the _Alkahest_, which
divides Bodies into other Distinct Substances, both as to number and
Nature, then the Fire does; it will not a little countenance my
Conjecture. But confining our selves to such wayes of Analyzing mix'd
Bodies, as are already not unknown to Chymists, it may without
Absurdity be Question'd, whether besides those grosser Elements of
Bodies, which they call Salt Sulphur and Mercury, there may not be
Ingredients of a more Subtile Nature, which being extreamly little,
and not being in themselves Visible, may escape unheeded at the
Junctures of the Destillatory Vessels, though never so carefully
Luted. For let me observe to you one thing, which though not taken
notice of by Chymists, may be a notion of good Use in divers Cases to
a Naturalist, that we may well suspect, that there may be severall
Sorts of Bodies, which are not Immediate Objects of any one of our
senses; since we See, that not only those little Corpuscles that issue
out of the Loadstone, and perform the Wonders for which it is justly
admired; But the _Effluviums_ of Amber, Jet, and other Electricall
Concretes, though by their effects upon the particular Bodies dispos'd
to receive their Action, they seem to fall under the Cognizance of our
Sight, yet do they not as Electrical immediately Affect any of our
senses, as do the bodies, whether minute or greater, that we See,
Feel, Taste, &c. But, continues _Carneades_, because you may expect I
should, as the Chymists do, consider only the sensible Ingredients of
Mixt Bodies, let us now see, what Experience will, even as to these,
suggest to us.

It seems then questionable enough, whether from Grapes variously
order'd there may not be drawn more distinct Substances by the help of
the Fire, then from most other mixt Bodies. For the Grapes themselves
being dryed into Raysins and distill'd, will (besides _Alcali_,
Phlegm, and Earth) yield a considerable quantity of an Empyreumatical
Oyle, and a Spirit of a very different nature from that of Wine. Also
the unfermented Juice of Grapes affords other distil'd Liquors then
Wine doth. The Juice of Grapes after fermentation will yield a
_Spiritus Ardens_; which if competently rectifyed will all burn away
without leaving any thing remaining. The same fermented Juice
degenerating into Vinager, yields an acid and corroding Spirit. The
same Juice turn'd [Errata: tunned] up, armes it self with Tartar; out
of which may be separated, as out of other Bodies, Phlegme, Spirit,
Oyle, Salt and Earth: not to mention what Substances may be drawn from
the Vine it self, probably differing from those which are separated
from Tartar, which is a body by it self, that has few resemblers in
the World. And I will further consider that what force soever you will
allow this instance, to evince that there are some Bodies that yield
more Elements then others, it can scarce be deny'd but that the Major
part of bodies that are divisible into Elements, yield more then
three. For, besides those which the Chymists are pleased to name
Hypostatical, most bodies contain two others, Phlegme and Earth, which
concurring as well as the rest to the constitution of Mixts, and being
as generally, if not more, found in their _Analysis_, I see no
sufficient cause why they should be excluded from the number of
Elements. Nor will it suffice to object, as the _Paracelsians_ are
wont to do, that the _Tria prima_ are the most useful Elements, and
the Earth and Water but worthlesse and unactive; for Elements being
call'd so in relation to the constituting of mixt Bodies, it should be
upon the account of its Ingrediency, not of its use, that any thing
should be affirmed or denyed to be an Element: and as for the
pretended uselessness of Earth and Water, it would be consider'd that
usefulnesse, or the want of it, denotes only a Respect or Relation to
us; and therefore the presence, or absence of it, alters not the
Intrinsick nature of the thing. The hurtful Teeth of Vipers are for
ought I know useless to us, and yet are not to be deny'd to be parts
of their Bodies; and it were hard to shew of what greater Use to Us,
then Phlegme and Earth, are those Undiscern'd Stars, which our New
_Telescopes_ discover to Us, in many Blanched places of the Sky; and
yet we cannot but acknowledge them Constituent and Considerably great
parts of the Universe. Besides that whether or no the Phlegme and
Earth be immediately Useful, but necessary to constitute the Body
whence they are separated; and consequently, if the mixt Body be not
Useless to us, those constituent parts, without which it could not
have been That mixt Body, may be said not to be Unuseful to Us: and
though the Earth and Water be not so conspicuously Operative (after
separation) as the other three more active Principles, yet in this
case it will not be amiss to remember the lucky Fable of _Menemius
Aggrippa_, of the dangerous Sedition of the Hands and Legs, and other
more busie parts of the Body, against the seemingly unactive Stomack.
And to this case also we may not unfitly apply that Reasoning of an
Apostle, to another purpose; _If the Ear shall say, because I Am not
the Eye, I am not of the Body; Is it therefore not of the Body? If the
whole Body were Eye, where were the Hearing? If the whole were for
hearing, where the smelling?_ In a word, since Earth and water appear,
as clearly and as generally as the other Principles upon the
resolution of Bodies, to be the Ingredients whereof they are made up;
and since they are useful, if not immediately to us, or rather to
Physitians, to the Bodies they constitute, and so though in somewhat a
remoter way, are serviceable to us; to exclude them out of the number
of Elements, is not to imitate Nature.

[Transcriber's Note: See the printer's note (beginning "The Authors
constant Absence") at the end of the book for material that the
printer inadvertently omitted from this page.]

But, pursues _Carneades_, though I think it Evident, that Earth and
Phlegme are to be reckon'd among the Elements of most Animal and
Vegetable Bodies, yet 'tis not upon that Account alone, that I think
divers Bodies resoluble into more Substances then three. For there are
two Experiments, that I have sometimes made to shew, that at least
some Mixts are divisible into more Distinct Substances then five. The
one of these Experiments, though 'twill be more seasonable for me to
mention it fully anon, yet in the mean time, I shall tell you thus
much of it, That out of two Distill'd Liquors, which pass for
Elements of the Bodies whence they are drawn, I can without Addition
make a true Yellow and Inflamable Sulphur, notwithstanding that the
two Liquors remain afterwards Distinct. Of the other Experiment, which
perhaps will not be altogether unworthy your Notice, I must now give
you this particular Account. I had long observ'd, that by the
Destillation of divers Woods, both in Ordinary, and some unusuall
sorts of Vessels, the Copious Spirit that came over, had besides a
strong tast, to be met with in the Empyreumaticall Spirits of many
other Bodies, an Acidity almost like that of Vinager: Wherefore I
suspected, that though the sowrish Liquor Distill'd, for Instance,
from Box-Wood, be lookt upon by Chymists as barely the Spirit of it,
and therefore as one single Element or Principle; yet it does really
consist of two Differing Substances, and may be divisible into them;
and consequently, that such Woods and other Mixts as abound with such
a Vinager, may be said to consist of one Element or Principle, more
then the Chymists as yet are Aware of; Wherefore bethinking my self,
how the separation of these two Spirits might be made, I Quickly
found, that there were several wayes of Compassing it. But that of
them which I shall at present mention, was this, Having Destill'd a
Quantity of Box-Wood _per se_, and slowly rectify'd the sowrish
Spirit, the better to free it both from Oyle and Phlegme, I cast into
this Rectify'd Liquor a convenient Quantity of Powder'd Coral,
expecting that the Acid part of the Liquor would Corrode the Coral,
and being associated with it would be so retain'd by it, that the
other part of the Liquor, which was not of an acid Nature, nor fit to
fasten upon the Corals, would be permitted to ascend alone. Nor was I
deceiv'd in my Expectation; For having gently abstracted the Liquor
from the Coralls, there came over a Spirit of a Strong smell, and of a
tast very piercing, but without any sourness; and which was in diverse
qualities manifestly different, not only from a Spirit of Vinager, but
from some Spirit of the same Wood, that I purposely kept by me without
depriving it of its acid Ingredient. And to satisfy you, that these
two Substances were of a very differing Nature, I might informe you
of several Tryals that I made, but must not name some of them, because
I cannot do so without making some unseasonable discoveries. Yet this
I shall tell you at present, that the sowre Spirit of _Box_, not only
would, as I just now related, dissolve Corals, which the other would
not fasten on, but being pour'd upon Salt of Tartar would immediately
boile and hiss, whereas the other would lye quietly upon it. The acid
Spirit pour'd upon _Minium_ made a Sugar of Lead, which I did not find
the other to do; some drops of this penetrant spirit being mingl'd
with some drops of the blew Syrup of Violets seem'd rather to dilute
then otherwise alter the colour; whereas the Acid Spirit turn'd the
syrup of a reddish colour, and would probably have made it of as pure
a red as Acid Salts are wont to do, had not its operation been
hindered by the mixture of the other Spirit. A few drops of the
compound Spirit being Shaken into a pretty quantity of the infusion of
_Lignum Nephriticum_, presently destroyed all the blewish colour,
whereas the other Spirit would not take it away. To all which it
might be added, that having for tryals sake pour'd fair water upon the
Corals that remained in the bottom of the glass wherein I had
rectifyed the double spirit (if I may so call it) that was first drawn
from the Box, I found according to my expectation that the Acid Spirit
