     can form a real team, one that will get things done because each
     man knows he can rely on the others, not only as a team, but as
     individuals. But to mechanize the anchor-setting phase would
     destroy all that completely.

     I don't want to see that destroyed, because I have felt what it is
     to be a part of the Belt team, even though only a small and
     unreliable part. Actually, I know I was not and could never be a
     real member of that team, but I was and am proud to have scrimmaged
     with the team, and I'm glad to be able to sit on the side-lines and
     cheer even if I can't carry the ball. (It just occurred to me that
     those metaphors might be a little cloudy to you, since you don't
     have football in the Belt, but I think you see what I mean.) I
     imagine that most of the men who have no "space experience" feel
     the same way. They know they'd never make a go of it out in space,
     but they're happy to be water boys.

     I wish I could stay in the Belt. I'm enough of a spaceman to
     appreciate what it really is to be a member of a space society. But
     I also know that I'd never last. I'm not fitted for it, really.
     I've had a small taste of it, but I know I couldn't take a full
     dose. I've worked hard for the influence and security I have in my
     job, and I couldn't give it up. Maybe this brands me as a coward in
     your eyes, and maybe I am a coward, but that's the way I'm built. I
     hope you'll take that into account when you think of me.

     At any rate, I have done what I have done. On Earth, there are men
     who envy you and hate you, and there will be others who will try to
     destroy you, but I have done what I could to give you a chance to
     gain the strength you need to resist the encroachment of Earth's
     sickness.

     I have a feeling that Tarnhorst saw your greatness, too, although
     he'd never admit it, even to himself. Certainly something changed
     him during the last months, even though he doesn't realize it. He
     came out wanting to help--and by that, he meant help the common
     people against the "tyranny" of the Companies. He still wants to
     help the common people, but now he wants to do it _through_ the
     Companies. The change is so subtle that he doesn't think he's
     changed at all, but I can see it.

     I don't deserve any thanks for what I have done. All I have done is
     repay you in the only way I knew how for what you have done for me.
     I may never see you again, captain, but I will always remember you.
     Please convey my warmest regards to Captain Brand and to Mr.
     Alhamid.

     Sincerely,

     Peter Danley

       *       *       *       *       *

Georges Alhamid handed the letter back to St. Simon. "There's your star
pupil," he said gently.

St. Simon nodded. "The wise fool. The guy who's got sense enough to know
that he isn't competent to do the job."

"Did you notice that he waltzed all around the real reason for the
anchor-setting program without quite hitting it?"

St. Simon smiled humorlessly. "Sure. Notice the wording of the letter.
He still thinks in terms of the Team, even when he's trying not to. He
thinks we do this just to train men to have a real good Team Spirit. He
can't see that that is only a very useful by-product."

"How could he think otherwise?" Alhamid asked. "To him, or to Tarnhorst,
the notion of deliberately tailoring a program so that it would kill off
the fools and the incompetents, setting up a program that will
deliberately destroy the men who are dangerous to society, would be
horrifying. They would accuse us of being soulless butchers who had no
respect for the dignity of the human soul."

"We're not butchering anybody," St. Simon objected. "Nobody is forced to
go through two years of anchor setting. Nobody is forced to die. We're
not running people into gas chambers or anything like that."

"No; of course not. But would you expect an Earthman like Tarnhorst to
see the difference? How could we explain to him that we have no
objection to fools other than that we object to putting them in
positions where they can harm others by their foolishness? Would you
expect him to understand that we must have a method of eliminating those
who are neither competent enough to be trusted with the lives of others
nor wise enough to see that they are not competent? How would you tell
him that the reason we send men out alone is so that if he destroys
anyone by his foolishness--after we have taught him everything we know
in the best way we know how--he will only destroy himself?"

"I wouldn't even try," St. Simon said. "There's an old saying that
neither money, education, liquor, nor women ever made a fool of a man,
they just give a born fool a chance to display his foolishness. Space
ought to be added to that list."

"Did you notice something else about that letter?" Alhamid asked. "I
mean, the very fact that he wrote a letter instead of telling you
personally?"

"Sure. He didn't trust me. He was afraid I, or someone else, would
dispose of him if we knew he knew our secret."

"I think that's it," Alhamid agreed. "He wanted to be safely away
first."

"Killing him would have brought down the biggest investigation the Earth
Congress has launched since the crack-up of the Earth-Luna ship thirty
years ago. Does he think we are fools?"

"You can't blame him. He's been brought up that way, and three months of
training isn't going to change him."

St. Simon frowned. "Suppose he changes his mind? Suppose he tells
Tarnhorst what he thinks?"

"He won't. He's told his lie, and now he'll have to stick by it or lose
his precious security. If he couldn't trade that for freedom, he sure
isn't going to throw it away." Alhamid grinned. "But can you imagine a
guy thinking that anchor setting could be completely mechanized?"

St. Simon grinned back. "I guess I'm not a very good teacher after all.
I told him and told him and told him for three solid months that the job
required judgment, but it evidently didn't sink in. He's got the heart
of a romantic and the soul of an Earthman--a very bad combination."

"He has my sympathy," Alhamid said with feeling. "Now, about you. Your
blue ticket still has three months to run, but I can't give you a class
if you're only going to run through the first half of the course with
them, and I don't have any more Earthmen for you to give special
tutoring to. You have three choices: You can loaf with pay for three
months; you can go back to space and get double pay for three months; or
you can take a regular six-month class and get double pay for the last
three months. Which'll it be?"

St. Simon grinned widely. "I'm going to loaf until I get sick of it,
then I'll go back to space and collect double pay for what's left of the
three months. First off, I'm going to take a run over to Vesta. After
that, who knows?"

"I thought so. Most of you guys would stay out there forever if you
didn't have to come back for supplies."

St. Simon shook his head. "Nope. Not true. A man's got to come back
every so often and get his feet on the ground. If you stay out there too
long, you get to talking to yourself."

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, the spaceboat _Nancy Bell_ lifted from the surface of
Pallas and shot toward Vesta.

"Jules, old cobblestone, we have just saved civilization."

"_Jawohl, Herr Hassenpfefferesser!_ Und now ve go to find _das Maedchen,
nicht war_?"

"Herr _Professor_ Hassenpfefferesser to you, my boy."

And then, all alone in his spaceboat, Captain Jules St. Simon burst into
song:

    "Oh, I'm the cook and the captain, too,
    And the men of the _Nancy's_ brig;
    The bosun tight, and the midshipmite,
    And the crew of the captain's gig!"

And the _Nancy Bell_ sped on toward Vesta and a rendevous with Eros.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCHORITE***


******* This file should be named 23561.txt or 23561.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/5/6/23561



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
