and "the known universe" have one meaning to a science-fictioneer, and
another to a historian. Semantics, anyone?

In Chapter Ten, right at the beginning, there is a conversation between
Commander Frank and Frater Vincent, and "agent of the Assembly" (read:
_priest_). If the reader will go back over that section, keeping in mind
the fact that what they are "actually" talking about are the Catholic
Church and the Christian religion _as seen from the viewpoint of a
couple of fanatically devout Sixteenth Century Spaniards_, he will
understand the method I used in presenting the whole story.

Let me quote:

"Mentally, the commander went through the symbol-patterns that he had
learned as a child--the symbol-patterns that brought him into direct
contact with the Ultimate Power, the Power that controlled not only the
spinning of atoms and the whirling of electrons in their orbits, but the
workings of probability itself."

Obviously, he is reciting the _Pater Noster_ and the _Ave Maria_. The
rest of the sentence is self-explanatory.

So is the following:

"Once indoctrinated into the teachings of the Universal Assembly, any
man could tap that power to a greater or lesser degree, depending on his
mental control and ethical attitude. At the top level, a first-class
adept could utilize that Power for telepathy, psychokinesis, levitation,
teleportation, and other powers that the commander only vaguely
understood."

It doesn't matter whether _you_ believe in the miracles attributed to
many of the Saints; Pizarro certainly did. His faith in that Power was
as certain as the modern faith in the power of the atomic bomb.

As a matter of fact, it was very probably that hard, unyielding Faith
which made the Sixteenth Century Spaniard the almost superhuman being
that he was. Only Spain of the Sixteenth Century could have produced the
Conquistadors or such a man as St. Ignatius Loyola, whose learned,
devout, and fanatically militant Society of Jesus struck fear into the
hearts of Protestant and Catholic Princes alike for the next two
centuries.

The regular reader of Astounding may remember that I gave another
example of the technique of truthful misdirection in "The Best Policy,"
(July, 1957). An Earthman, captured by aliens, finds himself in a
position in which he is unable to tell even the smallest lie. But by
telling the absolute truth, he convinces the aliens that _homo sapiens_
is a race of super-duper supermen. He does it so well that the aliens
surrender without attacking, even before the rest of humanity is aware
of their existence.

The facts in "Despoilers of the Golden Empire" remain. They _are_ facts.
Francisco Pizarro and his men--an army of less than two
hundred--actually _did_ inflict appalling damage on the Inca armies,
even if they were outnumbered ten to one, and with astonishingly few
losses of their own. They did it with sheer guts, too; their equipment
was not too greatly superior to that of the Peruvians, and by the time
they reached the Great Inca himself, none of the Peruvians believed that
the invaders were demons or gods. But in the face of the Spaniards'
determined onslaught, they were powerless.

The assassination scene at the end is almost an exact description of
what happened. It _did_ take a dozen men in full armor to kill the
armorless Pizarro, and even then it took trickery and treachery to do
it.

Now, just to show how fair I was--to show how I scrupulously refrained
from lying--I will show what a sacrifice I made for the sake of truth.

If you'll recall, in the story, the dying Pizarro traces the Sign of the
Cross on the floor in his own blood, kisses it, and says "_Jesus!_"
before he dies. This is in strict accord with every history on the
subject I could find.

But there is a legend to the effect that his last words were somewhat
different. I searched the New York Public Library for days trying to
find one single historian who would bear out the legend; I even went so
far as to get a librarian who could read Spanish and another whose
German is somewhat better than mine to translate articles in foreign
historical journals for me. All in vain. But if I _could_ have
substantiated the legend, the final scene would have read something like
this:

    Clawing at his sword-torn throat, the fearless old soldier brought
    his hand away coated with the crimson of his own blood. Falling
    forward, he traced the Sign of the Cross on the stone floor in
    gleaming scarlet, kissed it, and then glared up at the men who
    surrounded him, his eyes hard with anger and hate.

    "I'm going to Heaven," he said, his voice harsh and whispery. "And
    _you_, you _bastards_, can go to _Hell_!"

It would have made one hell of an ending--but it had to be sacrificed in
the interests of Truth.

So I rest my case.

I will even go further than that; I defy anyone to point out a single
out-and-out lie in the whole story. G'wan--I _dare_ ya!

(SECRET ASIDE TO THE READER; J. W. C., Jr., PLEASE DO _NOT_ READ!)

Ah, but wait! There _is_ a villain in the piece!

_I_ did not lie to you, no. But you were lied to, all the same.

By whom?

By none less than that conniving arch-fiend, John W. Campbell, Jr.,
that's who!

Wasn't it he who bought the story?

And wasn't it he who, with malice aforethought, published it in a
package which was plainly labeled Science Fiction?

And, therefore, didn't you have every right to think it _was_ science
fiction?

Sure you did!

I am guilty of nothing more than weakness; my poor, frail sense of
ethics collapsed completely at the sight of the bribe he offered me to
become a party to the dark conspiracy that sprang from the depths of his
own demoniac mind. Ah, well; none of us is perfect, I suppose.

                                                         DAVID GORDON.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_ March
    1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Despoilers of the Golden Empire, by 
Gordon Randall Garrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESPOILERS OF THE GOLDEN EMPIRE ***

***** This file should be named 24091.txt or 24091.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/0/9/24091/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
