message. What was the message and how did you send it?"

"The massacre on Houston's World was the message, Tallis. I even told
the Staff, when I suggested it. I said that such an act would strike
terror into the minds of Earthmen.

"And it did, Tallis; it did. But that terror was just the goad they
needed to make them fight. They had to sit up and take notice. If the
Kerothi had gone on the way they were going, taking one planet after
another, as they planned, the Kerothi would have won. The people of
each planet would think, 'It can't happen here.' And, since they felt
that nothing could be superior to anything else, they were complacently
certain that they couldn't be beat. Of course, maybe Earth couldn't
beat you, either, but that was all right; it just proved that there was
no such thing as superiority.

"But Houston's World jarred them--badly. It had to. 'Hell does more
than Heaven can to wake the fear of God in man.' They didn't recognize
beauty, but I shoved ugliness down their throats; they didn't know love
and friendship, so I gave them hatred and fear.

"The committing of atrocities has been the mistake of aggressors
throughout Earth's history. The battle cries of countless wars have
called upon the people to remember an atrocity. Nothing else hits an
Earthman as hard as a vicious, brutal, unnecessary murder.

"So I gave them the incentive to fight, Tallis. That was my message."

Tallis was staring at him wide eyed. "You _are_ insane."

"No. It worked. In six months, they found something that would enable
them to blast the devil Kerothi from the skies. I don't know what the
society of Earth is like now--and I never will. But at least I know
that men are allowed to think again. And I know they'll survive."

He suddenly realized how much time had passed. Had it been too long?
No. There would still be Earth ships prowling the vicinity, waiting for
any sign of a Kerothi ship that had hidden in the vastness of space by
not using its engines.

"I have some things I must do, Tallis," he said, standing up slowly.
"Is there anything else you want to know?"

Tallis frowned a little, as though he were trying to think of
something, but then he closed his eyes and relaxed. "No, Sepastian.
Nothing. Do whatever it is you have to do."

"Tallis," MacMaine said. Tallis didn't open his eyes, and MacMaine was
very glad of that. "Tallis, I want you to know that, in all my life,
you were the only friend I ever had."

The bright green eyes remained closed. "That may be so. Yes, Sepastian,
I honestly think you believe that."

"I do," said MacMaine, and shot him carefully through the head.

_The End_


--_and Epilogue._

"Hold it!" The voice bellowed thunderingly from the loud-speakers of
the six Earth ships that had boxed in the derelict. "Hold it! _Don't
bomb that ship!_ I'll personally have the head of any man who damages
that ship!"

In five of the ships, the commanders simply held off the bombardment
that would have vaporized the derelict. In the sixth, Major Thornton,
the Group Commander, snapped off the microphone. His voice was shaky as
he said: "That was close! Another second, and we'd have lost that ship
forever."

Captain Verenski's Oriental features had a half-startled, half-puzzled
look. "I don't get it. You grabbed that mike control as if you'd been
bitten. I know that she's only a derelict. After that burst of
fifty-gee acceleration for fifteen minutes, there couldn't be anyone
left alive on her. But there must have been a reason for using atomic
rockets instead of their antiacceleration fields. What makes you think
she's not dangerous?"

"I didn't say she wasn't dangerous," the major snapped. "She may be.
Probably is. But we're going to capture her if we can. Look!" He
pointed at the image of the ship in the screen.

She wasn't spinning now, or looping end-over-end. After fifteen minutes
of high acceleration, her atomic rockets had cut out, and now she moved
serenely at constant velocity, looking as dead as a battered tin can.

"I don't see anything," Captain Verenski said.

"The Kerothic symbols on the side. Palatal unvoiced sibilant, rounded----"

"I don't read Kerothic, major," said the captain. "I----" Then he
blinked and said, "_Shudos!_"

"That's it. The _Shudos_ of Keroth. The flagship of the Kerothi Fleet."

The look in the major's eyes was the same look of hatred that had come
into the captain's.

"Even if its armament is still functioning, we have to take the chance,"
Major Thornton said. "Even if they're all dead, we have to try to get
The Butcher's body." He picked up the microphone again.

"Attention, Group. Listen carefully and don't get itchy trigger fingers.
That ship is the _Shudos_. The Butcher's ship. It's a ten-man ship, and
the most she could have aboard would be thirty, even if they jammed her
full to the hull. I don't know of any way that anyone could be alive on
her after fifteen minutes at fifty gees of atomic drive, but remember
that they don't have any idea of how our counteraction generators damp
out spatial distortion either. Remember what Dr. Pendric said: 'No man
is superior to any other in _all_ ways. Every man is superior to every
other in _some_ way.' We may have the counteraction generator, but they
may have something else that we don't know about. So stay alert.

"I am going to take a landing-party aboard. There's a reward out for
The Butcher, and that reward will be split proportionately among us.
It's big enough for us all to enjoy it, and we'll probably get
citations if we bring him in.

"I want ten men from each ship. I'm not asking for volunteers; I want
each ship commander to pick the ten men he thinks will be least likely
to lose their heads in an emergency. I don't want anyone to panic and
shoot when he should be thinking. I don't want anyone who had any
relatives on Houston's World. Sorry, but I can't allow vengeance yet.

"We're a thousand miles from the _Shudos_ now; close in slowly until
we're within a hundred yards. The boarding parties will don armor and
prepare to board while we're closing in. At a hundred yards, we stop
and the boarding parties will land on the hull. I'll give further
orders then.

"One more thing. I don't think her A-A generators could possibly be
functioning, judging from that dent in her hull, but we can't be sure.
If she tries to go into A-A drive, she is to be bombed--no matter who
is aboard. It is better that sixty men die than that The Butcher
escape.

"All right, let's go. Move in."

                     *      *      *      *      *

Half an hour later, Major Thornton stood on the hull of the _Shudos_,
surrounded by the sixty men of the boarding party. "Anybody see
anything through those windows?" he asked.

Several of the men had peered through the direct-vision ports, playing
spotlight beams through them.

"Nothing alive," said a sergeant, a remark which was followed by a
chorus of agreement.

"Pretty much of a mess in there," said another sergeant. "That fifty
gees mashed everything to the floor. Why'd anyone want to use
acceleration like that?"

"Let's go in and find out," said Major Thornton.

The outer door to the air lock was closed, but not locked. It swung
open easily to disclose the room between the outer and inner doors. Ten
men went in with the major, the others stayed outside with orders to
cut through the hull if anything went wrong.

"If he's still alive," the major said, "we don't want to kill him by
blowing the air. Sergeant, start the airlock cycle."

There was barely room for ten men in the air lock. It had been built
big enough for the full crew to use it at one time, but it was only
just big enough.

When the inner door opened, they went in cautiously. They spread out
and searched cautiously. The caution was unnecessary, as it turned out.
There wasn't a living thing aboard.

"Three officers shot through the head, sir," said the sergeant. "One of
'em looks like he died of a broken neck, but it's hard to tell after
that fifty gees mashed 'em. Crewmen in the engine room--five of 'em.
Mashed up, but I'd say they died of radiation, since the shielding on
one of the generators was ruptured by the blast that made that dent in
the hull."

"Nine bodies," the major said musingly. "All Kerothi. And all of them
probably dead _before_ the fifty-gee acceleration. Keep looking,
sergeant. We've got to find the tenth man."

Another twenty-minute search gave them all the information they were
ever to get.

                     *      *      *      *      *

"No Earth food aboard," said the major. "One spacesuit missing.
Handweapons missing. Two emergency survival kits and two medical kits
missing. _And_--most important of all--the courier boat is missing." He
bit at his lower lip for a moment, then went on. "Outer air lock door
left unlocked. Three Kerothi shot--_after_ the explosion that ruined
the A-A drive, and _before_ the fifty-gee acceleration." He looked at
the sergeant. "What do you think happened?"

"He got away," the tough-looking noncom said grimly. "Took the courier
boat and scooted away from here."

"Why did he set the timer on the drive, then? What was the purpose of
that fifty-gee blast?"

"To distract us, I'd say, sir. While we were chasing this thing, he
hightailed it out."

"He might have, at that," the major said musingly. "A one-man courier
_could_ have gotten away. Our new detection equipment isn't perfect
yet. But----"

At that moment, one of the troopers pushed himself down the corridor
toward them. "Look, sir! I found this in the pocket of the Carrot-skin
who was taped up in there!" He was holding a piece of paper.

The major took it, read it, then read it aloud. "Greetings, fellow
Earthmen: When you read this, I will be safe from any power you may
think you have to arrest or punish me. But don't think _you_ are safe
from _me_. There are other intelligent races in the galaxy, and I'll be
around for a long time to come. You haven't heard the last of me. With
love--Sebastian MacMaine."

The silence that followed was almost deadly.

"He _did_ get away!" snarled the sergeant at last.

"Maybe," said the major. "But it doesn't make sense." He sounded
agitated. "Look. In the first place, how do we know the courier boat
was even aboard? They've been trying frantically to get word back to
Keroth; does it make sense that they'd save this boat? And why all the
fanfare? Suppose he did have a boat? Why would he attract our attention
with that fifty-gee flare? Just so he could leave us a note?"

"What do you think happened, sir?" the sergeant asked.

"I don't think he had a boat. If he did, he'd want us to think he was
dead, not the other way around. I think he set the drive timer on this
ship, went outside with his supplies, crawled up a drive tube and
waited until that atomic rocket blast blew him into plasma. He was
probably badly wounded and didn't want us to know that we'd won. That
way, we'd never find him."

There was no belief on the faces of the men around him.

"Why'd he want to do that, sir?" asked the sergeant.

"Because as long as we don't _know_, he'll haunt us. He'll be like
Hitler or Jack the Ripper. He'll be an immortal menace instead of a
dead villain who could be forgotten."

"Maybe so, sir," said the sergeant, but there was an utter lack of
conviction in his voice. "But we'd still better comb this area and keep
our detectors hot. We'll know what he was up to when we catch him."

"But if we _don't_ find him," the major said softly, "we'll _never_
know. That's the beauty of it, sergeant. If we don't find him, then
he's won. In his own fiendish, twisted way, he's won."

"If we don't find him," said the sergeant stolidly, "I think we better
keep a sharp eye out for the next intelligent race we meet. He might
find 'em first."

"Maybe," said the major very softly, "that's just what he wanted. I
wish I knew why."


THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Highest Treason, by Randall Garrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HIGHEST TREASON ***

***** This file should be named 24302.txt or 24302.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/3/0/24302/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
