right out of the car when it had gone over the embankment.

That, of course, meant that there would be no secret machines found in
the red Cadillacs Leibowitz & Hardin were examining now. But Malone had
already decided to let that phase of things go on. First of all, it was
always possible that he was wrong, and that some such machine really
did exist. Second, even if they didn't find a machine, they might find
something else. Almost anything, he thought, might turn up.

And, third, it kept Boyd decently busy, and out of Malone's hair.

That had been an easy solution. And, Malone thought, the problem of who
had been taking the red Cadillacs looked just as easy now, if his
answers were right. And he was reasonably sure of that.

Unfortunately, he was now left with a new and unusual question:

_How do you catch a teleport?_

Malone looked up, jarred to a stop by a man built like a brown bear,
with a chunky body and an oval, slightly sloping head and face. He had
very short brown hair shot through with gray, and he gave Malone a
small, inquisitive stare and looked away without a word.

Malone mumbled: "Sorry," and looked up at the street sign. He was at
Forty-seventh Street and Park Avenue. He jerked a hand up to his face,
and managed to hook the chunky man by the suit. It fell away, exposing
the initials SM carefully worked into his shirt. Second Mistake, Malone
thought wildly, muttered: "Sorry," again and turned west, feeling fairly
grateful to the unfortunate bystander.

He had reminded Malone of one thing. If he wanted to get even a part of
his plan past the drawing-board stage, he had to make a phone call in a
hurry.

He found a phone booth in a bar called the Ad Lib, at Madison Avenue.
Sternly telling himself that he was stopping there to make a phone call,
a business phone call, and not to have a drink, he marched right past
the friendly bartender and went into the phone booth, where he made a
call to New York Police Commissioner John Henry Fernack.

Fernack's face was that of an old man, but there was no telling how old.
The early seventies was one guess, Malone imagined; the late fifties
might be another. He looked tough, as if he had spent all of his life
trying to persuade other people that he was young enough for the
handball tournament. When he saw Malone, his eyebrows lifted slightly,
but he didn't say anything.

"Commissioner," Malone said, "I called to ask you to do me a favor."

There was caution hidden in the calm and quiet voice. "Well," Fernack
said, "what is it, Malone?"

"Can you have all the robberies for a given period run through the
computer?" Malone said. "I need some dope."

"Depends on the given period," Fernack said. "I can't do it for 1774."

"What would I need data on robberies in 1774 for?" Malone said, honestly
interested.

"I never question the FBI," Fernack said soberly. "But what dates do you
want?"

"The past year, maybe the past year and a half."

"And what data?"

"I want every reported crime that hasn't been solved," Malone said,
"which also seems to have been committed by some impossible means. A
safe that was robbed without being opened, for instance--that's the kind
of thing I mean."

"Every unsolved crime?" Fernack said. "Now, hold your horses, Malone.
I'm not at all sure that--"

"Don't worry about a thing, commissioner," Malone said. "This is
confidential."

"You know how I'd feel about this if word ever got out to--"

"I said confidential, John Henry," Malone said, trying to sound friendly
and trustworthy. "After all, every place has unsolved crimes. Even the
FBI isn't absolutely perfect."

"Oh," Fernack said. "Sure. But confidential, Malone."

"You have my word," Malone said sincerely.

Fernack said: "Well--"

"How fast can you get the dope?" Malone said.

"I don't exactly know," Fernack said. "The last time anything even
remotely like this was run through--departmental survey, but you
wouldn't be interested--it took something like eight hours."

"Fine," Malone said. "Eight hours then. I'll look everything over and if
we need a second run-through it won't take too long. I'll let you know
as soon as I can about that." He grinned into the phone.

Fernack cleared his throat and asked delicately: "Mind telling me what
all this is for?"

Malone offered up a little prayer before answering, and when he did
answer it was in his softest and most friendly tones: "I'd rather not
say just now, John Henry."

"But Malone--" Fernack's voice sounded a little strained, and his jaw
set just a trifle. "If you--"

Malone knew perfectly well how Fernack reacted when he didn't get a bit
of information he wanted. And this was no time to set off any fireworks
in the commissioner's office. "Look, John Henry," he said gently, "I'll
tell you as soon as I can. Honest. But this is classified
information--it's not my fault."

Fernack said: "But--" and apparently realized that argument was not
going to do him any good. "All right, Malone," he said at last. "I'll
have it for you as soon as possible."

"Great," Malone said. "Then I'll see you later."

"Sure," Fernack said. He paused, as if he were about to open the
controversy just once more. But all he said was: "So long, Malone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone breathed a great sigh of relief and flipped the phone off. He
stepped out of the booth feeling so proud of himself that he could
barely walk. Not only had he managed to calm down Commissioner Fernack,
he had also walked right past a bar on the way to the phone. He had
performed several acts, he felt, above and beyond the call of duty, and
he told himself that he deserved a reward.

Happily, the reward was convenient to hand. He went to the bar and
beckoned the bartender over to him. "Bourbon and soda," he said. "And a
medal, if possible."

"What?" the bartender said.

"A medal," Malone said. "For conduct beyond reproach."

The bartender nodded sadly. "Maybe you just ought to go home, Mac," he
said. "Sleep it off."

New Yorkers, Malone decided as the bartender went off to get his drink,
had no sense of humor. Back in Chicago--where he'd been more or less
weaned on gin, and discovered that, unlike his father, he didn't much
care for the stuff--and even in Washington, people didn't go around
accusing you of drunkenness just because you made some harmless little
pleasantry.

Oh, well. Malone drank his drink and went out into the afternoon
sunlight.

He considered the itinerary of the Magical Miguel Fueyo. He had gone
straight home from the police station, apparently, and had then told his
mother that he was going to leave home. But he had promised to send her
money.

Of course, money was easy for Mike to get. With a shudder, Malone
thought he was beginning to realize just _how_ easy. Houdini had once
boasted that no bank vault could hold him. In Mike Fueyo's case, that
was just doubly true. The vault could neither hold him out or keep him
in.

But he was going to leave home.

Malone said: "Hm-m-m," to himself, cleared his throat and tried it
again. By now he was at the corner of the block, where he nearly
collided with a workman who was busily stowing away a gigantic ladder, a
pot of paint and a brush. Malone looked up at the street sign, where the
words: "Avenue of the Americas" had been painted out, and "Sixth Avenue"
hand-lettered in.

"They finally gave in," the painter told him. "But do you think they'll
buy new signs? Nah. Cheap. That's all they are. Cheap as pretzels." He
gave Malone a friendly push with one end of the ladder and disappeared
into the crowd.

Malone didn't have the faintest idea of what he was talking about. And
how cheap could a pretzel be, anyway? Malone didn't remember ever having
seen an especially tight-fisted one.

New York, he decided for the fifteenth time, was a strange place.

He walked downtown for a block, still thinking about Mike Fueyo, and
absently turned west again. Between Sixth and Seventh, he had another
attack of brilliance and began looking for another phone booth.

He found one in a Mexican bar named the Xochitl, across the street from
the Church of Saint Mary the Virgin. It was just a coincidence that he
had landed in another bar, he told himself hopefully, but he didn't
quite believe it. To prove it to himself, he headed straight for the
phone booths again and put in his call, ignoring the blandishments of
several rows of sparkling bottles which he passed on the way.

He dialed the number for Lieutenant Lynch's precinct, and then found
himself connected with a new desk sergeant.

"I'm Malone," he said. "I want to talk to Lynch."

"Glad to know you, Malone," the desk sergeant said pleasantly. "Only
_Lieutenant_ Lynch doesn't want to subscribe to the Irish _Echo_."

"I'm the FBI." He showed his badge.

The desk sergeant took a good long look at it. "Maybe you are, and maybe
you aren't," he said at last. "Does the lieutenant know you?"

"We were kids together," Malone said. "We're brothers. Siamese twins.
Put him on the phone."

"Wait a minute," said the desk sergeant. "I'll check."

The screen went blank for two agonizing minutes before it cleared again
to show Lynch's face.

"Hello, Mr. Malone," Lynch said formally. "Have you found some new
little trick to show us poor, stupid policemen? Like, say, making
yourself vanish?"

"I'll make the whole police force vanish," Malone said, "in a couple of
minutes. I called to ask a favor."

"Anything," Lynch said. "Anything within my poor power. Whatever I have
is yours. Whither thou goest--"

"Knock it off," Malone said, and then grinned. After all, there was no
sense in making an enemy out of Lynch.

Lynch blinked, took a deep breath, and said in an entirely different
voice: "O.K., Malone. What's the favor?"

"Do you still have that list of Silent Spooks?" Malone said.

"Sure I do," Lynch said. "Why? I gave you a copy of it."

"I can't do this job," Malone said "You'll have to."

"Yes, sir," Lynch said, and saluted.

"Just listen," Malone said. "I want you to check up on every kid on that
list."

"And what are we supposed to do when we find them?" Lynch said.

"That's the trouble," Malone said. "You won't."

"And why not?"

"I'll lay you ten to one," Malone said, "that every one of them has
skipped out. Left home. Without giving a forwarding address."

Lynch nodded slowly. "Ten to one?" he said. "Want to make that a money
bet? Or does the FBI frown on gambling?"

"Ten dollars to your one," Malone said. "O.K.?"

"Made," Lynch said. "You've got the bet ... just for the hell of it,
understand."

"Oh, sure," Malone said.

"And where can I call you to collect?"

Malone shook his head. "You can't," he said. "I'll call you."

"I will wait with anxiety," Lynch said. "But it had better be before
eight. I get off then."

"If I can make it," Malone said.

"If you can't," Lynch said, "call me at home." He gave Malone the
number, and then added: "Whatever information I get, I can keep for my
own use this time, can't I?"

"You've already got all the information you're going to get. I just gave
it to you."

"That," Lynch said, "we'll see."

"I'll call to collect my money," Malone said.

"We'll talk about it later," Lynch said. "Farewell, old pal."

"Flights of angels," Malone said, "sing thee to thy rest."

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone replaced the microphone and headed for the door. Halfway there,
however, he stopped. He hadn't had a _tequila_ in a long time, and he
thought he owed it to himself. He felt he had come out ahead in his
exchange with Lynch, and another medal was in order.

Only a small one, though. He told himself that he would order one
_tequila_ and quit. Besides, he had to meet Dorothy.

He sat down on one of the tall bar stools. The bartender bustled over
and eyed him speculatively.

"_Tequila con limon_" he said negligently.

"Ah," the bartender said. "_Si, senor_."

Malone waited with ill-concealed impatience. At last it arrived.

Malone took the small glass of _tequila_ in his right hand, with the
slice of lemon held firmly between the index and middle fingers of the
same hand, the rind facing in toward the glass. On the web between the
thumb and forefinger of his left hand he had sprinkled a little salt.
Moving adroitly and with dispatch, he downed the _tequila_, licked off
the salt and bit his teeth into the lemon slice.

It felt better than good; it felt wonderful. He hadn't had such a good
time in years.

He had three more before he left the Xochitl.

Then, noticing the time, he moved in a hurry and got out of the bar
before temptation overcame him and he started ordering still more. It
was nearly six o'clock, and he had to meet Dorothy at Topp's.

He hoped he could find it.

He headed downtown toward Forty-second Street, turned left and--sure
enough--there was a big red sign. It said Topp's. Malone beamed his
approval at it. It was just where it ought to be, and he was grateful.

He pushed open the glass door of the place and went in.

The _maitre d'hotel_ was a chunky man with a pleasant face, a receding
hairline and some distance back on his head, dark, curly hair. He beamed
at Malone as if the FBI agent were a long-lost brother. "Table for one,
sir?" he said.

"No," Malone said, peering into the place. It was much bigger than he
had expected. "No," he said again. "I guess I'll just have a drink at
the bar."

The _maitre d'_ smiled and bowed him to a bar stool. Malone sat down and
looked the place over again. His first glance had shown him that Dorothy
wasn't there yet, but he saw no harm in making sure. _Always be careful
of your facts_, he admonished himself a little fuzzily.

There were a lot of women in the place, but they were all with escorts.
Some of them had two escorts, and Malone wondered about them. Were they
drunk, or was he? It was obvious that someone was seeing double, but
Malone wasn't quite sure who.

He stared at his face in the bar mirror for a few seconds, and ordered a
bourbon and soda when a bartender came over and occluded the image. The
bartender went away and Malone went on studying himself.

He wasn't bad-looking for an FBI agent. He was taller than his father,
anyway, and less heavily built. That was one good thing. As a matter of
fact, Malone told himself, he was really a pretty good-looking guy.

So why did women keep him waiting?

He heard her voice before he saw her, behind him. But she wasn't talking
to him.

"Hello, Milty," she said. "How's everything?"

Malone turned around to get a look at Milty. He turned out to be the
_maitre d'_. What did he have that Malone didn't have? the agent asked
himself sourly. Obviously Dorothy was captivated by his charm. Well,
that showed him what city girls were like. Butterflies. Social
butterflies. Flitting hither and yon with the wind, now attracted to
this man, now to that. Once, Malone told himself sadly, he had known
this beautiful woman. Now she belonged to someone else.

He felt a little bit sad about it, but he told himself to buck up and
learn to live with his tragedy. He drank some more of his bourbon and
soda, and then she noticed him.

He heard her say: "Oh. Excuse me, Milty. There's my man." She came over
and sat down next to him.

He wanted to ignore her, just to teach her a lesson. But he had already
turned around and smiled at her, and she smiled back.

"Hi," she said. "Did you get the tickets?"

_Tickets!_

Malone knew there had been something he'd forgotten, and now he knew
what it was. "Oh," he said. "Sure. Just a second. I've got to check up."

"Check up?"

"Friend of mine," Malone improvised hurriedly. "Bringing them." He gave
Dorothy a big smile and climbed down off the bar stool. He managed to
find a phone booth, and dialed FBI headquarters on Sixty-ninth Street
and blessed several saints when he found that A-in-C was still there.

"Tickets," Malone said.

The Agent-in-Charge blinked at him. "What tickets?" he said.

"The 'Hot Seat' tickets," Malone said. "Did you get 'em?"

"I got 'em," the Agent-in-Charge said sourly. "Had to chase all over
