responsibility for his Fiscal chief's actions in this matter. After all,
he hadn't given any detailed instructions. He had made no direct
suggestion of any illegal course. He'd merely consulted his Fiscal
expert on a technical matter, and if DeVore had seen fit to use an
illegal method of solving a problem, it was DeVore's responsibility
alone.

To be sure, Morely had been a little emphatic in his order, but that was
simply because he was well aware of his Fiscal chief's disinclination to
make exhaustive technical research.

DeVore pursed his lips and looked thoughtfully at the regulation book.
He might be able to use the same tactic Morely was following--if he were
so inclined. He could issue verbal instructions to the sector leader
concerned, and Bond might fail to see the trap. Then, he could report to
the leader that the matter was taken care of, indorse the letter back to
Central, with the agreement copy, and let Bond turn in funds under one
of the "miscellaneous received" accounts. In fact, he realized, that was
just about what the district leader expected him to do.

He smiled and shook his head. A few months ago, it was possible he could
have done that, but even then, he wouldn't have. And now, with the
mental communicators in use, it would be a flat impossibility. The trap
would be as obvious to Bond as it had been to him. He leaned back in his
chair and tapped his fingertips against each other.

The mentacoms, he knew, were in common use by this time, in virtually
every office of district, regional, and national administration, as well
as by most citizens. And he'd served under Marko Keller once--known him
fairly well, too. He shrugged.

It would be a little irregular for a district Fiscal chief to make
direct contact with the Coordination Agency's comptroller, but there was
nothing like getting the most expert and authoritative advice available.
He relaxed, trying to recreate his memories of the man who was now
National Comptroller.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marko Keller strode purposefully into the filing section. He could
easily get the data he needed by simply contacting one of the clerks, he
knew, but he felt an urgent need for personal activity. That
conversation with DeVore, way out in Region Nine, had upset him more
than he liked to admit, even to himself.

It wouldn't be so bad if it were an isolated incident. Such things could
be taken care of by administrative action, and a single instance would
cause little disturbance. But there were too many, happening too often.
He pulled a file drawer open, violently.

One of the clerks approached. "Can I help, sir?"

Keller turned to look at him. The man, he noted, was wearing one of the
late model inductive headbands that had been sold in such quantities
lately. Deluxe model, too. Must have cost him at least two months' pay.
Like almost everyone else, he was vitally concerned in this latest
affair. Keller frowned. He, himself, he realized, was acting childishly.
He would simply be wasting time by trying to do this by himself.

"Yes," he growled. "Get me a brief on a few cases like this one." He
made full contact with the man, rapidly summarizing his conversation
with DeVore, and including DeVore's short flash of his own conversation
with Ward Kirk.

"_And get a rundown from personnel. Dig up something on their angle,
too. Several representative cases. Get a few people to help you--many as
you need. I'm going to take this whole mess in to the Chief tomorrow
morning._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Paul Graham swept into the apartment, seized his wife about the waist
and swung her into the air, to set her on top of one of his bookcases.

"They've done it, honey," he shouted.

Elaine kicked her heels in a rapid tattoo against the back of the case.

"Paul Graham, you get me down this instant," she ordered indignantly.
"Who's done what?"

Graham stepped back and beat on his chest. "Meet the new production
manager, Mentacom Division, Consolidated Electronics."

"Production manager? But, Paul, only first-class citizens can hold
supervisory positions."

"Not any more. Didn't you have the communicator on for the news? It all
came in."

Elaine shook her head and jumped to the floor. "I've a confession to
make, Paul. Ever since they stopped the compulsory notices, I haven't
had the thing on at all. It bothered me."

Her husband shook his head in mock dismay. "So now, I'm married to an
ignoramus." He spread his hands. "She doesn't know what's going on in
the great, big world." He shook a finger at her.

"It all busted this afternoon, darling. While you sat around in your
splendid isolation, everything turned upside down."

She looked at him indignantly for an instant, then turned toward the
kitchen.

"Paul, if you don't stop raving, I'm going to get my mentacom and pry it
out of you," she threatened. "Now, you just settle down. Stop talking in
circles and tell me what this is all about."

"Oh, all right. If you insist." Graham sank into a chair, looking like a
small boy caught in a prank. "First, there are no more first-class
citizens--no second-class citizens--not even third-class citizens.
Everyone's a citizen again. Period." He threw his hands up.

"You mean--?"

"That's exactly what I mean. No more restrictions. No more compulsory
community work. No more quarters inspections. And no more privileges.
We've got rights again!

"If you want a dress, you buy it. You don't worry about whether it suits
your station. If I can hold a job, I get it. And I did!" He got out of
the chair and strode across the room, to sit on the arm of the divan.
"And I can do this, if I want to. If I break this thing down, so help
me, George, I'll go out and buy a new one." He bounced up and down a
little.

"The administrators are going back to their original jobs. They're
responsible for defense, in case of enemy attack, and that's all." He
paused. "Of course, until sector and district elections can be held,
they'll still take care of some of the community functions--some of
them, that is. But the elections'll be set up in a few weeks, and we'll
be able to choose our own officials for community government."

He bounced to his feet again, strode around the bookcases, and looked
down at his desk. Then, he looked around again.

"Corporations are being set up to take over home construction." He held
up a hand. "_Home_ construction, I said, not quarters. They're
commercializing helicopter manufacture, all kinds of repair work, and a
lot of other services. And they're going to restore patent rights. That
means plenty to us, darling, believe me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But, but why? What happened?"

Graham turned on her. "Elaine," he cried, "haven't you noticed how many
people are wearing mentacoms now, all the time? Haven't you noticed the
consideration people have been giving each other for the past weeks?
Remember what I told you once? If you fully understand a person, you
simply can't kick him around. It's too much like taking slaps at
yourself. With the exception of a few empathic cripples, who can't use
the mentacom properly anyway, everyone, inside the administrative
offices, as well as out, recognized that the bureaucracy was simply
unworkable as it stood. So, they changed it. Effective immediately."

Elaine stamped her foot. "You know I haven't been out of this
apartment," she cried. "And you know why. I simply couldn't stand the
treatment I got. I'd have gotten into serious trouble in minutes. So,
I've stayed in. I've done my shopping by communicator, and contented
myself right here." She paused.

"But how is the new administration going to be supported? What are
people going to do? How are they taking it? It's all so sudden, I should
think--"

Graham held up a hand.

"Hey," he protested. "One at a time, please! First--remember taxes?
Remember how we used to growl about them? They're back. And I love 'em.
Second--nobody is going to do anything. Anything drastic or unusual,
that is. And finally? Everyone I've seen is taking it in their stride.
Seems as though they've been sort of expecting it, ever since they
started mind-to-mind communication.

"You'd be surprised how good most people are at it, now that they're
used to it. You start into a line of helicopters. All at once, you
realize that the guy coming is really in a hurry. He's got to get
somewhere, fast. So, you let him go by. The next fellow's not going to
be in any tearing rush. He'll let you in, and cheer you on your way.

"You feel like being left alone? Nobody'll even notice you. But if you
feel like talking, half a dozen total strangers'll find something in
common with you. And they'll discuss it. Honey, you'll be surprised how
much you've missed. Get your mentacom. Let's take a little shopping
trip."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And here's one of our more difficult cases. But he's coming along
nicely." Dr. Moran pointed through the one-way window.

"Name's Howard Morely. He used to be a district leader, under the
bureaucracy. But along in the last few weeks, just before the change, he
got into some sort of scrape. They questioned him, and declared him
unfit for service. Put him out on a pension." He pulled at an ear.

"Matter of fact, I understand his case had quite a deal to do with the
change--sort of triggered it. They tell me it sort of pointed up the
fallacies of the bureaucracy." He shrugged.

"But that's unimportant now, I guess. He almost receded into complete
paranoia. Had a virtually complete case of empathic paralysis when he
came to us. Simply no conception of any other person's point of view,
and a hatred of people that was fantastic. But he's nearly normal now."

The visiting psychiatrist nodded. "I've seen the type, of course. We
have a number of them, too. You say this new technique was successfully
used in his case?"

"Yes. We had doubts of it, too. Seemed too simple. Sure, we're all
familiar with the mentacoms by now. Wouldn't be without my own. But the
idea of a field generator so powerful as to force clear impressions into
a crippled mind like his, without completely destroying that mind,
seemed a little fantastic." He shrugged.

"In this case, though, it was a last resort, so we tried it. He resisted
the field for days. Simply sat in his cell and stared at the walls. We
were almost ready to give up when one of the operators finally got
through to him. Know what his first visualization was?"

The visitor shook his head and laughed. "I could try a guess, I
suppose," he said, "but my chances would be something less than one in a
thousand million."

Moran grinned. "You're so right. There was a whole bunch of kids
standing around. Looked like dozens of 'em. And they were all chanting
at the top of their voices. You know that old jingle? 'Howie's got a
gir-rul?' Chanted it over and over." The grin widened. "Operator said
his face stung for ten minutes. That girl must have packed one sweet
wallop!"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_ June 1955.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Final Weapon, by Everett B. Cole

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FINAL WEAPON ***

***** This file should be named 24723.txt or 24723.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/7/2/24723/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
