difficulty in controlling his sexual appetite to that extent. If the
sexual intercourse occurs as infrequently as once or twice in a month,
the man, by living thus continently, will find it much more easy to
maintain his continence during the twelve-month period after his wife
becomes pregnant before he can properly have intercourse with her
again, than would be the case if he had had sexual relations much more
frequently.

That the man desires intercourse much more frequently than as above
outlined and that the woman, in the vast majority of cases, does not
desire intercourse except for procreation and about as frequently as
above indicated is, without any reasonable doubt, due to hereditary
tendencies. Under primeval conditions, and in fact, until
comparatively recent times, the vast majority of mankind were
polygamous, the strong men of the race--those who procreated their
kind--having as many wives as they could support and protect, the weak
men of the race being crowded aside, sometimes castrated, to become
the burden bearers for the strong.

Under conditions of polygamy the woman is rarely subjected to sexual
intercourse for other than procreative purposes, and even granting
that the man has intercourse for procreation only, if he had twelve
wives, he would be having it twelve times as frequently as any one of
them. That these experiences on the part of a long line of maternal
ancestors should lead the women of today to desire sexual intercourse
for procreation only, is easy to understand; that the impulses
transmitted along the paternal line of ancestors should lead the men
of today to desire intercourse far more frequently than this can,
under monogamous conditions be indulged, is also easy to understand.

8. _How frequently may sexual intercourse be indulged, in the marriage
state?_

If one is to overstep the bounds mentioned above, i.e., to indulge in
sexual intercourse once or twice in a month for procreation only and
not at all during the period of pregnancy and childbed period, the
limit is then set, not by strictly normal and anthropological
considerations, but by the health of the individuals. The author has
seen young married couples who had carried their sexual intercourse to
such extremes as seriously to deplete the physical vigor and menace
the health of both parties. Just how frequent indulgence will have
this effect in any particular case is impossible to say. In some cases
twice a week may have this effect; in other cases once in twenty-four
hours might be borne for a considerable time. In any case the
condition is an unnatural one and is certain to bring a natural
retribution in some form--either broken health, or sterility of the
wife, and depleted powers of the husband, or weak and sickly children,
separated by long intervals.

9. _How long is it possible for a young man to waste his vital fluid
and yet be able to raise healthy children?_

This question cannot be answered in other than most general terms. The
author has known one case of a young man who, for several years,
practiced masturbation several times a day, so far depleting his
powers that he could not walk erect, his muscles were flabby, his
testes were very soft and small, his eyes shifty, his hands clammy and
his mind incoherent in its working. He seemed to be a candidate for
the asylum and would probably have gone there if radical means had not
been adopted to break him of the habit. He was broken, however,
absolutely, and never performed the act after his nineteenth birthday.
Within three years he had completely recovered his virility. He had
nearly doubled in weight and in lung capacity and a large part of his
increased weight was in great bulk of muscle of high tonicity--muscle
which he had gained by heavy physical work upon a ranch. His sexual
organs had completely regained their tonicity and without doubt, their
virility. He had so far recovered mentally that he finished a course
of professional study and entered with great success upon the practice
of his chosen profession.

On the other hand, a middle-aged man consulted the author regarding
the sterility of his wife. After examination, it was found that the
husband had practiced masturbation about twice a week from the age of
puberty to his twenty-fourth year, when he was married. He assured the
author that at the time of his marriage his testicles were, as far as
he had known, similar to the testicles of other young men, and that
during his married life he had never had intercourse with his wife
more frequently than once in a month, but that during that time he had
noticed a gradual atrophy of the testes. At the time of the
examination only small atrophied remains of these testes could be
discovered. The sterility of the wife was due, without any question,
to the absolute impotence of the husband, and so far as the history of
the case would suggest, there was no other assignable cause of this
impotence than the eight years of masturbation.

From these two cases, it must be evident that no rules can be laid
down. In one case the subject recovered fully from a case of extreme
masturbation; in the other-case, a habit that would not be called
extreme resulted in impotence. It must be evident that the practice is
a dangerous one after puberty, as no individual can tell to which of
the above cases his may be similar.

10. _Granting that masturbation is harmful through loss of semen, is
there any compensation for this loss of semen in case of intercourse
with a woman?_

There is no doubt that an emission of semen following sexual
excitement is a draught upon the virile powers of the male animal. If
this sexual excitement is the artificial one cultivated by the
masturbator, the depletion seems to be more marked than is the case
with the normal, natural stimulation incident to sexual intercourse.
Some have suggested that the reciprocal influence of the woman can in
some way compensate for the vital fluid contributed by the male. It
is hardly likely that such a reciprocal influence is other than
psychical, but that is certainly sufficient to account for any
difference in these two forms of sexual gratification.

Nature calls upon the male animal to make a contribution for
procreation, which contribution is, always has been, and, in the very
nature of the case, always must be a certain tax upon the powers of
the male animal. When the intercourse is indulged for procreation
only, the male animal can well afford to make the contribution. Even
with that, the contribution which the male makes to procreation is
incomparably less depleting for him than are the contributions which
the female makes for her.

11. _Will vital fluid flow with every sexual intercourse?_

If vital fluid is present, and if the sexual intercourse is carried to
the point of causing an orgasm, there would, in all normal conditions,
be an emission of semen or "vital fluid."

12. _Is there any way to regulate intercourse so as to control the sex
of the offspring?_

While there are many theories upon this subject no one of them is
generally accepted by medical men.

13. _Will an intense and continuous desire on the part of a young man
for sexual intercourse cause a loss of seminal fluid?_

An intense and continuous desire for sexual intercourse will, without
question, cause an active secretion on the part of the testes, an
increased secretion on the part of the seminal vesicles and an active
secretion on the part of the prostate gland and of Cowper's glands.
The secretion from Cowper's glands will make its way along the urethra
and appear at the opening of that duct, probably soiling the linen of
the subject. The accumulated semen from the other glands will tend
rather to aggravate than allay the sexual desires. Such a condition of
the sexual apparatus is likely to cause a nocturnal emission,
relieving this tension and emptying the gorged gland ducts. If the
nocturnal emission does not occur, the sexual desires are certain to
return to occupy the waking hours more or less completely. If the
nocturnal emission does occur, it will carry away not alone the
vesicular secretion, but also more or less of the nascent spermatozoa
and other constituents of the vital fluid. Seasons of intense and
prolonged sexual excitement are in a high degree inimical to
continence, and even though the subject does not fully submit to his
inclination, his nocturnal emissions, which are likely to come
frequently, carry away the product of the testicular secretion,
thereby depleting to a certain extent, his virility. It is hardly
necessary to urge the importance of resisting these onslaughts of
sexual passion in their very incipiency.

14. _How may the habit of masturbation best be brought under
control?_

The first thing to accomplish is the purification of the thoughts. The
most effective way to purify the thoughts is to divert them to a pure
and strictly non-sexual subject--e.g., _pure mathematics_. The young
man who is trying to break this habit will do well to follow very
closely the rather strenuous regime outlined under hygiene in the body
of the book. If his condition is complicated because of the presence
of a very long loose foreskin, he will be wise to have this removed by
the simple operation of _circumcision_. If he should awake in the
night and feel the temptation to resort to his old habit, he should
resist the temptation in its first stage and instantly put his mind on
some subject quite foreign to his sexual apparatus. If he does not
succeed by force of will in diverting his mind from himself, the best
thing to do is to arise, dress and walk. If walking will not do it let
him run, and keep moving in the open air, under God's blue sky until
he is so tired he can hardly put one foot before the other. Then if he
will retire to his room, he will probably have no further difficulty
at that time.

15. _What influence has dancing upon the young man's solution of his
sexual problems?_

It hardly seems possible that a virile, husky young man, in his early
twenties, could be subjected for several hours to the conditions of
the modern dance hall, where he is brought into very close physical
contact with young women, dressed to expose their secondary sexual
features, perfumed to excite in a man his hereditary sexual
instincts; held so close to his partner in the round dance that he is
conscious of every movement of her limbs, and all of these under the
influence of artificial light and music--I say, it is hardly possible
for a virile young man to be subjected to all these conditions without
experiencing an extreme sexual excitement. That such an experience
often repeated not only does not simplify the young man's problem, but
seriously complicates it is not a matter of doubt on the part of
anyone who has studied these problems. All specialists in this field,
without a single exception, concur in the belief that the dance is a
device of the devil so far as the young man is concerned. That the
young women are, for the most part, quite innocent of the effect of
all these conditions upon their young men friends is also believed by
those who have studied the problem. If they were conscious of it, a
large majority of them would not longer consent to be the party to
such unfortunate conditions. The Square Dance, the Virginia Reel and
similar dances of the times of our grandparents are not remotely to be
compared in this matter with the modern Round Dance.

16. _May lost Virility be regained by use of "Remedies" or medicines
of any kind?_

No. Positively and absolutely, _No_. Many such nostrums are advertised
in the public prints. Many are sold by charlatans and quacks. No
reputable physician would hold out to his patient the hope that any
drug could bring back lost manhood.

_Lost manhood or lost virility may be regained by right living only._
The prescription for right living is as follows: _Live a continent
life_ and follow _a strenuous and sane regime of personal hygiene_,
such as outlined in chapter V above.

17. _Is the production of semen modified by nutrition?_

The production of semen is greatly modified by the state of nutrition.
Remember in this connection that semen is partly from the testes
(Spermatozoa) and partly from the vesicles and prostate. The formation
and release of spermatozoa is only slightly modified by the condition
of nutrition; while the rate of secretion from the vesicles is greatly
modified in quantity. This accounts for the fact that well nourished
men who eat heavily are very likely to experience frequent nocturnal
emissions, when living continently.




  LECTURES
  by the
  Author of Reproduction and Sexual Hygiene.

  THE YOUNG MAN'S PROBLEM.

  Heard by 20,000 men last year.

  WHAT IS SAID ABOUT IT.


The Young Men's Christian Association of Philadelphia.
Walter M. Wood, General Secretary

                                           October 17, 1908.
To Whom it May Concern:

    It is with great pleasure that I pay a tribute of appreciation
    to the excellent service of Dr. Winfield S. Hall, in his
    presentation to audiences of young men of the vital problems of
    sexual hygiene.

    With the intelligence of a trained and experienced physician,
    with the thoroughness and frankness of an expert teacher and
    with the delicacy and motive of a Christian gentleman, he
    presents the "Young Man's Problem" in such a way as to make him,
    in my judgment, one of the most helpful counselors of young men
    on the American platform today.

                                             Sincerely,
                                                 W.M. WOOD.


University of Notre Dame.

Winfield Scott Hall, M.D.,
Northwestern University Medical School.

My Dear Dr. Hall:

    In your lecture on "The Young Man's Problem" and in your book on
    "Sexual Hygiene" you are doing a great service for the rising
    generation. I am convinced that one great source of vice is
    ignorance about the matters touched upon in your lecture and
    book. Priests are constantly giving instruction on these same
    points, but it is a distinct advantage to have their teaching
    reinforced by a distinguished physician, expressing himself with
    the plainness of the laity and speaking always in a most
    reverential spirit. For students seventeen years of age or more
    your presentation of this difficult subject will be a God-send,
    for it abates curiosity, dissipates ignorance, warns of perils
    and arouses a manly desire for a clean life.

                             Very sincerely yours,
                                    JOHN CAVANAUGH, C.S.C.,
                                                  President.


Central Department, Young Men's Christian Association, Chicago.

                                           October 21, 1908.

Dr. Winfield S. Hall, Northwestern University Medical School.
My Dear Dr. Hall:

    Our committee wants to know if we cannot arrange a date with you
    this year to deliver your lecture on "The Young Man's Problem."
    I also want some more of your books on Reproduction and Sexual
    Hygiene.

    I cannot forbear to express my very hearty appreciation of the
    splendid service you have done and are doing to the young
    manhood of our country in this lecture and this book. I have
    never heard a presentation of the subject which takes hold so
    deeply upon thoughtful men, and your book is by all odds the
    best thing in print on this subject. Your scientific, yet
    popular method and the absence of vague moralizing are
    convincing and inspiring in their effects. I trust we may hear
    you this year.

                                 Very truly yours,
                                      HERBERT W. GATES,
                                      Secy., Religious Work.


THE SECRET OF MANHOOD

Given to many audiences of boys in High-School, Academy, Y.M.C.A. and
Summer Camp.


The Institute and Training School of Young Men's Christian
Associations, Chicago and Lake Geneva.

                                            October 7, 1908.

Dr. Winfield S. Hall, Northwestern Medical School, Chicago, Ill.

My Dear Dr. Hall:

    I want to express my appreciation of your talk to boys on Sexual
    Hygiene. I listened with the greatest of interest to your
    presentation before the Boys' Conference at Lake Geneva the past
    summer and it seemed to me that both in substance and in form of
    presentation you hit the nail on the head in a way I had never
    before seen it done. I believe that your contribution to boys in
    this direction is to be even greater than that which you have
    been making to young men.

                                       Sincerely yours,
                                              FRANK H. BURT,
                                                  President.


State Agricultural College of Colorado.

Dr. Winfield S. Hall,
  Fort Collins, Colo., October 27, 1908.
    Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago.

Dear Doctor:

    I wish to testify to the value of your lecture to boys from 12
    to 16 years of age. You have touched a vital subject in a most
    original way that impresses every boy that hears you. You lead
    up to your "Secret of Manhood" in a manner that holds the
    attention, impresses the truth you want to teach, so that it is
    sure to be of lasting good.

    This lecture I regard as the very best of its kind, which I have
    ever heard.

                                       Sincerely yours,
                                                 W.H. OLIN.
          Vice Dean, State Agricultural College of Colorado.


Princeton Township High School.

                           Princeton, Ill., October 6, 1908.

    Dr. Winfield S. Hall of the Northwestern University Medical
    School recently gave a talk to our high school boys along
    physiological lines, setting forth very scientifically but
    plainly many delicate and important truths which every boy
    should know. Dr. Hall is a master of his subject and his manner
    is so dignified and yet sympathetic that he commands respect and
    holds the closest attention. I feel sure that such a talk given
    to boys and young men does a great amount of good.

                                             Sincerely,
                                          H.S. MAGILL, JR.,
                                                  Principal.


International Committee, Young Men's Christian Association.

W.S. Hall, M.D., Chicago, Ill.
  Chicago, Ill., October 4, 1908.

My dear Doctor:

    I am more than glad to speak a word in commendation of your
