feeling of being able to talk forever, and the naked day was here, with
its demands for action. It is not so difficult to change your whole
view of life when you are flying, or even bumping along above the ground
with friends who understand, but soon, I knew, I'd be down in the dust
with something I never wanted to see again.

"Coffee, Ray?"

"Yeah, I guess so." I took the bottle from Alice and wondered whether my
face looked as glum as hers.

"They shouldn't salt butter," Pop asserted. "It makes it lousy for
shaving."

"It was the _best_ butter," Alice said.

"Yeah," I said. "The Dormouse, when they buttered the watch."

It may be true that feeble humor is better than none. I don't know.

"What are you two yakking about?" Pop demanded.

"A book we both read," I told him.

"Either of you writers?" Pop asked with sudden interest. "Some of the
boys think we should have a book about us. I say it's too soon, but they
say we might all die off or something. Whoa, Jenny! Easy does it.
Gently, please!"

That last remark was by way of recognizing that the plane had started an
authoritative turn to the left. I got a sick and cold feeling. This was
it.

Pop sheathed his knife and gave his face a final rub. Alice belted on
her satchel. I reached for my knapsack, but I was staring through the
viewport, dead ahead.

The haze lightened faintly, three times. I remembered the St. Elmo's
fire that had flamed from the cracking plant.

"Pop," I said--almost whined, to be truthful, "why'd the bugger ever
have to land here in the first place? He was rushing stuff they needed
bad at Atla-Hi--why'd he have to break his trip?"

"That's easy," Pop said. "He was being a bad boy. At least that's my
theory. He was supposed to go straight to Atla-Hi, but there was
somebody he wanted to check up on first. He stopped here to see his
girlfriend. Yep, his girlfriend. She tried to warn him off--that's my
explanation of the juice that flared out of the cracking plant and
interfered with his landing, though I'm sure she didn't intend the last.
By the way, whatever she turned on to give him the warning must still be
turned on. But Grayl came on down in spite of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Before I could assimilate that, the seven deformed gas tanks
materialized in the haze. We got the freeway in our sights and steadied
and slowed and kept slowing. The plane didn't graze the cracking plant
this time, though I'd have sworn it was going to hit it head on. When I
saw we _weren't_ going to hit it, I wanted to shut my eyes, but I
couldn't.

The stain was black now and the Pilot's body was thicker than I
remembered--bloated. But that wouldn't last long. Three or four vultures
were working on it.




CHAPTER 7

    _Here now in his triumph where all things falter,
    Stretched out on the spoils that his own hand spread,
    As a god self-slain on his own strange altar,
    Death lies dead._

                                        --A Forsaken Garden,
                                                _by Charles Swinburne_


Pop was first down. Between us we helped Alice. Before joining them I
took a last look at the control panel. The cracking plant button was up
again and there was a blue nimbus on another button. For Los Alamos, I
supposed. I was tempted to push it and get away solo, but then I
thought, _nope, there's nothing for me at the other end and the
loneliness will be worse than what I got to face here_. I climbed out.

I didn't look at the body, although we were practically on top of it. I
saw a little patch of silver off to one side and remembered the gun that
had melted. The vultures had waddled off but only a few yards.

"We could kill them," Alice said to Pop.

"Why?" he responded. "Didn't some Hindus use them to take care of dead
bodies? Not a bad idea, either."

"Parsees," Alice amplified.

"Yep, Parsees, that's what I meant. Give you a nice clean skeleton in a
matter of days."

Pop was leading us past the body toward the cracking plant. I heard the
flies buzzing loudly. I felt terrible. I wanted to be dead myself. Just
walking along after Pop was an awful effort.

"His girl was running a hidden observation tower here," Pop was saying
now. "Weather and all that, I suppose. Or maybe setting up a robot
station of some kind. I couldn't tell you about her before, because you
were both in a mood to try to rub out anybody remotely connected with
the Pilot. In fact, I did my best to lead you astray, letting you think
I'd been the one to scream and all. Even now, to be honest about it, I
don't know if I'm doing the right thing telling and showing you all
this, but a man's got to take some risks whatever he does."

"Say, Pop," I said dully, "isn't she apt to take a shot at us or
something?" Not that I'd have minded on my own account. "Or are you and
her that good friends?"

"Nope, Ray," he said, "she doesn't even know me. But I don't think she's
in a position to do any shooting. You'll see why. Hey, she hasn't even
shut the door. That's bad."

He seemed to be referring to a kind of manhole cover standing on its
edge just inside the open-walled first story of the cracking plant. He
knelt and looked down the hole the cover was designed to close off.

"Well, at least she didn't collapse at the bottom of the shaft," he
said. "Come on, let's see what happened." And he climbed into the shaft.

We followed him like zombies. At least that's how I felt. The shaft was
about twenty feet deep. There were foot- and hand-holds. It got stuffy
right away, and warmer, in spite of the shaft being open at the top.

At the bottom there was a short horizontal passage. We had to duck to
get through it. When we could straighten up we were in a large and
luxurious bomb-resistant dugout, to give it a name. And it was stuffier
and hotter than ever.

There was a lot of scientific equipment around and several small control
panels reminding me of the one in the back of the plane. Some of them, I
supposed, connected with instruments, weather and otherwise, hidden up
in the skeletal structure of the cracking plant. And there were signs of
occupancy, a young woman's occupancy--clothes scattered around in a
frivolous way, and some small objects of art, and a slightly more than
life-size head in clay that I guessed the occupant must have been
sculpting. I didn't give that last more than the most fleeting look,
strictly unintentional to begin with, because although it wasn't
finished I could tell whose head it was supposed to be--the Pilot's.

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole place was finished in dull silver like the cabin of the plane,
and likewise it instantly struck me as having a living personality,
partly the Pilot's and partly someone else's--the personality of a
marriage. Which wasn't a bit nice, because the whole place smelt of
death.

But to tell the truth I didn't give the place more than the quickest
look-over, because my attention was rivetted almost at once on a long
wide couch with the covers kicked off it and on the body there.

The woman was about six feet tall and built like a goddess. Her hair was
blonde and her skin tanned. She was lying on her stomach and she was
naked.

She didn't come anywhere near my libido, though. She looked sick to
death. Her face, twisted towards us, was hollow-cheeked and flushed. Her
eyes, closed, were sunken and dark-circled. She was breathing shallowly
and rapidly through her open mouth, gasping now and then.

I got the crazy impression that all the heat in the place was coming
from her body, radiating from her fever.

And the whole place stunk of death. Honestly it seemed to me that this
dugout was Death's underground temple, the bed Death's altar, and the
woman Death's sacrifice. (Had I unconsciously come to worship Death as a
god in the Deathlands? I don't really know. There it gets too deep for
me.)

No, she didn't come within a million miles of my libido, but there was
another part of me that she was eating at ...

If guilt's a luxury, then I'm a plutocrat.

... eating at until I was an empty shell, until I had no props left,
until I wanted to die then and there, until I figured I had to die ...

There was a faint sharp hiss right at my elbow. I looked and found that,
unbeknownst to myself, I'd taken the steel cube out of my pocket and
holding it snuggled between my first and second fingers I'd punched the
button with my thumb just as I'd promised myself I would if I got to
really feeling bad.

It goes to show you that you should never give your mind any kind of
instructions even half in fun, unless you're prepared to have them
carried out whether you approve later or not.

Pop saw what I'd done and looked at me strangely. "So you had to die
after all, Ray," he said softly. "Most of us find out we have to, one
way or another."

We waited. Nothing happened. I noticed a very faint milky cloud a few
inches across hanging in the air by the cube.

Thinking right away of poison gas, I jerked away a little, dispersing
the cloud.

"What's that?" I demanded of no one in particular.

"I'd say," said Pop, "that that's something that squirted out of a tiny
hole in the side of the cube opposite the button. A hole so nearly
microscopic you wouldn't see it unless you looked for it hard. Ray, I
don't think you're going to get your baby A-blast, and what's more I'm
afraid you've wasted something that's damn valuable. But don't let it
worry you. Before I dropped those cubes for Atla-Hi I snagged one."

And darn if he didn't pull the brother of my cube out of his pocket.

"Alice," he said, "I noticed a half pint of whiskey in your satchel when
we got the salve. Would you put some on a rag and hand it to me."

Alice looked at him like he was nuts, but while her eyes were looking
her pliers and her gloved hand were doing what he told her.

Pop took the rag and swabbed a spot on the sick woman's nearest buttock
and jammed the cube against the spot and pushed the button.

"It's a jet hypodermic, folks," he said.

He took the cube away and there was the welt to substantiate his
statement.

"Hope we got to her in time," he said. "The plague is tough. Now I guess
there's nothing for us to do but wait, maybe for quite a while."

I felt shaken beyond all recognition.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Pop, you old caveman detective!" I burst out. "When did you get that
idea for a steel hospital?" Don't think I was feeling anywhere near that
gay. It was reaction, close to hysterical.

Pop was taken aback, but then he grinned. "I had a couple of clues that
you and Alice didn't," he said. "I knew there was a very sick woman
involved. And I had that bout with Los Alamos fever I told you. They've
had a lot of trouble with it, I believe--some say its spores come from
outside the world with the cosmic dust--and now it seems to have been
carried to Atla-Hi. Let's hope they've found the answer this time.
Alice, maybe we'd better start getting some water into this gal."

After a while we sat down and fitted the facts together more orderly.
Pop did the fitting mostly. Alamos researchers must have been working
for years on the plague as it ravaged intermittently, maybe with
mutations and ET tricks to make the job harder. Very recently they'd
found a promising treatment (cure, we hoped) and prepared it for rush
shipment to Atla-Hi, where the plague was raging too and they were
sieged in by Savannah as well. Grayl was picked to fly the serum, or
drug or whatever it was. But he knew or guessed that this lone woman
observer (because she'd fallen out of radio communication or something)
had come down with the plague too and he decided to land some serum for
her, probably without authorization.

"How do we know she's his girlfriend?" I asked.

"Or wife," Pop said tolerantly. "Why, there was that bag of woman's
stuff he was carrying, frilly things like a man would bring for a woman.
Who else'd he be apt to make a special stop for?

"Another thing," Pop said. "He must have been using jets to hurry his
trip. We heard them, you know."

That seemed about as close a reconstruction of events as we could get.
Strictly hypothetical, of course. Deathlanders trying to figure out what
goes on inside a "country" like Atla-Alamos and _why_ are sort of like
foxes trying to understand world politics, or wolves the Gothic
migrations. Of course we're all human beings, but that doesn't mean as
much as it sounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then Pop told us how he'd happened to be on the scene. He'd been doing a
"tour of duty", as he called it, when he spotted this woman's
observatory and decided to hang around anonymously and watch over her
for a few days and maybe help protect her from some dangerous characters
that he knew were in the neighborhood.

"Pop, that sounds like a lousy idea to me," I objected. "Risky, I mean.
Spying on another person, watching them without their knowing, would be
the surest way to stir up in me the idea of murdering them. Safest thing
for me to do in that situation would be to turn around and run."

"_You_ probably should," he agreed. "For now, anyway. It's all a matter
of knowing your own strength and stage of growth. Me, it helps to give
myself these little jobs. And the essence of 'em is that the other
person shouldn't know I'm helping."

It sounded like knighthood and pilgrimage and the Boy Scouts all over
again--for murderers. Well, why not?

Pop had seen this woman come out of the manhole a couple of times and
look around and then go back down and he'd got the impression she was
sick and troubled. He'd even guessed she might be coming down with
Alamos fever. He'd seen us arrive, of course, and that had bothered him.
Then when the plane landed she'd come up again, acting out of her head,
but when she'd seen the Pilot and us going for him she'd given that
scream and collapsed at the top of the shaft. He'd figured the only
thing he could do for her was keep us occupied. Besides, now that he
knew for sure we were murderers he'd started to burn with the desire to
talk to us and maybe help us quit killing if we seemed to want to. It
was only much later, in the middle of our trip, that he began to suspect
that the steel cubes were jet hypodermics.

While Pop had been telling us all this, we hadn't been watching the
woman so closely. Now Alice called our attention to her. Her skin was
covered with fine beads of perspiration, like diamonds.

"That's a good sign," Pop said and Alice started to wipe her off. While
she was doing that the woman came to in a groggy sort of way and Pop fed
her some thin soup and in the middle of his doing it she dropped off to
sleep.

Alice said, "Any other time I would be wild to kill another woman that
beautiful. But she has been so close to death that I would feel I was
robbing another murderer. I suppose there is more behind the change in
my feelings than that, though."

"Yeah, a little, I suppose," Pop said.

I didn't have anything to say about my own feelings. Certainly not out
loud. I knew that they had changed and that they were still changing. It
was complicated.

After a while it occurred to me and Alice to worry whether we mightn't
catch this woman's sickness. It would serve us right, of course, but
plague is plague. But Pop reassured us. "Actually I snagged three
cubes," he said. "That should take care of you two. I figure I'm
immune."

Time wore on. Pop dragged out the harmonica, as I'd been afraid he
would, but his playing wasn't too bad. "Tenting Tonight," "When Johnnie
Comes Marching Home," and such. We had a meal.

The Pilot's woman woke up again, in her full mind this time or something
like it. We were clustered around the bed, smiling a little I suppose
and looking inquiring. Being even assistant nurses makes you all
concerned about the patient's health and state of mind.

Pop helped her sit up a little. She looked around. She saw me and Alice.
Recognition came into her eyes. She drew away from us with a look of
loathing. She didn't say a word, but the look stayed.

Pop drew me aside and whispered, "I think it would be a nice gesture if
you and Alice took a blanket and went up and sewed him into it. I
noticed a big needle and some thread in her satchel." He looked me in
the eye and added, "You can't expect this woman to feel any other way
toward you, you know. Now or ever."

He was right of course. I gave Alice the high sign and we got out.

No point in dwelling on the next scene. Alice and me sewed up in a
blanket a big guy who'd been dead a day and worked over by vultures.
That's all.

About the time we'd finished, Pop came up.

"She chased me out," he explained. "She's getting dressed. When I told
her about the plane, she said she was going back to Los Alamos. She's
not fit to travel, of course, but she's giving herself injections. It's
none of our business. Incidentally, she wants to take the body back with
her. I told her how we'd dropped the serum and how you and Alice had
helped and she listened."

The Pilot's woman wasn't long after Pop. She must have had trouble
getting up the shaft, she had a little trouble even walking straight,
but she held her head high. She was wearing a dull silver tunic and
sandals and cloak. As she passed me and Alice I could see the look of
loathing come back into her eyes, and her chin went a little higher. I
thought, why shouldn't she want us dead? Right now she probably wants to
be dead herself.

Pop nodded to us and we hoisted up the body and followed her. It was
almost too heavy a load even for the three of us.

As she reached the plane a silver ladder telescoped down to her from
below the door. I thought, _the Pilot must have had it keyed to her some
way, so it would let down for her but nobody else. A very lovely
gesture._

The ladder went up after her and we managed to lift the body above our
heads, our arms straight, and we walked it through the door of the plane
that way, she receiving it.

The door closed and we stood back and the plane took off into the orange
haze, us watching it until it was swallowed.

Pop said, "Right now, I imagine you two feel pretty good in a screwed-up
sort of way. I know I do. But take it from me, it won't last. A day or
two and we're going to start feeling another way, the _old_ way, if we
don't get busy."

I knew he was right. You don't shake Old Urge Number One anything like
that easy.
