through; there were none of the fringe thoughts that the six were used
to in each other.

"That's true," thought Reinhardt. "You see, we have been at this a good
deal longer than you." Then he directed his thoughts at members of the
crew of the spaceship, but they could still be heard by the six
prisoners. "All right, men, get those people off those rocks. We have to
make room for another batch."

The airlock in the side of the ship opened, and a dozen spacesuited men
leaped out. The propulsion units in their hands guided them toward the
prison asteroids.

"Give them all anaesthetic except Sager and Pederson," Reinhardt
ordered. "They won't need it." Then, with a note of apology, "I'm sorry
we'll have to anaesthetize you, but you've been in one position so long
that moving you will be rather painful. We have to get you to a hospital
quickly."

The minds of the six prisoners were frantically pounding questions at
the PD chief, but he gave them no answer. "No; wait until you're
better."

The spacesuited rescuers went to the "back" of each asteroid and
injected sleep-gas into the oxygen line that ran from the tank to the
spacesuit of the prisoner.

Houston could smell the sweetish, pungent odor in his helmet. Just
before he blacked out, he hurled one last accusing thought at Reinhardt.

"_You're_ the one who's been framing Controllers!"

"Naturally, Houston," came the answer. "How else could I get you out
here?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston woke up in a hospital bed. He was weak and hungry, but he felt
no pain. As he came up from unconsciousness, he felt a fully awake mind
guiding him out of the darkness.

It was Reinhardt.

"You're a tough man, Houston," he said mentally. "The others won't wake
up for a while yet."

He was sitting on a chair next to the bed, holding a smouldering
cigarette in one hand. He looked strange, somehow, and it took Houston a
moment to realize that there was a smile on that broad, normally
expressionless face.

Houston focussed his eyes on the man's face. "I want an explanation,
Reinhardt," he said aloud. "And it better be a damned good one."

"I give you free access to my mind," Reinhardt said. "See for yourself
if my method wasn't the best one."

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston probed. The explanation, if not the best, was better than any
Houston could have thought of.

When the hatred of the normal-minded people of Earth had been turned
against the Controllers because of the actions of a few megalomaniacs,
it had become obvious that legal steps had to be taken to prevent mob
violence.

It had been Reinhardt himself who had suggested the Penal method to the
UN government. At first, he had simply thought of it as a method to
keep the Controllers alive until he could think of something better. But
when he had discovered, by accident, what a small group of Controllers,
alone in space, could do, he had set up the present machinery.

As soon as a Controller was spotted, a careful frame-up was arranged.
Then, when several had been found, they were arrested in quick
succession and sent to the asteroids.

Always and invariably, they had done what Houston's group had done--the
sane or potentially sane ones had improved themselves tremendously,
while the megalomaniacs had lapsed into catatonia.

"Why couldn't it be done on Earth?" Houston asked.

"We tried it," Reinhardt said. "It didn't work. Safe, on Earth,
surrounded by Normals, a Controller still feels the hatred around him.
He can't open his mind completely. Only the certain knowledge of
impending death, and a complete freedom from the hatred of Normals can
free the mind.

"And that's why you couldn't be told beforehand; if you knew you were
going to be rescued, you wouldn't open up."

Houston nodded. It made sense. "Where are we now?" he asked.

"Antarctica," said Reinhardt. "We've built an outpost here--almost
self-sufficient. When you're in better shape physically, I'll show you
around."

"Do you mean that everyone who's been arrested is here, in Antarctica?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Reinhardt laughed. "No, not by a long shot. Most of us are back out in
civilization, searching for new, undiscovered Controllers, so that we
can frame them. And, of course, some of us--the insane ones--have died.
They will themselves to die when the going gets too tough."

"Searching for recruits? Then the Group that Dorrine was working for
was--"

Reinhardt shook his head. "No. They were going about it the wrong way,
just as you thought. We picked up the whole lot of them last week;
they're occupying the asteroids now."

"What do you do with the insane catatonics?"

"Put them under hibernene and keep them alive. We hope, someday, to
figure out a method of restoring their sanity. Until then, let them
sleep."

Houston narrowed his eyes. "How long have you known I was a Controller,
Reinhardt?"

The Prussian smiled. "Ever since you first tried to probe me.
Fortunately, my training enabled me to put up a shield that you couldn't
penetrate; I seemed like a Normal to you.

"I kept you on because I knew you'd be useful in cracking Lasser and his
gang when the time came. No one else could have done what you did that
night."

"Thanks," Houston said sincerely. "What's going to happen now? After I
get well, I mean."

"You'll do what the others have done. A little plastic surgery to change
your face a trifle, a little record-juggling to give you a new identity,
and you'll be ready to go back to work for the PD Police.

"If anyone recognizes you, it's easy to take over their minds just long
enough to make them forget. We allow that much Controlling."

"And then what?" Houston wanted to know. "What happens in the long run?"

"In a way," said Reinhardt, "your friend Sager was right. The
Controllers will eventually become the rulers of Earth. But not by force
or trickery. We must just bide our time. More and more of us are being
born all the time; the Normals are becoming fewer and fewer. Within a
century, we will outnumber them--we will be the Normals, not they.

"But they'll never know what's going on. The last Normal will die
without ever knowing that he is in a world of telepaths.

"By the time that comes about, we'll no longer need the Penal Cluster,
since Controllers will be born into a world where there is no fear of
non-telepaths."

"I wonder," Houston mused, "I wonder how this ability came about. Why is
the human race acquiring telepathy so suddenly?"

Reinhardt shrugged. "I can give you many explanations--atomic radiation,
cosmic rays, natural evolution. But none of them really explains it.
They just make it easier to live with.

"I think something similar must have happened a few hundred thousand
years ago, when Cro-Magnon man, our own ancestors, first developed true
intelligence instead of the pseudo-intelligence, the highly developed
instincts, of the Neanderthals and other para-men.

"Within a relatively short time, the para-men had died out, leaving the
Cro-Magnon, with his true intelligence, to rule Earth."

Reinhardt stood up. "Why is it happening? We don't know. Maybe we never
will know, any more than we know why Man developed intelligence." He
shrugged. "Perhaps the only explanation we'll ever have is to call it
the Will of God and let it go at that."

"Maybe that's the best explanation, after all," Houston said.

"Perhaps. Who knows?" Reinhardt crushed his cigarette out in a tray.
"I'll go now, and let you get some rest. And don't worry; I'll have you
notified as soon as Dorrine starts to come out of it."

"Thanks--Chief," Houston said as Reinhardt left the room.

David Houston lay back in his bed and closed his eyes.

For the first time in his life, he felt completely at peace--with
himself, and with the Universe.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ September 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Penal Cluster, by
Ivar Jorgensen (AKA Randall Garrett)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PENAL CLUSTER ***

***** This file should be named 25061.txt or 25061.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/0/6/25061/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
