sometimes put pins into their ears and so break the "drum." That is a
very bad thing to do. Use only a soft towel in washing your ears. You
should never put any thing hard or sharp into them.

I must tell you a short ear story, about my father, when he was a small
boy.

One day, when playing on the floor, he laid his ear to the crack of the
door, to feel the wind blow into it. He was so young that he did not
know it was wrong; but the next day he had the earache severely.
Although he lived to be an old man, he often had the earache. He thought
it began from the time when the wind blew into his ear from under that
door.


ALCOHOL AND THE SENSES.

All this fine work of touching, tasting, seeing, smelling, and hearing,
is nerve work.

The man who is in the habit of using alcoholic drinks can not touch,
taste, see, smell, or hear so well as he ought. His hands tremble, his
speech is sometimes thick, and often he can not walk straight.
Sometimes, he thinks he sees things when he does not, because his poor
nerves are so confused by alcohol that they can not do their work.

Answer now for your taste, smell, and touch, and also for your sight and
hearing; should their beautiful work be spoiled by alcohol?


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. Name the five senses.

          2. What is the pupil of the eye?

          3. How is it made larger or smaller?

          4. Why does it change in size?

          5. What can a cat's eyes do?

          6. Where is the nerve of the eye?

          7. What work does it do?

          8. Why must one be careful of his eyes?

          9. Where should the light be for reading or
          studying?

          10. Tell the story of the boys who looked at the
          sun.

          11. Tell the story of the boy who made himself
          cross-eyed.

          12. Why should you not read in the twilight?

          13. What would be the result, if you should kill
          the nerves of sight?

          14. Where are the true ears?

          15. How may the nerves of hearing be injured?

          16. Tell the story of the boy who injured his ear.

          17. How is the work of the senses affected by
          drinking liquor?




CHAPTER XVIII.

HEAT AND COLD.


WHAT MAKES US WARM?

"[Illustration: M]Y thick, warm clothes make me warm," says some child.

No! Your thick, warm clothes keep you warm. They do not make you warm.

Take a brisk run, and your blood will flow faster and you will be warm
very quickly.

On a cold day, the teamster claps his hands and swings his arms to make
his blood flow quickly and warm him.

Every child knows that he is warm inside; for if his fingers are cold,
he puts them into his mouth to warm them.

If you should put a little thermometer into your mouth, or under your
tongue, the mercury (m[~e]r'ku r[)y]) would rise as high as it does out
of doors on a hot, summer day.

This would be the same in summer or winter, in a warm country or a cold
one, if you were well and the work of your body was going on steadily.


WHERE DOES THIS HEAT COME FROM?

Some of the work which is all the time going on inside your body, makes
this heat.

The blood is thus warmed, and then it carries the heat to every part of
the body. The faster the blood flows, the more heat it brings, and the
warmer we feel.

In children, the heart pumps from eighty to ninety times a minute.

This is faster than it works in old people, and this is one reason why
children are generally much warmer than old people.

But we are losing heat all the time.

You may breathe in cold air; but that which you breathe out is warm. A
great deal of heat from your warm body is all the time passing off
through your skin, into the cooler air about you. For this reason, a
room full of people is much warmer than the same room when empty.


CLOTHING.

We put on clothes to keep in the heat which we already have, and to
prevent the cold air from reaching our skins and carrying off too much
heat in that way.

Most of you children are too young to choose what clothes you will wear.
Others decide for you. You know, however, that woolen under-garments
keep you warm in winter, and that thick boots and stockings should be
worn in cold weather. Thin dresses or boots may look pretty; but they
are not safe for winter wear, even at a party.

A healthy, happy child, dressed in clothes which are suitable for the
season, is pleasanter to look at than one whose dress, though rich and
handsome, is not warm enough for health or comfort.

When you feel cold, take exercise, if possible. This will make the hot
blood flow all through your body and warm it. If you can not, you should
put on more clothes, go to a warm room, in some way get warm and keep
warm, or the cold will make you sick.


TAKING COLD.

If your skin is chilled, the tiny mouths of the perspiration tubes are
sometimes closed and can not throw out the waste matter. Then, if one
part fails to do its work, other parts must suffer. Perhaps the inside
skin becomes inflamed, or the throat and lungs, and you have a cold, or
a cough.


ALCOHOL AND COLD.

People used to think that nothing would warm one so well on a cold day,
as a glass of whiskey, or other alcoholic drink.

It is true that, if a person drinks a little alcohol, he will feel a
burning in the throat, and presently a glowing heat on the skin.

The alcohol has made the hot blood rush into the tiny tubes near the
skin, and he thinks it has warmed him.

But if all this heat comes to the skin, the cold air has a chance to
carry away more than usual. In a very little time, the drinker will be
colder than before. Perhaps he will not know it; for the cheating
alcohol will have deadened his nerves so that they send no message to
the brain. Then he may not have sense enough to put on more clothing and
may freeze. He may even, if it is very cold, freeze to death.

People, who have not been drinking alcohol are sometimes frozen; but
they would have frozen much quicker if they had drunk it.

Horse-car drivers and omnibus drivers have a hard time on a cold winter
day. They are often cheated into thinking that alcohol will keep them
warm; but doctors have learned that it is the water-drinkers who hold
out best against the cold. Alcohol can not really keep a person warm.

All children are interested in stories about Arctic explorers, whose
ships get frozen into great ice-fields, who travel on sledges drawn by
dogs, and sometimes live in Esquimau huts, and drink oil, and eat walrus
meat.

These men tell us that alcohol will not keep them warm, and you know
why.

The hunters and trappers in the snowy regions of the Rocky Mountains say
the same thing. Alcohol not only can not keep them warm; but it lessens
their power to resist cold.

[Illustration: _Scene in the Arctic regions._]

Many of you have heard about the Greely party who were brought home from
the Arctic seas, after they had been starving and freezing for many
months.

There were twenty-six men in all. Of these, nineteen died. Seven were
found alive by their rescuers; one of these died soon afterward. The
first man who died, was the only one of the party who had ever been a
drunkard.

Of the nineteen who died, all but one used tobacco. Of the six now
living,--four never used tobacco at all; and the other two, very seldom.

The tobacco was no real help to them in time of trouble. It had probably
weakened their stomachs, so that they could not make the best use of
such poor food as they had.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. Why do you wear thick clothes in cold weather?

          2. How can you prove that you are warm inside?

          3. What makes this heat?

          4. What carries this heat through your body?

          5. How rapidly does your heart beat?

          6. How are you losing heat all the time?

          7. How can you warm yourself without going to the
          fire?

          8. Will alcohol make you warmer, or colder?

          9. How does it cheat you into thinking that you
          will be warmer for drinking it?

          10. What do the people who travel in very cold
          countries, tell us about the use of alcohol?

          11. How did tobacco affect the men who went to the
          Arctic seas with Lieutenant Greely?




CHAPTER XIX.

WASTED MONEY.


COST OF ALCOHOL.

[Illustration: N]OW that you have learned about your bodies, and what
alcohol will do to them, you ought also to know that alcohol costs a
great deal of money. Money spent for that which will do no good, but
only harm, is certainly wasted, and worse than wasted.

If a boy or a girl save ten cents a week, it will take ten weeks to save
a dollar.

You can all think of many good and pleasant ways to spend a dollar. What
would the beer-drinker do with it? If he takes two mugs of beer a day,
the dollar will be used up in ten days. But we ought not to say used,
because that word will make us think it was spent usefully. We will say,
instead, the dollar will be wasted, in ten days.

If he spends it for wine or whiskey, it will go sooner, as these cost
more. If no money was spent for liquor in this country, people would not
so often be sick, or poor, or bad, or wretched. We should not need so
many policemen, and jails, and prisons, as we have now. If no liquor was
drunk, men, women, and children would be better and happier.


COST OF TOBACCO.

Most of you have a little money of your own. Perhaps you earned a part,
or the whole of it, yourselves. You are planning what to do with it, and
that is a very pleasant kind of planning.

Do you think it would be wise to make a dollar bill into a tight little
roll, light one end of it with a match, and then let it slowly burn up?
That would be wasting it, you say! (_See Frontispiece._)

Yes! it would be wasted, if thus burned. It would be worse than wasted,
if, while burning, it should also hurt the person who held it. If you
should buy cigars or tobacco with your dollar, and smoke them, you could
soon burn up the dollar and hurt yourselves besides.

Can you count a million? Can you count a hundred millions? Try some day
to do this counting. Then, when you begin to have some idea how much six
hundred millions is, remember that six hundred million dollars are spent
in this country every year for tobacco--burned up--wasted--worse than
wasted.

Do you think the farmer who planted tobacco instead of corn, did any
good to the world by the change?


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. How may one waste money?

          2. Name some good ways for spending money.

          3. How does the liquor-drinker spend his money?

          4. What could we do, if no money was spent for
          liquor?

          5. Tell two ways in which you could burn up a
          dollar bill.

          6. Which would be the safer way?

          7. How much money is spent for tobacco, yearly, in
          this country?

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

This book contains pronunciation codes. These are indicated in the text
by the following

          breve: [)i]
          macron: [=i]
          tilde: [~i]
          slash through the letter: [\l]

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Health Primer For Primary
Classes, by Jane Andrews

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEALTH PRIMER ***

***** This file should be named 25646.txt or 25646.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/6/4/25646/

Produced by Stephen Hope, Joseph Cooper, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

