to many Tao also had sent emissaries who were fast winning converts to his
cause.

"Do all these people who believe in Tao expect to go to our earth when it
is conquered?" I asked Miela. "How can they--so many of them--hope to
benefit in that way? Aren't they satisfied here?"

Miela smiled sadly.

"No people can ever be satisfied--all of them. That you must know, my
husband. They have many grievances against our ruler. Many things they
want which he cannot give. Tao may promise these things--and if they
believe his promise it is very bad."

"He might come over here and try to make himself king," Mercer said
suddenly. "If it's like that maybe he could do it, too, with this grand
earth-conquest getting ready. Tell the king that--see what he says."

"He says that he realizes and fears it," Miela answered. "But he thinks
that first Tao will go to your earth, and he may never come back. So much
may happen--"

"So he's just going to wait," I explained. "Well, _we're_ not just going
to wait. Ask the king what our status is."

"Ask him about me," Mercer put in. "Are those Tao men going to grab me the
minute I show my face on the street, or will he protect me?"

Miela translated this to the king, adding something of her own to which he
evidently agreed.

"It is as I thought," she said. "He believes he can present you to the
people as men of earth who are our guests, and that they will accept you
in friendly spirit, most of them."

The king spoke to one of his advisers, who abruptly left the room.

"He will call the people now," Miela went on, "and will speak to them from
the tower--all who can leave their tasks to come. You will stand there
with him. He will ask that we of the Light Country allow you to remain
here in peace among us. And this captive earth man of Tao's"--she laid her
hand lightly on Mercer's shoulder--"he will ask, too, that he be given
sanctuary among us. Our people still are kindly--most of them--and they
will see the justice of what he asks."

I suggested then that Miela tell the king that we had determined, if we
could, to frustrate Tao in his plans; and showed her how to point out to
him that such an outcome would, if successful, make his throne secure and
insure peace for his nation.

He asked me bluntly what it was I thought I could do. The vague beginnings
of a plan were forming in my mind. "Tell him, Miela, I think we can rid
the Light Country of Tao's emissaries--send them back--without causing any
disturbances among the people. Ask him if that would not be a good thing."

The king nodded gravely as this was translated.

"He asks you how?" Miela said next.

"Tell him, Miela, that there are some things that might happen of which he
would be very glad, but which it might be better he did not know. You
understand. Make him see that we will be responsible for this--that he
needn't have anything to do with it or know anything about it. Then, if we
do anything wrong against your laws, he will be perfectly safe in stopping
and punishing us."

Miela nodded, and began swiftly telling this to the king. As she spoke I
saw his eyes twinkle and a swift little series of nods from the aged men
about the table made me know that I had carried my point. During the
latter part of this talk I had noticed the growing murmur of voices
outside the castle. The old man who had left the room at the king's order
came back.

"The people now are gathering," Miela said. "In a moment we shall go up
into the tower."

The king's councilors now rose and withdrew, and a few moments later the
king, without formality, led the four of us through the castle and up into
the tower.

We climbed a little stone staircase in the tower and came into a circular
room some sixty feet above the ground. A small doorway from this room gave
access to the narrow balcony which girdled the tower. The sounds of the
gathering crowd came up plainly from the gardens below. We waited for a
time, and then, at a sign from the king, stepped together upon the
balcony.

The gardens below were full of people--gathered among the palms and moving
about for points of vantage from which to obtain a view of the balcony.
Most of them were men and older women. The girls were, nearly all of them,
in the air, flying about the tower and hovering near the balcony, staring
at us curiously. The women were, for the most part, dressed as I have
described Lua.

The men wore knee-length trousers of fabric or leather, and sometimes a
shirt or leather jacket, although a difference of costume that made
evident the rank of the wearer was noticeable in both sexes. All were
bareheaded, with the exception of the king's guards, who were thus plainly
distinguishable, standing idly about among the crowd.

As we stepped out into view of the people a louder murmur arose, mingled
with a ripple of applause. Three or four girls, hovering only a few feet
in front of us, clapped their hands and laughed. The king placed Mercer
and me on either side of him, and, standing with his hands on our
shoulders, leaned over the balcony rail and began to speak.

A silence fell over the crowd; they listened quietly, but with none of
that respect and awe with which a people usually faces its king.

Miela whispered to me. "He is telling them about your earth, and that you
came here to visit us in friendly spirit."

There were some murmurs of dissent as the king proceeded, and once some
bolder individual shouted up a question, at which a wave of laughter
arose. As it died away, and the crowd appeared to listen to the king's
next words, a stone suddenly came whirling up from below, narrowly missing
the king's head. A sudden hush fell over the people at this hostile act;
then a tumult of shouting broke loose, and a commotion off to one side
showed where the offender was standing.

Mercer wheeled toward me, his face white with anger.

"Who did that--did you see him? Which one was it?"

The king began to speak, as if nothing had occurred, and an instant later
several more stones whistled past us. The commotion in the crowd grew more
violent, but it was evident that a great majority of the people were
against this demonstration.

"It is better we go inside," Miela said quietly.

The king was shouting down to his guards now, but they stood apathetically
by, taking no part.

Another stone hurtled past us, striking the tower and falling at our feet.
The king abruptly ceased his shouting and left the balcony. As he passed
me and I glanced into his frightened face I felt a sudden sense of pity
for this gentle, kindly old man, so well-meaning, but so utterly
ineffective as a ruler.

I was about to pull Miela back into the room when a girl flew up to the
balcony railing. As she balanced herself upon it I saw it was Anina. She
said something to Miela, who turned swiftly to me.

"She is right, my husband. We must not leave the matter like this. They
can have no confidence in you--our women most of all--if you do not do
something now. A sign of your strength now would make them respect
you--perhaps one of those who threw the stones you could punish."

I knew she was right. Most of the crowd was with us. If we retreated now,
those against us would grow bolder--our appearance on the street might at
any time be dangerous. But if now we proved ourselves superior in
strength, the popular sentiment in our favor would be just that much
stronger. At least, that is the way it seemed to me.

I did not need to ask Mercer's opinion, for at Miela's words he
immediately said: "That's my idea. Just give me a chance at them."

He leaned over the balcony. "How are we going to get down there? It's too
far to drop."

Miela spoke to Anina, and they both flew away. In a moment they were back
with two other girls. All four clung to the outside of the balcony
railing, and formed a cross with their joined hands. Into this little seat
of their arms I clambered. My weight was too great for them to have lifted
me up, but they fluttered safely with me to the ground, landing in a heap
among the people, who had cleared a space to receive us. As soon as I was
upon my feet the girls flew back for Mercer, and in a moment more he was
beside me.

"If we only knew who threw those stones," I said.

I stood erect, and my greater height enabled me to see over the heads of
the people easily.

Miela laid her hand on my arm.

"One of them I know. His name is Baar, a bad character. He has caused much
trouble in the past."

She then told me hastily that she and Anina would fly up and seek him out.
Mercer and I were to follow them through the crowd on the ground.

The throng was pushing close about us now, although those nearest us tried
to keep away as best they could. Miela and Anina flew up over our heads,
and, side by side, Mercer and I started off. The people struggled back
before our advance, striving to make a path for us. At times the press of
those behind made it impossible for them to give us room. We did not
hesitate, but shoved our way forward, elbowing them away roughly.

Suddenly, some twenty feet ahead of us, I saw Miela and Anina come to the
ground, and in a moment more we were with them again.

The crowd was less dense here, and about us there was a considerable open
space, Miela pointed out a man leaning against the trunk of a palm tree
near by and glaring at us malevolently.

"That is he," she said quietly. "A very bad man--this Baar--whom many
would like to see punished."

Mercer jumped forward, but I swept him back with my arm.

"Leave him to me," I said. "You stand here by the girls. If I need you,
I'll shout."

The man by the tree was a squat little individual, some five feet three or
four inches tall, and extraordinarily broad. He was bareheaded, with black
hair falling to his shoulders. He was naked to the waist, exposing a
powerful torso. His single garment was the usual knee-length trousers. I
thought I had never seen so evil a face as his, as he stood there, holding
his ground before my slow advance, and leering at me. His cheek bones were
high, his jowls heavy, his little eyes set wide apart. His nose was flat,
as though it had once been broken.

I went straight up to him, and he did not move. There were certainly three
hundred people watching us as I stood there facing him.

"You threw a stone at your king," I said to him sternly, although I knew
perfectly well he could not understand my words. "You shall be punished."

I reached out suddenly and struck him in the face as smartly as I could
with the flat of my hand. He gave a roar of surprise and pain, and as soon
as he could recover from my blow lunged at me with a snarl of rage.

As he came I turned and darted swiftly away. I heard a shout of surprise
from Mercer. "It's all right," he called. "Wait."

I ran about twenty feet, then turned and waited. The man came on, head
down, charging like a mad bull. When he was close upon me I gathered my
muscles and sprang clear over his head, landing well behind him.

He stopped and looked around confusedly, evidently not quite sure at first
what had become of me.

Mercer gave a shout of glee, and, to my great satisfaction, I heard it
taken up by the crowd, mingled with murmurs of surprise and awe.

I stood quiet, and again my opponent charged me. I eluded him easily, and
then for fully ten minutes I taunted and baited him this way, as a
skillful toreador taunts his bull. The crowd now seemed to enjoy the
affair hugely.

Finally I darted behind my adversary and, catching him by the shoulders,
tripped him and laid him on his back on the ground A great roar of
laughter went up from the onlookers.

The man was on his feet again in an instant, breathing heavily, for indeed
he had nearly winded himself by his exertions. I ran over to Mercer.

"Go on," I said; "show them what you can do."

The commotion of this contest had drawn many other spectators about us
now, but they kept a space clear, pushing back hurriedly before our sudden
rushes. At my words Mercer darted forward eagerly. His first move was to
leap some twenty feet across the open space. This smaller opponent seemed
to give the Mercutian new courage.

He shouted exultantly and dashed at Mercer, who stood quietly waiting for
him at the edge of the crowd.

Mercer's ideas evidently were different from mine, for as his adversary
came within reach he stepped nimbly aside and hit him a vicious blow in
the face. The man toppled over backward and lay still.

I ran over to where Mercer was bending over his fallen foe. As I came up
he straightened and grinned at me. "Oh, shucks," he said disgustedly. "You
can't fight up here--it's too easy."



CHAPTER XV.


THE MOUNTAIN CONCLAVE.


"It is reasonable," Miela said thoughtfully. "And that our women will help
as you say--of that I am sure."

We were gathered in the living room after the evening meal, and I had
given them my ideas of how we should start meeting the situation that
confronted us. We had had no more trouble that day. After the encounter in
the king's garden Mercer and I had followed the two girls swiftly home. We
were not molested in the streets, although the people crowded about us
wherever we went.

"Why did none of Baar's friends come to his rescue up there in the
garden?" I asked Miela. "Surely there must have been many of them about."

"They were afraid, perhaps," she answered. "And they knew the people were
against them. There might have been serious trouble; for that is not their
way--to fight in the open."

Her face became very grave. "We must be very careful, my husband, that
they, or Tao's men do not come here to harm you while you sleep."

"Why do you suppose they ever happened to bring me here in the first
place?" Mercer wanted to know. "That's what I can't figure out."

"They knew not that Alan was here," said Miela. "I think they wanted to
show you to our people as their captive--one of the earth-men."

Mercer chuckled.

"They didn't know what a good runner I was, or they'd never have taken a
chance like that."

I told Miela then my plan for enlisting the sympathy of the women of the
Light Country and for securing the active cooperation of the girls in
ridding us of the disturbing presence of these Tao emissaries.

We planned that whatever we did should be in secret, so far as possible.
Mercer and I talked together, while Miela consulted with Lua at length.

I explained to Mercer that Tao might at any time send an expedition to
invade the Light Country.

"How about that car we came from earth in?" he suggested. "He could sail
over in that, couldn't he--if he should want to come over here?"

I knew that was not feasible. In the outer realms of space the balancing
attractions of the different heavenly bodies made it easy enough to head
in any specified direction; but for travel over a planet's surface it was
quite impractical. Its rise and fall could be perfectly governed; but when
it was directed laterally the case was very different. Just where it would
go could not be determined with enough exactness.

Miela turned back to us from her consultation with Lua.

"In the mountains, high up and far beyond the Valley of the Sun," she
said, "lies a secret place known only to our women. Our mother says that
she and I and Anina can spread the news among our virgins to gather there
to-morrow at the time of sleep. Only to those we know we can trust will we
speak--and they will have no men to whom to tell our plans. To-morrow they
will gather up there in the clouds, among the crags, unseen by prying
eyes. And you and our--our friend Ollie"--she smiled as she used the
nickname by which he had asked her to call him--"you two we will take
there by the method you have told us. We will arrange, up there in secret,
what it is we are to do to help our world and yours."

This, in effect, was our immediate plan of procedure. Nearly all the next
day Mercer and I stayed about the house, while the three women went
through the city quietly, calling forth all those they could reach to our
conclave in the mountains.

They returned some time after midday. Miela came first, alighting with a
swift, triumphant swoop upon the roof where Mercer and I were sitting.

One glance at her face told me she had been successful.

"They will come, my husband," she announced. "And they are ready and
eager, all of them, to do what they can."

Anina and Lua brought the same news. When we were all together again
Mercer and I took them to the garden behind the house and showed them what
we had done while they were away.

It was my plan to have the girls carry Mercer and me through the air with
them. For that purpose we had built a platform of bamboo, which now lay
ready in the garden.

Miela clapped her hands at sight of it. "That is perfect, my husband. No
difficulty will there be in taking you with us now."

The platform was six feet wide by ten long. It rested upon a frame with
two poles of bamboo some forty feet in length running lengthwise along its
edges. These two poles thus projected in front and back of the platform
fifteen feet each way. Running under them crosswise at intervals were
other, shorter bamboo lengths which projected out the sides a few feet to
form handles. There were ten of them on a side at intervals of four feet.

I found it difficult to realize the difference between night and day,
since here on Mercury the light never changed. I longed now for that
darkness of our own earth which would make it so much easier for us to
conceal our movements. Miela relieved my mind on that score, however, by
explaining that at nearly the same hour almost every one in the city fell
asleep. The physical desire for sleep was, I learned, much stronger with
the Mercutians than with us; and only by the drinking of a certain
medicinal beverage could they ward it off.

It was after the evening meal, at a time which might have corresponded to
an hour or so before midnight, that the selected eighteen girls began to
arrive. Miela brought them into the living room with us until they were
all together.

It was a curious gathering--this bevy of Mercutian maidens. They all
seemed between the ages of sixteen and twenty-three--fragile, dainty
little wisps of femininity, yet having a strength in their highly
developed wing muscles that was truly surprising.

They were dressed in the characteristic costume I have described, with
only a slight divergence of color or ornamentation. They were of only two
types--jet black tresses, black eyes, and red-feathered wings like Miela;
or the less vivid, more ethereal Anina--blue-eyed, golden-haired, with
wing feathers of light blue.

When they had all arrived we went into the garden behind the house. In a
moment more Mercer and I were seated side by side on the little bamboo
platform. Miela and Anina took the center positions so that they would be
near us. The other girls ranged themselves along the sides, each grasping
one of the handles.

In another moment we were in the air. My first sensation was one of a
sudden rushing forward and upward. The frail little craft swayed under me
alarmingly, but I soon grew used to that. The flapping of those many pairs
of huge wings so close was very loud; the wind of our swift forward flight
whistled past my ears. Looking down over the side of the platform, between
the bodies of two of the girls, I could see the city silently dropping
away beneath us. Above there was nothing but the same dead gray sky, black
in front, with occasional vivid lightning flashes and the rumble of
distant thunder.

Underneath the storm cloud, far ahead, the jagged tops of a range of
mountains projected above the horizon. As I watched they seemed slowly
