a body with oxygen, attended by the disengagement of light and heat.

EMILY.

But are there no combustible bodies whose attraction for oxygen is so
strong, that they will combine with it, without the application of heat?

CAROLINE.

That cannot be; otherwise we should see bodies burning spontaneously.

MRS. B.

But there are some instances of this kind, such as phosphorus,
potassium, and some compound bodies, which I shall hereafter make you
acquainted with. These bodies, however, are prepared by art, for in
general, all the combustions that could occur spontaneously, at the
temperature of the atmosphere, have already taken place; therefore new
combustions cannot happen without the temperature of the body being
raised. Some bodies, however, will burn at a much lower temperature than
others.

CAROLINE.

But the common way of burning a body is not merely to approach it to one
already on fire, but rather to put the one in actual contact with the
other, as when I burn this piece of paper by holding it in the flame of
the fire.

MRS. B.

The closer it is in contact with the source of caloric, the sooner will
its temperature be raised to the degree necessary for it to burn. If you
hold it near the fire, the same effect will be produced; but more time
will be required, as you found to be the case with the piece of stick.

EMILY.

But why is it not necessary to continue applying caloric throughout the
process of combustion, in order to keep up the electric energy of the
wood, which is required to enable it to combine with the oxygen?

MRS. B.

The caloric which is gradually produced by the two electricities during
combustion, keeps up the temperature of the burning body; so that when
once combustion has begun, no further application of caloric is
required.

CAROLINE.

Since I have learnt this wonderful theory of combustion, I cannot take
my eyes from the fire; and I can scarcely conceive that the heat and
light, which I always supposed to proceed entirely from the coals, are
really produced as much by the atmosphere.

EMILY.

When you blow the fire, you increase the combustion, I suppose, by
supplying the coals with a greater quantity of oxygen gas?

MRS. B.

Certainly; but of course no blowing will produce combustion, unless the
temperature of the coals be first raised. A single spark, however, is
sometimes sufficient to produce that effect; for, as I said before, when
once combustion has commenced, the caloric disengaged is sufficient to
elevate the temperature of the rest of the body, provided that there be
a free access of oxygen. It however sometimes happens that if a fire be
ill made, it will be extinguished before all the fuel is consumed, from
the very circumstance of the combustion being so slow that the caloric
disengaged is insufficient to keep up the temperature of the fuel. You
must recollect that there are three things required in order to produce
combustion; a combustible body, oxygen, and a temperature at which the
one will combine with the other.

EMILY.

You said that combustion was one method of decomposing the atmosphere,
and obtaining the nitrogen gas in its simple state; but how do you
secure this gas, and prevent it from mixing with the rest of the
atmosphere?

MRS. B.

It is necessary for this purpose to burn the body within a close vessel,
which is easily done. --We shall introduce a small lighted taper (PLATE
VII. Fig. 1.) under this glass receiver, which stands in a bason over
water, to prevent all communication with the external air.

  [Illustration: Plate VII. Vol. I. p. 181.

  Fig. 1. Combustion of a taper under a receiver.

  Fig. 2. A Retort on a stand.

  Fig. 3. Preparation of oxygen gas.
  A Furnace.
  B Earthen Retort in the furnace.
  C Water bath.
  D Receiver.
  E.E Tube conveying the gas from the Retort through the water into
    the Receiver.
  F.F.F Shelf perforated on which the Receiver stands.

  Fig. 4. Combustion of iron wire in oxygen gas.]

CAROLINE.

How dim the light burns already! --It is now extinguished.

MRS. B.

Can you tell us why it is extinguished?

CAROLINE.

Let me consider. --The receiver was full of atmospherical air; the
taper, in burning within it, must have combined with the oxygen
contained in that air, and the caloric that was disengaged produced the
light of the taper. But when the whole of the oxygen was absorbed, the
whole of its electricity was disengaged; consequently no more caloric
could be produced, the taper ceased to burn, and the flame was
extinguished.

MRS. B.

Your explanation is perfectly correct.

EMILY.

The two constituents of the oxygen gas being thus disposed of, what
remains under the receiver must be pure nitrogen gas?

MRS. B.

There are some circumstances which prevent the nitrogen gas, thus
obtained, from being perfectly pure; but we may easily try whether the
oxygen has disappeared, by putting another lighted taper under it. --You
see how instantaneously the flame is extinguished, for want of oxygen to
supply the negative electricity required for the formation of caloric;
and were you to put an animal under the receiver, it would immediately
be suffocated. But that is an experiment which I do not think your
curiosity will tempt you to try.

EMILY.

Certainly not. --But look, Mrs. B., the receiver is full of a thick
white smoke. Is that nitrogen gas?

MRS. B.

No, my dear; nitrogen gas is perfectly transparent and invisible, like
common air. This cloudiness proceeds from a variety of exhalations,
which arise from the burning taper, and the nature of which you cannot
yet understand.

CAROLINE.

The water within the receiver has now risen a little above its level in
the bason. What is the reason of this?

MRS. B.

With a moment's reflection, I dare say, you would have explained it
yourself. The water rises in consequence of the oxygen gas within it
having been destroyed, or rather decomposed, by the combustion of the
taper.

CAROLINE.

Then why did not the water rise immediately when the oxygen gas was
destroyed?

MRS. B.

Because the heat of the taper, whilst burning, produced a dilatation of
the air in the vessel, which at first counteracted this effect.

Another means of decomposing the atmosphere is the _oxygenation_ of
certain metals. This process is very analogous to combustion; it is,
indeed, only a more general term to express the combination of a body
with oxygen.

CAROLINE.

In what respect, then, does it differ from combustion?

MRS. B.

The combination of oxygen in combustion is always accompanied by a
disengagement of light and heat; whilst this circumstance is not a
necessary consequence of simple oxygenation.

CAROLINE.

But how can a body absorb oxygen without the combination of the two
electricities which produce caloric?

MRS. B.

Oxygen does not always present itself in a gaseous state; it is a
constituent part of a vast number of bodies, both solid and liquid, in
which it exists in a much denser state than in the atmosphere; and from
these bodies it may be obtained without much disengagement of caloric.
It may likewise, in some cases, be absorbed from the atmosphere without
any sensible production of light and heat; for, if the process be slow,
the caloric is disengaged in such small quantities, and so gradually,
that it is not capable of producing either light or heat. In this case
the absorption of oxygen is called _oxygenation_ or _oxydation_, instead
of _combustion_, as the production of sensible light and heat is
essential to the latter.

EMILY.

I wonder that metals can unite with oxygen; for, as they are so dense,
their attraction of aggregation must be very great; and I should have
thought that oxygen could never have penetrated such bodies.

MRS. B.

Their strong attraction for oxygen counterbalances this obstacle. Most
metals, however, require to be made red-hot before they are capable of
attracting oxygen in any considerable quantity. By this combination they
lose most of their metallic properties, and fall into a kind of powder,
formerly called _calx_, but now much more properly termed an _oxyd_;
thus we have _oxyd of lead_, _oxyd of iron_, &c.

EMILY.

And in the Voltaic battery, it is, I suppose, an oxyd of zinc, that is
formed by the union of the oxygen with that metal?

MRS. B.

Yes, it is.

CAROLINE.

The word oxyd, then, simply means a metal combined with oxygen?

MRS. B.

Yes; but the term is not confined to metals, though chiefly applied to
them. Any body whatever, that has combined with a certain quantity of
oxygen, either by means of oxydation or combustion, is called an _oxyd_,
and is said to be _oxydated_ or _oxygenated_.

EMILY.

Metals, when converted into oxyds, become, I suppose, negative?

MRS. B.

Not in general; because in most oxyds the positive energy of the metal
more than counterbalances the native energy of the oxygen with which it
combines.

This black powder is an oxyd of manganese, a metal which has so strong
an affinity for oxygen, that it attracts that substance from the
atmosphere at any known temperature: it is therefore never found in its
metallic form, but always in that of an oxyd, in which state, you see,
it has very little of the appearance of a metal. It is now heavier than
it was before oxydation, in consequence of the additional weight of the
oxygen with which it has combined.

CAROLINE.

I am very glad to hear that; for I confess I could not help having some
doubts whether oxygen was really a substance, as it is not to be
obtained in a simple and palpable state; but its weight is, I think,
a decisive proof of its being a real body.

MRS. B.

It is easy to estimate its weight, by separating it from the manganese,
and finding how much the latter has lost.

EMILY.

But if you can take the oxygen from the metal, shall we not then have it
in its palpable simple state?

MRS. B.

No; for I can only separate the oxygen from the manganese, by presenting
to it some other body, for which it has a greater affinity than for the
manganese. Caloric affording the two electricities is decomposed, and
one of them uniting with the oxygen, restores it to the aeriform state.

EMILY.

But you said just now, that manganese would attract oxygen from the
atmosphere in which it is combined with the negative electricity; how,
therefore, can the oxygen have a superior affinity for that electricity,
since it abandons it to combine with the manganese?

MRS. B.

I give you credit for this objection, Emily; and the only answer I can
make to it is, that the mutual affinities of metals for oxygen, and of
oxygen for electricity, vary at different temperatures; a certain degree
of heat will, therefore, dispose a metal to combine with oxygen, whilst,
on the contrary, the former will be compelled to part with the latter,
when the temperature is further increased. I have put some oxyd of
manganese into a retort, which is an earthen vessel with a bent neck,
such as you see here. (PLATE VII. Fig. 2.) --The retort containing the
manganese you cannot see, as I have enclosed it in this furnace, where
it is now red-hot. But, in order to make you sensible of the escape of
the gas, which is itself invisible, I have connected the neck of the
retort with this bent tube, the extremity of which is immersed in this
vessel of water. (PLATE VII. Fig. 3.) --Do you see the bubbles of air
rise through the water?

CAROLINE.

Perfectly. This, then, is pure oxygen gas; what a pity it should be
lost! Could you not preserve it?

MRS. B.

We shall collect it in this receiver. --For this purpose, you observe,
I first fill it with water, in order to exclude the atmospherical air;
and then place it over the bubbles that issue from the retort, so as to
make them rise through the water to the upper part of the receiver.

EMILY.

The bubbles of oxygen gas rise, I suppose, from their specific levity?

MRS. B.

Yes; for though oxygen forms rather a heavy gas, it is light compared to
water. You see how it gradually displaces the water from the receiver.
It is now full of gas, and I may leave it inverted in water on this
shelf, where I can keep the gas as long as I choose, for future
experiments. This apparatus (which is indispensable in all experiments
in which gases are concerned) is called a water-bath.

CAROLINE.

It is a very clever contrivance, indeed; equally simple and useful. How
convenient the shelf is for the receiver to rest upon under water, and
the holes in it for the gas to pass into the receiver! I long to make
some experiments with this apparatus.

MRS. B.

I shall try your skill that way, when you have a little more experience.
I am now going to show you an experiment, which proves, in a very
striking manner, how essential oxygen is to combustion. You will see
that iron itself will burn in this gas, in the most rapid and brilliant
manner.

CAROLINE.

Really! I did not know that it was possible to burn iron.

EMILY.

Iron is a simple body, and you know, Caroline, that all simple bodies
are naturally positive, and therefore must have an affinity for oxygen.

MRS. B.

Iron will, however, not burn in atmospherical air without a very great
elevation of temperature; but it is eminently combustible in pure oxygen
gas; and what will surprise you still more, it can be set on fire
without any considerable rise of temperature. You see this spiral iron
wire--I fasten it at one end to this cork, which is made to fit an
opening at the top of the glass-receiver. (PLATE VII. Fig. 4.)

EMILY.

I see the opening in the receiver; but it is carefully closed by a
ground glass-stopper.

MRS. B.

That is in order to prevent the gas from escaping; but I shall take out
the stopper, and put in the cork, to which the wire hangs. --Now I mean
to burn this wire in the oxygen gas, but I must fix a small piece of
lighted tinder to the extremity of it, in order to give the first
impulse to combustion; for, however powerful oxygen is in promoting
combustion, you must recollect that it cannot take place without some
elevation of temperature. I shall now introduce the wire into the
receiver, by quickly changing the stoppers.

CAROLINE.

Is there no danger of the gas escaping while you change the stoppers?

MRS. B.

Oxygen gas is a little heavier than atmospherical air, therefore it will
not mix with it very rapidly; and, if I do not leave the opening
uncovered, we shall not lose any----

CAROLINE.

Oh, what a brilliant and beautiful flame!

EMILY.

It is as white and dazzling as the sun! --Now a piece of the melted wire
drops to the bottom: I fear it is extinguished; but no, it burns again
as bright as ever.

MRS. B.

It will burn till the wire is entirely consumed, provided the oxygen is
not first expended: for you know it can burn only while there is oxygen
to combine with it.

CAROLINE.

I never saw a more beautiful light. My eyes can hardly bear it! How
astonishing to think that all this caloric was contained in the small
quantity of gas and iron that was enclosed in the receiver; and that,
without producing any sensible heat!

CAROLINE.

How wonderfully quick combustion goes on in pure oxygen gas! But pray,
are these drops of burnt iron as heavy as the wire was before?

MRS. B.

They are even heavier; for the iron, in burning, has acquired exactly
the weight of the oxygen which has disappeared, and is now combined with
it. It has become an oxyd of iron.

CAROLINE.

I do not know what you mean by saying that the oxygen has _disappeared_,
Mrs. B., for it was always invisible.

MRS. B.

True, my dear; the expression was incorrect. But though you could not
see the oxygen gas, I believe you had no doubt of its presence, as the
effect it produced on the wire was sufficiently evident.

CAROLINE.

Yes, indeed; yet you know it was the caloric, and not the oxygen gas
itself, that dazzled us so much.

MRS. B.

You are not quite correct in your turn, in saying the caloric dazzled
you; for caloric is invisible; it affects only the sense of feeling; it
was the light which dazzled you.

CAROLINE.

True; but light and caloric are such constant companions, that it is
difficult to separate them, even in idea.

MRS. B.

The easier it is to confound them, the more careful you should be in
making the distinction.

CAROLINE.

But why has the water now risen, and filled part of the receiver?

MRS. B.

Indeed, Caroline, I did not suppose you would have asked such a
question! I dare say, Emily, you can answer it.

EMILY.

Let me reflect . . . . . . The oxygen has combined with the wire; the
caloric has escaped; consequently nothing can remain in the receiver,
and the water will rise to fill the vacuum.

CAROLINE.

I wonder that I did not think of that. I wish that we had weighed the
wire and the oxygen gas before combustion; we might then have found
whether the weight of the oxyd was equal to that of both.

MRS. B.

You might try the experiment if you particularly wished it; but I can
assure you, that, if accurately performed, it never fails to show that
the additional weight of the oxyd is precisely equal to that of the
oxygen absorbed, whether the process has been a real combustion, or a
simple oxygenation.

CAROLINE.

But this cannot be the case with combustions in general; for when any
substance is burnt in the common air, so far from increasing in weight,
it is evidently diminished, and sometimes entirely consumed.

MRS. B.

But what do you mean by the expression _consumed_? You cannot suppose
that the smallest particle of any substance in nature can be actually
destroyed. A compound body is decomposed by combustion; some of its
constituent parts fly off in a gaseous form, while others remain in a
concrete state; the former are called the _volatile_, the latter the
_fixed products_ of combustion. But if we collect the whole of them, we
shall always find that they exceed the weight of the combustible body,
by that of the oxygen which has combined with them during combustion.

EMILY.

In the combustion of a coal fire, then, I suppose that the ashes are
what would be called the fixed product, and the smoke the volatile
product?

MRS. B.

Yet when the fire burns best, and the quantity of volatile products
should be the greatest, there is no smoke; how can you account for that?

EMILY.

Indeed I cannot; therefore I suppose that I was not right in my
conjecture.

MRS. B.

Not quite: ashes, as you supposed, are a fixed product of combustion;
but smoke, properly speaking, is not one of the volatile products, as it
consists of some minute undecomposed particles of the coals that are
carried off by the heated air without being burnt, and are either
deposited in the form of soot, or dispersed by the wind. Smoke,
therefore, ultimately, becomes one of the _fixed_ products of
combustion. And you may easily conceive that the stronger the fire is,
the less smoke is produced, because the fewer particles escape
combustion. On this principle depends the invention of Argand's Patent
Lamps; a current of air is made to pass through the cylindrical wick of
the lamp, by which means it is so plentifully supplied with oxygen, that
scarcely a particle of oil escapes combustion, nor is there any smoke
produced.

EMILY.

But what then are the volatile products of combustion?

MRS. B.

Various new compounds, with which you are not yet acquainted, and which
being converted by caloric either into vapour or gas, are invisible; but
they can be collected, and we shall examine them at some future period.

CAROLINE.

There are then other gases, besides the oxygen and nitrogen gases.

MRS. B.

Yes, several: any substance that can assume and maintain the form of an
elastic fluid at the temperature of the atmosphere, is called a gas. We
shall examine the several gases in their respective places; but we must
now confine our attention to those that compose the atmosphere.

I shall show you another method of decomposing the atmosphere, which is
very simple. In breathing, we retain a portion of the oxygen, and expire
the nitrogen gas; so that if we breathe in a closed vessel, for a
certain length of time, the air within it will be deprived of its oxygen
gas. Which of you will make the experiment?

CAROLINE.

I should be very glad to try it.

MRS. B.

Very well; breathe several times through this glass tube into the
receiver with which it is connected, until you feel that your breath is
exhausted.

CAROLINE.

I am quite out of breath already!

MRS. B.

Now let us try the gas with a lighted taper.

EMILY.

It is very pure nitrogen gas, for the taper is immediately extinguished.

MRS. B.

That is not a proof of its being pure, but only of the absence of
oxygen, as it is that principle alone which can produce combustion,
every other gas being absolutely incapable of it.

EMILY.

In the methods which you have shown us, for decomposing the atmosphere,
the oxygen always abandons the nitrogen; but is there no way of taking
the nitrogen from the oxygen, so as to obtain the latter pure from the
atmosphere?

MRS. B.

You must observe, that whenever oxygen is taken from the atmosphere, it
is by decomposing the oxygen gas; we cannot do the same with the
nitrogen gas, because nitrogen has a stronger affinity for caloric than
for any other known principle: it appears impossible therefore to
separate it from the atmosphere by the power of affinities. But if we
cannot obtain the oxygen gas, by this means, in its separate state, we
have no difficulty (as you have seen) to procure it in its gaseous form,
by taking it from those substances that have absorbed it from the
atmosphere, as we did with the oxyd of manganese.

EMILY.

Can atmospherical air be recomposed, by mixing due proportions of oxygen
and nitrogen gases?

MRS. B.

Yes: if about one part of oxygen gas be mixed with about four parts of
nitrogen gas, atmospherical air is produced.*

    [Footnote *: The proportion of oxygen in the atmosphere varies
    from 21 to 22 per cent.]

EMILY.

The air, then, must be an oxyd of nitrogen?

MRS. B.

No, my dear; for there must be a chemical combination between oxygen and
nitrogen in order to produce an oxyd; whilst in the atmosphere these two
substances are separately combined with caloric, forming two distinct
gases, which are simply mixed in the formation of the atmosphere.

I shall say nothing more of oxygen and nitrogen at present, as we shall
continually have occasion to refer to them in our future conversations.
They are both very abundant in nature; nitrogen is the most plentiful in
the atmosphere, and exists also in all animal substances; oxygen forms a
constituent part, both of the animal and vegetable kingdoms, from which
it may be obtained by a variety of chemical means. But it is now time to
conclude our lesson. I am afraid you have learnt more to-day than you
will be able to remember.

CAROLINE.

I assure you that I have been too much interested in it, ever to forget
it. In regard to nitrogen there seems to be but little to remember; it
makes a very insignificant figure in comparison to oxygen, although it
composes a much larger portion of the atmosphere.

MRS. B.

Perhaps this insignificance you complain of may arise from the compound
nature of nitrogen, for though I have hitherto considered it as a simple
body, because it is not known in any natural process to be decomposed,
yet from some experiments of Sir H. Davy, there appears to be reason for
suspecting that nitrogen is a compound body, as we shall see afterwards.
But even in its simple state, it will not appear so insignificant when
you are better acquainted with it; for though it seems to perform but a
passive part in the atmosphere, and has no very striking properties,
when considered in its separate state, yet you will see by-and-bye what
a very important agent it becomes, when combined with other bodies. But
no more of this at present; we must reserve it for its proper place.




CONVERSATION VII.

ON HYDROGEN.


CAROLINE.

The next simple bodies we come to are CHLORINE and IODINE. Pray what
kinds of substances are these; are they also invisible?

MRS. B.

No; for chlorine, in the state of gas, has a distinct greenish colour,
and is therefore visible; and iodine, in the same state, has a beautiful
claret-red colour. The knowledge of these two bodies, however, and the
explanation of their properties, imply various considerations, which you
would not yet be able to understand; we shall therefore defer their
examination to some future conversation, and we shall pass on to the
next simple substance, HYDROGEN, which we cannot, any more than oxygen,
obtain in a visible or palpable form. We are acquainted with it only in
its gaseous state, as we are with oxygen and nitrogen.

CAROLINE.

But in its gaseous state it cannot be called a simple substance, since
it is combined with heat and electricity?

MRS. B.

True, my dear; but as we do not know in nature of any substance which is
not more or less combined with caloric and electricity, we are apt to
say that a substance is in its pure state when combined with those
agents only.

Hydrogen was formerly called _inflammable air_, as it is extremely
combustible, and burns with a great flame. Since the invention of the
new nomenclature, it has obtained the name of hydrogen, which is derived
from two Greek words, the meaning of which is, _to produce water_.

EMILY.

And how does hydrogen produce water?

MRS. B.

By its combustion. Water is composed of eighty-five parts, by weight, of
oxygen, combined with fifteen parts of hydrogen; or of two parts, by
bulk of hydrogen gas, to one part of oxygen gas.

CAROLINE.

Really! is it possible that water should be a combination of two gases,
and that one of these should be inflammable air! Hydrogen must be a most
extraordinary gas that will produce both fire and water.

EMILY.

But I thought you said that combustion could take place in no gas but
oxygen?

MRS. B.

Do you recollect what the process of combustion consists in?
