"But, my father, if you will only let me----"

"I am tired," interrupted the even, expressionless tones. "Go away and
leave me to sleep. To-morrow we will cut out this Houseman's eyes and
tongue, so that he may see nothing and tell nothing. Then you may have
him for your plaything--it will be better so."

The eyelids fell, and the old man slept placidly, his face serene as
that of a babe. The two boys stole quietly away.

Down a narrow passage and a flight of stairs into a dark, cool room,
underground, as Constans conjectured. Ulick left him there, counselling
quiet and repose for the next few hours.

It was night when Ulick finally appeared and conducted his departing
guest to the open air. The moon had not yet risen, and the danger of
detection was practically past.

"You are sure that you can find your boat," whispered Ulick, as they
stood facing each other, curiously loath to part.

"Yes," answered Constans, "for I shall follow the river straight down.
It will take a little longer, but that matters not. Good-bye; I sha'n't
forget."

A slender figure slipped out from the shadow of a doorway and confronted
them. It was Esmay, and she spoke with serene gravity.

"Since you and Ulick are friends you ought to make it up with me also.
But not unless you really want to," she added, hastily.

Constans smiled with youthful cynicism.

"Of course," he answered, magnificently condescending. "You are a woman,
and knew no better."

She snatched her hand away. "Yes, I am a woman, Master Constans, and
some day you will know what that means." She moved away, majestically as
does a goddess, conscious of her power but magnanimously refraining from
using it. Constans and Ulick laughed after the manner of men-kind who
find it easy to disbelieve in what they do not understand. Then, with a
long hand-grip, they parted.

The canoe was still in its hiding-place underneath the ruined pier, and
Constans's first care was to stow away in the stern-locker the two
volumes of the scientific cyclopaedia that he had been reading at the
time of his capture. Ulick of his own volition had stolen the books from
the library hall, and had put them into Constans's hands at the moment
of parting. They made a heavy load for him to carry, but what a precious
burden it was and how gladly he assumed it! For these were the keys of
power.

As Constans paddled out into the stream he heard the steady thumping of
oars in rowlock. He shoved back into the shadow of the pier just as a
great galley filled with men came foaming down the river. Constans could
see that it was a war-vessel of the largest size, for there were full
sixty oars on a side arranged in two banks. The figure-head was the
representation of a black swan, and on the poop-deck stood the slight,
graceful figure of a man wearing a plumed hat. Constans saw him remove
the cigar from his lips as he turned to give an order. Instantly the
port-oars held and backed, and the galley, swinging round on her heel,
headed up-stream again, passing within fifty yards of Constans's
hiding-place. The boy's bow was in his hand, but he had not attempted to
fit an arrow to the string. "It will come--the time," he said, under his
breath.

Constans stared gravely after the _Black Swan_ as she drove along. But
for the best of good-fortune he might now be tugging at a heavy ashen
oar, with the lash of the deck-master striping his back. Ulick,
Esmay--yes, he had much to remember.

Two hours later he had scaled the wall of Croye, without being
discovered by the sleepy sentinels, and was safe on his pallet of
corn-husks in Messer Hugolin's attic.




X

THE MESSAGE


Three years had passed since that first memorable visit to Doom the
Forbidden--years of work and of growth. The simple out-door life and the
physical toil had been good discipline for Constans, and he was now a
well-built young fellow of two-and-twenty, nearly six feet tall and with
muscles like steel wire.

The nights, too, had afforded compensation for the labors of the day,
for then he could read and study. The two big volumes of the scientific
cyclopaedia had been his school-masters, and he had striven faithfully to
learn of them. What a wonderful lesson it had been, for while there was
much in this teaching that he could not understand at all, there was
much again that, with the aid of the illustrations and diagrams, he
could make really his own. And so, little by little, he had been able to
reconstruct, in imagination, at least, the lost civilization of the
ancient world; how men had tamed the lightning and bade it speak their
will and work their pleasure; how the same vapor that issued from the
pot bubbling on Martina's fire could be harnessed and made to draw a
hundred wagons at once upon the old-time steel-railed highways; how a
child's hand on the crank of a machine-gun might hurl invisible death
among a regiment of men and put even an army to flight. Steam and
gunpowder and electricity, what wonderful ideas were connoted in the
words! The very names thrilled him with a sense of infinite power.

A wonderfully fascinating study, and yet at times it left him
unspeakably weary and depressed, for what did all this knowledge avail
without the practical means to apply it? The great machines that the
ancients had built, what were they now but masses of red rust, useless
alike to the fool who laughed at them and to the visionary who could
only dream of their magnificent potentialities.

A dream, for, in truth, a lion was in the way. So long as the Doomsmen
held sway in the land, so long must the wheels of progress stay locked.
Unable to use themselves the treasures of knowledge stored under their
hands, they were unwilling that another should even touch them. What
could he or any other one man do?

Once, indeed, during the three years, Constans had found brief
opportunity to revisit the scenes of his old home in the valley of the
Swiftwater. In this general district of the West Inch were to be found
nearly all of the larger estates, a fitting cradling-place, it would
seem, for the new liberty, the awakening era.

But time was not yet come, as Constans soon saw clearly. He had been
hospitably enough received, for the country-side had not forgotten the
story of the Greenwood Keep, and it was plain to see that this
clear-eyed, well-set-up lad was of the true Stockader breed. One of his
father's bond-friends, Piers Major, of the River Barony, had even
offered Constans a home under his roof-tree in exchange for
sword-service. But this he declined, with becoming gratitude indeed,
but none the less firmly. He had no fancy to spend the rest of his life
in a trooper's saddle riding down naked savages--an agreeable
occupation, whose only variation was an afternoon at pig-sticking or a
chance crack at some Doomsman's head. Better to endure the drudgery of
the tan-pits than to part with all purpose in life.

And so the crusade, which Constans had hoped to father, died at its
birth. The kinsmen and friends of his family were sincere enough in
their sympathy, but they could not be expected to risk their own skins
in the furtherance of his private quarrels, and, so far as it was a
question of political economy or of patriotism, these easy-going
gentlemen troubled themselves not one whit. For the most part the
Doomsmen kept their distance from a Stockader's threshold, and
_laissez-faire_ was a good motto for both sides to adopt.

Constans returned to Croye and to Messer Hugolin's attic neither
overmuch surprised nor discouraged by the results of his mission. After
all, his ultimate object was a personal one--his revenge--and only his
own hand could discharge that debt in full. Did the time seem over-long,
the way unendurably lonely and toilsome? He had only to close his eyes
to remember--to remember. And so the years had passed.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the noon spell on a day in late October, and Constans sat on the
river end of the long wooden pier at the tanyard eating his luncheon of
bread and bacon scraps. The tide was running up slowly, as could be
noted from the bubbles and drift-wood that circled past the piling of
the wharf, and Constans, happening to glance down into the swirl, saw
something that brought him to his feet. Nothing more remarkable than a
bottle of thick, greenish glass, but bottles of any kind had become
valuable now that the art of glass blowing was so little practised, and
such flotsam was not to be despised.

Having strung a length of noosed cord to a light pole, Constans threw
himself flat along the string-piece of the pier and began angling for
the prize. A failure or two and then he had it snared securely; now it
was in his hand.

The bottle was foul with slime and fungous growth, showing that it had
been in the water for a long period. Possibly it had been out to sea and
back many times before this particular flood-tide had brought it to
Messer Hugolin's tannery and under the eyes of one who would have the
wit to distinguish it from a rotten stick. At all events it had found a
port at last.

The bottle had been corked and then sealed with pitch, and Constans had
to use some care in getting at its contents, a slender cylinder of
tightly rolled paper. Finally he succeeded in drawing it out uninjured,
and saw that it was superscribed to his uncle Hugolin.

The old man looked up with a frown as Constans presented himself at the
door of the counting-room. The rest hour was over and Constans's place
was at the tan-pit. How was the work to get done if everybody shirked
their part of the common task? A message in a bottle. What foolery was
this? Nevertheless, Messer Hugolin extended his hand to receive the
roll, and, removing the waxed string that bound it, knit his brows over
the enclosure--half a dozen sheets of writing. Constans was about to
retire discreetly, but Messer Hugolin raised his hand.

"The writing is too fine for my eyes," he grumbled. "Read it for me,
nephew; but, harkee! you will keep your mouth shut whatever its import."
Then, in a sudden gust of passion: "A thousand plagues on that fool of
an up-river factor who broke for me my reading-glass! Not another one to
be had in Croye for good-will or gold, and I compelled to borrow
another's eyes, to live at the mercy of my meanest clerk. Come, boy, you
must have the sense of it by this time!"

"Shall I read it aloud?" asked Constans, and then, in compliance with
his uncle's nod, he began:

     "'Dated at Doom, in the year 90 after the Great Change.

     "'It is a score of years my brother, since that moonless August
     night when the Doomsmen came to Croye and I went back with them,
     tied to Mad Scarlett's saddle-bow. Twenty years of silence in the
     City of Silence, and I but a slim, brown-faced maid who might be
     found one day playing at polo and lamenting her lack of mustachios,
     and on the very next, mooning over a love charm. It was only
     through the look in my cousin Philip's eyes, as he died under the
     weight of the Doomsmen battle-axes, that I knew myself a woman,
     that I finally entered upon my sex's heritage of sorrow.

     "'Does this seem an old and hardly remembered tale to you, Anthony
     Hugolin, Councillor Primus of Croye, and a rich man, if one may
     judge from the yearly tax rate that stands opposite your name in
     Dom Gillian's head list? Withal, you are still my brother, and you
     must listen to what I have now to say, the first and the last word
     from me to you.

     "'I must be just and acknowledge that he truly loved me, the man
     who plucked me like an apple from the bough; later on he made what
     amends he could by proclaiming me his wife under the Doomsman law.
     Yet it was a tiger-cat rather than a woman whom he had taken to his
     bosom, and I wonder now that I did not a thousand times overpass
     the limits of his forbearance. Assuredly, in that first agony, I
     tried my hardest to stretch his patience to the breaking-point, in
     the hope that a knife-thrust might open for me the doors of the
     prison-house. You see, I was very young, and I could not forget my
     cousin Philip's eyes.

     "'A woman's heart is like a cup; it holds but one fixed quantity of
     life's essential liquor, be the latter sweet or bitter. An infinity
     of little sips or one deep draught, what does it matter? The vessel
     is empty in either case. Yet, as time went on, I grew to endure
     existence; afterwards, when my Esmay was born, I valued it again
     for her sake. Moreover, she was his daughter as well as mine, and
     so I came finally to endure and even to welcome the touch of my
     master's hand. In all these years it had never been aught but
     gentle, for all that they called him Mad Scarlett, and the children
     were taught to believe that he always wore gloves, because he had a
     bloody palm whose stain no water would wash away. Yes, and I wept,
     as any wife and mother might do, on that gray November day when I
     knelt beside his bier.

     "'But this concerns only myself, and it is of Esmay, my daughter,
     that I would speak. In a year she will be seventeen, and before
     that time, if at all, the way must be opened for her to go to her
     mother's people. I am helpless, except for this one opportunity of
     committing a message to the hands of Chance, one slender line
     dropped into the ocean of uncertainty. Yet nothing remains to me
     but to make the cast, for in six months' time I shall be dead; I
     can count the downward steps of my disease as clearly as though
     they formed part of the actual stairway under my feet.

     "'And this also I know--that the message will reach you, my
     brother; so far, at least, my eyes are permitted to explore the
     advancing darkness. You will assuredly receive this letter, but
     with what disposition of heart? That, alas! I may not know. Nor can
     I give aught of service in either counsel or means; I must trust to
     your love and good-will for everything. I can only say that the
     girl is known to all in Doom as Mad Scarlett's daughter. She has
     her father's tawny hair and red-brown eyes, and her name, as I have
     already told you, is Esmay.

     "'To-morrow night I shall make my opportunity to reach the river
     edge unobserved. I shall then commit to the current the bottle
     containing this message, a precious freight, for it is my darling's
     life and happiness.

     "'To you, my brother, the gift and the grace of God, according as
     you deal with me and mine.
                                  ELENA.

            *       *       *       *       *

     "'Watch him whom they call Quinton Edge.'"


"The date is a year ago, lacking a month," added Constans, as he handed
the roll to his uncle.

Messer Hugolin tied up the document with a piece of tape, labelled it
with the date of receipt, and laid it away in a pigeon-hole.

"Well?" said Constans, interrogatively.

"Do you want me to put myself within reach of the Gray Wolf's paws?"
retorted Messer Hugolin, shrewdly. "I was flayed badly enough the last
time the _Black Swan_ cast anchor before Croye, and I am not paying
between rent-days."

"The year is almost up," urged Constans, insistently.

"I have lived my life," returned the old man, with sombre fixity of
resolve, "and these things do not interest me. I have other use for my
hands than to keep them stretched out idly in the dark."

"But that letter--a mother pleading for her child. You have but to give
