process, by which a better imitation is produced. The ground is
prepared by one or more coats of white lead changed two or three
shades with yellow ochre. When dry, a thin staining of burnt
terra-de-sienna ground in water, containing a very little sugar or
gumarabic is laid on the work, and while this continues moist and
flowing, the graining is applied. The graining should consist of a
mixture of black and rose pink, ground in the staining compound. This
must be varnished when dry, with copal varnish. Some prefer, however,
to grind the staining and graining in oil, diluted with spirits of
turpentine. The learner must have some sample pieces of varnished
rosewood before him when graining.

       *       *       *       *       *




INDIA RUBBER.


The substance called India Rubber, or Caoutchouc, was not known in
Europe until the beginning of the eighteenth century. It was
originally brought as a great curiosity from South America. Europeans
continued ignorant of its origin until a deputation of the French
Academicians undertook a voyage to South America in 1735, for the
purpose of obtaining the correct admeasurement of a degree of the
meridian. These philosophers did not confine their attention to the
one great object of their pursuit, but among other interesting
discoveries made themselves acquainted with that peculiar
substance--caoutchouc. These Academicians discovered at Emeralds, in
Brazil, trees called by the natives _heve_, whence flowed a juice,
which, when dried, proved to be what is called India Rubber. The
_heve_ was also found growing in Cayenne, and on the banks of the
Amazon river. It has since been discovered that caoutchouc may be
obtained from another species of tree growing in South America, called
_jatropha elastica_. If these trees are punctured, a milky juice flows
out, which, on exposure to the air, thickens into a substance of a
pure white color, having neither taste nor smell. The hue of the
caoutchouc of commerce is black in consequence of the method employed
in drying it. The usual manner of performing this operation is to
spread a thin coating of the milky juice upon the moulds made of clay,
and fashioned into a variety of figures. These are then dried by
exposure to the heat of a smoke-fire: another layer is then spread
over the first, and dried by the same means; and thus layer after
layer is put on, until the whole is of the required thickness. While
yet soft it will receive and retain any impression that may be given
to if on the outside. When perfectly dry the clay within is broken
into small fragments by percussion, and the pieces are drawn out
through the aperture which is always left fur the purpose. The common
bottle of India Rubber, therefore, consists of numerous layers of pure
caoutchouc, alternating with as many layers of soot.

The natives of those parts of South America to which these trees are
indigenous, convert the juice to a variety of purposes. They collect
it chiefly in the rainy season, because, though it will exude at all
times, it flows then most abundantly. Boots are made of it by the
Indians, through which water cannot penetrate; and the inhabitants of
Quito prepare a kind of cloth with it, which they apply to the same
purposes as those for which oil-cloth or tarpaulin, it used here.
This, no doubt, is similar to the cloth now prepared with this
substance in America, the use of which yields so many important
advantages.--_Youths' Gazette_.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMMUNICATION ON ATMOSPHERIC RESISTANCE.


The following letter has been on hand several weeks, but deferred on
account of a constant press of matter by which the limited space in
our former small sheet was crowded. Our respected correspondent has
consented to excuse the delay.

                                          Providence, ---- 1846.

_Friend Porter_: In January last, I addressed a few lines to you,
asking information in regard to an article entitled Atmospheric
Resistance, in the New York Mechanic, of December 11, 1841. In your
answer, you say if the full surface is 30,000 square feet to each
wing, (which makes 60,000 square feet,) only about half of one horse
power would be required to sustain this weight, and I understand you,
virtually to say, that they must be ten times as large, in order that
the strength of one man be sufficient to work this and elevate himself
together with the apparatus, if it were not too heavy. Now, this makes
600,000 square feet. This is rather more than 774 feet square: rather
large sized wings. One would suppose that they might lift rather
heavy, if they were very light, being 387 by 774 feet each. Now, to me
this is entirely incomprehensible, and I should like an explanation,
if this calculation is correct, how it is that an eagle which
sometimes weighs nearly thirty pounds, can elevate himself, with so
much ease, and even carry with him nearly his own weight, using a pair
of wings, which if they were five feet long and two feet wide each,
would make but twenty feet of surface. Thus, you will see, is no where
in proportion to the weight even of the eagle alone, (which we will
suppose to weigh twenty pounds,) that the wings bears to the 150
pounds, while on the other hand, it is near in proportion to the
surface of the wings of a pidgeon and its weight. Nor can I comprehend
why it would require so much power, the eagle though he exerts himself
considerable in rising, no doubt, does not seem to use power any where
in the proportion that you have thought would be required supposing
the wings to be made in the same proportion to the 150 pounds that his
wings are to his weight, his beats are not so quick but what they can
be very easily counted.

  By answering, you will much oblige,

                          your friend,
                              YANKEE.

In answer to the foregoing, we would remind our correspondent, that in
his former communication, he proposed a limited weight of apparatus,
and in our answer, it was far from our intention to allow an
additional weight on account of the requisite extent of surface. With
regard to the philosophy of the flight of the eagle, it must be borne
in mind that atmospheric resistance is as the square of the velocity
_downward_ and the only way in which the phenomenon of the flight
of the eagle can be reconciled with the laws of mechanical science as
established by experiment, is by supposing the velocity of the wing
downward to be equal to 70 feet per second, whereby a resistance would
be encountered equal to 12 pounds per square foot of surface to the
wings. It is a fact, however, that kites, and hawks are often seen to
continue suspended in the air several minutes without any apparent
motion of the wings; but by what law or theory the feat is
accomplished, natural philosophy has ventured no other conjecture than
that the bird is endowed with the faculty of suspending occasionally
its ordinary subjection to the laws of gravity. If any observing
theorist will give any more rational conjecture on the subject, we
should be glad to have him examine it.

       *       *       *       *       *


It is proposed and urged by the papers in several States, to have a
thanksgiving day throughout the Union, on the 26th of November.

       *       *       *       *       *


"As dull as a hoe," is a very common phrase, and implies that hoes are
necessarily or ordinarily dull. But it is advisible for farmers to
keep their hoes sharp, as they regard a saving of labor.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: the conical windlass]


THE CONICAL WINDLASS.


Various methods have been heretofore described, for raising heavy
bodies, or producing for other purposes, a great force,--usually
miscalled power--by the application of a comparatively small force:
but no method is known, more unlimited in its effect, or more simple
in construction; than the conical windlass. It consists of a simple
horizontal windlass, with a crank at one end, as shown in the
engraving. The windlass is made in a conical form, being a little
larger at one end, than at the other; and if the friction of its
bearings be relieved by the ordinary friction rollers, it will so far
multiply the force applied, as to break a double inch-rope, by the
power of one man at the crank. An endless rope, or one of which the
two ends are spliced together, is passed five or six times round the
small end of the windlass, and down under a single pulley below: then,
as the windlass is turned by the crank, the rope is constantly given
off from one part, while the circumference is greater. Now it is
plain, that if the windlass is one-fifth of an inch larger in
circumference, at the point at which the rope is taken up, than at the
place where it is given off to the pulley, that whatever may be
appended thereto, will be raised one tenth of an inch by each
revolution Then, if we suppose the crank lever to be fifteen inches,
the handle will travel about 100 inches, in each revolution, which
gives a power, or increase of force, of 1000 to one. Therefore, if 100
pounds of power be applied to the crank handle, it will be
sufficient--minus friction--to raise a weight of 100,000 lbs. The only
inconvenience in this apparatus, and which prevents its coming into
more general use, is, that it is too limited in the extent of its
motion, in consequence of the travelling of the rope from one end of
the windlass to the other. Thus, if the windlass be but twenty-five
inches long, and the rope one inch in diameter, it will admit only
twenty revolutions, without renewing. Yet, in many cases, in which an
article in required to be raised, or moved but a few inches, the
conical windlass will be found preferable to any other method.

       *       *       *       *       *




REQUISITE STRENGTH OF STEAM BOILERS.


Our correspondent S. B. cannot comprehend that the strength of iron
for a cylindrical boiler should Be in direct proportion to the
diameter thereof, in order to sustain an equal pressure per square
inch; wherefore, we must reason with him on the long scale. The
cohesive strength of good iron is 64,000 lbs. per square inch; and of
course, a strip of boiler-iron plate 1/8th inch thick will sustain
8000 lbs. If a boiler made of thin iron is 14 inches in diameter, or
44 inches in circumference, each inch of its length will contain 44
square inches, and either half thereof will contain 22 inches, and as
the pressure on this portion is sustained by at least two inches of
width of plate,--one inch on each side,--it follows that it will
sustain a pressure of at least 700 lbs. per square inch, in the
direction of circumference. If the diameter is double, the number of
square inches will be double, and will require double the thickness to
sustain equal pressure. With regard to the pressure endwise, the area
of a cylinder head 14 inches in diameter is 154 inches, and the
strength of the 44 inches of circumference would be sufficient to
sustain 352,000 lbs., which, divided by the area, is 2,275 lbs. per
square inch. If the diameter is 56 inches, the circumference being
172, would sustain a pressure endwise of 555 lbs. per inch. Thus it
will be seen that if the cylinder were even 20 feet in diameter, the
iron would better sustain the pressure on the head that on the
periphery. With regard to the requisite strength of the cylinder's
head, if they are made in a semi-spherical convex form, they will
require no more thickness of plate than the cylinder: but if they
consist of plane disks, the thickness thereof should bear the same
proportion to that of the periphery that the area in square inches
does to three times the circumference. But in general, no other rule
is observed for the thickness of the heads, than to make them
extravagantly heavy, without much regard to theoretic calculation.

       *       *       *       *       *




BAGLEY'S GOLD PENS.


Do our readers wish to hear any thing more about them? If so, they
have only to inquire of any one of the many thousands of writers who
have used these pens six months or more, and can hear the fact
attested, that these are decidedly the cheapest pens (at $4) that can
be any where found. Mr. Bagley has recently patented a neat, elegant,
and excellent improvement in the pen-holder, which "takes the shine
off" all precedents. Should our readers find a real good article in
this paper, they may know it was written with one of Bagley's pens.
Nuf ced.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HUMMING BIRD.


A gentleman who resided some time on one of the West India Islands
informs us that while he was once travelling along the bed of a deep
ravine overhung with thick vines, he was actually startled by the
immense numbers of humming birds which hovered over and about him.
They hovered about him as if actuated by curiosity alone. They were of
various kinds and colors, some of them being nearly as large as
sparrows, while others were but little larger than a bee. Some were of
a dingy green, or a light brown, while others seemed gaudily arrayed
in plumage as brilliant and variegated as the rainbow. They would
approach within arms length of his face, and pausing in their flight,
with their little wings, in rapid motion, would stare at him as if
they wondered what possible business he could have in those remote
wilds; but they exhibited no symptoms of terror, not having been
taught by experience to fear the cruelty of man.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEW YORK
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN:

_Published Weekly at_ 128 _Fulton Street_., (_Sun Building_,) _New York_.

BY MUNN & COMPANY.

The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN is the Advocate of Industry and Journal of
Mechanical and other Improvements: as such its contents are probably
more varied and interesting, than those of any other weekly newspaper in
the United States, and certainly more useful. It contains as much
interesting Intelligence as six ordinary daily papers, while for _real
benefit_, it is unequalled by any thing yet published. Each number
regularly contains from THREE to SIX ORIGINAL ENGRAVINGS, illustrated
by NEW INVENTIONS, American and Foreign,--SCIENTIFIC PRINCIPLES and
CURIOSITIES,--Notices of the progress of Mechanical and other
Scientific Improvements, Scientific Essays on the principles of the
Sciences of MECHANICS, CHEMISTRY and ARCHITECTURE,--Catalogues of
American Patents,--INSTRUCTION in various ARTS and TRADES, _with
engravings_,--Curious Philosophical Experiments,--the latest RAIL ROAD
INTELLIGENCE in EUROPE and AMERICA,--Valuable information on the Art
of GARDENING, &c. &c.

This paper is especially entitled to the patronage of MECHANICS and
MANUFACTURERS, being devoted to the interests of those classes. It is
particularly useful to FARMERS, as it will not only apprise them of
IMPROVEMENTS in AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS, but INSTRUCT them in various
MECHANICAL TRADES, and guard against impositions. As a FAMILY
NEWSPAPER, it will convey more USEFUL Intelligence to children and
young people, than five times its cost in school instruction.

Being published in QUARTO FORM, it is conveniently adapted to
PRESERVATION and BINDING.

TERMS.--The Scientific American is sent to subscribers in the country
at the rate of $2 a year, ONE DOLLAR IN ADVANCE, the remainder in 6
months. Persons desiring to subscribe, have only to enclose the amount
in a letter, directed to

                    MUNN & COMPANY,

Publishers of the Scientific American, New York.

[Symbol: right Index] Specimen copies sent when desired. All letters
must be POST PAID.





TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

[Symbol: right Index] is used where the text had a picture of a hand
with the index finger pointing right.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected without comment,
except in those articles where they were intentionally presented.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American magazine, Vol. 2
Issue 1, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, VOL. 2, ISSUE 1 ***

***** This file should be named 27867.txt or 27867.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/8/6/27867/

Produced by David T. Jones

