result. It can follow and find the original mass of any metallic
substance it may contain."

"Clever," commented Greg.

Russ lit his pipe, puffed comfortably. "We needed something like that."

The red light on the board snapped on and blinked. Russ reached out and
slammed home the lever, twirled dials. It was only another passenger
ship. They relaxed, but not too much.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I wonder what he's up to," said Russ.

Stutsman's car had stopped in the dock section of New York. Crumbling,
rotting piers and old tumbledown warehouses, deserted and unused since
the last ship sailed the ocean before giving way to air commerce, loomed
darkly, like grim ghosts, in the darkness.

Stutsman had gotten out of the car and said: "Wait here."

"Yes, sir," said the voice of the driver.

Stutsman strode away, down a dark street. The televisor kept pace with
him and on the screen he could be seen as a darker shape moving among
the shadows of that old, almost forgotten section of the Solar System's
greatest city.

Another shadow detached itself from the darkness of the street, shuffled
toward Stutsman.

"Sir," said a whining voice, "I haven't eaten ..."

There was a swift movement as Stutsman's stick lashed out, a thud as it
connected with the second shadow's head. The shadow crumpled on the
pavement. Stutsman strode on.

Greg sucked in his breath. "He isn't very sociable tonight."

Stutsman ducked into an alley where even deeper darkness lay. Russ, with
a delicate adjustment, slid the televisor along, closer to Stutsman,
determined not to lose sight of him for an instant.

The man suddenly turned into a doorway so black that nothing could be
seen. Sounds of sharp, impatient rappings came out of the screen as
Stutsman struck the door with his stick.

Brilliant illumination sprang out over the doorway, but Stutsman seemed
not to see it, went on knocking. The colors on the screen were
peculiarly distorted.

"Ultra-violet," grunted Greg. "Whoever he's calling on wants to have a
good look before letting anybody in."

The door creaked open and a shaft of normal light spewed out into the
street, turning its murkiness to pallid yellow.

Stutsman stepped inside.

The man at the door jerked his head. "Back room," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The televisor slid through the door into the lighted room behind
Stutsman. Dust lay thick on the woodwork and floors. Patches of plaster
had broken away. Furrows zigzagged across the floor, marking the path of
heavy boxes or furniture which had been pushed along in utter disdain of
the flooring. Cheap wall-paper hung in tatters from the walls, streaked
with water from some broken pipe.

But the back room was a startling contrast to the first. Rich,
comfortable furniture filled it. The floor was covered with a
steel-cloth rug and steel-cloth hangings, colorfully painted, hid the
walls.

A man sat under a lamp, reading a newspaper. He rose to his feet, like
the sudden uncoiling of springs.

Russ gasped. That face was one of the best known faces in the entire
Solar System. A ratlike face, with cruel cunning printed on it that had
been on front pages and TV screens often, but never for pay.

"Scorio!" whispered Russ.

Greg nodded and his lips were drawn tight.

"Stutsman," said Scorio, surprised. "You're the last person in the world
I was expecting. Come in. Have a chair. Make yourself comfortable."

Stutsman snorted. "This isn't a social call."

"I didn't figure it was," replied the gangster, "but sit down anyway."

Gingerly Stutsman sat down on the edge of a chair, hunched forward.
Scorio resumed his seat and waited.

"I have a job for you," Stutsman announced bluntly.

"Fine. It isn't often you have one for me. Three-four years ago, wasn't
it?"

"We may be watched," warned Stutsman.

The mobster started from his chair, his eyes darting about the room.

Stutsman grunted disgustedly. "If we're watched, there isn't anything we
can do about it."

"We can't, huh?" snarled the gangster. "Why not?"

"Because the watcher is on the West Coast. We can't reach him. If he's
watching, he can see every move we make, hear every word we say."

"Who is it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Greg Manning or Russ Page," said Stutsman. "You've heard of them?"

"Sure. I heard of them."

"They have a new kind of television," said Stutsman. "They can see and
hear everything that's happening on Earth, perhaps in all the Solar
System. But I don't think they're watching us now. Craven has a machine
that can detect their televisor. It registers certain field effects they
use. They weren't watching when I left Craven's laboratory just a few
minutes ago. They may have picked me up since, but I don't think so."

"So Craven has made a detector," said Greg calmly. "He can tell when
we're watching now."

"He's a clever cuss," agreed Russ.

"Take a look at that machine now," urged Scorio. "See if they're
watching. You shouldn't have come here. You should have let me know and
I would have met you some place. I can't have people knowing where my
hideout is."

"Quiet down," snapped Stutsman. "I haven't got the machine. It weighs
half a ton."

Scorio sank deeper into his chair, worried. "Do you want to take a
chance and talk business?"

"Certainly. That's why I'm here. This is the proposition. Manning and
Page are working in a laboratory out on the West Coast, in the
mountains. I'll give you the exact location later. They have some papers
we want. We wouldn't mind if something happened to the laboratory. It
might, for example blow up. But we want the papers first."

       *       *       *       *       *

Scorio said nothing. His face was quiet and cunning.

"Give me the papers," said Stutsman, "and I'll see that you get to any
planet you want to. And I'll give you two hundred thousand in
Interplanetary Credit certificates. Give me proof that the laboratory
blew up or melted down or something else happened to it and I'll boost
the figure to five hundred thousand."

Scorio did not move a muscle as he asked: "Why don't you have some of
your own mob do this job?"

"Because I can't be connected with it in any way," said Stutsman. "If
you slip up and something happens, I won't be able to do a thing for
you. That's why the price is high."

The gangster's eyes slitted. "If the papers are worth that much to you,
why wouldn't they be worth as much to me?"

"They wouldn't be worth a dime to you."

"Why not?"

"Because you couldn't read them," said Stutsman.

"I can read," retorted the gangster.

"Not the kind of language on those papers. There aren't more than two
dozen people in the Solar System who could read it, perhaps a dozen who
could understand it, maybe half a dozen who could follow the directions
in the papers." He leaned forward and jabbed a forefinger at the
gangster. "And there are only two people in the System who could write
it."

"What the hell kind of a language is it that only two dozen people could
read?"

"It isn't a language, really. It's mathematics."

"Oh, arithmetic."

"No," Stutsman said. "Mathematics. You see? You don't even know the
difference between the two, so what good would the papers do you?"

Scorio nodded. "Yeah, you're right."




_CHAPTER ELEVEN_


The Paris-Berlin express thundered through the night, a gigantic ship
that rode high above the Earth. Far below one could see the dim lights
of eastern Europe.

Harry Wilson pressed his face against the window, staring down. There
was nothing to see but the tiny lights. They were alone, he and the
other occupants of the ship ... alone in the dark world that surrounded
them.

But Wilson sensed some other presence in the ship, someone besides the
pilot and his mechanics up ahead, the hostess and the three stodgy
traveling men who were his fellow passengers.

Wilson's hair ruffled at the base of his skull, tingling with an unknown
fear that left him shaken.

A voice whispered in his ear: "Harry Wilson. So you are running away!"

Just a tiny voice that seemed hardly a voice at all, it seemed at once
to come from far away and yet from very near. The voice, with an edge of
coldness on it, was one he never would forget.

He cowered in his seat, whimpering.

The voice came again: "Didn't I tell you that you couldn't run away?
That no matter where you went, I'd find you?"

"Go away," Wilson whispered huskily. "Leave me alone. Haven't you
hounded me enough?"

"No," answered the voice, "not enough. Not yet. You sold us out. You
warned Chambers about our energy and now Chambers is sending men to kill
us. But they won't succeed, Wilson."

"You can't hurt me," said Wilson defiantly. "You can't do anything but
talk to me. You're trying to drive me mad, but you can't. I won't let
you. I'm not going to pay any more attention to you."

The whisper chuckled.

"You can't," argued Wilson wildly. "All you can do is talk to me. You've
never done anything but that. You drove me out of New York and out of
London and now you're driving me out of Paris. But Berlin is as far as I
will go. I won't listen to you any more."

"Wilson," whispered the voice, "look inside your bag. The bag, Wilson,
where you are carrying that money. That stack of credit certificates.
Almost eleven thousand dollars, what is left of the twenty thousand
Chambers paid you."

With a wild cry Wilson clawed at his bag, snapped it open, pawed through
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The credit certificates were gone!

"You took my money," he shrieked. "You took everything I had. I haven't
got a cent. Nothing except a few dollars in my pocket."

"You haven't got that either, Wilson," whispered the voice.

There was a sound of ripping cloth as something like a great, powerful
hand flung aside Wilson's coat, tore away the inside pocket. There was a
brief flash of a wallet and a bundle of papers, which vanished.

The hostess was hurrying toward him.

"Is there something wrong?"

"They took ..." Wilson began and stopped.

What could he tell her? Could he say that a man half way across the
world had robbed him?

The three traveling men were looking at him.

"I'm sorry, miss," he stammered. "I really am. I fell asleep and
dreamed."

He sat down again, shaken. Shivering, he huddled back into the corner of
his seat. His hands explored the torn coat pocket. He was stranded, high
in the air, somewhere between Paris and Berlin ... stranded without
money, without a passport, with nothing but the clothes he wore and the
few personal effects in his bag.

Fighting to calm himself, he tried to reason out his plight. The plane
was entering the Central European Federation and that, definitely, was
no place to be without a passport or without visible means of support. A
thousand possibilities flashed through his mind. They might think he was
a spy. He might be cited for illegal entry. He might be framed by secret
police.

Terror perched on his shoulder and whispered to him. He shivered
violently and drew farther back into the corner of the seat. He clasped
his hands, beat them against his huddled knees.

He would cable friends back in America and have them identify him and
vouch for his character. He would borrow some money from them, just
enough to get back to America. But whom would he cable? And with aching
bitterness in his breast, Harry Wilson came face to face with the
horrible realization that nowhere in the world, nowhere in the Solar
System, was there a single person who was his friend. There was no one
to help him.

He bowed his head in his hands and sobbed, his shoulders jerking
spasmodically, the sobs racking his body.

The traveling men stared at him unable to understand. The hostess looked
briskly helpless. Wilson knew he looked like a scared fool and he didn't
care.

He _was_ scared.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gregory Manning riffled the sheaf of credit certificates, the wallet,
the passport and pile of other papers that lay upon the desk in front of
him.

"That closes one little incident," he said grimly. "That takes care of
our friend Wilson."

"Maybe you were a bit too harsh with him, Greg," suggested Russell Page.

Greg shook his head. "He was a traitor, the lowest thing alive. He sold
the confidence we placed in him. He traded something that was not his to
trade. He did it for money and now I've taken that money from him."

He shoved the pile of certificates to one side.

"Now I've got this stuff," he said, "I don't know what to do with it. We
don't want to keep it."

"Why not send it to Chambers?" suggested Russ. "He will find the
passport and the money on his desk in the morning. Give him something to
think about tomorrow."




_CHAPTER TWELVE_


Scorio snarled at the four men: "I want you to get the thing done right.
I don't want bungling. Understand?"

The bulky, flat-faced man with the scar across his cheek shuffled
uneasily. "We went over it a dozen times. We know just what to do."

He grinned at Scorio, but the grin was lopsided, more like a sneering
grimace. At one time the man had failed to side-step a heat ray and it
had left a neat red line drawn across the right cheek, nipped the end of
the ear.

"All right, Pete," said Scorio, glaring at the man, "your job is the
heavy work, so just keep your mind on it. You've got the two heaters and
the kit."

Pete grinned lopsidedly again. "Yeah, my own kit. I can open anything
hollow with this rig."

"You got a real job tonight," snarled Scorio. "Two doors and a safe.
Sure you can do it?"

"Just leave it to me," Pete growled.
