approximation, and we must rely upon the assumption that while the
temperatures which are actually measured may not be the average
temperature, the fluctuations of the average temperature are parallel to
the fluctuations in the temperatures measured. Since every effort is
made to keep these fluctuations at a minimum, it is seen that the error
of this assumption is not as great as might appear at first sight.
However, the calculation of the residual amount of oxygen in the chamber
is dependent upon this assumption and hence any errors in the assumption
will affect noticeably the calculation of the residual oxygen.

Attempts to compare the determination of the oxygen by the exceedingly
accurate Sonden apparatus with that calculated after determining the
water-vapor and carbon dioxide, temperature and pressure of the air in
the chamber have thus far led to results which indicate one of three
things: (1) that there is not a homogeneous mixture; (2) that during the
time required for making residual analyses, _i. e._, some three or four
minutes, there may be a variation in the oxygen content in the air of
the chamber due to the oxygen continually added from the cylinder; (3)
that the oxygen supplied from the cylinder is not thoroughly mixed with
the air in the chamber until some time has elapsed. That is to say, with
the method now in use it is necessary to fill the tension-equalizer to a
definite pressure immediately at the end of each experimental period.
This is done by admitting oxygen from the cylinder, and obviously this
oxygen was not present in the air when analyzed. A series of experiments
with a somewhat differently arranged system is being planned in which
the oxygen will be admitted to the respiration chamber directly and not
into the tension-equalizer, and at the end of the experiment the
tension-equalizer will be kept at such a point that when the motor is
stopped the amount of oxygen to be added to bring the tension to a
definite point will be small.

Under these conditions it is hoped to secure a more satisfactory
comparison of the analyses as made by means of the Sonden apparatus and
as calculated from the composition of the residual air by the
gravimetric analysis. It remains a fact, however, that no matter with
what skill and care the gasometric analysis is made, either
gravimetrically or volumetrically, the calculation of the residual
amount of oxygen presents the same difficulties in both cases.


CALCULATION OF TOTAL OUTPUT OF CARBON DIOXIDE AND WATER-VAPOR AND OXYGEN
ABSORPTION.

From the weights of the sulphuric-acid and potash-lime vessels, the
amounts of water-vapor and carbon dioxide absorbed out of the
air-current are readily obtained. The loss in weight of the oxygen
cylinder increased by 0.4 per cent (see page 88) gives the weight of
oxygen admitted to the chamber. It remains, therefore, to make proper
allowance for the variations in composition of the air inside the
chamber at the beginning and end of the different periods. From the
residual sheets the amounts of water-vapor, carbonic acid, and oxygen
present in the system at the beginning and end of each period are
definitely known. If there is an increase, for example, in the amount of
carbon dioxide in the chamber at the end of a period, this increase must
be added to the amount absorbed out of the air-current in order to
obtain the true value for the amount produced during the experimental
period.

A similar calculation holds true with regard to the water-vapor and
oxygen. For convenience in calculating, the amounts of water-vapor and
carbon dioxide residual in the chamber are usually expressed in grams,
while the oxygen is expressed in liters. Hence, before making the
additions or subtractions from the amount of oxygen admitted, the
variations in the amount of oxygen residual in the system should be
converted from liters to grams. This is done by dividing by 0.7.


CONTROL EXPERIMENTS WITH BURNING ALCOHOL.

After having brought to as high a degree of perfection as possible the
apparatus for determining carbon dioxide, water, and oxygen, it becomes
necessary to submit the apparatus to a severe test and thus demonstrate
its ability to give satisfactory results under conditions that can be
accurately controlled. The liberation of a definite amount of carbon
dioxide from a carbonate by means of acid has frequently been employed
for controlling an apparatus used for researches in gaseous exchange,
but this only furnishes a definite amount of carbon dioxide and throws
no light whatever upon the ability of the apparatus to determine the
other two factors, water-vapor and oxygen. Some of the earlier
experimenters have used burning candles, but these we have found to be
extremely unsatisfactory. The necessity for an accurate elementary
analysis, the high carbon content of the stearin and paraffin, and the
possibility of a change in the chemical composition of the material all
render this method unfit for the most accurate testing. As a result of a
large number of experiments with different materials, we still rely upon
the use of ethyl alcohol of known water-content. The experiments with
absolute alcohol and with alcohol containing varying amounts of water
showed no differences in the results, and hence it is now our custom to
obtain the highest grade commercial alcohol, determine the specific
gravity accurately, and burn this material. We use the Squibb
pyknometer[28] and thereby can determine the specific gravity of the
alcohol to the fifth or sixth decimal place with a high degree of
accuracy. Using the alcoholometric tables of Squibb[29] or Morley,[30]
the percentage of alcohol by weight is readily found, and from the
chemical composition of the alcohol can be computed not only the amount
of carbon dioxide and water-vapor formed and oxygen absorbed by the
combustion of 1 gram of ethyl hydroxide containing a definite known
amount of water, but also the heat developed during its combustion.

With the construction of this apparatus it was found impracticable to
employ the type of alcohol lamp formerly used with success in the
Wesleyan University respiration chamber. Inability to illuminate the
gage on the side of the lamp and the small windows on the side of the
calorimeter precluded its use. It was necessary to resort to the use of
an ordinary kerosene lamp with a large glass font and an Argand burner.
Of the many check-tests made we quote one of December 31, 1908, made
with the bed calorimeter:

     Several preliminary weights of the rates of burning were made
     before the lamp was introduced into the chamber. The lamp was
     then put in place and the ventilation started without sealing
     the cover. The lamp burned for about one hour and a quarter and
     was then weighed again. Then the window was sealed in and the
     experiment started as soon as possible. At the end of the
     experiment the window was taken out immediately and the lamp
     blown out and then weighed. The amount burned between the time
     of weighing the alcohol and the beginning of the experiment was
     calculated from the rate of burning before the experiment and
     this amount subtracted from the total burned from the time that
     the lamp was weighed before being sealed in until the end, when
     it was weighed the second time. For the minute which elapsed
     between the end of the experiment and the last weighing, the
     rate for the length of the experiment itself was used.

     During the experiment there were burned 142.7 grams of 92.20
     per cent alcohol of a specific gravity of 0.8163.

A tabular summary of results is given below:

  +----------------------+--------+-----------+
  |                      | Found. | Required. |
  +----------------------+--------+-----------+
  | Carbon dioxide  gms. | 259.9  |  251.4    |
  | Oxygen           "   | 278.5  |  274.8    |
  | Water-vapor      "   | 165.8  |  165.6    |
  | Heat           cals. | 829.0  |  834.5    |
  +----------------------+--------+-----------+

Thus does the apparatus prove accurate for the determination of all four
factors.


BALANCE FOR WEIGHING SUBJECT.

The loss or gain in body-weight has always been taken as indicating the
nature of body condition, a loss usually indicating that there is a loss
of body substance and a gain the reverse. In experiments in which a
delicate balance between the income and outgo is maintained, as in these
experiments, it is of special interest to compare the losses in weight
as determined by the balance with the calculated metabolism of material
and thus obtain a check on the computation of the whole process of
metabolism. Since the days of Sanctorius the loss of weight of the body
from period to period has been of special interest. The most recent
contribution to these investigations is that of the balance described by
Lombard,[31] in which the body-weight is recorded graphically from
moment to moment with an extraordinarily sensitive balance.

In connection with the experiments here described, however, the weighing
with the balance has a special significance, in that it is possible to
have an indirect determination of the oxygen consumption. As pointed out
by Pettenkofer and Voit, if the weight of the excretions and the loss in
body-weight are taken into consideration, the difference between the
weight of the excretions and the loss in body-weight should be the
weight of the oxygen absorbed. With this apparatus we are able to
determine the water-vapor, the carbon-dioxide excretion, and the weight
of the urine and feces when passed. If there is an accurate
determination of the body-weight from hour to hour, this should give the
data for computing exactly the oxygen consumption. Moreover, we have the
direct determination of oxygen with which the indirect method can be
compared.

In the earlier apparatus this comparison was by no means as satisfactory
as was desired. The balance there used was sensitive only to 2 grams,
the experiments were long (24 hours or more), and it seemed to be
absolutely impossible, even by exerting the utmost precaution, to secure
the body-weight of the subject each day with exactly the same clothing
and accessories. Furthermore, where there is a constant change in
body-weight amounting to 0.5 gram or more per minute, it is obvious that
the weighing should be done at exactly the same moment from day to day.
It is seen, therefore, that the comparison with the direct oxygen
determination is in reality an investigation by itself, involving the
most accurate measurements and the most painstaking development of
routine.

With the hope of contributing materially to our knowledge regarding the
indirect determination of oxygen, the special form of balance shown in
fig. 9 was installed above the chair calorimeter. This balance is
extremely sensitive. With a dead load of 100 kilograms in each pan it
has shown a sensitiveness of 0.1 gram, but in order to have the
apparatus absolutely air-tight for the oxygen and carbon-dioxide
determination, the rod on which the weighing-chair is suspended must
pass through an air-tight closure. For this closure we have used a thin
rubber membrane, weighing about 1.34 grams, one end of which is tied to
a hard-rubber tube ascending from the chair to the top of the
calorimeter, the other end being tied to the suspension rod. In playing
up and down this rod takes up a varying weight of the rubber diaphragm,
depending upon the position which it assumes, and therefore the
sensitiveness noted by the balance with a dead load and swinging freely
is greater than that under conditions of actual use. Preliminary tests
with the balance lead us to believe that with a slight improvement in
the technique a man can be weighed to within 0.3 gram by means of this
balance. A series of check-experiments to test the indirect with the
direct determination of oxygen are in progress at the moment of writing,
and it is hoped that this problem can be satisfactorily solved ere long.

During the process of weighing, the ventilating air-current is stopped
so as to prevent any slight tension on the rubber diaphragm and furnish
the best conditions for sensitive equilibrium. After the weighing has
been made and the time exactly recorded, the load is thrown off the
knife-edges of the balance, and then provision has been made to raise
the rod supporting the chair and simultaneously force a rubber stopper
tightly into the hard rubber tube at the top of the calorimeter, thus
making the closure absolutely tight. It is somewhat hazardous to rely
during the entire period of an experiment upon the thin rubber membrane
for the closure when the blower is moving the air-current.

To raise the chair and the man suspended on it in such a way as to draw
the cork into the hard-rubber tube, we formerly used a large hand-lever,
which was not particularly satisfactory. Thanks to the suggestion of Mr.
E. H. Metcalf, we have been able to attach a pneumatic lift (fig. 9) in
that the cross-bar above the calorimeter chamber, to which the
suspension rod is attached, rests on two oak uprights and can be raised
by admitting air into an air-cushion, through the central opening of
which passes the chair-suspending rod. As the air enters the air-cushion
it expands and lifts a large wooden disk which, in turn, lifts the iron
cross-bar, raising the chair and weight suspended upon it. At the proper
height and when the stopper has been thoroughly forced into place, two
movable blocks are slipped beneath the ends of the iron cross-bar and
thus the stopper is held firmly in place. The tension is then released
from the air-cushion. This apparatus functionates very satisfactorily,
raising the man or lowering him upon the knife-edges of the balance with
the greatest regularity and ease.


PULSE RATE AND RESPIRATION RATE.

The striking relationship existing between pulse rate and general
metabolism, noted in the fasting experiments made with the earlier
apparatus, has impressed upon us the desirability of obtaining records
of the pulse rate as frequently as possible during an experiment.
Records of the respiration rate also have an interest, though not of as
great importance. In order to obtain the pulse rate, we attach a Bowles
stethoscope over the apex beat of the heart and hold it in place with a
light canvas harness. Through a long transmission-tube passing through
an air-tight closure in the walls of the calorimeter it is possible to
count the beats of the heart without difficulty. The respiration rate is
determined by attaching a Fitz pneumograph about the trunk, midway
between the nipples and the umbilicus. The excursions of the tambour
pointer as recorded on the smoked paper of the kymograph give a true
picture of the respiration rate.

Of still more importance, however, is the fact that the expansion and
contraction of the pneumograph afford an excellent means for noting the
minor muscular activity of a subject, otherwise considered at complete
rest. The slightest movement of the arm or the contraction or relaxation
of any of the muscles of the body-trunk results in a movement of the
tambour quite distinct from the respiratory movements of the thorax or
abdomen. These movements form a very true picture of the muscular
movements of the subject, and these graphic records have been of very
great value in interpreting the results of many of the experiments.


ROUTINE OF AN EXPERIMENT WITH MAN.

In the numerous previously published reports which describe the
construction of and experiments with the respiration calorimeter, but
little attention has been devoted to a statement of the routine. Since,
with the increasing interest in this form of apparatus and the possible
construction of others of similar form, a detailed description of the
routine would be of advantage, it is here included.


PREPARATION OF SUBJECT.

Prior to an experiment, the subject is usually given either a stipulated
diet for a period of time varying with the nature of the experiment or,
as in the case of some experiments, he is required to go without food
for at least 12 hours preceding. Occasionally it has been deemed
advisable to administer a cup of black coffee without sugar or cream,
and by this means we have succeeded in studying the early stages of
starvation without making it too uncomfortable for the subject. The
stimulating effect of the small amount of black coffee on metabolism is
hardly noticeable and for most experiments it does not introduce any
error.

The urine is collected usually for 24 hours before, in either 6 or 12
hour periods. During the experiment proper urine is voided if possible
at the end of each period. This offers an opportunity for studying the
periodic elimination of nitrogen and helps frequently to throw light
upon any peculiarities of metabolism.

Even with the use of a long-continued preceding diet of constant
composition, it is impossible to rely upon any regular time for
defecation or for any definite separation of feces. For many experiments
it is impracticable and highly undesirable to have the subject attempt
to defecate inside the chamber, and for experiments of short duration
the desire to defecate is avoided by emptying the lower bowel with a
warm-water enema just before the subject enters the chamber. Emphasis
should be laid upon the fact that a moderate amount of water only should
be used and only the lower bowel emptied, so as not to increase the
desire for defecation.

The clothing is usually that of a normal subject, although occasionally
experiments have been made to study the influence of various amounts of
clothing upon the person. There should be opportunity for a comfortable
adjustment of the stethoscope and pneumograph, etc., and the clothing
should be warm enough to enable the subject to remain comfortable and
quiet during his sojourn inside the chamber.

The rectal thermometer, which has previously been carefully calibrated,
is removed from a vessel of lukewarm water, smeared with vaseline, and
inserted while warm in the rectum to the depth of 10 to 12 centimeters.
The lead wires are brought out through the clothing in a convenient
position.

The stethoscope is attached as nearly as possible over the apex beat of
the heart by means of a light harness of canvas. In the use of the
Bowles stethoscope, it has been found that the heart-beats can easily be
counted if there is but one layer of clothing between the stethoscope
and the skin. Usually it is placed directly upon the undershirt of the
subject.

The pneumograph is placed about the body midway between the nipple and
the umbilicus and sufficient traction is put upon the chain or strap
which holds it in place to secure a good and clear movement of the
tambour for each respiration.

The subject is then ready to enter the chamber and, after climbing the
stepladder, he descends into the opening of the chair calorimeter, sits
in the chair, and is then ready to take care of the material to be
handed in to him and adjust himself and his apparatus for the
experiment. Usually several bottles of drinking-water are deposited in
the calorimeter in a convenient position, as well as some urine bottles,
reading matter, clinical thermometer, note-book, etc. Before the cover
is finally put in place, the pneumograph is tested, stethoscope
connections are tested to see if the pulse can be heard, the rectal
thermometer connections are tested, and the telephone, call-bell, and
electric light are all put in good working order. When the subject has
been weighed in the chair, the balance is tested to see that it swings
freely and has the maximum sensibility. All the adjustments are so made
that only the minimum exertion will be necessary on the part of the
subject after the experiment has once began.


SEALING IN THE COVER.

The cover is put in place and wax is well crowded in between it and the
rim of the opening. The wax is preferably prepared in long rolls about
the size of a lead-pencil and 25 to 30 centimeters long. This is crowded
into place, a flat knife being used if necessary. An ordinary
soldering-iron, which has previously been moderately heated in a gas
flame, is then used to melt the wax into place. This process must be
carried out with the utmost care and caution, as the slightest pinhole
through the wax will vitiate the results. The sealing is examined
carefully with an electric light and preferably by two persons
independently. After the sealing is assured, the plugs connecting the
thermal junctions and heating wires of the cover with those of the
remainder of the chamber are connected, the water-pipe is put in place,
and the unions well screwed together. After seeing that the electrical
connections can not in any way become short-circuited on either the
metal chamber or metal pipes, the asbestos cover is put in place.


ROUTINE AT OBSERVER'S TABLE.

Some time before the man enters the chamber, an electric lamp of from 16
to 24 candle-power (depending upon the size of the subject) is placed
inside of the chamber as a substitute for the man, and the cooling
water-current is started and the whole apparatus is adjusted to bring
away the heat prior to the entrance of the man. The rate of flow with
the chair calorimeter is not far from 350 cubic centimeters per minute
with a resting man. The proper mixture of cold and warm water is made,
so that the electric reheater can be controlled readily by the
resistance in series with it. Care is taken not to allow the water to
enter the chamber below the dew-point and thus avoid the condensation of
moisture on the absorbers. The thermal junctions indicate the
temperature differences in the walls and the different sections are
heated or cooled as is necessary until the whole system is brought as
near thermal equilibrium as possible.

After the man enters, the lamp is removed and the water-current is so
varied, if necessary, and the heating and cooling of the various parts
so adjusted as to again secure temperature equilibrium of all parts.
When the amount of heat brought away by the water-current exactly
compensates that generated by the subject, when the thermal-junction
elements in the walls indicate a 0 or very small deflection, when the
resistance thermometers indicate a constant temperature of the air
inside the chamber and the walls of the chamber, the experiment proper
is ready to begin.

The physical observer keeps the chemical assistant thoroughly informed
as to the probable time for the beginning of the experiment, so that
there will be ample time for making the residual analyses of the air.
After these analyses have been made and the experiment is about to
begin, the observer at the table calls the time on the exact minute, at
which time the blower is stopped and the purifying system changed. The
physical observer takes the temperatures of the wall and air by the
electric-resistance thermometers, reads the mercury thermometers,
records the rectal thermometer, and at the exact moment of beginning the
experiment the current of water which has previously been running into
the drain is deflected into the water-meter. At the end of the period
this routine is varied only in that the water-current is deflected from
the water-meter into a small can holding about 4 liters, into which the
water flows while the meter is being weighed.


MANIPULATION OF THE WATER-METER.

The rate of flow of water through the apparatus is determined before the
experiment begins. This is done by deflecting the water for a certain
number of seconds into a graduate or by deflecting it into the small can
and weighing the water thus collected. The water is then directed into
the drain during the preliminary period. Meanwhile the main valve at the
bottom of the water-meter is opened, such water as has accumulated from
tests in preceding experiments is allowed to run out, and the valve is
closed after the can is empty. The meter is then carefully balanced on
the scales and the weight is recorded. At the beginning of the
experiment the water is deflected from the drain into the meter. At the
end of the period, while the water is running into the small can, the
water-meter is again carefully weighed and the weight recorded. Having
recorded the weight, the water is again deflected into the large meter
and what has accumulated in the small can is carefully poured into the
large meter through a funnel. If the meter is nearly full, so that
during the next period water will accumulate and overflow the meter, it
is emptied immediately after weighing and while the small can is filling
up. About 4 minutes is required to empty the can completely.

After it is emptied, it is again weighed, the water-current deflected
from the small can to the meter, and the water which has accumulated in
the small can carefully poured into the meter. All weights on the
water-meter, both of the empty can and the can at the end of each
period, are checked by two observers.


ABSORBER TABLE.

Shortly after the subject has entered the chamber and in many instances
before the sealing-in process has begun, the ventilating air-current is
started by starting the blower. The air passes through one set of
purifiers during this preliminary period, and as no measurements are
made for this period it is not necessary that the weights of the
absorbers be previously known.

All precautions are taken, however, so far as securing tightness in
coupling and installing them on the absorber system are concerned.
During this period the other set of absorbers is carefully weighed and
made ready to be put in place and tested and about 10 minutes before the
experiment proper begins the residual analyses are begun. The series of
U-tubes, which have previously been carefully weighed, are placed on
small inclined racks and are connected with the meter and also with the
tube leading to the mercury valve. The pet-cock which connects the
return air-pipe with the drying-tower and the gas-meter is then opened
and the mercury reservoir is lowered. The rate of flow of air through
the U-tubes is regulated by a screw pinch-cock on the rubber tube
leading to the first U-tube. This rate is so adjusted by means of the
pinch-cock that about 3 liters of air per minute will flow through the
U-tubes, and as the pointer on the gas-meter approaches 10 liters the
mercury reservoir is raised at just such a point, gained by experience,
as will shut off the air-current when the total volume registers 10
liters on the meter. The pet-cock in the pipe behind the meter is then
closed, the U-tubes disconnected, and a new set put in place. A
duplicate and sometimes a triplicate analysis is made.

When the physical observer calls the time for the end of the period, the
switch which controls the motor is opened and the chemical assistant
then opens the rear valve of the new set of absorbers and closes the
rear valve of the old set, and likewise opens the front valve of the new
set and closes the front valve of the old set. As soon as the signal is
given that the oxygen connections have been properly made and that the
oxygen has been admitted to the chamber in proper amount, the blower is
again started. It is then necessary to weigh the U-tubes and disconnect
the old set of absorbers and weigh them. If the sulphuric-acid absorbers
have not exceeded the limit of gain in weight they are used again; if
they have, new ones are put in their place.

The first sulphuric-acid absorber is connected to the front valve, then
the potash-lime can, and then the last sulphuric-acid absorber; but
before connecting the last sulphuric-acid absorber with the
sodium-bicarbonate can, a test is made of the whole system from the
front valve to the end of the second sulphuric-acid absorber. This is
made by putting a solid-rubber stopper in the exit end of the second
sulphuric-acid absorber and, by means of a bicycle pump, forcing
compressed air in through a pipe tapped into the pipe from the valve at
the front end until a pressure of about 2 feet of water is developed in
this part of the system. This scheme for testing and the method of
connecting the extra pipe have been discussed in detail in an earlier
publication.[32] Repeated tests have shown that this method of testing
the apparatus for tightness is very successful, as the minutest leak is
quickly shown.

After the system has been thoroughly tested, the rubber stopper in the
exit end of the second sulphuric-acid absorber is first removed, then
the tube connected with the pump and manometer is disconnected and its
end placed in the reservoir of mercury. Occasionally, through oversight,
the pressure is released at the testing-tube with the result that the
air compressed in the system expands, forcing sulphuric acid into the
valves and down into the blower, thus spoiling completely the
experiment. After the testing, the last sulphuric-acid absorber is
coupled to the sodium-bicarbonate can. It is seen that this last
connection is the only one not tested, and it has been found that care
must be taken to use only the best gaskets at this point, as frequently
leaks occur; in fact, it is our custom to moisten this connection with
soapsuds. If new rubber gaskets are used a leak is never found.


SUPPLEMENTAL APPARATUS.

To maintain the apparent volume of air through the whole system
constant, oxygen is admitted into the tension-equalizer until the same
tension is exerted on this part of the system at the end as at the
beginning. This is done by closing the valve connecting the
tension-equalizer with the system and admitting oxygen to the
tension-equalizer until the petroleum manometer shows a definite
tension. After the motor is stopped, at the end of the experimental
period, there is a small amount of air compressed in the blower which
almost instantly leaks back through the blower and the whole system
comes under atmospheric pressure, save that portion which is sealed off
between the two levels of the sulphuric acid in the two absorbing
vessels. A few seconds after the motor is stopped the valve cutting off
the tension-equalizer from the rest of the system is closed, the
pet-cock connecting this with the petroleum manometer is opened, and
oxygen is admitted by short-circuiting the electrical connections at the
two mercury cups. This is done by the hands of the observer and must be
