Where's Dar Girdek?"

Barra looked at the man in surprise. What was this? This fellow didn't
think like any pseudoman. Had Dar Girdek somehow managed to persuade a
halfman to act as his lead driver? But why?

He drew back a little, tensing. There was something wrong here.

"Now, look," persisted the man before him. "I'd like to see Dar Girdek.
I'd like to know why I haven't been able to get in touch with him this
morning."

Barra blinked, then activated the new probe. He would have to find out
what this man knew--how much others might know. Abruptly, he felt a
violent return of the fear sickness which had temporarily subsided with
the death of Dar Girdek.

The probe was met by an impenetrable barrier. Barra's eyes widened. This
man was no halfman, either. He was one of the great psionics.
Frantically, Barra's thought retraced the past.

Was this an investigator from the Council? Was he, Kio Barra, suspect?
But how had any leak occurred? The fear grew, till he could almost smell
the sour stench of it. And with it, came a buoying lift of pure fury.

This man may have unmasked him, to be sure. The Council might even now
be sending men to take him, but this spy would never know the results of
his work. He would profit nothing here.

He flipped the distorter from under his arm.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the Master Protector started to raise his distorter, Naran felt a
sharp twinge of regret. He had resigned himself to this, and had made
his preparations, but he hated to leave Barra to someone else. Of
course, the man had no chance now. The disturbance he had keyed himself
to make if he were hit with a distorter would be heard by every scholar
in Ganiadur, and by half the Council. But--

Suddenly, he felt a sort of pity for the killer before him. The guy
wasn't really altogether to blame. He'd been living for all these years
with everything against him.

Born into a psionic family, he had been the family skeleton--a thing of
disgrace--to be hidden from the rest of the world and given tolerant
protection.

And when this barely tolerated being had managed somehow to gain power
and get amplifying devices? Well--

The crystal was leveled at him now. He looked at it indifferently,
thinking of the man who held it.

"Poor, lonesome weakling!"

Abruptly, the clearing was lit up by a blinding red glare. Naran closed
his eyes against the searing light. Seconds went by and he opened his
eyes again, looking about the village in confusion.

Had he somehow managed to retain full consciousness of ego, even after
being reduced by a distorter beam? Was there a release into some other
state of being? He had felt no--

He looked at Kio Barra. The man stood, slack-faced, still holding his
distorter rod, but gradually allowing it to sag toward the ground. Naran
shook his head.

"Now, what goes on?"

He probed at the man's mind.

There was consciousness. The man could think, but the thoughts were dim
and blurred, with no trace of psionic carrier. The control and amplifier
jewels he wore had lost their inner fire--were merely dull, lifeless
reflectors of the sunlight. This man could do no more toward bringing
life to the jewels than could the village headman--perhaps, even less.

Naran looked at him in unbelieving confusion, then turned as a sudden,
screaming thought struck his mind.

"A stinking, high-nosed witchman! And we thought he was one of us! Ate
with him. Argued with him. Even fought with him. I've got to get away.
Got to!"

There was desperation in the thought. And there were hatred overtones,
which blended, then swelled.

As the terrorized ululation went on, Naran swung his head, locating the
source. He'd have to do something about that--fast. The fellow would
really demoralize the caravan now--even infect the big saurians--cause a
stampede.

This guy had some power of projection and his terror was intensifying it
till anyone could receive the disturbing impulses, even though complete
understanding might be lacking.

Naran lifted himself from the ground, arrowing rapidly toward the
caravan, his mind already forming the thoughts which he hoped would
soothe the frantic fear and--at least to some degree--allay the frenzy
of hatred that swelled and became stronger and stronger.

Barra could wait.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Barra swung his distorter to bear, he concentrated on the violent
pulse needed to trigger the jewel, his mind closed to all else. He
turned his attention on his target.

Suddenly, he recognized the curiously tender expression which had formed
on the face of the man before him.

Frantically, he tried to revise his thoughts--to recall the blaze of
energy he had concentrated to build up.

It was too late.

With a sense of despair, he recognized the sudden, lifting, twisting
agony that accompanied the flare of the overloaded power crystal. For an
eternal instant, his universe was a blinding, screaming, red nightmare.

The flare died and he watched dully as the unharmed man before him
looked about unbelievingly, then looked back to carefully examine him.

"Oh," he told himself dully. "I suppose they'll take care of me, but
what of it? They'll put me somewhere. I'll lose everything. It'll be
just like the place Boemar thought of sending me, when I--"

Furiously, he tried to summon some tiny bit of energy to activate the
distorter.

Nothing happened.

The man whose pity had destroyed him suddenly frowned, then turned and
darted away. Dully, Barra watched him, then he turned, to look around
the village. His face contorted in new terror.

Some of the village men were moving toward him, curious expressions on
their faces. He backed away from them and turned.

A few more had moved to block his path.

They were grunting and hissing to each other. Barra looked from face to
face, then looked over toward the well.

There were men over there, too, by the pile of stones. The old man who
worked on the retaining walls of the village had picked up some of his
building material.

He stood, eying Barra calculatingly, a stone poised in each hand.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Weakling, by Everett B. Cole

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WEAKLING ***

***** This file should be named 28486.txt or 28486.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/4/8/28486/

Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
