
Some time in the month of June I expect to make a trip to London,
England, and will be away possibly until the end of August. Even the
month of May in Kansas is sometimes too hot for this operation to be
successfully performed, and I make it a rule to suspend operations
entirely throughout June, July and August. Experience has taught me that
when the outdoor temperature is high the operation will almost certainly
be unsuccessful, and on account of the cost involved, as well as for the
saving of time and trouble for the patient, it is in the highest degree
unwise to go contrary to this rule. If the glands are transplanted
during very hot weather they will almost certainly slough, which means
re-operating later.

In many cases that are brought to me I do not operate or even advise
that the goat-glands be transplanted later. I cannot go into details of
such cases in these pages, but might cite the case of a man, syphilitic,
who was sent to me. Certainly I have never made the statement anywhere,
at any time, that this operation would cure syhpilis. The man is being
treated now for syphilis, and should not have been sent to me at all.

I quote the case of a woman of forty, who is normal in every way, and
the picture of health at the present time. Her desire is that she may
never grow to look any older than she does at this moment, and she asks
me if this gland-operation will hold her at the point she has now
reached. Frankly, this is pure experiment. I do not know. After another
ten years of work in this gland-surgery I might be able to give her a
definite opinion, but not at this stage, seeing that my oldest cases go
back only three years. On one point only I can speak with positiveness,
namely, if I cannot answer this question there is no man living who can
answer it, because I am the only man alive who can give an opinion on
this work that is founded on first-hand knowledge. We learn in this work
only by experience, and we draw just conclusions only from +quantity+ of
experience. No other man alive has had this experience in sufficient
quantity to justify him in forming a conclusion derived from his facts.
This is my answer not only to those who listen to encouraging advice
regarding the effects of this operation tendered by surgeons who are
embarking in this goat-gland operation, but also to those general
practitioners who inform patients asking their opinion in the matter
that the operation is useless because the glands are certain to slough,
I hold that they are not qualified to speak on the subject because they
have no knowledge. I have the most positive knowledge that when the
operation is rightly performed the glands do NOT slough, and my
knowledge is founded upon the hard facts of much experience. In another
ten years I shall know more than I know today because I shall have added
to my facts, and among those facts there may be some which confirm the
hope of the woman of forty alluded to above that this gland
transplantation may hold the condition of youth steady as something
static, which will not be suffered to pass. At present I do not know,
and if I offer an opinion it is to be understood that it is only a
guess. My guess, then, would be that in this case the operation would be
a waste, producing no effect whatever, neither adding to nor detracting
from the condition of health and normal function which is present today.




       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

The One Best Way Series of New Thought Books. Each 96 pages and cover,
green silk cloth bound, printed on heavy egg-shell paper, size 5x7.
Written by Sydney B. Flower. Price each, $1 postpaid to any part of the
world; four shillings and twopence in Great Britain.

No. I. Will-Power, Personal Magnetism, Memory-Training and Success
(illustrated).

No. II. The Biochemistry of Schuessler.

No. III. The New Thought System of Physical Culture and Beauty Culture
(illustrated).

No. IV. The New Thought System of Dietetics.

No. V. The Goat-Gland Transplantation, originated by Dr. J. R. Brinkley
of Milford, Kas., U.S.A.

Address New Thought Book Department, 722-732 Sherman St., Chicago, Ill.,
U.S.A.

NOTE--The Chicago New Thought office closes from March 31st to September
1st, each year.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


VOLUME II OF NEW THOUGHT

Beginning October, 1921, ending March, 1922, comprising six numbers,
each 32 pages, 6x9, edited and published by Sydney B. Flower, will be
issued monthly at a markedly REDUCED SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, namely, Single
Copies in the U.S.A. and Possessions, 10 cents a copy; 50 cents a year
of six numbers; Canada and Foreign, 12 cents a copy; 60 cents a year.
Great Britain, sixpence a copy; 2/6 a year.

Note: The Chicago NEW THOUGHT office closes from March 31st to September
1st, each year.

Volume II of NEW THOUGHT will maintain the high level attained in Volume
I. The same contributors. Dr. Brinkley, Ella Wheeler Wilcox, William
Walker Atkinson, Anne Beauford Houseman, Alberta Jean Rowell, Nate
Collier, Charles H. Ingersoll, Athene Rondell, Charles Edmund DeLand and
others will continue their valuable series throughout the year.

The cartoons of Nate Collier and the articles of Arthur Brisbane will
continue as special features.

Many new writers will be added.

The editor will contribute a series of six articles upon the effects of
Dr. Brinkley's Goat-Gland Transplantation, speaking from first-hand
knowledge and inviting question, comment and discussion.

  SPECIAL THREE YEAR SUBSCRIPTION OR
  ONE YEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THREE
  DIFFERENT ADDRESSES

We make a special rate for three year subscriptions in the U.S.A. and
possessions of $1 for Volume II, October, 1921, to March, 1922,
inclusive, or one year subscription to three different addresses at the
same rate, $1; Canada and Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, six shillings.
We invite you to take fullest advantage of this attractive offer.

Address: NEW THOUGHT, 732 Sherman St., Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.


VOLUME I OF NEW THOUGHT

A monthly magazine, 32 pages, 6x9, edited and published by Sydney B.
Flower, comprising 196 pages of reading matter in seven issues, viz.,
Oct., Nov., Dec, 1920, and Jan., Feb., March, April-May, 1921.

Price, bound in cloth, $2.50, or Ten Shillings, postpaid to any part of
the world.

Volume I of NEW THOUGHT contains: Seven articles written by J. R.
Brinkley, M.D., on his wonderful goat-gland transplantation work;
a series of articles on New Thought by such famous writers as Ella
Wheeler Wilcox, William Walker Atkinson, Anne Beauford Houseman, Alberta
Jean Rowell, Veni Cooper-Mathieson, of Australia, and Nate Collier of
New York; a series of articles on Astrology by Athene Rondell; a series
of articles on Spirit-Phenomena by Charles Edmund DeLand; and begins a
series by Charles H. Ingersoll on the Single Tax. The volume includes
five regular monthly cartoons by Nate Collier; with special articles by
Arthur Brisbane, most highly paid writer in the United States, stating
the case against spiritualism; and a number of special articles by the
editor and others on Health, Psychology, etc.

The brightest and most vital and most fascinating magazine published.
Volume I is to be had only in its bound form, and the number of copies
is limited. No plates were made and the type is destroyed. The book is
therefore a unique and limited first edition.

Orders for this book will be accepted now, to be filled not later than
September 15, 1921, in the order of their receipt, cash to accompany
order.

Cash will be returned immediately to unsuccessful applicants. We shall
not reprint this book, after this bound edition is exhausted, in the
original and complete form in which you may now procure it.

Address: NEW THOUGHT, 732 Sherman St., Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.

Note: The Chicago NEW THOUGHT office closes from March 31st to September
1st, each year.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Typographical Errors Noted by Transcriber

_Unless otherwise noted, errors were left as printed. Some variations
such as hyphenization may be carried over from quoted material._

  phemonena familiar to all of us  [phenomena]
  has sometimes made a laporotomy necessary [laparotomy]
  the belief now general among genetists and anatomists
    [_form "genetists" may be correct for 1921_]
  incision in the acrotum  [scrotum]
  On the other hand, in Locomoter Ataxia  [Locomotor]
  his cures of Locomoter Ataxia by the goat-gland operation  [Locomotor]
    [_these two misprints are on the same page_]
  and thirty-five other Chicago men and women by Dr. J. R. Brinkley
    [_invisible period in Dr. supplied by transcriber_]
  Dr. Brinkley's operation to-day is a marvel
    [_anomalous hyphen at mid-line_]
  Ageing took place early.  [Aging]
  I have operated upon and cured 5 cases of locomotor-ataxia. It is
  almost impossible for me to get cases of locomotor-ataxia.
    [_anomalous hyphens unchanged_]
  I should relinguish the goat-gland  [relinquish]
  that this operation would cure syhpilis  [syphilis]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Goat-gland Transplantation, by 
Sydney B. Flower and John R. Brinkley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOAT-GLAND TRANSPLANTATION ***

***** This file should be named 29362.txt or 29362.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/6/29362/

Produced by Louise Hope and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
