As soon as Sitsumi had turned back to his station Jeter's lips began to
move.

"See?" he said. "It isn't their machine guns these people fear. It isn't
their bombs--it's their motors! I wonder why...."

       *       *       *       *       *

By now the six planes were flying abreast, in battle formation, almost
above the space ship, at perhaps a thousand feet greater elevation. A
strange humming sound was traveling through the space ship. The whole
inner globe was vibrating, shaking--and vibration was a menace to glass
or crystal!

"We've got the answer!" said Jeter. "The outer rind, while capable of
being softened--in sections at least, with safety--for special reasons,
such as happened when we were 'swallowed,' can be hardened to the point
of disruption. It can be shattered, Tema, by vibration! That's why the
space ship keeps far above the roar of cities! The humming of countless
automobile engines might shatter the rind! God, I hope this is the
answer!"

In his mind's eye Eyer could picture it--the outer rind "freezing"
solid, and cracking with the thunderous report of snapping ice on a
forest lake. No wonder Sitsumi and the Three must destroy the six
planes.

"Now!" yelled Sitsumi. "Shift positions! The space ship will be hurled
directly at the formation of planes! Wang Li, to the beam controls!"

Wang Li sprang to the table, pressed a button. The humming sound in the
space ship grew to mighty proportions. The trembling increased.

Jeter and Eyer kept their eyes glued to the six planes above. Without
tilting their noses the six planes seemed to plunge straight down toward
the surface of the space ship. Thus the two knew that the space ship was
in motion--itself being bodily hurled, as its only present weapon of
offense, against the earthling attackers.

A split second--

One of the planes struck the surface solidly and crashed. Instantly its
wheels and its motor were caught in the outer rind.

The other five ships scattered wildly, escaping the collision by some
sixth sense, or through pure chance.

"Poor devil!" said Jeter. "But his buddies can see his plane and know
that it marks the spot where they could conveniently drop their bombs."

Eyer was on the point of nodding when Sitsumi shouted.

"Quickly, Wang Li! Spin the outer shell before the enemy uses the
wrecked plane as an aiming point!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A whirring sound. The plane whirled around as though it were twirled on
the end of a string. To the five other pilots it must have seemed that
the plane had struck some invisible obstruction, been smashed, and now
was whirling away to destruction after a strange, incomprehensible
hesitation in the heart of the stratosphere.

"Quickly, you fool!" shouted Sitsumi at Wang Li. "You're napping! You
should have got all those planes! And you should have spun the outer
globe instantly, before the remaining enemy had a chance to find out our
location."

"I can move away a half mile," suggested Wang Li.

"We've got to silence those motors, fool!" yelled Sitsumi. "You know
very well that we can't run. Charge them again, and take care this time
that you crash into the middle of their formation."

"They're scattered over too great an area. I should wait for them to
reform."

"Fool! Fool! Don't you think I know the weakness in my own invention?
The proper vibration will destroy us! If the rind is softened we become
visible. We dare not wait for them to reform! Attack each plane
separately if necessary, and at top speed!"

Jeter began to speak rapidly out of the corner of his mouth. Even Naka's
attention was fastened on the five planes and Wang Li's efforts to
destroy them.

"Gag Naka!" said Jeter. "The keys! In some way we've got to get to our
plane. It's barely possible. If we can start the motor.... Hurry! Now,
while the whole outfit is watching our friends out there!"

Eyer rose and reached for Naka with his right hand.

He dared not miss his lunge. He did not. His huge hand fastened in the
throat of their keeper. Nobody--neither Sitsumi nor the Three--turned as
Naka gasped and struggled. Eyer pulled the man back over the table and,
his neck thus within reach of both hands, snapped it as he would have
broken the neck of a chicken.

Jeter was already searching the body for the keys. He found them.

Their leg irons were just falling free when Sitsumi turned. Eyer was
feeling for the automatics in Naka's belt.

"We won't need them!" yelled Jeter. "There isn't time. Let's go!"

Jeter was away at top speed, almost pulling Eyer off his feet because
their hands were still fastened together with the handcuffs.

They were outside on the floor level.

And through many doors denizens of the lower control room, hurried out
by the commands of Sitsumi, were racing to head them off. But nothing
could stop them. One man got in their way and Eyer's right fist caved in
his face with one deadly, devastating blow. They had now reached the
stairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

The space ship was being hurled at the five remaining planes. Even as
the two men reached the stairs and started up, another of the dauntless
rescuers paid with his life for his courage. Several bombs exploded as
his plane struck the space ship, but they caused no damage whatever. The
hard outer rind seemed to be impervious to the explosions. Obviously no
explosive could destroy the space ship.

"Quickly, Tema," said Jeter. "The rind can be shattered by vibration,
and we've got to do it somehow."

"And after that?" panted Eyer.

"Our friends out there can then see the inner globe. They'll drop bombs.
They'll smash in the globe and--"

"I know," said Eyer. "Its inhabitants, including us, will start off in
all directions through the stratosphere, with great speed, and probably
in many pieces."

Jeter laughed. Eyer laughed with him. They didn't fear death, for now
they felt they were on the verge of destroying this monster of space.

Their pursuers were following them closely.

Jeter frantically tried to unfasten the handcuffs as they ran. He didn't
manage it until the door was almost reached. He left one cuff dangling
on his right wrist.

Then, they were through the door.

"Now, Tema," shouted Jeter, "if you believe in God--if you have
faith--pray for strength to move this plane!"

"Where?"

"So that its wheels and nose go through this open door! Then it won't
travel forward when we start the motor--and our pursuers won't be able
to get through to stop us."

"You think of everything, don't you?" There was a grin on Eyer's face.
But his eyes were stern. He wasn't belittling their deadly danger. And
there was also a chance that Jeter's vibration idea was wrong.

"Those four planes," panted Jeter, as the two tried to get their plane
in motion toward the door, "cause, from a distance, through thin air, a
slight vibration, varying with their distance from the globe; our plane
motor racing and actually in contact with the globe, can set up a
tremendous vibration by its great motor speed. If we can vibrate the
globe up to its shattering point there's a chance!"

"We can't pull her, Lucian," said Eyer. "I'll do a Horatius at the door.
You get in, start the motor, taxi her until the wheels go through. I'll
keep the crowd back."

"Right!"

Jeter went through the doors into the plane. In a few seconds the
propeller kicked over, hesitated, kicked again. Then the motor coughed,
coughed again, and broke into a steady roaring.




CHAPTER XII

_High Chaos_


The plane moved forward. Its tail swung around. Its wheels headed for
the door. They dropped through, into the faces of the foremost pursuers,
all of whom were thus effectually blocked off.

The plane was held as in a vise. The propeller vanished in a blur as
Jeter let the motor out. It was humming an even, steady note. The doors
came open again.

Jeter came out, his eyes glowing.

"We haven't the chance of the proverbial celluloid dog chasing the
asbestos cat," he shouted to be heard above the roar of the motor. "But
grab your high altitude suit, oxygen container, and parachute, and let's
get as far away from this plane as we can. Who knows? When the end comes
we may get a break at that!"

They ran until the bulge of the inner globe all but hid the plane from
them. They could see only the top wing. They did not go farther because
they wished to make sure that the enemy did not dislodge the plane and
nullify all their work.

"They won't be able to," said Jeter, "for that motor is pulling against
the wheels and holding them so tight against the side of that door that
a hundred men couldn't budge the plane. But we can't take chances."

Quickly the partners slipped into their suits, adjusted their oxygen
tanks and parachutes. Then Jeter slipped back the elastic sleeve of his
suit and motioned Eyer to do the same. The manacles were brought into
view again. They looked at each other. Eyer grinned and held out his
left hand. Jeter snapped the second cuff to Eyer's wrist.

The act was significant.

Whatever happened to them, would happen to both in equal measure. It was
a gesture which needed no words. If they were slain when their
friends--if their theory was correct--finally saw the space ship, they
would die together. If by some miracle they were hurled into outer space
and lived to use their parachutes--well, the discomfort was a small
price to pay to stay together.

Now they devoted all their attention to their own situation. Four planes
still spun warily above the space ship. Wang Li was patently trying with
all his might to get all four of them before the Jeter-Eyer plane, by
shattering the rind, disclosed the inner core to the bombs of the
remaining planes.

"Lucian!" said the fingers of Eyer. "Can you tell whether anything is
happening to the rind?"

Jeter hesitated for a long time. There was a distinct and almost
nauseating vibration throughout all the space ship. And was there not
something happening to the rind over a wide area, directly above the
Jeter-Eyer plane?

They could fancy the snapping of ice on a forest lake in mid-winter.

They couldn't hear, in their suits. They could only feel. But all at
once the outer rind, above their plane, vanished. At the same instant
the plane itself, propeller still spinning, rose swiftly up through the
hole in the rind. The air inside the globe was going out in a great
rush.

The partners looked at each other. At that moment the four planes
swooped over the space ship....

       *       *       *       *       *

Jeter and Eyer knew that the inner globe had at last become visible, for
from the bellies of the four planes dropped bomb after bomb. They fell
into the great aperture. Jeter and Eyer flung themselves flat. But the
bombs had worked sufficient havoc. They had removed all protection from
the low-pressure stratosphere. The air inside the space ship went out
with a rush. Jeter and Eyer, hearing nothing, though they knew that the
explosions must have been cataclysmic, were picked up and whirled toward
that opening, like chips spun toward the heart of a whirlpool.

But for their space suits they would have been destroyed in the outrush
of air. Out of the inner globe came men that flew, sprawled out,
somersaulting up and out of apertures made by the crashing bombs.
Ludicrous they looked. Blood streamed from their mouths. Their faces
were set in masks of agony. There were Sitsumi and, one after another,
the Three.

Then fastened together by the cuffs, the partners were being whirled
over and over, out into space. Their last signals to each other had
been:

"Even if you're already dead, pull the ripcord ring of your chute!"

Crushed, buffeted, they still retained consciousness. They sought
through the spinning stratosphere for their rescuers. Thousands of feet
below--or was it above?--they saw them. Yes, below, for they looked at
the tops of the planes. Their upward flight had been dizzying. They
waited until their upward flight ceased.

Then, as they started the long fall to Earth, they pulled their rings
and waited for their chutes to flower above them.

Soon they were floating downward. Side by side they rode. Above them
their parachutes were like two umbrellas, pressed almost too closely
together.

They looked about them, seeking the space ship.

The devastation of its outer rind had been complete, for they now could
see the inner globe, and it too was like--well, like merely part of an
eggshell.

The doomed space ship--gyroscope still keeping the ray pointed
Earthward--describing an erratic course, was shooting farther upward
into the stratosphere, propelled by the ghastly ray which, now no longer
controlled by Wang Li, drove the space ship madly through the outer
cold.

Far below the partners many things were falling: broken furnishings of
mad dreamers' stratosphere laboratories, parts of strange machines,
whirling, somersaulting things that had once been men.

The partners looked at each other.

The same thought was in the mind of each, as the four remaining planes
came in toward them to convoy them down--that when the lords of the
stratosphere finally reached the far Earth, only God would know which
was Sitsumi and who were the Three.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's Lords of the Stratosphere, by Arthur J. Burks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LORDS OF THE STRATOSPHERE ***

***** This file should be named 29466.txt or 29466.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/4/6/29466/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
