So they pushed back into that great submerged city, with Captain
Petersen and his skeptical crew. They entered one of the largest of
the temples, wandered forlornly through its flooded halls and
corridors, seeking some sign of these alleged beings Larry had sensed.

Nor was their search unrewarded, for suddenly the captain himself,
most skeptical of all, cried out:

"Listen! Did you hear that?"

There was no need to ask the question, for all had heard. It was a
rasping sound, as of some great door swinging shut, followed almost
immediately by a rushing gurgle--and as they stood there tense, the
water level began rapidly receding.

Even while it was still plashing about their ankles, a secret block of
masonry slid back and a horde of Antillians burst in upon them.

       *       *       *       *       *

What happened then, happened with a rush that left them dazed.

Unable to talk directly with the pigmies, by reason of their
pressure-suits, which they dared not remove, they started gesturing
with them, trying to explain their predicament and make known that
they bore them no ill-will, but the creatures waved for them to cease
and led them swiftly through the now waterless temple.

"Well, I guess it's all up!" said Larry, adding with dismal humor:
"They're probably going to finish that meal they started feeding their
dragon last night!"

No one laughed, nor made any comment, and he relapsed into silence,
realizing that they probably held him responsible for this latest
disaster.

Leaving the temple, their captors led them into a passage that was
level for a time, then inclined sharply. It was laborious going but
they struggled on.

"I believe they know we are not their enemies!" declared Professor
Stevens, at length, to everyone's cheer. "They seem to be leading us
back to the plateau by some underground passage."

"Let's hope so!" said Larry. "Perhaps I had the right hunch after
all."

"But my poor Diane!" came the professor's sorrowing after-thought.
"That fiend Von Ullrich could never get the _Nereid_ up safely."

"I think perhaps he could, with Miss Stevens to help him," put in
Captain Petersen, his usual optimism returning. "She is thoroughly
familiar with the craft's operation."

"That is so," her father admitted, his tone brighter. "But--"

"Of course it's so!" exclaimed Larry, breaking off any less hopeful
reflections. "So cheerio, folks, as the English say. We'll make it
yet!"

But in his heart, he was tormented with doubt for Diane's safety....

       *       *       *       *       *

The trail was growing eery, now, and precipitous. To their right rose
a sheer cliff. To their left, the path fell off abruptly to a gigantic
caldron where red flames leaped and waned.

"Looks like something out of Dante's 'Inferno'!" muttered Larry, with
a shudder.

"The volcano where they distill their atmosphere, evidently,"
commented Professor Stevens. "It would have been interesting, in other
circumstances, to observe the process."

"Not to me, it wouldn't!"

Larry was glad when they had passed that seething hell-pot and were
once more proceeding through a long, dark gallery.

But everywhere, though their guides were but a handful, was a sense of
those unseen presences, of gathering, furtive hosts about them,
waiting--waiting for what?

What was this strange sense of tension, of foreboding, that hung in
the air? Was the professor wrong? Were they being led to their doom,
after all?

He was soon to know, for now the gallery they had been traversing
levelled out into a series of short passages, each barred by a heavy
stone door, and finally they were led into a small, square room,
barely large enough to admit them all.

There, with gestures toward the far end, their guides left them.

The door closed, and almost immediately another on the opposite side
opened, slowly at first, then wider and wider, admitting a rush of
water that promptly filled the room.

Stepping wonderingly out, they found themselves on the upper level,
beside the second of the two smaller pyramids.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Whew!" gasped Larry, as they stood looking around, still a little
dazed. "These people are sure quick-change artists! First they try to
feed you to their gods, then they save you from almost as bad a fate.
Dizzy, I call it!"

"Quite understandable, I should say," declared the professor. "Unable
to cope with Von Ullrich themselves, they think perhaps we may be able
to."

"Well, let's hope they're right!" grimly. "If once I get my hands on
him--"

He broke off suddenly, as Captain Petersen called out:

"The _Nereid_! There she is!"

Following with their eyes the bright segment cut into the murky depths
by his flashlight, they saw the familiar outlines of their craft; and
close beside her lay the U-boat.

A feverish activity seemed to be going on between the two submarines.

"They're changing cargo!" cried Larry. "Quick! We've got them now!"

But the progress they were able to make, hampered by their heavy
suits, was maddeningly slow. Their searchlights, moreover, betrayed
their approach. Before they could reach the scene, most of the sailors
had abandoned their task and piled into the U-boat.

Arms swinging wildly, Von Ullrich stood beside it, trying to rally
then. Refusing to risk combat, however, since they were unable to use
their deadly hand-grenades under water, they continued clambering up
the sides of their submersible and shoving down through its
conning-tower hatch.

Now a figure in a familiar pressure-suit broke away and started toward
the advancing party.

It was Diane!

       *       *       *       *       *

Even as he recognized her, Larry saw Von Ullrich lunge forward, seize
his captive and mount to the conning-tower with her--but before the
German could thrust her into the hatch, he had reached the U-boat's
side and clambered to her rescue.

Dropping Diane, Von Ullrich wheeled to face his assailant. They
grappled, fell to the deck, rolled over and over.

But suddenly, as they were struggling, there came a sound that caused
the German to burst free and leap to his feet.

It was the sound of engines under them!

Ignoring Larry now, Von Ullrich staggered to the conning-tower hatch.
It was battened fast. Frantically he beat on it.

This much Larry saw, as he knelt there getting his breath. Then he
rose, took Diane by the arm and led her down. And he was none too
soon, for with a lunge the U-boat got under way.

But she seemed unable to lift her loot-laden mass from the ocean
floor, and headed off crazily across the plateau, dragging her keel in
the sand.

With fascinated horror, they watched the craft's erratic course, as it
swung loggily westward and headed toward that yawning abysm from which
they had all so lately risen.

The last sight they had of the U-boat was as it reached the brink, its
despairing commander still standing in the conning-tower, hammering
vainly on that fast-bound hatch; then they turned away faint, as the
doomed craft plunged down, stern up, into those crushing depths.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Stevens now joined them.

"A lesson in avarice," he said gravely, when he had greeted his
daughter with heartfelt relief. "And a typical fate of fortune
hunters! Let that be a lesson to you, young man."

"Amen!" said Larry.

"But what happened, my dear?" asked the professor of Diane, a moment
later. "Why were they in such a hurry to be off?"

"Because the sensible Antillians seized their opportunity and overcame
their guards, while we were below," was her reply. "When we got back,
we found the pyramids flooded, so there was nothing else for them to
do but go."

So that was the explanation of those gathering, furtive hosts in the
lower level, thought Larry. Now he knew what they had been waiting
for! They had been waiting for that usurping vandal to depart.

And how they must be gloating now, down there!

"But why were they so eager to abandon the _Nereid_?" asked the
savant, still puzzled. "It it a better boat than theirs, even if I do
say so myself."

"Because I put it out of commission, directly we got back up here,"
replied Diane. "But not permanently!" she added, with what Larry knew
was a smile, though he couldn't see her face, of course, through the
helmet of her pressure-suit.

"Little thoroughbred!" he exclaimed, half to himself.

"What did you say, Mr. Hunter?--Larry, I mean," she inquired.

"N--nothing," he replied uneasily.

"Fibber!" said Diane. "I heard you the first time!"

"Just wait till I get out of this darned suit!" said Larry.

"I guess I can wait that long!" she told him.

And if Professor Stevens heard any of this, it went in one ear and out
the other, for he was thinking what a report he would have to make to
his confreres when they got home--particularly with half a boatload
of assorted idols for proof.




[Illustration: He pressed the tiny switch in the flame-tool's handle
just as Arlok came through the door.]

The Gate to Xoran

_By Hal K. Wells_

    A strange man of metal comes to Earth on a dreadful mission.


He sat in a small half-darkened booth well over in the corner--the man
with the strangely glowing blue-green eyes.

The booth was one of a score that circled the walls of the "Maori
Hut," a popular night club in the San Fernando Valley some five miles
over the hills from Hollywood.

It was nearly midnight. Half a dozen couples danced lazily in the
central dancing space. Other couples remained tete-a-tete in the
secluded booths.

In the entire room only two men were dining alone. One was the slender
gray-haired little man with the weirdly glowing eyes. The other was
Blair Gordon, a highly successful young attorney of Los Angeles. Both
men had the unmistakable air of waiting for someone.

Blair Gordon's college days were not so far distant that he had yet
lost any of the splendid physique that had made him an All-American
tackle. In any physical combat with the slight gray-haired stranger,
Gordon knew that he should be able to break the other in two with one
hand.

Yet, as he studied the stranger from behind the potted palms that
screened his own booth. Gordon was amazed to find himself slowly being
overcome by an emotion of dread so intense that it verged upon sheer
fear. There was something indescribably alien and utterly sinister in
that dimly seen figure in the corner booth.

The faint eery light that glowed in the stranger's deep-set eyes was
not the lambent flame seen in the chatoyant orbs of some
night-prowling jungle beast. Rather was it the blue-green glow of
phosphorescent witch-light that flickers and dances in the night mists
above steaming tropical swamps.

The stranger's face was as classically perfect in its rugged outline
as that of a Roman war-god, yet those perfect features seemed utterly
lifeless. In the twenty minutes that he had been intently watching the
stranger, Gordon would have sworn that the other's face had not moved
by so much as the twitch of an eye-lash.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then a new couple entered the Maori Hut, and Gordon promptly forgot
all thought of the puzzlingly alien figure in the corner. The new
arrivals were a vibrantly beautiful blond girl and a plump,
sallow-faced man in the early forties. The girl was Leah Keith,
Hollywood's latest screen sensation. The man was Dave Redding, her
director.

A waiter seated Leah and her escort in a booth directly across the
room from that of Gordon. It was a maneuver for which Gordon had
tipped lavishly when he first came to the Hut.

A week ago Leah Keith's engagement to Blair Gordon had been abruptly
ended by a trivial little quarrel that two volatile temperaments had
fanned into flames which apparently made reconciliation impossible. A
miserably lonely week had finally ended in Gordon's present trip to
the Maori Hut. He knew that Leah often came there, and he had an
overwhelming longing to at least see her again, even though his pride
forced him to remain unseen.

Now, as he stared glumly at Leah through the palms that effectively
screened his own booth, Gordon heartily regretted that he had ever
come. The sight of Leah's clear fresh beauty merely made him realize
what a fool he had been to let that ridiculous little quarrel come
between them.

Then, with a sudden tingling thrill, Gordon realized that he was not
the only one in the room who was interested in Leah and her escort.

Over in the half-darkened corner booth the eery stranger was staring
at the girl with an intentness that made his weird eyes glow like
miniature pools of shimmering blue-green fire. Again Gordon felt that
vague impression of dread, as though he were in the presence of
something utterly alien to all human experience.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gordon turned his gaze back to Leah, then caught his breath sharply in
sudden amaze. The necklace about Leah's throat was beginning to glow
with the same uncanny blue-green light that shone in the stranger's
eyes! Faint, yet unmistakable, the shimmering radiance pulsed from the
necklace in an aura of nameless evil.

And with the coming of that aura of weird light at her throat, a
strange trance was swiftly sweeping over Leah. She sat there now as
rigidly motionless as some exquisite statue of ivory and jet.

Gordon stared at her in stark bewilderment. He knew the history of
Leah's necklace. It was merely an oddity, and nothing more--a freak
piece of costume jewelry made from fragments of an Arizona meteorite.
Leah had worn the necklace a dozen times before, without any trace of
the weird phenomena that were now occurring.

Dancers again thronged the floor to the blaring jazz of the negro
orchestra while Gordon was still trying to force his whirling brain to
a decision. He was certain that Leah was in deadly peril of some kind,
yet the nature of that peril was too bizarre for his mind to imagine.

Then the stranger with the glowing eyes took matters into his own
hands. He left his booth and began threading his way through the
dancers toward Leah. As he watched the progress of that slight
gray-haired figure Gordon refused to believe the evidence of his own
eyes. The thing was too utterly absurd--yet Gordon was positive that
the strong oak floor of the dancing space was visibly swaying and
creaking beneath the stranger's mincing tread!

       *       *       *       *       *

The stranger paused at Leah's booth only long enough to utter a brief
low-voiced command. Then Leah, still in the grip of that strange
trance, rose obediently from her seat to accompany him.

Dave Redding rose angrily to intercept her. The stranger seemed to
barely brush the irate director with his finger tips, yet Redding
reeled back as though struck by a pile-driver. Leah and the stranger
started for the door. Redding scrambled to his feet again and hurried
