reached groping and trembling toward the light, until the half-blinded
eyes of one saw the trickling brook.

Then, "Water!" he croaked in a voice hardly more human than the
grunts of horror from below, and he took the hand of another to help
in the steep descent--while the tribe beneath them forgot their
anticipated feast, forgot all but their primordial fear of the
unknown, and, with startled cries, broke and ran for the safety of the
forest....


CHAPTER IX

_The Throwers of Thunder_

It is doubtful if Walter Harkness heard or consciously saw that
fleeing tribe. He saw only the glorious sunlight and its sparkling
reflection upon the stream; and in his nostrils was the scent of
roasting meat to rouse him to a frenzy.

For seven Earth days he and Chet had kept account of the hours. How
long after that they had followed their stumbling course he could not
have told. Time ceased to be measured in hours and days; rather was it
reckoned in painful progress a foot at a time up rocky burrows,
helping, both of them, to ease the path for the girl who struggled so
bravely with them, until aching muscles refused to bear them further.
Then periods of drugged sleep with utter fatigue for an opiate--and on
again in hopeless, aimless wandering.

And now, the sun! And he was plunging his head into icy water to drink
until he strangled for breath! He knew that Chet and Diane were beside
him. A weak laugh came to his lips as he sat erect: the girl had drunk
as deeply as the rest--and now she was washing her hands and face.

The idea seemed tremendously amusing--or was it that the simple rite
indicated more than he could bear to know? It meant that they were
safe; they had escaped; and again a trifle like cleanliness was
important in a woman's eyes. He rocked with meaningless
laughter--until again a puff of wind brought distinctly the odor of
cooking food.

A hundred feet away, up higher in the valley, were the first of the
fires. Harkness came to his feet and ran--ran staggeringly, it is
true, but he ran--and he tore at some hanging shreds of smoking meat
regardless of the burn. But the fierce gnawing at his stomach did not
force him to wolf the food. He carried it back, a double handful of
half-cooked meat, to the others. And he doled it out sparingly to them
and to himself.

The cold water had restored his sanity. "Easy," he advised them; "too
much at first and we're done for."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was chewing on the last shred when a thought struck him; he had
been too stunned before to reason. For the first time he jerked up his
head in startled alarm. He looked carefully about--at the meat on its
pointed stakes, at the distant fires, at the open glade below them and
the dense jungle beyond where nothing stirred.

"Cooked meat!" he exclaimed in a whisper. "Who did it? This means
people!"

The memory that had registered only in some corner of a mind deeper
than the conscious, came to the surface. "I remember," he said. "There
were things that ran--men--apes--what were they?"

"Oh, Lord!" Chet groaned. "And all I ask is to be left alone!" But he
wearily raised himself upright and verified the other's words.

"They ran toward that opening among those trees. And I'll bet they
live in these caves up here behind us. I got a whiff of them as we
came past: they smelled like a zoo."

They had come out on top of the lava-flow, close to its end. The
molten rock had hardened to leave a drop of some forty feet to the
open glade below. Beyond that the jungle began, but behind them was
the lava bed, frozen in countless corrugations. Harkness rose and
helped Diane to her feet: they must force their aching muscles to take
up their task again.

He peered up the valley where a thousand fires smoked. "That stream,"
he said, "comes in from a little valley that branches off up there. We
had better follow it--and we had better get going before that gang
recovers from its surprise."

They were passing the first of the fires where the meat was smoking
when Chet called a halt. "Wait a bit," he begged: "let's take a
sirloin steak along--" He was haggling at a chunk of meat with a
broken flint when a spear whistled in and crashed upon the rocks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Harkness saw the thrower. Beyond the lava's edge the jungle could be
seen, and from among the spectral trees had darted a wild figure whose
hairy arm had snapped the spear into the air.

There were more who followed. They were sliding down the slender
trunks that supported the branches and leafy roof high above the
ground. To Harkness the open doorway to the jungle seemed swarming
with monkey-men. The movement of the three fugitives had been taken as
a retreat, and the courage of the cave-dwellers had returned.

Harkness glanced quickly about to size up their situation. To go on
was certain death; if these creatures came up to meet them on the
lava-beds, the end was sure. The escarpment gave the three some slight
advantage of a higher position.

One vain wish for the pistol now resting in the deep grass beside a
vanished ship; then he sprang for the weapon that had been thrown--it
was better than nothing--and advanced cautiously to the lava's edge.

No concealment there; no broken rocks, other than pieces of flint; a
poor fortress, this, that they must defend! And the weapons of their
civilization were denied them.

Another spear hummed its shrill song, coming dangerously close. He saw
women-figures that came from the jungle with supplies of weapons.
Short spears, about six feet long, like the one he held. But they had
others, too--long lances of slender wood with tips of flint. Thrusting
spears! He had a sickening vision of those jagged stone heads ripping
into their bodies while these beasts stood off in safety. It was thus
that they killed their prey. And Diane--he could not even spare
her--could not give her the kind oblivion of a mercy-shot!

The other two were lying beside him now at the edge of the sloping
cliff. The bank of shining gray was not steep; the enemy would climb
it with ease. Hopeless! They had won through for this!... Harkness
groaned silently in an agony of spirit at thought of the girl.

"Oh, for one detonite shell to land among them!" he said between
clenched teeth--then was breathless with a thought that exploded
within his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

His fingers were clumsy with haste as he fumbled at the head of the
spear. The sharp-edged stone was bound to its shaft with sinew, wound
round and round. The enemy were out in the open; he spared an
instant's look to see them advancing. A clattering of falling spears
sounded beyond, but the weapons were overcast, thanks to the
protection of the rocky edge.

"A shell!" Harkness spoke with sharp intensity. "Give me a cartridge
from your belt, quick!"

Chet handed him one. Harkness took one look, then pulled a cartridge
from his own belt.

"That explains it," he was muttering as he worked, "--the big
explosion when I smashed the rocks. You've got ammunition for your
pistol, but you put rifle cartridges in my belt--and service
ammunition at that. No wonder they raised the devil with those rocks!"

His fingers were working swiftly now to bind the slender cartridge to
the spear. A chipped out hollow in the flint made a seat. He gave
silent thanks for Chet Bullard's mistake. Chet had slipped; he had
filled Harkness' belt with ammunition that would have been useless for
the pistol--but it was just what he needed here.

So intent was he on his task that he hardly heard the yelling chorus
from below. It swelled to a din; but his work was finished, and he
looked up.

One figure in advance of the rest had been urging them on, and they
came in a wild rush now. Walt Harkness scrambled to his feet. Tall and
sinewy, his broad shoulders, scantily covered by the rags of blouse
that remained, were turned sideways as he raised the spear. The
yelling from below swelled louder and more shrill.

This strange one from another tribe--he was unarmed except for one of
their own spears. The curious covering on his body was flapping in the
breeze. Nothing here, surely, to hold a hunting-tribe in check.

The spear rose slowly in the air. What child of the tribe could not
have thrown it better! They came on faster now; the leader had almost
reached the place where the spear was dropping down. He must have
laughed, if laughter had yet been born in such a breast, at the futile
weapon dropping point first among the rocks.

One little shell, a scant three inches long, no thicker than the
stylus on milady's desk! But here was service ammunition, as Harkness
had said; and in the end of the lead a fulminate cap was buried--and a
grain of dense, gray dust!

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no flame--only a concussion that cracked upon one's ears,
and flying rock fragments that filled the air with demoniac shrieks.
And then that sound was lost in the shriller cries of terror and pain
as the ape-men broke for the trees.

Harkness saw some of them who rose and fell again to rise no more, and
one who dragged himself slowly from the blast that had struck him
down. But his eyes came back to another spear in his hands, and his
fingers were tearing at the sinew wrapping.

The spear bent in his hands; the wood was flexible and springy. It was
Diane who offered the next suggestion. She, too, was working at
another spear--what wonder if her breath came fast!--but her eyes were
alight, and her mind was at work.

"Make a bow!" she exclaimed. "A bow and arrow, Walter! We are fighting
primitive men, so we can't scorn primitive weapons." She stopped with
a little exclamation of pain; the sharp tip of the flint had cut her
hand.

Chet's spearhead was unloosed. He tried the spring of the shaft.
"Bully girl, Diane!" he said, and fell to gouging out a notch with the
sharp flint near the end of the shaft.

The sinew made a string. Three slender sticks lying about whose ends
had been sharpened for use on the meat: they would do for arrows. Each
arrow must be notched and headed with an explosive shell, and there
were many of them.

Chet sprang to his feet at last. Forgotten was the fatigue that had
numbed him. A wild figure, his clothes in rags, his short, curling
hair no longer blond, his face a mottling of brown and black, where
only here and there the white skin dared show through--he executed an
intricate dance-step with a bed of lava for a floor, while he
shouted:

"Bring on your fighters! Bring 'em on! Who's going to stop us now?"

       *       *       *       *       *

They were free to go, but Harkness paused at a renewed screaming from
the jungle. Again the hairy ones poured forth into the open glade. He
had half raised his bow, with arrow ready, before he saw that this was
no attack.

The screams merged discordantly with other sounds--a crashing of
uprooted trees--a chorus of harsh coughing--snorting--unrecognizable
noises. And the people were cowering in terror.

They half-ran toward the safety of their caves, but the throwers of
thunder, the demons on the lava bed, were between them and their
homes. They turned to face the jungle, and the wild sounds and crash
of splintered wood that drew near.

Harkness saw the first head that appeared. He stared in open-mouthed
amazement at the armored monster. Thick plates of shell covered its
mammoth body and lapped part way over the head to end at beady,
wicked, red eyes on either side of a single curved horn.

An instant the animal waited, to glare at the cowering human forms it
had tracked to their lair; others crashed through beside it; and in
that instant Harkness recognized the huddled group below as brothers.
Far down they were, in the long, weary path that was evolution, and
hardly come as yet to a consciousness of self--but there were those
who leaped before the others, their long spears couched and ready;
they were defending the weaker ones at their backs; they were men!

And Harkness was shouting as he raised his crude bow. "Shoot!" he
ordered. "Kill the brutes!" His own arrow was speeding true.

The rush of mammoth beasts was on as he fired, but it was checked as
quickly as it began. An inferno of explosions rose about the rushing
bodies; crashing detonations struck two of them down, their heads torn
and crushed. Between the helpless, primordial men and the charging
beasts was a geyser of spouting earth and rocks, through which showed
ugly heads and tremendous bodies that wheeled and crashed madly back
into the jungle growth.

Harkness suddenly realized that only he and Chet had fired. Diane's
bow was on the ground. He saw the girl beside it, sitting upright; but
her body was trembling and weaving, and she was plainly maintaining
her upright posture only by the greatest effort.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was beside her in an instant. "What is it?" he demanded. "Are you
hurt? What is it?"

She raised her hand that he might see; her lips, seemed almost too
numb for speech.

"Only a scratch," she whispered, but Harkness saw her eyes glazing. He
dropped to his knees and caught her swaying body in his arms.

"A scratch," she repeated in a fading voice, "from the spear....
Poison ... I think."

A head appeared over the lava crest. Harkness saw it vaguely. He knew
that Chet had the newcomer covered; his bow was drawn. It meant
nothing to him, for Diane was wounded--dying! Dying, now, in his
arms....

The ape-man came on; he was grovelling upon the ground. He was
hairless, like the one they had seen escape the attack of the giant
bat, and his cheek was slashed with a healing cut that might have been
made by a ripping talon. He abased himself before the awful might of
these creatures who had saved them. And he made motions with his arms
to picture how they had sailed down from the skies; had landed; and he
had seen them. He was plainly petitioning for pardon and the favor of
these gods--when he dropped his animal head to stare at the girl and
the cut hand that Harkness held in his.

The blue discoloration of the wound must have been plain in its
significance. The hairless one sprang abruptly to his feet and darted
toward a cave. He was back in a moment; and, though be approached with
wriggling humility, he reached the girl and he ventured to touch the
discolored hand with a sticky paste. He had a gourd that he held to
the girl's lips.

Harkness would have struck it away; he was beside himself with grief.
But Chet interposed.

"Give it to her," he said in a sharp, strained voice that told of his
own dismay. "I think the beggar knows what he's about. He is trying to
help."

The lips were lax; only a little of the liquid found its way down her
throat. But Harkness, after minutes of agony, saw the first flutter of
lids that betokened returning life....


CHAPTER X

"_But Awfully Dumb...._"

Harkness would never forget the helpless body in his arms, nor the
tender look that came slowly to the opened eyes that gazed so steadily
into his. And yet it was Chet that she seemed to want for the thousand
little services during the week that followed. And Harkness tried to
still the hurt in his heart, and he told himself that it was her
happiness be wanted more than his; that if she found greater pleasure
in having Chet near, then his love was unworthy if it placed itself as
a bar to that other happiness.

He talked by signs with the hairless one whom he called Towahg. It was
the sound the other made as he struck upon his chest. And he learned
that Towahg could guide him to the ship.

The tribe had left them alone. Only Towahg seemed inclined to
friendliness; and Harkness frequently saw the one who was their leader
in ugly, silent contemplation of them when Towahg brought food and
water to their cave.

Diane was recovering, but her progress was slow. She was able at once
to walk and go slowly about, but the least exertion tired her. It had
been a close call, Harkness knew, and he realized that some time must
pass before she could take up the hardships of the trail. And in the
meantime much might happen.

He felt that he must reach the ship at the first possible moment and
return for the others; Towahg would show him the way. He explained the
plan to Chet and Diane only to meet with emphatic dissent.

"You would go alone?" the girl exclaimed. "To meet heaven knows what
dangers? No, no, Walter; you must not! Wait; I am stronger; I can go
soon, I know."

Chet, too, was for delay--Diane was better, and she would improve
steadily. They could carry her, at first. But Harkness looked at the
