He kicked something that rattled and rolled away from him. He stopped,
freezing in his tracks, trying to pierce the dully glowing gloom. It was a
human skull.

He relaxed and began walking again.

[Illustration]

There were plenty of bones down here. Mannheim had said that the tunnels
had been used as air-raid shelters when the sun bomb had hit the island
during the Holocaust. Thousands had crowded underground after the warning
had come, and they had died when the bright, hot, deadly gas had roared
down through ventilators and open stairwells.

There were even caches of canned goods down here, some of them still
sealed after all this time. But the rats, wiser than they knew, had chewed
at them, exposing the steel beneath the tin plate. After a while,
oxidation would weaken a can to the point where some lucky rat could bite
through it and find himself a meal. Then he could move the empty can aside
and gnaw the next one in the pile, and the cycle would begin again. It
kept the rats fed almost as well as an automatic machine might have.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tunnel was an endless monochromatic world that was both artificial and
natural. Here, there was a neatly squared-off mosaic of ceramic tile; over
there, on a little hillock of earth, squatted a colony of fat mushrooms.
In one place, he had to skirt a pool of water; in another, climb over a
heap of rust and debris that had once been a subway car.

One man, alone, walking through the dark towards a superhuman monster that
had terrorized Earth for a decade.

A drug that would knock out the Nipe would have been useful, but that
would have required a greater knowledge of the Nipe's biochemistry than
anyone had. The same applied to anesthetic gases, or electric shock, or
supersonics.

The only answer was a man called Stanton.

And the voice near his ear said: "A hundred yards to go, Barbell."

"I know," he whispered. "He hasn't moved?"

"No."

_Wouldn't it be funny if he were dead?_ Stanton thought. _If his heart had
stopped, or something. Wouldn't that be a big joke on everybody?
Especially me._

Ahead the tunnel made a curving turn, and there was a large area that had
once been a major junction of two tunnels, one below the other. The Nipe
had taken over a part of that area to build his home-away-from-home.

Stanton approached the turn and took off the infra-red goggles. Enough
light spilled over from the Nipe's lair to illuminate the tunnel. He put
the goggles on the trackway. He wouldn't need them again.

He went on around the curve, slowly and quietly. He didn't want to fight
down here in the tracks, and he didn't want to be caught just yet.

Cautiously, he lifted himself up to the platform, where long-gone
passengers had once waited for long-gone trains. Now that he was out of
the trench that the tracks lay in, he could move more easily. He moved
away from the tracks.

"Barbell! He's heard you! Watch it!"

But Stanton had already heard the movement of the Nipe. He jerked off the
communicator and threw it away. He didn't want any encumbrances now.

And then, as fast as any express train that had ever moved in these
underground ways, the Nipe came around a corner thirty feet away, his four
violet eyes gleaming, his limbs rippling beneath his centipede-like body.

_From fifteen feet away, he launched himself through the air, his
outstretched hands ready to kill._

But Stanton's marvelous neuro-muscular system was already in action.

At this stage of the game, it would be suicide to let the Nipe get close.
He couldn't fend off eight grasping hands with his own two. He leaped to
one side, and the Nipe got his first surprise in ten years when Stanton's
fist slammed against the side of his snouted head, knocking him in the
opposite direction from that in which Stanton had moved.

The Nipe landed, turned, and charged back toward the man. This time, he
reared up, using his two rear pairs of limbs for locomotion, while the two
forward pair were held out, ready to kill.

He got surprise number two when Stanton's fist landed on his snout,
rocking his head back. His own hands met nothing but air, and by the time
he had recovered from the blow, Stanton was well back, out of the way.

_He's so small!_ Stanton thought wonderingly. Even when he reared up, the
Nipe's head was only three feet above the concrete floor.

The Nipe came in again--more cautiously, this time.

Stanton punched again with a straight right. The Nipe moved his head
aside, and Stanton's knuckles merely grazed the side of his head, below
the lower right eye. One of the Nipe's hands came in in a chopping right
hook that took Stanton just below the ribs. Stanton leaped back with a
gasp of pain.

The Nipe didn't use fists. He used his open hand, fingers together, like a
judo fighter.

The Nipe came forward once more, and as Stanton danced back, the Nipe made
a grab for his ankle, almost catching it.

There were too many hands to watch! Stanton had two advantages: weight and
reach. His arms were almost half again as long as the Nipe's.

Against that, the Nipe had all those hands; and with his low center of
gravity and four-footed stance, it would be hard to knock him down. If
Stanton lost his footing, the fight would be over fast.

Stanton lunged suddenly forward and planted a left in the Nipe's right
upper eye, then followed it with a right uppercut to the Nipe's jaw as his
head snapped back. The Nipe's four hands cut inward from the sides like
sword blades, but they found no target.

Backing away, Stanton suddenly realized that he had another advantage. The
Nipe couldn't throw a straight jab! His shoulder--if that's what they
should be called--were narrow and the upper armbones weren't articulated
properly for such a blow. He could throw a mean hook, but he had to get in
close to deliver it.

On the other side of the coin was the fact that the Nipe knew plenty about
human anatomy--from the bones out. Stanton's knowledge of Nipe anatomy was
almost totally superficial.

He wished he knew if and where the Nipe had a solar plexus. He would like
to punch something soft for a change.

Instead, he tried for another eye. He danced in, jabbed and danced out
again, The Nipe had ducked again, taking it on the side of his head.

Then the Nipe came in low, at an angle, trying for the groin. For his
troubles, he got a knee in the jaw that staggered him badly. One grasping
hand clutched at Stanton's right thigh and grasped hard. Stanton swung his
fist down like a pendulum and knocked the arm aside.

But there was a slight limp in his movement as he back-pedaled away from
the Nipe. That full-handed pinch had hurt!

Stanton was angry now, with the hot, controlled anger of a fighting man.
He stepped in and slammed two fast, hard jabs into the point of the
Nipe's snout, jarring the monster backwards. This time, it was the Nipe
who scuttled backwards.

Stanton moved in to press his advantage and landed a beaut on the Nipe's
lower left eye. Then he tried a body blow. It wasn't too successful. The
alien had an endoskeleton, but he also had a hide that was like somewhat
leathery chitin.

He pulled back, out of the way of the Nipe's judo cuts.

His fists were beginning to hurt, and his leg was paining him badly where
the Nipe had clamped on to it. And his ribs--

And then he realized that, so far, the Nipe had only landed one blow!

_One punch and one pinch,_ he thought with a touch of awe. _The only other
damage he's inflicted has been to my knuckles!_

The Nipe charged in again, then he leaped suddenly and clawed for
Stanton's face with his first pair of hands. The second and third pairs
chopped in toward the man's body. The last pair propelled him off the
floor.

Stanton stepped back and let him have a right just below the jaw, where
his throat would have been if he'd been human.

The Nipe arced backwards in a half-somersault and landed flat on his back.

Stanton backed up a little more, waiting, while the Nipe wriggled feebly
for a moment. _The Marquis of Queensbury should have lived to see this,_
he thought.

The Nipe rolled over and crouched on all eight limbs. His violet eyes
watched Stanton, but the man could read no expression on that inhuman
face.

"_You did not kill._"

For a moment, Stanton found it hard to believe that the hissing, guttural
voice had come from the crouching monster.

"_You did not even_ try _to kill._"

"I have no wish to kill you," Stanton said evenly.

"_I can see that. Do you ... Are you...._" He stopped, as if baffled.
"_There are not the proper words. Do you follow the Customs?_"

Stanton felt a surge of triumph. This was what George Yoritomo had guessed
might happen!

"If I must kill you," he said carefully, "I, myself, will do the honors.
You will not go uneaten."

The Nipe sagged a little, relaxing all over. "_I had hoped it was so. It
was the only thinkable thing. I saw you on the television, and it was only
thinkable that you came for me._"

Stanton blinked, stunned. What was the Nipe thinking? But, of course, he
knew. And he saw that even his brother's return had been a part of the
plan.

"_I knew you were out in the asteroids,_" the Nipe went on. "_But I had
decided you had come to kill. Since you did not, what are your thoughts,
Stanley Martin?_"

"That we should help each other," Stanton said.

It was as simple as that.


XVII

Stanton sat in his hotel room, smoking a cigarette, staring at the wall,
and thinking.

He was alone again. All the fuss, feathers, and fooferaw were over.
Farnsworth was in another room of the suite, making his plans for a
complete physical examination of the Nipe. Yoritomo was having the time of
his life, holding a conversation with the Nipe, drawing the alien out and
getting him to talk about his own race and their history. And Mannheim was
plotting the next phase of the capture--the cover-up.

Stanton smiled a little. Colonel Mannheim was a great one for planning,
all right. Every little detail was taken care of. It sometimes made his
plans more complex than necessary, Stanton suspected. Mannheim tended to
try to account for every eventuality, and, after he had done that, he
would set aside reserves here and there, just in case they might be useful
if something unforeseen happened.

Stanton got up, walked over to the window, and looked down at the streets
of Government City, eight floors below.

All things considered, the Government had done the right thing. And, in
picking Mannheim, they had picked the right man. What would the average
citizen think if he knew the true story of the Nipe? If he discovered
that, at this very moment, the Nipe was being treated almost as an honored
guest of the Government? If he suspected that the Nipe could have been
killed easily at any time during the past six years?

Would it be possible to explain that, in the long run, the knowledge
possessed by the Nipe was tremendously more valuable to the Race of Man
that the lives of a few individuals?

Could those people down there, and the others like them all over the
world, be made to understand that, by his own lights, the Nipe had been
acting in a most civilized and gentlemanly way he knew? Would they see
that, because of the priceless information stored in that alien brain, the
Nipe's life had to be preserved at any cost?

Dr. Yoritomo assumed that Mannheim would spread a story about the Nipe's
death--perhaps even display a carefully-made "corpse". But Stanton had the
feeling that the colonel had something else up his sleeve.

The phone rang. Stanton walked over, thumbed the answer stud, and watched
Dr. Farnsworth's face take shape on the screen.

"Bart, I just saw the tapes of your fight with the Nipe, Incredible! I'm
going to have them run over again, slowed down, so that I can see what
went on, and I'd like to have you tell as best you can, what went on in
your mind at each stage of the fight."

"You mean right now? I have an appointment--"

Farnsworth waved a hand. "No, no. Later. Take your time. But I am honestly
amazed that you won so easily. I knew you were good, and I knew you'd win,
but I honestly expected you to be injured."

Stanton looked down at his bandaged hands, and felt the ache of his broken
rib and the blue bruise on his thigh. In spite of the way it looked, he
had actually been hurt worse than the Nipe had. That boy was _tough_!

"The trouble was that he couldn't adapt himself to fighting in a new way,"
he told Farnsworth. "He fought me as he would have fought another Nipe,
and that didn't work. I had the reach on him, and I could maneuver
faster."

"It looked to me as though you were fighting him as you would fight
another human being," Farnsworth said.

Stanton grinned. "I was, in a modified way. But _I_ won--the Nipe didn't."

Farnsworth grinned back. "I see. Well, I'll let you know when I'm ready
for your impressions. Probably tomorrow some time."

"Fine."

       *       *       *       *       *

He walked back over to the window, but this time he looked at the horizon,
not at the street.

Farnsworth had called him "Bart". It's funny, Stanton thought, how habit
can get the best of a man. Farnsworth had known the truth all along, and
now he knew that his patient--_former_ patient--was aware of the truth.
And still, he had called him "Bart".

_And I still think of myself as Bart,_ he thought. _I probably always
will._

And why not? Martin Stanton no longer existed--in fact he had never had
much of a real existence. He was only a bad dream; only "Bart" was real.

Take two people, genetically identical. Damage one of them so badly that
he is helpless and useless--and always only a step away from death. It is
inevitable that the weaker will identify himself with the stronger.

The vague telepathic bond that always links identical twins (they "think
alike", they say) becomes unbalanced under such conditions. Normally,
there is a give-and-take, and each preserves the sense of his own
identity, since the two different sets of sense receptors give different
viewpoints. But if one of the twins is damaged badly enough something must
happen to the telepathic link. Usually, it is broken.

But the link between Mart and Bart Stanton had not been broken. It had
become a one-way channel. Martin, in order to escape the prison of his own
body, had become a receptor for Bart's thoughts. He felt as Bart felt--the
thrill of running after a baseball, the pride of doing something clever
with his hands.

In effect, Martin ceased to think. The thoughts in his mind were Bart's.
The feeling of identity was almost complete.

To an outside observer, it appeared that Martin had become a cataleptic
schizophrenic, completely cut off from reality. The "Bart" part of him did
not want to be disturbed by the sensory impressions that "Mart's" body
provided. Like the schizophrenic, Martin was living in a little world that
was cut off from the actual physical world around his body.

The difference between Martin's condition and that of the ordinary
schizophrenic was that _his_ little world actually existed. It was an
almost exact counterpart of the world that existed in the perfectly sane,
rational mind of his brother, Bart. It grew and developed as Bart did, fed
by the telepathic flow from the stronger mind to the weaker.

There were two Barts, and no Mart at all.

And then the Neurophysical Institute had come into the picture. A new
process had been developed, by which a human being could be
reconstructed--made, literally, into a superman. The drawback was that a
normal human body resisted the process--to the death, if necessary, just
as a normal human body will resist a skin graft from an alien donor.

But the radiation-damaged body of Martin Stanton had no resistance of that
kind. With him--perhaps--the process might work.

So Bartholomew Stanton, Martin's legal guardian after the death of their
mother, had given permission for the series of operations that would
rebuild his brother.

The telepathic link, of course, had to be shut off--for a time, at least.
Part of that could be done in the treatment of Martin, but Bart, too, had
to do his part. By submitting to hypnosis, he had allowed himself to be
convinced that his name was Stanley Martin. He had taken a job on Luna,
and then had gone to the asteriods. The simple change of name and
environment had been just enough to snap the link during a time when
Martin's brain had been inactivated by therapy and anesthetics.

Only the sense of identity remained. The patient was still Bart.

Mannheim had used them both, naturally. Colonel Mannheim had the ability
to use anyone at hand, including himself, to get a job done.

Stanton looked at his watch. It was almost time.

Mannheim had sent for "Stanley Martin" when the time had come for him to
return in order to give the Nipe data that he would be sure to
misinterpret. A special code phrase in the message had released "Stanley
Martin" from the posthypnotic suggestion that had held him for so long. He
knew that he was Bartholomew Stanton again.

_And so do I,_ thought the man by the window. _We have a lot to straighten
out, we two._

There was a knock at the door.

Stanton walked over and opened it, trying to think.
