
"As you will." Dalgetty leaned back again, casually shoving his chair
a couple of feet. He was now facing the window and, as far as he could
tell, sitting exactly on a line between the man there and the man at
the farther wall. "The Union of Tau Ceti is interested in seeing that
the right kind of civilizations develop on other planets. You could be
of value to us, Thomas Bancroft, if you can be persuaded to our side,
and the rewards are considerable." His glance went for a moment to the
girl and she nodded imperceptibly. "For example...."

The power rushed up in him. Elena clubbed her gun butt and struck the
man next to her behind the ear. In the fractional second before the
others could understand and react Dalgetty was moving.

The impetus which launched him from the chair sent that heavy padded
piece of furniture sliding across the floor to hit the man behind him
with a muffled thud. His left fist took Bancroft on the jaw as he went
by. The guard at the window had no time to swing his gun back from
Elena and squeeze trigger before Dalgetty's hand was on his throat.
His neck snapped.

Elena stood over her victim even as he toppled and aimed at the man
across the room. The armchair had knocked his rifle aside. "Drop that
or I shoot," she said.

Dalgetty snatched up a gun for himself, leveling it at the door. He
more than half expected those outside to come rushing in, expected
hell would explode. But the thick oak panels must have choked off
sound.

Slowly, the man behind the chair let his rifle fall to the floor. His
mouth was stretched wide with supernatural fear.

"My God!" Dr. Tighe's long form was erect, shaking, his calm broken
into horror. "Simon, the risk...."

"We didn't have anything to lose, did we?" Dalgetty's voice was thick
but the abnormal energy was receding from him. He felt a surge of
weariness and knew that soon the payment must be made for the way he
had abused his body. He looked down at the corpse before him. "I
didn't mean to do that," he whispered.

Tighe collected himself with an effort of disciplined will and stepped
over to Bancroft. "He's alive, at least," he said. "Oh my God, Simon!
You could have been killed so easily."

"I may yet. We aren't out of the woods by any means. Find something to
tie these two others up with, will you, Dad?"

The Englishman nodded. Elena's slugged guard was stirring and
groaning. Tighe bound and gagged him with strips torn from his tunic.
Under the submachine-gun the other submitted meekly enough. Dalgetty
rolled them behind a sofa with the one he had slain.

Bancroft was wakening too. Dalgetty located a flask of bourbon and
gave it to him. Clearing eyes looked up with the same terror. "Now
what?" mumbled Bancroft. "You can't get away--"

"We can damn well try. If it had come to fighting with the rest of
your gang we'd have used you as a hostage but now there's a neater
way. On your feet! Here, straighten your tunic, comb your hair. Okay,
you'll do just as you're told, because if anything goes wrong we'll
have nothing at all to lose by shooting you." Dalgetty rapped out his
orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bancroft looked at Elena and there was more than physical hurt in his
eyes. "Why did you do it?"

"FBI," she said.

He shook his head, still stunned, and shuffled over to the desk
visiphone and called the hangar. "I've got to get to the mainland in a
hurry. Have the speedster ready in ten minutes. No, just the regular
pilot, nobody else. I'll have Dalgetty with me but it's okay. He's on
our side now."

They went out the door. Elena cradled her tommy-gun under one arm.
"You can go back to the barracks, boys," said Bancroft wearily to the
men outside. "It's all been settled."

A quarter hour later Bancroft's private jet was in the air. Five
minutes after that he and the pilot were bound and locked in a rear
compartment. Michael Tighe took the controls. "This boat has legs," he
said. "Nothing can catch us between here and California."

"All right." Dalgetty's tones were flat with exhaustion. "I'm going
back to rest, Dad." Briefly his hand rested on the older man's
shoulder. "It's good to have you back," he said.

"Thank you, son," said Michael Tighe. "I can't tell you how wonderful
it is to be free again."


IX

Dalgetty found a reclining seat and eased himself into it. One by one
he began releasing the controls over himself--sensitivities, nerve
blocs, glandular stimulation. Fatigue and pain mounted within him. He
looked out at the stars and listened to the dark whistle of air with
merely human senses.

Elena Casimir came to sit beside him and he realized that his job
wasn't done. He studied the strong lines of her face. She could be a
hard foe but just as stubborn a friend.

"What do you have in mind for Bancroft?" he asked.

"Kidnapping charges for him and that whole gang," she said. "He won't
wriggle out of it, I can guarantee you." Her eyes rested on him,
unsure, a little frightened. "Federal prison psychiatrists have
Institute training," she murmured. "You'll see that his personality is
reshaped _your_ way, won't you?"

"As far as possible," Simon said. "Though it doesn't matter much.
Bancroft is finished as a factor to be reckoned with. There's still
Bertrand Meade himself, of course. Even if Bancroft made a full
confession I doubt that we could touch him. But the Institute has now
learned to take precautions against extra-legal methods--and within
the framework of the law we can give him cards and spades and still
defeat him."

"With some help from my department," Elena said. There was a touch of
steel in her voice. "But the whole story of this rescue will have to
be played down. It wouldn't do to have too many ideas floating around
in the public mind, would it?"

"That's right," he admitted. His head felt heavy, he wanted to rest it
on her shoulder and sleep for a century. "It's up to you really. If
you submit the right kind of report to your superiors it can all be
worked out. Everything else will just be detail. But otherwise you'll
ruin everything."

"I don't know." She looked at him for a long while. "I don't know if I
should or not. You may be correct about the Institute and the justice
of its aims and methods. But how can I be sure, when I don't know
what's behind it? How do I know there wasn't more truth than fiction
in that Tau Ceti story, that you aren't really the agent of some
non-human power quietly taking over all our race?"

At another time Dalgetty might have argued, tried to veil it from her,
tried to trick her once again. But now he was too weary. There was a
great surrender in him. "I'll tell you if you wish," he said, "and
after that it's in your hands. You can make us or break us."

"Go on then." Her tone withdrew into wariness.

"I'm human," he said. "I'm as human as you are. Only I've had rather
special training, that's all. It's another discovery of the Institute
for which we don't feel the world is ready. It'd be too big a
temptation for too many people, to create followers like me." He
looked away, into the windy dark. "The scientist is also a member of
society and has a responsibility toward it. This--restraint--of ours
is one way in which we meet that obligation."

She didn't speak, but suddenly one hand reached over and rested on
his. The impulsive gesture brought warmth flooding through him.

"Dad's work was mostly in mass-action psych," he said, making his tone
try to cover what he felt, "but he has plenty of associates trying to
understand the individual human being as a functioning mechanism. A
lot's been learned since Freud, both from the psychiatric and the
neurological angle. Ultimately, those two are interchangeable.

"Some thirty years ago one of the teams which founded the Institute
learned enough about the relationship between the conscious,
subconscious and involuntary minds to begin practical tests. Along
with a few others I was a guinea pig. And their theories worked.

"I needn't go into the details of my training. It involved physical
exercises, mental practice, some hypnotism, diet and so on. It went
considerably beyond the important Synthesis education which is the
most advanced thing known to the general public. But its aim--only
partially realized as yet--its aim was simply to produce the
completely integrated human being."

Dalgetty paused. The wind flowed and muttered beyond the wall.

"There is no sharp division between conscious and subconscious or even
between those and the centers controlling involuntary functions," he
said. "The brain is a continuous structure. Suppose, for instance,
that you become aware of a runaway car bearing down on you.

"Your heartbeat speeds up, your adrenalin output increases, your sight
sharpens, your sensitivity to pain drops--it's all preparation for
fight or flight. Even without obvious physical necessity the same
thing can happen on a lesser scale--for example when you read an
exciting story. And psychotics, especially hysterics, can produce some
of the damnedest physiological symptoms you ever saw."

"I begin to understand," she whispered.

"Rage or fear brings abnormal strength and fast reaction. But the
psychotic can do more than that. He can show physical symptoms like
burns, stigmata or--if female--false pregnancy. Sometimes he becomes
wholly insensitive in some part of his body via a nerve bloc.
Bleeding can start or stop without apparent cause. He can go into a
coma or he can stay awake for days without getting sleepy. He can--"

"Read minds?" It was a defiance.

"Not that I know of." Simon chuckled. "But human sense organs are
amazingly good. It only takes three or four quanta to stimulate the
visual purple--a little more actually because of absorption by the
eyeball itself. There have been hysterics who could hear a watch
ticking twenty feet away that the normal person could not hear at one
foot. And so on.

"There are excellent reasons why the threshold of perception is
relatively high in ordinary people--the stimuli of usual conditions
would be blinding and deafening, unendurable, if there weren't a
defense." He grimaced. "I _know_!"

"But the telepathy?" Elena persisted.

"It's been done before," he said. "Some apparent cases of mindreading
in the last century were shown to be due to extremely acute hearing.
Most people sub-vocalize their surface thoughts. With a little
practice a person who can hear those vibrations can learn to interpret
them. That's all." He smiled with one side of his mouth. "If you want
to hide your thoughts from me just break that habit, Elena."

She looked at him with an emotion he could not quite recognize. "I
see," she breathed. "And your memory must be perfect too, if you can
pull any datum out of the subconscious. And you can--do everything,
can't you?"

"No," he said. "I'm only a test case. They've learned a great deal by
observing me but the only thing that makes me unusual is that I have
conscious control of certain normally subconscious and involuntary
functions. Not all of them by a long shot. And I don't use that
control any more than necessary.

"There are sound biological reasons why man's mind is so divided and
plenty of penalties attached to a case like mine. It'll take me a
couple of months to get back in shape after this bout. I'm due for a
good old-fashioned nervous breakdown and while it won't last long it
won't be much fun while it does last."

The appeal rose in his eyes as he watched Elena. "All right," he said.
"Now you have the story. What are you going to do about it?"

For the first time she gave him a real smile. "Don't worry," she said,
"Don't worry, Simon."

"Will you come hold my hand while I'm recuperating?" he asked
anxiously.

"I'm holding it now, you fool," Elena answered.

Dalgetty chuckled happily. Then he went to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's The Sensitive Man, by Poul William Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SENSITIVE MAN ***

***** This file should be named 31501.txt or 31501.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/0/31501/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

