
Martin sprang.

So did St. Cyr--in another direction, screaming with sudden terror. For,
after all, he was only a medievalist. The feudal man is far more
civilized than the so-called man of Mammoth-Slayer's primordially direct
era, and as a man recoils from a small but murderous wildcat, so St. Cyr
fled in sudden civilized horror from an attacker who was, literally,
afraid of nothing.

He sprang through the window and, shrieking, vanished into the night.

Martin was taken by surprise. When Mammoth-Slayer leaped at an enemy,
the enemy leaped at him too, and so Martin's head slammed against the
wall with disconcerting force. Dimly he heard diminishing, terrified
cries. Laboriously he crawled to his feet and set back against the wall,
snarling, quite ready....

"Nick!" Erika's voice called. "Nick, it's me! Stop it! _Stop it!_
DeeDee--"

"Ugh?" Martin said thickly, shaking his head. "Kill." He growled softly,
blinking through red-rimmed little eyes at the scene around him. It swam
back slowly into focus. Erika was struggling with DeeDee near the
window.

"You let me go," DeeDee cried. "Where Raoul goes, I go."

"DeeDee!" pleaded a new voice. Martin glanced aside to see Tolliver Watt
crumpled in a corner, a crushed lamp-shade half obscuring his face.

With a violent effort Martin straightened up. Walking upright seemed
unnatural, somehow, but it helped submerge Mammoth-Slayer's worst
instincts. Besides, with St. Cyr gone, stresses were slowly subsiding,
so that Mammoth-Slayer's dominant trait was receding from the active
foreground.

Martin tested his tongue cautiously, relieved to find he was still
capable of human speech.

"Uh," he said. "Arrgh ... ah. Watt."

Watt blinked at him anxiously through the lamp-shade.

"Urgh ... Ur--release," Martin said, with a violent effort. "Contract
release. Gimme."

Watt had courage. He crawled to his feet, removing the lamp-shade.

"Contract release!" he snapped. "You madman! Don't you realize what
you've done? DeeDee's walking out on me. DeeDee, don't go. We will bring
Raoul back--"

"Raoul told me to quit if he quit," DeeDee said stubbornly.

"You don't have to do what St. Cyr tells you," Erika said, hanging onto
the struggling star.

"Don't I?" DeeDee asked, astonished. "Yes, I do. I always have."

"DeeDee," Watt said frantically, "I'll give you the finest contract on
earth--a ten-year contract--look, here it is." He tore out a
well-creased document. "All you have to do is sign, and you can have
anything you want. Wouldn't you like that?"

"Oh, yes," DeeDee said. "But Raoul wouldn't like it." She broke free
from Erika.

"Martin!" Watt told the playwright frantically, "Get St. Cyr back.
Apologize to him. I don't care how, but get him back! If you don't,
I--I'll never give you your release."

Martin was observed to slump slightly--perhaps with hopelessness. Then,
again, perhaps not.

"I'm sorry," DeeDee said. "I liked working for you, Tolliver. But I have
to do what Raoul says, of course." And she moved toward the window.

Martin had slumped further down, till his knuckles quite brushed the
rug. His angry little eyes, glowing with baffled rage, were fixed on
DeeDee. Slowly his lips peeled back, exposing every tooth in his head.

"You," he said, in an ominous growl.

DeeDee paused, but only briefly.

        *        *       *        *        *

Then the enraged roar of a wild beast reverberated through the room.
"_You come back!_" bellowed the infuriated Mammoth-Slayer, and with one
agile bound sprang to the window, seized DeeDee and slung her under one
arm. Wheeling, he glared jealously at the shrinking Watt and reached for
Erika. In a trice he had the struggling forms of both girls captive, one
under each arm. His wicked little eyes glanced from one to another.
Then, playing no favorites, he bit each quickly on the ear.

"Nick!" Erika cried. "How dare you!"

"Mine," Mammoth-Slayer informed her hoarsely.

"You bet I am," Erika said, "but that works both ways. Put down that
hussy you've got under your other arm."

Mammoth-Slayer was observed to eye DeeDee doubtfully.

"Well," Erika said tartly, "make up your mind."

"Both," said the uncivilized playwright. "Yes."

"No!" Erika said.

"Yes," DeeDee breathed in an entirely new tone. Limp as a dishrag, the
lovely creature hung from Martin's arm and gazed up at her captor with
idolatrous admiration.

"Oh, you hussy," Erika said. "What about St. Cyr?"

"Him," DeeDee said scornfully. "He hasn't got a thing, the sissy. I'll
never look at him again." She turned her adoring gaze back to Martin.

"Pah," the latter grunted, tossing DeeDee into Watt's lap. "Yours. Keep
her." He grinned approvingly at Erika. "Strong she. Better."

Both Watt and DeeDee remained motionless, staring at Martin.

"You," he said, thrusting a finger at DeeDee. "You stay with him. Ha?"
He indicated Watt.

DeeDee nodded in slavish adoration.

"You sign contract?"

Nod.

Martin looked significantly into Watt's eyes. He extended his hand.

"The contract release," Erika explained, upside-down. "Give it to him
before he pulls your head off."

Slowly Watt pulled the contract release from his pocket and held it out.
But Martin was already shambling toward the window. Erika reached back
hastily and snatched the document.

"That was a wonderful act," she told Nick, as they reached the street.
"Put me down now. We can find a cab some--"

"No act," Martin growled. "Real. Till tomorrow. After that--" He
shrugged. "But tonight, Mammoth-Slayer." He attempted to climb a palm
tree, changed his mind, and shambled on, carrying the now pensive Erika.
But it was not until a police car drove past that Erika screamed....

        *        *       *        *        *

"I'll bail you out tomorrow," Erika told Mammoth-Slayer, struggling
between two large patrolmen.

Her words were drowned in an infuriated bellow.

Thereafter events blurred, to solidify again for the irate
Mammoth-Slayer only when he was thrown in a cell, where he picked
himself up with a threatening roar. "I kill!" he announced, seizing the
bars.

"_Arrrgh!_"

"Two in one night," said a bored voice, moving away outside. "Both in
Bel-Air, too. Think they're hopped up? We couldn't get a coherent story
out of either one."

The bars shook. An annoyed voice from one of the bunks said to shut up,
and added that there had been already enough trouble from nincompoops
without--here it paused, hesitated, and uttered a shrill, sharp,
piercing cry.

Silence prevailed, momentarily, in the cell-block as Mammoth-Slayer, son
of the Great Hairy One, turned slowly to face Raoul St. Cyr.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ego Machine, by Henry Kuttner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EGO MACHINE ***

***** This file should be named 32108.txt or 32108.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/1/0/32108/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
