Baldy took the freezer from his pocket and casually tossed it to Pell.

A sudden change came over Pell, then. His smile disappeared. He stepped
quickly away from Ciel, whirled and faced all of them. He pointed the
freezer. "All right, everybody stay perfectly still--you, too, Ciel.
This is where we break up your little Supremist nightmare."

Larkin stared in utter amazement. Nebel's turtle lids opened wide. Ciel
brought her hand to her throat.

Red's hand blurred suddenly, going for his own weapon. Pell squeezed the
trigger, the violet sparks danced for an instant, and then Red stood
frozen with his hand almost to his chest.

"I'd advise nobody else to try that," said Pell, and then in an ironical
tone to Larkin: "C.I.B. agents are trained to be pretty quick with a
freezer, right, Chief?"

Larkin seemed to find his voice now. "But--how--what happened? You were
injected. How can you...."

"I just took a little precaution, that's all," said Pell. "There'll be
plenty of time to explain it all later. You'll probably hear the whole
thing in court, Larkin, when I testify at your trial for treason.
Meanwhile, all of you just stay nice and calm while I use the viewer."

He stepped to the viewer and dialed with his free hand. The plate
glowed, shimmered and a moment later the pale, grave face of Theodor
Rysland came into view. His eyebrows rose as he saw the weapon in Pell's
hand and glimpsed the people beyond Pell. "Hello--what's this all
about?"

"Haven't time to explain fully now," said Pell, "but I want you to get
to Larkin's country house as soon as you can. I'll call agent Kronski in
a moment and have him bring some others, and together we'll take Larkin
and Nebel into custody. They're behind the Supremist movement--a
deliberate attempt to take over the government. They did it with a drug;
that's how Supremist's are made."

"What's this? A drug?"

"Think about it later," said Pell. "Just grab the facts right now. The
drug makes a person subject to post-hypnotic commands--that's why your
Supremists are blindly, unthinkingly loyal. However, the command can be
erased by a second treatment. That'll be tough and take a lot of
ferreting out, but it won't be impossible." He glanced at Ciel, and saw
that she was staring at him with horror--with enmity. It sickened him,
but he steadied himself with the realization that Ciel would be one of
the first to be re-treated.

       *       *       *       *       *

Several minutes later he had completed his calls. Rysland, Kronski and
the others were on the way. He kept the freezer pointed, and watched his
captives carefully. Ciel had gone over to the couch and was sitting
there, her face in her hands, weeping softly.

"I don't know how you did it," said Larkin. "I don't understand it. The
injection should have worked. It always did before."

"Well, it almost worked," said Pell. "I must admit I had quite a time
fighting off your commands. But, you see, I knew you'd gotten to Ciel
somehow when she called me up to make the date this evening. She spoke
of going out to the terrace at the Stardust Cafe. It was a little odd
that she should speak of the terrace like that, out of a clear sky--and
I wondered why it should be on her mind. Then it struck me that neither
of us had ever noticed a terrace there, and Ciel must have some special
reason for knowing about it.

"She did, of course--she'd been instructed to get me out there where
your boys could slap a freezer on me. So I started guessing with that
hunch to work on. Everything more or less fell into place after that. It
was pretty certain that they'd try to make a loyal Supremist out of me,
too, and that's when I took that little precaution I mentioned to you."

"What precaution?"

Pell smiled. "I had Marco the mentalist hypnotize me and give me a
rather special post-hypnotic command. He ordered me not to believe any
_subsequent_ post-hypnotic commands. That's why your conditioning didn't
work on me."

Larkin could find no words; he just stared.

"Think about it, Larkin," said Pell. "Think hard. Maybe you'd convinced
yourself you were doing good, but your purpose was still tyranny. And
like any tyranny it contained the means of its own destruction. It
always works out that way, Larkin--maybe it's a law, or something."

It had been a long speech for Pell, practically an oration. He was,
after all, a cop, not a philosopher. Just a guy trying to get along.
Just an ordinary citizen whose name was legion, looking at his wife now
and waiting with what patience he could find for the time when she would
be cleared of the poisonous doctrine that any one race or group or even
species was supreme.

He was thinking, too, that the trial would keep him busy as the very
devil and that they _still_ wouldn't get to that vacation and second
honeymoon for a long time....

That, considering everything, was not too much to put up with.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Brink of Madness, by Walter J. Sheldon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRINK OF MADNESS ***

***** This file should be named 32339.txt or 32339.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/3/32339/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
