puma but there was also about it the appearance of solid reality.

Retch spun to face the menace coming from behind him. The gun in his
hands spat flame and fury.

He had destroyed the Jezbro hawk. He would also destroy this Jezbro
puma.

The puma dropped the man from its jaws. It crouched. It leaped straight
at the gun spouting lead. Retch slid to one side. The puma missed. It
hit the floor, slid, tried to turn as a frantic girl moved buttons on
the key board.

The floor was slick, the padded feet did not grip. The tail of the
sliding puma touched the pool of mercury. The tail smoked as if it was
suddenly on fire.

The puma screamed. It seemed to be drawn into the pool. It was as if
something in the pool caught the puma, held it, pulled it into the
mercury.

It went out of sight, vanished. No puff of flame followed. The life that
had animated it had come from this pool. Now the life had returned to
its source.

The dazed Retch lowered his smoking gun.

Parker moved silently forward.

"Lay down the gun, Johnny Retch!" he said.

Retch seemed to stiffen. His back was to Parker. He did not attempt to
turn.

"You called for me," Parker said. "Here I am. Drop the gun!"

Retch snarled, spun, dropping flat as he turned. His eyes were narrowed.
They glared at Parker like twin flames of yellow hate. He tried to bring
up the gun.

Something came through the air, something that he did not see. It
grabbed his arms, clutched them with a fierce grip, screamed at him.
Mercedes!

Retch, with one savage thrust, flung her aside. Again the two yellow
eyes glared at Parker as Retch brought up the weapon that he held.

"You haven't licked me yet!" Retch screamed.

The gun in Parker's hand exploded.

Suddenly Retch had three eyes. One of them was in the middle of his
forehead. It was round and blue.

He stood for a second, transfixed. Something had happened to him. He did
not know exactly what it was. He had come here seeking Montezuma's
treasure. He had it in the reach of his hand. But something had happened
to him. What it was he did not quite know. Something--

He tried to lift the gun he held. His hands would not obey him. Or
perhaps the gun had suddenly grown too heavy for him to lift. He could
not raise it.

The yellow light in his eyes did not change. But suddenly he collapsed,
went down, did not move.

       *       *       *       *       *

Even after he was on the floor, his eyes remained fixed on Parker,
glaring, yellow. Then, little by little, the yellow flames began to go
out.

In the silence were two sounds. The first, Mercedes, whispering. "'Ave I
paid my debt, Beel? I tried."

"You have paid it," Parker said.

The other sound was that of the old priest beginning the prayers for the
dying. He had laid aside his spear. Now he was kneeling again, his voice
lifting as he prayed even for those who had mis-used him.

Then there was another sound, voices shouting in the distance. The men
who had run from this room were trying to regain their courage, trying
to find the will to come back again.

Parker moved to the girl who sat at the key board.

"Effra, my dear, if you would--"

Catching his idea, she nodded. Her fingers lifted the image of an
alligator from its niche.

Parker saw the 'gator waddle from this room of mystery and of magic,
from this room of lost science, from this forgotten laboratory of a
vanished race.

After the alligator, went a jungle cat, full of spit and scratch and the
sounds of fury. After the cat went a jaguar, black, fanged, also with
yellow eyes.

In the corridors the screaming stopped. Parker, listening, shuddered. He
was glad he was not out in one of those corridors; one of the men who
had tried to steal the treasure of Montezuma, one of the men who had
followed Johnny Retch. Hell was walking through those tunnels--hell in
the form of an alligator; hell in the form of a jungle cat; hell in the
form of a jaguar with yellow eyes.

From the window slot, Parker watched men swarm out of the cliff. Some
found the small boats, pushed out in them to the PT boat. Others swam. A
jaguar went along the shoreline screeching at them. A jungle cat spat at
them from the edge of the water.

On the boat, the anchors were hastily cast off. Powerful motors growled.
Gathering speed, leaving a growing wake behind it, the boat drove itself
into the veil, went out of sight.

Parker went back to the girl at the key board.

Her eyes came up to him. "Hello, Bill," she said.

"Effra?" he whispered.

"As I was sitting here, I remembered who you were--and who I
am--Bill--Bill--" She came into his arms.

Hours later, on a balcony in front of one of the window slots, they
still stood very close together. Rozeno and Mercedes were with them.
Rozeno was speaking.

"Do you think, my son, that you can go out into the world, and contact
the great men of this time, and bring them here one by one, so that we
may build in this secure spot a group from which the lines of progress
can flow out to all men in all the corners of the earth?"

"I can, Father," Parker answered.

"Unto all men--" Rozeno's lips moved in prayer. "Unto all men--"

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Sinister Paradise, by Robert Moore Williams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SINISTER PARADISE ***

***** This file should be named 32359.txt or 32359.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/5/32359/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
