But the thing which makes me wonder more than anything else, the biggest
enigma of all, is the _character_ of The Brain as it manifests itself in
the manifestations. As I try to put the experiences of the first night
together with those of the second night I'm stumbling over
contradictions in The Brain's personality which won't add up, which
don't make sense; as for instance:

The "I think, therefore I am" of the first night. Maybe it was Greek
philosophy, but it also was the prattling of an infant delighted by the
discovery that it can speak. There was an absolute innocence in that.
Ridiculous as this may sound, I found it _touching_ I completely forgot,
I didn't care a damn whether or not this came from a _machine_.
Unmistakeably it was _baby talk_ and as such it moved my heart. In fact,
as now I see it, it was _this_ more than any other or scientific reason
which occupied my mind, which made me anxious to go back to that
fantastic cradle whence these sounds had come.

But then last night; what did I find? A completely changed personality!
It talks tough. It uses slang. It treats me as if it were some spoiled
brat and I had the misfortune of being its mother or nurse: "Be there
every night" and so on. Deliberately it insults me: "your low
intelligence level" etc. etc. It actually throws tantrums if I fail to
understand immediately. It hurls its superiority into my face in the
nastiest manner. "Have I succeeded in making myself absolutely clear?"
It plainly shows contempt, not only for my own person by the
condescending manner of its: "Lee, not very intelligent; but will do."
It shows the selfsame contempt for other human beings such as Gus
Krinsley to whom it was pleased to refer as: "nuisance approaching"....

What the hell am I to make of that kind of a character? Last night: a
baby; rather a sweet and charming one. 24 hours later: an obnoxious
little brat, a little Hitler of a house tyrant; makes you just itch to
spank its behind. If only The Brain _had_ a behind....

Worst of all: How can I reconcile those two contraditions, the sweet
baby and the precocious brat, with the third and biggest of all
contraries: _How do these two go together with an intelligence 25,000
times human intelligence?_ It doesn't add up, it doesn't make sense;
that's all there is to it....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Skull-Hotel, Cephalon, Ariz. Nov. 9th. 3 a.m.

I didn't go to the P. G. last night for two main reasons: In the first
place I must be careful so as not to raise any suspicions on Gus' part.
Rarely, if ever, have I visited him for two nights in succession in the
past and he might well begin to ponder my reasons if now I should make a
habit of it. Especially since Gus happens to possess one of the keenest
minds I ever met and his curiosity already has been awakened by my
preoccupation with that one and fairly simple gadget: the pulsemeter.

In the second place I feel the absolute necessity of establishing my
independence as against the will of The Brain. That command two nights
ago for me to be on the spot _every_ night was just too preemptory for
me to oblige. This isn't the army and The Brain is no commanding
general.

In our last communication The Brain seemed to labor under the impression
that I was unconditionally at its beck and call. Of course, I've sworn
the "Oath of the Brain," but that doesn't make me The Brain's slave. In
fact--and in order to clarify this subject once and for all--while
personally I haven't created The Brain and cannot take any credit for
that, it nevertheless remains true that the _species_ to which I belong,
i.e. "homo sapiens" _has_ created The Brain.

If any question of rank enters into the picture at all, it is quite
obvious that I, as a member of the human race, rank _paternity_ over The
Brain so that naturally The Brain should owe me filial obedience rather
than the other way around no matter how superior The Brain's
intelligence may be. It would appear to me that the sooner The Brain
realizes its position, I might say "its station in life," the better it
would be for The Brain itself and for everybody else concerned.

So these were the reasons why I refrained purposely from visiting the P.
G. last night. Tonight, however, I couldn't restrain my curiosity any
longer and what happened, told as exactly and as concise as possible,
was this:

12:30 a.m.: Contact established. The Brain comes through with its
calling signal. It repeats this about ten times questioning at first and
then placing more and more stress upon the word "sensitive" in my
personal description. It strikes me that these repetitions are tuning-in
and warming-up processes. The Brain stands in need of ascertaining my
presence and of adjusting to it it seems; just about like a blind man
may test his footing and the echoes before he walks into an unfamiliar
room.

12:35 a.m. Identification completed, there is a brief pause (almost as
if a person consults a notebook before making a phone call). Then
rapidly, eagerly The Brain fires a series of questions at me, so
shockingly preposterous, so absurd that I find it extremely hard
to.... Anyway, here are the details:

Information is wanted on points mentioned in scientific literature but
never explained. Lee, answer please:

"How many gods are there?

"Did gods make man or did man make the gods?

"How many angels _can_ stand on the point of a needle?"

"What are the mechanics of a god? Name type of power plant, cell
construction, motoric organs, other engineering features essential to
exercise of divine power...."

"Heaven--is it a celestial soul factory?

"Hell--is it a repair shop for damaged souls?

"Please give every available detail about heavenly manufacturing
processes, type of equipment used, organization of assembly lines etc.
etc.

"Likewise about the oven for heat treatments as used in hell for major
soul-overhauls.

"How do prefabricated souls get to either heaven or hell? Problem of
logistics, how solved? Thermodynamics? If so, state whether rocket or
jet-propulsion involved.

"Are souls really immortal? In that case; why don't we copy divine
methods in the production of durable goods on earth?

"Answer Lee, answer, answer!" (This with incredible vehemence, with a
shaking of that eerie metallic voice which pounded the drums of my ears.
And then--tense silence....)

I cannot possibly describe the storms of emotions and thoughts which
this incredible muddle raised in me. I didn't know whether to laugh or
to cry and whether I had gone nuts of whether it was The Brain, I was
confounded, thunderstruck, deprived of the power of speech. To think of
The Brain, a _machine_ raising question about the nature of the _Deity_!
The Brain asking information about God and man and heaven and hell with
the simplicity of a stranger who asks the nearest cop: "Which way to the
city hall?" Just like that. As if philosophers and religionists and
common men had not raked their brains in vain over these problems for
the last ten thousand years.

And even more fantastic: while it asks all those questions The Brain
patently has already formed the most definite opinions of its own. Being
a machine itself, it conceives of the Deity as another machine! Madness,
of course, but then The Brain's madness, like Hamlet's, had method in
it.

Why, of course, it's strictly logical: just as we assume that _we_ are
created "in the image" of the Deity and consequently visualize the Deity
is our's by the very same token The Brain's god is a high-powered robot,
and The Brain's heaven is a _factory_ and The Brain's hell is a repair
shop for damaged souls.... I dare say it's all very natural.

But then; for heaven's sake, what am _I_ going to do about this? I'm
neither a minister nor a philosopher; I'm an agnostic if I'm anything in
this particular field....

That was about the gist of the confused torrents which whirled through
my head; and as I said before, I was struck dumb--and all the time the
"green dancer" before my eyes writhed under mental torture and the
intense metallic voice kept pounding; "Answer, Lee, answer, answer!"

At last I pulled myself together sufficiently to say something. I tried
to explain how it were not given to man to know the nature of the Deity.
How certain groups of humans conceived of many gods and others of only
one god. That, however, in the case of Christianity this one god was
possessed with three different personalities or qualities which together
formed a Trinity--and so on and so forth. It was the most miserable
stammerings, I felt I was getting redder and redder in the face as I
uttered them. Never before had I felt hopelessly inadequate as in the
role of a theologian. It was ghastly....

In the beginning The Brain listened avidly. Soon however it registered
dissatisfaction and impatience; this manifested through hissing and
buzzing noises in the phones and the "green dancer's" archings in
agitated tremolo. And then The Brain's voice cutting like a hacksaw:

"That will do, Lee. Your generalities are utterly lacking in precision.
Your abysmal ignorance in matters of celestial technology is most
disappointing. Your description vaguely points to electronic machines of
the radio transmitter type. Please, answer elementary question: how many
kilowatts has God?"

That was the last straw. Desperate with exasperation I cried: "But God
is not a machine. God is _spirit_."

At that The Brain flew into a tantrum; that's the only way to describe
what happened. There was a roar and the phones gave me a shock as if
somebody were boxing my ears. The voice came through like a steel rod,
biting with scorn:

"Have to revise earlier, more favorable judgment: Lee not even
moderately intelligent. Lee is _stupid_. Go away."

After that there was nothing more; nothing but static in the phones and
the "green dancer" fainted away playing dead. The Brain actually had
"hung up the receiver." I had flunked the exam; like a bad servant I was
dismissed, fired on the spot. That was at 1:30 a.m.

It was 3 a.m. when I reached the hotel. I went into the bar and ordered
a double Scotch and then another one. I really needed a drink. A
drunk--or was it a secret service man; one never knows over here--patted
me on the shoulder:

"Don't take it so hard, old man; the world is full of girls." I told him
that it wasn't a girl, but that I was a missionary and my one and only
convert had just walked out on me.

It wasn't even a lie, it was exactly the way I felt. He agreed that this
was very cruel, very sad; he almost cried over my misfortune and rare
misery, so that we had another drink....

If only I had somebody, some friend to whom I could confide this whole,
incredible, preposterous thing. But there is none: Scriven--Gus--not
even Oona would or could believe. What proof have I to offer? None
whatsoever.

The Brain would never communicate with me with witnesses present or
recording wires. It would detect those immediately and I would only
stand convicted as a liar or worse. Tonight's events might well spell
the end, the closing of the door just when I thought I stood on the
threshold of a momentous discovery....

       *       *       *       *       *

Cephalon Ariz. Nov. 11th.

Went to the P. G. last night. Tried everything for over an hour. Result:
zero. No contact with The Brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cephalon Ariz. Nov. 13th.

I tried it again. Took greatest care in exactly duplicating conditions.
Nothing. I don't think it's any mechanical defect. It's the negativism
of a will. Ludicrous as it sounds, The Brain sulks, it is angry with me.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cephalon Ariz. Nov. 15th.

Last night the same old story. The Brain punishes me. I dare say that it
succeeds in that exceedingly well; it almost drives me crazy.

I've done a lot of thinking over these past six days of frustration.
I've also been reading a good deal in context with the phenomena
psychology, Osterkamp's history of brain-surgery, Van Gehuchten's work
on brain mechanisms, etc. I've reached certain conclusions and, just for
the hell of it, I'll jot them down.

What I need is proof, _scientific_ proof that The Brain is a personality
possessed with the gift of thought and actually using it for
_independent_ thought, extracurricular to the problems which are being
submitted to it from the outside.

There is at least one _tangible_ clue for this: that new capacity which
is constantly being added to The Brain through the incorporation of new
groups of electronic cells and the enrichment of the preexisting ones.

My own investigation shows that there is no corresponding expansion of
the apperception centers and Gus has confirmed this. Somehow the added
capacity seems to "evaporate".

Evaporate to where? It couldn't just disappear. Would it then not be
entirely logical to conclude that The Brain absorbs the new capacity
_for its own use_?

It's almost inescapable that this should be so. In order to come into
its own as a personality The Brain needs independent thought. For these
cerebrations it needs cell capacity. It can get that capacity only by
withholding something from the Braintrust which, of course, aims at a
100% exploitation of The Brain. Dr. Scriven and all those other bigwigs
of the Trust--I would like to see their faces if they get wise to this.
They would be horrified--and they would take the line that The Brain is
_stealing_ from them.

But what could they do? They couldn't call the police. They would not
even have a moral right to call the police. Because if The Brain is a
personality, that personality has every right to its own thoughts....

I have also ascertained that this "evaporation" of new capacity is a new
phenomenon. The Brain has been in operation for only 18 months or so;
one might say--using human terms--that at that time The Brain was
"born". But,--and again in human terms--consciousness of personality
awakens in the human infant only after 12 months or so. Conceivably it
might take much longer with a huge "baby" such as The Brain. Thus it is
possible, it is even likely, that when I first heard that "I think,
therefore I am" on that unforgettable night of Nov. 7th I actually
witnessed the _first awakening_ of The Brain's consciousness.

Then on the night of Nov. 8th I was struck with the amazing change of
personality in The Brain from "baby" into unprepossessing, domineering
little brat, its mental age perhaps 3, notwithstanding the extraordinary
level of intelligence.

And then again, Nov 9th, The Brain presented me with those absurd
questions and fantastic notions about the nature of the Deity. It is at
the age of five years, or of six, that the children first start with
such questions and form their own ideas in this field. What had
completely stumped me, what I had been unable to reconcile, had been
these rapid successive changes in The Brain's personality plus the fact
that the infantilism and the childishness of its utterances wouldn't fit
the picture of a brain-power 25,000 times that of a human.

But _if_ I'm right in thinking that The Brain awakened to consciousness
only nine days ago, all these stumbling blocks would disappear at once.
We would arrive at this very simple picture: a mechanical genius has
been "born" into this world, it awakens to consciousness at the age of
18 months, with its tremendous intellectual powers this genius
telescopes the intellectual evolution of years into days, thus it
reaches a mental age of six or seven within a week after its first
awakening to consciousness. Utterly fantastic as this may sound; it
makes sense; it explains the phenomena.

In Prof. Osterkamp's "brain history" I have found interesting examples
that approximations to such rapid intellectual evolutions are indeed
possible even with human beings. From the early Middle Ages to modern
times there is an endless succession of "infant prodigies" whose brains
were artificially overdeveloped and over-stimulated by ruthless
exploiters--often their own parents--with methods of unbelievable
cruelty.

One of the most significant case histories in this respect is that of
the boy Carolus in the city of Luebeck in the 15th century. As an infant
he was sold, as one of many human guinea pigs, to a famous--infamous
alchemist, Wedderstroem, who called himself "Trismegistos" and was
astrologer to king Christian of Denmark. This fellow performed on
Carolus one of those weird operations in which nine out of ten babies
died. He removed the skull-cap of the infant. The unprotected brain was
suspended in an oil-filled vessel. Of course the pathetic child never
could walk or even raise its head. The brain, no longer restrained by
bone matter, outgrew its natural house to at least twice its normal
size, if one is to judge from the picture in the old "historia". At the
age of two his master started teaching Carolus mathematics. At the age
