figures.

There was a mixture of belligerence and distress in their actions. They
carried odd looking weapons and seemed interested in using them upon
something or someone, but they apparently lacked the energy to raise
them although they appeared to be rather light.

The creatures themselves were humanoid, Frank thought. He tightened his
grip on Nora's hand. "They've seen us."

"Let's not run," Nora said. "I'm tired of running. All it's gotten us is
trouble. Let's just stand here."

"Don't be foolish."

"I'm not running. You can if you want to."

Frank turned his attention back to the three strange creatures. He
allowed natural curiosity full reign. Thoughts of flight vanished from
his mind.

"They're so thin--so fragile," Nora said.

"But their weapons aren't."

"It's hard to believe, even seeing them, that they're from another
planet."

"How so? They certainly don't look much like us."

"I mean with the talk, for so long, about flying saucers and space
flight and things like that. Here they are, but it doesn't seem
possible."

"There's something wrong with them."

This was true. Two of the strange beings had fallen to the sidewalk. The
third came doggedly on, dragging one foot after the other until he went
to his hands and knees. He remained motionless for a long time, his head
hanging limply. Then he too, sank to the cement and lay still.

The wailings from the north now took on a tone of intense agony--great
desperation. After that came a yawning silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

"They defeated themselves," the military man said. "Or rather, natural
forces defeated them. We certainly had little to do with it."

Nora, Frank, and Jim Wilson stood at the curb beside a motorcycle. The
man on the cycle supported it with a leg propped against the curb as he
talked.

"We saw three of them die up the street," Frank said.

"Our scouting party saw the same thing happen. That's why we moved in.
It's about over now. We'll know a lot more about them and where they
came from in twenty-four hours."

They had nothing further to say. The military man regarded them
thoughtfully. "I don't know about you three. If you ignored the
evacuation through no fault of your own and can prove it--"

"There were four of us," Jim Wilson said. "Then we met another man. He's
inside on the floor. I killed him."

"Murder?" the military man said sharply.

"He killed a woman who was with us," Frank said. "He was a maniac. When
he's identified I'm pretty sure he'll have a past record."

"Where is the woman's body?"

"On a bed upstairs," Wilson said.

"I'll have to hold all of you. Martial law exists in this area. You're
in the hands of the army."

       *       *       *       *       *

The streets were full of people now, going about their business, pushing
and jostling, eating in the restaurants, making electricity for the
lights, generating power for the telephones.

Nora, Frank, and Jim Wilson sat in a restaurant on Clark Street. "We're
all different people now," Nora said. "No one could go through what
we've been through and be the same."

Jim Wilson took her statement listlessly. "Did they find out what it was
about our atmosphere that killed them?"

"They're still working on that, I think." Frank Brooks stirred his
coffee, raised a spoonful and let it drip back into the cup.

"I'm going up to the Chicago Avenue police station," Wilson said.

Frank and Nora looked up in surprise. Frank asked, "Why? The military
court missed it--the fact you escaped from jail."

"They didn't miss it I don't think. I don't think they cared much. I'm
going back anyway."

"It won't be much of a rap."

"No, a pretty small one. I want to get it over with."

He got up from his chair. "So long. Maybe I'll see you around."

"So long."

"Goodbye."

Frank said, "I think I'll beat it too. I've got a job in a factory up
north. Maybe they're operating again." He got to his feet and stood
awkwardly by the table. "Besides--I've got some pay coming."

Nora didn't say anything.

Frank said, "Well--so long. Maybe I'll see you around."

"Maybe. Goodbye."

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Brooks walked north on Clark Street. He was glad to get away from
the restaurant. Nora was a good kid but hell--you didn't take up with a
hooker. A guy played around, but you didn't stick with them.

But it made a guy think. He was past the kid stage. It was time for him
to find a girl and settle down. A guy didn't want to knock around all
his life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nora walked west on Madison Street. Then she remembered the Halstead
Street slums were in that direction and turned south on Wells. She had
nine dollars in her bag and that worried her. You couldn't get along on
nine dollars in Chicago very long.

There was a tavern on Jackson near Wells. Nora went inside. The barkeep
didn't frown at her. That was good. She went to the bar and ordered a
beer and was served.

After a while a man came in. A middle aged man who might have just come
into Chicago--whose bags might still be at the LaSalle Street Station
down the block. The man looked at Nora, then away. After a while looked
at her again.

Nora smiled.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Deadly City, by Paul W. Fairman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEADLY CITY ***

***** This file should be named 32705.txt or 32705.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/0/32705/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
