slap a HOLD order on all the M2AP's you can reach--I'll call District
and make you personally responsible for every premature that occurs from
now on."

Since any safety man, anywhere, would much rather stop a process than
authorize one, and since this particular safety man loved to throw his
weight around, Kinnison was surprised that Moulton did not act
instantly. The fact that he did not so act should have, but did not,
give the naive Kinnison much information as to conditions existing
Outside the Fence.

"But they need those mines very badly; they are an item of very heavy
production. If we stop them ... how long? Have you any suggestions?"

"Yes. Call District and have them rush through a change of spec--include
heat-treat and a modified Charpy test. In the meantime, we can get back
into full production tomorrow if you have District slap a
hundred-per-cent inspection onto those pins."

"Excellent! We can do that--very fine work, Doctor! Miss Morgan, get
District at once!"

This, too, should have warned Kinnison, but it did not. He went back to
the Laboratory.

Tempus fugited.

Orders came to get ready to load M67 H.E., A.T. (105 m/m High Explosive,
Armor Tearing) shell on the Nine, and the Siberians went joyously to
work upon the new load. The explosive was to be a mixture of TNT and a
polysyllabic compound, everything about which was highly confidential
and restricted.

"But what the hell's so hush-hush about _that_ stuff?" demanded Blondie,
who, with five or six others, was crowding around the Czar's desk.
Unlike the days of Cappy Sumner, the private office of the Chief Chemist
was now as much Siberia as Siberia itself. "The Germans developed it
originally, didn't they?"

"Yes, and the Italians used it against the Ethiopians--which was why
their bombs were so effective. But it says 'hush-hush,' so that's the
way it will be. And if you talk in your sleep, Blondie, tell Betty not
to listen."

The Siberians worked. The M67 was put into production. It was such a
success that orders for it came in faster than they could be filled.
Production was speeded up. Small cavitations began to appear. Nothing
serious, since they passed Inspection. Nevertheless, Kinnison protested,
in a formal report, receipt of which was formally acknowledged.

General Somebody-or-other, Entwhistle's Commanding Officer, whom none of
the Siberians had ever met, was transferred to more active duty, and a
colonel--Snodgrass or some such name--took his place. Ordnance got a new
Chief Inspector.

An M67, Entwhistle loaded, prematured in a gun-barrel, killing twenty
seven men. Kinnison protested again, verbally this time, at a staff
meeting. He was assured--verbally--that a formal and thorough
investigation was being made. Later he was informed--verbally and
without witnesses--that the investigation had been completed and that
the loading was not at fault. A new Commanding Officer--Lieutenant-Colonel
Franklin--appeared.

The Siberians, too busy to do more than glance at newspapers, paid very
little attention to a glider-crash in which several notables were
killed. They heard that an investigation was being made, but even the
Czar did not know until later that Washington had for once acted fast
in correcting a bad situation; that Inspection, which had been under
Production, was summarily divorced therefrom. And gossip spread abroad
that Stillman, then Head of the Inspection Division, was not a big
enough man for the job. Thus it was an entirely unsuspecting Kinnison
who was called into the innermost private office of Thomas Keller, the
Superintendent of Production.

"Kinnison, how in hell do you handle those Siberians? I never saw
anything like them before in my life."

"No, and you never will again. Nothing on Earth except a war could get
them together or hold them together. I don't 'handle' them--they can't
be 'handled'. I give them a job to do and let them do it. I back them
up. That's all."

"Umngpf." Keller grunted. "That's a hell of a formula--if I want
anything done right I've got to do it myself. But whatever your system
is, it works. But what I wanted to talk to you about is, how'd you like
to be Head of the Inspection Division, which would be enlarged to
include your present Chemical Section?"

"Huh?" Kinnison demanded, dumbfounded.

"At a salary well up on the confidential scale." Keller wrote a figure
upon a piece of paper, showed it to his visitor, then burned it in an
ash-tray.

Kinnison whistled. "I'd like it--for more reasons than that. But I
didn't know that you--or have you already checked with the General and
Mr. Black?"

"Naturally," came the smooth reply. "In fact, I suggested it to them and
have their approval. Perhaps you are curious to know why?"

"I certainly am."

"For two reasons. First, because you have developed a crew of technical
experts that is the envy of every technical man in the country. Second,
you and your Siberians have done every job I ever asked you to, and done
it fast. As a Division Head, you will no longer be under me, but I am
right, I think, in assuming that you will work with me just as
efficiently as you do now?"

"I can't think of any reason why I wouldn't." This reply was made in all
honesty; but later, when he came to understand what Keller had meant,
how bitterly Kinnison was to regret its making!

He moved into Stillman's office, and found there what he thought was
ample reason for his predecessor's failure to make good. To his way of
thinking it was tremendously over-staffed, particularly with Assistant
Chief Inspectors. Delegation of authority, so widely preached
throughout Entwhistle Ordnance Plant, had not been given even lip
service here. Stillman had not made a habit of visiting the lines; nor
did the Chief Line Inspectors, the boys who really knew what was going
on, ever visit him. They reported to the Assistants, who reported to
Stillman, who handed down his Jovian pronouncements.

Kinnison set out, deliberately this time, to mold his key Chief Line
Inspectors into just such a group as the Siberians already were. He
released the Assistants to more productive work; retaining of Stillman's
office staff only a few clerks and his private secretary, one Celeste de
St. Aubin, a dynamic, vivacious--at times explosive--brunette. He gave
the boys on the Lines full authority; the few who could not handle the
load he replaced with men who could. At first the Chief Line Inspectors
simply could not believe; but after the affair of the forty millimeter,
in which Kinnison rammed the decision of his subordinate past Keller,
past the General, past Stoner and Black, and clear up to the Commanding
Officer before he made it stick, they were his to a man.

Others of his Section Heads, however, remained aloof. Pettler, whose
Technical Section was now part of Inspection, and Wilson, of Gages, were
two of those who talked largely and glowingly, but acted obstructively
if they acted at all. As weeks went on, Kinnison became wiser and wiser,
but made no sign. One day, during a lull, his secretary hung out the "In
Conference" sign and went into Kinnison's private office.

"There isn't a reference to any such Investigation anywhere in Central
Files." She paused, as if to add something, then turned to leave.

"As you were, Celeste. Sit down. I expected that. Suppressed--if made at
all. You're a smart girl, Celeste, and you know the ropes. You know that
you can talk to me, don't you?"

"Yes, but this is ... well, the word is going around that they are going
to break you, just as they have broken every other good man on the
Reservation."

"I expected that, too." The words were quiet enough, but the man's jaw
tightened. "Also, I know how they are going to do it."

"How?"

"This speed-up on the Nine. They know that I won't stand still for the
kind of casts that Keller's new procedure, which goes into effect
tonight, is going to produce ... and this new C.O. probably will."

Silence fell, broken by the secretary.

"General Sanford, our first C.O., was a soldier, and a good one," she
declared finally. "So was Colonel Snodgrass. Lieutenant Colonel Franklin
wasn't; but he was too much of a man to do the dir ..."

"Dirty work," dryly. "Exactly. Go on."

"And Stoner, the New York half--ninety five percent, really--of Stoner
and Black, Inc., is a Big Time Operator. So we get this damned
nincompoop of a major, who doesn't know a f-u-s-e from a f-u-z-e, direct
from a Wall Street desk."

"So what?" One must have heard Ralph Kinnison say those two words to
realize how much meaning they can be made to carry.

"So what!" the girl blazed, wringing her hands. "Ever since you have
been over here I have been expecting you to blow up--to smash
something--in spite of the dozens of times you have told me 'a fighter
can not slug effectively, Celeste, until he gets both feet firmly
planted.' When--_when_--are you going to get your feet planted?"

"Never, I'm afraid," he said glumly, and she stared. "So I'll have to
start slugging with at least one foot in the air."

That startled her. "Explain, please?"

"I wanted _proof_. Stuff that I could take to the District--that I could
use to tack some hides out flat on a barn door with. Do I get it? I do
not. Not a shred. Neither can you. What chance do you think there is of
ever getting any real proof?"

"Very little," Celeste admitted. "But you can at least smash Pettler,
Wilson, and that crowd. _How_ I hate those slimy snakes! I wish that you
could smash Tom Keller, the poisonous moron!"

"Not so much moron--although he acts like one at times--as an ignorant
puppet with a head swelled three sizes too big for his hat. But you can
quit yapping about slugging--fireworks are due to start at two o'clock
tomorrow afternoon, when Drake is going to reject tonight's run of
shell."

"Really? But I don't see how either Pettler or Wilson come in."

"They don't. A fight with those small fry--even smashing them--wouldn't
make enough noise. Keller."

"Keller!" Celeste squealed. "But you'll...."

"I know I'll get fired. So what? By tackling him I can raise enough hell
so that the Big Shots will have to cut out at least some of the rough
stuff. You'll probably get fired too, you know--you've been too close to
me for your own good."

"Not me." She shook her head vigorously. "The minute they terminate you,
I quit. Poof! Who cares? Besides, I can get a better job in Townville."

"Without leaving the Project. That's what I figured. It's the boys I'm
worried about. I've been getting them ready for this for weeks."

"But they will quit, too. Your Siberians--your Inspectors--of a surety
they will quit, every one!"

"They won't release them; and what Stoner and Black will do to them,
even after the war, if they quit without releases, shouldn't be done to
a dog. They won't quit, either--at least if they don't try to push them
around too much. Keller's mouth is watering to get hold of Siberia, but
he'll never make it, nor any one of his stooges.... I'd better dictate a
memorandum to Black on that now, while I'm calm and collected; telling
him what he'll have to do to keep my boys from tearing Entwhistle
apart."

"But do you think he will pay any attention to it?"

"I'll say he will!" Kinnison snorted. "Don't kid yourself about Black,
Celeste. He's a smart man, and before this is done he'll know that he'll
have to keep his nose clean."

"But you--how can you do it?" Celeste marveled. "Me, I would urge them
on. Few would have the patriotism...."

"Patriotism, hell! If that were all, I would have stirred up a
revolution long ago. It's for the boys, in years to come. They've got to
keep _their_ noses clean, too. Get your notebook, please, and take this
down. Rough draft--I'm going to polish it up until it has teeth and
claws in every line."

And that evening, after supper, he informed Eunice of all the new
developments.

"Is it still O.K. with you," he concluded, "for me to get myself fired
off of this high-salaried job of mine?"

"Certainly. Being you, how can you do anything else? Oh, how I wish I
could wring their necks!" That conversation went on and on, but
additional details are not necessary here.

Shortly after two o'clock of the following afternoon, Celeste took a
call; and listened shamelessly.

"Kinnison speaking."

"Tug, Uncle Ralph. The casts sectioned just like we thought they would.
Dead ringers for Plate D. So Drake hung a red ticket on every tray.
Piddy was right there, waiting, and started to raise hell. So I chipped
in, and he beat it so fast that I looked to see his coat-tail catch
fire. Drake didn't quite like to call you, so I did. If Piddy keeps on
going at the rate he left here, he'll be in Keller's office in nothing
flat."

"O.K., Tug. Tell Drake that the shell he rejected are going to stay
rejected, and to come in right now with his report. Would you like to
come along?"

"_Would_ I!" Tugwell hung up and:

"But do you want _him_ here, Doc?" Celeste asked, anxiously, without
considering whether or not her boss would approve of her eavesdropping.

"I certainly do. If I can keep Tug from blowing his top, the rest of the
boys will stay in line."

A few minutes later Tugwell strode in, bringing with him Drake, the
Chief Line Inspector of the Nine Line. Shortly thereafter the office
door was wrenched open. Keller had come to Kinnison, accompanied by the
Superintendent whom the Siberians referred to, somewhat contemptuously,
as "Piddy."

"Damn your soul, Kinnison, come out here--I want to talk to you!" Keller
roared, and doors snapped open up and down the long corridor.

"Shut up, you God damned louse!" This from Tugwell, who, black eyes
almost emitting sparks, was striding purposefully forward. "I'll sock
you so damned hard that...."

"Pipe down, Tug, I'll handle this." Kinnison's voice was not loud, but
it had then a peculiarly carrying and immensely authoritative quality.
"Verbally or physically; however he wants to have it."

He turned to Keller, who had jumped backward into the hall to avoid the
young Siberian.

"As for you, Keller, if you had the brains that God gave bastard geese
in Ireland, you would have had this conference in private. Since you
started it in public, however, I'll finish it in public. How you came to
pick _me_ for a yes-man I'll never know--just one more measure of your
stupidity, I suppose."

"Those shell are perfect!" Keller shouted. "Tell Drake here to pass
them, right now. If you don't, by God I'll...."

"Shut up!" Kinnison's voice cut. "I'll do the talking--you listen. The
spec says quote shall be free from objectionable cavitation unquote. The
Line Inspectors, who know their stuff, say that those cavitations are
objectionable. So do the Chemical Engineers. Therefore, as far as I am
concerned, they are objectionable. Those shell are rejected, and they
will _stay_ rejected."

"That's what _you_ think," Keller raged. "But there'll be a new Head of
Inspection, who will pass them, tomorrow morning!"

"In that you may be half right. When you get done licking Black's boots,
tell him that I am in my office."

Kinnison re-entered his suite. Keller, swearing, strode away with Piddy.
Doors clicked shut.

"I _am_ going to quit, Uncle Ralph, law or no law!" Tugwell stormed.
"They'll run that bunch of crap through, and then...."

"Will you promise not to quit until they do?" Kinnison asked, quietly.

"Huh?" "What?" Tugwell's eyes--and Celeste's--were pools of
astonishment. Celeste, being on the inside, understood first.

"Oh--to keep his nose clean--I see!" she exclaimed.

"Exactly. Those shell will not be accepted, nor any like them. On the
surface, we got licked. I will get fired. You will find, however, that
we won this particular battle. And if you boys stay here and hang
together and keep on slugging you can win a lot more."

"Maybe, if we raise enough hell, we can make them fire us, too?" Drake
suggested.

"I doubt it. But unless I'm wrong, you can just about write your own
ticket from now on, if you play it straight." Kinnison grinned to
himself, at something which the young people could not see.

"You told me what Stoner and Black would do to us," Tugwell said,
intensely. "What I'm afraid of is that they'll do it to you."

"They can't. Not a chance in the world," Kinnison assured him. "You
fellows are young--not established. But I'm well-enough known in my own
field so that if they tried to black-ball me they'd just get themselves
laughed at, and they know it. So beat it back to the Nine, you kids, and
hang red tickets on everything that doesn't cross-section up to
standard. Tell the gang goodbye for me--I'll keep you posted."

