"We'll get a signal through to you," Bram Forest said. With Ylia he
climbed into a skiff and poled it out into the river.

Now the riverbanks were deserted, except for the solitary stilt-birds,
tall as men, wading out into the frigid water, their low-pitched calls
all but swallowed by the sound the cold wind made rustling through the
river rushes.

After a while the skiff came to a bend in the river. It was the last
turn before the Gates of Ice--and Nadia City. Here the wind blew more
strongly, and there was a section of rushes which had been cleared,
cut probably by an Ice Fields nomad who had used the tall rushes as
fuel.

"Look!" Ylia cried suddenly, startled.

Through the gap in the rushes, at a distance of two or three jeks
across the flat plain from the river, Bram Forest saw an armed
encampment. There were tents with flying standards, tethered stads,
pyramids of stacked spears like hayricks, and pacing sentries.

"What can it mean?" Ylia asked. "Those standards are Abarian."

"Retoc," Bram Forest said. He lifted the pole and felt the mud of the
river-bottom cling to it before it came clear. He allowed the skiff to
drift toward the bank. "Retoc's planning treachery. We'll have to go
back and alert the Golden Apes. Bylanus and his Apes can destroy
Retoc's legions before they even march on Nadia City."

"But we can't go back, Bram. If Retoc's army is here, ready, then
what's happening in Nadia City? Who can say what Retoc is doing?
You'll have to go ahead and stop him--or at least delay him. I'll go
back for Bylanus."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bram Forest shook his head. "I can't let you go alone, Ylia. Not with
the Abarian legions so close."

"But I must, don't you see?"

Bram Forest frowned. There did not seem any other way, but he was
reluctant. "I love you, Ylia. I couldn't let--"

"What happens in Nadia City today is more important than our love,
Bram Forest! What would our love mean if Retoc the Abarian ruled all
Tarth?"

"Then you take the skiff," Bram Forest said finally. "I can make my
way to the city along the bank."

"No. The army is still encamped. They won't do anything for some time
yet. See? All their tents are still standing."

That was true enough. "Besides," Ylia went on, "we don't know what
Retoc is planning in the city. You can reach it faster by skiff. I'll
go back for Bylanus on foot."

The logic of what Ylia said could not be refuted. With sinking heart
Bram Forest helped her from the skiff. He kissed her quickly. "I love
you, Ylia," he said.

"And I love you, Bram Forest."

"Be careful. Keep hidden in the rushes. Tell Bylanus to use his
judgment in attacking or waiting for Retoc's legions to make the first
move."

Ylia's pretty head nodded. Then she ducked into the rushes and was
gone. Bram Forest looked after her until the rustling in the rushes
stopped, then he poled the skiff once more out into the center of the
river and sped swiftly toward the Gates of Ice.

No one stopped him. No guards were posted. He beached the skiff and
sprinted through the gates and through the city and up its biggest
hill toward the amphitheater. Then, only a jek's distance away, he
heard the crowd at the funeral games. They roared suddenly in a frenzy
of excitement and another part of Portox's poem slipped into place.
The crowd watching the games in Nadia City was the raging beast,
blood-lusting, expectant, animal-savage, whipped into a fever of
goggle-eyed enthusiasm and ready to move, _en-masse_, in whatever
direction a strong leader might push them.

A strong leader....

Retoc? Or Bram Forest? Which one?

       *       *       *       *       *

Pirum the Abarian shifted his weight uncomfortably, leaning down on
the haft of his spear. The whole idea of posting pickets along the
bank of the river seemed unnecessary to him. They could not actually
see the river through the rushes, and they dared not go closer for
fear of being spotted by whatever traffic moved on the icy waters.
Then what was the point of them standing here, half-frozen with the
cold, waiting for an assailant who would never come?

And while he was thinking thus, the girl virtually walked into Pirum's
arms. At first he heard a faint rustling in the rushes and, before he
could investigate, the tallest of the dry plants had parted and a
lovely bronze-skinned girl appeared. She turned to run, but Pirum
caught her in his muscular arms and held her despite her struggles.

She bit his arm and, with an oath, he caught her hair and twisted her
head back. "Who are you?" he said. "Who are you, eh?"

The girl glowered at him.

Pirum dragged her along. She continued to struggle. Shaking his head,
he hit her on the jaw with his fist and caught her before she could
fall. Then, swinging her up over his broad shoulder, he stalked
through the rushes toward Nadia City.




CHAPTER XVII

_The Prison Without Bars_


No one tried to stop Bram Forest until he reached the very gates of
the amphitheater. But there a guard with drawn whip-sword barred the
way and demanded: "You don't look Nadian to me. What delegation are
you with, man?"

Bram Forest had no time to parry words with words. He tried to push
his way past the guard who, too surprised to thrust with his weapon,
used his free hand to grab Bram Forest by the shoulder and spin him
around. Bram Forest drove his left fist into the guard's belly and
heard the whoosh of air escaping from his lungs.

That was the last thing he heard for some time. A second guard crept
up quietly behind him and struck expertly with the hilt of his
whip-sword just behind the left ear. Bram Forest fell as if the ground
dropped out from under him.

"By all the fiery gods of Tarth, will you look at that!" the first
guard exclaimed.

The second guard could only gawk, not comprehending.

The unconscious man was growing tenuous.

The first guard in confused alarm, lashed down with the whip-sword.
But its point passed through Bram Forest's now transparent body
without meeting any resistance.

"Right through him! Right through him!" cried the guard.

And, by the time he said it, and coiled his sword again, Bram Forest
had vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

When an urgent message had come for Retoc, the Princess Volna, alone
in the royal box, had decided to investigate the matter herself. She
had to hurry, though. In not many minutes, Retoc and Bontarc would
find themselves face to face on the sands of the amphitheater.
Wouldn't Bontarc be surprised! Too proud to flee, not swordsman enough
to match the mighty Retoc....

"Yes, yes, what is it?" she snapped irritably when she entered the
dungeon-like ready-room below the amphitheater sands. She was in a
hurry to return to her box, lest she miss the duel between Bontarc and
Retoc. Alone in the ready-room was a soldier in the uniform of Abaria.

"Begging your pardon, ma'am," said the soldier. "My message is for
Retoc of Abaria."

"And I tell you Retoc of Abaria is not here to receive it." Volna
clapped her hands and two of her own guards appeared. "I am the
Princess Volna. Well?"

Pirum looked at her, at the armed guards flanking her on either side,
at the door through which she had entered, at the ready-room's second
door. "Very well," he said at last, and opened the second door,
beckoning.

Volna went to the doorway and looked. She gasped involuntarily, hardly
able to believe her eyes. There on the stone floor of a smaller
ready-room, only now regaining consciousness, was the Virgin Wayfarer
of Ofrid, she who had seen Retoc slay Jlomec, she who had been sent by
Volna herself to sure death on the Journey of No Return. Terror
gripped her.

"What does this mean?" Volna cried. "Where did you find her? Where,
man? Speak!"

"On the river, ladyship."

"On the river? Returning from the Place of the Dead?"

"No, ladyship. Heading toward the Place of the Dead."

Volna went to the girl and stood over her. "You! What's your name?"

"Ylia," the girl said.

"What were you trying to do, Ylia?"

The girl said nothing.

Volna called to Pirum, who came at once. "Hit her," Volna said.

Grasping Ylia by her hair, Pirum struck her face with his open hand.
Her head snapped back. The mark of his fingers was on her face. She
said nothing.

"Hit her again," Volna said.

Pirum struck Ylia a second time. The girl whimpered, but held her
tongue. "Where is your friend, that giant of a man?" Volna asked.

Again Pirum hit Ylia when she would say nothing. Finally Volna
shrugged. "She'll talk, given enough of that. What's _your_ name,
man?"

"Pirum, ladyship."

"Very well, Pirum. My guards and I are returning to our seats. There
is a duel I wouldn't want to miss. All Tarth will reap its
consequences. Meanwhile, stay with this girl and do what you must do
to make her talk. It might be important."

Pirum bowed. "Yes, ladyship," he said, and watched the others depart.
Then, when they were alone, Ylia surprised him by flying at him, nails
bared, like a wildcat. He fought off her attack and struck her a
savage open-handed blow, and she fell back. At least this, Pirum
thought advancing on her, might be an interesting assignment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"... hit by that cab, mac."

"You all right?"

"He's getting up, ain't he?"

"Jeez, I swear," the sweating taxi driver said to the crowd which had
gathered about the prostrate man, "he popped up outa nowhere. One
second I'm driving along, looking for a fare, the next, he's standing
right in front of me. I almost pushed the brake through the floor,
honest, but--"

"Ylia," the stricken man said.

"Hey now, take it easy."

"What he say, anyhow?"

"... be going to a costume ball or something. Lookit that outfit he's
wearing, willya? What's he supposed to be, a man from Mars or
something? I read in the papers where Mars was pretty close a while
back. My kid thinks there are...."

"Aw, shudap about your kid."

"Need any help, mister?"

"No. No, thank you. I'm all right."

"... got a nasty crack on his head, is all. See? See the blood?"

"He's getting up."

"... a cop. When you don't want 'em, they're around. Now you need
them, where in heck are they, that's what I wanna know."

"The bracelet!" the stricken man said in sudden alarm. He stared at
his own right arm in confusion, then his left. His arms were bare.

"You wasn't wearing no bracelet, mac," someone said.

"No bracelet," he said. "No bracelet." His eyes looked vague,
confused.

After a while a policeman came and took in the situation at a glance.
"All right, all right," he bawled. "Step back and givemair, givemair,
will you?"

The crowd dispersed slowly, and the policeman talked for a while with
the taxi-driver, then with the stricken man.

"My name?" the stricken man said in answer to a question. "Bram
Forest. Yes, Bram Forest. But I don't have the bracelet. The bracelet
is gone, forever. Without the bracelet I can't...." his voice trailed
off.

"He drunk?" the policeman asked the cab driver.

"Search me."

"'A prison without bars,'" the man recited. "Earth is my prison,
forever. Ylia. Ylia!"

The driver made a circular motion with his forefinger, in the general
vicinity of his temple.

"You both better come down the station house with me," the policeman
said.

"Aw, officer, I'll lose some fares."

"Anyhow. The guy talks batty, but he don't look drunk. We got to
figure this here out."

"Ylia," the man said, almost as if the sound were a name and he was
crying out to the owner of that name across an unthinkable abyss.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bontarc, King of Nadia, felt as good as could be expected under the
circumstances. Now that the first shock of bereavement had passed, he
knew no mourning would bring back his dead brother Jlomec. And the sun
of Tarth was hot on the amphitheater sands as Bontarc stood awaiting
his as yet unknown adversary. He flexed and uncoiled his whip-sword,
smiling in expectancy. He was a competent swordsman, among the dozen
or so best in Nadia. The duel-to-first-blood would be just what he
needed. Win or lose, he'd feel a lot better afterwards. And meanwhile,
he was a king, wasn't he? The adulation of the crowd swept down all
around him, lifting his spirits. The corpse of Prince Jlomec,
treacherously slain, seemed very far away--as, indeed, it was....

A roar of expectancy went up from a hundred thousand throats as
Bontarc's adversary appeared at the other end of the arena. The sun
was dazzling. At first Bontarc saw the swordsman only as a dot across
the gleaming sands. But now the roar of expectancy had turned to a
groan of dismay, which was followed by a silence, as of death, then an
eager whispered buzzing. Why should this be? Why....

The figure came closer on the burning sands. Bontarc squinted. Was it
possible? He felt a tremor go through his body.

It was Retoc of Abaria!

"To the death, Bontarc," Retoc said softly, savagely, as they
approached.

Bontarc shook his head imperceptibly. He was no coward, but knew he
was no match for Retoc and didn't see why he should lay down his life
on the amphitheater sands. "I'll not fight you to the death, Retoc of
Abaria," he said.

Retoc shrugged as if it weren't very important. "Well," he said
slowly, "if you don't want to kill the slayer of your brother...."

Bontarc charged.

Laughing, Retoc was ready for him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"... Please ... please ... you're just wasting your time. I ... won't ...
tell you."

"No?" Pirum said, panting. He saw the girl through a haze of anger,
frustration, and desire. She was naked, her lips were bloody, but her
eyes still flashed defiance. Pirum, like most Abarians, was something
of a sadist.

"Oh, you'll talk," he said. "You'll talk."

"... never...."

He dug his strong finger cruelly into her tender body.

"Bram Forest...." she cried.

       *       *       *       *       *

The policeman behind the desk was saying things. Bram Forest heard the
droning voice, but not the words. Ylia, he thought. Ylia. A moment
before, he actually believed he heard her cry out to him in pain. But
that couldn't be. Besides, what could he do about it? He was trapped
forever on Earth, without the bracelet which could send him, almost on
the wings of thought, back to Tarth, to Ylia, to his destiny.

_I love you, girl of Tarth, he thought. I love you, Ylia, more than
words and more than worlds._

Something whisperingly cold plucked at him, and for an instant his
heart was stilled.

_Ylia!_

Could his love for the girl of Tarth draw him across the unthinkable
abyss?

"... immodestly attired and ..." the desk sergeant was saying.

_Ylia, Ylia, call me! Draw me to you, girl of Tarth._

_... bramforesthelp...._

_Ylia! I hear you! I hear you!_

"What the heck's he doing? Praying?" the patrolman asked.

For Bram Forest was staring devoutly at nothing, staring at the air in
front of his face there in the mundane precinct room as if it held a
radiant vision.

Suddenly the desk sergeant's jaw dropped open. The patrolman said:
"Hey, wait a mo...."

Bram Forest was becoming tenuous, vanishing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Insubstantial, transparent, the image of Bram Forest soared past the
encampment of the Golden Apes. "Bylanus!" he called, and his voice was
not insubstantial. Bylanus came at once.

"If the Abarian legions move, attack them, Bylanus."

"As you will, Bram Forest. But you...."

"Don't worry about me. I can control it, I can control it."

Bylanus passed an enormous hand through Bram Forest's body.

"I'll materialize, when I find Ylia. She draws me...." Already the
vision was fading.

"Farewell, Bram Forest."

_Farewell...._

Was it merely the sound of the wind along the banks of the River of
Ice? Bylanus wondered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something struck Pirum's shoulder. The girl crouched, sobbing, at his
feet. Pirum whirled.

His face went white when he saw the man. He swung his fist
desperately, and the man blocked it without effort. His arm was
caught, as in a vise. He screamed. Something snapped in his arm.
Something streaked at his face....

He took the blow from Bram Forest's fist under the point of the jaw.
His head snapped back against the dungeon wall and memory and desire
and lust and life oozed out through his smashed skull.

"Ylia!"

"You came, Bram Forest."

"I'll never leave you again."

"Yes, now, in the amphitheater. I think...."

Overhead, the crowd roared. Bram Forest listened for a fraction of a
second, and raced for the stairs.

When word of the duel between Bontarc and Retoc came by courier to
Laugrim, second in command of the Abarian army under the missing
Hultax, Laugrim decided it was time to attack. He gave the signal for
his army to march on the city, and the signal was passed from
signal-fire to signal-fire in the huge encampment. In a very short
time, the army's vanguard began to march. _There's no force on all
Tarth strong enough to stop us now_, Laugrim thought exultantly. _This
day, Retoc would rule Tarth._

He was right. There was no Tarthian army strong enough to stop them.
But the Army of the Golden Apes which, after Bram Forest's warning,
had deployed itself at the very gates of Nadia City so the people in
the amphitheater might witness the battle, was not of Tarth....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Bontarc," cried Retoc, "can't you do better than that? Surely a
king...."

For many minutes now Retoc, the finest swordsman on Tarth, had been
toying with his adversary. He could have killed Bontarc a dozen times
over, but he waited, driving the Nadian ruler back, playing with him,
making him do incredible gymnastics in order to survive, three times
returning his whip-sword to him when it had been torn from the
Nadian's hands.

All Nadia--and all the rulers of Tarth--watched spellbound. It seemed
to them that the Nadian ruler had gone into the contest willingly.
They made no move, and under the ethics that governed their world,
would make no move, to stop the uneven contest.

Retoc's blurring sword-point whipped and flashed, drawing blood from a
dozen superficial wounds. The smile never left Retoc's face.
Desperately, knowing his life was forfeit whenever Retoc chose,
Bontarc parried the whip-lashing blade.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bram Forest emerged into the dazzling sunlight of the arena floor.
Squinting, he saw the figures across the sand.

The men before him were Bontarc of Nadia and Retoc, slayer of his
mother, destroyer of Ofridia.

Retoc saw him first, and cried out exultantly. His wrist blurred, his
whip-sword flashed, the point singing, and Bontarc's sword flew from
his fingers. "You!" Retoc cried.

The sword-point had slashed an artery on Bontarc's wrist. The blood
spurted out and Bontarc stood there, dazed, holding the wound shut
with his left hand.

"Are you all right, sire?" Bram Forest asked.

"I can manage until a doctor binds--"

       *       *       *       *       *

