a faint circle of violet light. It lay ahead and slightly above, and
it grew visibly larger as he watched. A ring of nothingness, whose
outline was the faintest shimmering halo; more of the distant stars
winked out swiftly behind that ghostly circle; it was the Dark
Moon!--and it was rushing upon them!

       *       *       *       *       *

Chet swung an instrument upon it. He picked out a jet of violet light
that could be distinguished, and he followed it with the cross-hairs
while he twirled a micrometer screw; then he swiftly copied the
reading that the instrument had inscribed. The invisible disk with its
ghostly edge of violet was perceptibly larger as he slammed over the
control-ball to up-end them in air.

Under the control-room's nitron illuminator the cheeks of Herr Doktor
Kreiss were pale and bloodless as if his heart had ceased to function.
Harkness had moved quietly back to the side of Diane Delacouer and was
holding her two hands firmly in his.

The very air seemed charged with the quick tenseness of emotions.
Schwartzmann must have sensed it even before he saw the onrushing
death. Then he leaped to a lookout, and, an instant later, sprang at
Chet calmly fingering the control.

"Fool!" he screamed, "you would kill us all? Turn away from it! Away
from it!"

He threw himself in a frenzy upon the pilot. The detonite pistol was
still in his hand. "Quick!" he shouted. "Turn us!"

Harkness moved swiftly, but the scientist, Kreiss, was nearer; it was
he who smashed the gun-hand down with a quick blow and snatched at the
weapon.

Schwartzmann was beside himself with rage. "You, too?" he demanded.
"Giff it me--traitor!"

       *       *       *       *       *

But the tall man stood uncompromisingly erect. "Never," he said, "have
I seen a ship large enough to hold two commanding pilots. I take your
orders in all things, Herr Schwartzmann--all but this. If we die--we
die."

Schwartzmann sputtered: "We should haff turned away. Even yet we
might. It will--it will--"

"Perhaps," agreed Kreiss, still in that precise, class-room voice,
"perhaps it will. But this I know: with an acceleration of one
thousand m.p.h. as this young man with the badge of a Master Pilot
says, we cannot hope, in the time remaining, to overcome our present
velocity; we can never check our speed and build up a relatively
opposite motion before that globe would overwhelm us. If he has
figured correctly, this young man--if he has found the true resultant
of our two motions of approach--and if he has swung us that we may
drive out on a line perpendicular to the resultant--"

"I think I have," said Chet quietly. "If I haven't, in just a few
minutes it won't matter to any of us; it won't matter at all." He met
the gaze of Herr Doktor Kreiss who regarded him curiously.

"If we escape," the scientist told him, "you will understand that I am
under Herr Schwartzmann's command; I will be compelled to shoot you if
he so orders. But, Herr Bullard, at this moment I would be very proud
to shake your hand."

And Chet, as he extended his hand, managed a grin that was meant also
for the tense, white-faced Harkness and Diane. "I like to see 'em
dealt that way," he said, "--right off the top of the deck."

But the smile was erased as he turned back to the lookout. He had to
lean close to see all of the disk, so swiftly was the approaching
globe bearing down.

       *       *       *       *       *

It came now from the side; it swelled larger and larger before his
eyes. Their own ship seemed unmoving; only the unending thunder of the
generator told of the frantic efforts to escape. They seemed hung in
space; their own terrific speed seemed gone--added to and fused with
the orbital motion of the Dark Moon to bring swiftly closer that
messenger of death. The circle expanded silently; became menacingly
huge.

Chet was whispering softly to himself: "If I'd got hold of her an hour
sooner--thirty minutes--or even ten.... We're doing over twenty
thousand an hour combined speed, and we'll never really hit it....
We'll never reach the ground."

He turned this over in his mind, and he nodded gravely in confirmation
of his own conclusions. It seemed somehow of tremendous importance
that he get this clearly thought out--this experience that was close
ahead.

"Skin friction!" he added. "It will burn us up!"

He had a sudden vision of a flaming star blazing a hot trail through
the atmosphere of this globe; there would be only savage eyes to
follow it--to see the line of fire curving swiftly across the
heavens.... He, himself, was seeing that blazing meteor so plainly....

His eyes found the lookout: the globe was gone. They were
close--close! Only for the enveloping gas that made of this a dark
moon, they would be seeing the surface, the outlines of continents.

Chet strained his eyes--to see nothing! It was horrible. It had been
fearful enough to watch that expanding globe.... He was abruptly aware
that the outer rim of the lookout was red!

For Chet Bullard, time ceased to have meaning; what were seconds--or
centuries--as he stared at that glowing rim? He could not have told.
The outer shell of their ship--it was radiant--shining red-hot in the
night. And above the roar of the generator came a nerve-ripping
shriek. A wind like a blast from hell was battering and tearing at
their ship.

"Good-by!" He had tried to call; the demoniac shrieking from without
smothered his voice. One arm was across his eyes in an unconscious
motion. The air of the little room was stifling. He forced his arm
down: he would meet death face to face.

       *       *       *       *       *

The lookout was ringed with fire; it was white with the terrible white
of burning steel!--it was golden!--then cherry red! It was dying, as
the fire dies from glowing metal plunged in its tempering bath--or
thrown into the cold reaches of space!

In Chet's ears was the roar of a detonite motor. He tried to realize
that the lookouts were rimmed with black--cold, fireless black! An
incredible black! There were stars there like pinpoints of flame! But
conviction came only when he saw from a lookout in another wall a
circle of violet that shrank and dwindled as he watched....

A hand was gripping his shoulder; he heard the voice of Walter
Harkness speaking, while Walt's hand crept over to raise the triple
star that was pinned to his blouse.

"Master Pilot of the World!" Harkness was saying. "That doesn't cover
enough territory, old man. It's another rating that you're entitled
to, but I'm damned if I know what it is."

And, for once, Chet's ready smile refused to form. He stared dumbly at
his friend; his eyes passed to the white face of Mademoiselle Diane;
then back to the controls, where his hand, without conscious volition,
was reaching to move a metal ball.

"Missed it!" he assured himself. "Hit the fringe of the air--just the
very outside. If we'd been twenty thousand feet nearer!..." He was
moving the ball; their bow was swinging. He steadied it and set the
ship on an approximate course.

"A stern chase!" he said aloud. "All our momentum to be overcome--but
it's easy sailing now!"

He pushed the ball forward to the limit, and the explosion-motor gave
thunderous response.


CHAPTER IV

_The Return to the Dark Moon_

No man faces death in so shocking a form without feeling the effects.
Death had flicked them with a finger of flame and had passed them by.
Chet Bullard found his hands trembling uncontrollably as he fumbled
for a book and opened it. The tables of figures printed there were
blurred at first to his eyes, but he forced himself to forget the
threat that was past, for there was another menace to consider now.

And uppermost in his mind, when his thoughts came back into some
approximate order, was condemnation of himself for an opportunity that
was gone.

"I could have jumped him," he told himself with bitter self-reproach;
"I could have grabbed the pistol from Kreiss--the man was petrified."
And then Chet had to admit a fact there was no use of denying: "I was
as paralyzed as he was," he said, and only knew he had spoken aloud
when he saw the puzzled look that crossed Harkness' face.

Harkness and Diane had drawn near. In a far corner of the little room
Schwartzmann had motioned to Kreiss to join him; they were as far away
from the others as could be managed. Schwartzmann, Chet judged, needed
some scientific explanation of these disturbing events; also he
needed to take the detonite pistol from Kreiss' hand and jam it into
his own hand. His eyes, at Chet's unconscious exclamation, had come
with instant suspicion toward the two men.

"Forty-seven hours, Walt," the pilot said, and repeated it loudly for
Schwartzmann's benefit; "--forty-seven hours before we return to this
spot. We are driving out into space; we've crossed the orbit of the
Dark Moon, and we're doing twenty thousand miles an hour.

"Now we must decelerate. It will take twenty hours to check us to zero
speed; then twenty-seven more to shoot us back to this same point
in space, allowing, of course, for a second deceleration. The same
figuring with only slight variation will cover a return to the Dark
Moon. As we sweep out I can allow for the moon-motion, and we'll hit
it at a safe landing speed on the return trip this time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Chet was paying little attention to his companion as he spoke. His
eyes, instead, were covertly watching the bulky figure of
Schwartzmann. As he finished, their captor shot a volley of questions
at the scientist beside him; he was checking up on the pilot's
remarks.

Chet was leaning forward to stare intently from a lookout, his head
was close to that of Harkness.

"Listen, Walt," he whispered; "the Moon's out of sight; it's easy to
lose. Maybe I can't find it again, anyway--it's going to take some
nice navigating--but I'll miss it by ten thousand miles if you say so,
and even the Herr Doktor can't check me on it."

Chet saw the eyes of Schwartzmann grow intent. He reached
ostentatiously for another book of tables, and he seated himself that
he might figure in comfort.

"Just check me on this," he told Harkness.

He put down meaningless figures, while the man beside him remained
silent. Over and over he wrote them--would Harkness never reach a
decision?--over and over, until--

"I don't agree with that," Harkness told him and reached for the
stylus in Chet's hand. And, while he appeared to make his own swift
computations, there were words instead of figures that flowed from his
pen.

"Only alternative: return to Earth," he wrote. "Then S will hold off;
wait in upper levels. Kreiss will give him new bearings. We'll shoot
out again and do it better next time. Kreiss is nobody's fool. S means
to maroon us on Moon--kill us perhaps. He'll get us there, sure. We
might as well go now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Chet had seen a movement across the room. "Let's start all over
again," he broke in abruptly. He covered the writing with a clean
sheet of paper where he set down more figures. He was well under way
when Schwartzmann's quick strides brought him towering above them.
Again the detonite pistol was in evidence; its small black muzzle
moved steadily from Harkness to Chet.

"For your life--such as is left of it--you may thank Herr Doktor
Kreiss," he told Chet. "I thought at first you would have attempted to
kill us." His smile, as he regarded them, seemed to Chet to be
entirely evil. "You were near death twice, my dear Herr Bullard; and
the danger is not entirely removed.

"'Forty-seven hours' you have said; in forty-seven hours you will land
us on the Dark Moon. If you do not,"--he raised the pistol
suggestively--"remember that the pilot, Max, can always take us back
to Earth. You are not indispensable."

Chet looked at the dark face and its determined and ominous scowl.
"You're a cheerful sort of soul, aren't you?" he demanded. "Do you
have any faint idea of what a job this is? Do you know we will shoot
another two hundred thousand miles straight out before I can check
this ship? Then we come back; and meanwhile the Dark Moon has gone on
its way. Had you thought that there's a lot of room to get lost in out
here?"

"Forty-seven hours!" said Schwartzmann. "I would advise that you do
not lose your way."

Chet shot one quizzical glance at Harkness.

"That," he said, "makes it practically unanimous."

Schwartzmann, with an elaborate show of courtesy, escorted Diane
Delacouer to a cabin where she might rest. At a questioning look
between Diane and Harkness, their captor reassured them.

"Mam'selle shall be entirely safe," he said. "She may join you here
whenever she wishes. As for you,"--he was speaking to Harkness--"I
will permit you to stay here. I could tie you up but this iss not
necessary."

And Harkness must have agreed that it was indeed unnecessary, for
either Kreiss or Max, or some other of Schwartzmann's men, was at his
side continuously from that moment on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chet would have liked a chance for a quiet talk and an exchange of
ideas. It seemed that somewhere, somehow, he should be able to find an
answer to their problem. He stared moodily out into the blackness
ahead, where a distant star was seemingly their goal. Harkness stood
at his side or paced back and forth in the little room, until he threw
himself, at last, upon a cot.

And always the great stern-blast roared; muffled by the insulated
walls, its unceasing thunder came at last to be unheard. To the pilot
there was neither sound nor motion. His directional sights were
unswervingly upon that distant star ahead. Seemingly they were
suspended, helpless and inert, in a black void. But for the occasional
glowing masses of strange living substance that flashed past in this
ocean of space, he must almost have believed they were motionless--a
dead ship in a dead, black night.

But the luminous things flashed and were gone--and their coming,
strangely, was from astern; they flicked past and vanished up ahead.
And, by this, Chet knew that their tremendous momentum was unchecked.
Though he was using the great stern blast to slow the ship, it was
driving stern-first into outer space. Nor, for twenty hours, was there
a change, more than a slackening of the breathless speed with which
the lights went past.

Twenty hours--and then Chet knew that they were in all truth hung
motionless, and he prayed that his figures that told him this were
correct.... More timeless minutes, an agony of waiting--and a
dimly-glowing mass that was ahead approached their bow, swung off and
vanished far astern. And, with its going, Chet knew that the return
trip was begun.

He gave Harkness the celestial bearing marks and relinquished the
helm. "Full speed ahead as you are," he ordered: "then at
nineteen-forty on W.S. time, we'll cut it and ease on bow repulsion to
the limit."

And, despite the strangeness of their surroundings, the ceaseless,
murmuring roar of the exhaust, the weird world outside, where endless
space was waiting for man's exploration--despite the deadly menace
that threatened, Chet dropped his head upon his outflung arms and
slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

To his sleep-drugged brain it was scarcely a moment until a hand was
dragging at his shoulder.

"Forty-seven hours!" the voice of Schwartzmann was saying.

And: "Some navigating!" Harkness was exclaiming in flattering
amazement. "Wake up, Chet! Wake up! The Dark Moon's in sight. You've
hit it on the nose, old man: she isn't three points off the sights!"

The bow-blast was roaring full on. Ahead of them Chet's sleepy eyes
found a circle of violet; and he rubbed his eyes savagely that he
might take his bearings on Sun and Earth.

As it had been before, the Earth was a giant half-moon; like a
