tribe. His breast expanded. Always his tribesmen went quietly and
fearfully, making no sound. But a sudden, exultant yell burst from
Burl's lips--the first hunting cry from the lips of a man in three
hundred centuries!

       *       *       *       *       *

The next second his pulse nearly stopped in sheer panic at having made
such a noise. He listened fearfully, but there was no sound. He drew
near his prey and carefully withdrew his spear. The viscid liquid made
it slimy and slippery, and he had to wipe it dry against a leathery
toadstool. Then Burl had to conquer his illogical fear again before
daring to touch the creature he had slain.

He moved off presently, with the belly of the spider upon his back and
two of the hairy legs over his shoulders. The other limbs of the monster
hung limp, and trailed upon the ground. Burl was now a still more
curious sight as a gayly colored object with a cloak shining in
iridescent colors, the golden antennae of a great moth rising from his
forehead, and the hideous bulk of a gray spider for a burden.

He moved through the thin-stalked mushroom forest, and, because of the
thing he carried, all creatures fled before him. They did not fear
man--their instinct was slow-moving--but during all the millions of
years that insects have existed, there have existed spiders to prey upon
them. So Burl moved on in solemn state, a brightly clad man bent beneath
the weight of a huge and horrible monster.

He came upon a valley full of torn and blackened mushrooms. There was
not a single yellow top among them. Every one had been infested with
tiny maggots which had liquefied the tough meat of the mushroom and
caused it to drip to the ground below. And all the liquid had gathered
in a golden pool in the center of the small depression. Burl heard a
loud humming and buzzing before he topped the rise that opened the
valley for his inspection. He stopped a moment and looked down.

A golden-red lake, its center reflecting the hazy sky overhead. All
about, blackened mushrooms, seeming to have been charred and burned by a
fierce flame. A slow-flowing golden brooklet trickled slowly over a
rocky ledge, into the larger pool. And all about the edges of the golden
lake, in ranks and rows, by hundreds, thousands, and by millions, were
ranged the green-gold, shining bodies of great flies.

They were small as compared with the other insects. They had increased
in size but a fraction of the amount that the bees, for example, had
increased; but it was due to an imperative necessity of their race.

The flesh-flies laid their eggs by hundreds in decaying carcases. The
others laid their eggs by hundreds in the mushrooms. To feed the maggots
that would hatch, a relatively great quantity of food was needed,
therefore the flies must remain comparatively small, or the body of a
single grasshopper, say, would furnish food for but two or three grubs
instead of the hundreds it must support.

Burl stared down at the golden pool. Bluebottles, greenbottles, and all
the flies of metallic luster were gathered at the Lucullan feast of
corruption. Their buzzing as they darted above the odorous pool of
golden liquid made the sound Burl had heard. Their bodies flashed and
glittered as they darted back and forth, seeking a place to alight and
join in the orgy.

Those which clustered about the banks of the pool were still as if
carved from metal. Their huge, red eyes glowed, and their bodies shone
with an obscene fatness. Flies are the most disgusting of all insects.
Burl watched them a moment, watched the interlacing streams of light as
they buzzed eagerly above the pool, seeking a place at the festive
board.

A drumming roar sounded in the air. A golden speck appeared in the sky,
a slender, needle-like body with transparent, shining wings and two huge
eyes. It grew nearer and became a dragonfly twenty feet and more in
length, its body shimmering, purest gold. It poised itself above the
pool and then darted down. Its jaws snapped viciously and repeatedly,
and at each snapping the glittering body of a fly vanished.

A second dragonfly appeared, its body a vivid purple, and a third. They
swooped and rushed above the golden pool, snapping in mid air, turning
their abrupt, angular turns, creatures of incredible ferocity and
beauty. At the moment they were nothing more or less than
slaughtering-machines. They darted here and there, their many-faceted
eyes burning with blood-lust. In that mass of buzzing flies even the
most voracious appetite must be sated, but the dragonflies kept on.
Beautiful, slender, graceful creatures, they dashed here and there above
the pond like avenging fiends or the mythical dragons for which they had
been named.

       *       *       *       *       *

Only a few miles farther on Burl came upon a familiar landmark. He knew
it well, but from a safe distance as always. A mass of rock had heaved
itself up from the nearly level plain over which he was traveling, and
formed an outjutting cliff. At one point the rock overhung a sheer drop,
making an inverted ledge--a roof over nothingness--which had been
pre-empted by a hairy creature and made into a fairylike dwelling. A
white hemisphere clung tenaciously to the rock above, and long cables
anchored it firmly.

Burl knew the place as one to be fearfully avoided. A Clotho spider
(_Clotho Durandi, LATR_) had built itself a nest there, from which it
emerged to hunt the unwary. Within that half-globe there was a monster,
resting upon a cushion of softest silk. But if one went too near, one of
the little inverted arches, seemingly firmly closed by a wall of silk,
would open and a creature out of a dream of hell emerge, to run with
fiendish agility toward its prey.

Surely, Burl knew the place. Hung upon the outer walls of the silken
palace were stones and tiny boulders, discarded fragments of former
meals, and the gutted armour from limbs of ancient prey. But what caused
Burl to know the place most surely and most terribly was another
decoration that dangled from the castle of this insect ogre. This was
the shrunken, desiccated figure of a man, all its juices extracted and
the life gone.

The death of that man had saved Burl's life two years before. They had
been together, seeking a new source of edible mushrooms for food. The
Clotho spider was a hunter, not a spinner of snares. It sprang suddenly
from behind a great puff-ball, and the two men froze in terror. Then it
came swiftly forward and deliberately chose its victim. Burl had escaped
when the other man was seized. Now he looked meditatively at the hiding
place of his ancient enemy. Some day--

But now he passed on. He went past the thicket in which the great moths
hid during the day, and past the pool--a turgid thing of slime and
yeast--in which a monster water snake lurked. He penetrated the little
wood of the shining mushrooms that gave out light at night, and the
shadowed place where the truffle-hunting beetles went chirping
thunderously during the dark hours.

And then he saw Saya. He caught a flash of pink skin vanishing behind
the thick stalk of a squat toadstool, and ran forward, calling her name.
She appeared, and saw the figure with the horrible bulk of the spider
upon its back. She cried out in horror, and Burl understood. He let his
burden fall and then went swiftly toward her.

They met. Saya waited timidly until she saw who this man was, and then
astonishment went over her face. Gorgeously attired, in an iridescent
cloak from the whole wing of a great moth, with a strip of softest fur
from a night-flying creature about his middle, with golden, feathery
antennae bound upon his forehead, and a fierce spear in his hands--this
was not the Burl she had known.

But then he moved slowly toward her, filled with a fierce delight at
seeing her again, thrilling with joy at the slender gracefulness of her
form and the dark richness of her tangled hair. He held out his hands
and touched her shyly. Then, manlike, he began to babble excitedly of
the things that had happened to him, and dragged her toward his great
victim, the gray-bellied spider.

Saya trembled when she saw the furry bulk lying upon the ground, and
would have fled when Burl advanced and took it upon his back. Then
something of the pride that filled him came vicariously to her. She
smiled a flashing smile, and Burl stopped short in his excited
explanation. He was suddenly tongue-tied. His eyes became pleading and
soft. He laid the huge spider at her feet and spread out his hands
imploringly.

Thirty thousand years of savagery had not lessened the femininity in
Saya. She became aware that Burl was her slave, that these wonderful
things he wore and had done were as nothing if she did not approve. She
drew away--saw the misery in Burl's face--and abruptly ran into his arms
and clung to him, laughing happily. And quite suddenly Burl saw with
extreme clarity that all these things he had done, even the slaying of a
great spider, were of no importance whatever beside this most wonderful
thing that had just happened, and told Saya so quite humbly, but holding
her very close to him as he did so.

And so Burl came back to his tribe. He had left it nearly naked, with
but a wisp of moth-wing twisted about his middle, a timid, fearful,
trembling creature. He returned in triumph, walking slowly and
fearlessly down a broad lane of golden mushrooms toward the hiding place
of his people.

Upon his shoulders was draped a great and many-colored cloak made from
the whole of a moth's wing. Soft fur was about his middle. A spear was
in his hand and a fierce club at his waist. He and Saya bore between
them the dead body of a huge spider--aforetime the dread of the
pink-skinned, naked men. But to Burl the most important thing of all was
that Saya walked beside him openly, acknowledging him before all the
tribe.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mad Planet, by Murray Leinster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAD PLANET ***

***** This file should be named 35425.txt or 35425.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/4/2/35425/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
