1888.

J. Ritsema, in _Petites Nouvelles Entomologiques_ for September 15, 1869,
described the species as _Platypsyllus castoris_. He found it on some
American beavers (_Castor canadensis_) in the zoological garden of
Rotterdam. He considered it to "undoubtedly" belong to the Suctoria of De
Geer, and to form a new genus of Pulicidae.

In the same year, in the _Tijdschrift voor Entomologie_, 2d ser., vol. v.,
p. 185 (which I have not seen), the same author publishes what is
apparently a redescription of the insect. He gives his views more fully as
to its systematic position, considering that it belongs to the
Aphaniptera, and is equivalent to the Pulicidae.

In the same year, Prof. J. O. Westwood (having previously read a
description of the species, November 9, 1868, before the Ashmolean Society
of Oxford) published in the _Entomologist's Monthly Magazine_, vol. vi.,
October, 1869, pp. 118-119, a full characterization of the insect under
the name of _Platypsyllus castorinus_. A new order, _Achreioptera_, is
established upon the species, which he very aptly likens, in general
appearance, to a cross between a flattened flea and a diminutive
cockroach. "The abnormal economy of the insect, its remarkable structure,
the apparent want of mandibles, our ignorance of its transformations, and
the possibility that the creature may be homomorphous in the larva and
pupa states," are the reasons assigned for establishing the new order, and
here Prof. Westwood is perfectly consistent, as in his famous
"Introduction to the Classification of Insects" the Forficulidae are placed
in the order Euplexoptera; the Thripidae in the order Thysanoptera; the
Phryganeidae in the order Thrichoptera; the Stylopidae in the order
Strepsiptera; and the Pulicidae in the order Aphaniptera.

In 1872, Dr. J. L. Le Conte published his paper "On _Platypsyllidae_, a New
Family of Coleoptera" (Proc. Zool. Soc. of London for 1872, pp. 779-804,
pl. lxviii.), in which he shows that _Platypsylla_ is undoubtedly
coleopterous and cannot possibly be referred to the Aphaniptera. Careful
descriptions and figures of anatomical details are given, and he finds
that its affinities are very composite, but in the direction of the
Adephagous and Clavicorn series. Its most convenient place is shown to be
between the _Hydrophilidae_ and _Leptinidae_. There seems to be no good
reason why the name _Platypsyllus_ is here changed to _Platypsylla_, a
spelling adopted by most subsequent American writers.

In 1874, Prof. Westwood, in the "_Thesaurus Entomologicus Oxoniensis_"
(Oxford, 1874), p. 194, pl. xxxvii., gives figures with details; reprints
his previous diagnosis, and maintains his previous course in erecting a
new order for the insect, without giving any additional reasons.

In 1880, P. Megnin, in "Les Parasites et les maladies parasitaires," etc.,
Paris, 1880, gives (pp. 66-67) a description of the family
"Platypsyllines" without expressing an opinion concerning the systematic
position. He also describes and figures the species.

In 1882, Dr. Geo. H. Horn (Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc., x., 1882-83; Monthly
Proc., Feb. 10, 1882, p. ii.) exhibited drawings illustrating the anatomy
of _Platypsylla_ and _Leptinus_, and showed that a close relationship
exists between these genera. Later, in his "Notes on Some Little Known
Genera and Species of Coleoptera" (Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc., x., 1882-83,
pp. 113-126, pl. v., 114-116), he reviews the characters, and explains and
illustrates the anatomical details. The differences he points out between
his observations and those of Le Conte are more particularly in the
mandibles. In connection with this paper he also describes and illustrates
the structure of Leptinillus, which he separates from Leptinus, and
demonstrates their close relationship with Platypsyllus.

In 1883, Le Conte and Horn, in their "Classification of the Coleoptera of
North America" (Washington, Smithsonian Institution, 1883), give (pp.
13-15) a full description of the family characters, a little modified from
Le Conte's first description, but sustaining his views on the systematic
position of _Platypsyllidae_.

In 1883, Alphonse Bonhoure (Ann. Soc. de France, 1883; Bull, des Seances,
p. cxxvi.) exhibited drawings and specimens of _Platypsyllus castoris_
found in the _Departement des Bouches du Rhone_.

In 1884, Edm. Reitter, in "_Platypsylla castoris_ Rits. als Vertreter
einer neuer europaischen Coleopteren-Familie" (Wiener entom. Zeit. iii.,
1884, pp. 19-21) gives a lengthy description of the species with special
regard to the sexual differences. He shows that the European insect is not
specifically distinct from the American form, but he does not express an
opinion on the position of the family among the Coleoptera.

In the same year, Bonhoure (Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1884, pp. 143-153)
more fully records its discovery on _Castor fiber_ taken in the
Petit-Rhone. It is a question whether this European beaver, now quite
rare, is distinct from ours. He gives a very good review of the subject,
with a plate of the most important details, after Horn, and he fully
indorses the coleopterological position of the insect.

In the same year Ritsema (_Tijdschrift voor Entomologie_, 1883-84,
lxxxvi.) refers to Bonhoure's discovery of _Platypsylla_ in France, and
corrects Reitter in some unimportant details.

In 1885, Reitter, in "_Coleopterologische Notizen_" xiii. (Wiener
entomolog. Zeit., vol. iv., 1885, p. 274), answers Ritsema's criticism.

In the same year, Dr. Friederich Brauer, in his masterly
"Systematisch-zoologische Studien" (Sitzh. der Kais. Akad. der Wissensch.,
xci., p. 364), speaks of the relationship in the thoracic characters
between Mallophaga and Coleoptera as illustrated by Platypsyllus, by
inference admitting the coleopterous nature of the latter, but recognizing
that it has mallophagous affinities.

In 1886, H. J. Kolbe, in his "Ueber die Stellung von Platypsyllus im
System" (Berlin entom. Zeitsch., xxx., 1886, pp. 103-105), discusses the
subject, without any new evidence, however. He concludes that most of its
characteristics relate it to the Corrodentia, and particularly to the
sub-order Mallophaga, in which it has its closest kinship in Liotheidae.
The remarkable tripartite mentum he thinks should not be compared with the
bipartite mentum of Leptinus, and calls attention to the fact that in
Ancistrona in Mallophaga it is also trilobed.

The above are the more important papers on the subject, though the insect
has been referred by other authors to both Neuroptera and Orthoptera.


                     CHARACTERS OF PLATYPSYLLUS.

[Illustration: LARVA OF PLATYPSYLLUS CASTORIS--DORSAL VIEW.]

[Illustration: PLATYPSYLLUS CASTORIS.]

Where the characters of the image have been so often described, it is
unnecessary to refer to them in detail, and I will only call attention to
the more striking structural features and to some omissions by, or
differences between, previous authors. A glance at the illustrations which
I have prepared will show the prevailing characteristics of this
interesting creature, its general ovoid and flattened form, and more
particularly the flattened semicircular head. Dorsally, we notice the
rather prominent occiput fringed behind with short and broad depressed
spines or teeth which form a sort of comb, the prothorax trapezoidal and
but very slightly curved, with side margins strongly grooved. There is a
very distinct scutellem, and the two elytra are rounded at the tip and
without venation. Hind wings and eyes are both wanting. The abdomen shows
five segments, each with a row of depressed bristles.

On the ventral surface we find among the more curious characteristics,
first the antennae; these were originally described by Westwood as
three-jointed, the club being annulated. Le Conte could not distinctly
make out the number of annular joints upon this club, though he thought he
detected seven, which made nine joints to the whole antenna. The club is
received in the deep cup-shaped excavation of the second joint. Horn
thought he detected a division of the second joint, and resolved but six
segments in the club, making also nine joints to the whole antenna, but in
a somewhat different fashion from Le Conte. Westwood's figure shows eight
annuli to the club. He failed to find any trace of the mandibles, but Le
Conte described them as small, flat, subquadrate, with the inner side
deeply crenulate, and resembling those of _Corylophus_; the stipes well
developed, and biarticulate. Horn could not entirely make out the
mandibles as described by Le Conte, and rather concluded that what Le
Conte described is really one of the granules which occur behind the
labrum. He considered that the piece could hardly be even an aborted
mandible, because of its diminutive size.

[Illustration: YOUNG LARVA.]

What all authors have agreed in calling the mentum is very noticeable,
being large and broad, and trilobed behind. The maxillae are strong, with
complicated stipes and with two flat, thin lobes, the inner one smaller
than the outer and rounded at the tip, both lobes being ciliate. The
maxillary palpi are four-jointed, the labial palpi three-jointed. The
prosternum is very large, subtriangular, concealing the insertion of the
coxae, and extending over the front part of the mesosternum, as does this
over the front of the metasternum. Six ventral segments of the abdomen are
visible behind the posterior coxae, which conceal two and the base of a
third. The coxae are flat and not at all prominent. The legs are
characterized by broad and flattened tibiae and femora, and the strong
spines with which they are armed. The tarsi are five-jointed, the front
and middle pair with a row of claviform membraneous appendages each side,
which Le Conte found only in the male.

American entomologists have been satisfied to follow Le Conte and Horn as
to the position of Platypsyllus. Yet with such diversity of opinion on the
subject among high European authorities, the importance of a knowledge of
the adolescent states has been recognized, as the character of either the
larva or pupa would settle the question.

During a stay at West Point, Neb., in October, 1886, I learned from one of
my agents, Mr. Lawrence Bruner, that there was a beaver in a creek not far
from that point, and I at once made arrangements for him to trap the
beaver, and to look particularly for living specimens of Platypsyllus on
the skin, and especially the earlier stages. He succeeded in capturing the
beaver and sent me some fifteen specimens of the larva and also some
imagos, but neither eggs nor pupae were found. A glance at the larva
satisfied me at once of its coleopterous nature; but as we have, waiting
to be worked up and published, an _embarras de richesses entomologiques_
in the collections of the National Museum, and as circumstances largely
decide the precedence, I should probably not have called attention to this
larva for some time, had it not been that at the last monthly meeting of
the Entomological Society of Washington, Dr. Horn, who was present,
announced the finding, the present spring, by one of his correspondents,
of this very larva, and exhibited a specimen. Some points about it, and
especially the position of the spiracles, being yet rather obscure in his
mind, he requested me to examine my material, which I have thus been led
to do. I have made a figure of this larva which will sufficiently indicate
its nature.

The general form of the trophi, and particularly the anal cerci, fully
settle the disputed point, and remove this insect completely from the
Mallophaga (none of which possess them), and confirm its position in the
Clavicorn series of the Coleoptera. Yet in the larva, as in the imago, the
effects of its parasitic life are shown in certain modifications which
approach the running section of the Mallophaga. Without going into details
I may say that, besides its general and more decided coleopterological
features, this larva is distinguished by the shortness and stoutness of
its legs, by the size and stoutness of the antennae, by the stiff and long
depressed hairs on the dorsal and more particularly on the ventral
surface, and by the dorsal position of the abdominal spiracles, all
characters approaching the Mallophaga. The first pair of spiracles is
lateral, and may be said to be mesothoracic, being placed on the
mesothoracic joint, but on a distinct fold. The eight abdominal spiracles
are placed on the sides of the dorsum, and in this respect recall the
parasitic triungulin of the meloid larvae. The mandibles are barely
corneous, and they are more elongate and curved in the younger than in the
older larva, while the legs are also relatively stouter, more curved, and
with a much longer and sharper claw in the younger larva, which seems well
fitted for grasping the hairs of its host.

There can no longer be any doubt, therefore, about the true position of
Platypsyllus. The eggs will probably be found attached in some way to the
hairs of the animal they are laid on, much as they are in Mallophaga, and
the pupa is probably formed in the nests of the host, and not upon the
skin, which will explain the reason for its not occurring with the larva
and imago upon the beaver, either in the case of my specimens or those of
Dr. Horn.

The greatest resemblance of Platypsyllus in the imago state to the
Mallophaga is found in the spinous comb on the hind border of the occiput,
the arrangement of the spines on the abdomen, and the superficial antennal
structure, but particularly in the broad trilobed mentum. All of the other
characteristics are readily referable to the Coleoptera, though, as Le
Conte pointed out, they are composite, recalling in the antennae the
Grynidae, in the pronotum the Silphidae, in the mesosternum Limulodes, in
the elytra the Staphilindae, in the legs the Anisotomidae, and in the
mandibles the Corylophidae. The scutellum and the five-jointed tarsi at
once remove it from Mallophaga, and it is a wonder that Le Conte and Horn
have not more fully insisted on this fact. The trophi are very
complicated, and there are various details of structure not noticed or not
mentioned by any of the writers upon the subject hitherto.

I have been led to very carefully examine the imago, and the more closely
I have done so, the more completely I realize the accuracy of Le Conte's
original work. The mandibles are visible or not, according as they are
exposed or withdrawn, and their existence may depend on the sex, as, so
far as my material justifies conclusion, they are visible in the male
only. Where found they correspond to Le Conte's description. Even in the
larva they are weak and of doubtful service in mastication, while in the
imago they are, as is also the labrum, quite rudimentary, which fact
hardly justifies us, however, in arguing their non-existence.

As confirmatory of the affinities of Platypsyllus, as here proved, it may
be mentioned that _Leptinus testaceous_ Mull., the only species of its
genus, is known to be parasitic on mice, as it has been found upon them in
Philadelphia by Dr. Jno. A. Ryder, and I have taken it in the nests of a
common field mouse near Washington. But still more interesting is the fact
that _Leptinillus validus_ Horn (also the only species of its genus) is an
associate parasite of Platypsyllus on the beaver, a number of both having
been taken by one of my agents, Mr. A. Koebele, in San Francisco, from
beaver skins brought from Alaska.

[Illustration: LARVA OF PLATYPSYLLUS CASTORIS.]

In reference to the classificatory value that should be attached to an
aberrant type like this, I have already expressed my opinion in a paper on
Megathymus, a Lepidopteron that connects in many ways the two great
divisions of butterflies and moths, published in the Transactions of the
Academy of Sciences of St. Louis, volume iii., 1876, and will take the
liberty of reading a few passages therefrom:

    "Between all classificatory divisions, from variety to kingdom,
    the separating lines we draw get more and more broken in
    proportion as our knowledge of forms, past and present,
    increases. Every step in advance toward a true conception of the
    relations of animals brings the different groups closer
    together, until at last we perceive an almost continuous chain.
    Even the older naturalists had an appreciation of this fact.
    Linnaeus' noted dictum, '_Natura saltus non facit_' implies it;
    and Kirby and Spence justly observe that 'it appears to be the
    opinion of most modern physiologists that the series of
    affinities in nature is a concatenation or continuous series;
    and that though an hiatus is here and there observable, this has
    been caused either by the annihilation of some original group or
    species, or that the objects required to fill it up are still in
    existence but have not yet been discovered.'"

    "Modern naturalists find in this more or less gradual blending
    their strongest arguments in favor of community of descent; and
    speculation as to the origin, or outcome rather, in the near
    present or remote past of existing forms is naturally and very
    generally indulged, even by those who a few years back were more
    inclined to ridicule than accept Darwinian doctrine. Shall we
    then say that the old divisions must be discarded because not
    absolute? As well might we argue for the abolition of the four
    seasons because they differ with the latitude, or because they
    gradually blend into each other. Entomologists will always speak
    of moths and butterflies, howsoever arbitrary the groups may
    come to be looked upon, or however numerous the intermediate
    gradations."

    "Families should, I think, be made as comprehensive as possible,
    and not unduly multiplied; and in considering aberrant forms,
    the objects of classification are best subserved by retaining
    them in whatever division can claim the balance of characters.
    It is better to widen than to restrict in the higher groups. Le
    Conte does better service in bringing Platypsylla among the
    Coleoptera than does Westwood in creating a new order--
    Achreioptera--for it. Phylloxera, in Homoptera, is much more
    wisely retained in the Aphididae than made the type of a new
    family."

Platypsyllus, therefore, is a good Coleopteron, and in all the characters
in which it so strongly approaches the Mallophaga it offers merely an
illustration of modification due to food habit and environment. In this
particular it is, however, of very great interest as one of the most
striking illustrations we have of variation in similar lines through the
influence of purely external or dynamical conditions, and where genetic
connection and heredity play no part whatever. It is at the same time
interesting because of its synthetic characteristics, being evidently an
ancient type from which we get a very good idea of the connection in the
past of some of the present well-defined orders of insects.

Westwood, though now an octogenarian, may safely be called England's most
eminent entomologist by virtue of the character and volume of the work
which he has accomplished. Dr. Le Conte was, _facile princeps_, America's
leading coleopterist. I do not know that any greater tribute could be
added to the sound judgment and deep knowledge possessed by that late
distinguished member of the Academy than the confirmation of his views as
opposed to the views of Westwood and other European authorities which the
discovery of this larva now gives us.




                        THE SPECTRA OF OXYGEN.


The author has observed a fact which furnishes a remarkable demonstration
of the law of the production of the dark bands which he has detected in
the spectrum of oxygen. The phenomena of elective absorption in oxygen gas
are manifested in two mutually distinct spectral systems. A first system,
formed of fine rays, follows the law of the product of the gaseous system
traversed by its density. The second system is formed of bands much less
easily resolved, is governed by the law of the product of the thickness by
the square of the density. This second law being quite novel in spectral
analysis, the author has instituted experiments necessary to prove that
this system of obscure bands really belongs to oxygen. These experiments
range from pressures of 100 atmospheres down to those of a few units, and
with lengths of tubes from 0.42 meter to 60 meters. At the same time
prolonged observations have been made upon the atmosphere, brought into
connection with the experiments in the tubes. These observations, and
especially those made during autumn last on the Pic du Midi, prove that
all the bands of the spectrum of oxygen are found in the spectrum of the
solar light if it is allowed to traverse a sufficient thickness of the
atmospheric medium. Further, on comparing, by the aid of photography, the
intensities of the bands of the atmospheric spectrum with those given in
the tubes, the author has found that the intensities of these atmospheric
bands fulfill the law of the square. It appears from _Wiedemann's Annalen_
that M. Olszewski, when liquefying oxygen, examined its spectrum and
ascertained the existence of the bands in question with a stratum of 7 mm.
of liquid oxygen.--_J. Jansen._




       ON A THEORY CONCERNING THE SUDDEN LOSS OF MAGNETIC PROPERTIES
                           OF IRON AND NICKEL.

                       By Mr. H. TOMLINSON, B.A.


Experiments by himself and other observers have shown that the
temperatures at which iron and nickel lose their magnetic properties
depend on the specimens used and the magnetizing forces employed; but the
temperatures at which they _begin to lose_ these properties are
definite--for nickel about 300 deg. C., and iron about 680 deg. C. The author's
own experiments on "Recalescence of Iron" show two critical temperatures;
and Pinchon has shown by calorimetric measurement that between 660 deg. and
720 deg. C., and between 1,000 deg. and 1,050 deg. C., heat becomes latent. All these
facts seem to indicate a molecular rearrangement about these temperatures.

In his proposed theory he assumes that the molecules of iron (say)
contain magnetic atoms capable of motions of translation and of rotation.
These tend to form closed magnetic circuits, but at ordinary temperatures
are unable to do so on account of the close proximity of their centers. On
raising the temperature their centers are further separated, till at about
680 deg. C. their polar extremities rush together, forming complete circuits
and exhibiting no external magnetic properties. On cooling down, the
centers approach until the gravitation attraction overcomes the magnetic
attraction of their poles, when the magnetic properties reappear.

Prof. Ayrton asked whether the author had made experiments on the
reappearance of magnetic properties when raised to a white heat, and Prof.
Thompson inquired whether cobalt had been tested. Both questions were
answered negatively.




      POISON OF THE SOMALIS, EXTRACTED FROM THE WOOD OF THE OUABAIO.


The principle in question, ouabaine, forms rectangular plates, very
slender, of a nacreous appearance. It is absolutely white, inodorous, and
not appreciably bitter. It contains no nitrogen, and does not react with
coloring matters. At a boiling heat, in presence of dilute acids, it is
split up, yielding a reductive sugar. Its composition is
C_{90}H_{45}O_{12}. It is poisonous if introduced into the circulation,
but not if swallowed.--_M. Arnaud, in Comptes Rendus._




                            (Advertisements.)


                 A New Catalogue of Valuable Papers

Contained in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT during the past ten years,
sent _free of charge_ to any address. MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

                   Architects and Builders Edition.

                 $2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued monthly--on
the first day of the month. Each number contains about forty large quarto
pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book pages, forming,
practically, a large and splendid =Magazine of Architecture=, richly
adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with fine engravings,
illustrating the most interesting examples of modern Architectural
Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of the
latest and best plans for private residences, city and country, including
those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive. Drawings in
perspective and in color are given, together with full Plans,
Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Hundreds of
dwellings have already been erected on the various plans we have issued
during the past year, and many others are in process of construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building or
improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before them in
this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best examples_ from
which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated. An
extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given, in
which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods, Machines,
Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with addresses of the
makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have won
for it the =Largest Circulation= of any Architectural publication in the
world.

                        MUNN & CO., Publishers,

                        361 Broadway, New York.

A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of charge,
sent to any address.

       *       *       *       *       *

                  Building Plans and Specifications.

In connection with the publication of the BUILDING EDITION of the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. Munn & Co. furnish plans and specifications
for buildings of every kind, including Churches, Schools, Stores,
Dwellings, Carriage Houses, Barns, etc.

In this work they are assisted by able and experienced architects. Full
plans, details, and specifications for the various buildings illustrated
in this paper can be supplied.

Those who contemplate building, or who wish to alter, improve, extend, or
add to existing buildings, whether wings, porches, bay windows, or attic
