After a little while the searchlight was put in operation and began to
reach out like a pencil of brilliant white light. It darted here and
there and found a wharf reaching out from the shore to deep water. The
_Esperance_ floated toward it, her engine barely turning over. There was
still no sign of activity, except for the lighted windows.

The engine stopped, then reversed, and the yacht drifted gently until it
contacted the wharfs snubber-pilings. Jug and Tony jumped ashore with
lines to fasten the yacht. Still no sign of life.

"Queer," said Davis, staring ashore. "They knew we were coming!"

A moving light suddenly appeared in the sky. A fireball, which is an
unusually lurid type of shooting star. It came over the tree-tops and
crossed the zenith, leaving a trail of light behind it. It went on and
on, seemingly slowing down, which meant that it was descending from a
very high altitude. Its brilliance became more and more intense, then it
dimmed. At this point the fireball seemed to plunge downward. Then its
flame went out and only a faint, dull-red speck in motion could be seen.

It plunged down beyond the trees on the far side of the lagoon. Or so it
seemed. Actually, it might have plunged into the sea, miles away. Then
there was a faint noise which was something between a rumble and a hiss.
The sound went back across the sky along the path the fireball had
followed. It died away.

There was silence. Shooting stars as bright as this one are rare. Most
meteors are very small, but they are visible because of the attrition
produced by their falling bodies in the atmosphere that sets them on
fire. They usually appear at around a seventy-mile height, but
frequently they are vaporized before they have descended more than
thirty miles. Sometimes they explode in mid-air and strew the earth with
fragments. Sometimes they strike ground, leaving monstrous craters where
they have fallen. Most meteors fall in the sea. But a meteor has to be
at least down to twenty miles from sea level before its sound can be
heard.

Someone came out of a building and moved toward the wharf, an electric
lantern bobbing in his hand. Halfway out to the yacht he called,
"Davis?"

"Yes," said Davis. "What's happened?"

"Nothing," said the man ashore. "We were watching for that bolide. It
was picked up by space radar a couple of hours ago, but then we figured
it to land farther on than it did."

It was an educated voice, a scholarly voice.

"Big?" asked Davis as the light drew nearer.

"We've seen them bigger, but not much." The man with the lantern reached
the end of the wharf. "Glad to see you. We've got some fish for you, by
the way. We caught them in the lagoon. They're waiting for you in the
deep-freeze. There's a _Macrourus violaceus_, if we read the books
right, and a _Gonostoma polypus_. They match the pictures, anyhow. What
do you make of that?"

"You haven't got them!" said Davis incredulously. "You can't have them!
I'm no fish specialist, but those are abyssal fish! They can only be
caught at a depth of two or more miles!"

"We caught 'em," said the man cheerfully, "on a hook and line, in the
lagoon, at night. Come ashore! Everybody'll be glad to see you."

Davis protested, "I won't believe you've got that kind of fish until I
see them!"

The man with the lantern stepped down to the yacht's deck.

"All you've got to do is look in the mess hall deep-freeze. The cook's
complaining that they take up space. Nobody wants to find out if they're
good to eat. Most unwholesome-looking creatures! And how are you, young
lady?" he asked Deirdre. "We've missed you. Tony, Nick, Jug...."

Deirdre introduced Terry.

"Ha!" said the man. "They got you enlisted, eh? They were talking about
it a month ago. You've solved the problem by now, I daresay. Including
how these very queer fish happen to be in our lagoon instead of miles
down in the Luzon Deep. When you find time, tell me!"

"I'll try," said Terry reservedly.

The man went down into the after-cabin and Davis followed him. Deirdre
said amusedly:

"Dr. Morton's a dear! Don't take him seriously, Terry! He loves to
tease. He'll hound you to tell him how deep-sea fish got up here and
into a shallow lagoon. Please don't mind!"

"I won't," said Terry. "I'll tell him tomorrow, I think. I believe now I
know how it happened, but I want to check it first."




_Five_


When Terry awoke, next morning, the reflections of sunlight on water
came in through the porthole of his cabin. He watched the shimmering
contortions of the light spots on the wall. His thoughts went instantly
back to the subject they'd dwelt on before he went to sleep. The man
with the spectacles--Dr. Morton, but his doctorate was in astronomy
instead of medicine--had said that Deirdre and his father had discussed
enlisting him in the _Esperance's_ company a month ago. Deirdre'd come
into the shop of Jimenez y Cia. only four days before. Some of the delay
could have been caused by time spent in simple sailing from one place to
another, mostly on wholly futile errands. They'd gotten a fish-driving
paddle at Alua. That'd take some days of sailing each way. Apparently,
they'd been fumbling at some vague idea of trying to find out what would
produce the facts they'd noted. 'Very queer fish,' Davis had said of
some of the catches _La Rubia_ had made. The abyssal fish mentioned last
night would be very queer fish to catch in a lagoon. Yes....

He lay still, surveying other aspects of the situation. Davis had called
on an aircraft carrier for electronic items, and the _Esperance_ was in
constant touch with somebody by short-wave radio. It might be the same
carrier. The Manila police department was on very cordial terms with
Davis, and the staff of a satellite-tracking installation saved odd
specimens of fish for him.

The _Esperance's_ enterprise was plainly not a brand-new adventure. It
had been carried on for some time. They had had technical aid of the
very highest caliber, but they hadn't gotten anywhere yet. It did
appear that Terry had added a minor specialty to the arsenal of
investigative techniques. Without the data gathered on recorder-tape,
their idea of the events of two nights before would be very different.
The sea would have seemed very bright, then the glowing area would have
been noted to have grown smaller, and something resembling a whale would
have been seen leaping high above the water. Then the brightness would
have faded out. It would have been mysterious enough, but an entire
aspect of the phenomenon would have gone unnoticed. There was still no
answer to any of the far-reaching questions Terry had asked himself, but
most of them had never been asked before. Sea noises had proved to be
closely connected to whatever had to be found out. What was known about
them was due to his findings. He'd established a new frame of reference.

And he'd discovered the solution of a minor problem before the problem
was even stated. He had only to prove it. Then, of course, there would
be other problems arising from it.

He got up, put on swimming trunks, and duck trousers over them. He
slipped into a sweat shirt and went upon deck. Deirdre hailed him.

"Good morning! Everybody's over at the tracking station, arguing about
the bolide that went over last night. According to the radar, it plunged
into the sea, miles and miles away."

"What should it have done?" asked Terry. "I'm not familiar with
meteorites. Are they planning to dive for it?"

"Hardly!" Deirdre laughed. "It landed in the Luzon Deep." She waved a
hand in an inclusive gesture. "This island's on the brink of it. A
bathyscaphe might go down there--in fact, I think it's scheduled; you
know, the one I said was coming to Manila on the oceanographic ship? A
bathyscaphe can go that deep, but it's not likely to hunt for
meteorites."

"Ah," said Terry judicially. "Then what difference does it make where it
hit?"

"It didn't fall the way it should have," said Deirdre. "It was spotted
by space radar away out, and they tried to compute its path, but they
figured it wrong. Now they're trying to make it come out right by
allowing for the effect of the earth's magnetic field on a metal
meteorite. They're arguing and waving equations at each other."

"Let them," said Terry. "I have trouble enough with fish. Do you think I
could borrow a boat?"

"We've always been able to," said Deirdre. Then she added, "I've kept
your breakfast hot. While you eat it I'll get a boat."

She went below, and instants later was up again.

"I have a feeling," she said, "that something interesting is going to
happen. I'll be back."

She swung lightly to the wharf and headed for land. Terry went below, to
find his breakfast laid out on the cabin table. He settled down to it,
but first pulled a book from the shelves. It was a volume on
oceanography, and its pages showed that it had often been referred to.
He found the Luzon Deep described. Its area was relatively small, a mere
ninety-mile-long chasm in the sea-bed. But it was second only to the
Mindanao Deep in its soundings, and a close second at that. Its maximum
depth was measured at twenty-seven thousand feet. Over five miles. There
was a mention of Thrawn Island as being on the very edge of the Deep.
According to the book, the island was the peak of one of the most
precipitous and tallest submarine mountains in the world. Three miles
from where Thrawn Island lay, there were soundings of twenty-eight
thousand feet and upward. This depth extended as a trench....

The staccato roaring of an outboard motor sounded some distance away. It
bellowed toward the yacht, swung about, and cut off. Terry gulped down
his coffee and went abovedecks, just as Deirdre was fastening the small
craft alongside the yacht.

"Taxi?" she asked amiably. "I got the boat. Where to?"

Terry swung down and took the steering grip. He headed the boat away.
There was a box for bait, a few fishing lines, and even two highly
professional fish-spears on board. Fishing was not necessarily a
sedentary pastime here.

"We try the lagoon entrance," he said. "I've an idea. I noticed
something last night, when we came in."

"Do you want to brief me?"

"I'd rather not," he admitted.

Deirdre shrugged without resentment. The little craft went sturdily
toward the passageway to the open sea. She formed an arrowhead of waves
as she moved. She neared the points of land at the ends of the coral
formation enclosing the lagoon. Thrawn Island was not an atoll. But the
beaches were made of snow-white coral sand. Outside there was clear
water for a space and then a reef on which the seas broke.

Terry headed the boat toward the open sea. Almost immediately after,
there was nothing but the reef and the sea between the boat and the
horizon. He slowed the boat almost to a stop, well within the reef's
tumult. She swayed and rolled on the surging water.

"Stay here," he commanded. "I want to swim out and back."

He pulled the sweat shirt over his head. He jumped overboard, leaving
Deirdre in charge of the boat.

The world looked strange to him when waves rolled by higher than his
head. A few times the sky narrowed to the space between wave-crests.
Other times he was lifted upon a wave-peak, and the sky was illimitably
high and large, and the breaking seas on the nearby reef merely roared
and grumbled to themselves.

He swam out, away from the land. Suddenly his body began to tingle. He
stopped and paddled, analyzing the sensation. One side of his body felt
as if the most minute of electric currents entered his skin. It was not
an unpleasant sensation. Deirdre, in the small boat, was fifty yards
behind, watching him. As he swam on, the tingling grew stronger. He
dived. The tingling did not vary with depth. He came up, and he was
farther out than he'd realized.

He suddenly knew that he'd been incautious. There are currents which
flow in and out of lagoons. A barrier of reef affects them, too. Terry
found himself swimming in an outward-bound current, which pushed him out
and away from the island.

Within seconds the sensation in his body changed from a mere tingling
to torment. For a moment it was just very much stronger and slightly
painful, but a moment later it felt as if he swam among flames. It was
unbearable. His muscles were not contracted, as if by an electric shock,
but he couldn't control their reflexes. He found himself splashing
crazily, trying to fight his way out of the anguish which engulfed him.

He went under. His body had taken complete control over his mind, and he
found himself swimming frantically, underwater. He couldn't reach the
surface. His body tried to escape the intolerable agony in which it was
immersed but couldn't.

He heard a roaring sound, but it meant nothing. The roaring grew louder.
Finally, he did break surface for a few seconds, and he gasped horribly,
but then he went under. The roaring grew thunderous, and he broke
surface again....

Something seized his flailing arm and pulled him up. The arm ceased to
experience the horrible sensation of being in boiling oil. His hand
recognized a gunwale. He swarmed up the solid object with hands helping
him, and found himself in the boat, gasping and shivering, and cringing
at the bare memory of the suffering he'd undergone.

Deirdre stared at him, frightened. She swung the boat's bow shoreward.
The outboard motor roared, and the boat raced past the gap in the reef
and rushed toward the lagoon opening.

"Are you all right? What happened? You were swimming and suddenly...."

He swallowed. His hands quivered. He shook his head and then said
unsteadily, "I meant to ... check the reason those queer fish stay in
the lagoon. I thought that if they belonged in the depths and were
somehow carried out of them, they would try to get back. I found out!"

He felt an unreasonable relief when the lagoon entrance was behind the
boat. The glassy water was reassuring. The _Esperance_ looked like
safety itself.

"I think I know how they got here, now," he added. "We underestimated
what we're trying to understand. I'll be all right in a minute."

It was less than a minute before he shook himself and managed to grin
wryly at Deirdre.

"Was there a hum in the water?" asked Deirdre, still staring at him. "I
thought I heard it on the bottom of the boat. Was that the trouble?"

"Yes. I wouldn't call it a hum," Terry admitted. "Not any longer. Now I
know what a slow fire feels like."

"You frightened me," said Deirdre, "the way you splashed...."

"I heard the humming sound," said Terry, "last night when the yacht came
up to the island. We were perhaps a half-mile off-shore. It was very
faint, but I had the amplifier turned down low. The hum was at its
loudest just before we passed the reef, but nobody else noticed. When
Dr. Morton said there were abyssal fish in the lagoon, I knew why they'd
be there. I made a guess at what might drive them there. I went to find
out if I was right. I found out!"

"The hum?" asked Deirdre again. When he nodded, she said: "What are you
going to do now? What do you think makes the hum?"

"I'm trying hard not to guess what makes the hum," Terry told her.
"Insufficient data. I need more. I think I'll ask what other odd
phenomena have turned up in this neighborhood. Foam-patches on the sea?
