flirtatious, seductive pluckings of a web-cable which would mean that an
amorous male of her own species sought the grisly creature's affection.

Hallet made the web quiver as small prey would shake it. The spider
would have responded instantly to bigger game, if only to secure it
before the vast snare was damaged by frenzied plungings. Still, though
there was no haste, the giant rose and in leisurely fashion traversed
the long cable to the web's center. Moran saw it.

"Hallet!" he barked into his helmet-phone, "Hallet! Hold still! Don't
move!"

He raced desperately along the edge of the cliff, risking a fall more
immediately fatal than Hallet's. It was idiotic to make such an attempt
at rescue. It was sheer folly. But there are instincts one has to obey
against all reason. Moran did not think of the fuel-block. Typically,
Hallet did.

"_I've got the fuel-block_," he gasped between screams. "_If you don't
help me--_"

But then the main cable nearest him moved in a manner not the result of
his own struggles. It was the enormous weight of the owner of the web,
moving leisurely on her own snare, which made the web shake now. And
Hallet lost even the coherence of hysteria and simply shrieked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran came to a place where a main anchor-cable reached bed-rock. It ran
under yeasty ground-cover to an anchorage. He thrust his torch deep,
feeling for the cable. It seared through. The web jerked wildly as one
of its principal supports parted. The giant spider turned aside to
investigate the event. Such a thing should happen only when one of the
most enormous of possible victims became entangled.

Moran went racing for another cable-anchorage. But when he found where
the strong line fastened, it was simply and starkly impossible to climb
down to it. He swore and looked desperately for Burleigh and Brawn and
Harper. They were far away, hurrying to descend but not yet where they
could bring the web toppling down by cutting other cables.

The yellow-banded monster came to the cut end of the line. It swung
down. It climbed up again. Hallet shrieked and kicked.

The spider moved toward him. Of all nightmarish creatures on this
nightmare of a planet, a giant spider with a body eight feet long and
legs to span as many yards was most revolting. Its abdomen was obscenely
swollen. As it moved, its spinnerets paid out newly-formed cord behind
it. Its eyes were monstrous and murderously intent. The ghastly,
needle-sharp mandibles beside its mouth seemed to move lustfully with a
life of their own. And it was somehow ten times more horrible because of
its beastly fur. Tufts of black hairiness, half-yards in length,
streamed out as its legs moved.

There was another cable still. Moran made for it. He reached it where it
stretched down like a slanting tight-rope. He jerked out his torch to
sever it,--and saw that to cut it would be to drop the spider almost
upon Hallet. It would seize him then because of his writhings. But not
to cut it--

He tried his blaster. He fired again and again. The blaster-bolts hurt.
The spider reacted with fury. The blaster would have killed a man at
this distance, though it would have been ignored by a chitin-armored
beetle. But against the spider the bolts were like bites. They made
small wounds, but not serious ones. The spider made a bubbling sound
which was more daunting than any cry would have been. It flung its legs
about, fumbling for the thing that it believed attacked it. It continued
the bubbling sounds. Its mandibles clashed and gnashed against each
other. They were small noises in the din which was the norm on this mad
world, but they were more horrible than any other sounds Moran had ever
heard.

       *       *       *       *       *

The spider suddenly began to move purposefully toward the spot where
Hallet jerked insanely and shrieked in heart-rending horror.

Moran found himself attempting the impossible. He knew it was
impossible. The blast-pistol hurt but did not injure the giant because
the range was too long. So--it was totally unjustifiable--he found
himself slung below the downward-slanting cable and sliding down its
slope. He was going to where the range would be short enough for his
blast-pistol to be effective. He slid to a cross-cable, and avoided it
and went on.

Burleigh and Brawn and Harper were tiny figures, very far away. Moran
hung by one hand and used his free hand to fire the blaster once more.
It hurt more seriously, now. The spider made bubbling noises of infinite
ferocity. And it moved with incredible agility toward the one object it
could imagine as meaning attack.

It reached Hallet. It seized him.

Moran's blast-pistol could not kill it. It had to be killed. Now! He
drew out his torch and pressed the continuous-flame stud. Raging, he
threw it at the spider.

It spun in the air, a strange blue-white pinwheel in the gray light of
this planet's day. It cut through a cable that might have deflected it.
It reached the spider, now reared high and pulling Hallet from the
sticky stuff that had captured him.

The spinning torch hit. The flame burned deep. The torch actually sank
into the spider's body.

And there was a titanic flame and an incredible blast and Moran knew
nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long time later he knew that he ached. He became aware that he hurt.
Still later he realized that Burleigh and Brawn and Harper stood around
him. He'd splashed in some enormous thickness of the yeasty soil, grown
and fallen from the cliff-edge, and it was not solid enough to break his
bones. Harper, doubtless, had been most resolute in digging down to him
and pulling him out.

He sat up, and growled at innumerable unpleasant sensations.

"That," he said painfully, "was a very bad business."

"It's all bad business," said Burleigh in a flat and somehow exhausted
tone. "The fuel-block burned. There's nothing left of it or Hallet or
the spider."

Moran moved an arm. A leg. The other arm and leg. He got unsteadily to
his feet.

"It was bessendium and uranium," added Burleigh hopelessly. "And the
uranium burned. It wasn't an atomic explosion, it just burned like
sodium or potassium would do. But it burned fast! The torch-flame must
have reached it." He added absurdly. "Hallet died instantly, of course.
Which is better fortune than we are likely to have."

"Oh, that ..." said Moran. "We're all right. I said I was going to kill
him. I wasn't trying to at the moment, but I did. By accident." He
paused, and said dizzily; "I think he should feel obliged to me. I was
distinctly charitable to him!"

Harper said grimly;

"But we can't lift off. We're all marooned here now."

Moran took an experimental step. He hurt, but he was sound.

"Nonsense!" he said. "The crew of the _Malabar_ went off without taking
the fuel-block from the wreck's engines. It's in a drawer in the
_Nadine's_ control-room with a note to Carol that I asked her to read
should something happen to me. We may have to machine it a little to
make it fit the _Nadine's_ engines. But we're all right!"

Carol's voice came in his helmet-phone. It was shaky and desperately
glad.

"_You're--all right? Quite all right? Please hurry back?_"

"We're on the way," said Moran.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was pleased with Carol's reaction. He also realized that now there
would be the right number of people on the _Nadine_; they would take off
from this world and arrive reasonably near due-time at Loris without
arousing the curiosity of space-port officials.

He looked about him. The way the others had come down was a perfectly
good way to climb up again. On the surface, above, their trail would be
clear on the multi-colored surface rusts. There were four men together,
all with blast-pistols and three with torches. They should be safe.

Moran talked cheerfully, climbing to the plateau on which the _Nadine_
had landed, trudging with the others across a world on which it was
impossible to see more than a quarter-mile in any direction. But the way
was plain. Beyond the mist Carol waited.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Planet of Dread, by Murray Leinster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLANET OF DREAD ***

***** This file should be named 43046.txt or 43046.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/0/4/43046/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
