laughing at the discomfiture of the Britishers.  Dietz, Heinz, and
Klatz also seemed to enjoy the entertainment immensely; but two of the
men--Plesser and Hindle--marched with eyes straight to the front and
with scowling faces.

Bradley felt his blood boil at sight of the cowardly indignities being
heaped upon his men, and in the brief span of time occupied by the
column to come abreast of where he lay hidden he made his plans,
foolhardy though he knew them.  Then he drew the girl close to him.
"Stay here," he whispered.  "I am going out to fight those beasts; but
I shall be killed.  Do not let them see you.  Do not let them take you
alive.  They are more cruel, more cowardly, more bestial than the
Wieroos."

The girl pressed close to him, her face very white.  "Go, if that is
right," she whispered; "but if you die, I shall die, for I cannot live
without you."  He looked sharply into her eyes.  "Oh!" he ejaculated.
"What an idiot I have been!  Nor could I live without you, little
girl."  And he drew her very close and kissed her lips.  "Good-bye."
He disengaged himself from her arms and looked again in time to see
that the rear of the column had just passed him.  Then he rose and
leaped quickly and silently from the jungle.

Suddenly von Schoenvorts felt an arm thrown about his neck and his
pistol jerked from its holster.  He gave a cry of fright and warning,
and his men turned to see a half-naked white man holding their leader
securely from behind and aiming a pistol at them over his shoulder.

"Drop those guns!" came in short, sharp syllables and perfect German
from the lips of the newcomer.  "Drop them or I'll put a bullet through
the back of von Schoenvorts' head."

The Germans hesitated for a moment, looking first toward von
Schoenvorts and then to Schwartz, who was evidently second in command,
for orders.

"It's the English pig, Bradley," shouted the latter, "and he's
alone--go and get him!"

"Go yourself," growled Plesser.  Hindle moved close to the side of
Plesser and whispered something to him.  The latter nodded.  Suddenly
von Schoenvorts wheeled about and seized Bradley's pistol arm with both
hands, "Now!" he shouted.  "Come and take him, quick!"

Schwartz and three others leaped forward; but Plesser and Hindle held
back, looking questioningly toward the English prisoners.  Then Plesser
spoke.  "Now is your chance, Englander," he called in low tones.
"Seize Hindle and me and take our guns from us--we will not fight hard."

Olson and Brady were not long in acting upon the suggestion.  They had
seen enough of the brutal treatment von Schoenvorts accorded his men
and the especially venomous attentions he had taken great enjoyment in
according Plesser and Hindle to understand that these two might be
sincere in a desire for revenge.  In another moment the two Germans
were unarmed and Olson and Brady were running to the support of
Bradley; but already it seemed too late.

Von Schoenvorts had managed to drag the Englishman around so that his
back was toward Schwartz and the other advancing Germans.  Schwartz was
almost upon Bradley with gun clubbed and ready to smash down upon the
Englishman's skull.  Brady and Olson were charging the Germans in the
rear with Wilson, Whitely, and Sinclair supporting them with bare
fists.  It seemed that Bradley was doomed when, apparently out of
space, an arrow whizzed, striking Schwartz in the side, passing
half-way through his body to crumple him to earth.  With a shriek the
man fell, and at the same time Olson and Brady saw the slim figure of a
young girl standing at the edge of the jungle coolly fitting another
arrow to her bow.

Bradley had now succeeded in wrestling his arm free from von
Schoenvorts' grip and in dropping the latter with a blow from the butt
of his pistol.  The rest of the English and Germans were engaged in a
hand-to-hand encounter, Plesser and Hindle standing aside from the
melee and urging their comrades to surrender and join with the English
against the tyranny of von Schoenvorts.  Heinz and Klatz, possibly
influenced by their exhortation, were putting up but a half-hearted
resistance; but Dietz, a huge, bearded, bull-necked Prussian, yelling
like a maniac, sought to exterminate the Englische schweinhunde with
his bayonet, fearing to fire his piece lest he kill some of his
comrades.

It was Olson who engaged him, and though unused to the long German
rifle and bayonet, he met the bull-rush of the Hun with the cold, cruel
precision and science of English bayonet-fighting.  There was no
feinting, no retiring and no parrying that was not also an attack.
Bayonet-fighting today is not a pretty thing to see--it is not an
artistic fencing-match in which men give and take--it is slaughter
inevitable and quickly over.

Dietz lunged once madly at Olson's throat.  A short point, with just a
twist of the bayonet to the left sent the sharp blade over the
Englishman's left shoulder.  Instantly he stepped close in, dropped his
rifle through his hands and grasped it with both hands close below the
muzzle and with a short, sharp jab sent his blade up beneath Dietz's
chin to the brain.  So quickly was the thing done and so quick the
withdrawal that Olson had wheeled to take on another adversary before
the German's corpse had toppled to the ground.

But there were no more adversaries to take on.  Heinz and Klatz had
thrown down their rifles and with hands above their heads were crying
"Kamerad!  Kamerad!" at the tops of their voices.  Von Schoenvorts
still lay where he had fallen.  Plesser and Hindle were explaining to
Bradley that they were glad of the outcome of the fight, as they could
no longer endure the brutality of the U-boat commander.

The remainder of the men were looking at the girl who now advanced
slowly, her bow ready, when Bradley turned toward her and held out his
hand.

"Co-Tan," he said, "unstring your bow--these are my friends, and
yours."  And to the Englishmen:  "This is Co-Tan.  You who saw her save
me from Schwartz know a part of what I owe her."

The rough men gathered about the girl, and when she spoke to them in
broken English, with a smile upon her lips enhancing the charm of her
irresistible accent, each and every one of them promptly fell in love
with her and constituted himself henceforth her guardian and her slave.

A moment later the attention of each was called to Plesser by a volley
of invective.  They turned in time to see the man running toward von
Schoenvorts who was just rising from the ground.  Plesser carried a
rifle with bayonet fixed, that he had snatched from the side of Dietz's
corpse.  Von Schoenvorts' face was livid with fear, his jaws working as
though he would call for help; but no sound came from his blue lips.

"You struck me," shrieked Plesser.  "Once, twice, three times, you
struck me, pig.  You murdered Schwerke--you drove him insane by your
cruelty until he took his own life.  You are only one of your
kind--they are all like you from the Kaiser down.  I wish that you were
the Kaiser.  Thus would I do!"  And he lunged his bayonet through von
Schoenvorts' chest.  Then he let his rifle fall with the dying man and
wheeled toward Bradley.  "Here I am," he said.  "Do with me as you
like.  All my life I have been kicked and cuffed by such as that, and
yet always have I gone out when they commanded, singing, to give up my
life if need be to keep them in power.  Only lately have I come to know
what a fool I have been.  But now I am no longer a fool, and besides, I
am avenged and Schwerke is avenged, so you can kill me if you wish.
Here I am."

"If I was after bein' the king," said Olson, "I'd pin the V.C. on your
noble chist; but bein' only an Irishman with a Swede name, for which
God forgive me, the bist I can do is shake your hand."

"You will not be punished," said Bradley.  "There are four of you
left--if you four want to come along and work with us, we will take
you; but you will come as prisoners."

"It suits me," said Plesser.  "Now that the captain-lieutenant is dead
you need not fear us.  All our lives we have known nothing but to obey
his class.  If I had not killed him, I suppose I would be fool enough
to obey him again; but he is dead.  Now we will obey you--we must obey
some one."

"And you?"  Bradley turned to the other survivors of the original crew
of the U-33.  Each promised obedience.

The two dead Germans were buried in a single grave, and then the party
boarded the submarine and stowed away the oil.

Here Bradley told the men what had befallen him since the night of
September 14th when he had disappeared so mysteriously from the camp
upon the plateau.  Now he learned for the first time that Bowen J.
Tyler, Jr., and Miss La Rue had been missing even longer than he and
that no faintest trace of them had been discovered.

Olson told him of how the Germans had returned and waited in ambush for
them outside the fort, capturing them that they might be used to assist
in the work of refining the oil and later in manning the U-33, and
Plesser told briefly of the experiences of the German crew under von
Schoenvorts since they had escaped from Caspak months before--of how
they lost their bearings after having been shelled by ships they had
attempted to sneak farther north and how at last with provisions gone
and fuel almost exhausted they had sought and at last found, more by
accident than design, the mysterious island they had once been so glad
to leave behind.

"Now," announced Bradley, "we'll plan for the future.  The boat has
fuel, provisions and water for a month, I believe you said, Plesser;
there are ten of us to man it.  We have a last sad duty here--we must
search for Miss La Rue and Mr. Tyler.  I say a sad duty because we know
that we shall not find them; but it is none the less our duty to comb
the shoreline, firing signal shells at intervals, that we at least may
leave at last with full knowledge that we have done all that men might
do to locate them."

None dissented from this conviction, nor was there a voice raised in
protest against the plan to at least make assurance doubly sure before
quitting Caspak forever.

And so they started, cruising slowly up the coast and firing an
occasional shot from the gun.  Often the vessel was brought to a stop,
and always there were anxious eyes scanning the shore for an answering
signal.  Late in the afternoon they caught sight of a number of Band-lu
warriors; but when the vessel approached the shore and the natives
realized that human beings stood upon the back of the strange monster
of the sea, they fled in terror before Bradley could come within
hailing distance.

That night they dropped anchor at the mouth of a sluggish stream whose
warm waters swarmed with millions of tiny tadpolelike organisms--minute
human spawn starting on their precarious journey from some inland pool
toward "the beginning"--a journey which one in millions, perhaps, might
survive to complete.  Already almost at the inception of life they were
being greeted by thousands of voracious mouths as fish and reptiles of
many kinds fought to devour them, the while other and larger creatures
pursued the devourers, to be, in turn, preyed upon by some other of the
countless forms that inhabit the deeps of Caprona's frightful sea.

The second day was practically a repetition of the first.  They moved
very slowly with frequent stops and once they landed in the Kro-lu
country to hunt.  Here they were attacked by the bow-and-arrow men,
whom they could not persuade to palaver with them.  So belligerent were
the natives that it became necessary to fire into them in order to
escape their persistent and ferocious attentions.

"What chance," asked Bradley, as they were returning to the boat with
their game, "could Tyler and Miss La Rue have had among such as these?"

But they continued on their fruitless quest, and the third day, after
cruising along the shore of a deep inlet, they passed a line of lofty
cliffs that formed the southern shore of the inlet and rounded a sharp
promontory about noon.  Co-Tan and Bradley were on deck alone, and as
the new shoreline appeared beyond the point, the girl gave an
exclamation of joy and seized the man's hand in hers.

"Oh, look!" she cried.  "The Galu country!  The Galu country!  It is my
country that I never thought to see again."

"You are glad to come again, Co-Tan?" asked Bradley.

"Oh, so glad!" she cried.  "And you will come with me to my people?  We
may live here among them, and you will be a great warrior--oh, when Jor
dies you may even be chief, for there is none so mighty as my warrior.
You will come?"

Bradley shook his head.  "I cannot, little Co-Tan," he answered.  "My
country needs me, and I must go back.  Maybe someday I shall return.
You will not forget me, Co-Tan?"

She looked at him in wide-eyed wonder.  "You are going away from me?"
she asked in a very small voice.  "You are going away from Co-Tan?"

Bradley looked down upon the little bowed head.  He felt the soft cheek
against his bare arm; and he felt something else there too--hot drops
of moisture that ran down to his very finger-tips and splashed, but
each one wrung from a woman's heart.

He bent low and raised the tear-stained face to his own.  "No, Co-Tan,"
he said, "I am not going away from you--for you are going with me.  You
are going back to my own country to be my wife.  Tell me that you will,
Co-Tan."  And he bent still lower yet from his height and kissed her
lips.  Nor did he need more than the wonderful new light in her eyes to
tell him that she would go to the end of the world with him if he would
but take her.  And then the gun-crew came up from below again to fire a
signal shot, and the two were brought down from the high heaven of
their new happiness to the scarred and weather-beaten deck of the U-33.

An hour later the vessel was running close in by a shore of wondrous
beauty beside a parklike meadow that stretched back a mile inland to
the foot of a plateau when Whitely called attention to a score of
figures clambering downward from the elevation to the lowland below.
The engines were reversed and the boat brought to a stop while all
hands gathered on deck to watch the little party coming toward them
across the meadow.

"They are Galus," cried Co-Tan; "they are my own people.  Let me speak
to them lest they think we come to fight them.  Put me ashore, my man,
and I will go meet them."

The nose of the U-boat was run close in to the steep bank; but when
Co-Tan would have run forward alone, Bradley seized her hand and held
her back.  "I will go with you, Co-Tan," he said; and together they
advanced to meet the oncoming party.

There were about twenty warriors moving forward in a thin line, as our
infantry advance as skirmishers.  Bradley could not but notice the
marked difference between this formation and the moblike methods of the
lower tribes he had come in contact with, and he commented upon it to
Co-Tan.

"Galu warriors always advance into battle thus," she said.  "The lesser
people remain in a huddled group where they can scarce use their
weapons the while they present so big a mark to us that our spears and
arrows cannot miss them; but when they hurl theirs at our warriors, if
they miss the first man, there is no chance that they will kill some
one behind him.

"Stand still now," she cautioned, "and fold your arms.  They will not
harm us then."

Bradley did as he was bid, and the two stood with arms folded as the
line of warriors approached.  When they had come within some fifty
yards, they halted and one spoke.  "Who are you and from whence do you
come?" he asked; and then Co-Tan gave a little, glad cry and sprang
forward with out-stretched arms.

"Oh, Tan!" she exclaimed.  "Do you not know your little Co-Tan?"

The warrior stared, incredulous, for a moment, and then he, too, ran
forward and when they met, took the girl in his arms.  It was then that
Bradley experienced to the full a sensation that was new to him--a
sudden hatred for the strange warrior before him and a desire to kill
without knowing why he would kill.  He moved quickly to the girl's side
and grasped her wrist.

"Who is this man?" he demanded in cold tones.

Co-Tan turned a surprised face toward the Englishman and then of a
sudden broke forth into a merry peal of laughter.  "This is my father,
Brad-lee," she cried.

"And who is Brad-lee?" demanded the warrior.

"He is my man," replied Co-Tan simply.

"By what right?" insisted Tan.

And then she told him briefly of all that she had passed through since
the Wieroos had stolen her and of how Bradley had rescued her and
sought to rescue An-Tak, her brother.

"You are satisfied with him?" asked Tan.

"Yes," replied the girl proudly.

It was then that Bradley's attention was attracted to the edge of the
plateau by a movement there, and looking closely he saw a horse bearing
two figures sliding down the steep declivity.  Once at the bottom, the
animal came charging across the meadowland at a rapid run.  It was a
magnificent animal--a great bay stallion with a white-blazed face and
white forelegs to the knees, its barrel encircled by a broad surcingle
of white; and as it came to a sudden stop beside Tan, the Englishman
saw that it bore a man and a girl--a tall man and a girl as beautiful
as Co-Tan.  When the girl espied the latter, she slid from the horse
and ran toward her, fairly screaming for joy.

The man dismounted and stood beside Tan.  Like Bradley he was garbed
after the fashion of the surrounding warriors; but there was a subtle
difference between him and his companion.  Possibly he detected a
similar difference in Bradley, for his first question was, "From what
country?" and though he spoke in Galu Bradley thought he detected an
accent.

"England," replied Bradley.

A broad smile lighted the newcomer's face as he held out his hand.  "I
am Tom Billings of Santa Monica, California," he said.  "I know all
about you, and I'm mighty glad to find you alive."

"How did you get here?" asked Bradley.  "I thought ours was the only
party of men from the outer world ever to enter Caprona."

"It was, until we came in search of Bowen J. Tyler, Jr.," replied
Billings.  "We  found him and sent him home with his bride; but I was
kept a prisoner here."

Bradley's face darkened--then they were not among friends after all.
"There are ten of us down there on a German sub with small-arms and a
gun," he said quickly in English.  "It will be no trick to get away
from these people."

"You don't know my jailer," replied Billings, "or you'd not be so sure.
Wait, I'll introduce you."  And then turning to the girl who had
accompanied him he called her by name.  "Ajor," he said, "permit me to
introduce Lieutenant Bradley; Lieutenant, Mrs. Billings--my jailer!"

The Englishman laughed as he shook hands with the girl.  "You are not
as good a soldier as I," he said to Billings.  "Instead of being taken
prisoner myself I have taken one--Mrs. Bradley, this is Mr. Billings."

Ajor, quick to understand, turned toward Co-Tan.  "You are going back
with him to his country?" she asked.  Co-Tan admitted it.

"You dare?" asked Ajor.  "But your father will not permit it--Jor, my
father, High Chief of the Galus, will not permit it, for like me you
are cos-ata-lo.  Oh, Co-Tan, if we but could!  How I would love to see
all the strange and wonderful things of which my Tom tells me!"

Bradley bent and whispered in her ear.  "Say the word and you may both
go with us."

Billings heard and speaking in English, asked Ajor if she would go.

"Yes," she answered, "If you wish it; but you know, my Tom, that if Jor
captures us, both you and Co-Tan's man will pay the penalty with your
lives--not even his love for me nor his admiration for you can save
you."

Bradley noticed that she spoke in English--broken English like Co-Tan's
but equally appealing.  "We can easily get you aboard the ship," he
said, "on some pretext or other, and then we can steam away.  They can
neither harm nor detain us, nor will we have to fire a shot at them."

And so it was done, Bradley and Co-Tan taking Ajor and Billings aboard
to "show" them the vessel, which almost immediately raised anchor and
moved slowly out into the sea.

"I hate to do it," said Billings.  "They have been fine to me.  Jor and
Tan are splendid men and they will think me an ingrate; but I can't
waste my life here when there is so much to be done in the outer world."

As they steamed down the inland sea past the island of Oo-oh, the
stories of their adventures were retold, and Bradley learned that Bowen
Tyler and his bride had left the Galu country but a fortnight before
and that there was every reason to believe that the Toreador might
still be lying in the Pacific not far off the subterranean mouth of the
river which emitted Caprona's heated waters into the ocean.

Late in the second day, after running through swarms of hideous
reptiles, they submerged at the point where the river entered beneath
the cliffs and shortly after rose to the sunlit surface of the Pacific;
but nowhere as far as they could see was sign of another craft.  Down
the coast they steamed toward the beach where Billings had made his
crossing in the hydro-aeroplane and just at dusk the lookout announced
a light dead ahead.  It proved to be aboard the Toreador, and a
