demands identity; similarity, however close, will not answer. Though a
mother could not tell her twin sons apart, it would not make it any more
just to punish one for the other's sins."

"Then you don't believe in the punishment of crime?" said Henry.

"Most emphatically I do," replied the doctor; "only I don't believe in
calling it justice or ascribing it a moral significance. The punishment
of criminals is a matter of public policy and expediency, precisely like
measures for the suppression of nuisances or the prevention of epidemics.
It is needful to restrain those who by crime have revealed their
likelihood to commit further crimes, and to furnish by their punishment a
motive to deter others from crime."

"And to deter the criminal himself after his release," added Henry.

"I included him in the word 'others,'" said the doctor. "The man who is
punished is other from the man who did the act, and after punishment he
is still other."

"Really, doctor," observed Henry, "I don't see that a man who fully
believes your theory is in any need of your process for obliterating his
sins. He won't think of blaming himself for them any way."

"True," said the doctor, "perfectly true. My process is for those who
cannot attain to my philosophy. I break for the weak the chain of memory
which holds them to the past; but stronger souls are independent of me.
They can unloose the iron links and free themselves. Would that more had
the needful wisdom and strength thus serenely to put their past behind
them, leaving the dead to bury their dead, and go blithely forward,
taking each new day as a life by itself, and reckoning themselves daily
new-born, even as verily they are! Physically, mentally, indeed, the
present must be for ever the outgrowth of the past, conform to its
conditions, bear its burdens; but moral responsibility for the past the
present has none, and by the very definition of the words can have none.
There is no need to tell people that they ought to regret and grieve over
the errors of the past. They can't help doing that. I myself suffer at
times pretty sharply from twinges of the rheumatism which I owe to
youthful dissipation. It would be absurd enough for me, a quiet old
fellow of sixty, to take blame to myself for what the wild student did,
but, all the same, I confoundedly wish he hadn't.

"Ah, me!" continued the doctor. "Is there not sorrow and wrong enough in
the present world without having moralists teach us that it is our duty
to perpetuate all our past sins and shames in the multiplying mirror of
memory, as if, forsooth, we were any more the causers of the sins of our
past selves than of our fathers' sins. How many a man and woman have
poisoned their lives with tears for some one sin far away in the past!
Their folly is greater, because sadder, but otherwise just like that of
one who should devote his life to a mood of fatuous and imbecile
self-complacency over the recollection of a good act he had once done.
The consequences of the good and the bad deeds our fathers and we have
done fall on our heads in showers, now refreshing, now scorching, of
rewards and of penalties alike undeserved by our present selves. But,
while we bear them with such equanimity as we may, let us remember that
as it is only fools who flatter themselves on their past virtues, so it
is only a sadder sort of fools who plague themselves for their past
faults."

Henry's quick ear caught a rustle in the retiring-room. He stepped to the
door and looked in. Madeline was sitting up.




CHAPTER XII.


Her attitude was peculiar. Her feet were on the floor, her left hand
rested on the sofa by her side, her right was raised to one temple and
checked in the very act of pushing back a heavy braid of hair which had
been disarranged in sleep. Her eyebrows were slightly contracted, and she
was staring at the carpet. So concentrated did her faculties appear to be
in the effort of reflection that she did not notice Henry's entrance
until, standing by her aide, he asked, in a voice which he vainly tried
to steady--

"How do you feel ?"

She did not look up at him at all, but replied, in the dreamy, drawling
tone of one in a brown study--

"I--feel--well. I'm--ever--so--rested."

"Did you just wake up?" he said, after a moment. He did not know what to
say.

She now glanced up at him, but with an expression of only partial
attention, as if still retaining a hold on the clue of her thoughts.

"I've been awake some time trying to think it out," she said.

"Think out what?" he asked, with a feeble affectation of ignorance. He
was entirely at loss what course to take with her.

"Why, what it was that we came here to have me forget," she said,
sharply. "You needn't think the doctor made quite a fool of me. It was
something like hewing, harring, Howard. It was something that began with
'H,' I'm quite sure. 'H,'" she continued, thoughtfully, pressing her hand
on the braid she was yet in the act of pushing back from her forehead.
"'H,'--or maybe--'K.' Tell me, Henry. You must know, of course."

"Why--why," he stammered in consternation. "If you came here to forget
it, what's the use of telling you, now you've forgotten it, that is--I
mean, supposing there was anything to forget."

"I haven't forgotten it," she declared. "The process has been a failure
anyhow. It's just puzzled me for a minute. You might as well tell me.
Why, I've almost got it now. I shall remember it in a minute," and she
looked up at him as if she were on the point of being vexed with his
obstinacy. The doctor coming into the room at this moment, Henry turned
to him in his perplexity, and said--

"Doctor, she wants to know what it was you tried to make her forget."

"What would you say if I told you it was an old love affair?" replied the
doctor, coolly.

"I should say that you were rather impertinent," answered Madeline,
looking at him somewhat haughtily.

"I beg your pardon. I beg your pardon, my dear. You do well to resent it,
but I trust you will not be vexed with an old gentleman," replied the
doctor, beaming on her from under his bushy eyebrows with an expression
of gloating benevolence.

"I suppose, doctor, you were only trying to plague me so as to confuse
me," she said, smiling. "But you can't do it. I shall remember presently.
It began with 'H'--I am almost sure of that. Let's see--Harrington,
Harvard. That's like it."

"Harrison Cordis, perhaps," suggested the doctor, gravely.

"Harrison Cordis? Harrison? Harrison?" she repeated, contracting her
eyebrows thoughtfully; "no, it was more like Harvard. I don't want any
more of your suggestions. You'd like to get me off the track."

The doctor left the room, laughing, and Henry said to her, his heart
swelling with an exultation which made his voice husky, "Come, dear, we
had better go now: the train leaves at four."

"I'll remember yet," she said, smiling at him with a saucy toss of the
head. He put out his arms and she came into them, and their lips met in a
kiss, happy and loving on her part, and fraught with no special feeling,
but the lips which hers touched were tremulous. Slightly surprised at his
agitation, she leaned back in his clasp, and, resting her glorious black
eyes on his, said--

"How you love me, dear!"

Oh, the bright, sweet light in her eyes! the light he had not seen since
she was a girl, and which had never shone for him before. As they were
about to leave, the doctor drew him aside.

"The most successful operation I ever made, sir," he said,
enthusiastically. "I saw you were startled that I should tell her so
frankly what she had forgotten. You need not have been so. That memory is
absolutely gone, and cannot be restored. She might conclude that what she
had forgotten was anything else in the world except what it really was.
You may always allude with perfect safety before her to the real facts,
the only risk being that, if she doesn't think you are making a bad joke,
she will be afraid that you are losing your mind."

All the way home Madeline was full of guesses and speculation as to what
it had been which she had forgotten, finally, however, settling down to
the conclusion that it had something to do with Harvard College, and
when Henry refused to deny explicitly that such was the case, she was
quite sure. She announced that she was going to get a lot of old
catalogues and read over the names, and also visit the college to see if
she could not revive the recollection. But, upon his solemnly urging her
not to do so, lest she might find her associations with that institution
not altogether agreeable if revived, she consented to give up the plan.

"Although, do you know," she said, "there is nothing in the world which I
should like to find out so much as what it was we went to Dr. Heidenhoff
in order to make me forget. What do you look so sober for? Wouldn't I
really be glad if I could?"

"It's really nothing of any consequence," he said, pretending to be
momentarily absorbed in opening his penknife.

"Supposing it isn't, it's just as vexatious not to remember it," she
declared.

"How did you like Dr. Heidenhoff?" he asked.

"Oh, I presume he's a good enough doctor, but I thought that joke about
an affair of the heart wasn't at all nice. Men are so coarse."

"Oh, he meant no harm," said Henry, hastily.

"I suppose he just tried to say the absurdest thing he could think of to
put me off the track and make me laugh. I'm sure I felt more like boxing
his ears. I saw you didn't like it either, sir."

"How so?"

"Oh, you needn't think I didn't notice the start you gave when he spoke,
and the angry way you looked at him. You may pretend all you want to, but
you can't cheat me. You'd be the very one to make an absurd fuss if you
thought I had even so much as looked at anybody else." And then she burst
out laughing at the red and pale confusion of his face. "Why, you're the
very picture of jealousy at the very mention of the thing. Dear me, what
a tyrant you are going to be! I was going to confess a lot of my old
flirtations to you, but now I sha'n't dare to. O Henry, how funny my face
feels when I laugh, so stiff, as if the muscles were all rusty! I should
think I hadn't laughed for a year by the feeling."

He scarcely dared leave her when they reached her lodgings, for fear that
she might get to thinking and puzzling over the matter, and, possibly, at
length might hit upon a clue which, followed up, would lead her back to
the grave so recently covered over in her life, and turn her raving mad
with the horror of the discovery. As soon as he possibly could, he almost
ran back to her lodgings in a panic. She had evidently been thinking
matters over.

"How came we here in Boston together, Henry? I don't seem to quite
understand why I came. I remember you came after me?"

"Yes, I came after you."

"What was the matter? Was I sick?"

"Very sick."

"Out of my head?"

"Yes."

"That's the reason you took me to the doctor, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"But why isn't mother here with me?"

"You--you didn't seem to want her," answered Henry, a cold sweat covering
his face under this terrible inquisition.

"Yes," said she, slowly, "I do remember your proposing she should come
and my not wanting her. I can't imagine why. I must have been out of my
head, as you say. Henry," she continued, regarding him with eyes of
sudden softness, "you must have been very good to me. Dr. Heidenhoff
could never make me forget that."

The next day her mother came. Henry met her at the station and explained
everything to her, so that she met Madeline already prepared for the
transformation, that is, as much prepared as the poor woman could be. The
idea was evidently more than she could take in. In the days that followed
she went about with a dazed expression on her face, and said very little.
When she looked at Henry, it was with a piteous mingling of gratitude and
appeal. She appeared to regard Madeline with a bewilderment that
increased rather than decreased from day to day. Instead of becoming
familiar with the transformation, the wonder of it evidently grew on her.
The girl's old, buoyant spirits, which had returned in full flow, seemed
to shock and pain her mother with a sense of incongruity she could not
get over. When Madeline treated her lover to an exhibition of her old
imperious tyrannical ways, which to see again was to him sweeter than the
return of day, her mother appeared frightened, and would try feebly to
check her, and address little deprecating remarks to Henry that were very
sad to hear. One evening, when he came in in the twilight, he saw
Madeline sitting with "her baby," as she had again taken to calling her
mother, in her arms, rocking and soothing her, while the old lady was
drying and sobbing on her daughter's bosom.

"She mopes, poor little mother!" said Madeline to Henry. "I can't think
what's the matter with her. We'll take her off with us on our wedding
trip. She needs a little change."

"Dear me, no, that will never do," protested the little woman, with her
usual half-frightened look at Henry. "Mr. Burr wouldn't think that nice
at all."

"I mean that Mr. Burr shall be too much occupied in thinking how nice I
am to do any other thinking," said Madeline.

"That's like the dress you wore to the picnic at Hemlock Hollow," said
Henry.

"Why, no, it isn't either. It only looks a little like it. It's light,
and cut the same way; that's all the resemblance; but of course a man
couldn't be expected to know any better."

"It's exactly like it," maintained Henry.

"What'll you bet?"

"I'll bet the prettiest pair of bracelets I can find in the city."

"Betting is wicked," said Madeline, "and so I suppose it's my duty to
take this bet just to discourage you from betting any more. Being engaged
makes a girl responsible for a young man's moral culture."

She left the room, and returned in a few moments with the veritable
picnic dress on.

"There!" she said, as she stepped before the mirror.

"Ah, that's it, that's it! I give in," he exclaimed, regarding her
ecstatically. "How pretty you were that day! I'd never seen you so pretty
before. Do you remember that was the day I kissed you first? I should
never have dared to. I just had to--I couldn't help it."

"So I believe you said at the time," observed Madeline, dryly. "It does
make me not so bad," she admitted, inspecting herself with a critical
air. "I really don't believe you could help it. I ought not to have been
so hard on you, poor boy. There! there! I didn't mean that. Don't! Here
comes mother."

Mrs. Brand entered the room, bringing a huge pasteboard box.

"Oh, she's got my wedding dress! Haven't you, mother?" exclaimed
Madeline, pouncing on the box. "Henry, you might as well go right home. I
can't pay any more attention to you to-night. There's more important
business."

"But I want to see you with it on," he demurred.

"You do?"

"Yes."

"Very much?"

"The worst kind."

"Well, then, you sit down and wait here by yourself for about an hour,
and maybe you shall;" and the women were off upstairs.

At length there was a rustling on the stairway, and she re-entered the
room, all sheeny white in lustrous satin. Behind the gauzy veil that fell
from the coronal of dark brown hair adown the shoulders her face shone
with a look he had never seen in it. It was no longer the mirthful,
self-reliant girl who stood before him, but the shrinking, trustful
bride. The flashing, imperious expression that so well became her bold
beauty at other times had given place to a shy and blushing softness,
inexpressibly charming to her lover. In her shining eyes a host of
virginal alarms were mingled with the tender, solemn trust of love.

As he gazed, his eyes began to swim with tenderness, and her face grew
dim and misty to his vision. Then her white dress lost its sheen and
form, and he found himself staring at the white window-shade of his
bedroom, through which the morning light was peering. Startled,
bewildered, he raised himself on his elbow in bed. Yes, he was in bed. He
looked around, mechanically taking note of one and another familiar
feature of the apartment to make sure of his condition. There, on the
stand by his bedside, lay his open watch, still ticking, and indicating
his customary hour of rising. There, turned on its face, lay that dry
book on electricity he had been reading himself to sleep with. And there,
on the bureau, was the white paper that had contained the morphine
sleeping powder which he took before going to bed. That was what had made
him dream. For some of it must have been a dream! But how much of it was
a dream? He must think. That was a dream certainly about her wedding
dress. Yes, and perhaps--yes, surely--that must be a dream about her
mother's being in Boston. He could not remember writing Mrs. Brand since
Madeline had been to Dr. Heidenhoff. He put his hand to his forehead,
then raised his head and looked around the room with an appealing stare.
Great God! why, that was a dream too! The last waves of sleep ebbed from
his brain and to his aroused consciousness the clear, hard lines of
reality dissevered themselves sharply from the vague contours of
dreamland. Yes, it was all a dream. He remembered how it all was now. He
had not seen Madeline since the evening before, when he had proposed
their speedy marriage, and she had called him back in that strange way to
kiss her. What a dream! That sleeping powder had done it--that, and the
book on electricity, and that talk on mental physiology which he had
overheard in the car the afternoon before. These rude materials, as
unpromising as the shapeless bits of glass which the kaleidoscope turns
into schemes of symmetrical beauty, were the stuff his dream was made of.

It was a strange dream indeed, such an one as a man has once or twice in
a lifetime. As he tried to recall it, already it was fading from his
remembrance. That kiss Madeline had called him back to give him the night
before; that had been strange enough to have been a part also of the
dream. What sweetness, what sadness, were in the touch of her lips. Ah!
when she was once his wife, he could contend at better advantage with her
depression of spirits, He would hasten their marriage. If possible, it
should take place that very week.

There was a knock at the door. The house-boy entered, gave him a note,
and went out. It was in Madeline's hand, and dated the preceding evening.
It read as follows:--

"You have but just gone away. I was afraid when I kissed you that you
would guess what I was going to do, and make a scene about it, and oh,
dear! I am so tired that I couldn't bear a scene. But you didn't think.
