France and Switzerland, at those of Austria and Prussia, in the sugar
of milk factories of France and Switzerland, and, finally, in 1882, the
first application of it in the sugar industry was made at Pohrlitz, in
Moravia.

The saving of fuel that has been made in these different applications
has always been great.

We shall now, for the sake of explaining the system, give a brief
description of the apparatus as used at the Pohrlitz sugar works
mentioned above. These works treat 255 tons of beets per 24 hours, and
obtain 4,000 hectoliters of juice, which is reduced to about 1,000
hectoliters of sirup. Up to the present, the concentration has been
effected in a double acting apparatus partly supplied by exhaust steam
from the motive engines and partly by steam coming directly from the
generators.

In order to diminish the consumption of direct steam, these sugar works
put in a Weibel-Piccard apparatus designed to concentrate only a third
of their juice, or about 1,350 hectoliters per day.

This apparatus (see engraving) consists of a steam compressor, 0.835 m.
in diameter, actuated directly by a driving cylinder of 0.5 m. diameter
and 0.8 m. stroke, and of three evaporating boilers of the ordinary
vertical tube type, the first of which has a surface of 150 square
meters, the second 60, and the third 80.

The steam, at the ordinary pressure of the generators, say 5
atmospheres, is taken from the connected generators of the works, and is
led to the driving cylinder, where it expands and furnishes the power
necessary to run the compressor. It then escapes at a pressure of l.4
atmospheres and enters the intertubular space of the first evaporator.
The compressor sucks up the steam from the juice of the first evaporator
(which is boiling at the pressure of the atmosphere, without vacuum or
effective pressure), compresses it to 1.4 atmospheres, and forces it
likewise into the intertubular space. The ebullition of the first
evaporator, then, is kept up not only by the exhaust from the motive
cylinder, but also by the steam from the juice itself, which has been
rendered fit to serve as a heating steam by the pressure that it has
undergone in the compressing cylinder.

In this first application of the new system to sugar making, it became
a question of ascertaining whether the advantage resulting from
compression was of great importance, and, in the second place, whether
the apparatus could be run with certainty and ease. In truth, the
applications of the system for some years past in other industries
permitted a favorable result to be hoped for, and the result turned out
as was expected.

With this apparatus it has been found that the work furnished by one
kilogramme of steam passing through the motive cylinder, from a
pressure of 5 atmospheres to one of 1.4, is sufficient to compress 2.5
kilogrammes of steam taken from the juice, led into the compressor
at one atmosphere and escaping therefrom at 1.4. In other words, one
kilogramme of motive steam is sufficient to convert into heating steam
for the first evaporator 2.5 kilogrammes of steam taken from the juice
in this same evaporator. Besides, this same kilogramme of motive steam
produces three effects, one in this same evaporator, and the other
two in the two succeeding ones. The effect obtained, then, from one
kilogramme of motive steam is, in round numbers, 5.5 kilogrammes of
steam removed from the juice.

It must not be forgotten that the motive steam was at the very moderate
pressure of 4 effective atmospheres. Had the use of steam at high
pressure (7 atmospheres for example) been possible, it is easy to
conclude from the above results that more than 6 kilogrammes of water
would have been vaporized with one kilogramme of steam.

The results here cited were ascertained by accurately measuring the
quantities of water of condensation from each evaporator, they soon
received, moreover, the most important of confirmations by the decrease
in the general consumption of fuel by the generators which occurred
after the new apparatus was set in operation.

The mean consumption of coal per 24 hours for the twenty days preceding
the 18th of November was 86,060 kilogrammes. After this date the regular
consumption was as follows:

  Nov. 19.................31,800 kilogrammes.
   "   20.................33,800     "
   "   21.................33,800     "
   "   22.................32,000     "
   "   23.................31,400     "
   "   24.................31,600     "
   "   25.................30,500     "
   "   26.................30,500     "
   "   27.................28,600     "
   "   28.................30,300     "

It must be remarked that in the perfectly regular running of the sugar
works, nothing was changed saving the setting of this evaporating
apparatus running. The same quantity of beets was treated per 24 hours,
and the general temperature remained the same. This remarkable result in
the saving of fuel was brought about notwithstanding the new apparatus
treated but a third, at the most, of the total amount of the juice, the
rest continuing to be concentrated by the double action process.

As for the running of the apparatus, that was perfectly regular, and the
deviations in temperature in each evaporater were scarcely two or three
degrees. The following are the mean temperatures:

First evaporator: heating steam 110 deg. C.; juice steam 100 deg. C. Second
evaporator: juice steam 83 deg. C. Third evaporator: juice steam 62 deg. C. As
regards facility of operating the apparatus, the experiment has proved
so conclusive that the plant will be considerably enlarged in view of
the coming crop, in order that a larger quantity of juice may be treated
by the new process. The effect of this will be to still further increase
the saving in coal that has already been effected by the present
apparatus. The engraving which accompanies this article represents the
Weibel-Piccard apparatus as it is now working in the Pohrlitz sugar
works. What we have said of it above we think will suffice to make it
understood without further explanation.--_Le Genie Civil_.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMPARISON OF STRENGTH OF LARGE AND SMALL ANIMALS.

W. N. LOCKINGTON.


M. Delebeuf, in a paper read before the Academie Royale de Belgique, and
published in the _Revue Scientique_, reviews the attempts of various
naturalists to make comparisons between the strength of large animals
and that of small ones, especially insects, and shows that ignorance or
forgetfulness of physical laws vitiates all their conclusions.

After a plea for the idea without which the fact is barren, M. Delbeuf
repeats certain statements with which readers of modern zoological
science are tolerably familiar, such as the following: A flea can jump
two hundred times its length; therefore a horse, were its strength
proportioned to its weight, could leap the Rocky Mountains, and a whale
could spring two hundred leagues in height. An Amazon ant walks about
eight feet per minute, but if the progress of a human Amazon were
proportioned to her larger size, she could stride over eight leagues in
an hour; and if proportioned to her greater weight, she would make the
circuit of the globe in about twelve minutes. This seems greatly to the
advantage of the insect. What weak creatures vertebrates must be, is the
impression conveyed.

But the work increases as the weight. In springing, walking, swimming,
or any other activity, the force employed has first to overcome the
weight of the body. A man can easily bound a height of two feet, and
he weighs as much as a hundred thousand grasshoppers, while a hundred
thousand grasshoppers could leap no higher than one--say a foot. This
shows that the vertebrate has the advantage. A man represents the volume
of fifteen millions of ants, yet can easily move more than three hundred
feet a minute, a comparison which gives him forty times more power, bulk
for bulk, than the ant possesses. Yet were all the conditions compared,
something like equality would probably be the result. Much of the force
of a moving man is lost from the inequalities of the way. His body,
supported on two points only when at rest, oscillates like a pendulum
from one to the other as he moves. The ant crawls close to the ground,
and has only a small part of the body unsupported at once. This
economizes force at each step, but on the other hand multiplies the
number of steps so greatly, since the smallest irregularity of the
surface is a hill to a crawling creature, that the total loss of force
is perhaps greater, since it has to slightly raise its body a thousand
times or so to clear a space spanned by a man's one step.

By what peculiarity of our minds do we seem to expect the speed of an
animal to be in proportion to its size? We do not expect a caravan to
move faster than a single horseman, nor an eight hundred pound shot to
move twelve thousand eight hundred times farther than an ounce ball.
Devout writers speak of a wise provision of Nature. "If," say they, "the
speed of a mouse were as much less than that of a horse as its body is
smaller, it would take two steps per second, and be caught at once."
Would not Nature have done better for the mouse had she suppressed the
cat? Is it not a fact that small animals often owe their escape to their
want of swiftness, which enables them to change their direction readily?
A man can easily overtake a mouse in a straight run, but the ready
change of direction baffles him.

M. Plateau has experimented on the strength of insects, and the facts
are unassailable. He has harnessed carabi, necrophori, June-beetles
(Melolontha), and other insects in such a way that, with a delicate
balance, he can measure their powers of draught. He announces the result
that the smallest insects are the strongest proportioned to their size,
but that all are enormously strong when compared bulk, for bulk, with
vertebrates. A horse can scarcely lift two-thirds of its own weight,
while one small species of June-beetle can lift sixty-six times its
weight; forty thousand such June-beetles could lift as much as a
draught-horse. Were our strength in proportion to this, we could play
with weights equal to ten times that of a horse.

This seems, again, great kindness in Nature to the smaller animal. But
all these calculations leave out the elementary mechanical law: "What
is gained in power is lost in time." The elevation of a ton to a given
height represents an expenditure of an equal amount of force, whether
the labor is performed by flea, man, or horse. Time supplies lack of
strength. We can move as much as a horse by taking more time, and can
choose two methods--either to divide the load or use a lever or a
pulley. If a horse moves half its own weight three feet in a second,
while a June-beetle needs a hundred seconds to convey fifty times
its weight an equal distance, the two animals perform equal work
proportioned to their weights. True, the cockchafer can hold fourteen
times its weight in equilibrium (one small June-beetle sixty-six times),
while a horse cannot balance nearly his own weight. But this does not
measure the amount of oscillatory motion induced by the respective
pulls. For this, both should operate against a spring.

A small beetle can escape from under a piece of cardboard a hundred
times its weight. Pushing its head under the edge and using it as a
lever, it straightens itself on its legs and moves the board just a
little, but enough to escape. Of course, we know a horse would be
powerless to escape from a load a hundred times its own weight. His head
cannot be made into a lever. Give him a lever that will make the time he
takes equal to that taken by the insect, and he will throw off the load
at a touch. The fact is that in small creatures the lack of muscular
energy is replaced by time.

Of two muscles equal in bulk and energy the shortest moves most weight.
If a muscular fiber ten inches in length can move a given weight five
inches, ten fibers one inch long will move ten times that weight a
distance of half an inch. Thus smaller muscles have an absolutely
slower motion, but move a greater proportional weight than larger.
The experimenter before mentioned was surprised to find that two
grasshoppers, one of which was three times the bulk of the other,
leaped an equal height. This was what might be expected of two animals
similarly constructed. The spring was proportioned to the bulk. In
experiments on the insects with powerful wings, such as bees, flies,
dragon-flies, etc., it was found that the weight they could bear without
being forced to descend was in most cases equal to their own. In some
cases it was more, but the inequality of rate of flight, had it been
taken into the reckoning, would have accounted for this.

Take two creatures of different bulk but built upon exactly the same
plan and proportions, say a Brobdingnagian and a Lilliputian, and let
both show their powers in the arena. Suppose the first to weigh a
million times more than the second. If the giant could raise to his
shoulder, some thirty-five feet from the ground, a weight twenty
thousand pounds, the dwarf can raise to his shoulder, not, as might be
thought, a fiftieth of a pound, but two full pounds. The distance raised
would be a hundred times less. In a race the Lilliputian, with a hundred
skips a second, will travel an equal distance with the giant, who would
take but a skip in a second. The leg of the latter weighs a million
times the most, but has only ten thousand times as many muscle fibers,
each a hundred times longer than those of the dwarf, who thus takes one
hundred skips while the giant takes one. The same physical laws apply to
all muscles, so that, when all the factors are considered, muscles of
the same quality have equal power.--_Am. Field._.

       *       *       *       *       *




OIL IN CALIFORNIA.


J.W. McKinley, writing to the Pittsburg _Dispatch_, gives the following
account of the California oil field at Newhall:

On the edge of the town is located the refinery of the company,
connected by pipe lines with the wells, a few miles distant. Leaving
Newhall, we drove to Pico Canyon, the principal producing territory of
the region. As we approached, we saw, away up on the peaks, the tall
derricks in places which looked inaccessible; but no spot is out of
reach of American enterprise and perseverance. In one of the wildest
spots of the canyon, about thirty men were making the mountains echo to
the strokes of their hammers upon the iron plates of a new 20,000 barrel
tank. Along the canyon are scattered the houses of the employes of the
company, most of whom have recently come from Pennsylvania. Near one of
the houses was a graded and leveled croquet ground, with a little oil
tank on a post, for lighting it at night. Farther up we came to a
cluster of producing wells, with others at a little distance on the
sides of the mountains, or even at the top, hundreds of feet above our
heads.

The first well was put down about eight years ago, but more has been
accomplished in the last two years than in all the time previous. One
well which we visited has produced 130,000 barrels in the last three
years, and is still yielding. There have been no very large wells, the
best being 250 per day, and the average being about 90 barrels, but they
keep up their production, with scarcely any diminution from year to
year. Drilling has been found difficult, as a great portion of the rock
is broken shale lying obliquely. The tools slip to one side very easily,
and a number of "crooked holes" have resulted. One driller lost his
tools altogether in a well, and finished it with new ones. The cost of
putting down a well is from $5,000 to $7,000, depending upon depth, etc.
Most of the wells are from 1,200 to 1,500 feet, but some have yielded at
a much less depth. One well of 270 feet depth produced 40 barrels per
day for about three years, has been deepened, and is now yielding even
more. Another one of 800 feet is said to have produced 200,000 barrels
in the last five or six years. Drilling has been very successful in
striking oil in paying quantities wherever there were indications of its
presence.

The Pacific Oil Company now has 27 wells producing or drilling, and
during the last two years has been rapidly widening the scope of its
operations. It has now from 30 to 40 miles of pipe lines, and is
preparing to lay 20 miles more, to connect its land with ocean shipping
at Ventura. The producers of California have a great advantage in their
proximity to the ocean, which gives them free commerce with the outside
world. Crude oil is now sold at $3 per barrel in Los Angeles, and the
oil companies are making immense profits. There is a very large amount
of oil territory as yet undeveloped, and a rich reward awaits enterprise
in these regions. In the Camulos District, which lies west of the San
Fernando, are even stronger surface indications of oil than there
were in the Pico Canyon. We first went up the Brea Canyon, in which are
numerous outbursts and springs of oil. Ascending the mountain west of
this canyon, we could plainly see the break in the mountains crossing
from the San Fernando through this district to those beyond which
have been developed. A couple of miles farther west, the Hooper Canyon
stretches back over two miles into the mountain, and is full of oil.
Great pools of oil fill its water courses, that are dry at present.
Hundreds of barrels of oil must be wasted away and evaporated during a
year. A well put down only 90 feet by horse power, struck light oil in
considerable quantity, and, had it not been for the death of one of the
owners and the consequent suspension of operations, would doubtless have
yielded in large quantities at the depth of a few hundred feet.

The mountainous territory between these two canyons will probably in a
few years be the scene of great activity. In the Little Sespe District,
a few miles west of Camulos, a 125 barrel well was struck at 1,500
feet recently. The Santa Paula region, a little farther west, is also
yielding large profits to the parties developing it.

       *       *       *       *       *




NUTRITIVE VALUE OF CONDIMENTS.

By HELEN D. ABBOTT, Assistant in the Chemical Laboratory of the
Philadelphia Polyclinic, and College for Graduates in Medicine.


The prevailing opinion respecting the substances known as condiments
is, that they possess essentially stimulating qualities, rendering them
peculiarly fitted for inducing, by reflex action, the secretion of the
alimentary juices. Letheby gives, as the functions of condiments,
such as pepper, mustard, spices, pot-herbs, etc., that besides their
stimulating properties they give flavor to food; and by them indifferent
food is made palatable, and its digestion accelerated. He enumerates as
aids to digestion--proper selection of food, according to the taste of
the individual, proper treatment of it as regards cooking, and proper
variation of it, both as to its nature and treatment.

While it is difficult to give an entirely satisfactory definition as to
what constitutes food, the following extracts from standard works
will serve as guides. Hermann[1] says: "The compound must be fit
for absorption into the blood or chyle, either directly, or after
preparation by the processes of digestion, i.e., it must be digestible.
It must replace directly some inorganic or organic constituent of the
body; or it must undergo conversion into such a constituent, while in
the body; or it must serve as an ingredient in the construction of such
a constituent." He further says that water, chlorides, and phosphates
are the most indispensable articles of diet. Watts[2] states that
"whatever is commonly absorbed in a state of health is perhaps the best,
or rather the truest, definition of food."

[Footnote 1: Elements of Human Physiology, by L. Hermann. Translated by
Gamgee.]

[Footnote 2: Dictionary of Chemistry, vol. iv., pages 147-8.]

Chemical analysis shows that the most important and widely applicable
foods contain carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and mineral matter,
the latter containing phosphates and chlorides. Other things being
equal, it may be considered that the comparative nutrient value of
two articles is in proportion to the amounts of carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphoric acid they contain.

"The food of man also contains certain substances known under the name
of condiments. Since these bodies perform their functions outside the
real body, though within the alimentary canal, they have no
better reason to be considered as food than has hunger, _optimum
condimentum_."[1] Such is the positively expressed opinion of Foster,
the author of the article on nutrition in Watts' Dictionary of
Chemistry. With a view of determining how far the common condiments
deserve this summary dismissal, a number of analyses have been made in
the laboratory of the Philadelphia Polyclinic. My examinations were
especially directed to the mineral matter, phosphoric acid, and
nitrogen. The following table shows the result of the analyses:

                                 Percent.   Percent.
                                 of ash.    of P_{2}O_{5}.

  Fennel........................  9.00       .103
  Marjoram......................  8.84       .050
  Peppermint....................  8.80       .016
  Thyme.........................  8.34       .122
  Poppy.........................  7.74       .024
  Sage..........................  7.58       .033
  Caraway.......................  7.08       .118
  Spearmint.....................  7.06       .017
  Coriander.....................  6.10       .097
  Cloves........................  5.84       .563
  Allspice......................  5.54       .017
  Mustard.......................  3.90       .134
  Black pepper..................  3.60       .011
  Jamaica ginger................  3.16       .052
  Cinnamon......................  3.02       .009
  Mace..........................  2.44       .230
  Nutmeg........................  2.24       .092
  Celery........................  1.29       .082
  White pepper..................  1.16       .017
  Aniseed.......................  1.05       .113

[Footnote 1: Ibid., page 149.]

The articles were examined in the condition in which they were
obtained in the market, without any preliminary drying, selecting, or
preparation. The ash was obtained by burning in a platinum crucible, at
as low a temperature as possible, dissolving in hydrochloric acid the
phosphoric acid separated as ammonium molybdo-phosphate, and determined
in the usual manner.

Qualitative tests made for nitrogen indicated its presence in each one
of the condiments examined.

It is of importance to observe that the majority of these condiments are
fruits, ripe or nearly so. The seed appropriates to itself the nitrogen
and the greatest nutritive properties for the development of the future
plant. All nutritive substances fall into two classes: the one serves
for the repair of the unoxidizable constituents of the body, the other
is destined to replace the oxidizable. Condiments fulfill both of
these requirements, as is shown by a study of their composition; the
phosphoric acid and nitrogen are taken up by the tissues, as from other
substances used in diet. Some articles affect the character of the
excretions; this is often due to essential oils; the presence of these
in the excretions cannot be said to diminish the value of the substances
in supplying the tissues the necessary elements. The same holds true for
condiments; the essential oils conspicuous in them are accorded only
stimulating properties; however, it may be observed that the essential
oils in tea and coffee are accredited with a portion of the dietetic
value of these beverages. It appears that when condiments are used in
food, especially for the sick, they may serve the double purpose of
rendering the food more appetizing and of adding to its nutritive value.
The value of food as a purely therapeutic agent is attracting some
attention at present, and in its study we must not neglect
