knives, C, stationary knives, D, and fillers, F, in the hopper, A,
substantially as and for the purposes described.

4th, The roller way, O, provided with openings and rollers, g and g',
substantially as and for the purposes described.


72,016.--HARVESTER RAKE.--James H. Glass and Albert J Glass, McGregor,
Iowa.

We claim, 1st, The combination of the wheel, L, with the rake wheel, A
and arms, C, substantially as herein shown and described and for the
purpose set forth.

2d, The combination of the cam, O, and bent or crooked lever, M,
with the shaft N, of the gear wheel, L, and with the arm, I, rigidly
connected with the switch, F, substantially as herein shown and
described and for the purpose set forth.


72,017.--METHOD OF MOLDING PLASTIC MATERIAL.--Wm. B, Gleason, Boston,
Mass.

I claim the process substantially as and for the purposes specified.


72,018.--HAND CULTIVATOR.--Wm. C. Goodwin, Hampden, Conn.

I claim, 1st, The combination of the frame, C, with frame, G, and the
set screws, x and y, and binding screw, f, when they are constructed,
arranged, and fitted for adjusting the blades, substantially as herein
described and set, forth.

2d, The combination of the blade with the foot and shank, when the foot
is made with a keel, like v, to guide the blade and strengthen the
shank, substantially as herein described and set forth.

3d, The combination of the handle, D, with the frame, G, when the handle
is made adjustable by means of the tongue, h, and set screw, j, and the
whole is constructed, combined, and fitted for use substantially as
herein described and set forth.


72,019.--APPARATUS FOR MAKING DIPPED CANDLES.--Peter R. Gottstein,
Houghton, Mich.

I claim, 1st, The combination and arrangement, substantially as
described, of the weighted cistern, B, car, A, and straps, C, for the
purpose set forth.

2d, The combination of the cistern, B, car, A, and track, I,
substantially as and for the purpose described.

3d, The combination and arrangement of the slab or board, J, with the
weighted cistern, B, substantially as and for the purpose described.

4th, The new process of producing dipped candles by raising the molten
tallow or other liquid to the wicks, substantially as described.


72,020.--CORN SHELLER.--Joseph Gould, Grinnell, Iowa.

I claim the roller, C, having its teeth placed upon its face in
the manner herein described, and placed within the box between the
stationary board, b, and adjustable board, F, by means of its curved
springs or oblong slot, when used in combination with metallic inclined
plane, E, and hopper, B, with false bottom, as herein set forth.


72,021.--KNIFE CLEANER.--Lewis Goulding, Medfield, assignor to himself
and James E. Carpenter, Foxborough, Mass.

I claim, 1st, The combination in an implement for scouring knives, of
the bar, B, with its adjustable pad, g, arranged for operation as and
for the purposes herein shown and described.

2d, Also in combination with the board or tablet, A, the bar, B,
provided with the scouring pad, g, and pivoted to such board, and
operating with its upper surface, or upon an inclined bed formed
thereon, essentially as herein set forth and explained.

3d, Also the combination with the bar, B, and its pad, of the knife
bed and the enclosure for holding and receiving the scouring material,
arranged relatively to each other and to the bar, B, as herein shown and
set forth.


72,022.--FENCE POST.--David M. Graham, Evansville, Ind.

I claim, 1st, The construction of double portable fence posts, attached
by metallic bevel clasps, with flanges, slots, and tongues, and secured
by keys, substantially in the manner and for the purposes as herein
described and shown.

2d, The adjustable anchors or braces attached by metallic eyes and key,
and the combination of the feet of the posts and base, substantially in
the manner and for the purposes as herein described.


72,023.--STEAM GAGE.--Albert S. Greene (assignor to John F. Olmsted),
Washington, D.C.

I claim, 1st, The construction of a steam gage with two columns
of mercury, A and F, communicating with each other at their lower
extremities by means of the flexible diaphragms, c and d. and the solid
double-headed lifter C, substantially in the manner and for the purpose
as herein set forth.

2d, The solid double headed lifter, C, in combination with the flexible
diaphragms, c and d, and the primary and secondary reservoirs,
substantially in the manner and for the purpose as herein set forth.

3d, The transmission of the pressure of steam from one column to the
other by means of a solid double headed lifter, in combination with the
flexible diaphragms, c and d, substantially in the manner and for the
purpose as herein set forth.

4th, Providing the primary reservoir, I, with the screw plunger, H,
substantially in the manner and for the purpose as herein set forth.


72,024.--MACHINE FOR WALL BUILDING AND STUMP EXTRACTING.--Thomas S.
Greenman, Mystic Bridge, assignor to George W. Packer, Jr., Mystic
River, Conn.

I claim, 1st, The within described novel construction of a truss for a
wall building machine, the same consisting in the pyramidal framing, A B
B, the horizontal timbers, D D, uprights. E F, holding-down bolts G J,
and inclined braces, I H, combined and arranged substantially as and for
the purpose herein set forth.

2d, Also in such truss firmly securing the timbers, D D, to the
pyramidal framing, A B B, by enlarging and bolting, or equivalent
fastenings, at the points of contact, in addition to the truss work
before described, substantially as and for the purpose herein specified.

3d, Also the diagonal arrangement of the holding-down bolts, G, at the
front of my truss, the same being arranged relatively to the timbers, D,
triangular frame, A B B, and their several connections, substantially in
the manner and for the purpose herein set forth.


72,025.--WINDOW SCREEN.--A.W. Griffith, Roxbury, Mass.

I claim the roller cover, E, in combination with the removable screen,
D, spring roller, C, sash, A, and window frame, as herein described for
the purpose specified.


72,026.--FERTILIZER.--Wm.C. Grimes, Ladiesburg, Md.

I claim forming a fertilizer in the manner herein described, of the
ingredients and proportions substantially as specified.


72,027.--CULTIVATOR.--John Gross and John C. Tunison, Decatur, Ill.

We claim, 1st, the arrangement and combined action of the two frames, so
that when any permanent obstruction comes against any of the plows the
frames will disconnect, and the back frame ride or move up on the front
one and thus avoid breakage, substantially as described.

2d, Also a frictional spring hook upon the tongue or tongue frame, for
catching or holding upon a cross bar of the rear frame so that the two
frames will not disconnect until the pressure upon the plow or plows
exceeds that for which the hook has been adjusted, substantially as
described.


72,028.--HOSE SHIELD.--John A. Hasse, Philadelphia, Pa.

I claim the combination of the floor or footway, C, with the side
pieces, b b, of a sectional hose bridge, constructed substantially as
described.


72,029.--SKY ROCKET.--John W. Hadfield, Newtown, N.Y.

I claim the application of detachable wings to a sky rocket, through the
medium of a collar or band, arranged so that the wings may be detached
from the collar or band, or the latter detached from the rocket,
substantially as shown and described.


72,030.--SKY ROCKET.--John W. Hadfield, East Williamsburg, N.Y.

I claim the attachment to a sky rocket of three or more sticks, at equal
distances apart, substantially in the manner and for the purpose set
forth.


72,031.--MACHINE FOR REFITTING CONICAL VALVE.--Chas. F. Hall, Brooklyn,
N.Y.

I claim, last, A milling tool with one or more cutters attached to one
or more arms or longitudinal sections of a cone, whether straight
or oblique, whereby conical valves of different sizes may refitted,
constructed substantially as shown and described.

2d, In combination therewith, the yielding center, C, substantially as
described.


72,032.--COLLECTING OXIDE OF ZINC.--Geo.C. Hall, Brooklyn, N.Y.

I claim, 1st, A building, structure, or compartment, A, provided with
openings, a, covered by screens, B, substantially as and for the purpose
set forth,

2d, A screen for separating the oxide of zinc from the fumes and gases
of burning zinc ore, composed of ground cork, hair, wool, sponge, or
other suitable or similar material, confined within a suitable chamber,
substantially as set forth.


72,033.--REGISTER FOR ODOMETERS.--Henry F. Hart, New York City.

I claim the arrangement in an inclined position of the counting wheels,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, upon shafts of equal lengths, in combination with
the notched and perforated lid, B, as herein shown and described.


72,034.--NECKTIE.--Wm.H. Hart, Jr., Philadelphia, Pa.

I claim a bow or tie, A, having an elastic loop or cord, B, arranged
horizontally at its rear, with both of its ends free, for the purpose
substantially as described.


72,035.--ELLIPTIC CARRIAGE SPRING.--Horace R. Hawkins, Akron. Ohio.

I claim an elliptical carriage spring composed of a single piece, F, or
two separate pieces, E E, of steel, united by means of blocks and bolts,
substantially as herein shown and specified.


72,038.--HATCH-LINING DRAWINGS.--E.K. Haynes, Hanover, N.H.

I claim a straight-edge or scale having a mechanism for effecting an
intermittent movement of the same, substantially as described.

Also in combination therewith the tongue, q, tor angular lining,
substantially as described.

Also in combination with the feed mechanism, a mechanism for presenting
the straight edge in positions radiating from a center, substantially as
set forth.


72,037.--PLATFORM SCALE.--D. Hazzard, Milton, Del.

I claim the Hollow stand, A, the spindle, C, the springs, D, the
elastic rod, G, and the graduated plate, H, in combination and arranged
substantially as shown and described tor the purposes set forth.


72,038.--PIANO LOCK.--Adam Helmstaedter, Newark, N.J.

I claim the pin, a, secured in the oscillating hook, C, and catching in
a slot in the hook, C', substantially as and tor the purpose described.


72,039.--TWEER.--John B. Himberg, Frederick City, Md.

I claim a tweer consisting of the box, A, annular cover, C, with a
convex under side, and of the removable ring, E, from which the concave
plate, F, is suspended, all made and operating substantially as herein
shown and described.


72,040.--LAMP FOR BURNING PETROLEUM.--James Hinks and Joseph Hinks,
Birmingham, England.

We claim, 1st, Constructing the burners of the said lamps substantially
in the manner hereinbefore described and illustrated in figs. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, and 6, of the accompanying drawings, that is to say, the
combination in the same burner, of two or more flat or curved wick cases
or holders, in which two or more flat wicks are placed, so as to produce
thereby two or more flat flames or elliptical of nearly circular flames.

2d, Constructing and arranging the shade holders or galleries of the
said lamps for the purpose of admitting air to the flames, substantially
in the manner hereinbefore described, and illustrated in figs. 7, 11, 12
13 and 14, of the accompanying drawings.

3d, Supporting the shade holders or galleries in a vase, or cup on the
top of the pillar of the lamp, and supplying air to the lamp through
the said pillar or vase, or supporting them in a cup or vase without
a pillar, the air in this case being supplied through the vase,
substantially in the manner hereinbefore described, and illustrated in
fig. 7 of the accompanying drawings.

4th, The improvement described and illustrated in figs. 11, 12, 13, and
14, of the accompanying drawings, for isolating the shade from the shade
holder or gallery.

5th, The arrangement or combination of the parts of punkah-protectors or
wind protectors, substantially in the manner hereinbefore described, and
illustrated in figs. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, and 16, of the accompanying
drawings.


72,041.--DEVICE FOR LASHING AND BINDING.--John M. Hirlinger, Red Rock,
Pa.

I claim the cord, A, provided with the links, B and C, hooked lever, D,
and slide, E, with its ring, a, arranged and used as and for the purpose
set forth.


72,042.--TOOL FOR OPENING FRUIT CANS.--Horace Holt, New York city.

I claim, 1st, A tool for opening sheet metal cans, composed of a hand
lever, B, carrying a tooth, c, and connected to tongs, A, or other
equivalent means, capable of clamping said tooth-carrying lever to the
can, as set forth.

2d, Placing the tooth, c, in an oblique direction, when the same is
used in combination with the hand lever, B, and clamping device A,
substantially as and for the purpose described.

