
The latest dispatches that had come, before the cessation of all
communication to the newspapers, had told of the prevalence of stifling
heat throughout the southern hemisphere, and of the vast fleets of
antarctic icebergs that filled the south seas. The mighty deposits of
ice, towering to mountain heights, that stretched a thousand miles in
every direction around the south pole were melting as the arctic ice had
melted, and, when the water thus formed was added to the already
overflowing seas, to what elevation might not the flood attain!

The antarctic ice was known to be the principal mass of frozen water on
the globe. The frigid cap of the north was nothing in comparison with
it. It had long been believed that that tremendous accumulation
unbalanced the globe and was the principal cause of the unsteadiness of
the earth's axis of rotation.

Every fresh exploration had only served to magnify the conception of the
incredible vastness of that deposit. The skirts of the Antarctic
Continent had proved to be rich in minerals wherever the rocks could
find a place to penetrate through the gigantic burden of ice, and the
principal nations had quarreled over the possession or control of these
protruding bits of wealth-crammed strata. But behind the bordering
cliffs of ice, rising in places a thousand feet above the level of the
sea, and towering farther inland so high that this region was, in mean
elevation, the loftiest on the planet, nothing but ice could be seen.

And now that ice was dissolving and flowing into the swollen oceans,
adding billions of tons of water every minute!

Men did not stop to calculate, as Cosmo Versal had done, just how much
the dissolution of all the ice and permanent snow of the globe would add
to the volume of the seas. He knew that it would be but a drop in the
bucket--although sufficient to start the flood--and that the great thing
to be feared was the condensation of the aqueous nebula, already
beginning to enwrap the planet in its stifling folds.

The public could understand the melting ice, although it could not fully
understand the nebula; it could understand the swelling sea, and the
raging rivers, and the lakes breaking over their banks--and the terror
and despair became universal.

But what should they _do?_

Those who had thought of building arks hurried to see if the work might
not yet be completed, but most of them had begun their foundations on
low land, which was already submerged.

Then a cry arose, terrible in its significance and in its
consequences--one of those cries that the vanished but unconquerable god
Pan occasionally sets ringing, nobody can tell how:

"Cosmo's ark! Get aboard! Storm it!"

And thereupon there was a mighty rush for Mineola. Nobody who caught the
infection stopped to reason. Some of them had to wade through water,
which in places was knee-deep. They came from various directions, and
united in a yelling mob. They meant to carry the ark with a rush. They
would not be denied. As the excited throngs neared the great vessel they
saw its huge form rising like a mount of safety, with an American flag
flapping over it, and they broke into a mighty cheer. On they sped,
seized with the unreason of a crowd, shouting, falling over one another,
struggling, fighting for places, men dragging their wives and children
through the awful crush, many trampled helpless under the myriads of
struggling feet--driving the last traces of sanity from one another's
minds.

The foremost ranks presently spied Cosmo Versal, watching them from an
open gangway sixty feet above their heads. They were dismayed at finding
the approaches gone. How should they get into the ark? How could they
climb up its vertical sides?

But they would find means. They would re-erect the approaches. They
would _get in somehow_.

Cosmo waved them off with frantic gesticulations; then, through a
trumpet, he shouted in a voice audible above the din:

"Keep back, for your lives!"

But they paid no attention to him; they rushed upon the raised wall,
surrounding the field where Cosmo had buried his mysterious lines of
wire. Then the meaning of that enigmatical work was flashed upon them.

As the first to arrive laid their hands upon the top of the low wall
they fell as if shot through the brain, tumbling backward on those
behind. Others pushed wildly on, but the instant they touched the wall
they too collapsed. Wicked blue-green sparks occasionally flashed above
the struggling mass.

The explanation was clear. Cosmo, foreseeing the probability of a
despairing attack, had surrounded the ark with an impassable electric
barrier. The sound of a whirring dynamo could be heard. A tremendous
current was flowing through the hidden wires and transmitting its
paralyzing energy to the metallic crest of the wall.

Still those behind pushed on, until rank after rank had sunk helpless at
the impregnable line of defense. They were not killed--at least, not
many--but the shock was so paralyzing that those who had experienced its
effects made no further attempts to cross the barrier. Many lay for a
time helpless upon the sodden ground.

Cosmo and Joseph Smith, who had now appeared at his side, continued to
shout warnings, which began to be heeded when the nature of the obstacle
became known. The rush was stopped, and the multitude stood at bay,
dazed, and uncertain what to do. Then a murmur arose, growing louder and
more angry and threatening, until suddenly a shot was heard in the midst
of the crowd, and Cosmo was seen to start backward, while Joseph Smith
instantly dodged out of sight.

A cry arose:

"Shoot him! That's right! Shoot the devil! He's a witch! He's drowning
the world!"

They meant it--at least, half of them did. It was the logic of terror.

Hundreds of shots were now fired from all quarters, and heads that had
been seen flitting behind the various portholes instantly disappeared.
The bullets rattled on the huge sides of the ark, but they came from
small pistols and had not force enough to penetrate.

Cosmo Versal alone remained in sight. Occasionally a quick motion showed
that even his nerves were not steady enough to defy the whistling of the
bullets passing close; but he held his ground, and stretched out his
hand to implore attention.

When the fusillade ceased for a moment he put his trumpet again to his
lips and shouted:

"I have done my best to save you, but you would not listen. Although I
know that you must perish, I would not myself harm a hair of your heads.
Go back, I implore you. You may prolong your lives if you will fly to
the highlands and the mountains--but here you cannot enter. _The ark
is full._"

Another volley of shots was the only answer. One broad-shouldered man
forced his way to the front, took his stand close to the wall, and
yelled in stentorian tones:

"Cosmo Versal, listen to me! You are the curse of the world! You have
brought this flood upon us with your damnable incantations. Your
infernal nebula is the seal of Satan! Here, beast and devil, here at my
feet, lies my only son, slain by your hellish device. By the Eternal I
swear you shall go back to the pit!"

Instantly a pistol flashed in the speaker's hand, and five shots rang in
quick succession. One after another they whistled by Cosmo's head and
flattened themselves upon the metal-work behind. Cosmo Versal,
untouched, folded his arms and looked straight at his foe. The man,
staring a moment confusedly, as if he could not comprehend his failure,
threw up his arms with a despairing gesture, and fell prone upon the
ground.

Then yells and shots once more broke out. Cosmo stepped back, and a
great metallic door swung to, closing the gangway.

But three minutes later the door opened, and the mob saw two
machine-guns trained upon them.

Once more Cosmo appeared, with the trumpet.

"If you fire again," he cried, "I shall sweep you with grapeshot. I have
told you how you can prolong your lives. Now go!"

Not another shot was fired. In the face of the guns, whose terrible
power all comprehended, no one dared to make a hostile movement.

But, perhaps, if Cosmo Versal had not set new thoughts running in the
minds of the assailants by telling them there was temporary safety to be
found by seeking high ground, even the terror of the guns would not have
daunted them. Now their hopefulness was reawakened, and many began to
ponder upon his words.

"He says we must perish, and yet that we can find safety in the hills
and mountains," said one man. "I believe half of that is a lie. We are
not going to be drowned. The water won't rise much higher. The flood
from the south pole that they talk about must be here by this time, and
then what's left to come?"

"The nebula," suggested one.

"Aw, the nebula be hanged! There's no such thing! I live on high ground;
I'm going to keep a sharp outlook, and if the water begins to shut off
Manhattan I'll take my family up the Hudson to the Highlands. I guess
old Storm King'll keep his head above. That's where I come from--up that
way. I used to hear people say when I was a boy that New York was bound
to sink some day. I used to laugh at that then, but it looks mighty like
it now, don't it?"

"Say," put in another, "what did the fellow mean by saying the ark was
_full_? That's funny, ain't it? Who's he got inside, anyway?"

"Oh, he ain't got nobody," said another.

"Yes, he has. I seen a goodish lot through the portholes. He's got
somebody, sure."

"A lot of fools like himself, most likely."

"Well, if he's a fool, and they's fools, what are _we_, I'd like to
know? What did you come here for, hey?"

It was a puzzling question, and brought forth only a sheepish laugh,
followed by the remark:

"I guess we fooled ourselves considerable. We got scared too easy."

"Maybe you'll feel scared again when you see the water climbing up the
streets in New York. I don't half like this thing. I'm going to follow
his advice and light out for higher ground."

Soon conversation of this sort was heard on all sides, and the crowd
began to disperse, only those lingering behind who had friends or
relatives that had been struck down at the fatal wall. It turned out
that not more than one or two had been mortally shocked. The rest were
able to limp away, and many had fully recovered within five minutes
after suffering the shock. In half an hour not a dozen persons were in
sight from the ark.

But when the retreating throngs drew near the shores of the Sound, and
the East River, which had expanded into a true arm of the sea, and found
that there had been a perceptible rise since they set out to capture the
ark, they began to shake their heads and fear once more entered their
hearts.

Thousands then and there resolved that they would not lose another
instant in setting out for high land, up the Hudson, in Connecticut,
among the hills of New Jersey. In fact, many had already fled thither,
some escaping on aeros; and hosts would now have followed but for a
marvelous change that came just before nightfall and prevented them.

For some days the heavens had alternately darkened and lightened, as
gushes of mist came and went, but there had been no actual rain. Now,
without warning, a steady downpour began. Even at the beginning it would
have been called, in ordinary times, a veritable cloudburst; but it
rapidly grew worse and worse, until there was no word in the vernacular
or in the terminology of science to describe it.

It seemed, in truth, that "all the fountains of the great deep were
broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened." The water thundered
upon the roofs, and poured off them in torrents. In five minutes every
sloping street had become an angry river, and every level place a
swelling lake. People caught out of doors were almost beaten to the
ground by the force of the water falling upon them as if they had been
standing under a cataract.

In a short time every cellar and every basement was filled to
overflowing, and in the avenues the flood, lapping every instant higher
upon the doorsteps and the walls, rushed by with frightful roarings,
bearing in its awful embrace pieces of furniture, clothing, bedding,
washed out of ground-floor rooms--and, alas! human beings; some
motionless, already mercifully deprived of life, but others struggling
and shouting for aid which could not be given.

So terrible a spectacle no one had ever looked upon, no one had ever
imagined. Those who beheld it were too stunned to cry out, too
overwhelmed with terror and horror to utter a word. They stood, or fell
into chairs or upon the floor, trembling in every limb, with staring
eyes and drooping jaws, passively awaiting their fate.

As night came on there was no light. The awful darkness of the _third
sign_ once more settled upon the great city, but now it was not the
terror of indefinite expectation that crushed down the souls of men and
women--it was the weight of doom accomplished!

There was no longer any room for self-deception; every quaking heart
felt now that the nebula had come. _Cosmo Versal had been right!_

After the water had attained a certain height in the streets and yards,
depending upon the ratio between the amount descending from the sky and
that which could find its way to the rivers, the flood for the time
being rose no higher. The actual drowning of New York could not happen
until the Hudson and the East River should become so swollen that the
water would stand above the level of the highest buildings, and turn the
whole region round about, as far as the Orange hills, the Ramapo
Mountains, the Highlands, and the Housatonic hills, into an inland sea.

But before we tell that story we must return to see what was going on at
Mineola. Cosmo Versal, on that awful night when New York first knew
beyond the shadow of a doubt, or the gleam of a hope, that it was
doomed, presided over a remarkable assembly in the grand saloon of his
ark.




CHAPTER IX

THE COMPANY OF THE REPRIEVED


How did it happen that Cosmo Versal was able to inform the mob when it
assailed the ark that he had no room left?

Who composed his ship's company, whence had they come, and how had they
managed to embark without the knowledge of the public?

The explanation is quite simple. It was all due to the tremendous
excitement that had prevailed ever since the seas began to overflow. In
the universal confusion people had to think of other things nearer their
doors than the operations of Cosmo Versal. Since the embarkation of the
animals the crowds had ceased to visit the field at Mineola, and it was
only occasionally that even a reporter was sent there. Accordingly,
there were many hours every day when no curiosity-seekers were in sight
of the ark, and at night the neighborhood was deserted; and this state
of affairs continued until the sudden panic which led to the attack that
has been described.

Cosmo Versal, of course, had every reason to conceal the fact that he
was carefully selecting his company. It was a dangerous game to play,
and he knew it. The consequence was that he enjoined secrecy upon his
invited guests, and conducted them, a few at a time, into the ark,
assuring them that their lives might be in peril if they were
recognized. And once under the domain of the fear which led them to
accept his invitation, they were no less anxious than he to avoid
publicity. Some of them probably desired to avoid recognition through
dread of ridicule; for, after all, the flood might not turn out to be so
bad as Cosmo had predicted.

So it happened that the ark was filled, little by little, and the public
knew nothing about it.

And who composed the throng which, while the awful downpour roared on
the ellipsoidal cover of the ark, and shook it to its center and while
New York, a few miles away, saw story after story buried under the
waters, crowded Cosmo's brilliantly lighted saloon, and raised their
voices to a high pitch in order to be heard?

Had all the invitations which he dictated to Joseph Smith after their
memorable discussion, and which were sent forth in the utmost haste,
flying to every point of the compass, been accepted, and was it the
famous leaders of science, the rulers and crowned heads who had passed
his critical inspection that were now knocking elbows under the great
dome of levium? Had kings and queens stolen incognito under the shelter
of the ark, and magnates of the financial world hidden themselves there?

It would have been well for them all if they had been there. But, in
fact, many of those to whom the invitations had gone did not even take
the trouble to thank their would-be savior. A few, however, who did not
come in person, sent responses. Among these was the President of the
United States. Mr. Samson's letter was brief but characteristic. It
read:

To COSMO VERSAL, ESQ.

Sir:

The President directs me to say that he is grateful for your invitation,
and regrets that he cannot accept it. He is informed by those to whose
official advice he feels bound to listen, that the recent extraordinary
events possess no such significance as you attach to them.

Respectfully, FOR THE PRESIDENT,

JAMES JENKS, Secretary.

It must be remembered that this letter was written before the oceanic
overflow began. After that, possibly, the President and his advisers
changed their opinion. But then communication by rail was cut off, and
as soon as the downpour from the sky commenced the aero express lines
were abandoned. The airships would have been deluged, and blown to
