by having their angles thawed off by the warmer air beneath as they
descend; and part of the water produced by these angles thus dissolved
is absorbed into the body of the hailstone, as may be seen by holding a
lump of snow over a candle, and there becomes frozen into ice by the
quantity of cold which the hailstone possesses beneath the freezing
point, or which is produced by its quick evaporation in falling; and
thus hailstones are often found of greater or less density according as
they consist of a greater portion of snow or ice. If hailstones
consisted of the large drops of showers frozen in their descent, they
would consist of pure transparent ice.

As hail is only produced in summer, and is always attended with storms,
some philosophers have believed that the sudden departure of electricity
from a cloud may effect something yet unknown in this phenomenon; but it
may happen in summer independent of electricity, because the aqueous
vapour is then raised higher in the atmosphere, whence it has further to
fall, and there is warmer air below for it to fall through.]

[_Or sink in silver dews_. l. 18. During the coldness of the night the
moisture before dissolved in the air is gradually precipitated, and as
it subsides adheres to the bodies it falls upon. Where the attraction of
the body to the particles of water is greater than the attractions of
those particles to each other, it becomes spread upon their surface, or
slides down them in actual contact; as on the broad parts of the blades
of moist grass: where the attraction of the surface to the water is less
than the attraction of the particles of water to each other, the dew
stands in drops; as on the points and edges of grass or gorse, where the
surface presented to the drop being small it attracts it so little as
but just to support it without much changing its globular form: where
there is no attraction between the vegetable surface and the dew drops,
as on cabbage leaves, the drop does not come into contact with the leaf,
but hangs over it repelled, and retains it natural form, composed of the
attraction and pressure of its own parts, and thence looks like
quicksilver, reflecting light from both its surfaces. Nor is this owing
to any oiliness of the leaf, but simply to the polish of its surface, as
a light needle may be laid on water in the same manner without touching
it; for as the attractive powers of polished surfaces are greater when
in actual contact, so the repulsive power is greater before contact.]

[_The blue mist_. l. 20. Mists are clouds resting on the ground, they
generally come on at the beginning of night, and either fill the moist
vallies, or hang on the summits of hills, according to the degree of
moisture previously dissolved, and the eduction of heat from them. The
air over rivers during the warmth of the day suspends much moisture, and
as the changeful surface of rivers occasions them to cool sooner than
the land at the approach of evening, mists are most frequently seen to
begin over rivers, and to spread themselves over moist grounds, and fill
the vallies, while the mists on the tops of mountains are more properly
clouds, condensed by the coldness of their situation.

On ascending up the side of a hill from a misty valley, I have observed
a beautiful coloured halo round the moon when a certain thickness of
mist was over me, which ceased to be visible as soon as I emerged out of
it; and well remember admiring with other spectators the shadow of the
three spires of the cathedral church at Lichfield, the moon rising
behind it, apparently broken off, and lying distinctly over our heads as
if horizontally on the surface of the mist, which arose about as high as
the roof of the church. There are some curious remarks on shadows or
reflexions seen on the surface of mists from high mountains in Ulloa's
Voyages. The dry mist of summer 1783, was probably occasioned by
volcanic eruption, as mentioned in note on Chunda, Vol. II. and
therefore more like the atmosphere of smoke which hangs on still days
over great cities.

There is a dry mist, or rather a diminished transparence of the air,
which according to Mr. Saussure accompanies fair weather, while great
transparence of air indicates rain. Thus when large rivers two miles
broad, such as at Liverpool, appear narrow, it is said to prognosticate
rain; and when wide, fair weather. This want of transparence of the air
in dry weather, may be owing to new combinations or decompositions of
the vapours dissolved in it, but wants further investigation. Essais sur
L'Hygromet, p. 357.]

[_Round the gelid hill_. l. 20. See additional notes, No. XXVI. on the
origin of springs.]


 25    "NYMPHS! YOU then guide, attendant from their source,
     The associate rills along their sinuous course;
     Float in bright squadrons by the willowy brink,
     Or circling slow in limpid eddies sink;
     Call from her crystal cave the Naiad-Nymph,
 30  Who hides her fine form in the passing lymph,
     And, as below she braids her hyaline hair,
     Eyes her soft smiles reflected in the air;
     Or sport in groups with River-Boys, that lave
     Their silken limbs amid the dashing wave;
 35  Pluck the pale primrose bending from its edge,
     Or tittering dance amid the whispering sedge.--

       "Onward YOU pass, the pine-capt hills divide,
     Or feed the golden harvests on their side;
     The wide-ribb'd arch with hurrying torrents fill,
 40  Shove the slow barge, or whirl the foaming mill.
     OR lead with beckoning hand the sparkling train
     Of refluent water to its parent main,
     And pleased revisit in their sea-moss vales
     Blue Nereid-forms array'd in shining scales,
 45  Shapes, whose broad oar the torpid wave impels,
     And Tritons bellowing through their twisted shells.

       "So from the heart the sanguine stream distils,
     O'er Beauty's radiant shrine in vermil rills,
     Feeds each fine nerve, each slender hair pervades,
 50  The skins bright snow with living purple shades,
     Each dimpling cheek with warmer blushes dyes,
     Laughs on the lips, and lightens in the eyes.
     --Erewhile absorb'd, the vagrant globules swim
     From each fair feature, and proportion'd limb,
 55  Join'd in one trunk with deeper tint return
     To the warm concave of the vital urn.

       II. 1."AQUATIC MAIDS! YOU sway the mighty realms
     Of scale and shell, which Ocean overwhelms;
     As Night's pale Queen her rising orb reveals,
 60  And climbs the zenith with refulgent wheels,
     Car'd on the foam your glimmering legion rides,
     Your little tridents heave the dashing tides,
     Urge on the sounding shores their crystal course,
     Restrain their fury, or direct their force.


[_Car'd on the foam_. l. 61. The phenomena of the tides have been well
investigated and satisfactorily explained by Sir Isaac Newton and Dr.
Halley from the reciprocal gravitations of the earth, moon, and sun. As
the earth and moon move round a centre of motion near the earth's
surface, at the same time that they are proceeding in their annual orbit
round the sun, it follows that the water on the side of the earth
nearest this centre of motion between the earth and moon will be more
attracted by the moon, and the waters on the opposite side of the earth
will be less attracted by the moon, than the central parts of the earth.
Add to this that the centrifugal force of the water on the side of the
earth furthest from the centre of the motion, round which the earth and
moon move, (which, as was said before, is near the surface of the earth)
is greater than that on the opposite side of the earth. From both these
causes it is easy to comprehend that the water will rise on two sides of
the earth, viz. on that nearest to the moon, and its opposite side, and
that it will be flattened in consequence at the quadratures, and thus
produce two tides in every lunar day, which consists of about twenty-
four hours and forty-eight minutes.

These tides will be also affected by the solar attraction when it
coincides with the lunar one, or opposes it, as at new and full moon,
and will also be much influenced by the opposing shores in every part of
the earth.

Now as the moon in moving round the centre of gravity between itself and
the earth describes a much larger orbit than the earth describes round
the same centre, it follows that the centrifugal motion on the side of
the moon opposite to the earth must be much greater than the centrifugal
motion of the side of the earth opposite to the moon round the same
centre. And secondly, as the attraction of the earth exerted on the
moon's surface next to the earth is much greater than the attraction of
the moon exerted on the earth's surface, the tides on the lunar sea, (if
such there be,) should be much greater than those of our ocean. Add to
this that as the same face of the moon always is turned to the earth,
the lunar tides must be permanent, and if the solid parts of the moon be
spherical, must always cover the phasis next to us. But as there are
evidently hills and vales and volcanos on this side of the moon, the
consequence is that the moon has no ocean, or that it is frozen.]


 65    2."NYMPHS! YOU adorn, in glossy volumes roll'd,
     The gaudy conch with azure, green, and gold.
     You round Echinus ray his arrowy mail,
     Give the keel'd Nautilus his oar and sail;
     Firm to his rock with silver cords suspend
 70  The anchor'd Pinna, and his Cancer-friend;
     With worm-like beard his toothless lips array,
     And teach the unwieldy Sturgeon to betray.--
     Ambush'd in weeds, or sepulcher'd in sands,
     In dread repose He waits the scaly bands,
 75  Waves in red spires the living lures, and draws
     The unwary plunderers to his circling jaws,
     Eyes with grim joy the twinkling shoals beset,
     And clasps the quick inextricable net.
     You chase the warrior Shark, and cumberous Whale,
 80  And guard the Mermaid in her briny vale;
     Feed the live petals of her insect-flowers,
     Her shell-wrack gardens, and her sea-fan bowers;
     With ores and gems adorn her coral cell,
     And drop a pearl in every gaping shell.


[_The gaudy conch_. l. 66. The spiral form of many shells seem to have
afforded a more frugal manner of covering the long tail of the fish with
calcareous armour; since a single thin partition between the adjoining
circles of the fish was sufficient to defend both surfaces, and thus
much cretaceous matter is saved; and it is probable that from this
spiral form they are better enabled to feel the vibrations of the
element in which they exist. See note on Canto IV. l. 162. This
cretaceous matter is formed by a mucous secretion from the skin of the
fish, as is seen in crab-fish, and others which annually cast their
shells, and is at first a soft mucous covering, (like that of a hen's
egg, when it is laid a day or two too soon,) and which gradually
hardens. This may also be seen in common shell snails, if a part of
their shell be broken it becomes repaired in a similar manner with
mucus, which by degrees hardens into shell.

It is probable the calculi or stones found in other animals may have a
similar origin, as they are formed on mucous membranes, as those of the
kidney and bladder, chalk-stones in the gout, and gall-stones; and are
probably owing to the inflammation of the membrane where they are
produced, and vary according to the degree of inflammation of the
membrane which forms them, and the kind of mucous which it naturally
produces. Thus the shelly matter of different shell-fish differs, from
the courser kinds which form the shells of crabs, to the finer kinds
which produces the mother-pearl.

The beautiful colours of some shells originate from the thinness of the
laminae of which they consist, rather than to any colouring matter, as
is seen in mother-pearl, which reflects different colours according to
the obliquity of the light which falls on it. The beautiful prismatic
colours seen on the Labrodore stone are owing to a similar cause, viz.
the thinness of the laminae of which it consists, and has probably been
formed from mother-pearl shells.

It is curious that some of the most common fossil shells are not now
known in their recent state, as the cornua ammonis; and on the contrary,
many shells which are very plentiful in their recent state, as limpets,
sea-ears, volutes, cowries, are very rarely found fossil. Da Costa's
Conchology, p. 163. Were all the ammoniae destroyed when the continents
were raised? Or do some genera of animals perish by the increasing power
of their enemies? Or do they still reside at inaccessible depths in the
sea? Or do some animals change their forms gradually and become new
genera?]

[_Echinus. Nautilus_. l. 67, 68. See additional notes, No. XXVII.]

[_Pinna. Cancer_. l. 70. See additional notes, No. XXVII.]

[_With worm-like beard_. l. 71. See additional notes, No. XXVIII.]

[_Feed the live petals_. l. 82. There is a sea-insect described by Mr.
Huges whose claws or tentacles being disposed in regular circles and
tinged with variety of bright lively colours represent the petals of
some most elegantly fringed and radiated flowers as the carnation,
marigold, and anemone. Philos. Trans. Abridg. Vol. IX. p. 110. The Abbe
Dicquemarre has further elucidated the history of the actinia; and
observed their manner of taking their prey by inclosing it in these
beautiful rays like a net. Phil. Trans. Vol. LXIII. and LXV. and LXVII.]

[_And drop a pearl_. l. 84. Many are the opinions both of antient and
modern concerning the production of pearls. Mr. Reaumur thinks they are
formed like the hard concretions in many land animals as stones of the
bladder, gallstones, and bezoar, and hence concludes them to be a
disease of the fish, but there seems to be a stricter analogy between
these and the calcareous productions found in crab-fish called crab's
eyes, which are formed near the stomach of the animal, and constitute a
reservoir of calcareous matter against the renovation of the shell, at
which time they are re-dissolved and deposited for that purpose. As the
internal part of the shell of the pearl oyster or muscle consists of
mother-pearl which is a similar material to the pearl and as the animal
has annually occasion to enlarge his shell there is reason to suspect the
loose pearls are similar reservoirs of the pearly matter for that
purpose.]


 85    3. "YOUR myriad trains o'er stagnant ocean's tow,
     Harness'd with gossamer, the loitering prow;
     Or with fine films, suspended o'er the deep,
     Of oil effusive lull the waves to sleep.
     You stay the flying bark, conceal'd beneath,
 90  Where living rocks of worm-built coral breathe;
     Meet fell TEREDO, as he mines the keel
     With beaked head, and break his lips of steel;
     Turn the broad helm, the fluttering canvas urge
     From MAELSTROME'S fierce innavigable surge.
 95  --'Mid the lorn isles of Norway's stormy main,
     As sweeps o'er many a league his eddying train,
     Vast watery walls in rapid circles spin,
     And deep-ingulph'd the Demon dwells within;
     Springs o'er the fear-froze crew with Harpy-claws,
100  Down his deep den the whirling vessel draws;
     Churns with his bloody mouth the dread repast,
     The booming waters murmuring o'er the mast.


[_Or with fine films_. l. 87. See additional notes, No. XXIX.]

[_Where living rocks_. l. 90. The immense and dangerous rocks built by
the swarms of coral infects which rise almost perpendicularly in the
southern ocean like walls are described in Cook's voyages, a point of
one of these rocks broke off and stuck in the hole which it had made in
the bottom of one of his ships, which would otherwise have perished by
the admission of water. The numerous lime-stone rocks which consist of a
congeries of the cells of these animals and which constitute a great
part of the solid earth shew their prodigious multiplication in all ages
of the world. Specimens of these rocks are to be seen in the Lime-works
at Linsel near Newport in Shropshire, in Coal-brook Dale, and in many
parts of the Peak of Derbyshire. The insect has been well described by
M. Peyssonnel, Ellis, and others. Phil. Trans. Vol. XLVII. L. LII. and
LVII.]

[_Meet fell Teredo_. l. 91. See additional notes, No. XXX.]

[_Turn the broad helm_. l 93. See additional notes, No. XXXI.]


       III. "Where with chill frown enormous ALPS alarms
     A thousand realms, horizon'd in his arms;
105  While cloudless suns meridian glories shed
     From skies of silver round his hoary head,
     Tall rocks of ice refract the coloured rays,
     And Frost sits throned amid the lambent blaze;
     NYMPHS! YOUR thin forms pervade his glittering piles,
110  His roofs of chrystal, and his glasy ailes;
     Where in cold caves imprisoned Naiads sleep,
     Or chain'd on mossy couches wake and weep;
     Where round dark crags indignant waters bend
     Through rifted ice, in ivory veins descend,
115  Seek through unfathom'd snows their devious track,
     Heave the vast spars, the ribbed granites crack,
     Rush into day, in foamy torrents shine,
     And swell the imperial Danube or the Rhine.--
     Or feed the murmuring TIBER, as he laves
120  His realms inglorious with diminish'd waves,
     Hears his lorn Forum sound with Eunuch-strains,
     Sees dancing slaves insult his martial plains;
     Parts with chill stream the dim religious bower,
     Time-mouldered bastion, and dismantled tower;
125  By alter'd fanes and nameless villas glides,
     And classic domes, that tremble on his sides;
     Sighs o'er each broken urn, and yawning tomb,
     And mourns the fall of LIBERTY and ROME.


[_Where round dark craggs_. l. 113. See additional notes, No. XXXII.]

[_Heave the vast spars_. l. 116. Water in descending down elevated
situations if the outlet for it below is not sufficient for its emission
acts with a force equal to the height of the column, as is seen in an
experimental machine called the philosophical bellows, in which a few
pints of water are made to raise many hundred pounds. To this cause is
to be ascribed many large promontories of ice being occasionally thrown
down from the glaciers; rocks have likewise been thrown from the sides
of mountains by the same cause, and large portions of earth have been
removed many hundred yards from their situations at the foot of
mountains. On inspecting the locomotion of about thirty acres of earth
with a small house near Bilder's Bridge in Shropshire, about twenty
years ago, from the foot of a mountain towards the river, I well
remember it bore all the marks of having been thus lifted up, pushed
away, and as it were crumpled into ridges, by a column of water
contained in the mountain.

From water being thus confined in high columns between the strata of
mountainous countries it has often happened that when wells or
perforations have been made into the earth, that springs have arisen
much above the surface of the new well. When the new bridge was building
at Dublin Mr. G. Semple found a spring in the bed of the river where he
meant to lay the foundation of a pierre, which, by fixing iron pipes
into it, he raised many feet. Treatise on Building in Water, by G.
Semple. From having observed a valley north-west of St. Alkmond's well
near Derby, at the head of which that spring of water once probably
existed, and by its current formed the valley, (but which in after times
found its way out in its present situation,) I suspect that St.
Alkmond's well might by building round it be raised high enough to
supply many streets in Derby with spring-water which are now only
supplied with river-water. See an account of an artificial spring of
water, Phil. Trans. Vol. LXXV. p. 1.

In making a well at Sheerness the water rose 300 feet above its source
in the well. Phil. Trans. Vol. LXXIV. And at Hartford in Connecticut
there is a well which was dug seventy feet deep before water was found,
then in boring an augur-hole through a rock the water rose so fast as to
make it difficult to keep it dry by pumps till they could blow the hole
larger by gunpowder, which was no sooner accomplished than it filled and
run over, and has been a brook for near a century. Travels through
America. Lond. 1789. Lane.]


       IV. "Sailing in air, when dark MONSOON inshrouds
130  His tropic mountains in a night of clouds;
     Or drawn by whirlwinds from the Line returns,
     And showers o'er Afric all his thousand urns;
     High o'er his head the beams of SIRIUS glow,
     And, Dog of Nile, ANUBIS barks below.
135  NYMPHS! YOU from cliff to cliff attendant guide
     In headlong cataracts the impetuous tide;
     Or lead o'er wastes of Abyssinian sands
     The bright expanse to EGYPT'S shower-less lands.
     --Her long canals the sacred waters fill,
140  And edge with silver every peopled hill;
     Gigantic SPHINX in circling waves admire;
     And MEMNON bending o'er his broken lyre;
     O'er furrow'd glebes and green savannas sweep,
     And towns and temples laugh amid the deep.


[_Dark monsoon inshrouds_. l. 129. When from any peculiar situations of
land in respect to sea the tropic becomes more heated, when the sun is
vertical over it, than the line, the periodical winds called monsoons
are produced, and these are attended by rainy seasons; for as the air at
the tropic is now more heated than at the line it ascends by decrease of
its specific gravity, and floods of air rush in both from the South West
and North East, and these being one warmer than the other the rain is
precipitated by their mixture as observed by Dr. Hutton. See additional
notes, No. XXV. All late travellers have ascribed the rise of the Nile
to the monsoons which deluge Nubia and Abyssinia with rain. The whirling
of the ascending air was even seen by Mr. Bruce in Abyssinia; he says,
"every morning a small cloud began to whirl round, and presently after
the whole heavens became covered with clouds," by this vortex of
ascending air the N.E. winds and the S.W. winds, which flow in to supply
the place of the ascending column, became mixed more rapidly and
deposited their rain in greater abundance.

Mr. Volney observes that the time of the rising of the Nile commences
about the 19th of June, and that Abyssinia and the adjacent parts of
Africa are deluged with rain in May, June, and July, and produce a mass
of water which is three months in draining off. The Abbe Le Pluche
observes that as Sirius, or the dog-star, rose at the time of the
commencement of the flood its rising was watched by the astronomers, and
notice given of the approach of inundation by hanging the figure of
Anubis, which was that of a man with a dog's head, upon all their
temples. Histoire de Ciel.]

[Illustration:  Fertilization of Egypt.]

[_Egypt's shower-less lands_. l. 138. There seem to be two situations
which may be conceived to be exempted from rain falling upon them, one
where the constant trade-winds meet beneath the line, for here two
regions of warm air are mixed together, and thence do not seem to have
any cause to precipitate their vapour; and the other is, where the winds
are brought from colder climates and become warmer by their contact with
the earth of a warmer one. Thus Lower Egypt is a flat country warmed by
the sun more than the higher lands of one side of it, and than the
Mediterranean on the other; and hence the winds which blow over it
acquire greater warmth, which ever way they come, than they possessed
before, and in consequence have a tendency to acquire and not to part
with their vapour like the north-east winds of this country. There is
said to be a narrow spot upon the coast of Peru where rain seldom
occurs, at the same time according to Ulloa on the mountainous regions
of the Andes beyond there is almost perpetual rain. For the wind blows
uniformly upon this hot part of the coast of Peru, but no cause of
devaporation occurs till it begins to ascend the mountainous Andes, and
then its own expansion produces cold sufficient to condense its vapour.]


145     V. 1. "High in the frozen North where HECCLA glows,
     And melts in torrents his coeval snows;
     O'er isles and oceans sheds a sanguine light,
     Or shoots red stars amid the ebon night;
     When, at his base intomb'd, with bellowing sound
150  Fell GIESAR roar'd, and struggling shook the ground;
     Pour'd from red nostrils, with her scalding breath,
     A boiling deluge o'er the blasted heath;
     And, wide in air, in misty volumes hurl'd
     Contagious atoms o'er the alarmed world;
155  NYMPHS! YOUR bold myriads broke the infernal spell,
     And crush'd the Sorceress in her flinty cell.

[_Fell Giesar roar'd_. l. 150. The boiling column of water at Giesar in
Iceland was nineteen feet in diameter, and sometimes rose to the height
of ninety-two feet. On cooling it deposited a siliceous matter or
