well above the ground; but now, when a new line of towering cliffs
confronted them, Oceaxe did not urge the beast upward, but caused it to
enter a narrow canyon, which intersected the mountains like a channel.
They were instantly plunged into deep shade. The canal was not above
thirty feet wide; the walls stretched upward on both sides for many
hundred feet. It was as cool as an ice chamber. When Maskull attempted
to plumb the chasm with his eyes, he saw nothing but black obscurity.

"What is at the bottom?" he asked.

"Death for you, if you go to look for it."

"We know that. I mean, is there any kind of life down there?"

"Not that I have ever heard of," said Oceaxe, "but of course all things
are possible."

"I think very likely there is life," he returned thoughtfully.

Her ironical laugh sounded out of the gloom. "Shall we go down and see?"

"You find that amusing?"

"No, not that. What I do find amusing is the big stranger with the
beard, who is so keenly interested in everything except himself."

Maskull then laughed too. "I happen to be the only thing in Tormance
which is not a novelty for me."

"Yes, but I am a novelty for you."

The channel went zigzagging its way through the belly of the mountain,
and all the time they were gradually rising.

"At least I have heard nothing like your voice before," said Maskull,
who, since he had no longer anything to look at, was at last ready for
conversation.

"What's the matter with my voice?"

"It's all that I can distinguish of you now; that's why I mentioned it."

"Isn't it clear--don't I speak distinctly?"

"Oh, it's clear enough, but--it's inappropriate."

"Inappropriate?"

"I won't explain further," said Maskull, "but whether you are speaking
or laughing, your voice is by far the loveliest and strangest instrument
I have ever listened to. And yet I repeat, it is inappropriate."

"You mean that my nature doesn't correspond?"

He was just considering his reply, when their talk was abruptly broken
off by a huge and terrifying, but not very loud sound rising up from the
gulf directly underneath them. It was a low, grinding, roaring thunder.

"The ground is rising under us!" cried Oceaxe.

"Shall we escape?"

She made no answer, but urged the shrowk's flight upward, at such a
steep gradient that they retained their seats with difficulty. The floor
of the canyon, upheaved by some mighty subterranean force, could be
heard, and almost felt, coming up after them, like a gigantic landslip
in the wrong direction. The cliffs cracked, and fragments began to fall.
A hundred awful noises filled the air, growing louder and louder each
second--splitting, hissing, cracking, grinding, booming, exploding,
roaring. When they had still fifty feet or so to go, to reach the top,
a sort of dark, indefinite sea of broken rocks and soil appeared under
their feet, ascending rapidly, with irresistible might, accompanied by
the most horrible noises. The canal was filled up for two hundred yards,
before and behind them. Millions of tons of solid matter seemed to be
raised. The shrowk in its ascent was caught by the uplifted debris.
Beast and riders experienced in that moment all the horrors of an
earthquake--they were rolled violently over, and thrown among the rocks
and dirt. All was thunder, instability, motion, confusion.

Before they had time to realise their position, they were in the
sunlight. The upheaval still continued. In another minute or two the
valley floor had formed a new mountain, a hundred feet or more higher
than the old. Then its movement ceased suddenly. Every noise stopped, as
if by magic; not a rock moved. Oceaxe and Maskull picked themselves
up and examined themselves for cuts and bruises. The shrowk lay on its
side, panting violently, and sweating with fright.

"That was a nasty affair," said Maskull, flicking the dirt off his
person.

Oceaxe staunched a cut on her chin with a corner of her robe.

"It might have been far worse.... I mean, it's bad enough to come up,
but it's death to go down, and that happens just as often."

"Whatever induces you to live in such a country?"

"I don't know, Maskull. Habit, I suppose. I have often thought of moving
out of it."

"A good deal must be forgiven you for having to spend your life in a
place like this, where one is obviously never safe from one minute to
another."

"You will learn by degrees," she answered, smiling.

She looked hard at the monster, and it got heavily to its feet.

"Get on again, Maskull!" she directed, climbing back to her perch. "We
haven't too much time to waste."

He obeyed. They resumed their interrupted flight, this time over the
mountains, and in full sunlight. Maskull settled down again to his
thoughts. The peculiar atmosphere of the country continued to soak into
his brain. His will became so restless and uneasy that merely to sit
there in inactivity was a torture. He could scarcely endure not to be
doing something.

"How secretive you are, Maskull!" said Oceaxe quietly, without turning
her head.

"What secrets--what do you mean?"

"Oh, I know perfectly well what's passing inside you. Now I think it
wouldn't be amiss to ask you--is friendship still enough?"

"Oh, don't ask me anything," growled Maskull. "I've far too many
problems in my head already. I only wish I could answer some of them."

He stared stonily at the landscape. The beast was winging its way
toward a distant mountain, of singular shape. It was an enormous natural
quadrilateral pyramid, rising in great terraces and terminating in a
broad, flat top, on which what looked like green snow still lingered.

"What mountain is that?" he asked.

"Disscourn. The highest point in Ifdawn."

"Are we going there?"

"Why should we go there? But if you were going on farther, it might be
worth your while to pay a visit to the top. It commands the whole land
as far as the Sinking Sea and Swaylone's Island--and beyond. You can
also see Alppain from it."

"That's a sight I mean to see before I have finished."

"Do you, Maskull?" She turned around and put her hand on his wrist.
"Stay with me, and one day we'll go to Disscourn together."

He grunted unintelligibly.

There were no signs of human existence in the country under their feet.
While Maskull was still grimly regarding it, a large tract of forest not
far ahead, bearing many trees and rocks, suddenly subsided with an awful
roar and crashed down into an invisible gulf. What was solid land one
minute became a clean-cut chasm the next. He jumped violently up with
the shock. "This is frightful."

Oceaxe remained unmoved.

"Why, life here must be absolutely impossible," he went on, when he had
somewhat recovered himself. "A man would need nerves of steel.... Is
there no means at all of foreseeing a catastrophe like this?"

"Oh, I suppose we wouldn't be alive if there weren't," replied Oceaxe,
with composure. "We are more or less clever at it--but that doesn't
prevent our often getting caught."

"You had better teach me the signs."

"We'll have many things to go over together. And among them, I expect,
will be whether we are to stay in the land at all.... But first let us
get home."

"How far is it now?"

"It is right in front of you," said Oceaxe, pointing with her
forefinger. "You can see it."

He followed the direction of the finger and, after a few questions, made
out the spot she was indicating. It was a broad peninsula, about two
miles distant. Three of its sides rose sheer out of a lake of air, the
bottom of which was invisible; its fourth was a bottleneck, joining it
to the mainland. It was overgrown with bright vegetation, distinct in
the brilliant atmosphere. A single tall tree, shooting up in the middle
of the peninsula, dwarfed everything else; it was wide and shady with
sea-green leaves.

"I wonder if Crimtyphon is there," remarked Oceaxe. "Can I see two
figures, or am I mistaken?"

"I also see something," said Maskull.

In twenty minutes they were directly above the peninsula, at a height of
about fifty feet. The shrowk slackened speed, and came to earth on
the mainland, exactly at the gateway of the isthmus. They both
descended--Maskull with aching thighs.

"What shall we do with the monster?" asked Oceaxe. Without waiting for a
suggestion, she patted its hideous face with her hand. "Fly away home! I
may want you some other time."

It gave a stupid grunt, elevated itself on its legs again, and, after
half running, half flying for a few yards, rose awkwardly into the air,
and paddled away in the same direction from which they had come. They
watched it out of sight, and then Oceaxe started to cross the neck of
land, followed by Maskull.

Branchspell's white rays beat down on them with pitiless force. The sky
had by degrees become cloudless, and the wind had dropped entirely. The
ground was a rich riot of vividly coloured ferns, shrubs, and grasses.
Through these could be seen here and there the golden chalky soil--and
occasionally a glittering, white metallic boulder. Everything looked
extraordinary and barbaric. Maskull was at last walking in the weird
Ifdawn Marest which had created such strange feelings in him when seen
from a distance.... And now he felt no wonder or curiosity at all, but
only desired to meet human beings--so intense had grown his will. He
longed to test his powers on his fellow creatures, and nothing else
seemed of the least importance to him.

On the peninsula all was coolness and delicate shade. It resembled a
large copse, about two acres in extent. In the heart of the tangle of
small trees and undergrowth was a partially cleared space--perhaps the
roots of the giant tree growing in the centre had killed off the smaller
fry all around it. By the side of the tree sparkled a little, bubbling
fountain, whose water was iron-red. The precipices on all sides,
overhung with thorns, flowers, and creepers, invested the enclosure with
an air of wild and charming seclusion--a mythological mountain god might
have dwelt here.

Maskull's restless eye left everything, to fall on the two men who
formed the centre of the picture.

One was reclining, in the ancient Grecian fashion of banqueters on a
tall couch of mosses, sprinkled with flowers; he rested on one arm, and
was eating a kind of plum, with calm enjoyment. A pile of these plums
lay on the couch beside him. The over-spreading branches of the tree
completely sheltered him from the sun. His small, boyish form was clad
in a rough skin, leaving his limbs naked. Maskull could not tell from
his face whether he were a young boy or a grown man. The features were
smooth, soft, and childish, their expression was seraphically tranquil;
but his violet upper eye was sinister and adult. His skin was of the
colour of yellow ivory. His long, curling hair matched his sorb--it was
violet. The second man was standing erect before the other, a few feet
away from him. He was short and muscular, his face was broad, bearded,
and rather commonplace, but there was something terrible about his
appearance. The features were distorted by a deep-seated look of pain,
despair, and horror.

Oceaxe, without pausing, strolled lightly and lazily up to the outermost
shadows of the tree, some distance from the couch.

"We have met with an uplift," she remarked carelessly, looking toward
the youth.

He eyed her, but said nothing.

"How is your plant man getting on?" Her tone was artificial but
extremely beautiful. While waiting for an answer, she sat down on the
ground, her legs gracefully thrust under her body, and pulled down
the skirt of her robe. Maskull remained standing just behind her, with
crossed arms.

There was silence for a minute.

"Why don't you answer your mistress, Sature?" said the boy on the couch,
in a calm, treble voice.

The man addressed did not alter his expression, but replied in a
strangled tone, "I am getting on very well, Oceaxe. There are already
buds on my feet. Tomorrow I hope to take root."

Maskull felt a rising storm inside him. He was perfectly aware that
although these words were uttered by Sature, they were being dictated by
the boy.

"What he says is quite true," remarked the latter. "Tomorrow roots will
reach the ground, and in a few days they ought to be well established.
Then I shall set to work to convert his arms into branches, and his
fingers into leaves. It will take longer to transform his head into
a crown, but still I hope--in fact I can almost promise that within a
month you and I, Oceaxe, will be plucking and enjoying fruit from this
new and remarkable tree."

"I love these natural experiments," he concluded, putting out his hand
for another plum. "They thrill me."

"This must be a joke," said Maskull, taking a step forward.

The youth looked at him serenely. He made no reply, but Maskull felt as
if he were being thrust backward by an iron hand on his throat.

"The morning's work is now concluded, Sature. Come here again after
Blodsombre. After tonight you will remain here permanently, I expect,
so you had better set to work to clear a patch of ground for your roots.
Never forget--however fresh and charming these plants appear to you now,
in the future they will be your deadliest rivals and enemies. Now you
may go."

The man limped painfully away, across the isthmus, out of sight. Oceaxe
yawned.

Maskull pushed his way forward, as if against a wall. "Are you joking,
or are you a devil?"

"I am Crimtyphon. I never joke. For that epithet of yours, I will devise
a new punishment for you."

The duel of wills commenced without ceremony. Oceaxe got up, stretched
her beautiful limbs, smiled, and prepared herself to witness the
struggle between her old lover and her new. Crimtyphon smiled too;
he reached out his hand for more fruit, but did not eat it. Maskull's
self-control broke down and he dashed at the boy, choking with red
fury--his beard wagged and his face was crimson. When he realised with
whom he had to deal, Crimtyphon left off smiling, slipped off the
couch, and threw a terrible and malignant glare into his sorb. Maskull
staggered. He gathered together all the brute force of his will, and by
sheer weight continued his advance. The boy shrieked and ran behind the
couch, trying to get away.... His opposition suddenly collapsed. Maskull
stumbled forward, recovered himself, and then vaulted clear over the
high pile of mosses, to get at his antagonist. He fell on top of him
with all his bulk. Grasping his throat, he pulled his little head
completely around, so that the neck was broken. Crimtyphon immediately
died.

The corpse lay underneath the tree with its face upturned. Maskull
viewed it attentively, and as he did so an expression of awe and wonder
came into his own countenance. In the moment of death Crimtyphon's face
had undergone a startling and even shocking alteration. Its personal
character had wholly vanished, giving place to a vulgar, grinning mask
which expressed nothing.

He did not have to search his mind long, to remember where he had seen
the brother of that expression. It was identical with that on the face
of the apparition at the seance, after Krag had dealt with it.



Chapter 10. TYDOMIN

Oceaxe sat down carelessly on the couch of mosses, and began eating the
plums.

"You see, you had to kill him, Maskull," she said, in a rather quizzical
voice.

He came away from the corpse and regarded her--still red, and still
breathing hard. "It's no joking matter. You especially ought to keep
quiet."

"Why?"

"Because he was your husband."

"You think I ought to show grief--when I feel none?"

"Don't pretend, woman!"

Oceaxe smiled. "From your manner one would think you were accusing me of
some crime."

Maskull literally snorted at her words. "What, you live with filth--you
live in the arms of a morbid monstrosity and then--"

"Oh, now I grasp it," she said, in a tone of perfect detachment.

"I'm glad."

"Well, Maskull," she proceeded, after a pause, "and who gave you the
right to rule my conduct? Am I not mistress of my own person?"

He looked at her with disgust, but said nothing. There was another long
interval of silence.

"I never loved him," said Oceaxe at last, looking at the ground.

"That makes it all the worse."

"What does all this mean--what do you want?"

"Nothing from you--absolutely nothing--thank heaven!"

She gave a hard laugh. "You come here with your foreign preconceptions
and expect us all to bow down to them."

"What preconceptions?"

"Just because Crimtyphon's sports are strange to you, you murder
him--and you would like to murder me."

"Sports! That diabolical cruelty."

"Oh, you're sentimental!" said Oceaxe contemptuously. "Why do you need
to make such a fuss over that man? Life is life, all the world over, and
one form is as good as another. He was only to be made a tree, like a
million other trees. If they can endure the life, why can't he?"

"And this is Ifdawn morality!"

Oceaxe began to grow angry. "It's you who have peculiar ideas. You rave
about the beauty of flowers and trees--you think them divine. But
when it's a question of taking on this divine, fresh, pure, enchanting
loveliness yourself, in your own person, it immediately becomes a cruel
and wicked degradation. Here we have a strange riddle, in my opinion."

"Oceaxe, you're a beautiful, heartless wild beast--nothing more. If you
weren't a woman--"

"Well"--curling her lip--"let us hear what would happen if I weren't a
woman?"

Maskull bit his nails.

"It doesn't matter. I can't touch you--though there's certainly not the
difference of a hair between you and your boy-husband. For this you may
thank my 'foreign preconceptions.'... Farewell!"

He turned to go. Oceaxe's eyes slanted at him through their long lashes.
