and he muttered beneath his breath.  "If he wants to trade, we'll
trade."

P x B

"Advance robot battery 7," he said out loud.  "Knock him out of the
sky."  The order was passed on, and several seconds later the blip that
had been the enemy cruiser also vanished from the globe.

A yeoman entered, bringing news of the Coalition reinforcements.
Dubcek acknowledged the message, gave one of his own, then turned to
his young lieutenant as if in answer to his unspoken question.  His
eyes, like those of a bird of prey, had returned to their normal
luster.

"We don't have to beat him, just hold him off till help arrives.  That
is why we are aligned defensively, ready to counter-punch, and take
advantage of his mistakes."  Both turned back to the projection, and to
their own thoughts.

11)  0-0-0

Masaryk began to speak again, but Dubcek waved him off.  "Here," he
pointed.  "He's moved his battle station behind the carrier, and
brought the corresponding battleship to corridor five, trying to
strengthen his position for a frontal assault."

Brunner hesitated, not wishing to overstep his bounds.  "Does that
surprise you?"

Dubcek almost smiled.

"No.  He imagines he's being clever, showing me something I haven't
seen.  But I've played this game a few times before."  To his exec:
"Battleship A to corridor four."  Masaryk nodded, and passed the order
on.  The main battle computer silently acknowledged the move.

R-K1

Again Dubcek turned to his lieutenant.  "In a battle of this scale, and
fought under the controlled conditions imposed by the grids,
preparation is paramount.  But once the real fighting begins, the book
goes out the window.  You may see me do things you question.  If so, do
not assume that you are wrong.  Decisions made in the heat of it are
based mostly on instinct, and instincts can go astray.  Don't override
me, but if you see anything unusual in either my strategy or his, I
want your comments as soon as there is time."

Brunner was having trouble adjusting to this new intimacy, however
strained.  "Colonel.  Won't the computer do that?"

"To hell with the computer.  This is no damned field exercise.  I'll
ask for your comments, and those of my staff because I want input, not
analysis.  You'll be dead wrong most of the time."  The expression
changed slightly.  "I need your inexperience, to remind me of things I
might forget."

Dubcek moved back toward the place where his exec stood leaning over
the main ship's console, one hand on the back of the First Technician's
chair, the other pointing to the vision screen before her.  Both looked
up as their commander approached.

"Major," he said to the woman.  "Would you excuse us for a moment?"
Wessenberg rose, gave a quick bow and left them.

"Well," he said to Masaryk, who had been his second many times in the
past.  "What do you think of the way he has positioned himself?"

"He's done very well.  If he does as well the rest of the way, we could
catch it hot."

"Yes, but he won't.  Everything up to this point has been done by the
book---his computer could have done the same.  Once the main engagement
starts, he'll find himself hard pressed to sweep us away.  We have
reinforcements coming in six hours.  He does not."

"Do you take that for granted?"

"What do you think?"  The commander glared and Masaryk, who knew him
well, adopted a more deferential tone.

"No, sir."

"I'm sorry, Rolf.  As always, you see what troubles me.  It makes no
sense.  Why do they divide their forces, and simultaneously attack the
Dutch colonies at Larkspur?  Half their fleet tied up hundreds of
parsecs away, the rest barely more than what we have here.  They may
walk through the Dutch outposts---they have the hardware---but they
will have no such easy time here."

"Could they have made an alliance we don't know about? the greater part
of their force yet to arrive?"

"Yes, but with who?  And how will they come in time?  Our Coalition
reconnaissance nets are thick and constantly monitored, yet we've heard
of no unaccounted for ships anywhere in the vicinity.  He has walked
into this as if he knows no fear, and that troubles me.  The Belgians
might attempt such a thing, but never the Swiss."

"But doesn't the fact that they show no fear prove they are capable of
anything?  Ambition and inexperience often lead to such blunders."

"Yes.  Let us hope that is it."  He unconsciously turned toward Brunner
with a wistful glance.  "Still. . .this could be our last battle."

Masaryk looked up at him, stunned.

"Peace, my friend.  I only meant that the times are changing, and we
must prepare the young."

As Dubcek walked away, and gestured the technician back to her post, it
suddenly occurred to Masaryk that in all their years together, he had
never before called him friend.

12)  B-R6

Almost the instant Major Wessenberg sat down, she saw a movement so
incredulous that at first she thought something must be wrong with the
equipment.  Not waiting for the exec:

"Colonel.  He's brought his second cruiser straight at us."

Dubcek hurried back, stood on the other side of her, checking the
screen.  He turned back to Brunner, who said "Correct," in a voice
suddenly full of optimism.

"By God, he is a fool.  Light cruiser A, engage."  Masaryk relayed the
message, and the Czech/East German light weapons ship advanced.

B x B

"Now he's put his foot in it."

13)  Q x B

"Enemy carrier to corridor one---light cruiser knocked out.  Carrier
fighters and torpedo ships releasing."

"Of course; he's got no choice.  All forward guns at the ready.
Battleship A to column four."

R-K4

As the Exec relayed these orders and the gunnery shields were rolled
back, along with the steel plates that covered the huge battle room
'window,' those in the large, arcing chamber were given their first
direct view of the battle among the stars. The massive Bel-Swiss
carrier, of German States construction, loomed long and gray at its
distance, fighters and missile ships hovering below it, but made no
attempt to come closer, within the range of their guns.  It had been
brought forward without adequate support.  Far to the right their own
battle cruiser could be seen moving into place, along with the
stationary first destroyer group and robot-repulse ships, all perfectly
positioned.  And they knew also that their own carrier, every measure
the equal of the enemy's, was not far off, ready to be brought into
play at a moment's notice.

The twenty-odd officers and staff within the battle room, to that point
largely somber and dutiful, trying to suppress anxiety and inner doubt,
seemed to come suddenly to life.  They attended their posts with
greater enthusiasm, and unconsciously began to speak louder and faster,
through the headsets and to each other.  For the real fighting had
begun; it was no longer left to dark imagining.  They were doing it,
with the clear and early advantage going to their own forces.  Their
commanding officer, a staid veteran who had been here before, grew in
their eyes to something almost more than human, while the enemy's
commanders had begun to show signs of impatience and inexperience.  The
oncoming fleet, which before had loomed so ominous, became mere ships
once more, made of the same metal, and no greater than their own.

Dubcek seemed to sense this, and though he did not want to lower their
confidence in him---this confidence, and the increased efficiency it
brought, were a major reason for all that he did---he knew it was far
too soon to be jubilant.  Before giving his next order, he spoke to
them directly.

"Communications.  Give me an open channel to all vessels."  In a louder
voice.  "I want the rest of you to listen to this also."  The channel
was opened, and his voice subtly amplified within the chamber.

"This is your commander speaking.  Do not be premature in your
enthusiasm.  Our enemy has overextended himself and diminished his
force without apparent gain, but that is all.  While his actions may
seem foolish, we do not know all the reasons they were taken.  I have
learned in my many years that things are not always as they first
appear.  If you believe everything you see, or must see confirmation of
all you believe is happening, you will be misled.  I have faith in your
courage and your judgment.  We still have a long way to go."  Without
further speech he moved away and stood by Brunner's tactical projection
globe.  The room became quieter, the faces more serious.

"Your observations, lieutenant."

"May I ask a question first?"

"Ask it."

"Do you suspect he has reinforcements coming?  If not, I see no logical
pattern to his later development.  Why did he not move straight ahead
with his robot batteries, try to weaken our forward wall?"

"War is seldom logical, Brunner, but it is a valid point.  As for
reinforcements, I wish I knew.  I don't see how; but I must remember it
is possible."

14)  P-KN4

Masaryk's voice.  "Enemy robot ship coming straight ahead, corridor
two."  Brunner suppressed an urge to look out through the wide portal.

Dubcek pointed to the globe, again made several marks on the glass.
"You see.  Now he's done it, but a step too late.  Carry on."  He
strode back to the command station, nodding sternly to his second.
"Bring our carrier to corridor three.  Engage his if he's willing."

Q-KB1

Several minutes later the huge outline of the German/Czech carrier ship
became visible, though still at a distance, as it took up its position
beside and slightly ahead of them.  The engagement, if it took place,
would happen right before their eyes.

The fighters and larger torpedo ships of both vessels continued to
stream out of launching chutes spread across their undersides, forming
up into squadrons, attack groups and flotillas.  The starboard guns of
the Mongoose were activated, and Masaryk could be heard giving
instructions to the captain of the second battle cruiser.

Brunner looked up to see Dubcek standing before the foot-thick plate
glass of the battle room portal, headset on and hands clasped tightly
behind his back, the one held by the other opening and closing
sporadically.  The huge 'window' began at his feet, rising and arching
high above his head.  For a moment Brunner's eyes lost their focus, and
the aging commander seemed to stand among the stars:  between two
giants and their swarming offspring, trying to orchestrate, or at least
influence, a battle between angry gods and their armies, wholly
unaware, and indifferent to his presence.

The Belgian-Swiss carrier, which had the edge in tempo and preparation,
came forward.  Squadrons bolted forward, and both sides began to fire.

At first the more experienced German/Czech pilots seemed to be holding
the enemy off, keeping his forces from linking up into an effective
attacking thrust.  But the sheer numbers of the ships pouring out at
them (which they had no way of anticipating), and the equally
surprising effectiveness of the carrier's supporting fire, began slowly
but inexorably to turn the tide against them.  Lasers and explosive
torpedoes flashed.  Ships burst silently into flame, or broke apart, or
were disintegrated.  The tortured voices that came to Brunner through
his ear-piece were soon more than he could bear.  Almost he wished that
the gray goliath would turn its guns on them, that they might respond.
But it was a wasted hope.  Though tantalizingly close, the aggressor
and all his forces were just out of range, and they knew it.

Brunner next became aware, to his dismay, that none of this seemed to
alarm either Dubcek or his executive officer.  The commander watched,
but gave no order; and Masaryk continued to speak only to the captain
of the corresponding battleship.

He suddenly realized what this meant, but a part of his mind refused to
accept it.  They were sacrificing their own carrier to set up and then
destroy the other.  Strategically it was sound---weakening the enemy's
thrust, buying time for the reinforcements.

But what of the lives and humanity, the hundreds of men and women whom
Dubcek had just spoken to about courage and judgment?  What about their
FAMILIES?  Didn't he care?  Didn't anyone care?  And where was the God
that he had reluctantly begun to believe in?

At that moment all he knew was hatred and grief.  For perhaps a minute
he ignored his instruments, glaring instead at Dubcek's back, silently
daring him to turn around.

Suddenly a ship burst apart directly in front of them, not more than
ten kilometers off.  Out of the wreckage a tiny white projectile moved
toward them, and others of similar shape were sent flying in all
directions.  To his horror Brunner recognized them as men.  Too light
an object to trigger their shields, the writhing body came straight at
them, seeming to gather speed, and with a final orgasm of misery,
crashed against the glass.

With a dull thud it bounced off and back into the emptiness of Space,
leaving a wide splotch of blood on the glass at their commander's feet.
 If Brunner hated him then, the emotion changed when the man finally
did turn around.  There were no tears, but something in his face spoke
of a much deeper wound.  His voice boomed across the room.

"If there is anyone here who does not yet know what war is, look with
your eyes!"  His arm jerked toward the stain.  "It is blood!  Blood and
men dying."

As if cued by these words a blinding flash, followed in rapid
succession by several others, lit the room.  The enemy carrier, finally
scoring a direct and unshielded hit, had sent its blackened counterpart
to infinity.

Q x Q

As if regretting his outburst Dubcek stood very still, then descended
the high step and strode quickly to the command station.  He took off
the headset, and gave his orders.

"Battle cruiser B:  I want a full spread of anti-matter torpedoes, then
move in and finish him off.  All remaining fighters back to Scypion
Base; those that can't make it, to Mongoose emergency docks.  Destroyer
group A, prepare to clean up enemy stragglers."

"And the torpedo ships, Colonel?"

"Keep firing at the carrier until there is no carrier to fire AT."

"But without escort---"

Dubcek's eyes flashed.  Masaryk relayed the orders.

R x Q

The battle between the two vessels must have ensued---after several
minutes the enemy carrier disappeared from the projection globe---but
Brunner saw and heard none of it.  He remained silent with his head
down, palms leaning heavily on the console.  Crying.  The next thing he
was aware of was Dubcek's steadied voice, once more amplified, once
more, he assumed, on an open channel to all ships.  He looked out of
the portal, but there was no afterglow.  Nothing.  Dubcek's voice.

"All ships' personnel not engaged or on standby readiness, this is your
commanding officer.  The carrier J.S. Bach and all its crew have been
lost."  Pause.  "There is nothing that can bring them back, or justify
their death.  They will be sorely missed.

"But know this:  that they died not in any act of aggression, but
defending their homes, and the ones they loved.  It may be small
consolation, but we have hurt our enemy badly.  They no longer have the
position or the firepower to seriously threaten us.  I won't lie to
you.  More men and women will die before our reinforcements arrive.
And there is no more fairness to who dies in battle than there is to
who is struck down by fatal illness, and who is left to die of age.....
 We can only continue, and hope that our acts will one day be
remembered, and our sorrows vindicated.

"My strategy from this point forward will be to engage the enemy as
little as possible, which is only now a viable option.  Take heart in
the fact that this is now a fight he cannot win, unless he holds some
card that is hidden from me.  The colonies, the people you guard, are
safe.  And if we keep our courage and our wits about us, we will see
him beaten before the day is passed."

Dubcek signaled the communications officer to shut him off, said to
Masaryk, "I'll be in my quarters.  I don't think he'll try to attack
again soon, but call me if he does."  And left the battle room.

Brunner gathered himself, sat down before the console and tried to
think.

*


After perhaps fifteen minutes he got up and asked Commander Masaryk to
be relieved, saying that he felt ill.  The executive officer, who knew
a thing or two, looked hard at him and said, "If you've got any sense,
you'll be careful what you say to him."

Brunner nodded, and walked slowly out into the main corridor, then
through several passages before reaching the short hallway that ran
before his Commanding Officer's chamber.

Remaining a short distance from the doorway, he hesitated.  He gathered
his courage, turned the corner and entered the room.

"Sir, may I speak---"  He stopped, seeing the older man sitting quietly
at a wooden table, a bottle and glass in front of him.  "I'm sorry,
sir.....  Excuse me."  So far as he (or anyone) knew, the Colonel never
drank.

"No, no.  Come in.  You have not discovered a terrible secret.  I have
an artificial liver; didn't you know?  I can turn it higher whenever I
wish---the first sign of combat---and be sober in two minutes time.  A
waste of good liquor, really.  Please.  Sit down."  Brunner approached
hesitantly, sat in the wooden chair opposite.

"Besides," the man continued.  "Didn't you know that all good field
commanders were drunks?  Take the famous Ulysses S. Grant.  They say
that on the day of a battle he was rarely sober by mid afternoon.
Probably why he was so successful:  he could send his men off to the
slaughter without a second thought.  Some even go so far as to say he
tried to end all his battles in a single day, so that the next morning,
when he was apt to be sick, he could sleep and give no orders.  But you
look surprised.  Is all of this new to you?"

"I was never much on the American Civil War," said the young man
evasively, not liking (or understanding) the tone of sarcasm in the
older man's voice.

"Oh, really?  That's too bad.  It is filled with such irony.  For
example, the saying, 'War is hell.'  Very true, but do you know who
said it?  The equally famous General Sherman.  And he should know,
since he did everything in his power to make it so---burned and
pillaged like a regular barbarian.  A nation of 'heroes'."  He cleared
