
"Look at the clock!" exclaimed Mark suddenly, pointing to the
time-piece.

"What's the matter with it?" asked Jack.

"Can it be right?" went on Mark. "Surely it isn't nine o'clock, and the
sun shining as brightly as if it was noon."

"It's nine o'clock at night!" exclaimed the professor, entering the
steering tower in time to hear Mark's words.

"But it can't be," argued the boy. "Look how the sun is shining."

"You must realize where you are," was the reply. "We are so far north,
my boy, that we are in the land of the midnight sun. From now on we will
have daylight all the while. We are nearing the pole, where it is light
six months of the year, and dark the other six. We are having summer
here, now."

"I guess it don't feel much like summer outside," said Mark. "The
thermometer indicates fifty below zero!"

"So it does," said Amos Henderson, glancing at the instrument which,
though it was outside, could be read through the glass in the tower.
"Well, we may have struck a cold wave. Ordinarily we will not have much
more than twenty below zero when the sun shines."

"That's cold enough for me," said Mark.

The professor announced that the airship's machinery was now in good
shape. He said he expected to come to the end of the journey in about
three days more, provided no accidents occurred, and there were no
storms to delay the _Monarch_.

"I think we will divide the night into four watches," he said.
"Washington, Jack, Mark and I will take them in turn. During the day we
will all be on duty, but from six in the morning to six at night we will
stand watch and watch."

It was arranged that Jack should take the first period, the professor
the second, Mark the third and Washington the fourth. As the first watch
had passed Jack was excused and the inventor said he would take charge
of the ship. Then, as every one was tired from the happenings of the
day, they all went to bed, excepting Amos Henderson, who entered the
tower to steer the ship.

The engines, dynamos and motors ran without much attention save such as
the pilot might give them occasionally, for he could leave the ship with
the steering wheel fastened, a few minutes at a time, as there was no
danger of collisions. So the _Monarch_ continued to race toward the
north.

It was almost time for Mark's tour of duty to begin. The two boys, who
were sleeping together, were in a deep slumber, when Washington ran in
and shouted at the top of his voice:

"Wake up everybody! De perfessor is killed dead!"

Andy, Mark, Jack and the two helpers sat up in their bunks, rubbing
their sleepy eyes and wondering what had happened.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack.

"Mr. Henderson is dead! He's in the engine room!"

"What killed him?" inquired Andy.

"He must hab got a shock from de dynamo!"

Andy jumped from his bunk and hurried to the engine room. There, as the
negro had described, Professor Henderson was lying white and senseless
on the floor.

The old hunter stooped over the inventor and felt of his heart.

"He is alive!" he exclaimed. "His heart beats! We must carry him to a
bunk!"

Aided by Washington, Andy carried the professor to the sleeping room,
where he was made comfortable in one of the beds. The captain was so
near death that he could not be seen to breathe, and only the faint
flutter of his heart told that life existed.

"We're lost!" cried Washington. "If he dies we'll never get back home
again. He is de only one dat knows how to mix de chemicals for de gas!"

This was alarming news. Without the mysterious vapor the ship would not
keep afloat long, nor could it be worked back from the desolate land of
ice and snow. How much of the gas was left no one knew.

"Did he ever get a shock like this before?" asked the hunter of
Washington.

"Once, but not so strong."

"What did you do for him? What medicine did he take?"

"Glory! Glory!" shouted the negro, jumping up and down in his
excitement. "I remembers it now. Wait a second!"

He hurried to the engine room, and came back in a little while with a
small bottle.

"Perfessor done say," he began, "dat if eber I seed him senselike, when
he done gone and got a shock from de 'lectrisititeness, I was to gib him
two spoons full ob dis."

Andy took the bottle, which contained a red liquid. Bill got a spoon
from the locker where the dishes were kept. With hands that trembled the
old hunter poured out some of the fluid. Then, with Jack's help he
forced open the inventor's mouth and put the medicine in.

"I hope it works!" murmured Andy.

He poured out a second spoonful. This was administered to the
unconscious man. In a few seconds his face that had been pale showed a
little color. His chest expanded as he drew a long breath. Then the old
inventor opened his eyes and asked faintly:

"What happened? Where am I?"

"You are all right now," spoke Andy in a gentle voice. "You are out of
danger I hope, and safe on the _Monarch_."

"Is the airship all right?" asked the captain eagerly.

"Yes, and sailing along like a bird," was the answer. In fact every one
had forgotten that the craft was forging ahead, and that all the
machinery was working.

A look of relief crossed Professor Henderson's face, and he sat up.

"I remember now," he said. "I was adjusting the dynamo, and I touched a
live wire. The current was very strong. It is a wonder I was not killed.
But how did you bring me around again?"

"Washington happened to remember some medicine you had told him to use
in emergencies."

"Oh, yes: I'm glad I had some on board. It is a remedy for those shocked
with electricity. But I must see to the machinery."

"No, you must not," said Andy firmly. "You are too weak to get up yet,
and you have a bad burn on your hand."

"All right," agreed Amos Henderson, for he felt weak and sick from the
shock. "Some one had better see to the steering now," he added, and then
he leaned back in the bunk and closed his eyes.

Jack ran to the conning tower. He found that the ship, under the
influence of a strong wind, was going due west, instead of to the north.
He shifted the steering wheel and brought the _Monarch_ on her course
again, pointing to the north pole. Then he called for Mark, and the two
boys arranged that between them they would run the ship until Professor
Henderson recovered.

Andy and Washington, who were watching beside the professor's bunk,
where he reclined, seemingly in a deep slumber, were startled as he
suddenly sat upright.

"Hark!" the old man exclaimed. "Listen! Do you hear it?"

"Hear what?" asked the hunter, in a soothing tone, wishing to humor the
sick man.

"Do you not hear a terrible rushing, roaring wind? The ship! The ship is
in danger!"

The thrilling words sent a chill to the hearts of the watchers. There
was no sign of a storm. In fact it was strangely quiet outside, the
only noise heard being that of the engines of the ship.

"His mind wanders," said Andy.

He had no sooner spoken than a cry from Jack, who with Mark was in the
steering tower, startled them. His voice ran out through the cabins as
he cried:

"A whirlwind! A whirlwind! We are running straight into a whirlwind!"




CHAPTER XIV

TOSSED BY A TORNADO


"Shut down de engines!" cried Washington.

"Lower the ship!" exclaimed Mark, who had run back from the tower.
"Close to the earth we may escape the wind!"

"Is it headed toward us?" asked Andy.

"Straight," answered Mark. Jack tried to steer to one side, but the
currents of air sucked the ship right back into the path again!

"The captain knew more than we gave him credit for," muttered the
hunter. "He heard the storm coming."

The air, that had been so strangely quiet, now vibrated with a curious
humming. It seemed to make the whole ship tremble. Then, just as the
craft began to settle down, the upward pulling force of the gas being
lessened under Washington's manipulations, there came a terrible
roaring. The wind howled like a thousand demons seeking to tear the
_Monarch_ to pieces.

"It's a regular tornado!" cried Andy.

Then the storm picked the downward-falling ship up as if it had been a
feather and tossed the craft into the air. The adventurers were in a sad
plight.

There was nothing to be done. The forces of nature were ten times
stronger than those of man. To start the engines and try to run the ship
out of the grasp of the wind would only mean to strain the craft to a
dangerous point. There was but one thing to do, to run before the
tornado, as ships on the sea scud before the gale. In this way the
airship might be saved, if it was not dashed down to earth.

As soon as this plan manifested itself to be the best one, Washington
stopped drawing gas from the bag. He wanted to keep the ship as high as
he could. Jack still held his place in the conning tower, but he could
do nothing to guide the craft, and it would have been folly to attempt
it, so fearful was the force of the wind.

"Which way are we headed?" asked Mark, making his way back to the tower
where Jack was.

"Almost due west," was the reply. "About two points to the south, too."

"Then we are being driven away from the north pole," said Mark.

"We're as helpless as kittens tied up in a sack," said Andy. "If only I
could do something I'd feel better. But I've got to sit here and take
what comes."

The sick man stirred uneasily. Then he muttered in his delirium
something about the tornado that was tossing him from side to side of
the bunk.

Strangely enough there was nothing to the storm but wind. There was no
rain or snow, and the air was remarkably clear, excepting for the
darkness of the clouds. Aside from the way in which the ship was blown
along there was nothing to indicate that the breeze was rushing along at
tempest speed. There were no trees bent to the earth, and no clouds of
dust. The sky clouds kept pace with the airship.

"I wonder where we are?" asked Jack, who with Mark had come back from
the tower.

"We'll have to guess at it," replied Andy. "It would be as much as a
man's life is worth to go outside and take an observation."

"Don't hab to do dat," broke in Washington. "See here!"

He stooped over and pulled on an iron ring that was fastened in the
floor of the dining-room cabin. A section of a board came up.

"Look!" exclaimed the negro pointing down. All leaned forward and saw
that a heavy plate glass had been set over a hole cut through the floor
of the ship. By means of this strange window one could look directly
down toward the earth. Jack kneeled and peered through the glass. He
rose to his feet with a cry of fear.

"What's the matter?" asked Andy.

"We are right over the ocean!" exclaimed the boy. "I can see immense
waves not three hundred feet below! The airship must be falling and
we'll be dashed into the sea!"

At these words Washington ran to the engine room. He looked at the
height indicator.

"We's four hundred feet in de air, an' a--we's agoin' down!" he
muttered.

Jack, who had followed him, saw by the instrument what the dreadful
truth was. Blown from her course, the _Monarch_ was now over an open
polar sea, into which she might be dashed at any moment. The tornado
still howled and roared outside, making it impossible to inflate the gas
bag, so strong was the pressure of wind on it. And without a fresh
supply of gas, the ship must fall.

There was no abatement to the tornado. The ship was tossed more
violently than ever. Jack peered through the floor-window again.

"We are nearer the water!" he exclaimed as he arose. "The sea is
covered with icebergs. They are crashing together in the big waves. If
we fall the ship will be ground to pieces in the floes!"

"Try the gas machine again!" urged Andy. "Maybe the wind has lessened."

Washington started the machine. He kept one eye on the needle of the
indicator that told the gas pressure in the bag, and the other on the
height register. The black pointer of the latter went lower and lower.
It was now at one hundred, and kept on going down slowly, until it stood
at seventy-five. Soon only sixty-five feet stood between the airship and
her passengers, and the angry, swirling water beneath, where the
icebergs crashed and ground together.

Then Washington, who was ready to faint with fear and despair, gave a
cry of joy. He had noticed that the height indicator stopped. At the
same time the gas register showed that the vapor from the machine was
entering the bag.

"Glory! Glory!" cried the negro. "We's saved now. De ship is goin' up,
and the gas is workin' in. De wind must be goin' down!"

Then, while all save Professor Henderson, who was still unconscious,
crowded into the engine room, they saw that what Washington said was
true. The pressure of the wind had lessened, permitting the bag to fill
with the gas. This served to lift the ship, and the pointer on the
height indicator began to move upward. Higher and higher went the craft,
until in a few minutes the register showed six hundred feet. They had
been saved from death in the sea.

"Hurrah!" cried Jack. "I believe the tornado has left us!"
