crossed the wilderness. As it ran in the direction of the bayou, he
turned into it. Then for the second time he came into the glen of the
pool and passed along the path Jeems had known. So somehow Val was not
surprised, when he came out upon the edge of the bayou levee, to see
Jeems sitting there.

"Hello!"

The swamper looked up at Val's hail but this time he did not leave.

"Hullo," he answered sullenly.

Val stood there, ill at ease, while the swamper eyed him composedly.
What could he say now? Val's embarrassment must have been very apparent,
for after a long moment Jeems smiled derisively.

"Yo' goin' ridin' in them funny pants?" he asked, pointing to the
other's breeches.

"Well, that's what they are intended for," Val replied.

"Wheah's youah hoss?"

"I sent him back to Sam's." Val was beginning to feel slightly warm. He
decided that Jeems' manners were not all that they might be.

"Sam!" the swamp boy spat into the water. "He's a--"

But what Sam was, in the opinion of the swamper, Val never learned, for
at that moment Ricky burst from between two bushes.

"Well, at last," she panted, "I've gotten rid of my army. Val, do you
think that Lucy is going to be like this all the time--order us about, I
mean?"

"Who's that?" Jeems was on his feet looking at Ricky.

"Ricky," her brother said, "this is Jeems. My sister Richanda."

"Yo' one of the folks up at the big house?" he asked her directly.

"Why, yes," she answered simply.

"Yo' don' act like yo' was." He stabbed his finger at both of them. "Yo'
don't walk with youah noses in the air looking down at us--"

"Of course we don't!" interrupted Ricky. "Why should we, when you know
more about this place than we do?"

"What do yo' mean by that?" he flashed out at her, his sullen face
suddenly dark.

"Why--why--" Ricky faltered, "Charity Biglow said that you knew all
about the swamp--"

His tense position relaxed a fraction. "Oh, yo' know Miss Charity?"

"Yes. She showed us the picture she is painting, the one you are posing
for," Ricky went on.

"Miss Charity is a fine lady," he returned with conviction. He shifted
from one bare foot to the other. "Ah'll be goin' now." With no other
farewell he slipped over the side of the levee into his canoe and headed
out into midstream. Nor did he look back.

Lucy departed after dinner that evening to bed down her family before
returning with Letty-Lou to occupy one of the servant's rooms over the
side wing. Rupert had gone with her to interview Sam. Val gathered that
Sam had some notion of trying to reintroduce the growing of indigo, a
crop which had been forsaken for sugar-cane at the beginning of the
nineteenth century when a pest had destroyed the entire indigo crop of
that year all over Louisiana.

"Let's go out in the garden," suggested Ricky.

"What for?" asked her brother. "To provide a free banquet for
mosquitoes? No, thank you, let's stay here."

"You're lazy," she countered.

"You may call it laziness; I call it prudence," he answered.

"Well, I'm going anyway," she made a decision which brought Val
reluctantly to his feet. For mosquitoes or no mosquitoes, he was not
going to allow Ricky to be outside alone.

They followed the path which led around the side of the house until it
neared the kitchen door. When they reached that point Ricky halted.

"Listen!"

A plaintive miaow sounded from the kitchen.

"Oh, bother! Satan's been left inside. Go and let him out."

"Will you stay right here?" Val asked.

"Of course. Though I don't see why you and Rupert have taken to acting
as if Fu Manchu were loose in our yard. Now hurry up before he claws the
screen to pieces. Satan, I mean, not the worthy Chinese gentleman."

But Satan did not meet Val at the door. Apparently, having received no
immediate answer to his plea, he had withdrawn into the bulk of the
house. Speaking unkind things about him under his breath, Val started
across the dark kitchen.

Suddenly he stopped. He felt the solid edge of the table against his
thigh. When he put out his hand he touched the reassuring everyday form
of Lucy's stone cooky jar. He was in their own pleasant everyday
kitchen.

But--

He was not alone in that house!

There had been the faintest of sounds from the forepart of the main
section, a sound such as Satan might have caused. But Val knew--knew
positively--that Satan was guiltless. Someone or something was in the
Long Hall.

He crept by the table, hoping that he could find his way without running
into anything. His hand closed upon the knob of the door opening upon
the back stairs used by Letty-Lou. If he could get up them and across
the upper hall, he could come down the front stairs and catch the
intruder.

It took Val perhaps two minutes to reach the head of the front stairs,
and each minute seemed a half-hour in length. From below he could hear a
regular _pad, pad_, as if from stocking feet on the stone floor. He drew
a deep breath and started down.

When he reached the landing he looked over the rail. Upright before the
fireplace was a dim white blur. As he watched, it moved forward. There
was something uncanny about that almost noiseless movement.

The blur became a thin figure clad in baggy white breeches and loose
shirt. Below the knees the legs seemed to fade into the darkness of the
hall and there was something strange about the outlines of the head.

Again the thing resumed its padding and Val saw now that it was pacing
the hall in a regular pattern. Which suggested that it was human and was
there with a very definite purpose.

He edged farther down the stairs.

"And just what are you doing?"

If his voice quavered upon the last word, it was hardly his fault. For
when the thing turned, Val saw--

It had no face!

With a startled cry he lunged forward, clutching at the banister to
steady his blundering descent. The thing backed away; already it was
fading into the darkness beside the stairs. As Val's feet touched the
floor of the hall he caught his last glimpse of it, a thin white patch
against the solid paneling of the stairway's broad side. Then it was
gone. When Rupert and Ricky came in a few minutes later and turned on
the lights, Val was still staring at that blank wall, with Satan rubbing
against his ankles.




CHAPTER IX

PORTRAIT OF A LADY AND A GENTLEMAN


Rupert had dismissed Val's story of what he had seen in the hall in a
very lofty manner. When his brother had persisted in it, Rupert
suggested that Val had better keep out of the sun in the morning. For no
trace of the thing which had troubled the house remained.

Ricky hesitated between believing wholly in Val's tale or just in his
powers of imagination. And between them his family drove him sulky to
bed. He was still frowning, or maybe it was a new frown, when he looked
into the bathroom mirror the next morning as he dressed. For Val knew
that he _had_ seen something in the hall, something monstrous which had
no right to be there.

What had their rival said before he left? "Play it that way and you
won't be here a month from now." It was just possible--Val paused, half
in, half out of, his shirt. Could last night's adventure have had
anything to do with that threat? Two or three episodes of that sort
might unsettle the strongest nerves and drive the occupants from a house
where such a shadow walked.

Something else nagged at the boy's memory. Slowly he traced back over
the events of the day before, from the moment when he had watched that
queer swamp car crawl downstream. After the visit of the rival, Lucy had
come to stay. And then Ricky had started for Charity's while he had gone
down to the bayou where he met Jeems. That was it. Jeems!

When Ricky had hinted that he knew more of the swamp than the Ralestones
did, why had he been so quick to resent that remark? Could it be because
he understood her to mean that he knew more of Pirate's Haven than they
did?

And the thing in the Long Hall last night had known of some exit in the
wall that the Ralestones did not know of. It had faded into the base of
the staircase. And yet, when Val had gone over the paneling there inch
by inch, he had gained nothing but sore finger tips.

He tucked his shirt under his belt and looked down to see if Sam Junior
had polished his boots as Lucy had ordered her son to do. Save for a
trace of mud by the right heel, they had the proper mirror-like surface.

"Mistuh Val," Lucy's penetrating voice made him start guiltily, "is yo'
or is yo' not comin' to brekfas'?"

"I am," he answered and started downstairs at his swiftest pace.

The new ruler of their household was standing at the foot of the stairs,
her knuckles resting on her broad hips. She eyed the boy sternly. Lucy
eyed one, Val thought, much as a Scotch nurse Ricky and he had once had.
They had never dared question any of Annie's decrees, and one look from
her had been enough to reduce them to instant order. Lucy's eye had the
same power. And now as she herded Val into the dining-room he felt like
a six-year-old with an uneasy conscience.

Rupert and Ricky were already seated and eating. That is, Ricky was
eating, but Rupert was reading his morning mail.

"Yo'all sits down," said Lucy firmly, "an' yo'all eats what's on youah
plate. Yo'all ain' much fattah nor a jay-bird."

"I don't see why she keeps comparing me to a living skeleton all the
time," Val complained as she departed kitchenward.

"She told Letty-Lou yesterday," supplied Ricky through a mouthful of
popover, "that you are 'peaked lookin'."

"Why doesn't she start in on Rupert? He needs another ten pounds or so."
Val reached for the butter. "And he hasn't got a very good color,
either." Val surveyed his brother professionally. "Doesn't get outdoors
enough."

"No," Ricky's voice sounded aggrieved, "he's too busy having secrets--"

"Hmm," Rupert murmured, more interested in his letter than in the
conversation.

"The trouble is that we are not Chinese bandits, Malay pirates, or Arab
freebooters. We don't possess color, life, enough--enough--"

"Sugar," Rupert interrupted Val, pushing his coffee-cup in the general
direction of Ricky without raising his eyes from the page in his hand.
She giggled.

"So that's what we lack. Well, now we know. How much sugar should we
have, Rupert? Rupert--Mr. Rupert Ralestone--Mr. Rupert Ralestone of
Pirate's Haven!" Her voice grew louder and shriller until he did lay
down his reading matter and really looked at them for the first time.

"What do you want?"

"A little attention," answered Ricky sweetly. "We aren't Chinese, Arabs,
or Malays, but we are kind of nice to know, aren't we, Val? If you'd
only come out of your subconscious, or wherever you are most of the
time, you'd find that out without being told."

Rupert laughed and pushed away his letters. "Sorry. I picked up the bad
habit of reading at breakfast when I didn't have my table brightened by
your presence. I know," he became serious, "that I haven't been much of
a family man. But there are reasons--"

"Which, of course, you can not tell _us_," flashed Ricky.

His face lengthened ruefully. He pulled at his tie with an embarrassed
frown. "Not yet, anyway. I--" He fumbled with his napkin. "Oh, well, let
me see how it comes out first."

Ricky opened her eyes to their widest extent and leaned forward, every
inch of her expressing awe. "Rupert, don't tell me that you are an
_inventor_!" she cried.

"Now I know that we'll end in the poorhouse," Val observed.

Rupert had recovered his composure. "'I yam what I yam,'" he quoted.

"Very well. Keep it to yourself then," pouted Ricky. "We can have
secrets too."

"I don't doubt it." He glanced at Val. "Unfortunately you always tell
them. See any more bogies last night, Val? Did a big, black, formless
something reach out from under the bed and clutch at you?"

But his brother refused to be drawn. "No, but when it does I'll sic it
onto you. A big, black, formless something is just what you need. And
I'll--"

"Am I interrupting?" Charity stood in the door. "Goodness! Haven't you
finished breakfast yet? Do you people know that it is almost ten?"

"Madam, we have banished time." Rupert drew out the chair at his left.
"Will you favor us with your company?"

"I thought you were going to be busy today," said Ricky as she rang for
Letty-Lou and a fresh cup of coffee for their guest.

"So did I," sighed Charity. "And I should be. I've got this order, you
know, and now I can't get any models. Why there should be a sudden
dearth of them right now, I can't imagine. I thought I could use Jeems
again, but somehow he isn't the type." She raised her cup to her lips.

"Are you doing story illustrations?" asked Rupert, more alive now than
he had been all morning.

"Yes. A historical thriller for a magazine. They want a full-page cut
for the first chapter and a half-page to illustrate the most exciting
scene. Then there're innumerable smaller ones. But the two large ones
are what I'm worrying about. I like to get the important stuff finished
first, and now I simply can't get models who are the right types."

"What's the story about?" demanded Ricky.

"It's laid in Haiti during the French invasion led by Napoleon's
brother-in-law, the one who married Pauline. All voodoo and aristocratic
young hero and beautiful maiden pursued by an officer of the black
rebels. And," she almost wailed, "here I am with the clothes spread all
over my bed--the right costumes, you know--with no one to wear them. I
went over to the Corners this morning and called Johnson--he runs a
registration office for models--but he couldn't promise me anyone." She
bit absent-mindedly into a round spiced roll Ricky had placed before
her.

"Wait!" She laid down the roll in a preoccupied fashion and stared
across the table. "Val, stand up."

Wondering, he pushed back his chair and arose obediently.

"Turn your head a little more to the right," Charity ordered. "There,
that's it! Now try to look as if there were something all ready to
spring at you from that corner over there."

For one angry moment he thought that she had been told of what had
happened the night before and was baiting him, as the others had done.
But a sidewise glance showed him that her interest lay elsewhere. So he
screwed up his features into what he fondly hoped was a grim and deadly
smile.

"For goodness sake, don't look as if you had eaten green apples," Ricky
shot at him. "Just put on that face you wear when I show you a new hat.
No, not that sneering one; the other."

Rupert threw back his head and laughed heartily. "Better let him alone,
Ricky. After all, it's _his_ face."

"I'm glad that someone has pointed out that fact," Val said stiffly,
"because--"

"Oh, be quiet!" Charity leaned forward across the table. "Yes," she
nodded, "you'll do."

"For what?" Val asked, slightly apprehensive.

"For my hero. Of course your hair is too short and you are rather too
youthful, but I can disguise those points. And," she turned upon Ricky,
"you can be the lady in distress. Which gives me another idea. Do you
suppose that I might use your terrace for a background and have that big
chair, the one with the high back?" she asked Rupert.

"You may have anything you want within these walls," he answered lightly
enough, but it was clear that he really meant it.

"What am I supposed to do?" Val asked.

Charity considered. "I think I'll try the action one first," she said
half to herself. "That's going to be the most difficult. Ricky, will you
send one of Lucy's children over with me to help carry back the costumes
and my material--" She was already at the door.

"Val and I will go instead," Ricky replied.

Some twenty minutes later Val was handed a suitcase and told to use the
contents to cover his back. Having doubts of the wisdom of the whole
affair, he went reluctantly upstairs to obey. But the result was not so
bad. The broad-shouldered, narrow-waisted coat did not fit him ill,
though the shiny boots were at least a size too large. Timidly he went
down. Ricky was the first to see him.

"Val! You look like something out of _Lloyds of London_. Rupert, look at
Val. Doesn't he look wonderful?"

Having thus made public his embarrassment, she ran to the mirror to
finish her own prinking. The high-waisted Empire gown of soft green
voile made her appear taller than usual. But she walked with a little
shuffle which suggested that her ribbon-strapped slippers fitted her no
better than Val's boots did him. Charity was coaxing Ricky's tight
fashionable curls into a looser arrangement and tying a green ribbon
about them. This done, she turned to survey Val.

"I thought so," she said with satisfaction. "You are just what I want.
But," the tiny lines about her eyes crinkled in amusement, "at present
you are just a little too perfect. Do you realize that you have just
fought off an attack, led by a witch doctor, in which you were wounded;
that you have struggled through a jungle for seven hours in order to
reach your betrothed; and that you are now facing death by torture? I
hardly think that you should look as if you had just stepped out of the
