
Why, what was this? Not George Prince? A masquerader, yet so like
George Prince.

"Gregg don't you know me?"

Clinging to me. A soft touch upon my arm. Fingers, clinging. A surge
of warm, tingling current was flowing between us.

My sweep of instant thoughts. A speck of human Earth dust falling
free. That was George Prince who had been killed. George Prince's
body, disguised by the scheming Carter and Dr. Frank, buried in the
guise of his sister. And this black-robed figure who was trying to
help me....

"Anita! Anita darling--"

"Gregg, dear one!"

"Anita!" My arms went around her, my lips pressed hers, and felt her
tremulous eager answer.

The form of Coniston showed at our window. She cast me off. She said,
with her throaty swagger of amused, masculinity:

"I have him, Sir Arthur. He will obey us."

I sensed her warning glance. She shoved me toward the window. She
said ironically, "Have no fear, Haljan. You will not be tortured, you
and Dean, if you obey our commands."

Coniston gripped me. "You fool! You caused us a lot of trouble. Move
along there!"

He jerked me roughly through the window. Marched me the length of the
deck, out to the stern space, opened the door of my cubby, flung me in
and sealed the door upon me.

"Miko will come presently."

I stood in the darkness of my tiny room, listening to his retreating
footsteps. But my mind was not upon him.

All the universe, in that instant, had changed for me. Anita was
alive!




XIV


The giant Miko stood confronting me. He slid my cubby door closed
behind him. He stood with his head towering close against my ceiling.
His cloak was discarded. In his leather clothes, and with his clanking
sword ornament, his aspect carried the swagger of a brigand of old. He
was bare-headed; the light from one of my tubes fell upon his
grinning, leering gray face.

"So, Gregg Haljan? You have come to your senses at last. You do not
wish me to write my name on your chest? I would not have done that to
Dean; he forced me. Sit back."

I had been on my bunk. I sank back at the gesture of his huge hairy
arm. His forearm was bare now; the sear of a burn on it was plain to
be seen. He remarked my gaze.

"True. You did that, Haljan, in Greater New York. But I bear you no
malice. I want to talk to you now."

He cast about for a seat, and took the little stool which stood by my
desk. His hand held a small cylinder of the Martian paralyzing ray. He
rested it beside him on the desk.

"Now we can talk."

I remained silent. Alert. Yet my thoughts were whirling. Anita was
alive. Masquerading as her brother. And, with the joy of it, came a
shudder. Above everything, Miko must not know.

"A great adventure we are upon, Haljan."

My thoughts came back. Miko was talking with an assumption of friendly
comradeship. "All is well--and we need you, as I have said before. I
am no fool. I have been aware of everything that went on aboard this
ship. You, of all the officers, are most clever at the routine
mathematics. Is that so?"

"Perhaps."

"You are modest." He fumbled at a pocket of his jacket, produced a
scroll-sheaf. I recognized it. Blackstone's figures. The calculation
Blackstone made of the asteroid we had passed.

"I am interested in these," Miko went on. "I want you to verify them.
And this." He held up another scroll. "This is the calculation of our
present position and our course. Hahn claims he is a navigator. We
have set the ship's gravity plates--see, like this."

He handed me the scrolls. He watched me keenly as I glanced over them.

"Well?" I said.

"You are sparing of words, Haljan. By the devils of the airways, I
could make you talk! But I want to be friendly."

I handed him back the scrolls. I stood up. I was almost within reach
of his weapon, but with a sweep of his great arm he knocked me back to
my bunk.

"You dare?" Then he smiled. "Let us not come to blows!"

In truth, physical violence could get me nothing. I would have to try
guile. And I saw now that his face was flushed and his eyes
unnaturally bright. He had been drinking alcolite; not enough to
befuddle him, but enough to make him triumphantly talkative.

"Hahn may not be much of a mathematician," I suggested. "But there is
your Sir Arthur Coniston." I managed a sarcastic grin. "Is that his
name?"

"Almost. Haljan, will you verify these figures?"

"Yes. But why? Where are we going?"

He laughed. "You are afraid I will not tell you! Why should I? This
great adventure of mine is progressing perfectly. A tremendous stake,
Haljan. A hundred million dollars in gold leaf. There will be fabulous
riches for all of us--"

"But where are we going?"

"To that asteroid," he said. "I must get rid of these passengers. I am
no murderer."

With a half-dozen killings in the recent fight this was hardly
convincing. But he was obviously wholly serious. He seemed to read my
thoughts.

"I kill only when necessary. We will land upon the asteroid. A perfect
place to maroon the passengers. Is it not so? I will give them the
necessities of life. They will be able to signal. And in a month or
so, when we are perfectly safe and finished with our adventure, a
police ship no doubt will rescue them."

"And then, from the asteroid," I suggested, "we are going--"

"To the Moon, Haljan. What a clever guesser you are! Coniston and Hahn
are calculating our course. But I have no great confidence in them.
And so I want you."

"You have me."

"Yes. I have you. I would have killed you long ago--I am an impulsive
fellow--but my sister restrained me."

He gazed at me slyly. "Moa seems strangely to like you, Haljan."

"Thanks," I said. "I'm flattered."

"She still hopes I may really win you to join us," he went on. "Gold
leaf is a wonderful thing; there would be plenty for you in this
affair. And to be rich, and have the love of a woman like Moa...."

He paused. I was trying cautiously to gauge him, to get from him all
the information I could. I said, with another smile, "That is
premature, to talk of Moa. I will help you chart your course. But this
venture, as you call it, is dangerous. A police ship--"

"There are not many," he declared. "The chances of our encountering
one are very slim." He grinned at me. "You know that as well as I do.
And we now have those code passwords--I forced Dean to tell me where
he had hidden them. If we should be challenged, our password answer
will relieve suspicion."

"The _Planetara_," I objected, "being overdue at Ferrok-Shahn, will
cause alarm. You'll have a covey of patrol ships after you."

"That will be two weeks from now," he smiled. "I have a ship of my own
in Ferrok-Shahn. It lies there waiting now, manned and armed. I am
hoping that, with Dean's help, we may be able to flash them a signal.
It will join us on the Moon. Fear not for the danger, Haljan. I have
great interests allied with me in this thing. Plenty of money. We have
planned carefully."

He was idly fingering his cylinder; he gazed at me as I sat docile on
my bunk. "Did you think George Prince was a leader of this? A mere
boy. I engaged him a year ago--his knowledge of science is valuable to
us."

My heart was pounding but I strove not to show it. He went on calmly.

"I told you I am impulsive. Half a dozen times I have nearly killed
George Prince, and he knows it." He frowned. "I wish I had killed him
instead of his sister. That was an error."

There was a note of real concern in his voice. He added, "That is
done--nothing can change it. George Prince is helpful to me. Your
friend Dean, is another. I had trouble with him, but he is docile
now."

I said abruptly, "I don't know whether your promise means anything or
not, Miko. But Prince said you would use no more torture."

"I won't. Not if you and Dean obey me."

"You tell Dean I have agreed to that. You say he gave you the code
words he took from Johnson?"

"Yes. There was a fool, for you! That Johnson! You blame me, Haljan,
for the death of Carter? You need not. Johnson offered to try and
capture you, take you both alive. He killed Carter because he was
angry with him. A stupid, vengeful fool! He is dead and I'm glad of
it."

My mind was on Miko's plans. I ventured, "This treasure on the
Moon--did you say it was on the Moon?"

"Don't play the fool," he retorted. "I know as much about Grantline as
you do."

"That's very little."

"Perhaps."

"Perhaps you know more, Miko. The Moon is a big place. Where, for
instance, is Grantline located?"

I held my breath. Would he tell me that? A score of questions--vague
plans were in my mind. How skilled at mathematics were these brigands?
Miko, Coniston, Hahn--could I fool them? If I could learn Grantline's
location on the Moon, and keep the _Planetara_ away from it. A
pretended error of charting. Time lost--and perhaps Snap could find an
opportunity to signal Earth, get help.

Miko answered my question as bluntly as I asked it. "I don't know
where Grantline is located. But we will find out. He will not suspect
the _Planetara_ so when we get close to the Moon, we will signal and
ask him. We can trick him into telling us. You think I do not know
what is on your mind, Haljan? There is a secret code of signals
arranged between Dean and Grantline. I have forced Dean to confess it.
Without torture! Prince helped me in that. He persuaded Dean not to
defy me. A very persuasive fellow, George Prince. More diplomatic than
I am. I give him credit for that."

I strove to hold my voice calm. "If I should join you, Miko--my word,
if I ever gave it, you would find dependable--I would say George
Prince is very valuable to us. You should rein your temper. He is
half your size--you might some time, without intention, do him
injury."

He laughed. "Moa says so. But have no fear--"

"I was thinking," I persisted. "I'd like to have a talk with George
Prince."

Ah, my pounding, tumultuous heart! But I was smiling calmly. And I
tried to put into my voice a shrewd note of cupidity. "I really know
very little about this treasure, Miko. If there were a million or two
of gold leaf in it for me--"

"Perhaps there would be."

"Suppose you let me have a talk with Prince? I have some scientific
knowledge myself about the powers of this catalyst. Prince's knowledge
and mine--we might be able to come to a calculation on the value of
Grantline's treasure. You don't know. You are only assuming."

I paused after this glib outburst. Whatever may have been in Miko's
mind, I cannot say. But abruptly he stood up. I had left my bunk but
he waved me back.

"Sit down. I am not like Moa. I would not trust you just because you
protested you would be loyal." He picked up his cylinder. "We will
talk again." He gestured to the scrolls he had left upon my desk.
"Work on those. I will judge you by the results."

He was no fool, this brigand leader.

"Yes," I agreed. "You want a true course to the asteroid?"

"Yes. And by the gods, I warn you, I can check up on you!"

I said meekly, "Very well. But you ask Prince if he wants my
calculations on Grantline's possibilities."

I shot Miko a foxy look as he stood by the door. I added, "You think
you are clever. There is plenty you don't know. Our first night out
from Earth--Grantline's signals--didn't it ever occur to you that I
might have some figures on his treasure?"

It startled him. "Where are they?"

I tapped my forehead. "You don't suppose I was foolish enough to
record them. You ask Prince if he wants to talk to me. A hundred
million, or two hundred million--it would make a big difference,
Miko."

"I will think about it." He backed out and sealed the door upon me.

But Anita did not come. I verified Hahn's figures, which were very
nearly correct. I charted a course for the asteroid; it was almost the
one which had been set.

Coniston came for my results. "I say, we are not so bad as navigators,
are we? I think we're jolly good, considering our inexperience. Not
bad at all, eh?"

"No."

I did not think it wise to ask him about Prince.

"Are you hungry, Haljan?"

"Yes."

A steward came with a meal. The saturnine Hahn stood at my door with a
weapon upon me while I ate. They were taking no chances and they were
wise not to.

The day passed. Day and night, all the same of aspect here in the
starry vault of space. But with the ship's routine it was day. And
then another time of sleep. I slept fitfully, worrying, trying to
plan. Within a few hours we would be nearing the asteroid.

The time of sleep was nearly passed. My chronometer marked five A.M.
original Earth starting time. The seal of my cubby door hissed. The
door slowly opened.

Anita!

She stood there with her cloak around her. A distance away on the
shadowed deck Coniston was loitering.

"Anita!" I whispered it.

"Gregg, dear!"

She turned and gestured to the watching brigand. "I will not be long,
Coniston."
