automatically, dodging behind the protection of a shop front. The men
crumpled. The wooden front buckled under the impact of a projectile
weapon and splinters slashed his hand. Barrent saw a fourth man firing
at him from an alley. He brought the man down with two shots.

And that was that. In the space of a few seconds, he had killed four
men.

Although he didn't think of himself as having a murderer's mentality,
Barrent was pleased and elated. He had fired only in self-defense. He
had given the status-seekers something to think about; they wouldn't be
so quick to gun for him next time. Quite possibly they would concentrate
on easier targets and leave him alone.

When he returned to his shop, he found Joe waiting for him. The little
credit thief had a sour look on his face. He said, "I saw your fancy
gun-work today. Very pretty."

"Thank you," Barrent said.

"Do you think that sort of thing will help you? Do you think you can
just go on breaking the law?"

"I'm getting away with it," Barrent said.

"Sure. But how long do you think you can keep it up?"

"As long as I have to."

"Not a chance," Joe said. "_Nobody_ keeps on breaking the law and
getting away with it. Only suckers believe that."

"They'd better send some good men after me," Barrent said, reloading his
needlebeam.

"That's not how it'll happen," Joe said. "Believe me, Will, there's no
counting the ways they have of getting you. Once the law decides to
move, there'll be nothing you can do to stop it. And don't expect any
help from that girl friend of yours, either."

"Do you know her?" Barrent asked.

"I know everybody," Joe said moodily. "I've got friends in the
government. I know that people have had about enough of you. Listen to
me, Will. Do you want to end up dead?"

Barrent shook his head. "Joe, can you visit Moera? Do you know how to
reach her?"

"Maybe," Joe said. "What for?"

"I want you to tell her something," Barrent said. "I want you to tell
her that I didn't commit the murder I was accused of on Earth."

Joe stared at him. "Are you out of your mind?"

"No. I found the man who actually did it. He's a Second Class Resident
named Illiardi."

"Why spread it around?" Joe asked. "No sense in losing credit for the
kill."

"I didn't murder the man," Barrent said. "I want you to tell Moera. Will
you?"

"I'll tell her," Joe said. "If I can locate her. Look, will you remember
what I've said? Maybe you still have time to do something about it. Go
to Black Mass or something. It might help."

"Maybe I'll do that," Barrent said. "You'll be sure to tell her?"

"I'll tell her," Joe said. He left the Antidote Shop shaking his head
sadly.




Chapter Fifteen


Three days later, Barrent received a visit from a tall, dignified man
who stood as rigidly erect as the ceremonial sword that hung by his
side. The old man wore a high-collared coat, black pants, and gleaming
black boots. From his clothing, Barrent knew he was a high government
official.

"The government of Omega sends you greetings," said the official. "I am
Norins Jay, Sub-Minister of Games. I am here, as required by law, to
inform you personally of your good fortune."

Barrent nodded warily and invited the old man into his apartment. But
Jay, erect and proper, preferred to stay in the store.

"The yearly Lottery drawing was held last night," Jay said. "You,
Citizen Barrent, are one of the prize winners. I congratulate you."

"What is the prize?" Barrent asked. He had heard of the yearly Lottery,
but had only a vague idea of its significance.

"The prize," Jay said, "is honor and fame. Your name inscribed on the
civic rolls. Your record of kills preserved for posterity. More
concretely, you will receive a new government-issue needlebeam and,
afterwards, you will be awarded posthumously the silver sunburst
decoration."

"Posthumously?"

"Of course," Jay said. "The silver sunburst is always awarded after
death. It is no less an honor for that."

"I'm sure it isn't," Barrent said. "Is there anything else?"

"Just one other thing," Jay said. "As a Lottery winner, you will take
part in the symbolic ceremony of the Hunt, which marks the beginning of
the yearly Games. The Hunt, as you may know, personifies our Omegan way
of life. In the Hunt we see all the complex factors of the dramatic rise
and fall from grace, combined with the thrill of the duel and the
excitement of the chase. Even peons are allowed to participate in the
Hunt, for this is the one holiday open to all, and the one holiday that
symbolizes the common man's ability to rise above the restraints of his
status."

"If I understand correctly," Barrent said, "I'm one of the people who
have been chosen to be hunted."

"Yes," Jay said.

"But you said the ceremony is symbolic. Doesn't that mean no one gets
killed?"

"Not at all!" Jay said. "On Omega, the symbol and the thing symbolized
are usually one and the same. When we say a Hunt, we mean a true hunt.
Otherwise the thing would be mere pageantry."

Barrent stopped a moment to consider the situation. It was not a
pleasing prospect. In a man-to-man duel he had an excellent chance of
survival. But the yearly Hunt, in which the entire population of
Tetrahyde took part, gave him no chance at all. He should have been
ready for a possibility like this.

"How was I picked?" he asked.

"By random selection," said Norins Jay. "No other method would be fair
to the Hunteds, who give up their lives for Omega's greater glory."

"I can't believe I was picked purely by chance."

"The selection was random," Jay said. "It was made, of course, from a
list of suitable victims. Not everyone can be a Quarry in a Hunt. A man
must have demonstrated a considerable degree of tenacity and skill
before the Games Committee would think of considering him for selection.
Being Hunted is an honor; it is not one which we confer lightly."

"I don't believe it," Barrent said. "You people in the government were
out to get me. Now, it seems, you've succeeded. It's as simple as that."

"Not at all. I can assure you that none of us in the government bear you
the slightest ill will. You may have heard foolish stories about
vindictive officials, but they simply aren't true. You have broken the
law, but that is no longer the government's concern. Now it is entirely
a matter between you and the law."

Jay's frosty blue eyes flashed when he spoke of the law. His back
stiffened, and his mouth grew firm.

"The law," he said, "is above the criminal and the judge, and rules them
both. The law is inescapable, for an action is either lawful or
unlawful. The law, indeed, may be said to have a life of its own, an
existence quite apart from the finite lives of the beings who
administer it. The law governs every aspect of human behavior;
therefore, to the same extent that humans are lawful beings, the law is
human. And being human, the law has its idiosyncrasies, just as a man
has his. For a citizen who abides by the law, the law is distant and
difficult to find. For those who reject and violate it, the law emerges
from its musty sepulchers and goes in search of the transgressor."

"And that," Barrent said, "is why I was chosen for the Hunt?"

"Of course," Jay said. "If you had not been chosen in that way, the
zealous and never-sleeping law would have selected another means, using
whatever instruments were at its disposal."

"Thanks for telling me," Barrent said. "How long do I have before the
Hunt begins?"

"Until dawn. The Hunt begins then, and ends at dawn of the following
day."

"What happens if I'm not killed?"

Norins Jay smiled faintly. "That doesn't happen often, Citizen Barrent.
I'm sure it need not worry you."

"It happens, doesn't it?"

"Yes. Those who survive the Hunt are automatically enrolled in the
Games."

"And if I survive the Games?"

"Forget it," Jay said in a friendly manner.

"But what if I do?"

"Believe me, Citizen, you won't."

"I still would like to know what happens if I do."

"Those who live through the Games are beyond the law."

"That sounds promising," Barrent said.

"It isn't. The law, even at its most threatening, is still your
guardian. Your rights may be few, but the law guarantees their
observance. It is because of the law that I do not kill you here and
now." Jay opened his hand, and Barrent saw a tiny single-charge weapon.
"The law sets limits, and acts as a modifier upon the behavior of the
lawbreaker and the law enforcer. To be sure, the law now states that you
must die. But all men must die. The law, by its ponderous and
introspective nature, gives you time in which to die. You have a day at
least; and without the law, you would have no time at all."

"What happens," Barrent asked, "if I survive the Games and pass beyond
the law?"

"There is only one thing beyond the law," Norins Jay said reflectively,
"and that is The Black One himself. Those who pass beyond the law belong
to him. But it would be better to die a thousand times than to fall
living into the hands of The Black One."

Barrent had long ago dismissed the religion of The Black One as
superstitious nonsense. But now, listening to Jay's earnest voice, he
began to wonder. There might be a difference between the commonplace
worship of evil and the actual presence of Evil itself.

"But if you have any luck," Jay said, "you will be killed early. Now I
will end the interview with your final instructions."

Still holding the tiny weapon, Jay reached into a pocket with his free
hand and withdrew a red pencil. In a quick, practiced motion he drew the
pencil over Barrent's cheeks and forehead. He was finished before
Barrent had time to recoil.

"That marks you as one of the Hunted," Jay said. "The hunt-marks are
indelible. Here is your government-issue needlebeam." He drew a weapon
from his pocket and put it on the table. "The Hunt, as I told you,
begins at first light of dawn. Anyone may kill you then, except another
Hunted man. You may kill in return. But I suggest that you do so with
the utmost circumspection. The sound and flash of needlebeams have given
many Hunteds away. If you try concealment, be sure you have an exit.
Remember that others know Tetrahyde better than you. Skilled Hunters
have explored all the possible hiding places over the years; many of the
Hunted are trapped during the first hours of the holiday. Good luck,
Citizen Barrent."

Jay walked to the door. He opened it and turned to Barrent again.

"There is, I might add, one barely possible way of preserving both life
and liberty during the Hunt. But, since it is forbidden, I cannot tell
you what it is."

Norins Jay bowed and went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent found, after repeated washings, that the crimson hunt-marks on
his face were indeed indelible. During the evening, he disassembled the
government-issue needlebeam and inspected its parts. As he had suspected
the weapon was defective. He discarded it in favor of his own.

He made his preparations for the Hunt, putting food, water, a coil of
rope, a knife, extra ammunition, and a spare needlebeam into a small
knapsack. Then he waited, hoping against all reason that Moera and her
organization would bring him a last-minute reprieve.

But no reprieve came. An hour before dawn, Barrent shouldered his
knapsack and left the Antidote Shop. He had no idea what the other
Hunteds were doing; but he had already decided on a place that might be
secure from the Hunters.




Chapter Sixteen


Authorities on Omega agree that a Hunted man experiences a change of
character. If he were able to look upon the Hunt as an abstract problem,
he might arrive at certain more or less valid conclusions. But the
typical Hunted, no matter how great his intelligence, cannot divorce
emotion from reasoning. After all, _he_ is being hunted. He becomes
panic-stricken. Safety seems to lie in distance and depth. He goes as
far from home as possible; he goes deep into the ground along the
subterranean maze of sewers and conduits. He chooses darkness instead of
light, empty places in preference to crowded ones.

This behavior is well known to experienced Hunters. Quite naturally,
they look first in the dark, empty places, in the underground
passageways, in deserted stores and buildings. Here they find and flush
the Hunted with inexorable precision.

Barrent had thought about this. He had discarded his first instinct,
which was to hide in the intricate Tetrahyde cloaca. Instead, an hour
before dawn, he went directly to the large, brightly lighted building
that housed the Ministry of Games.

When the corridors seemed to be deserted, he entered quickly, read the
directory, and climbed the stairs to the third floor. He passed a dozen
office doors, and finally stopped at the one marked NORINS JAY,
SUB-MINISTER OF GAMES. He listened for a moment, then opened the door
and stepped in.

There was nothing wrong with old Jay's reflexes. Before Barrent was
through the doorway, the old man had spotted the crimson hunt-marks on
his face. Jay opened a drawer and reached into it.

Barrent had no desire to kill the old man. He flung the government-issue
needlebeam at Jay, and caught him full on the forehead. Jay staggered
back against the wall, then collapsed to the floor.

Bending over him, Barrent found that his pulse was strong. He bound and
gagged the sub-minister, and pushed him out of sight under his desk.
Hunting through the drawers, he found a CONFERENCE: DO NOT DISTURB sign.
He hung this outside the door, and locked it. With his own needlebeam
drawn, he sat down behind the desk and awaited events.

Dawn came, and a watery sun rose over Omega. From the window, Barrent
could see the streets filled with people. There was a hectic carnival
atmosphere in the city, and the noise of the holiday celebration was
punctuated by the occasional hiss of a beamer or the flat explosion of a
projectile weapon.

By noon, Barrent was still undetected. He looked through windows, and
found that he had access to the roof. He was glad to have an exit, just
as Jay had suggested.

