
As he connected up the educator, Seaton explained what had happened, and
concluded:

"I want to stop this civil war, keep Dunark from destroying this planet,
preserve Osnome for Osnomians, and make them all co-operate with us
against the Fenachrone. That's one tall order, since these folks haven't
the remotest notion of anything except killing."

A company of soldiers approached, and Dorothy got up hastily.

"Stick around, folks. We can all talk to them."

"I believe that it would be better for you to be alone," Crane decided,
after a moment's thought. "They are used to autocratic power, and can
understand nothing but one-man control. The girls and I will keep out of
it."

"That might be better at that," and Seaton went to the door to welcome
the guests. Seaton instructed them to lie flat, and put on all the
acceleration they could bear. It was not long until they were back in
Kondal, where Roban, the Karfedix, and Tarnan, the Karbix, accepted
Seaton's invitation and entered the Skylark, unarmed. Back out in space,
the vessel stationary, Seaton introduced the emperors and
commanders-in-chief to each other--introductions which were acknowledged
almost imperceptibly. He then gave each a headset, and ran the complete
record of the Fenachrone brain.

"Stop!" shouted Roban, after only a moment. "Would you, the Overlord of
Osnome, reveal such secrets as this to the arch-enemies of Osnome?"

"I would. I have taken over the Overlordship of the entire green system
for the duration of this emergency, and I do not want two of its planets
engaged in civil war."

The record finished, Seaton tried for some time to bring the four green
warriors to his way of thinking, but in vain. Roban and Tarnan remained
contemptuous. They would have thrown themselves upon him, but for the
knowledge that no fifty unarmed men of the green race could have
overcome his strength--to them supernatural. The two Urvanians were
equally obdurate. This soft earth-being had given them everything; they
had given him nothing and would give him nothing. Finally Seaton rose to
his full height and stared at them in turn, wrath and determination
blazing in his eyes.

"I have brought you four together, here in a neutral vessel in neutral
space, to bring about peace between you. I have shown you the benefits
to be derived from the peaceful pursuit of science, knowledge, and
power, instead of continuing this utter economic waste of continual war.
You all close your senses to reason. You of Osnome accuse me of being an
ingrate and a traitor; you of Urvania consider me a soft-headed,
sentimental weakling, who may safely be disregarded--all because I think
the welfare of the numberless peoples of the Universe more important
than your narrow-minded, stubborn, selfish vanity. Think what you
please. If brute force is your only logic, know now that I can, and
will, use brute force. Here are the seven disks," and he placed the
bracelet upon Roban's knee.

"If you four leaders are short-sighted enough to place your petty enmity
before the good of all civilization, I am done with you forever. I have
deliberately given Urvanians precisely the same information that I have
given the Osnomians--no more and no less. I have given neither of you
all that I know, and I shall know much more than I do now, before the
time of the conquest shall have arrived. Unless you four men, here and
now, renounce this war and agree to a perpetual peace between your
worlds, I shall leave you to your mutual destruction. You do not yet
realize the power of the weapons I have given you. When you do realize
it, you will know that mutual destruction is inevitable if you continue
this internecine war. I shall continue upon other worlds my search for
the one secret standing between me and a complete mastery of power. That
I shall find that secret I am confident; and, having found it, I shall,
without your aid, destroy the Fenachrone.

"You have several times remarked with sneers that you are not to be
swayed by empty threats. What I am about to say is no empty threat--it
is a most solemn promise, given by one who has both the will and the
power to fulfill his every given word. Now listen carefully to this, my
final utterance. If you continue this warfare and if the victor should
not be utterly destroyed in its course, I swear as I stand here, by the
great First Cause, that I shall myself wipe out every trace of the
surviving nation as soon as the Fenachrone shall have been obliterated.
Work with each other and me and we all may live--fight on and both your
nations, to the last person, will most certainly die. Decide now which
it is to be. I have spoken."

       *       *       *       *       *

Roban took up the bracelet and clasped it again about Seaton's arm,
saying, "You are more than ever our Overlord. You are wiser than are we,
and stronger. Issue your commands and they shall be obeyed."

"Why did not you say those things first, Overlord?" asked the Urvanian
emperor, as he saluted and smiled. "We could not in honor submit to a
weakling, no matter what the fate in store. Having convinced us of your
strength, there can be no disgrace in fighting beneath your screens. An
armlet of seven symbols shall be cast and ready for you when you next
visit us. Roban of Osnome, you are my brother."

The two emperors saluted each other and stared eye to eye for a long
moment, and Seaton knew that the perpetual peace had been signed. Then
all four spoke, in unison:

"Overlord, we await your commands."

"Dunark of Osnome is already informed as to what Osnome is to do. Say to
him that it will not be necessary for him to build the vessel for me;
the Urvanians will do that. Urvan of Urvania, you will accompany Roban
to Osnome, where you two will order instant cessation of hostilities.
Osnome has many ships of this type, and upon some of them you will
return your every soldier and engine of war to your own planet. As soon
as possible you will build for me a vessel like that of the Fenachrone,
except that it shall be ten times as large, in every dimension, and
except that every instrument, control, and weapon is to be left out."

"Left out? It shall be so built--but of what use will it be?"

"The empty spaces shall be filled after I have returned from my quest.
You will build this vessel of dagal. You will also instruct the Osnomian
commander in the manufacture of that metal, which is so much more
resistant than their arenak."

"But, Overlord, we have...."

"I have just brought immense stores of the precious chemical and of the
metal of power to Osnome. They will share it with you. I also advise you
to build for yourselves many ships like those of the Fenachrone, with
which to do battle with the invaders, in case I should fail in my quest.
You will, of course, see to it that there will be a corps of your most
efficient mechanics and artisans within call at all times in case I
should return and have sudden need for them."

"All these things shall be done."

The conference ended, the four nobles were quickly landed upon Osnome
and once more the _Skylark_ traveled out into her element, the total
vacuum and absolute zero of the outer void, with Crane at the controls.

"You certainly sounded savage, Dick. I almost thought you really meant
it!" Dorothy chuckled.

"I did mean it, Dot. Those fellows are mighty keen on detecting bluffs.
If I hadn't meant it, and if they hadn't known that I meant it, I'd
never have got away with it."

"But you _couldn't_ have meant it, Dick! You wouldn't have destroyed the
Osnomians, surely--you know you wouldn't."

"No, but I would have destroyed what was left of the Urvanians, and all
five of us knew exactly how it would have turned out and exactly what I
would have done about it--that's why they all pulled in their horns."

"I don't know what would have happened," interjected Margaret. "What
would have?"

"With this new stuff the Urvanians would have wiped the Osnomians out.
They are an older race, and so much better in science and mechanics that
the Osnomians wouldn't have stood much chance, and knew it.
Incidentally, that's why I'm having them build our new ship. They'll put
a lot of stuff into it that Dunark's men would miss--maybe some stuff
that even the Fenachrone haven't got. However, though it might seem that
the Urvanians had all the best of it, Urvan knew that I had something up
my sleeve besides my bare arm--and he knew that I'd clean up what there
was left of his race if they polished off the Osnomians."

"What a frightful chance you were taking, Dick!" gasped Dorothy.

"You have to be hard to handle those folks--and believe me, I was a
forty-minute egg right then. They have such a peculiar mental and moral
slant that we can hardly understand them at all. This idea of
co-operation is so new to them that it actually dazed all four of them
even to consider it."

"Do you suppose they will fight, anyway?" asked Crane.

"Absolutely not. Both nations have an inflexible code of honor, such as
it is, and lying is against both codes. That's one thing I like about
them--I'm sort of honest myself, and with either of these races you need
nothing signed or guaranteed."

"What next, Dick?"

"Now the real trouble begins. Mart, oil up the massive old intellect.
Have you found the answer to the problem?"

"What problem?" asked Dorothy. "You didn't tell us anything about a
problem."

"No, I told Mart. I want the best physicist in this entire solar
system--and since there are only one hundred and twenty-five planets
around these seventeen suns, it should be simple to yon phenomenal
brain. In fact, I expect to hear him say 'elementary, my dear Watson,
elementary'!"

"Hardly that, Dick, but I have found out a few things. There are some
eighty planets which are probably habitable for beings like us. Other
things being equal, it seems reasonable to assume that the older the
sun, the longer its planets have been habitable, and therefore the older
and more intelligent the life...."

"'Ha! ha! It was elementary,' says Sherlock." Seaton interrupted.
"You're heading directly at that largest, oldest, and most intelligent
planet, then, I take it, where I can catch me my physicist?"

"Not directly at it, no. I am heading for the place where it will be
when we reach it. That is elementary."

"Ouch! That got to me, Mart, right where I live. I'll be good."

"But you are getting ahead of me, Dick--it is not as simple as you have
assumed from what I have said so far. The Osnomian astronomers have done
wonders in the short time they have had, but their data, particularly on
the planets of the outer suns, is as yet necessarily very incomplete.
Since the furthermost outer sun is probably the oldest, it is the one in
which we are most interested. It has seven planets, four of which are
probably habitable, as far as temperature and atmosphere are concerned.
However, nothing exact is yet known of their masses, motions, or places.
Therefore I have laid our course to intercept the closest one to us, as
nearly as I can from what meager data we have. If it should prove to be
inhabited by intelligent beings, they can probably give us more exact
information concerning their neighboring planets. That is the best I can
do."

"That's a darn fine best, old top--narrowing down to four from a hundred
and twenty-five. Well, until we get there, what to do? Let's sing us a
song, to keep our fearless quartette in good voice."

"Before you do anything," said Margaret seriously, "I would like to know
if you really think there is a chance of defeating those monsters."

       *       *       *       *       *

"In all seriousness, I do. In fact, I am quite confident of it. If we
had two years, I know that we could lick them cold; and by stepping on
the gas I believe we can get the dope in less than the six months we
have to work in."

"I know that you are serious, Dick. Now you know that I do not want to
discourage any one, but I can see small basis for optimism," Crane spoke
slowly and thoughtfully. "I hope that you will be able to control the
zone of force--but you are not studying it yourself. You seem to be
certain that somewhere in this system there is a race who already knows
all about it. I would like to know your reasons for thinking that such a
race exists."

"They may not be upon this system; they may have been outsiders, as we
are--but I have reasons for believing them to be natives of this system,
since they were green. You are as familiar with Osnomian mythology as I
am--you girls in particular have read Osnomian legends to Osnomian
children for hours. Also identically the same legends prevail upon
Urvania. I read them in that lieutenant's brain--in fact, I looked for
them. You also know that every folk-legend has some basis, however
tenuous, in fact. Now, Dottie, tell about the battle of the gods, when
Osnome was a pup."

"The gods came down from the sky," Dorothy recited. "They were green, as
were men. They wore invisible armor of polished metal, which appeared
and disappeared. They stayed inside the armor and fought outside it with
swords and lances of fire. Men who fought against them cut them through
and through with swords, and they struck the men with lances of flame so
that they were stunned. So the gods fought in days long gone and
vanished in their invisible armor, and----"

"That's enough," interrupted Seaton. "The little red-haired girl has her
lesson perfectly. Get it, Mart?"

"No, I cannot say that I do."

"Why, it doesn't even make sense!" exclaimed Margaret.

"All right, I'll elucidate. Listen!" and Seaton's voice grew tense with
earnestness. "Visitors came down out of space. They were green. They
wore zones of force, which they flashed on and off. They stayed inside
the zones and projected their images outside, and used rays _through the
zones_. Men who fought against the images cut them through and through
with swords, but could not harm them since they were not actual
substance; and the images directed rays against the men so that they
were stunned. So the visitors fought in days long gone, and vanished in
their zones of force. How does that sound?"

"You have the most stupendous imagination the world has ever seen--but
there may be some slight basis of fact there, after all," said Crane,
slowly.

"I'm convinced of it, for one reason in particular. Notice that it says
specifically that the visitors stunned the natives. Now that thought is
absolutely foreign to all Osnomian nature--when they strike they kill,
and always have. Now if that myth has come down through so many
generations without having that 'stunned' changed to 'killed', I'm
willing to bet a few weeks of time that the rest of it came down fairly
straight, too. Of course, what they had may not have been the zone of
force as we know it, but it must have been a ray of some kind--and
believe me, that was one educated ray. Somebody sure had something, even
'way back in those days. And if they had anything at all back there,
they must know a lot by now. That's why I want to look 'em up."

"But suppose they want to kill us off at sight?" objected Dorothy. "They
might be able to do it, mightn't they?"

"Sure, but they probably wouldn't want to--any more than you would step
on an ant who asked you to help him move a twig. That's about how much
ahead of us they probably are. Of course, we struck a pure mentality
once, who came darn near dematerializing us entirely, but I'm betting
that these folks haven't got that far along yet. By the way, I've got a
hunch about those pure intellectuals."

"Oh, tell us about it!" laughed Margaret. "Your hunches are the world's
greatest brainstorms!"

"Well, I pumped out and rejeweled the compass we put on that funny
planet--as a last resort, I thought we might maybe visit them and ask
that bozo we had the argument with to help us out. I think he--or
it--would show us everything about the zone of force we want to know. I
don't think that we'd be dematerialized, either, because the situation
would give him something more to think about for another thousand
cycles; and thinking seemed to be his main object in life. However, to
get back to the subject, I found that even with the new power of the
compass the entire planet was still out of reach. Unless they've
dematerialized it, that means about ten billion light-years as an
absolute minimum. Think about that for a minute!... I've just got a kind
of a hunch that maybe they don't belong in this Galaxy at all--that they
might be from some other Galaxy, planet and all; just riding around on
it, as we are riding in the _Skylark_. Is the idea conceivable to a sane
mind, or not?"

"Not!" decided Dorothy, promptly. "We'd better go to bed. One more such
idea, in progression with the last two you've had, would certainly give
you a compound fracture of the skull. 'Night, Cranes."



