few of her passengers were saved. The Pacific was never heard from after
sailing from Liverpool, and all the persons on board were lost. The
Atlantic, after rotting and rusting at her wharf, was deprived of her
machinery and converted into a sailing vessel, and was broken up in New
York last year. The Adriatic, the "queen of the fleet," made less than a
half dozen voyages, was sold to the Galway Company, and is now used in
the Western Islands as a coal hulk by an English company.

The Baltic was in the government service during the war as a supply
vessel, and was afterward sold at auction; her machinery was removed and
sold as old iron. She was then converted into a sailing ship, and of
late years has been used as a grain carrying vessel between San
Francisco and Great Britain. On a recent voyage to Boston she was
strained to such an extent as to be made unseaworthy, and for that
reason is to be broken up.

One cannot but remark in this connection how small has been the advance
in steamship building during the quarter century since the Collins line
was in its glory.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHINESE WOMEN'S FEET.


[Illustration: CHINESE WOMEN'S FEET.]

An American missionary, Miss Norwood, of Swatow, recently described in a
_Times_ paragraph how the size of the foot is reduced in Chinese women.
The binding of the feet is not begun till the child has learnt to walk.
The bandages are specially manufactured, and are about two inches wide
and two yards long for the first year, five yards long for subsequent
years. The end of the strip is laid on the inside of the foot at the
instep, then carried over the toes, under the foot, and round the heel,
the toes being thus drawn toward and over the sole, while a bulge is
produced on the instep, and a deep indentation in the sole. Successive
layers of bandages are used till the strip is all used, and the end is
then sewn tightly down. The foot is so squeezed upward that, in walking,
only the ball of the great toe touches the ground. After a month the
foot is put in hot water to soak some time; then the bandage is
carefully unwound, much dead cuticle coming off with it. Frequently,
too, one or two toes may even drop off, in which case the woman feels
afterward repaid by having smaller and more delicate feet. Each time the
bandage is taken off, the foot is kneaded to make the joints more
flexible, and is then bound up again as quickly as possible with a fresh
bandage, which is drawn up more tightly. During the first year the pain
is so intense that the sufferer can do nothing, and for about two years
the foot aches continually, and is the seat of a pain which is like the
pricking of sharp needles. With continued rigorous binding the foot in
two years becomes dead and ceases to ache, and the whole leg, from the
knee downward, becomes shrunk, so as to be little more than skin and
bone. When once formed, the "golden lily," as the Chinese lady calls her
delicate little foot, can never recover its original shape. Our
illustrations show the foot both bandaged and unbandaged, and are from
photographs kindly forwarded by Mr. J. W. Bennington, R.N., who writes:
"It is an error to suppose, as many do, that it is only the Upper Ten
among the daughters of China that indulge in the luxury of 'golden
lilies,' as it is extremely common among every class, even to the very
poorest--notably the poor sewing women one sees in every Chinese city
and town, who can barely manage to hobble from house to house seeking
work. The pain endured while under the operation is so severe and
continuous that the poor girls never sleep for long periods without the
aid of strong narcotics, and then only but fitfully; and it is from this
constant suffering that the peculiar sullen or stolid look so often seen
on the woman's face is derived. The origin of this custom is involved in
mystery to the Westerns. Some say that the strong-minded among the
ladies wanted to interfere in politics, and that there is a general
liking for visiting, chattering, and gossip (and China women _can_
chatter and gossip), both and all of which inclinations their lords
desired, and desire, to stop by crippling them."

       *       *       *       *       *


To the alteration and metamorphism of rocks by the infiltration of rain
and other meteoric waters, M. De Koninck, of the Belgian Academy of
Sciences, assigns the cause of many hitherto unexplained phenomena in
geology.

       *       *       *       *       *




CORRESPONDENCE


ICE AT HIGH TEMPERATURES.

_To the Editor of the Scientific American:_

Your issues of October 23 and 30 contain some remarkable articles under
the heading of "Ice at High Temperatures."

Prof. Carnelley says; "In order to convert a solid into a liquid, the
_pressure_ must be above a certain point, otherwise no amount of heat
will melt the substance," as it passes at once from the sold state into
the state of gas, subliming away without previous melting. And, "having
come to this conclusion, it was easily foreseen that it would be
possible to have solid ice at temperatures far above the ordinary
melting point."

The first conclusion of the professor is correct, but not new. The
second conclusion is new, but very doubtful as to its correctness, and
certainly does not follow as a sequence from his premise.

If we try to heat ice in a vacuum, we cannot apply any heat to the ice
direct, but only to the vessel containing the ice. The vessel may be
much heated; but whether it will convey heat to the ice quick enough to
heat it over 32 deg., and whether at all it can be heated over 32 deg., this is
a question of a different nature. Before crediting such a conclusion we
must know more of the details of the experiments which the professor
made in order to verify its correctness. When saying that "on one
occasion a small quantity of water was frozen in a glass vessel which
was so hot that it could not be touched by the hand without burning it,"
he evidently assumes that if the vessel is hot, the ice inside must be
equally so; but this assumption is erroneous. Faraday has made water to
freeze in a red hot platina pot; the ice thus formed was not red hot
like the platina, but was below the freezing point. Just so with
Professor Carnelley's glass vessel: the vessel was hot, but the ice
inside no doubt was "ice cold." If the professor would surround a
thermometer bulb with ice and then make the mercury rise above the
freezing point, we would believe in "hot ice;" not before. Until he
does, we prefer to believe that the heat conveyed through the vessel to
the ice is all absorbed in vaporizing the ice, and not in raising its
temperature above 32 deg..

Professor Carnelley's further statement, apparently proving his theory,
that the ice at once liquefies as soon as pressure is admitted (say by
admitting air), is readily accounted for by the phenomena connected with
the "Leydenfrost Drop." Water in a red hot vessel will vaporize off much
slower than in a vessel heated a little above the boiling point, from
the reason that in the red hot vessel no _real contact_ takes place
between the vessel and the water. At the place where the two ought to
touch, steam is formed quicker than it can escape, which steam prevents
the contact between vessel and water; therefore, as no real contact
takes place, the heat from the vessel can pass into the water but
slowly, viz., in the proportion as it works itself through the layer of
steam, which in itself is a bad conductor. Just so in Prof. Carnelley's
experiment: The heated glass vessel will convey heat to the ice only at
those points where it touches the ice; at those points at once a
formation of vapor takes place, which prevents an intimate contact
between the glass and the ice, so that they do not really touch each
other, consequently the heat can pass into the ice but slowly, having to
work its way through the thin layer of rarefied vapor between the two.
As soon as pressure is admitted by admitting atmospheric air, vapors can
no longer form; an intimate contact will take place between the glass
and the ice, and consequently the heat be conveyed over quick enough to
make the ice melt away rapidly.

The professor's experiments, therefore, so far as published, do not
prove anything to justify his strange conclusion. It is perfectly true
that in a vacuum of less than 4.6 mm. mercury pressure, no amount of
heat will melt ice, all heat that can be conveyed to the ice being
absorbed by vaporization. But before crediting the professor's further
conclusion, that ice can be heated much above the freezing point, he
must actually produce "hot ice," not only a hot vessel containing ice.
N. J.

Brooklyn, N. Y., October 25, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *




SCHOOLS OF INVENTION.


The school of invention has not yet been established, but its germ is
growing in the mechanical schools. This school, according to Hon. W. H.
Ruffner, in _Va. Ed. Journal_, will educate men, and women too, for the
special career of inventing new things. Why not? We already have
something closely analogous in schools of design, where the pupil is
trained to invent new forms or patterns, chiefly of an artistic or
decorative character. The same idea will be applied to the invention of
machinery, or improvements in machinery, or the adaptation of machinery
to the accomplishment of special ends. Inventions usually spring from
individuals striving to lighten their own labor, or from some idea
entering the brain of a genius. But we shall have professional inventors
who will be called on to contrive original devices, and his success will
depend on the sound and practical character of his prescriptions.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPOSED EXHIBITION OF BATHING APPLIANCES.


The Board of Health of this city has recently been notified that a
Balneological Exhibition, to illustrate the various systems of bathing,
bath appliances, and kindred matters, is to be held in Frankfort-On-Main,
Germany, next summer. The exhibition will last from May to September,
1881.

H. H. Heinrich, No. 41 Maiden Lane, New York, Inventor Patentee, and
Sole Manufacturer of the Self-Adjusting Chronometer Balance, which is
not affected by "extremes of high and low temperatures, as fully
demonstrated by a six months' test at the Naval Observatory at
Washington, D. C., showing results in temperatures from 134 deg. down to
18 deg., of 5-10 of a second only, unparalleled in the history of horology
and certified to by Theo F. Kone. Esq., Commander U. S. N. in charge of
the Observatory. Mr. Heinrich is a practical working mechanic and
adjuster of marine and pocket chronometers to positions and
temperatures, and is now prepared to apply his new balance wheel to any
fine timekeeping instrument, either for public or private use, he also
repairs marine and pocket chronometers, as well as all kinds of
complicated watches, broken or lost parts made new and adjusted. Mr.
Heinrich was connected for many years with the principal manufacturers
of England, Geneva and Locle, Switzerland, and for the last fifteen
years in the United States, and very recently with Messrs. Tiffany &
Co., of Union Square, New York. Shipowners, captains naval and army
officers, railroad and telegraph officials, physicians and horsemen, and
all others wanting true time, should send to him. Fine watches of the
principal manufacturers, for whom he is their agent, constantly on hand.
His office is connected by electric wires with the Naval Observatory's
astronomical clock, through the Western Union Telegraph, thus giving him
daily New York's mean time. Many years ago the British Government made
an offer of L6,000 for a chronometer for her navy, keeping better time
than the ones in use, but no European horologist ever discovered the
sequel which Mr. Heinrich has now worked out to perfection, overcoming
the extremes, as stated above. With him is connected Mr. John P.
Krugler for thirty years connected with the trade as salesman.--Adv.

       *       *       *       *       *


Toope's Felt and Asbestos Covering for Steam Pipes and other surfaces,
illustrated on page 357, present volume, received a Medal of Excellence
at the late American Institute Fair. See advertisement on another page.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUSINESS AND PERSONAL.


_The Charge for Insertion under this head is One Dollar a line for each
insertion; about eight words to a line. Advertisements must be received
at publication office as early as Thursday morning to appear in next
issue._

[Symbol: Hand] _The publishers of this paper guarantee to advertisers a
circulation of not less than 50,000 copies every weekly issue._

Chard's Extra Heavy Machinery Oil.

Chard's Anti-Corrosive Cylinder Oil.

Chard's Patent Lubricene and Gear Grease.

R. J. Chard, Sole Proprietor, 6 Burling Slip, New York.

Wanted--Superintendent for six thousand spindle cotton yarn mill. State
salary and references, Rosalie Yarn Mills, Natchez, Miss.

Use Vacuum Oil Co.'s Lubricating Oil. Rochester, N. Y.

50,000 Sawyers wanted. Your full address for Emerson's Hand Book of Saws
(free). Over 100 illustrations and pages of valuable information. How to
straighten saws, etc. Emerson, Smith & Co., Beaver Falls, Fa.

Interesting to Manufacturers and Others.--The worldwide reputation of
Asbestos Liquid Paints, Roofing, Roof Paints, Steam Pipe, Boiler
Coverings, etc., has induced unscrupulous persons to sell and apply
worthless articles, representing them as being made of Asbestos. The use
of Asbestos in these and other materials for structural and mechanical
purposes is patented, and the genuine are manufactured only by the H.W.
Johns M'f'g Co., 87 Maiden Lane, New York.

Three requisites--pens, pins, and needles. The two latter you can get of
any make, but when you want a good pen get one of Esterbrook's.

For Heavy Punches, etc., see illustrated advertisement of Hilles &
Jones, on page 380.

Frank's Wood Working Mach'y. See illus. adv., p. 382.

Painters' list of 65 good recipes. J. J. Callow, Clevel'd, O.

Improved Speed Indicator. Accurate, reliable, and of a convenient size.
Sent by mail on receipt of $1.50. E. H. Gilman, 21 Doane St., Boston,
Mass.

Astronomical Telescopes, first quality & low prices, Eye Pieces,
Micrometers, etc. W. T. Gregg, 75 Fulton St., N. Y.

Engines. Geo. F. Shedd, Waltham, Mass.

The Mackinnon Pen or Fluid Pencil. The commercial pen of the age. The
only successful reservoir pen in the market. The only pen in the world
with a diamond circle around the point. The only reservoir pen supplied
with a gravitating valve: others substitute a spring, which soon gets
