"Throw out all the stuff loaded so far," he commanded. "Some of it may
be booby-trapped like that last one. We won't take a chance. Heave it
all out again."

"_Yes, sir._"

Bors gave other orders. The harsh-voiced broadcast stopped. Bors's own
voice went out on the air, steely-hard.

"Captain Bors, pirate ship _Isis_ speaking," he said coldly. "We
demanded supplies. They were sent us--government-supplied. We have found
one booby-trap included. In retaliation for this attempted
assassination, we are going to lob chemical-explosive missiles into the
principal government buildings of this city. We give three minutes'
leeway for clerks and other persons to get clear of those buildings. The
three minutes start now!"

The sun shone tranquilly on the planet Tralee. White clouds floated with
infinite leisureliness across the blue sky. There was no motion of any
sort within the wide, open area of the landing-grid. Over a large part
of this world's surface all activity had stopped while men listened to a
broadcast.

"Fifteen seconds gone," said Bors icily.

He wrote out an order and passed it for execution.

"Thirty seconds gone."

From twenty giant buildings in the city, a black tide of running figures
began to pour. When they reached the street, they went on running. They
wanted to get as far as possible from the buildings Bors had said would
be destroyed.

"Forty-five seconds gone," said Bors implacably.

A voice spoke from the grid-control building, where men were now
placing explosives with precisely calculated effects. The voice came on
microwaves to the ship.

"_Sir_," said the voice, "_landing-grid reporting. Space-yacht_ Sylva
_reports breakout from overdrive and asks coordinates for landing.
Purpose of visit, pleasure-travel._"

Bors swore, then smiled to himself. Gwenlyn had threatened to do
something drastic!

"Say landing's forbidden," he commanded an instant later. "Advise
immediate departure."

He pressed a button and said evenly:

"One minute gone! In two minutes more we send our bombs and take off."

Streets outside the government buildings were filled from building-wall
to building-wall by clerks drafted to staff the incredible, arbitrary
government set up on its tributary worlds by Mekin. Bors scribbled a
list of buildings to be ranged on. The map from the spaceport office
would help. He marked the Ministry of Police, which would contain the
records essential to the operation of the planet-wide police system.
Anything that happened to those records would be so much good fortune
for Tralee, and so much bad for the master race and its quislings. He
marked the Ministry of the Interior, which would house the machinery for
requisitions of tribute to Mekin. The Ministry of Public Order would be
the headquarters of the secret and the political police. It ran the
forced-labor camps. It filed all anonymous accusations. It kept records
on all persons suspected of the crime of patriotism. If anything
happened to those records, it would be all to the good.

"Two minutes gone," said Bors.

The voice from the spaceport control building said briskly:

"_Demolition charges placed, sir. Ready to evacuate and fire. Sir, the
space-yacht_ Sylva _sends a message to the captain of the pirate ship.
It says they'll wait._"

Bors said, "Damn! All right." Then into the broadcast-microphone,
"Two-and-a-half minutes. There will be no further count-down. In thirty
seconds we fire missiles into government buildings, in retaliation for
an attempt to assassinate us with time-bombs. The next sound you hear
will be our missiles arriving." He cut back to the grid-control
building. "Fire all charges and report to the ship."

Almost instantly curt, crisp reports sounded nearby. The landing-party
came smartly back to the airlock, while explosions continued in the
building they'd left.

"Launcher-tubes train on targets," Bors commanded. He pressed another
button. "Rocket-room, make ready for lift." Back to the launcher-tube
communicator. "Fire missiles one, two, three, four, five, six."

There were boomings, which rose to bellowings as devastation tore away
from the _Isis's_ launching-tubes. Bors said irritably to the
rocket-room:

"Take her up!"

And then the ship lifted on her rockets--they were not solely for
emergency use, as on cargo-ships--and rushed toward the sky. As the ship
mounted on its column of writhing smoke, other smoky columns spouted up.
Six of them. But they were limited. They went up two thousand feet and
then tended to mushroom. Bits of debris went higher and spread more
widely, and for a time there were fragments of buildings and their
contents flying wildly about.

But the ship went straight upward. The city and the open country beyond
it shrank swiftly. The spouted smokes of explosions in the city were
left behind. Mountains appeared at one horizon and a sea at another.
Then the vast expanse of the planet suddenly acquired a curved edge, and
the ship again went up and up--while the sky turned dark and some stars
appeared in futile competition with the sun--and the surface of Tralee
became visibly the near side of an enormous globe.

Then the planet became plainly what it was, a great ball floating in
space, one-half of it brilliant in the sunshine and one part of it
bathed in night.

Bors put on the solar-system drive and changed course. A voice came
through:

"_Calling pirate ship ... calling pirate ship.... Space yacht_ Sylva
_calling pirate ship...._"

Bors growled into a microphone, "What the devil are you doing in this
place. What's happened?"

Gwenlyn's voice, bland and amused. "_Nothing happened. But we've got
some news for you. Make rendezvous at the fourth planet?_"

Bors swore again. That was where he was to meet the cargo-ship captured
and sent aloft, supposedly destroyed on Tralee. But he drove on out,
around and away from Tralee.

He was reasonably satisfied with his landing on Tralee. With some luck,
the news of the landing of a lone survivor of the Kandarian fleet might
reach Mekin before it was aware of what had happened to its occupation
force. With a little more luck, the attention of Mekin would be devoted
more to a ship which dared to turn pirate than to Kandar itself. With
unlimited favorable fortune, Mekin might actually send ships to hunt the
_Isis_ instead of asking questions on Kandar.

But Bors made a mental note. The more time that passed before Mekin knew
what had happened, the better. So a ship or two or three might be
detached from the fleet and sent back to hang off Kandar. If a single
ship came inquiringly, it might be sniped and the news of Kandar
suppressed for a while longer. And it was conceivable that Mekin might
come to worry more about other matters than the success or failure of a
routine expansion of its empire.

The fourth planet loomed up on schedule. Bors was irritated, as often
before, by the relatively slow solar-system drive. Overdrive was
sometimes not fast enough--but solar-system drive was infuriatingly
slow. Yet one couldn't use overdrive in a solar system. Approaching a
planet on overdrive would be like trying to garage a ground-car at sixty
miles an hour. One couldn't stop where one wanted to. He wondered
vaguely if Logan, the math Talent, could handle such a problem, and
dismissed the idea. One could break a circuit with an accuracy of
microseconds, but that wouldn't be close enough for overdrive. It
wouldn't be practical.

Then the ice-sheet of Tralee's nearest neighbor planet spread out in the
vision-port's range of view. Bors called for the cargo-ship. It answered
almost immediately. It was standard practice, of course, that the site
of a meeting planned at a given planet would be wherever its poles
pointed nearest to galactic north. The cargo-ship had just arrived. It
barely responded before the _Sylva_ began to call again.

The three ships, then, joined their orbits and went swinging about the
glacier-world beneath them while they conferred.

The report from the cargo-ship was unexpectedly satisfactory. It had
been almost completely loaded, and its cargo was largely foodstuffs
intended for Mekin. Kandar's fleet-in-hiding was already subsisting on
emergency rations. This cargo of assorted frozen foods would be welcome.
Bors gave orders for it to head for Glamis immediately, in overdrive.

Communication had been three-way, and Gwenlyn said quickly;

"_Just a moment! Did you pick up any news-reports on Tralee?_"

"Hm. Yes. I'd better send them--"

"_You'd better?_" echoed Gwenlyn, scolding. "_My father stayed with the
fleet to try to explain what Talents, Incorporated can do! He kept most
of the Talents with him, for demonstrations! The Department for
Predicting Dirty Tricks is there! Don't you remember what that
Department works on? Of course you've got to send those news-reports!_"

Bors ordered a space-boat to come from the cargo-ship for the reports.

"_Would you like to come to dinner on the yacht?_" asked Gwenlyn.
"_You're all living on emergency rations. Nobody asked us to divide our
supplies with the fleet. I can give you a nice meal._"

"Better not," said Bors curtly, and mumbled thanks.

He ordered the cargo-ship to send as much of its stores as the
space-boat could conveniently carry.

"_Then how about some cigars?_" asked Gwenlyn. She seemed at once amused
and approving, because Bors would not indulge himself in a really
satisfying meal while his crew lived on far from appetizing emergency
foodstuffs.

"No," said Bors. "No cigars either. You said you had some news for me.
What is it?"

"_I brought along our ship-arrival Talent_," said Gwenlyn blandly. "_He
can only tell when a ship will arrive at the solar system where he is,
so he had to come here to precognize._"

Bors felt again that stubborn incredulity which Talents, Incorporated
would always rouse in a mind like his.

"_There'll be a ship arriving here in two days, four hours, sixteen
minutes from now_," said Gwenlyn matter-of-factly. "_He thinks it's a
fighting ship, though he can't be sure. It could be a cruiser or
something like that doing mail duty, coming to deliver orders and
receive reports. You can't run an empire without a regular news system,
and Mekin wouldn't depend on commercial ships for government business._"

"Good!" said Bors. "Thanks!"

There was a pause.

"_What will you do now?_"

"Try to raise the devil somewhere else," said Bors. "Try to pick up
another food-ship, probably. Maybe I ought to let this ship alone, to
carry news of the pirate ship _Isis_ back to Mekin, but-- No. They use
booby-traps as police devices!"

It was not reasonable, but Bors could not think of missing a Mekinese
warship. The idea of a government using booby-traps to enforce its
orders somehow put it beyond forgiveness, and with the government all
those who served it willingly.

"_You'll go to Garen then?_" asked Gwenlyn.

Bors felt a sharp sting of annoyance. He had carefully kept secret the
choice of Garen Three as the next planet to be invaded by the
pseudo-pirate ship. It was upsetting to find that Gwenlyn knew about it.
Blast Talents, Incorporated!

"_The dowsing Talent_," said Gwenlyn, "_says there's a battleship
aground there. There've been some riots. The people of Garen don't like
Mekin, either. Strange? The battleship is to overawe them._"

"How do you know that?" demanded Bors.

"_The Department for Predicting Dirty Tricks was reading old
news-reports_," she told him. "_We're leaving now. 'Bye._"

"Goodbye," said Bors, and sighed, not knowing whether he felt regret or
relief.

The space-yacht _Sylva_ flicked out of sight. It had gone into
overdrive. Bors realized that he hadn't noticed which way it pointed. He
should have taken note. But he shook his head. He gave the cargo-ship
detailed orders, receiving its space-boat and what food it had been able
to bring. He sent it off to meet his fleet at Glamis.

He stayed in orbit around the fourth planet to wait for a Mekinese
fighting-ship. He began, too, to make long-range plans.




_Part Three_




Chapter 7


The Mekinese ship was a cruiser, and it broke out of overdrive within
the Tralee solar system just two days, four hours, and some odd minutes
after Gwenlyn predicted its coming. Presumably, it had made the
customary earlier breakout to correct its course and measure the
distance remaining to be run. In overdrive there was not as yet a way to
know accurately one's actual speed, and at astronomical distances small
errors piled up. Correction of line was important, too, because a course
that was even a second off arc could mount up to hundreds of thousands
of miles. But even with that usual previous breakout, the Mekinese
cruiser did not turn up conveniently close to its destination. It needed
a long solar-system drive to make its planetfall.

Bors's long-range radar picked it up before it was near enough to notify
its arrival to the planet--if it intended to notify at all. Most likely
its program was simply and frighteningly to appear overhead and
arrogantly demand the services of the landing-grid to lower it to the
ground.

Bors's radar detected the cruiser and instantly cut itself off. The cry
of "_Co-o-ntact!_" went through the ship and all inner doors closed,
sealing the ship into sections. Bors was already at the board in the
control room. He did not accept the predictions of Talents, Incorporated
as absolute truth. It bothered him that such irrational means of
securing information should be so accurate. So he compromised in his own
mind to the point where, when Talents, Incorporated gave specific
information, it was possible; no more. Then, having admitted so much, he
acted on the mere possibility, and pretended to be surprised when it
turned out to be a fact.

That was the case now. A ship had appeared in this solar system at the
time the ship-arrival Talent on the _Sylva_ predicted. Bors scowled, and
swung the _Isis_ in line between Tralee and the new arrival. He turned,
then, and drove steadily out toward it. The other ship's screens would
show a large blip which was the planet, and in direct line a very much
smaller blip which was the _Isis_. The small blip might not be noticed
because it was in line with the larger. If it were noticed, it would be
confusing, because such things should not happen. But the cruisers of
Mekin were not apt to be easily alarmed. They represented a great
empire, all of whose landing-grids were safely controlled, and though
there was disaffection everywhere there was no reason to suspect
rebellion at operations in space.

For a long time nothing happened. The _Isis_ drove to meet the cruiser.
The two vessels should be approaching each other at a rate which was the
total of their speeds. Bors punched computer-keys and got the
gravitational factor at this distance from Tralee's sun. He set the
_Isis's_ solar-system drive to that exact quantity. He waited.

His own radar was now non-operative. Its first discovery-pulse would
have been observed by the Mekinese duty-officer. The fact that it did
not repeat would be abnormal. The duty-officer would wonder why it
didn't come again.

The astrogation-radar cut off. Then a single strong pulse came. It would
be a ranging-pulse. Cargo-ship radars sacrificed high accuracy for wide
and deep coverage. But war-vessels carried pulse instruments which could
measure distances within feet up to thousands of miles, and by
