
The confluent small-pox is attended with sensitive inirritated fever, or
inflammation with arterial debility; whence the danger of this disease is
owing to the general tendency to gangrene, with petechiae, or purple spots,
and haemorrhages; besides the two sources of danger from the tumor of the
throat about the height, or eleventh day of the eruption, and the purulent
fever after that time; which are generally much more to be dreaded in this
than in the distinct small-pox described above.

M. M. The method of treatment must vary with the degree and kind of fever.
Venesection may be used in the distinct small-pox early in the disease,
according to the strength or hardness of the pulse; and perhaps on the
first day of the confluent small-pox, and even of the plague, before the
sensorial power is exhausted by the violence of the arterial action? Cold
air, and even washing or bathing in cold water, is a powerful means in
perhaps all eruptive diseases attended with fever; as the quantity of
eruption depends on the quantity of the fever, and the activity of the
cutaneous vessels; which may be judged of by the heat produced on the skin;
and which latter is immediately abated by exposure to external cold.
Mercurial purges, as three grains of calomel repeated every day during the
eruptive fever, so as to induce three or four stools, contribute to abate
inflammation; and is believed by some to have a specific effect on the
variolous, as it is supposed to have on the venereal contagion.

It has been said, that opening the pock and taking out the matter has not
abated the secondary fever; but as I had conceived, that the pits, or marks
left after the small-pox, were owing to the acrimony of the matter beneath
the hard scabs, which not being able to exhale eroded the skin, and
produced ulcers, I directed the faces of two patients in the confluent
small-pox to be covered with cerate early in the disease, which was daily
renewed; and I was induced to think, that they had much less of the
secondary fever, and were so little marked, that one of them, who was a
young lady, almost entirely preserved her beauty. Perhaps mercurial
plasters, or cerates, made without turpentine in them, might have been more
efficacious, in preventing the marks, and especially if applied early in
the disease, even on the first day of the eruption, and renewed daily. For
it appears from the experiments of Van Woensel, that calomel or sublimate
corrosive, triturated with variolous matter, incapacitates it from giving
the disease by inoculation. Calomel or sublimate given as an alterative for
ten days before inoculation, and till the eruptive fever commences, is said
with certainty to render the disease mild by the same author. Exper. on
Mercury by Van Woensel, translated by Dr. Fowle, Salisbury.

_Variola inoculata._ The world is much indebted to the great discoverer of
the good effects of inoculation, whose name is unknown; and our own country
to Lady Wortley Montague for its introduction into this part of Europe. By
inserting the variolous contagion into the arm, it is not received by the
tonsils, as generally happens, I suppose, in the natural small-pox; whence
there is no dangerous swelling of the throat, and as the pustules are
generally few and distinct, there is seldom any secondary fever; whence
those two sources of danger are precluded; hence when the throat in
inoculated small-pox is much inflamed and swelled, there is reason to
believe, that the disease had been previously taken by the tonsils in the
natural way.--Which also, I suppose, has generally happened, where the
confluent kind of small-pox has occurred on inoculation.

I have known two instances, and have heard of others, where the natural
small-pox began fourteen days after the contagion had been received; one of
these instances was of a countryman, who went to a market town many miles
from his home, where he saw a person in the small-pox, and on returning the
fever commenced that day fortnight: the other was of a child, whom the
ignorant mother carried to another child ill of the small-pox, on purpose
to communicate the disease to it; and the variolous fever began on the
fourteenth day from that time. So that in both these cases fever commenced
in half a lunation after the contagion was received. In the inoculated
small-pox the fever generally commences on the seventh day, or after a
quarter of a lunation; and on this circumstance probably depends the
greater mildness of the latter. The reason of which is difficult to
comprehend; but supposing the facts to be generally as above related, the
slower progress of the contagion indicates a greater inirritability of the
system, and in consequence a tendency to malignant rather than to
inflammatory fever. This difference of the time between the reception of
the infection and the fever in the natural and artificial small-pox may
nevertheless depend on its being inserted into a different series of
vessels; or to some unknown effect of lunar periods. It is a subject of
great curiosity, and deserves further investigation.

When the inoculated small-pox is given under all the most favourable
circumstances I believe less than one in a thousand miscarry, which may be
ascribed to some unavoidable accident, such as the patient having
previously received the infection, or being about to be ill of some other
disease. Those which have lately miscarried under inoculation, as far as
has come to my knowledge, have been chiefly children at the breast; for in
these the habit of living in the air has been confirmed by so short a time,
that it is much easier destroyed, than when these habits of life have been
established by more frequent repetition. See Sect. XVII. 3. Thus it appears
from the bills of mortality kept in the great cities of London, Paris, and
Vienna, that out of every thousand children above three hundred and fifty
die under two years old. (Kirkpatrick on Inoculation.) Whence a strong
reason against our hazarding inoculation before that age is passed,
especially in crowded towns; except where the vicinity of the natural
contagion renders it necessary, or the convenience of inoculating a whole
family at a time; as it then becomes better to venture the less favourable
circumstances of the age of the patient, or the chance of the pain from
toothing, than to risk the infection in the natural way.

The most favourable method consists in, first, for a week before
inoculation, restraining the patients from all kinds of fermented or
spirituous liquor, and from animal food; and by giving them from one grain
to three or four of calomel every other day for three times. But if the
patients be in any the least danger of taking the natural infection, the
inoculation had better be immediately performed, and this abstinence then
began; and two or three gentle purges with calomel should be given, one
immediately, and on alternate days. These cathartics should not induce more
than two or three stools. I have seen two instances of a confluent
small-pox in inoculation following a violent purging induced by too large a
dose of calomel.

Secondly, the matter used for inoculation should be in a small quantity,
and warm, and fluid. Hence it is best when it can be recently taken from a
patient in the disease; or otherwise it may be diluted with part of a drop
of warm water, since its fluidity is likely to occasion its immediate
absorption; and the wound should be made as small and superficial as
possible, as otherwise ulcers have been supposed sometimes to ensue with
subaxillary abscesses. Add to this, that the making two punctures either on
the same, or one on each arm, secures the success of the operation in
respect to communicating the infection.

Thirdly, at the time of the fever or eruption the application of cool air
to those parts of the skin, which are too warm, or appear red, or are
covered with what is termed a rash, should be used freely, as well as
during the whole disease. And at the same time, if the feet or hands are
colder than natural, these should be covered with flannel. See Class IV. 2.
2. 10.

10. _Rubeola irritata, morbilli._ The measles commence with sneezing, red
eyes, dry hoarse cough, and is attended with sensitive irritated fever. On
the fourth day, or a little later, small thick eruptions appear, scarcely
eminent above the skin, and, after three days, changing into very small
branny scales.

As the contagious material of the small-pox may be supposed to be diffused
in the air like a fine dry powder, and mixing with the saliva in the mouth
to infect the tonsils in its passage to the stomach; so the contagious
material of the measles may be supposed to be more completely dissolved in
the air, and thus to impart its poison to the membrane of the nostrils,
which covers the sense of smell; whence a catarrh with sneezing ushers in
the fever; the termination of the nasal duct of the lacrymal sac is subject
to the same stimulus and inflammation, and affects by sympathy the lacrymal
glands, occasioning a great flow of tears. See Sect. XVI. 8. And the
redness of the eye and eyelids is produced in consequence of the tears
being in so great quantity, that the saline part of them is not entirely
reabsorbed. See Sect. XXIV. 2. 8.

The contagion of the measles, if it be taken a sufficient time before
inoculation, so that the eruption may commence before the variolous fever
comes on, stops the progress of the small-pox in the inoculated wound, and
delays it till the measle-fever has finished its career. See Sect. XXXIII.
2. 9.

The measles are usually attended with inflammatory fever with strong pulse,
and bear the lancet in every stage of the disease. In the early periods of
it, venesection renders the fever and cough less; and, if any symptoms of
peripneumony occur, is repeatedly necessary; and at the decline of the
disease, if a cough be left after the eruption has ceased, and the
subsequent branny scales are falling off, venesection should be immediately
used; which prevents the danger of consumption. At this time also change of
air is of material consequence, and often removes the cough like a charm,
as mentioned in a similar situation at the end of the chin-cough.

_Rubeola inirritata._ Measles with inirritated fever, or with weak pulse,
has been spoken of by some writers. See London Med. Observ. Vol. IV. Art.
XI. It has also been said to have been attended with sore throat. Edinb.
Essays, Vol. V. Art. II. Could the scarlet fever have been mistaken for the
measles? or might one of them have succeeded the other, as in the measles
and small-pox mentioned in Sect. XXXIII. 2. 9.?

From what has been said, it is probable that inoculation might disarm the
measles as much as the small-pox, by preventing the catarrh, and frequent
pulmonary inflammation, which attends this disease; both of which are
probably the consequence of the immediate application of the contagious
miasmata to these membranes. Some attempts have been made, but a difficulty
seems to arise in giving the disease; the blood, I conjecture, would not
infect, nor the tears; perhaps the mucous discharge from the nostrils might
succeed; or a drop of warm water put on the eruptions, and scraped off
again with the edge of a lancet; or if the branny scales were collected,
and moistened with a little warm water? Further experiments on this subject
would be worthy the public attention.

11. _Scarlatina mitis._ The scarlet fever exists with all degrees of
virulence, from a flea-bite to the plague. The infectious material of this
disease, like that of the small-pox, I suppose to be diffused, not
dissolved, in the air; on which account I suspect, that it requires a much
nearer approach to the sick, for a well person to receive the infection,
than in the measles; the contagion of which I believe to be more volatile,
or diffusible in the atmosphere. But as the contagious miasmata of
small-pox and scarlet fever are supposed to be more fixed, they may remain
for a longer time in clothes or furniture; as a thread dipped in variolous
matter has given the disease by inoculation after having been exposed many
days to the air, and after having been kept many months in a phial. This
also accounts for the slow or sporadic progress of the scarlet fever, as it
infects others at but a very small distance from the sick; and does not
produce a quantity of pus-like matter, like the small-pox, which can adhere
to the clothes of the attendants, and when dried is liable to be shook off
in the form of powder, and thus propagate the infection.

This contagious powder of the small-pox, and of the scarlet fever, becomes
mixed with saliva in the mouth, and is thus carried to the tonsils, the
mucus of which arrests some particles of this deleterious material; while
other parts of it are carried into the stomach, and are probably decomposed
by the power of digestion; as seems to happen to the venom of the viper,
when taken into the stomach. Our perception of bad tastes in our mouths, at
the same time that we perceive disagreeable odours to our nostrils, when we
inhale very bad air, occasions us to spit out our saliva; and thus, in some
instances, to preserve ourselves from infection. This has been supposed to
originate from the sympathy between the organs of taste and smell; but any
one who goes into a sick room close shut up, or into a crowded
assembly-room, or tea-room, which is not sufficiently ventilated, may
easily mix the bad air with the saliva on his tongue so as to taste it; as
I have myself frequently attended to.

Hence it appears that these heavy infectious matters are more liable to mix
with the saliva, and inflame the tonsils, and that either before or at the
commencement of the fever; and this is what generally happens in the
scarlet fever, always I suppose in the malignant kind, and very frequently
in the mild kind. But as this infection may be taken by other means, as by
the skin, it also happens in the most mild kind, that there is no
inflammation of the tonsils at all; in the same manner as there is
generally no inflammation of the tonsils in the inoculated small-pox.

In the mild scarlatina on the fourth day of the fever the face swells a
little, at the same time a florid redness appears on various parts of the
skin, in large blotches, at length coalescing, and after three days
changing into branny scales.

M. M. Cool air. Fruit. Lemonade. Milk and water.

_Scarlatina maligna._ The malignant scarlet fever begins with inflamed
tonsils; which are succeeded by dark drab coloured sloughs three or five
lines in diameter, flat, or beneath the surrounding surface; and which
conceal beneath them spreading gangrenous ulcers. The swellings of the
tonsils are sensible to the eye and touch externally, and have an elastic
rather than an oedematous feel, like parts in the vicinity of gangrenes.
The pulse is very quick and weak, with delirium, and the patient generally
dies in a few days; or if he recovers, it is by slow degrees, and attended
with anasarca.

M. M. A vomit once. Wine. Beer. Cyder. Opium. Bark; in small repeated
doses. Small successive blisters, if the extremities are cooler than
natural. Cool air on the hot parts of the skin, the cool extremities being
at the same time covered. Iced lemonade. Broth. Custards. Milk. Jellies.
Bread pudding. Chicken. Touch the ulcers with a dry sponge to absorb the
contagious matter, and then with a sponge filled with vinegar, with or
without sugar of lead dissolved in it, about six grains to an ounce; or
with a very little blue vitriol dissolved in it, as a grain to an ounce;
but nothing so instantaneously corrects the putrid smell of ulcers as a
solution of alum; about half an ounce to a pint of water, which should be a
little warmish, and injected into the fauces gently by means of a syringe.
These should be repeated frequently in a day, if it can be done easily, and
without fatigue to the child. A little powder of bark taken frequently into
the mouth, as a grain or two, that it may mix with the saliva, and thus
frequently stimulate the dying tonsils. Could a warm bath made of decoction
of bark, or a cold fomentation with it, be of service? Could oxygene gas
mixed with common air stimulate the languid system? Small electric shocks
through the tonsils every hour? ether frequently applied externally to the
swelled tonsils?

As this disease is attended with the greatest degree of debility, and as
stimulant medicines, if given in quantity, so as to produce more than
natural warmth, contribute to expend the already too much exhausted
sensorial power; it appears, that there is nothing so necessary to be
nicely attended to, as to prevent any unnecessary motions of the system;
this is best accomplished by the application of cold to those parts of the
skin, which are in the least too hot. And secondly, that the exhibition of
the bark in such quantity, as not to oppress the stomach and injure
digestion, is next to be attended to, as not being liable to increase the
actions of the system beyond their natural quantity; and that opium and
wine should be given with the greatest caution, in very small repeated
quantity, and so managed as to prevent, if possible, the cold fits of
fever; which probably occur twice in 25 hours, obeying the lunations like
the tides, as mentioned in Sect. XXXII. 6. that is, I suppose, the cold
periods, and consequent exacerbations of fever, in this malignant
scarlatina, occur twice in a lunar day; which is about ten minutes less
than 25 hours; so that if the commencement of one cold fit be marked, the
commencement of the next may be expected, if not disturbed by the
exhibition of wine or opium, or the application of blisters, to occur in
about twelve hours and a half from the commencement of the former; or if
not prevented by large doses of the bark.

No one could do an act more beneficial to society, or glorious to himself,
than by teaching mankind how to inoculate this fatal disease; and thus to
deprive it of its malignity. Matter might be taken from the ulcers in the
throat, which would probably convey the contagion. Or warm water might be
put on the eruption, and scraped off again by the edge of a lancet. These
experiments could be attended with no danger, and should be tried for the
public benefit, and the honour of medical science.

12. _Miliaria._ Miliary fever. An eruption produced by the warmth, and more
particularly by the stimulus of the points of the wool in flannel or
blankets applied to the skin, has been frequently observed; which, by cool
dress, and bed-clothes without flannel, has soon ceased. See Class I. 1. 2.
3. This, which maybe called _miliaria sudatoria_, has been confounded with
other miliary fevers, and has made the existence of the latter doubted. Two
kinds of eruptions I have seen formerly attended with fever, but did not
sufficiently mark their progress, which I conceived to be miliary
eruptions, one with arterial strength, or with sensitive irritated fever,
and the other with arterial debility, or with sensitive inirritated fever.

In the former of these, or _miliaria irritata_, the eruptions were distinct
and larger than the small-pox, and the fever was not subdued without two or
three venesections, and repeated cathartics with calomel.

The latter, or _miliaria inirritata_, was attended with great arterial
debility; and during the course of the fever pellucid points appeared
within the skin, particularly on the soft parts of the fingers. And, in one
patient, whom I esteemed near her end, I well recollect to have observed
round pellucid globules, like what are often seen on vines in hot-houses,
no larger than the smallest pins' heads, adhere to her neck and bosom;
which were hard to the touch, but were easily rubbed off. These diseases,
if they are allied, do not differ more than the kinds of small-pox; but
require many further observations.

The eruption so often seen on children in the cradle, and called by the
nurses red-gum, and which is attended with some degree of fever, I suspect
to be produced by too great warmth, and the contact of flannel next their
tender skins, like the miliaria sudatoria; and like that requires cool air,
cool clothes, and linen next their skin.

13. _Pestis._ The plague, like other diseases of this class, seems to be
sometimes mild, and sometimes malignant; according to the testimony of
different writers. It is said to be attended with inflammation, with the
greatest arterial debility, and to be very contagious, attended at an
uncertain time of the fever with buboes and carbuncles. Some authors
affirm, that the contagion of the plague may be repeatedly received, so as
to produce the disease; but as this is contrary to the general analogy of
all contagious diseases, which are attended with fever, and which cure
themselves spontaneously; there is reason to suspect, that where it has
been supposed to have been repeatedly received, that some other fever with
arterial debility has been mistaken for it, as has probably universally
been the case, when the small-pox has been said to have been twice
experienced.

M. M. Venesection has been recommended by some writers on the first day,
where the inflammation was supposed to be attended with sufficient arterial
strength, which might perhaps sometimes happen, as the bubo seems to be a
suppuration; but the carbuncle, or anthrax, is a gangrene of the part, and
shews the greatest debility of circulation. Whence all the means before
enumerated in this genus of diseases to support the powers of life are to
be administered. Currents of cold air, cold water, ice, externally on the
hot parts of the skin.

The methods of preventing the spreading of this disease have been much
canvassed, and seem to consist in preventing all congregations of the
people, as in churches, or play-houses; and to remove the sick into tents
on some airy common by the side of a river, and supply them with fresh
food, both animal and vegetable, with beer and wine in proper quantities,
and to encourage those who can, daily to wash both their clothes and
themselves.

The _pestis vaccina_, or disease amongst the cows, which afflicted this
island about half a century ago, seems to have been a contagious fever with
great arterial debility; as in some of them in the latter stage of the
disease, an emphysema could often be felt in some parts, which evinced a
considerable progress of gangrene beneath the skin. In the sensitive
inirritated fevers of these animals, I suppose about sixty grains of opium,
with two ounces of extract of oak-bark, every six hours, would supply them
with an efficacious medicine; to which might be added thirty grains of
vitriol of iron, if any tendency to bloody urine should appear, to which
this animal is liable. The method of preventing the infection from
spreading, if it should ever again gain access to this island, would be
immediately to obtain an order from government to prevent any cattle from
being removed, which were found within five miles of the place supposed to
be infected, for a few days; till the certainty of the existence of the
pestilence could be ascertained, by a committee of medical people. As soon
as this was ascertained, all the cattle within five miles of the place
should be immediately slaughtered, and consumed within the circumscribed
district; and their hides put into lime-water before proper inspectors.

14. _Pemphigus_ is a contagious disease attended with bladdery eruptions
appearing on the second or third day, as large as filberts, which, remain
many days, and then effuse a thin ichor. It seems to be either of a mild
kind with sensitive fever only, of which I have seen two instances, or with
irritated, or with inirritated fever, as appears from the observations of
M. Salabert. See Medical Comment, by Dr. Duncan, Decad. II. Vol. VI.

15. _Varicella._ Chicken-pox is accompanied with sensitive fever, pustules
break out after a mild fever like the small-pox, seldom suppurate, and
generally terminate in scales without scars. I once saw a lady, who
miscarryed during this disease, though all her children had it as slightly
as usual. It sometimes leaves scars or marks on the skin. This disease has
been mistaken for the small-pox, and inoculated for it; and then the
small-pox has been supposed to happen twice to the same person. See Trans.
of the College London. It is probable that the pemphigus and urticaria, as
well as this disease, have formerly been diseases of more danger; which the
habit of innumerable generations may have rendered mild, and will in
process of time annihilate. In the same manner as the small-pox, venereal
disease, and rickets, seem to become milder or less in quantity every half
century. While at the same time it is not improbable, that other new
diseases may arise, and for a season thin mankind!

16. _Urticaria._ Nettle-rash begins with mild sensitive fever, which is
sometimes scarcely perceptible. Hence this eruption has been thought of two
sorts, one with and the other without fever. On the second day red spots,
like parts stung with nettles, are seen; which almost vanish during the
day, and recur in the evening with the fever, succeeded in a few days by
very minute scales. See Trans. of the College, London.

17. _Aphtha._ Thrush. It has been doubted, whether aphtha or thrush, which
consists of ulcers in the mouth, should be enumerated amongst febrile
diseases; and whether these ulcers are always symptomatic, or the
consequence rather than the cause of the fevers which attend them. The
tongue becomes rather swelled; its colour and that of the fauces purplish;
sloughs or ulcers appear first on the throat and edges of the tongue, and
at length over the whole mouth. These sloughs are whitish, sometimes
distinct, often coalescing, and remain an uncertain time. Cullen. I shall
concisely mention four cases of aphtha, but do not pretend to determine
whether they were all of them symptomatic or original diseases.

_Aphtha sensitiva._ A lady during pregnancy was frequently seized with
ulcers on her tongue and cheeks, or other parts of the mouth, without much
apparent fever; which continued two or three weeks, and returned almost
every month. The thrush in the mouths of young children seems to be a
similar disease. These ulcers resemble those produced in the sea-scurvy,
and have probably for their cause an increased action of the secerning
system from increased sensation, with a decreased action of the absorbent
system from decreased irritation. See Class I. 2. 1. 15.

M. M. Solutions of alum, of blue vitriol. Powder of bark taken frequently
into the mouth in very small quantity. See Class II. 1. 3. 1.

_Aphtha irritata._ Inflammatory aphtha. A case of this kind is related
under the title of suppurative rheumatism. Class IV. 1. 2. 16.

_Aphtha inirritata._ Sloughs or ulcers of the mouth, attended with
sensitive fever with great arterial debility. They seem to spread downwards
from the throat into the stomach, and probably through the whole intestinal
canal, beginning their course with cardialgia, and terminating it with
tenesmus; and might perhaps be called an erysipelas of this mucous
membrane.

M. M. Cool air. A small blister on the back. Bark. Wine. Opium in small
repeated quantities. Soap neutralizes the gastric acid without
effervescence, and thus relieves the pain of cardialgia, where the stomach
is affected. Milk also destroys a part of this acid. Infusion of sage
leaves two ounces, almond soap from five grains to ten, with sugar and
cream, is generally both agreeable and useful to these patients. See I. 2.
4. 5.

Where the stomach may be supposed to be excoriated by poisons containing
acid, as sublimate of mercury or arsenic; or if it be otherwise inflamed,
or very sensible to the stimulus of the gastric acid; or where it abounds
with acid of any kind, as in cardialgia; the exhibition of soap is perhaps
a preferable manner of giving alcali than any other, as it decomposes in
the stomach without effervescence; while the caustic alcali is too acrid to
be administered in such cases, and the mild alcali produces carbonic gas.
If a drop of acid of vitriol be put on cap paper, it will be long before it
destroys the paper; but if a drop of mild alcali be added, a sudden
effervescence arises, and the paper is instantly destroyed by the escape of
the fixed air; in the same manner as lumps of solid lime are broken into
powder by the escape of the steam produced from the water, which is poured
on them. This shews why a succession of acid and of alcaline caustics
sooner destroys a part, than either of them applied separately.

18. _Dysenteria._ Bloody-flux is attended with sensitive fever generally
with arterial debility; with frequent mucous or bloody stools; which
contain contagious matter produced by the membranes of the intestines; the
alimentary excrement being nevertheless retained; with griping pains and
tenesmus.

M. M. Emetics. Antimonials. Peruvian bark. Opium and calomel of each a
grain every night. Bolus armeniae. Earth of alum. Chalk. Calcined
hartshorn. Mucilage. Bee's wax mixt with yolk of egg. Cerated glass of
antimony. Warm bath. Flannel clothing next to the skin. Large clysters with
opium. With ipecacuanha, with smoke of tobacco? Two dysenteric patients in
the same ward of the infirmary at Edinburgh quarrelled, and whipped each
other with horsewhips a long time, and were both much better after it,
owing perhaps to the exertion of so much of the sensorial power of
volition; which, like real insanity, added excitement to the whole system.

The prevention of this contagion must consist principally in ventilation
and cleanliness; hence the patients should be removed into cottages distant
from each other, or into tents; and their faeces buried as soon as may be;
or conveyed into a running stream; and themselves should be washed with
cold or warm water after every evacuation. For the contagious matter
consists in the mucous or purulent discharge from the membrane which lines
the intestines; and not from the febrile perspiration, or breath of the
patients. For the fever is only the consequence and not the cause of
contagion; as appears from Genus the Fifth of this Order, where contagion
exists without fever.

19. _Gastritis superficialis._ Superficial inflammation of the stomach. An
erysipelatous inflammation of the stomach is mentioned by Dr. Cullen from
his own observations; which is distinguished from the inflammatory
gastritis by less pain, and fever, and by an erysipelatous redness about
the fauces. Does this disease belong to aphtha?

20. _Enteritis superficialis._ Superficial inflammation of the bowels is
also mentioned by Dr. Cullen from his own observation under the name of
enteritis erythematica; and is said to be attended with less pain and
fever, without vomiting, and with diarrhoea. May not this disease be
referred to aphtha, or to dysentery?

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Sensation._

GENUS IV.

_With the Production of new Vessels by internal Membranes or Glands,
without Fever._

Where inflammation is produced in a small part, which has not great natural
sensibility, the additional sensation does not produce an increased action
of the arterial system; that is, the associated motions which are employed
in the circulation of the blood, those for instance of the heart, arteries,
glands, capillaries, and their correspondent veins, are not thrown into
increased action by so small an addition of the sensorial power of
sensation. But when parts, which naturally possess more sensibility, become
inflamed, the quantity of the sensorial power of sensation becomes so much
increased, as to affect the associated motions belonging to the
circulation, occasioning them to proceed with greater frequency; that is, a
fever is induced. This is well exemplified in the internal and superficial
paronychia, one of which is attended with great pain and fever, and the
other with little pain and no fever. See Class II. 1. 2. 19. and II. 1. 4.
5.

From hence it appears, that the sensitive fever is an accidental
consequence of the topical phlegmon, or inflammation, and not a cause of
it; that it is often injurious, but never salutary; and should therefore
always be extinguished, as soon as may be, either by the lancet and
cathartics, and diluents, and cold air, when it is of the irritated kind;
or by the bark, opium, cool air, and nutrientia, when it is of the
inirritated kind.

SPECIES.

1. _Ophthalmia superficialis._ As the membranes, which cover the eye, are
excluded from the air about one third part of the twenty-four hours; and
are moistened by perpetual nictitation during the other sixteen; they may
be considered as internal membranes; and from the analogy of their
inflammation to that of other internal membranes, it is arranged under this
genus; whilst the tonsillitis is esteemed an inflammation of an external
membrane, because currents of air are perpetually passing both day and
night over the fauces.

The superficial ophthalmy has generally been esteemed a symptom of
scrophula, when it recurs frequently in young persons; but is probably only
a concomitant of that disease, as a symptom of general debility;
ramifications of new red vessels, and of enlarged old ones, are spread over
the white part of the eye; and it is attended with less heat, less pain,
and less intolerance of light than the ophthalmia interna, described in
Class II. 1. 2. 2. It occurs in those of feeble circulation, especially
children of a scrophulous tendency, and seems to arise from a previous
torpor of the vessels of the tunica albuginea from their being exposed to
cold air; and from this torpor being more liable to occur in habits, which
are naturally inirritable; and therefore more readily fall into quiescence
by a smaller deduction of the stimulus of heat, than would affect stronger
or more irritable habits; the consequence of this torpor is increased
action, which produces pain in the eye, and that induces inflammation by
the acquisition of the additional sensorial power of sensation.

_Ophthalmia lymphatica_ is a kind of anasarca of the tunica adnata; in this
the vessels over the sclerotica, or white part of the eye, rise
considerably above the cornea, which they surround, are less red than in
the ophthalmia superficialis, and appear to be swelled by an accumulation
of lymph rather than of blood; it is probably owing to the temporary
obstruction of a branch of the lymphatic system.

M. M. If the pain be great, venesection by leeches on the temple, or
cutting the temporal artery, and one purge with three or four grains of
calomel should be premised. Then the Peruvian bark twice a day. Opium from
a quarter to half a grain twice a day for some weeks. Bathe the eye
frequently with cold water alone, or with cold water, to a pint of which is
added half an ounce of salt. White vitriol six grains dissolved in one
ounce of water; a drop or two to be put between the eyelids twice a day.
Take very small electric sparks from the eyes every day for a fortnight.
Bathe the whole head with salt and water made warm every night for some
months. Send such children to a school near the sea for the convenience of
sea-bathing for many months annually; such schools are to be found in or
near Liverpool.

When a child is afflicted with an inflamed eye of this kind, he should
always sit with his back to the window or candle; but it is generally not
necessary to cover it, or if the uneasy sensation of light makes this
proper, the cover should stand off from the eye, so as not much to exclude
the cool air from it. As covering an eye unnecessarily is liable to make
that eye weaker than the other, from its not being sufficiently used, and
thence to produce a squinting for ever afterwards.

Nevertheless, when the pain is great, a poultice must be applied to keep
the eyes moist, or a piece of oiled silk bound lightly over them. Or thus,
boil an egg till it is hard, cut it longitudinally into two hemispheres,
take out the yolk, sew the backs of the two hollow hemispheres of the white
to a ribbon, and bind them over the eyes every night on going to bed;
which, if nicely fitted on, will keep the eyes moist without any
disagreeable pressure. See Class I. 1. 3. 14.

_Ophthalmia equina._ An inflammation of this kind is liable to affect the
eyes of horses; one cause of which is owing to a silly custom of cutting
the hair out of horses' ears; by which they are not only liable to take
cold at the ear, but grass seeds are liable to fall into their ears from
the high racks in stables; and in both cases the eye becomes inflamed by
sympathy. I once directed the temporal artery of a horse to be opened, who
had frequent returns of an inflamed eye; and I believed it was of essential
service to him; it is probable that the artery was afterwards contracted in
the wounded part, and that thence less blood was derived to the eye: the
haemorrhage was stopped by two persons alternately keeping their fingers on
the orifice, and afterwards by a long bandage of broad tape.

2. _Pterigion._ Eye-wing. A spot of inflammation sometimes begins on the
inside of the lower eyelid, or on the tunica albuginea, and spreads an
intertexture of red vessels from it, as from a center, which extend on the
white part of the eye, and have the appearance of the wing of a fly, from
whence its name.

M. M. Cut the ramifications of vessels again and again with the point of a
lancet close to the center of inflammation.

3. _Tarsitis palpebrarum._ Inflammation of the edges of the eyelids. This
is a disease of the glands, which produce the hairs of the eye-lashes, and
is frequently the cause of their falling off. After this inflammation a
hard scar-like ridge is left on the edge of the eyelid, which scratches and
inflames the eyeball, and becomes a very troublesome disease.

The Turkish ladies are said to colour the edge of the eyelash with crude
antimony in very fine powder, which not only gives lustre to the eye, as a
diamond set on a black soil, but may prevent extraneous light from being
reflected from these edges into the eye, and thus serve the purpose of the
black feathers about the eyes of swans, described in Sect. XXXIX. 5. 1. and
may also prevent the edges of the eyelids from being inflamed by the
frequent stimulus of tears on them. Black lead in fine powder might be
better for all these purposes than antimony, and might be put on with a
camel's hair brush.

M. M. Mercurial ointment smeared at night on the edges of the eyelids.
Burnt alum sixty grains, hog's grease half an ounce, well rubbed into an
ointment to be smeared on them in the night. Cold water frequently in the
day. See Class II. 1. 1. 8.

4. _Hordeolum._ Stye. This inflammation begins either on or near the edges
of the eyelids, or in the loose skin of them, and is sometimes very slow
either in coming to suppuration or in dispersing. The skin beneath the
lower eyelid is the most frequent seat of this tumor, which sometimes never
suppurates at all, but becomes an incysted tumor: for as this skin is very
loose for the purpose of admitting great motion to the eyelid, the
absorbent power of the veins seems particularly weak in this part; whence
when any person is weakened by fatigue or otherwise, a darker shade of
colour is seen beneath the eyes; which is owing to a less energetic action
of the absorbent terminations of the veins, whence the currents of dark or
venous blood are delayed in them. This dark shade beneath the eyes, when it
is permanent, is a symptom of habitual debility, or inirritability of the
circulating system. See Class I. 2. 2. 2.

M. M. Smear the tumors with mercurial ointment, moisten them frequently
with ether. To promote their suppuration they may be wounded with a lancet,
or slit down the middle, or they may be cut out. A caustic leaves a large
scar.

5. _Paronychia superficialis._ Whitlow. An inflammation about the roots of
the nail beneath the skin, which suppurates without fever, and sometimes
destroys the nail; which is however gradually reproduced. This kind of
abscess, though not itself dangerous, has given opportunity for the
inoculation of venereal matter in the hands of accoucheurs, and of putrid
matter from the dissection of diseased bodies; and has thus been the cause
of disease and death. When putrid matter has been thus absorbed from a dead
body, a livid line from the finger to the swelled gland in the axilla is
said to be visible; which shews the inflammation of the absorbent vessel
along its whole course to the lymphatic gland; and death has generally been
the consequence.

M. M. In the common paronychia a poultice is generally sufficient. In the
absorption of putrid matter rub the whole hand and arm with mercurial
ointment three or four times a day, or perpetually. Could the swelled
axillary gland be exsected? In the absorption of venereal matter the usual
methods of cure in syphilis must be administered, as in Class II. 1. 5. 2.

6. _Gutta rosea._ The rosy drop on the face is of three kinds. First, the
_gutta rosea hepatica_, or the red pimples on the faces of drunkards, which
are probably a kind of crisis, or vicarious inflammation, which succeeds,
or prevents, a torpor of the membranes of the liver. This and the
succeeding species properly belong to Class IV. 1. 2. 14.

Secondly, the pimpled face in consequence of drinking cold water, or eating
cold turnips, or other insipid food, when much heated with exercise; which
probably arises from the sympathy between the skin of the face and the
stomach; and may be called the _gutta rosea stomatica_. Which is
distinguished from the former by the habits of the patient in respect to
drinking; by the colour of the eruptions being less deep; and by the
patient continuing generally to be troubled with some degree of apepsia.
See Class I. 3. 1. 3. I knew a lady, who had long been afflicted with pain
about the region of the stomach; and, on drinking half a pint of vinegar,
as a medicine, she had a breaking out commenced on her face; which
remained, and she became free from the pain about the stomach. Was this a
stomachic, or an hepatic disease?

Thirdly, there is a red face, which consists of smaller pimples than those
above mentioned; and which is less liable to suppurate; and which seems to
be hereditary, or at least has no apparent cause like those above
mentioned; which may be termed _gutta rosea hereditaria_, or puncta rosea.

Mrs. S. had a pimpled face, which I believe arose from potation of ale. She
applied alum in a poultice to it, and had soon a paralytic stroke, which
disabled her on one side, and terminated in her death.

Mrs. L. had a red pimpled face, which seemed to have been derived from her
mother, who had probably acquired it by vinous potation; she applied a
quack remedy to it, which I believe was a solution of lead, and was seized
with epileptic fits, which terminated in palsy, and destroyed her. This
shews the danger of using white paint on the face, which is called bismuth,
but is in reality white lead or cerussa.

Mr. Y---- had acquired the gutta rosea on his nose, and applied a saturnine
solution on it for a few nights, and was then seized with paralysis on one
side of his face; which however he gradually recovered, and has since
acquired the gutta rosea on other parts of his face.

These fatal effects were probably caused by the disagreeable sensation of
an inflamed liver, which used before to be relieved of the sympathetic
action and consequent inflammation of the skin of the face, which was now
prevented by the stronger stimulus of the application of calx of lead. The
manner in which disagreeable sensations induce epilepsy and palsy is
treated of in Class III. In some cases where habitual discharges, or
eruptions, or ulcers are stopped, a torpor of the system may follow, owing
to the want of the accustomed quantity of sensation or irritation. See
Class I. 1. 2. 9. and II. 1. 5. 6. In both these situations some other
stimulus should be used to supply the place of that which is taken away;
which may either be perpetual, as an issue; or periodical, as a cathartic
repeated once a fortnight or month.

Miss W. an elegant young lady of about twenty, applied a mercurial lotion
to her face, which was covered with very small red points; which seemed to
have been not acquired by any known or avoidable means; she was seized with
inflammation of her liver, and after repeated bleeding and cathartics
recovered, and in a few weeks the eruption appeared as before.

M. M. Five grains of calomel once a month, with a cathartic, five grains of
rhubarb and a quarter of a grain of emetic tartar every night for many
weeks. With this preparation mercurial plasters, made without turpentine,
and applied every night, and taken off every morning, will sometimes
succeed, and may be used with safety. But blistering the face all over the
eruption, beginning with a part, succeeds better than any other means, as I
have more than once experienced.--Something like this is mentioned in the
Letters of Lady Mary Wortley Montague, who blistered her face with balsam
of Mecca.

Mrs. F. had for many years had a disagreeably looking eruption on her chin,
after a cathartic with calomel, she was advised to blister her whole chin;
on the healing of the blister a few eruptions again appeared, which ceased
on the application of a second blister. She took rhubarb five grains, and
emetic tartar a quarter of a grain every night for many weeks.

Miss L. a young lady about eighteen, had tried variety of advice for
pimples over the greatest part of her face in vain. She took the above
medicines internally, and blistered her face by degrees all over and became
quite beautiful. A spot or two now and then appeared, and on this account
she frequently slept with parts of her face covered with mercurial plaster,
made without turpentine, which was held on by a pasteboard mask, and taken
off in the mornings; if any part of the plaster adhered, a little butter or
oil destroyed the adhesion.

7. _Odontitis._ Inflammatory tooth-ach is occasioned by inflammation of the
membranes of the tooth, or a caries of the bone itself. The gum sometimes
suppurates, otherwise a swelling of the cheek succeeds by association, and
thus the violence of the pain in the membranes of the tooth is relieved,
and frequently cured; and when this happens the disease properly belongs to
Class IV. as it so far resembles the translations of morbid actions in the
gout and rheumatism.

At other times the tooth dies without caries, especially in people about
sixty years of age, or before; and then it stimulates its involving
membrane, like any other extraneous substance. The membrane then becomes
inflamed and thickened, occasioning some pain, and the tooth rises upwards
above the rest, and is gradually pushed out whole and undecayed; on its
rising up a pus-like mucus is seen discharged from the gum, which surrounds
it; and the gum seems to have left the tooth, as the fangs or roots of it
are in part naked.

M. M. Where the tooth is sound it can only be saved by evacuations by
venesection, and a cathartic; and after its operation two grains of opium,
a blister may also be used behind the ear, and ether applied to the cheek
externally. In slighter cases two grains of opium with or without as much
camphor may be held in the mouth, and suffered to dissolve near the
affected tooth, and be gradually swallowed. See Class I. 2. 4. 12.
Odontalgia may be distinguished from otitis by the application of cold
water to the affected tooth; for as the pain of common tooth-ach is owing
to torpor, whatever decreases stimulus adds to the torpor and consequent
pain; whereas the pain of an inflamed tooth being ceased by the increased
action of the membranes of it is in some measure alleviated by the
application of cold.

8. _Otitis._ Inflammation and consequent suppuration of some membranes of
the internal ear frequently occur in children, who sleep in cold rooms, or
near a cold wall, without a night-cap. If the bones are affected, they come
out in a long process of time, and the child remains deaf of that ear. But
in this case there is generally a fever attends this inflammation; and it
then belongs to another genus.

M. M. A warmer night-cap. Warmish water should be gently syringed into the
ear to keep it clean twice a day; and if it does not heal in a week, a
little spirit of wine should be added; first about a fourth part, and it
should be gradually increased to half rectified spirit and half water: if
it continues long to discharge matter with a very putrid smell, the bones
are injured, and will in time find their exit, during which time the ear
should be kept clean by filling it with a weaker mixture of spirit of wine
and water; or a solution of alum in water; which may be poured into the
ear, as the head is inclined, and shook out again by turning the head, two
or three times morning and evening. See Class II. 1. 4. 10.

9. _Fistula lacrymalis._ The lacrymal sack, with its puncta lacrymalia and
nasal duct, are liable to be destroyed by suppuration without fever; the
tears then run over the eyelids, and inflame the edges of them, and the
cheeks, by their perpetual moisture, and saline acrimony.

M. M. By a nice surgical operation a new aperture is to be made from the
internal corner of the eye into the nostril, and a silver tube introduced,
which supplies the defect by admitting the tears to pass again into the
nostril. See Melanges de Chirurgie par M. Pouteau; who thinks he has
improved this operation.

10. _Fistula in ano._ A mucous discharge from the anus, called by some
white piles, or matter from a suppurated pile, has been mistaken for the
matter from a concealed fistula. A bit of cotton wool applied to the
fundament to receive the matter, and renewed twice a day for a week or two,
should always be used before examination with the probe. The probe of an
unskilful empyric sometimes does more harm in the loose cellular membrane
of these parts than the original ulcer, by making a fistula he did not
find. The cure of a fistula in ano of those, who have been much addicted to
drinking spirituous liquor, or who have a tendency to pulmonary
consumption, is frequently of dangerous consequence, and is succeeded by
ulcers of the lungs, and death.

M. M. Ward's paste, or 20 black pepper-corns taken after each meal twice a
day; the pepper-corns should be cut each into two or three pieces. The late
Dr. Monro of Edinburgh asserted in his lectures, that he had known a
fistula in ano cured by injecting first a mixture of rectified spirit of
wine and water; and by gradually increasing the strength of it, till the
patient could bear rectified spirit alone; by the daily use of which at
length the sides of the fistula became callous, and ceased to discharge,
though the cavity was left. A French surgeon has lately affirmed, that a
wire of lead put in at the external opening of the ulcer, and brought
through the rectum, and twisted together, will gradually wear itself
through the gut, and thus effect a cure without much pain. The ends of the
leaden wire must be twisted more and more as it becomes loose. Or, lastly,
it must be laid open by the knife.

11. _Fistula urethrae._ Where a stricture of the urethra exists, from
whatever cause, the patient, in forcing the stream of urine through the
structure, distends the urethra behind it; which after a time is liable to
burst, and to become perforated; and some of the urine is pushed into the
cellular membrane, occasioning fistulas, which sometimes have large
surfaces producing much matter, which is pressed out at the time of making
water, and has been mistaken for a catarrh of the bladder; these fistulas
sometimes acquire an external opening in the perinaeum, and part of the
urine is discharged that way.

Can this matter be distinguished from mucus of the bladder by the criterion
delivered in Class II. 1. 6. 6?
