
Results negative. Every question was answered by a shake of Poli's head,
and very soon the old man grew irritated and pointed to the work he
hadn't finished.

"Yes, I know you have work to do," Jason said. "But this is important."
Poli shook his head an angry _no_ and reached to turn off his hearing
aid. Jason groped for a question that might get a more positive answer.
There was something tugging at his mind, a word he had heard and made a
note of, to be investigated later. Something that Kerk had said ...

"That's it!" It was right there--on the tip of his tongue. "Just a
second, Poli, just one more question. What is a 'grubber'? Have you ever
seen one or know what they do, or where they can be found--"

The words were cut off as Poli whirled and lashed the back of his good
arm into Jason's face. Though the man was aged and crippled, the blow
almost fractured Jason's jaw, sending him sliding across the floor.
Through a daze he saw Poli hobbling towards him, making thick bubbling
noises in his ruined throat; what remained of his face twisted and
working with anger.

This was no time for diplomacy. Moving as fast as he could, with the
high-G, foot-slapping shuffle, Jason headed for the sealed door. He was
no match for any Pyrran in hand-to-hand combat, young and small or old
and crippled. The door thunked open, as he went through, and barely
closed in Poli's face.

Outside the rain had turned to snow and Jason trudged wearily through
the slush, rubbing his sore jaw and turning over the only fact he had.
_Grubber_ was a key--but to what? And who did he dare ask for more
information? Kerk was the man he had talked to best, but not any more.
That left only Meta as a possible source. He wanted to see her at once,
but sudden exhaustion swept through him. It took all of his strength to
stumble back to the school buildings.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the morning he ate and left early. There was only a week left. It was
impossible to hurry and he cursed as he dragged his double-weight body
to the assignment center. Meta was on night perimeter duty and should
be back to her quarters soon. He shuffled over there and was lying on
her bunk when she came in.

"Get out," she said in a flat voice. "Or do I throw you out?"

"Patience, please," he said as he sat up. "Just resting here until you
came back. I have a single question, and if you will answer it for me
I'll go and stop bothering you."

"What is it?" she asked, tapping her foot with impatience. But there was
also a touch of curiosity in her voice. Jason thought carefully before
he spoke.

"Now _please_, don't shoot me. You know I'm an off-worlder with a big
mouth, and you have heard me say some awful things without taking a shot
at me. Now I have another one. Will you please show your superiority to
the other people of the galaxy by holding your temper and not reducing
me to component atoms?"

His only answer was a tap of the foot, so he took a deep breath and
plunged in.

"What is a 'grubber'?"

For a long moment she was quiet, unmoving. Then she curled her lips back
in disgust. "You find the most repulsive topics."

"That may be so," he said, "but it still doesn't answer my question."

"It's ... well, the sort of thing people just don't talk about."

"I do," he assured her.

"Well, I _don't_! It's the most disgusting thing in the world, and
that's all I'm going to say. Talk to Krannon, but not to me." She had
him by the arm while she talked and he was half dragged to the hall. The
door slammed behind him and he muttered "_lady wrestler_" under his
breath. His anger ebbed away as he realized that she had given him a
clue in spite of herself. Next step, find out who or what Krannon was.

Assignment center listed a man named Krannon, and gave his shift number
and work location. It was close by and Jason walked there. A large,
cubical, and windowless building, with the single word _food_ next to
each of the sealed entrances. The small entrance he went through was a
series of automatic chambers that cycled him through ultrasonics,
ultraviolet, antibio spray, rotating brushes and three final rinses. He
was finally admitted, damper but much cleaner to the central area. Men
and robots were stacking crates and he asked one of the men for Krannon.
The man looked him up and down coldly and spat on his shoes before
answering.

Krannon worked in a large storage bay by himself. He was a stocky man in
patched coveralls whose only expression was one of intense gloom. When
Jason came in he stopped hauling bales and sat down on the nearest one.
The lines of unhappiness were cut into his face and seemed to grow
deeper while Jason explained what he was after. All the talk of ancient
history on Pyrrus bored him as well and he yawned openly. When Jason
finished he yawned again and didn't even bother to answer him.

[Illustration]

Jason waited a moment, then asked again. "I said do you have any old
books, papers, records or that sort of thing?"

"You sure picked the right guy to bother, off-worlder," was his only
answer. "After talking to me you're going to have nothing but trouble."

"Why is that?" Jason asked.

"Why?" For the first time he was animated with something besides grief.
"I'll tell you why! I made one mistake, just one, and I get a life
sentence. For life--how would you like that? Just me alone, being by
myself all the time. Even taking orders from the grubbers."

Jason controlled himself, keeping the elation out of his voice.
"Grubbers? What are grubbers?"

The enormity of the question stopped Krannon, it seemed impossible that
there could be a man alive who had never heard of grubbers. Happiness
lifted some of the gloom from his face as he realized that he had a
captive audience who would listen to his troubles.

"Grubbers are traitors--that's what they are. Traitors to the human race
and they ought to be wiped out. Living in the jungle. The things they do
with the animals--"

"You mean they're people ... Pyrrans like yourself?" Jason broke in.

"Not like _me_, mister. Don't make that mistake again if you want to go
on living. Maybe I dozed off on guard once so I got stuck with this job.
That doesn't mean I like it or like them. They stink, really stink, and
if it wasn't for the food we get from them they'd all be dead tomorrow.
That's the kind of killing job I could really put my heart into."

"If they supply you with food, you must give them something in return?"

"Trade goods, beads, knives, the usual things. Supply sends them over in
cartons and I take care of the delivery."

"How?" Jason asked.

"By armored truck to the delivery site. Then I go back later to pick up
the food they've left in exchange."

"Can I go with you on the next delivery?"

Krannon frowned over the idea for a minute. "Yeah, I suppose it's all
right if you're stupid enough to come. You can help me load. They're
between harvests now, so the next trip won't be for eight days--"

"But that's after the ship leaves--it'll be too late. Can't you go
earlier?"

"Don't tell me your troubles, mister," Krannon grumbled, climbing to his
feet. "That's when I go and the date's not changing for you."

Jason realized he had got as much out of the man as was possible for one
session. He started for the door, then turned.

"One thing," he asked. "Just what do these savages--the grubbers--look
like?"

"How do I know," Krannon snapped. "I trade with them, I don't make love
to them. If I ever saw one, I'd shoot him down on the spot." He flexed
his fingers and his gun jumped in and out of his hand as he said it.
Jason quietly let himself out.

Lying on his bunk, resting his gravity-weary body, he searched for a way
to get Krannon to change the delivery date. His millions of credits were
worthless on this world without currency. If the man couldn't be
convinced, he had to be bribed. With what? Jason's eyes touched the
locker where his off-world clothing still hung, and he had an idea.

It was morning before he could return to the food warehouse--and one day
closer to his deadline. Krannon didn't bother to look up from his work
when Jason came in.

"Do you want this?" Jason asked, handing the outcast a flat gold case
inset with a single large diamond. Krannon grunted and turned it over in
his hands.

"A toy," he said. "What is it good for?"

"Well, when you press this button you get a light." A flame appeared
through a hole in the top. Krannon started to hand it back.

"What do I need a little fire for? Here, keep it."

"Wait a second," Jason said, "that's not all it does. When you press the
jewel in the center one of these comes out." A black pellet the size of
his fingernail dropped into his palm. "A grenade, made of solid
ulranite. Just squeeze it hard and throw. Three seconds later it
explodes with enough force to blast open this building."

This time Krannon almost smiled as he reached for the case. Destructive
and death-dealing weapons are like candy to a Pyrran. While he looked at
it Jason made his offer.

"The case and bombs are yours if you move the date of your next delivery
up to tomorrow--and let me go with you."

"Be here at 0500," Krannon said. "We leave early."




XV.


The truck rumbled up to the perimeter gate and stopped. Krannon waved to
the guards through the front window, then closed a metal shield over it.
When the gates swung open the truck--really a giant armored tank--ground
slowly forward. There was a second gate beyond the first, that did not
open until the interior one was closed. Jason looked through the
second-driver's periscope as the outer gate lifted. Automatic
flame-throwers flared through the opening, cutting off only when the
truck reached them. A scorched area ringed the gate, beyond that the
jungle began. Unconsciously Jason shrank back in his seat.

All the plants and animals he had seen only specimens of, existed here
in profusion. Thorn-ringed branches and vines laced themselves into a
solid mat, through which the wild life swarmed. A fury of sound hurled
at them, thuds and scratchings rang on the armor. Krannon laughed and
closed the switch that electrified the outer grid. The scratchings died
away as the beasts completed the circuit to the grounded hull.

It was slow-speed, low-gear work tearing through the jungle. Krannon had
his face buried in the periscope mask and silently fought the controls.
With each mile the going seemed to get better, until he finally swung up
the periscope and opened the window armor. The jungle was still thick
and deadly, but nothing like the area immediately around the perimeter.
It appeared as if most of the lethal powers of Pyrrus were concentrated
in the single area around the settlement. Why? Jason asked himself. Why
this intense and planetary hatred?

The motors died and Krannon stood up, stretching. "We're here," he said.
"Let's unload."

There was bare rock around the truck, a rounded hillock that projected
from the jungle, too smooth and steep for vegetation to get a hold.
Krannon opened the cargo hatches and they pushed out the boxes and
crates. When they finished Jason slumped down, exhausted, onto the pile.

"Get back in, we're leaving," Krannon said.

"You are, I'm staying right here."

Krannon looked at him coldly. "Get in the truck or I'll kill you. No one
stays out here. For one thing you couldn't live an hour alone. But worse
than that the grubbers would get you. Kill you at once, of course, but
that's not important. But you have equipment that we can't allow into
their hands. You want to see a grubber with a gun?"

While the Pyrran talked, Jason's thoughts had rushed ahead. He hoped
that Krannon was as thick of head as he was fast of reflex.

Jason looked at the trees, let his gaze move up through the thick
branches. Though Krannon was still talking, he was automatically aware
of Jason's attention. When Jason's eyes widened and his gun jumped into
his hand, Krannon's own gun appeared and he turned in the same
direction.

"There--in the top!" Jason shouted, and fired into the tangle of
branches. Krannon fired, too. As soon as he did, Jason hurled himself
backwards, curled into a ball, rolling down the inclined rock. The shots
had covered the sounds of his movements, and before Krannon could turn
back the gravity had dragged him down the rock into the thick foliage.
Crashing branches slapped at him, but slowed his fall. When he stopped
moving he was lost in the tangle. Krannon's shots came too late to hit
him.

Lying there, tired and bruised, Jason heard the Pyrran cursing him out.
He stamped around on the rock, fired a few shots, but knew better than
to enter the trees. Finally he gave up and went back to the truck. The
motor gunned into life and the treads clanked and scraped down the rock
and back into the jungle. There were muted rumblings and crashes that
slowly died away.

Then Jason was alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Up until that instant he hadn't realized quite how alone he would be.
Surrounded by nothing but death, the truck already vanished from sight.
He had to force down an overwhelming desire to run after it. What was
done was done.

This was a long chance to take, but it was the only way to contact the
grubbers. They were savages, but still they had come from human stock.
And they hadn't sunk so low as to stop the barter with the civilized
Pyrrans. He had to contact them, befriend them. Find out how they had
managed to live safely on this madhouse world.

If there had been another way to lick the problem, he would have taken
it; he didn't relish the role of martyred hero. But Kerk and his
deadline had forced his hand. The contact had to be made fast and this
was the only way.

There was no telling where the savages were, or how soon they would
arrive. If the woods weren't too lethal he could hide there, pick his
time to approach them. If they found him among the supplies, they might
skewer him on the spot with a typical Pyrran reflex.

Walking warily he approached the line of trees. Something moved on
a branch, but vanished as he came near. None of the plants near a
thick-trunked tree looked poisonous, so he slipped behind it. There was
nothing deadly in sight and it surprised him. He let his body relax a
bit, leaning against the rough bark.

Something soft and choking fell over his head, his body was seized in a
steel grip. The more he struggled the tighter it held him until the
blood thundered in his ears and his lungs screamed for air.

Only when he grew limp did the pressure let up. His first panic ebbed a
little when he realized that it wasn't an animal that attacked him. He
knew nothing about the grubbers, but they were human so he still had a
chance.

His arms and legs were tied, the power holster ripped from his arm. He
felt strangely naked without it. The powerful hands grabbed him again
and he was hurled into the air, to fall face down across something warm
and soft. Fear pressed in again, it was a large animal of some kind. And
all Pyrran animals were deadly.

When the animal moved off, carrying him, panic was replaced by a feeling
of mounting elation. The grubbers had managed to work out a truce of
some kind with at least one form of animal life. He had to find out how.
If he could get that secret--and get it back to the city--it would
justify all his work and pain. It might even justify Welf's death if the
age-old war could be slowed or stopped.

Jason's tightly bound limbs hurt terribly at first, but grew numb with
the circulation shut off. The jolting ride continued endlessly, he had
no way of measuring the time. A rainfall soaked him, then he felt his
clothes steaming as the sun came out.

The ride was finally over. He was pulled from the animal's back and
dumped down. His arms dropped free as someone loosed the bindings. The
returning circulation soaked him in pain as he lay there, struggling to
move. When his hands finally obeyed him he lifted them to his face and
stripped away the covering, a sack of thick fur. Light blinded him as he
sucked in breath after breath of clean air.

Blinking against the glare, he looked around. He was lying on a floor of
crude planking, the setting sun shining into his eyes through the
doorless entrance of the building. There was a ploughed field outside,
stretching down the curve of hill to the edge of the jungle. It was too
dark to see much inside the hut.

Something blocked the light of the doorway, a tall animallike figure.
On second look Jason realized it was a man with long hair and thick
beard. He was dressed in furs, even his legs were wrapped in fur
leggings. His eyes were fixed on his captive, while one hand fondled an
ax that hung from his waist.

"Who're you? What y'want?" the bearded man asked suddenly.
