the other sacred objects.

"Where were Raoul and Greenglove when you took my trunk and things in
the carriage?"

"Before Armand got drunk, Monsieur Raoul made him look through Monsieur
Elysee's room for the paper that says you are to inherit the estate.
Armand found it and gave it to your uncle, and he threw it into the fire
while Armand and Eli Greenglove watched and laughed. Then Monsieur
Raoul, he got into a most furious argument with Eli Greenglove about
Greenglove's daughter. They nearly fight, but I think they are afraid of
each other. They are both great killers. So finally they went down to
town. Monsieur Raoul agreed to bring his woman, Greenglove's daughter,
and the two boys to the chateau."

"Disgraceful!" snorted Reverend Hale. "Publicly living in sin."

"I wonder why he didn't bring them to the funeral?" Nancy said.

Auguste thought he knew why. Clarissa Greenglove had been a pretty,
full-bosomed girl when he first arrived at Victoire. But in the years
during which she had borne two boys to Raoul, she had turned into a
lank-haired, snuff-sniffing slattern. Years ago Raoul had said he was
going to marry Clarissa, but he never had. And Auguste had seen Raoul
bending a hungry look on Nancy throughout the funeral mass this morning.
The thought of Raoul laying even a hand on Nancy angered him. It would
anger Eli Greenglove, too, for a different reason.

Eli Greenglove, it was said, could shoot the wings off a fly one at a
time at fifty yards and was wanted in Missouri for over a dozen murders.
He might take orders from Raoul, but it would not do for Raoul to offend
such a man. So if Eli persisted, Raoul probably would take Clarissa into
the chateau.

Auguste felt a sinking in his stomach as he touched his fingers lightly
to his throbbing head. He was alive now only because Greenglove had
chosen to hit him instead of shooting him down--or instead of letting
Raoul have that pleasure.

"Will you stay the night, Marchette?" Nancy asked.

"No, I must go back to the chateau before Armand wakes up. Otherwise he
will beat me worse."

"I'm going with you," said Auguste.

"No," said Nancy. "They'll kill you."

Auguste looked across the table at Nancy, staring at him with round blue
eyes full of the yearning, now mixed with fear, that he'd seen in them
earlier. "Pale eyes," the Sauk term for her people, did no justice to
her eyes, the color of the turquoise stone he kept in his medicine bag.
Her blond hair made his blood race. His fingertips tingled with the
desire to touch the white skin of her cheek.

Though Nancy's very differentness made him desire her, he knew that he
and she could never belong to each other as completely as he and Redbird
did. He could have a deep and lasting union with Redbird, a union that
would make him feel whole.

But it had been six years since he had seen Redbird, and no woman of the
Sauk would go without a man for that long.

_My mother did_, he reminded himself.

But Redbird had probably given in to Wolf Paw and married him. After
all, she hadn't had a word from White Bear in all that time.

Marchette's urgent tone refocused his thoughts. "Monsieur Raoul, he
stood up on the table and held up a bag full of Spanish dollars--he
said there were fifty--and said he would give it to the man who shoots
you. And there were many men who cheered at that and boasted they would
be the one to win the silver."

Auguste pictured men scattering out all over Smith County, hunting for
him. He could almost feel the rifle ball shattering his skull.

"I can't hide in your house forever, Nancy. Sooner or later they'll come
looking for me, and I don't want to bring that down on your heads."

Reverend Hale said nothing, but Auguste saw relief in his square
face--and grudging respect. But Hale's respect, he thought, would do him
little good when he lay dead on the prairie.

Nancy's full lips quivered as she said, "You'll go to the chateau and
let them shoot you?"

Auguste realized that his hands were cold with fear, and he rubbed them
together to warm them. Hale's house was about ten miles across the
prairie from the Mississippi. Could he cover all that distance without
being seen and shot?

"I'm not going to the chateau. I'll just see that Marchette gets there
safely. Traveling at night, she should have someone go back with her.
Then I'll go on to town. To Nicole and Frank's house. To Grandpapa. I
must see him." He turned toward the cook and felt a stabbing in his gut
at the sight of her bruised face. She'd suffered that out of love for
his father, he thought, and for his sake too.

"If you're seen you'll be shot," said Hale.

_Don't you think I know that?_ he wanted to scream at the minister. What
choice did he have? He was like a rabbit surrounded by wolves. He forced
calm on himself and spoke with sarcasm.

"Surely you know, Reverend, that Indians are good at getting about
unnoticed."

He felt his fear turning to a rising excitement as he recalled the
lessons of stealth and cunning he'd learned as a child of the Sauk.

"But what will you do then?" Nancy asked. "How will you get back here?"

Auguste hesitated. Remembering that he was a Sauk had moved his thoughts
in a new direction.

_I have been dispossessed. Just as my people have been dispossessed._

Nancy was waiting for him to speak.

"Raoul told me to go back to the woods with the other Indians. Even
though the advice came from him, I think that is just what I should do."

Nancy gasped as if he had struck her. There was silence in the cottage
for a moment.

"How will you get back to your people?" she said. "How will you find
them?"

He smiled, trying to get her to smile back at him. "I know exactly where
they are. They've crossed the Mississippi to their hunting grounds in
the Ioway Territory. I spent the first fifteen winters of my life there
with the British Band."

Auguste remembered his dream of becoming a shaman. It had come back to
life a bit with his effort to heal Pierre. Among the pale eyes there was
no room for magic. But now he felt he could go back to his own people
and find magic again.

Hale said, "An unwise decision, it seems to me. You've been educated.
You've had an opportunity to learn about white Christian civilization.
Your uncle can't take that away from you, and you should not throw it
away."

Auguste said, "Reverend, you know what I'm leaving behind. But you don't
know what I'm going back to."

Nancy started speaking rapidly, as if she was trying to hold back tears.
"Well, what about these things of yours that Marchette brought here?
There's no way you can carry a trunk on foot even as far as Nicole and
Frank's house. Would you like us to keep your things here for you?
Perhaps someday, after you've settled with your tribe"--she swallowed
hard--"you could send for them."

Auguste heard the anguish in her voice but decided to take her words at
only face value. "Yes, I'd be truly grateful if you'd keep them for me.
The only thing I want to take now is my medicine bundle."

Reverend Hale pursed his lips and snorted, but Auguste ignored him.

Auguste thought a moment. "And I can use the surgical instruments. And
at least one book."

"Let it be a Bible," said Hale. Auguste made no answer to that.

As Eli Greenglove struck him down, Auguste remembered, he had been
charging at Raoul with his knife in his hand.

"What happened to my knife?"

"I picked it up," said Nancy in a clipped tone. She stood up and went
over to an elaborately carved oak sideboard, a handsome piece of
furniture that seemed out of place in this simple cabin, and took
Auguste's knife out of a drawer. She handed it to him and he slipped it
into the leather sheath at his belt.

"Thank you, Nancy. My father gave that to me a long time ago." Their
eyes met, and he felt a warmth spread through him. It was going to be
hard to leave her.

Nancy remained standing. "Let's go out to the wagon and see what
Marchette has brought. I can help you carry your trunk in."

Marchette and Reverend Hale both said at the same time, "I can do that!"
The coincidence made everyone laugh nervously.

"No," said Nancy firmly. "Marchette, you're hurt and tired. Father, why
don't you see what consolation you can offer this poor, mistreated
woman. Auguste's trunk can't be that heavy. Come on, Auguste."

Before either Hale or Marchette could answer, Nancy had Auguste out the
door. He glanced back into the room just before the door closed and saw
Hale's fists clenched on either side of his open Bible.

Auguste stood for a moment, letting his eyes adjust from the lamplight
inside to the darkness out here. A fat moon hung overhead; he judged it
would be full in two nights. With this much light he'd be in even more
danger tonight. The white-painted steeple of Reverend Hale's little
church, next to the cottage where he and Nancy lived, gleamed in the
moonlight.

Beside him in the dark Nancy whispered fiercely, "I don't _want_ you to
go."

Sadly he said, "I know." He took her hand and squeezed it. Perhaps it
was a mistake to do that, but he could not stop himself.

"Come away from the house," she said.

Now he could see the wagon Marchette had come in, the horse tied to a
fence post beside the Hales' garden on the south side of the house. The
horse shifted from foot to foot and burbled its breath out through its
lips.

Holding tight to his hand, Nancy led him around to the rear of the
house, beyond which rows of corn stood, their tassels silvery in the
moonlight.

"You and your father grow all this corn?" Auguste asked.

"It's our land, but a neighbor does the work. He sells it in Victor and
we share the proceeds." She led him into the corn, brushing past the
crackling leaves. The concealment of the leaves and stalks made him feel
closer to her than ever. He wanted to reach out to her.

But the corn evoked another feeling, as well.

_She can't know it, but this field reminds me of the corn bottoms around
Saukenuk. It makes me want to go back all the more._

When there were leafy stalks all around them, hiding them from the
house, she turned to him again and said, "Please, Auguste, I don't want
you to go away for good." Her eyes were bright in the moonlight.

Her nearness was thrilling. He wanted to forget the worries that made
him hesitate, and take her in his arms.

"You don't want me to stay here and risk getting killed," he said.

"You could go to Vandalia," she said. "Tell Governor Reynolds what
happened. If he can't do anything for you himself, maybe he can help you
find a lawyer who will fight Raoul for you in the courts."

How innocent she was, he thought bitterly. "It was Governor Reynolds who
called out the militia to drive my people from Saukenuk. It's just as
Raoul said, he would be the last man to want to help an Indian fight for
land with a white man."

"Your father sent you to school in the East because he wanted a
different future for you than just spending your life hunting and living
in a wigwam. You'll be throwing all that away."

He felt a flash of anger at her. She did not understand the Sauk way of
life at all. She was just repeating what her father had said.

He remembered the way Nancy's eyes had shone each time they met on the
prairie last summer. He had known then that if he spoke to Nancy of
marriage, she would want it no matter how much it enraged her father.
But marriage with Nancy would be a coming together of two strangers, of
people whose worlds were utterly different. In the past six years he had
learned much about her world, but that did not mean he belonged in it.
And she knew next to nothing of his.

It hurt to hold himself back; he felt powerfully drawn to her. But what
he was feeling was impossible. Impossible to fulfill.

"I can use my schooling to help my people make a better life for
themselves. The gift my father gave me is a gift I will give to the
Sauk. And it may be worth more than the land Raoul has stolen from me."

"I don't want to lose you," she sobbed. She threw herself against him
and wrapped her arms around him. Her tear-wet cheek pressed against his.
Her face was hot, as though she had a fever. She wanted him; he felt it
now, just as he had seen it hours ago in her unguarded eyes.

"I've never cared for a man as I care for you, Auguste," she said.
"Everything you say may be true, but if you go back to your tribe I'll
never see you again."

It hurt Auguste to admit it, but it was almost certain that they would
never meet again.

"If you want to--you could come with me." Even as he spoke, he was sure
it would never work. Did she not dismiss the way of the Sauk as "hunting
and living in a wigwam"?

And suppose Redbird _had_ waited for him? What would he do with Nancy
then?

"No," she said. "If I went with you my father would hunt us down and
Raoul would help him. And besides--" She hesitated.

"What else?"

She shook her head. "I'm too afraid. Indians frighten me. Not you. Real
Indians."

_Real Indians?_

Anger pulsed in his head. He wanted to pull away from her then, but she
wouldn't let him go. Her arms tightened around him, and her body moved
against him.

"Auguste, do you know where it says in the Bible, 'Adam knew Eve, his
wife'? I want to know you--that way."

Her soft words thrilled him, and he forgot his anger. He felt exalted,
and he held her tightly. He had wanted Nancy ever since he met her last
June. All summer long, desiring her, he had fought his desire.

He pressed his mouth on hers, crushing her soft, full lips. She was
pulling at him now, pulling him down. Pulling him to lie with her
between the rows of corn.

_I must not do this._

Abruptly he steadied his feet and drew his face away from hers.

The vague shape of a future different from the one he planned shimmered
in his mind. They could have each other here and now, and he could give
up his decision to return to the Sauk. He might flee temporarily to some
nearby county, find work, study until he could begin practicing
medicine, marry Nancy, perhaps even try to win back the estate in the
pale eyes' courts.

He would become, more or less, a pale eyes. It would be the end of him
as a Sauk.

And the White Bear arose in his mind, as clearly as if he had suddenly
stood up here among the corn stalks.

The White Bear said, _Your people need you_.

"Auguste, please, _please_," Nancy whispered. "It isn't wrong. It's
right for us. There's no other man but you who's right for me. I don't
want to end up a dried-up old spinster who never knew the man she truly
loved."

She slid down the length of him, falling to her knees in the furrow. She
pressed her cheek against the hard bulge in his trousers, sending a
thrill through his whole body.

"Please."

He wanted to let himself sink to the ground with her. He shut his eyes
and saw the White Bear more vividly in his mind. It seemed to glow.

He held himself rigid, fighting the pressure inside him that made him
want to give in to her. He told himself he could give Nancy this moment
of love she wanted and still go back to the Sauk. If he did not take her
now as she wanted to be taken, he would regret it bitterly later.

But if he did this with her it would tie them in a bond that would be
wrong to break. If he gave her what she wanted and then left, it would
hurt her, might even kill her.

He took a step backward, then another. His legs felt as if they were
made of wood; he could barely move them.

Nancy let him go, put her hands to her face and sobbed, kneeling between
the rows of corn.

He stood there a moment, feeling helpless. Then he went to her, took her
arms and helped her to stand up.

"I do love you, Nancy," he said. "But if I knew you as Adam knew Eve, I
would still have to leave you. And it would hurt both of us much more."

Sobs still shook her body. He did not even know if she heard him. But
she let him lead her out of the cornfield, around the locked and silent
church, and back to the wagon where his trunk lay. As they walked she
pulled a handkerchief out of her sleeve, wiped her face and blew her
nose.

His heart felt heavy as lead. Sure as he was that this was the right
thing to do, he was almost as sure it was wrong.

When they got to the wagon, he was still holding her arm. Gently she
pulled free of him.

"You're a good man, Auguste. I'm afraid I'll always love you. Whether
you want me to or not."

"Are you all right?" he asked. He wanted to make her happy, and he felt
terribly helpless.

"I will be," she said.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he rode in the wagon back to the chateau with Marchette, the back of
Auguste's neck tingled. He pictured silent hunters crouched out in the
prairie, their Kentucky long rifles ready, their thoughts fixed on fifty
pieces of silver. His eyes moved restlessly over the low hills around
them. The nearly full moon was sinking before them in the west, a
lantern at the end of their trail. In some places the prairie grass
closed in around the horse and wagon, high as the horse's rump and the
wagon's wheels, and it looked to Auguste as if they were pushing their
way through a moonlit lake.

The loudest sound he heard was the steady singing of choruses of
crickets more numerous than all the tribes of man. Somehow it seemed
they always sang louder this time of year, as if they knew that frost
and snow were coming soon to silence their song.

The chateau's peaked roof rose black against the stars. Before they
reached the orchards, Auguste put his arm around Marchette and gave her
a kiss on the cheek. Jumping down from the wagon, he tied to his
shoulders with rawhide thongs the pack that held his medicine bundle,
his instruments and his book.

"Good-bye and thank you, Marchette," he whispered, and darted off into
the tall grass.

"God keep His eye upon you," she called softly after him.

Watching for Raoul's lurking hunters, he was soon past the chateau and
slipping along the edge of the road that led through the hills to town.

He froze. He saw a light ahead of him, a swinging lantern moving away
from him. Loud voices carried to him on the still night air.

Those must be some of Raoul's men. He was frightened, but he needed to
know what Raoul was doing. Staying well in the shadows of the trees that
grew along the edge of the road, he moved quickly and silently until he
was close enough to make out words.

They staggered along, praising Raoul's generosity with Old Kaintuck.
Auguste saw three of them in the lantern's yellow glow, each carrying a
rifle.

He bit his lower lip, and fear formed a cold hollow in his chest. If
these men saw him they would shoot him on the spot.

Or try to. He doubted they could hit anything, drunk as they looked.
With that thought, his tense muscles eased a little.

The men crossed a narrow ridge that connected a hill with the bluff on
which the trading post stood. Auguste flinched, startled by a whoop and
a wail, followed by the crash of a body falling through shrubbery and a
heavy clattering--probably a rifle--against rocks.

From the ridge came a burst of drunken laughter. Two of the men mocked
their comrade who had rolled to the bottom of the hill. They wouldn't
help him climb back up. Sleep it off down there, they told him. Curses
floated faintly from below, then there was silence.

"What if that Indian is lurking around here?" said the man carrying the
lantern. "He might come upon Hodge in the dark and scalp him or
something."

Auguste thought, _How I would love to_. He recognized the Prussian
accent of the man speaking. It was Otto Wegner, one of the men who
worked at Raoul's trading post.

The other man said, "Hell, if the Injun ain't dead from the way Eli
conked him with that rifle butt, he's halfway to Canada. He knows he'll
get his red hide full of holes if he stays around Smith County."

"As for me, I do not shoot unarmed Indians," said Wegner. "Fifty Spanish
dollars or not. I have my pride. I served under von Bluecher at
Waterloo."

"Waterloo, hah? Well, ain't you a hell of a fella! Raoul'd skin you
alive and wear you for a hat if he heard you talking like that."

"He would not. I am his best rifleman--after Eli Greenglove. He knows
my value. And my honor as a soldier is worth more to me than fifty
pieces of eight."

Crouching in the shrubbery, Auguste shook his head in wonder. There was
some sense of right and wrong even among Raoul's rogues.

But that hadn't stopped Wegner from being one of the men who backed
Raoul with his rifle this morning.

He waited for the men to cross the ridge. He heard no sound from the one
who had fallen; he had probably taken his comrades' advice and gone to
sleep.

When the lantern swung out of sight around a corner of the trading post
palisade, Auguste darted forward. Keeping low, he made a wide circle
through the wooded slope above Victor. He scrambled down to the road
where the Hopkins house stood. A long-eared black dog barked and ran at
him when he passed one of the houses along the road. His heart stopped
as he waited for doors to fly open and rifles to fire at him. But he
kept walking, and the dog stopped barking when he was beyond the house
it was guarding.

Hoping none of the neighbors would hear him, he knocked loudly at the
Hopkins door to wake them up.

Frank Hopkins, holding a candle in his hand, stood in the doorway in a
long nightshirt. "What the devil is it? We've got a sick man in here--"
He peered closer. "My God, Auguste! Get inside, quick."

He reached out, dragged Auguste through the door and shut it quickly
behind him.

"I thought you were out at the Hales'." They stood in Frank's
ground-floor workshop. The iron printing press towered shadowy in the
candle's glow.

"I came to see Grandpapa. And--Frank, I'm going back to my people. I
need your help."

"Come upstairs." Frank helped Auguste untie his backpack.

The stairs led to a second-floor corridor, and Frank drew Auguste into a
room where an oil lamp with a tall glass chimney burned next to a large
bed. Nicole sat there. The lamplight revealed Elysee's sharp profile
against the white of the pillow.

Nicole jumped to her feet. "Oh, Auguste! Are you all right?"

"I'm getting better. How is Grandpapa?"

"He's only been awake half the time. Gram Medill looked in on him. She
said he wrenched his hip when he fell and had bad bruises, but he hadn't
broken any bones. I've been sitting up with him. What about you--how is
your head?"

Auguste felt as if chains had fallen away from his chest at the news
that Grandpapa was not dying. Then his head started to hurt. In the
excitement of slipping past his enemies, Auguste had forgotten his pain.
Now he rubbed the spot above his right ear where Greenglove's rifle had
hit him. He felt a lump that was sore to the touch. But he was able to
smile reassuringly at Nicole.

He spoke in a low voice so as not to disturb Elysee. "I won't be able to
put my fine beaver hat on over this bump. But I won't be taking my fine
beaver hat where I'm going."

"I'll get some more chairs," Frank said. "We can talk in here. The old
gentleman is sound asleep now. Could you use a drop of brandy, Auguste?"

Auguste nodded. "That might ease the pain." He thought not only of the
pain from the rifle blow, but of the pain in his heart from having lost
Victoire despite his promise to his father. And the pain of tearing
himself away from Nancy.

He and Frank quietly removed chairs from the other upstairs rooms where
the Hopkins children were sleeping. Frank went down to the kitchen and
came back with a tray bearing three small bowl-shaped crystal glasses
and a cut-glass decanter that twinkled in the lamplight.

"Handsome glassware," Auguste said, seating himself and carefully
setting his backpack between his feet.

"From the time of Louis the Fifteenth," Nicole said. "One of the things
Papa brought over from the old chateau in France. And he gave it to
Frank and me as a wedding present. At least Raoul won't get his hands on
this."

Auguste said, "But Raoul has everything else, because father left it all
to me. I told him he should will it to you; I should have insisted." His
face burned with shame.

Frank said, "I doubt we'd have held onto the estate any longer than you
did. And, frankly, I don't want it any more than you do. I don't know
how Nicole feels."

Now that the land was irrevocably lost to him, Auguste was no longer so
sure that he did not want it. He twisted in his chair, angry at himself
for his uncertainty.

Nicole shook her head. "I'm a wife and mother. I'm not prepared to be a
chatelaine. Especially when I'd have to fight that--that beast."

As Frank poured an inch of the warm amber liquid into each of their
glasses, Auguste noticed that his fingers were, as always, blackened. He
must never get the stains of his trade off his hands.

Frank said, "I'm going to write in the _Visitor_ about what happened
today, tell what I saw, so the whole county will know what happened."

Auguste looked at Nicole. He saw fear in her eyes, but she said nothing.

"Why write about it?" Auguste said. "Raoul would do some harm to you.
And it would change nothing. I won't even be here to read it." The last
thing he wanted was these people, whom he cared about, getting into
trouble because of him.

Frank smiled faintly. "You know that unlike just about every other man
in Smith County, I don't carry a gun." He pointed downward, in the
direction of the press on the floor below them. "That's my way of
fighting."

For a moment Auguste felt ashamed that he was running away from that
same fight.

"Because you stood by me today my heart will always sing your praises.
Do you think my father's spirit will be sad if I do not stay and fight
for the land until I die?"

"You almost did die, Auguste," Nicole said.

_And I might yet, before I get away from here._

He sipped the brandy. It burned his tongue and his throat and lit a fire
in his belly. It made him feel stronger.

Frank said, "Nobody's saying you should stay. I don't want to see you
killed."

Nicole said, "Neither would your father. Pierre wanted you to have the
estate, but he didn't want you dead on account of it."

"Amen to that," said Frank.

_Yes_, Auguste thought, despising himself, _but I think he expected me
to keep the land for more than a day_.

Frank went on, "But if you go back to your people, you've got to tell
them--they can no more fight the United States for their land than you
could fight Raoul."

A fierce heat rose in Auguste as he took another sip of brandy. "At St.
George's School I read that the Indian does not make good use of the
land. The whites need the land. Therefore the Indian must yield." He
clenched his fist around the glass in his hand. "We were living on this
land! Doesn't that mean anything?"

Frank said, "Auguste, you know better than any of your people how much
power the United States have. You've got to tell them."

Auguste was silent for a moment.

_The long knives_, he thought. That was what his people called the
American soldiers. But the British Band had no idea how very many long
knives there were. He must make Black Hawk understand.

He sipped a little more of the brandy, and its fire flowed through his
blood.

He sighed and nodded. "I will tell them. Frank, I need a boat."

Nicole said, "Your eyelids are drooping, Auguste. You're tired and
you're still hurt. You can't go tonight."

True. And he wanted to stay long enough to see Grandpapa when he was
awake.

Auguste's last memory that night was of letting Frank lead him across
the corridor into a darkened bedroom, where he fell face down on an
empty bed.

When he came to himself again, he was lying on the same bed, still fully
clothed except for his boots. The room was not as dark as he remembered;
it was in a sort of twilight. The one window was shuttered. A curtain
covered the doorway. He looked around the room, saw boys' clothing
hanging on pegs and piled on the floor, another bed, covered with
rumpled sheets, empty. His own boots and his pack were set neatly at the
foot of his bed.

An urgent pressure inside told him he had been sleeping a long time. He
saw a chamber pot in one corner. Smart of them to leave the pot here, he
thought as he filled it. He didn't dare to go to their outhouse during
daylight.

He went to the window and cautiously looked through the shutter. The
window looked south, and he could not see the sun, only the black
shadows it painted in the ruts of the road that slanted up the hill past
the Hopkins house. It must be late afternoon.

He wondered, were Raoul and his men out there somewhere, looking for
him? Would he live to see another nightfall?

His head ached less than it had last night--until he touched it. Then
the pain was like someone pounding a nail into his brain. The bump felt
as big as a hen's egg.

Opening his backpack, he took out his leather medicine bag and drew out
the stones one by one, rubbing his fingers over each. He opened his
shirt and touched the tip of the bear's claw to the five scars on his
chest.

Then, on impulse, he touched it to the old scar on his cheek.

A black leather bag contained his surgical instruments--two saws, a big
one for legs and a smaller one for arms; four scalpels; lancets for
bleeding; a turnkey for pulling teeth; a probe and tongs for removing
bullets; a small jar of opium. Any of those things might be needed,
where he was going.

Last, he took out a book, chosen almost at random from his small
collection. On the spine of its brown leather cover was stamped in gold:
"J. Milton. _Paradise Lost_."

Reverend Hale had recommended that he take a Bible. This long poem
giving the Christian account of creation was the next thing to a Bible.
But he had read it at St. George's and enjoyed it. And its title and its
story of Adam and Eve being driven out of the Garden of Eden made him
think of how he was dispossessed. Perhaps he would find some wisdom or
guidance in the book.

Today he thought, _Paradise lost? It may be that I'm returning to
paradise._

But then he remembered how Nancy had wanted to "know" him as Adam knew
Eve. He _was_ leaving behind what might have been a great happiness.

He opened the book and read the first verse his eye fell upon:

    High on a Throne of Royal State, which far
    Outshone the wealth of _Ormus_ and of _Ind_,
    Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
    Show'rs on her Kings _Barbaric_ Pearl and Gold,
    Satan exalted sat ...

Sounded like Raoul, with his fifty Spanish dollars and his steamboat and
lead mine and trading post. Raoul was better fitted to be Satan than to
be the angel at the gates of Eden keeping sinners away.

He heard voices nearby. One, faint but unmistakable, was Grandpapa's.
His heart leaped. He quickly repacked his treasures.

He pushed the curtain aside and hurried across the hall. It was a joy to
see Elysee's eyes looking at him, open and bright.

"I do not as a rule believe in miracles," Elysee said, smiling at
Auguste, "but it's certainly a miracle that you could charge a man
pointing a pistol at your chest and come out with nothing but a bump on
your head."

"It's a bad enough bump, Grandpapa," said Auguste, dragging over the
chair he had sat in last night and pulling it close to the side of the
bed. "I wish I could stay and doctor you."

"Our local midwife says I too will heal," said Elysee. "I can move all
my arms and legs without extreme pain. I think the worst injury was to
my hip." He touched his right side gently. "I bruised it when I fell.
There's swelling there, but I can move my leg. The hip is not broken."
He closed his eyes, and Auguste knew that the old man was feeling a
sharper pain in his heart than in his bones. "You must not think of
staying here. I am afraid Raoul is perfectly capable of murdering you."

_One son dead, the other an enemy. And now I must leave him. How much
more can he stand?_

Nicole was sitting beside Elysee's bed, just as she had been last night
when Auguste arrived. He wondered whether she had slept.

Nicole smiled at him. "I sent the children down to play by the river.
Having two injured adults to care for has been very restful for me."

Elysee sat up a little straighter, Nicole quickly plumping the pillows
behind him, and turned a sharp, blue-eyed stare at Auguste.

"Nicole and Frank told me about your plan to go back to the Sauk. I can
understand why you would wish to do so, but that is not the only choice
open to you. You might consider going where people are much more
civilized than they are around here--back East, where you were educated.
Emilie and Charles would be happy, I am sure, to take you in again for a
time. And I could help you. I have money banked with Irving and Sons on
Wall Street. You could continue your education and follow the medical
profession in New York."

Wishing he did not have to refuse the old man, Auguste said, "Grandpapa,
I must go to the only other people I love in the world as much as I love
you and Aunt Nicole."

Elysee uttered a little sigh. "I understand. Loyalty pulls you back to
your mother's people. It is a family trait. I suppose your father must
have told you about the mystery around the origin of our family name."

"Yes, Grandpapa." Wanting him to know his French forebears, Pierre had
spent hours with Auguste recounting their names and deeds. And he had
told him that, strangely, the de Marion records extended back only to
the late thirteenth century, though the family was wealthy and powerful
even then. According to a murky legend, one ancestor had committed
treason against the King, and that one's son had deserted his wife and
children, simply disappeared. Feeling the original name, whatever it had
been, irreparably tarnished, the first recorded Count de Marion had
destroyed all record of it--apparently with the approval and help of the
royal authorities--and had taken his mother's family's name instead. The
story had left Auguste wishing he could use his shaman's powers to learn
more, but he doubted that the Sauk spirits could see clear across the
ocean.

Elysee said, "We de Marions sometimes display an overabundance of
loyalty, as if we were still trying to expiate that ancient guilt."

Puzzled, Auguste said, "There's nothing wrong with loyalty, is there?"

"Certainly not. But remember this--if I had let loyalty keep me in
France, we would not be here in this primeval paradise."

_He sees this land as a paradise too. But it has not been kind to him._

"Looking back, Grandpapa, do you think you would have done better to
have stayed in France?"

Elysee laughed, a short, humorless bark. "Not at all. I would almost
certainly have lost my head to Dr. Guillotine's wonderful invention. Our
lands would have been confiscated, and that would have been the end of
the family."

"But now, with most of the wealth in Raoul's hands--"

Elysee raised a hand and shook his head. "This is not the end. I do not
believe in divine intervention, but I do believe there is a law of
nature that says a bad man will do badly in the end."

Auguste was about to reply when he heard footsteps coming down the road
toward the house, reminding him of how quiet it had been ever since he
awakened. A good part of the town was sleeping off Raoul's Old Kaintuck,
he suspected.

He heard the door open and close below. A moment later Frank came into
the room carrying a long rifle, with an ammunition bag and a powder horn
slung over his shoulder.

"Well, I bought you a little bateau that will get you across the
Mississippi," he said, "for five dollars, from an old trapper who
doesn't feel up to going out this winter. And for another twenty dollars
I got him to throw in his second best rifle and a good supply of
ammunition." He smiled grimly at Auguste. "I expect you'll find this
useful over in Ioway."

Auguste nodded. "I'll eat better. But--twenty-five dollars. Frank,
that's too much for you to spend on me." He felt a warm gratitude toward
the plump, sandy-haired man who was risking so much to help him. Frank's
newspaper, his printing business and his carpentry all together could
hardly bring in twenty-five dollars in a month, little enough to feed a
family of ten.

Elysee said, "I told you I had some money salted away, Auguste. Let the
boat and the rifle be my gift to you."

Auguste reached out and squeezed his grandfather's bony hand.

Frank said, "I've moved the boat about half a mile below town and hidden
it. We should be able to get down there unseen after dark."

Nicole said, "If Auguste is leaving as Raoul wants him to, why wouldn't
Raoul just let him go?"

Frank said, "We can't take that chance. I believe Raoul won't be content
unless he kills Auguste."
