placidly from the Gardens. It waited, also, for the car. The car
arrived, in its two sections of first and second class; the first
reserved for _cavalhieros_, which is to say persons wearing coat,
shirt, collar, necktie, hat, shoes and socks, and carrying no parcel
larger than a brief case. Lesser folk who lacked any of the sartorial
requirements for admission to the first class section, or wore
_tomancos_ instead of shoes, heaped themselves into the second section
and paid one-third of the fare in the first.

Bell took his seat in the first section. It was comfortably filled.
The bulky person with the thick spectacles wedged himself carefully
into the space beside Bell. He unfolded a copy of the _Jornal do
Commercio_ and began to regard the advertisements. Presently he found
what he was looking for. "_O Bicho_," said medium-sized type. Beside
it was a picture of a kangaroo. The gentleman with the thick
spectacles resignedly fished into his pockets and found a lottery
ticket. He tore it into scraps and threw them away. Then he began to
gaze disinterestedly at the scenery and the other passengers in the
car.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bell drummed on his knee. With one's forefinger representing a dot,
and one's second finger serving as a dash, it is surprising how
naturally and absentmindedly one may convey a perfectly intelligible
message to a man sitting within a reasonable distance. When the man is
alongside, the matter is absurdly simple.

Presently the man with the thick lenses got out his paper again, as if
bored by vistas such as no other city in the world can offer. His
paper was in the pocket which pressed against Bell. If in getting out
his newspaper he also abstracted a thick fat envelope from Bell's
pocket and placed it in his own, and if all this took place under a
sign--even in the section reserved for _cavalhieros_ of approved
raiment--solemnly warning passengers against "_batadores de
carteiras_," or pickpockets--well, it was an ironical coincidence
whose humor Bell did not see.

He was busily tapping out on his knee the briefest possible account of
what he had learned at Ribiera's _fazenda_ up country.

"_One chance for me_," he tapped off at the end. "_If I can kidnap
Ribiera I can make him talk. Somehow. He has big amphibian plane kept
fueled and ready for long trip. I think he is back in Rio to direct
hunt for me. Paula kidnapped. My job finished. On my own now._"

The man with thick spectacles did not nod. He seemed to be looking
idly at his paper, but it was folded at an article very discreetly
phrased, beneath a photograph of Senhor Teixeira Canalejas, Minister
of War, who had very unfortunately been found dead that morning. He
had been depressed, of late, but there were certain circumstances
which made it as yet impossible to determine whether he had killed
himself or was the victim of an assassin.

"_Getting set for me_," tapped Bell grimly on his knee. "_Ribiera told
me too much._"

       *       *       *       *       *

The man with thick spectacles yawned and turned the paper over. Under
a smaller headline--which would only find a place on a Brazilian
sheet--"A Regrettable Incident"--an item of more direct importance was
printed. It told of an unnamed Senhor from the United States of the
North America, who as the guest of a widely known Brazilian gentleman
had behaved most boorishly, had stolen an airplane from his host and
broken it to bits on landing unskilfully, and had vanished with
priceless heirlooms belonging to his host. It read, virtuously:

     No names are mentioned because the American Senhor has been
     widely introduced in Rio society as a person with an
     official status in Washington. It is understood that an
     inquiry is to be made of the Ambassador as to the status of
     the young man, before any action is taken by the police. It
     is to be expected, however, that he will at least be
     requested to leave the country.

Bell managed the barest flicker of a smile. Arrest, of course.
Detention, most courteously arranged, while the Ambassador was
communicated with. And Ribiera.

"_Give me dismiss_," he tapped on his knee.

The gentleman in the thick spectacles ran his finger thoughtfully
about the edge of his collar. In the Trade that is a signal of many
varied meanings. A hand across the throat in any fashion means, "Clear
out, your job is finished," "Save your skin as best you can," and "Get
away without trying to help me," according to circumstances. In this
case it relieved Bell of all future responsibility.

He yawned, tapping his lips with the back of his hand, signaled for a
stop of the car, and got out. Five minutes later he had signaled a
taxicab and given Ribiera's address. In six minutes he was being
whirled toward the one house in all Rio de Janeiro from which his
chance of a safe departure was slightest. In little more than half an
hour he had dismissed the cab and was gazing placidly into the
startled eyes of the doorman. The doorman, like all of Rio where
Ribiera was known and feared, knew that Bell was being hunted.

Bell handed over his card with an inscrutable air.

"The Senhor Ribiera," he said drily, "returned to the city last night.
Present my card and say that I would like to speak to him."

       *       *       *       *       *

The doorman ushered him inside and summoned the major-domo, still
blinking his amazement. And the major-domo blinked again. But Bell
followed with the air of an habitue, as he was again ushered into the
luxurious salon in which he had once been offered a drugged drink.

Again he sank down in a softly padded chair and surveyed the pictures
and the minor objects of decadent art about him. Again he lighted a
cigarette with every appearance of ease, and again had the impression
of eyes upon him. The major-domo appeared, somewhat agitated.

"The Senhor Ribiera," he said harshly, "will see you only if you are
not armed. He requires your word of honor."

Bell smiled lazily.

"I'll do better than that," he said languidly. "I haven't had time to
buy a revolver. But the automatic he had put out of commission is in
my pocket. Present it to him with my compliments."

He handed over the weapon, butt first. The major-domo blinked, and
took it. Bell sat down and smiled widely. He had been expected to be
uproarious, to attempt to force the major-domo to lead him to Ribiera.
And, of course, he would have been led past a perfectly planned ambush
for his capture--but he might have killed the major-domo. Which would
not disturb Ribiera, but had disturbed the servant.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bell smoked comfortably. And suddenly hangings parted, and Ribiera
came into the room. He smiled nervously, and then, as Bell blew a puff
of smoke at him and nodded casually, he scowled.

"I came," said Bell deliberately, "to make a bargain. Frankly, I do
not like to break my word. I was under obligations to deliver a
package from Senhor Canalejas to a certain messenger who will take it
to my government. I have done it. But I am not, Senhor Ribiera, a
member of the Secret Service. I am entirely a free agent now, and I am
prepared to consider your proposals, which I could not in honor do
before."

He smiled pleasantly. Effrontery, properly managed, is one of the most
valuable of all qualities. Especially in dealing with people who
themselves are arrogant when they dare.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ribiera purpled with rage, and then controlled it.

"Ah!" he rumbled. "You are prepared to consider my proposals. There
are no proposals. The Master may be amused at your cleverness in
escaping. I do not know. I do know that I am ordered to make you my
slave and send you to The Master. That, I shall do."

"Perhaps," said Bell blandly: "but I can go without food and drink for
several days, which will delay the process. And while I cannot
honorably tell you how to stop the man bearing Senhor Canalejas'
package to my government, still ... If I willingly accepted a dose of
_yague_ in token of my loyalty to The Master...."

Ribiera's good humor returned. He chuckled.

"You actually mean," he said jovially, "that you think you were given
some of The Master's little compound, and that you wish to make terms
before your hands begin to writhe at the ends of your wrists. Is not
that your reason?"

Bell's eyes flickered. He had been horribly afraid of just that. But
Ribiera's amusement was reassuring.

"Perhaps," said Bell. "Perhaps I am."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ribiera sat down and stretched his fat legs in front of him. He
surveyed Bell with an obscene, horrible amusement.

"Ah, Senhor," he chuckled, "some day we will laugh together over this!
You yet hope, and do not yet know how much better it will be for you
if you cease to hope, and cultivate desires! The Master is pleased
with you. You have just those qualities he knows are necessary in
dealing with your nation. He is not angry with you. It is his
intention to use you to extend his--ah--influence among the officials
of your nation. You know, of course, that in but a little more time I
will hold all Brazil--as I now hold this city--in the hollow of my
hand. Four of the republics of this continent are already completely
under the control of The Master's deputies, and of the rest, Brazil is
not the most nearly subdued. A year or two, and The Master will
become Emperor, and his deputies viceroys. And it is his whim to give
you the opportunity of becoming the first deputy and the first viceroy
of North America. And you come to me and offer--you, Senhor!--to make
terms! I believe even The Master will laugh when he hears of it."

"But," said Bell practically, "do you accept my terms?"

Ribiera chuckled again.

"What are they, Senhor?"

"That you release the daughter of the Senhor Canalejas and pledge your
word of honor that she will not be enslaved."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ribiera's word of honor, of course, would be worth rather less than
the breath that was used to give it. But his reception of the proposal
would be informative.

He chuckled again.

"No, Senhor. I do not accept. But I will promise you as a favor,
because my uncle The Master admires you, that within a few weeks you
shall enjoy her charms. I do not," he added with amused candor, "find
that any one woman diverts me for a very long time."

"Oh," said Bell, very quietly.

He sat still for an instant, and then shrugged, and looked about as if
for an ash tray in which to knock the ashes from his cigarette. He
stood up, carrying the tube of tobacco gingerly, and moved toward one
by Ribiera's elbow. He knocked off the ash, and crushed out the tiny
coal. He fumbled in his pockets.

The next instant Ribiera choked with terror.

"Let me explain," said Bell softly. "I did not give your major-domo my
word that I was unarmed. I merely gave him a weapon. I got these from
two policemen who tried to arrest me an hour or so ago. And I also
remind you, Senhor, that if the armed men you have posted to prevent
my escape try to shoot me, that the inevitable contraction of my
muscles will send two bullets into your heart--even if I am dead. I
am a dead man, Senhor, if you give the word, but so are you if you
give it."

Ribiera gasped. His eyes rolled in his head.

"Send for her," said Bell very gently. "Send for her, Senhor. I
estimate that she has been in this house for less than half an hour.
Have her brought here at once, and if she has been harmed the three of
us will perish very promptly, and half of Rio will go mad after our
death."

And the muzzles of two revolvers bored into the fat flesh of Ribiera's
body, and a gasp that was almost a wail of terror came from the
watchers--armed watchers--who dared not kill the man they had been
posted to guard Ribiera against.

Ribiera lifted his hand and croaked an order.

(_To be continued._)

[Advertisement:]




Brigands of the Moon

(The Book of Gregg Haljan)

PART THREE OF A FOUR-PART NOVEL

_By Ray Cummings_

[Illustration: Light-rays and silent flashes seemed to envelop us.]

[Sidenote: Gregg and Anita risk quick, sure death in a desperate bluff
on the ruthless Martian brigands.]


_WHAT HAS GONE BEFORE_

One day in 2075 the Interplanetary Space-Ship _Planetara_ left the
Earth for Mars. I, Gregg Haljan, was third officer.

It was destined to be a tragic voyage. For in our midst were
unscrupulous brigands, masquerading as harmless passengers, intent on
seizing the secret treasure of radium ore Johnny Grantline of the
Grantline Expedition had dug from the Moon. The _Planetara_ was to
stop on the Moon and pick the treasure up on her return trip from
Mars.

Miko, a giant Martian, and his sister, Moa, were the ringleaders. With
them were, as passengers, Sir Arthur Coniston and Ob Hahn, a Venus
mystic. The whole crew was in their pay.

Miko struck. The captain was killed, as were the officers. Only Snap
Dean, the radio-helio operator, Venza, a girl of Venus, and I were
left. And, of course, Anita Prince, who had captivated my heart upon
my first glimpse of her.

The brigands abandoned the other passengers on a small asteroid, and
Miko signaled his space-ship far off on Mars to meet him on the Moon.
I was forced to guide the _Planetara_ to the Moon. We sighted the huts
of the Grantline Expedition, and suddenly, just as we started to
descend, the controls, snapped, and the _Planetara_ tumbled like a
spent rocket! Desperately I tried to check her, but only partially
succeeded. We crashed horribly against the barren gray rock of the
Moon. Anita, Venza, Snap and I lived through it, but we could not find
the bodies of Miko and Moa in the wreckage. Evidently they were still
alive, somewhere.

We reached Johnny Grantline. The _Planetara_ was a complete wreck.
And, speeding to us from Mars, was Miko's brigand ship.

We were powerless--without means of leaving the Moon--and completely
at the mercy of Miko's fast approaching brigands!


CHAPTER XXIII

_The Prowling Watchman_

"Try it again," Snap urged. "Good God, Johnny, we've got to raise some
Earth station! Chance it! Use your power--run it up to the full.
Chance it!"

We were gathered in Grantline's instrument room. The duty-man, with
blanched grim face, sat at his senders. The Grantline crew shoved
close around us, tense and silent.

Above everything we must make some Earth station aware of our plight.
Conditions were against us. There were very few observers, in the
high-powered Earth stations who knew that an exploring party was on
the Moon. Perhaps none of them. The Government officials who had
sanctioned the expedition--and Halsey and his confreres in the
Detective Bureau--were not anticipating trouble now. The _Planetara_
was supposed to be well on her course to Ferrok-Shahn. It was when she
was due to return that Halsey would be alert.

And it seemed, too, that nature was against us. The bulging
half-Earth[1] hung poised near the zenith over our little crater. Its
rotation through the hours was clearly visible. We timed our signals
when the western hemisphere was facing us. But nature was against us.
No clouds, no faintest hint of mist could fog the airless Lunar
surface. But there were continuous clouds over the Americas.

[Footnote 1: Between the half and the full illumined disc, the
complete Earth now was some ten days old.]

"Try it again," Snap urged.

       *       *       *       *       *

These bulging walls! Grantline used his power far beyond the limits of
safety. He cut down his lights; the telescope intensifiers were
permanently disconnected; the ventilators were momentarily stilled, so
that the air here in the little room crowded with men rapidly grew
fetid. All to save power pressure, that the vital Erentz system might
survive.

Even so it was strained to the danger point. The walls seemed to bulge
outward with the pressure of the room, the aluminite braces straining
and creaking. And our heat was radiating away; the deadly chill of
space crept in.

"Again!" ordered Grantline.

The duty-man flung on the power in rhythmic pulses. In the silence the
tubes hissed. The light sprang through the banks of rotating prisms,
