leafy plant, two to four feet high, and covered with velvety down
as a protection against the clogging of its pores by the moisture
arising from its wet retreats. Plants that live in swamps must
"perspire" freely and keep their pores open. From the marsh
mallow's thick roots the mucilage used in confectionery is
obtained, a soothing demulcent long esteemed in medicine. Another
relative, the OKRA or GUMBO PLANT of vegetable gardens (Hibiscus
esculentus), has mucilage enough in its narrow pods to thicken a
potful of soup. Its pale yellow, crimson-centered flowers are
quite as beautiful as any hollyhock, but not nearly so
conspicuous, because of the plant's bushy habit of growth. In
spite of its name, the ALTHAEA of our gardens, or ROSE OF SHARON
(Hibiscus Syriacus), is not so closely allied to Althaea
officinalis as to the swamp rose-mallow.

Another immigrant from Europe and Asia sparingly naturalized in
waste places and roadsides in Canada, the United States, and
Mexico is the COMMON HIGH MALLOW, CHEESEFLOWER, or ROUND DOCK
(Malva sylvestris). Its purplish-rose flowers, from which the
French have derived their word mauve, first applied to this
plant, appear in small clusters on slender pedicels from the leaf
axils along a leafy, rather weak, but ascending stem, maybe only
a foot high, or perhaps a yard, throughout the summer months. The
leaf, borne on a petiole two to six inches long, is divided into
from five to nine shallow, angular, or rounded saw-edged lobes.
Country children eat unlimited quantities of the harmless little
circular, flattened "cheeses" or seed vessels, a characteristic
of the genus Malva. Since the flower invites a great number of
insects to feast on its nectar, secreted in five little pits
(protected for them from the rain by hairs at the base of the
petals), and compels its visitors to wipe off pollen brought from
the pyramidal group of anthers in a newly opened blossom to the
exserted, radiating stigmas of older ones, the mallow produces
more cheeses than all the dairies of the world. So rich is its
store of nectar that the hive-bee, shut out from a legitimate
entrance to the flower when it closes in the late afternoon,
climbs up the outside of the calyx, and inserting his tongue
between the five petals, empties the nectaries one after another
- intelligent rogue that he is!

The LOW, DWARF, or RUNNING MALLOW (M. rotundifolia), a very
common little weed throughout our territory, Europe, and Asia,
depends scarcely at all upon insects to transfer its pollen, as
might be inferred from its unattractive pale blue to white
flowers, that measure only about half an inch across. In default
of visitors, its pollen-laden anthers, instead of drooping to get
out of the way of the stigmas, as in the showy high mallow,
remain extended so as to come in contact with the rough, sticky
sides of the long curling stigmas. The leaves of this spreading
plant, which are nearly round, with five to nine shallow,
saw-edged lobes, are thin, and furnished with long petioles;
whereas the flowers which spring from their axils keep close to
the main stem. Usually there are about fifteen rounded carpels
that go to make up the Dutch, doll, or fairy cheeses, as the seed
vessels are called by children. Only once is the mallow mentioned
in the Bible, and then as food for the most abject and despised
poor (Job 30: 4); but as eighteen species of mallow grow in
Palestine, who is the higher critic to name the species eaten?

Occasionally we meet by the roadside in Canada, the Eastern,
Middle, and Southern States pink, sometimes white, flowers, about
two inches across, growing in small clusters at the top of a stem
a foot or two high, the whole plant emitting a faint odor of
musk. If the stem leaves are deeply divided into several narrow,
much-cleft segments, and the little cheeses are densely hairy, we
may safely call the plant MUSK MALLOW (M. moschata), and expect
to find it blooming throughout the summer.


MARSH ST.-JOHN'S-WORT
  (Triadenum Virginicum; Elodea Virginica of Gray)
St.-John's-wort family

Flowers - Pale magenta, pink, or flesh color, about 1/2 in.
across, in terminal clusters, or from leaf axils. Calyx of 5
equal sepals, persistent on fruit; 5 petals; 9 or more stamens
united in 3 sets; pistil of 3 distinct styles. Stem: to 1 1/2 ft.
high, simple, leafy. Leaves: Opposite, pale, with black,
glandular dots, broadly oblong, entire edged, seated on stem or
clasping by heart-shaped base. Fruit: An oblong, acute, deep red
capsule.
Preferred Habitat - Swamps and cranberry bogs.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - Labrador to the Gulf, and westward to Nebraska.

Late in the summer, after the rather insignificant pink flowers
have withered, this low plant, which almost never lacks some
color in its green parts, greatly increases its beauty by tinting
stems, leaves, and seed vessels with red. Like other members of
the family, the flower arranges its stamens in little bundles of
three, and when an insect comes to feast on the abundant pollen -
no nectar being secreted - he cannot avoid rubbing some off on
the stigmas that are on a level with the anthers. He may
sometimes carry pollen from blossom to blossom, it is true, but
certainly the St.-John's-wort takes no adequate precautions
against self-fertilization at any time. Toward the close of its
existence the flower draws its petals together toward the axils,
thus bringing anthers and stigmas in contact.


SPIKED WILLOW-HERB; LONG PURPLES; SPIKED or PURPLE LOOSESTRIFE
  (Lythrum Salicaria)  Loosestrife family

Flowers - Bright magenta (royal purple) or pinkish purple, about
1/2 in. broad, crowded in whorls around long bracted spikes.
Calyx tubular, ribbed, 5 to 7 toothed, with small projections
between. Corolla of 5 or 6 slightly wrinkled or twisted petals.
Stamens, in 2 whorls of 5 or 6 each, and 1 pistil, occurring in
three different lengths. Stem: 2 to 3 ft. high, leafy, branched.
Leaves: Opposite, or sometimes in whorls of 3; lance-shaped, with
heart-shaped base clasping stem.
Preferred Habitat - Wet meadows, watery places, ditches, and
banks of streams.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - Eastern Canada to Delaware, and westward through
Middle States; also in Europe.

Through Darwin's patient study of this trimorphic flower, it has
assumed so important a place in his theory of the origin of
species that its fertilization by insects deserves special
attention. On page 5, the method by which the pickerel weed,
another flower whose stamens and pistil occur in three different
lengths, should be read to avoid much repetition. Now the
loosestrife produces six different kinds of yellow and green
pollen on its two sets of three stamens; and when this pollen is
applied by insects to the stigmatic surface of three different
lengths of pistil, it follows that there are eighteen ways in
which it may be transferred. But Darwin proved that only pollen
brought from the shortest stamens to the shortest pistil, from
the middle-length stamens to the middle-length pistil, and from
the long stamens to the long pistil effectually fertilizes the
flower. And as all the flowers on any one plant are of the same
kind, we have here a marvelous mechanism to secure
cross-fertilization. His experiments with this loosestrife also
demonstrated that "reproductive organs, when of different length,
behave to one another like different species of the same genus in
regard both to direct productiveness and the character of the
offspring; and that consequently mutual barrenness, which was
once thought conclusive proof of difference of species, is
worthless as such, and the last barrier that was raised between
species and varieties is broken down." (Muller.)

Naturally the bright-hued, hospitable flower, which secretes
abundant nectar at the base of its tube, attracts many insects,
among others, bees of larger and middle size, and the butterflies
for which it is especially adapted. They alight on the stamens
and pistil on the upper side of the flower. Those with the
longest tongues stand on one blossom to sip from the next one:
this is the butterfly's customary attitude. But nearly every
visitor comes in contact with at least one set of organs. When
Darwin first interpreted the trimorphism of the loosestrife, we
can realize something of the enthusiasm such a man must have felt
in writing to Gray: "I am almost stark, staring mad over
lythrum.... For the love of Heaven have a look at some of your
species, and if you can get me some seed, do!"

Long ago this beautiful plant reached our shores from Europe, and
year by year is extending its triumphal march westward,
brightening its course of empire through low meadows and marshes
with torches that lengthen even as they glow. It is not a spring
flower, even in England; and so when Shakespeare, whose knowledge
of floral nature was second only to that of human nature, wrote
of Ophelia,

    "With fantastic garlands did she come,
     Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,"

is it probable he so combined flowers having different seasons of
bloom? Dr. Prior suggests that the purple orchis (0. mascula)
might have been the flower Ophelia wore; but, as long purples has
been the folk name of this loosestrife from time immemorial in
England, it seems likely that Shakespeare for once may have made
a mistake.


BLUE WAX-WEED; CLAMMY CUPHEA; TAR-WEED
  (Parsonia petiolata; Cuphea viscosissima of Gray)  Loosestrife
family

Flowers - Purplish pink, about 1/4 in. across, on short peduncles
from leaf axils, solitary or clustered. Calyx sticky, tubular,
12-ribbed, with 6 primary teeth, oblique at mouth, extending into
a rounded swelling on upper side at base; 6 unequal, wrinkled
petals, on short claws; 11 or 12 stamens inserted on calyx
throat; pistil with 2-lobed stigma. Stem: 6 to 20 in. high,
branched, very sticky-hairy. Leaves: Opposite, on slender
petioles, lance-shaped, rounded at base, harsh to the touch.
Preferred Habitat - Dry soil, waste places, fields, roadsides.
Flowering Season - July-October.
Distribution - Rhode Island to Georgia, westward to Louisiana,
Kansas, and Illinois.

A first cousin of the familiar Mexican cigar plant, or
fire-cracker plant (Cuphea platycentra), whose abundant little
vermilion tubes, with black-edged lower lip tipped with white,
brighten the borders of so many Northern flower-beds. Kyphos, the
Greek for curved, from which cuphea was derived, has reference to
the peculiar, swollen little seedpod. From a slit on one side of
the clammy cuphea's capsule the placenta, set with tiny flattened
seeds, sticks out like a handle. Probably the flower has already
fertilized itself in the bud, although, from the fact that the
plant has taken such pains to punish crawling insect foes by
coating itself with sticky hairs, one might imagine it was wholly
dependent upon winged insects to transfer its pollen. What an
unworthy relative of the purple loosestrife, whose elaborate
scheme to insure cross-fertilization is one of the botanical
wonders!


MEADOW-BEAUTY; DEER GRASS
  (Rhexia Virginica)  Meadow-beauty family

Flowers - Purplish pink, 1 to 1 1/2 in. across, pedicelled,
clustered at top of stem. Calyx 4-lobed, tubular or urn-shaped,
narrowest at neck; 4 rounded, spreading petals, joined for half
their length; 8 equal, prominent stamens in 2 rows; pistil. Stem:
1 to 1 1/2 ft. high, square, more or less hairy, erect, sometimes
branching at top. Leaves: Opposite, ascending, seated on stem,
oval, acute at tip, mostly 5-nerved, the margins saw-edged.
Preferred Habitat - Sandy swamps or near water.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - United States, chiefly east of Mississippi.

Suggesting a brilliant magenta evening primrose in form, the
meadow-beauty is likewise a rather niggardly bloomer, only a few
flowers in each cluster opening at once; but where masses adorn
our marshes, we cannot wonder so effective a plant is exported to
European peat gardens. Its lovely sister, the MARYLAND
MEADOW-BEAUTY (R. Mariana), a smaller, less brilliant flower,
found no farther north than the swamps and pine barrens of New
Jersey, also goes abroad to be admired; yet neither is of any
value for cutting, for the delicate petals quickly discolor and
drop off when handled. Blossoms so attractively colored naturally
have many winged visitors to transfer their pollen. All too soon
after fertilization the now useless petals fall, leaving the
pretty urn-shaped calyx, with the large yellow protruding
stamens, far more conspicuous than some flowers. "Its
seed-vessels are perfect little cream pitchers of graceful form,"
said Thoreau. Within the smooth capsule the minute seeds are
coiled like snail-shells.


GREAT OR SPIKED WILLOW-HERB; FIRE-WEED
  (Chamaenerion angustifolium; Epilobium angustifolium of Gray)
Evening Primrose family

Flowers - Magenta or pink, sometimes pale, or rarely white, more
or less than 1 in. across, in an elongated, terminal, spike-like
raceme. Calyx tubular, narrow, in 4 segments; 4 rounded,
spreading petals; 8 stamens; 1 pistil, hairy at base; the stigma
4-lobed. Stem: 2 to 8 ft. high, simple, smooth, leafy. Leaves:
Narrow, tapering, willow-like, 2 to 6 in. long. Fruit: A slender,
curved, violet-tinted capsule, from 2 to 3 in. long, containing
numerous seeds attached to tufts of fluffy, white, silky threads.
Preferred Habitat - Dry soil, fields, roadsides, especially in
burnt-over districts.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - From Atlantic to Pacific, with few interruptions;
British Possessions and United States southward to the Carolinas
and Arizona. Also Europe and Asia.

Spikes of these beautiful brilliant flowers towering upward above
dry soil, particularly where the woodsman's axe and forest fires
have devastated the landscape, illustrate Nature's abhorrence of
ugliness. Other kindly plants have earned the name of fire-weed,
but none so quickly beautifies the blackened clearings of the
pioneer, nor blossoms over the charred trail in the wake of the
locomotive. Beginning at the bottom of the long spike, the
flowers open in slow succession upward throughout the summer,
leaving behind the attractive seed-vessels, which, splitting
lengthwise in September, send adrift white silky tufts attached
to seeds that will one day cover far distant wastes with beauty.
Almost perfect rosettes, made by the young plants, are met with
on one's winter walks.

Epi, upon, and lobos, a pod, combine to make a name applicable to
many flowers of this family. In general structure the fire-weed
closely resembles its relative the evening primrose. Bees, not
moths, however, are its benefactors. Coming to a newly opened
flower, the bee finds abundant pollen on the anthers and a sip of
nectar in the cup below. At this stage the flower keeps its still
immature style curved downward and backward lest it should become
self-fertilized - an evil ever to be guarded against by ambitious
plants. In a few days, or after the pollen has been removed, up
stretches the style, spreading its four receptive stigmas just
where an incoming bee, well dusted from a younger flower, must
certainly leave some pollen on their sticky surfaces.

The GREAT HAIRY WILLOW-HERB (Epilobium hirsutum), whose white
tufted seeds came over from Europe in the ballast to be blown
over Ontario and the Eastern States, spreads also by underground
shoots, until it seems destined to occupy wide areas. In these
showy magenta flowers, about one inch across, the stigmas and
anthers mature simultaneously but cross-fertilization is usually
insured because the former surpass the latter, and naturally are
first touched by the insect visitor. In default of visits,
however, the stigmas, at length curling backward, come in contact
with the pollen-laden anthers. The fire-weed, on the contrary, is
unable to fertilize itself.

A pale magenta-pink or whitish, very small-flowered, branching
species, one to two feet high, found in swamps from New Brunswick
to the Pacific, and southward to Delaware, is the LINEAR-LEAVED
WILLOW-HERB (F. lineare), whose distinguishing features are its
very narrow, acute leaves, its hoariness throughout, the dingy
threads on its tiny seeds, and the occasional bulblets it bears
near the base of the stem. It is scarcely to be distinguished by
one not well up in field practice from another bog lover, the
DOWNY or SOFT WILLOW-HERB (F. strictum), which, however, is a
trifle taller, glandular throughout, and with sessile, not
petioled, leaves. The PURPLE-LEAVED WILLOW-HERB (E. coloratum),
common in low grounds, may best be named by the reddish-brown
coma to which its seeds are attached. Both leaves and stem are
often highly colored.


BOG WINTERGREEN
  (Pyrola uliginosa; P. rotundifolia, var. uliginosa of Gray)
Wintergreen family

Flowers - Magenta pink, fragrant, about 1/2 in. across, 7 to 15
on a leafless scape 6 to 15 in. high. Calyx 5-parted; 5 concave
petals; 10 stamens; style curved upward, exserted. Leaves: From
the root, broadly oval or round, rather thick and dull, on
petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Swamps and bogs.
Flowering Season - June.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to British Columbia, southward to New
York and Colorado.

Fragrant colonies of this little plant cuddled close to the moss
of cool, northern peat bogs draw forth our admiration when we go
orchid hunting in early summer. A similar species, the LIVER-LEAF
WINTERGREEN (P. asarifolia), with shining, not dull, leaves and
rose-colored flowers, not to mention minor differences, is
likewise found in swamps and wet woods. These two wintergreens,
formerly counted mere varieties of the white-flowered
rotundifolia, a lover of dry woods, have now been given specific
individuality by later-day systematists. Short-lipped bees and
flies may be detected in the act of applying their mouths to the
orifices of the anthers through which pollen is shed, and some
must be carried to the stigma of another flower.


PIPSISSEWA; PRINCE'S PINE
  (Chimaphila umbellata)  Wintergreen family

Flowers - Flesh-colored, or pinkish, fragrant, waxy, usually with
deep pink ring around center, and the anthers colored; about 1/2
in. across; several flowers in loose, terminal cluster. Calyx
5-cleft; corolla of 5 concave, rounded, spreading petals; 10
stamens, the filaments hairy style short, conical, with a round
stigma. Stem: Trailing far along ground, creeping, or partly
subterranean, sending up sterile and flowering branches 3 to 10
in. high. Leaves: Opposite or in whorls, evergreen, bright,
shining, spatulate to lance-shaped, sharply saw-edged.
Preferred Habitat - Dry woods, sandy leaf-mould.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - British Possessions and the United States north of
Georgia from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Also Mexico, Europe,
and Asia.

A lover of winter indeed (cheima = winter and phileo = to love)
is the prince's pine, whose beautiful dark leaves keep their
color and gloss in spite of snow and intense cold. A few yards of
the trailing stem, easily ripped from the light soil of its
woodland home, make a charming indoor decoration, especially when
the little brown seed-cases remain. Few flowers are more
suggestive of the woods than these shy, dainty, deliciously
fragrant little blossoms.

The SPOTTED WINTERGREEN, or PIPSISSEWA (C. maculata), closely
resembles the prince's pine, except that its slightly larger
white or pinkish flowers lack the deep pink ring; and the
lance-shaped leaves, with rather distant saw-teeth, are
beautifully mottled with white along the veins. When we see
short-lipped bees and flies about these flowers, we may be sure
their pollen-covered mouths come in contact with the moist stigma
on the summit of the little top-shaped style, and so effect
cross-fertilization.


WILD HONEYSUCKLE; PINK, PURPLE, or WILD AZALEA; PINXTER-FLOWER
  (Azalea nudiflora)  Heath family

Flowers - Crimson pink, purplish or rose pink, to nearly white, 1
1/2 to 2 in. across, faintly fragrant, clustered, opening before
or with the leaves, and developed from cone-like, scaly brown
buds. Calyx minute, 5-parted; corolla funnel-shaped, the tube
narrow, hairy, with 5 regular, spreading lobes; 5 long red
stamens; 1 pistil, declined, protruding. Stem: Shrubby, usually
simple below, but branching above, 2 to 6 ft. high. Leaves:
Usually clustered, deciduous, oblong, acute at both ends, hairy
on midrib.
Preferred Habitat - Moist, rocky woods, or dry woods and
thickets.
Flowering Season - April-May.
Distribution - Maine to Illinois, and southward to the Gulf.

Woods and hillsides are glowing with fragrant, rosy masses of
this lovely azalea, the Pinxter-bloem or Whitsunday flower of the
Dutch colonists, long before the seventh Sunday after Easter.
Among our earliest exports, this hardy shrub, the swamp azalea,
and the superb flame-colored species of the Alleghanies, were
sent early in the eighteenth century to the old country, and
there crossed with A. Pontica of southern Europe by the Belgian
horticulturalists, to whom we owe the Ghent azaleas, the final
triumphs of the hybridizer, that glorify the shrubberies on our
own lawns to-day. The azalea became the national flower of
Flanders. These hardy species lose their leaves in winter,
whereas the hothouse varieties of A. Indica, a native of China
and Japan, have thickish leaves, almost if not quite evergreen. A
few of the latter stand our northern winters, especially the pure
white variety now quite commonly planted in cemetery lots. In
that delightfully enthusiastic little book, "The Garden's Story,"
Mr. Ellwanger says of the Ghent azalea "In it I find a charm
presented by no other flower. Its soft tints of buff, sulphur,
and primrose; its dazzling shades of apricot, salmon, orange, and
vermilion are always a fresh revelation of color. They have no
parallel among flowers, and exist only in opals, sunset skies,
and the flush of autumn woods." Certainly American
horticulturists were not clever in allowing the industry of
raising these plants from our native stock to thrive on foreign
soil.

Naturally the azalea's protruding style forms the most convenient
alighting place for the female bee, its chief friend; and there
she leaves a few grains of pollen, brought on her hairy underside
from another flower, before again dusting herself there as she
crawls over the pretty colored anthers on her way to the nectary.
Honey produced from azaleas by the hive bee is in bad repute. All
too soon after fertilization the now useless corolla slides along
to the tip of the pistil, where it swings a while before dropping
to earth.

Our beautiful wild honeysuckle, called naked (nudiflora), because
very often the flowers appear before the leaves, has a peculiar
Japanese grace on that account. Every farmer's boy's mouth waters
at sight of the cool, juicy May-apple, the extraordinary pulpy
growth on this plant and the swamp pink. This excrescence seems
to have no other use than that of a gratuitous, harmless gift to
the thirsty child, from whom it exacts no reward of carrying
seeds to plant distant colonies, as the mandrake's yellow,
tomato-like May-apple does. But let him beware, as he is likely
to, of the similar looking, but hollow, stringy apples growing on
the bushy Andromeda, which turn black with age.

>From Maine to Florida and westward to Texas, chiefly near the
coast, in low, wet places only need we look for the SWAMP PINK or
HONEYSUCKLE, WHITE or CLAMMY AZALEA (A. viscosa), a more hairy
species than the Pinxter-flower, with a very sticky, glandular
corolla tube, and deliciously fragrant blossoms, by no means
invariably white. John Burroughs is not the only one who has
passed "several patches of swamp honeysuckles, red with blossoms"
("Wake-Robin"). But as this species does not bloom until June and
July, when the sun quickly bleaches the delicate flowers, it is
true we most frequently find them white, merely tinged with pink.
The leaves are well developed before the blossoms appear.
Concerning azaleas' poisonous property, see the discussion under
mountain laurel that follows.

RHODORA
  (Rhodora Canadensis; Rhododendron Rhodora of Gray)  Heath
family

Flowers - Purplish pink, rose, or nearly white, 1 1/2 in. broad
or less, in clusters on short, stiff, hairy pedicels, and usually
appearing before the leaves, from scaly, terminal buds. Calyx
minute; corolla 2-lipped, upper lip unequally 2-3 lobed; lower
lip 2-cleft; 10 stamens; pistil, the style slightly protruding.
Stem: 1 to 3 ft. high, shrubby, branching. Leaves: Deciduous,
oval to oblong, dark green above, pale and hairy beneath.
Preferred Habitat - Wet hillsides, damp woods, beside sluggish
streams, cool bogs.
Flowering Season - May.
Distribution - Newfoundland to Pennsylvania mountains.

A superficial glance at this low, little, thin shrub might
mistake it for a magenta variety of the leafless Pinxter-flower.
It does its best to console the New Englanders for the scarcity
of the magnificent rhododendron, with which it was formerly
classed. The Sage of Concord, who became so enamored of it that
Massachusetts people often speak of it as "Emerson's flower,"
extols its loveliness in a sonnet:

     "Rhodora! If the sages ask thee why
      This charm is wasted on the earth and sky,
      Tell them, dear, if eyes were made for seeing,
      Then Beauty is its own excuse for being."


AMERICAN or GREAT RHODODENDRON; GREAT LAUREL; ROSE TREE, or BAY
  (Rhododendron maximum)  Heath family

Flowers - Rose pink, varying to white, greenish in the throat,
spotted with yellow or orange, in broad clusters set like a
bouquet among leaves, and developed from scaly, cone-like buds;
pedicels sticky-hairy. Calyx 5-parted, minute; corolla 5-lobed,
broadly bell-shaped, 2 in. broad or less usually 10 stamens,
equally spreading; pistil. Stem: Sometimes a tree attaining a
height of 40 ft., usually 6 to 20 ft., shrubby, woody. Leaves:
Evergreen, drooping in winter, leathery, dark green on both
sides, lance-oblong, 4 to 10 in. long, entire edged, narrowing
into stout petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Mountainous woodland, hillsides near streams.
Flowering Season - June-July.
Distribution - Uncommon from Ohio and New England to Nova Scotia;
abundant through the Alleghanies to Georgia.

When this most magnificent of our native shrubs covers whole
mountain sides throughout the Alleghany region with bloom, one
stands awed in the presence of such overwhelming beauty. Nowhere
else does the rhododendron attain such size or luxuriance. There
it produces a tall trunk, and towers among the trees; it spreads
its branches far and wide until they interlock and form almost
impenetrable thickets locally called "hells;" it glorifies the
loneliest mountain road with superb bouquets of its delicate
flowers set among dark, glossy foliage scarcely less attractive.
The mountain in bloom is worth travelling a thousand miles to
see.

Farther south the more purplish-pink or lilac-flowered CAROLINA
RHODODENDRON (R. Catawbiense) flourishes. This southern shrub,
which is perfectly hardy, unlike its northern sister, has been
used by cultivators as a basis for producing the fine hybrids now
so extensively grown on lawns in this country and Europe. Crossed
with the Nepal species (R. arboreum) the best results follow.
Americans, ever too prone to make the eagle scream on their trips
abroad, need not monopolize all the glory for the cultivated
rhododendron, as they are apt to do when they see it on fine
estates in England. The Himalayas, which are covered with
rhododendrons of brighter hue than ours, furnish many of the
shrubs of commerce. Our rhododendron produces one of the hardest
and strongest of woods, weighing thirty-nine pounds per cubic
foot.

Rhododendrons, azaleas, and laurels fall under a common ban
pronounced by bee-keepers. The bees which transfer pollen from
blossom to blossom while gathering nectar, manufacture honey said
to be poisonous. Cattle know enough to let all this foliage
alone. Apparently the ants fear no more evil results from the
nectar than the bees themselves; and were it not for the sticky
parts nearest the flowers, on which they crawl to meet their
death, the blossom's true benefactors would find little
refreshment left.


MOUNTAIN or AMERICAN LAUREL; CALICO BUSH; SPOONWOOD; CALMOUN;
BROAD-LEAVED KALMIA
  (Kalmia latifolia)  Heath family

Flowers - Buds and new flowers bright rose pink, afterward fading
white, and only lined with pink, 1 in. across, or less, numerous,
in terminal clusters. Calyx small, 5-parted, sticky corolla like
a 5-pointed saucer, with 10 projections on outside; 10 arching
stamens, an anther lodged in each projection; 1 pistil. Stem:
Shrubby, woody, stiffly branched, 2 to 20 ft. high. Leaves:
Evergreen, entire, oval to elliptic, pointed at both ends,
tapering into petioles. Fruit: A round, brown capsule, with the
style long remaining on it.
Preferred Habitat - Sandy or rocky woods, especially in hilly or
mountainous country.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - New Brunswick and Ontario, southward to the Gulf
of Mexico, and westward to Ohio.

It would be well if Americans, imitating the Japanese in making
pilgrimages to scenes of supreme natural beauty, visited the
mountains, rocky, woody hillsides, ravines, and tree-girt uplands
when the laurel is in its glory; when masses of its pink and
white blossoms, set among the dark evergreen leaves, flush the
landscape like Aurora, and are reflected from the pools of
streams and the serene depths of mountain lakes. Peter Kalm, a
Swedish pupil of Linnaeus, who traveled here early in the
eighteenth century, was more impressed by its beauty than that of
any other flower. He introduced the plant to Europe, where it is
known as kalmia, and extensively cultivated on fine estates that
are thrown open to the public during the flowering season. Even a
flower is not without honor, save in its own country. We have
only to prepare a border of leaf-mould, take up the young plant
without injuring the roots or allowing them to dry, hurry them
into the ground, and prune back the bush a little, to establish
it in our gardens, where it will bloom freely after the second
year.

All the kalmias resort to a most ingenious device for compelling
insect visitors to carry their pollen from blossom to blossom. A
newly opened flower has its stigma erected where the incoming bee
must leave on its sticky surface the four minute orange-like
grains carried from the anther of another flower on the hairy
underside of her body. Now, each anther is tucked away in one of
the ten little pockets of the saucer-shaped blossom, and the
elastic filaments are strained upward like a bow. After hovering
above the nectary, the bee has only to descend toward it, when
her leg, touching against one of the hair-triggers of the spring
trap, pop goes the little anther-gun, discharging pollen from its
bores as it flies upward. So delicately is the mechanism
adjusted, the slightest jar or rough handling releases the
anthers; but, on the other hand, should insects be excluded by a
net stretched over the plant, the flowers will fall off and
wither without firing off their pollen-charged guns. At least,
this is true in the great majority of tests. As in the case of
hothouse flowers no fertile seed is set when nets keep away the
laurel's benefactors. One has only to touch the hair-trigger with
the end of a pin to see how exquisitely delicate is this
provision for cross-fertilization.

However much we may be cautioned by the apiculturalists against
honey made from laurel nectar, the bees themselves ignore all
warnings and apparently without evil results - happily for
flowers dependent upon them and their kin. Mr. Frank R. Cheshire,
in "Bees and Bee-keeping," the standard English work on the
subject, writes: "During the celebrated Retreat of the Ten
Thousand, as recorded by Xenophon in his 'Anabasis,' the soldiers
regaled themselves upon some honey found near Trebizonde where
were many beehives. Intoxication with vomiting was the result.
Some were so overcome, he states, as to be incapable of standing.
Not a soldier died, but very many were greatly weakened for
several days. Tournefort endeavored to ascertain whether this
account was corroborated by anything ascertainable in the
locality, and had good reason to be satisfied respecting it. He
concluded that the honey had been gathered from a shrub growing
in the neighborhood of Trebizonde, which is well known there as
producing the before-mentioned effects. It is now agreed that the
plants were species of rhododendron and azaleas. Lamberti
confirms Xenophon's account by stating that similar effects are
produced by honey of Colchis, where the same shrubs are common.
In 1790, even, fatal cases occurred in America in consequence of
eating wild honey, which was traced to Kahmia latifolia by an
inquiry instituted under direction of the American government.
Happily, our American cousins are now never likely to thus
suffer, thanks to drainage, the plow, and the bee-farm."

One of the beautiful swallow-tail butterflies lays its eggs on
laurel leaves, that the larvae may feed on them later; yet the
foliage often proves deadly to more highly organized creatures.
Most cattle know enough to let it alone; nevertheless some fall
victims to it every year. Even the intelligent grouse, hard
pressed with hunger when deep snow covers much of their chosen
food are sometimes found dead and their crops distended by these
leaves. How far more unkind than the bristly armored thistle's is
the laurel's method of protecting itself against destruction!
Even the ant, intent on pilfering sweets secreted for bees, it
ruthlessly glues to death against its sticky stems and calices.
According to Dr. Barton the Indians drink a decoction of kalmia
leaves when they wish to commit suicide.

As laurel wood is very hard and solid, weighing forty-four pounds
