of water, composed of                    { Oxygen    346     2     3    44.60

                                         { Hydrogen    8     0     0     0
100 libs. sugar, composed of             { Oxygen     64     0     0     0
                                         { Charcoal   28     0     0     0

                                         { Hydrogen    0     4     5     9.30
2 libs. 12 oz. 1 gros 28 grs. of         { Oxygen      1    10     2    28.76
dry yeast, composed of                   { Charcoal    0    12     4    59
                                         { Azote       0     0     5     2.94
                                                     -----------------------
                                      Total weight   510     0     0     0


TABLE III. _Recapitulation of these Elements._

                   libs.     oz.   gros  grs.
Oxygen:
  of the water       340      0      0    0    }
  of the water                                 } libs.   oz.    gros   grs.
    in the yeast       6      2      3   44.60 }   411    12      6    1.36
  of the sugar        64      0      0    0    }
  of the dry yeast     1     10      2   28.76 }
Hydrogen:
  of the water        60      0      0    0    }
  of the water                                 }
  in the yeast         1      1      2   71.40 }    69     6      0    8.70
  of the sugar         8      0      0    0    }
  of the dry yeast     0      4      5    9.30 }
Charcoal:
  of the sugar        28      0      0    0    }
  of the yeast         0     12      4   59.00 }    28    12      4   59.00
Azote of the yeast     -      -      -    -    }     0     0      5    2.94
                                                 --------------------------
                                           In all  510     0      0    0

Having thus accurately determined the nature and quantity of the
constituent elements of the materials submitted to fermentation, we have
next to examine the products resulting from that process. For this
purpose, I placed the above 510 libs. of fermentable liquor in a
proper[26] apparatus, by means of which I could accurately determine the
quantity and quality of gas disengaged during the fermentation, and
could even weigh every one of the products separately, at any period of
the process I judged proper. An hour or two after the substances are
mixed together, especially if they are kept in a temperature of from 15
deg. (65.75 deg.) to 18 deg. (72.5 deg.) of the thermometer, the first
marks of fermentation commence; the liquor turns thick and frothy, little
globules of air are disengaged, which rise and burst at the surface; the
quantity of these globules quickly increases, and there is a rapid and
abundant production of very pure carbonic acid, accompanied with a scum,
which is the yeast separating from the mixture. After some days, less or
more according to the degree of heat, the intestine motion and
disengagement of gas diminish; but these do not cease entirely, nor is
the fermentation completed for a considerable time. During the process,
35 libs. 5 oz. 4 gros 19 grs. of dry carbonic acid are
disengaged, which carry alongst with them 13 libs. 14 oz. 5 gros
of water. There remains in the vessel 460 libs. 11 oz. 6 gros 53
grs. of vinous liquor, slightly acidulous. This is at first muddy, but
clears of itself, and deposits a portion of yeast. When we separately
analise all these substances, which is effected by very troublesome
processes, we have the results as given in the following Tables. This
process, with all the subordinate calculations and analyses, will be
detailed at large in the Memoirs of the Academy.


TABLE IV. _Product of Fermentation._

                                                             libs. oz. gros grs.
35 libs. 5 oz. 4 gros 19 grs.           { Oxygen              25   7    1   34
  of carbonic acid, composed of         { Charcoal             9  14    2   57

408 libs. 15 oz. 5 gros 14 grs.         { Oxygen             347  10    0   59
  of water, composed of                 { Hydrogen            61   5    4   27

                                        { Oxygen, combined
                                        {   with hydrogen     31   6    1   64
                                        { Hydrogen, combined
57 libs. 11 oz. 1 gros 58 grs.          {   with oxygen        5   8    5    3
  of dry alkohol, composed of           { Hydrogen, combined
                                        {   with charcoal      4   0    5    0
                                        { Charcoal, combined
                                        {   with hydrogen     16  11    5   63

2 libs. 8 oz. of dry acetous            { Hydrogen             0   2    4    0
  acid, composed of                     { Oxygen               1  11    4    0
                                        { Charcoal             0  10    0    0

4 libs. 1 oz. 4 gros 3 grs.             { Hydrogen             0   5    1   67
  of residuum of sugar,                 { Oxygen               2   9    7   27
  composed of                           { Charcoal             1   2    2   53

                                        { Hydrogen             0   2    2   41
1 lib. 6 oz. 0 gros 5 grs.              { Oxygen               0  13    1   14
of dry yeast, composed of               { Charcoal             0   6    2   30
                                        { Azote                0   0    2   37
---                                                            -----------------
510 libs.                                      Total       510   0    0    0


TABLE V. _Recapitulation of the Products._

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       libs.  oz.  gros grs.

409 libs. 10 oz. 0 gros 54 grs.   { Water                347   10   0   59
  of oxygen contained in the      { Carbonic acid         25    7   1   34
                                  { Alkohol               31    6   1   64
                                  { Acetous acid           1   11   4    0
                                  { Residuum of sugar      2    9   7   27
                                  { Yeast                  0   13   1   14

28 libs. 12 oz. 5 gros 59 grs.    { Carbonic acid          9   14   2   57
  of charcoal contained           { Alkohol               16   11   5   63
  in the                          { Acetous acid           0   10   0    0
                                  { Residuum of sugar      1    2   2   53
                                  { Yeast                  0    6   2   30

                                  { Water                 61    5   4   27
71 libs. 8 oz. 6 gros 66 grs.     { Water of the alkohol   5    8   5    3
  of hydrogen contained           { Combined with the
  in the                          {  charcoal of the alko. 4    0   5    0
                                  { Acetous acid           0    2   4    0
                                  { Residuum of sugar      0    5   1   67
                                  { Yeast                  0    2   2   41

                  2 gros 37 grs. of azote in the yeast     0    0   2   37
---                                                        ---------------
510 libs.                                 Total        510    0   0    0

In these results, I have been exact, even to grains; not that it is
possible, in experiments of this nature, to carry our accuracy so far,
but as the experiments were made only with a few pounds of sugar, and
as, for the sake of comparison, I reduced the results of the actual
experiments to the quintal or imaginary hundred pounds, I thought it
necessary to leave the fractional parts precisely as produced by
calculation.

When we consider the results presented by these tables with attention,
it is easy to discover exactly what occurs during fermentation. In the
first place, out of the 100 libs. of sugar employed, 4 libs. 1 oz.
4 gros 3 grs. remain, without having suffered decomposition; so
that, in reality, we have only operated upon 95 libs. 14 oz. 3
gros 69 grs. of sugar; that is to say, upon 61 libs. 6 oz. 45
grs. of oxygen, 7 libs. 10 oz. 6 gros 6 grs. of hydrogen, and
26 libs. 13 oz. 5 gros 19 grs. of charcoal. By comparing these
quantities, we find that they are fully sufficient for forming the whole
of the alkohol, carbonic acid and acetous acid produced by the
fermentation. It is not, therefore, necessary to suppose that any water
has been decomposed during the experiment, unless it be pretended that
the oxygen and hydrogen exist in the sugar in that state. On the
contrary, I have already made it evident that hydrogen, oxygen and
charcoal, the three constituent elements of vegetables, remain in a
state of equilibrium or mutual union with each other which subsists so
long as this union remains undisturbed by increased temperature, or by
some new compound attraction; and that then only these elements
combine, two and two together, to form water and carbonic acid.

The effects of the vinous fermentation upon sugar is thus reduced to the
mere separation of its elements into two portions; one part is
oxygenated at the expence of the other, so as to form carbonic acid,
whilst the other part, being deoxygenated in favour of the former, is
converted into the combustible substance alkohol; therefore, if it were
possible to reunite alkohol and carbonic acid together, we ought to form
sugar. It is evident that the charcoal and hydrogen in the alkohol do
not exist in the state of oil, they are combined with a portion of
oxygen, which renders them miscible with water; wherefore these three
substances, oxygen, hydrogen, and charcoal, exist here likewise in a
species of equilibrium or reciprocal combination; and in fact, when they
are made to pass through a red hot tube of glass or porcelain, this
union or equilibrium is destroyed, the elements become combined, two and
two, and water and carbonic acid are formed.

I had formally advanced, in my first Memoirs upon the formation of
water, that it was decomposed in a great number of chemical experiments,
and particularly during the vinous fermentation. I then supposed that
water existed ready formed in sugar, though I am now convinced that
sugar only contains the elements proper for composing it. It may be
readily conceived, that it must have cost me a good deal to abandon my
first notions, but by several years reflection, and after a great number
of experiments and observations upon vegetable substances, I have fixed
my ideas as above.

I shall finish what I have to say upon vinous fermentation, by
observing, that it furnishes us with the means of analysing sugar and
every vegetable fermentable matter. We may consider the substances
submitted to fermentation, and the products resulting from that
operation, as forming an algebraic equation; and, by successively
supposing each of the elements in this equation unknown, we can
calculate their values in succession, and thus verify our experiments by
calculation, and our calculation by experiment reciprocally. I have
often successfully employed this method for correcting the first results
of my experiments, and to direct me in the proper road for repeating
them to advantage. I have explained myself at large upon this subject,
in a Memoir upon vinous fermentation already presented to the Academy,
and which will speedily be published.

FOOTNOTES:

[26] The above apparatus is described in the Third Part.--A.




CHAP. XIV.

_Of the Putrefactive Fermentation._


The phenomena of putrefaction are caused, like those of vinous
fermentation, by the operation of very complicated affinities. The
constituent elements of the bodies submitted to this process cease to
continue in equilibrium in the threefold combination, and form
themselves anew into binary combinations[27], or compounds, consisting
of two elements only; but these are entirely different from the results
produced by the vinous fermentation. Instead of one part of the hydrogen
remaining united with part of the water and charcoal to form alkohol, as
in the vinous fermentation, the whole of the hydrogen is dissipated,
during putrefaction, in the form of hydrogen gas, whilst, at the same
time, the oxygen and charcoal, uniting with caloric, escape in the form
of carbonic acid gas; so that, when the whole process is finished,
especially if the materials have been mixed with a sufficient quantity
of water, nothing remains but the earth of the vegetable mixed with a
small portion of charcoal and iron. Thus putrefaction is nothing more
than a complete analysis of vegetable substance, during which the whole
of the constituent elements is disengaged in form of gas, except the
earth, which remains in the state of mould[28].

Such is the result of putrefaction when the substances submitted to it
contain only oxygen, hydrogen, charcoal and a little earth. But this
case is rare, and these substances putrify imperfectly and with
difficulty, and require a considerable time to complete their
putrefaction. It is otherwise with substances containing azote, which
indeed exists in all animal matters, and even in a considerable number
of vegetable substances. This additional element is remarkably
favourable to putrefaction; and for this reason animal matter is mixed
with vegetable, when the putrefaction of these is wished to be hastened.
The whole art of forming composts and dunghills, for the purposes of
agriculture, consists in the proper application of this admixture.

The addition of azote to the materials of putrefaction not only
accelerates the process, that element likewise combines with part of
the hydrogen, and forms a new substance called _volatile alkali_ or
_ammoniac_. The results obtained by analysing animal matters, by
different processes, leave no room for doubt with regard to the
constituent elements of ammoniac; whenever the azote has been previously
separated from these substances, no ammoniac is produced; and in all
cases they furnish ammoniac only in proportion to the azote they
contain. This composition of ammoniac is likewise fully proved by Mr
Berthollet, in the Memoirs of the Academy for 1785, p. 316. where he
gives a variety of analytical processes by which ammoniac is decomposed,
and its two elements, azote and hydrogen, procured separately.

I already mentioned in Chap. X. that almost all combustible bodies were
capable of combining with each other; hydrogen gas possesses this
quality in an eminent degree, it dissolves charcoal, sulphur, and
phosphorus, producing the compounds named _carbonated hydrogen gas_,
_sulphurated hydrogen gas_, and _phosphorated hydrogen gas_. The two
latter of these gasses have a peculiarly disagreeable flavour; the
sulphurated hydrogen gas has a strong resemblance to the smell of rotten
eggs, and the phosphorated smells exactly like putrid fish. Ammoniac has
likewise a peculiar odour, not less penetrating, or less disagreeable,
than these other gasses. From the mixture of these different flavours
proceeds the fetor which accompanies the putrefaction of animal
substances. Sometimes ammoniac predominates, which is easily perceived
by its sharpness upon the eyes; sometimes, as in feculent matters, the
sulphurated gas is most prevalent; and sometimes, as in putrid herrings,
the phosphorated hydrogen gas is most abundant.

I long supposed that nothing could derange or interrupt the course of
putrefaction; but Mr Fourcroy and Mr Thouret have observed some peculiar
phenomena in dead bodies, buried at a certain depth, and preserved to a
certain degree, from contact with air; having found the muscular flesh
frequently converted into true animal fat. This must have arisen from
the disengagement of the azote, naturally contained in the animal
substance, by some unknown cause, leaving only the hydrogen and charcoal
remaining, which are the elements proper for producing fat or oil. This
observation upon the possibility of converting animal substances into
fat may some time or other lead to discoveries of great importance to
society. The faeces of animals, and other excrementitious matters, are
chiefly composed of charcoal and hydrogen, and approach considerably to
the nature of oil, of which they furnish a considerable quantity by
distillation with a naked fire; but the intolerable foetor which
accompanies all the products of these substances prevents our expecting
that, at least for a long time, they can be rendered useful in any other
way than as manures.

I have only given conjectural approximations in this Chapter upon the
composition of animal substances, which is hitherto but imperfectly
understood. We know that they are composed of hydrogen, charcoal, azote,
phosphorus, and sulphur, all of which, in a state of quintuple
combination, are brought to the state of oxyd by a larger or smaller
quantity of oxygen. We are, however, still unacquainted with the
proportions in which these substances are combined, and must leave it to
time to complete this part of chemical analysis, as it has already done
with several others.

FOOTNOTES:

[27] Binary combinations are such as consist of two simple elements
combined together. Ternary, and quaternary, consist of three and four
elements.--E.

[28] In the Third Part will be given the description of an apparatus
proper for being used in experiments of this kind.--A.




CHAP. XV.

_Of the Acetous Fermentation._


The acetous fermentation is nothing more than the acidification or
oxygenation of wine[29], produced in the open air by means of the
absorption of oxygen. The resulting acid is the acetous acid, commonly
called Vinegar, which is composed of hydrogen and charcoal united
together in proportions not yet ascertained, and changed into the acid
state by oxygen. As vinegar is an acid, we might conclude from analogy
that it contains oxygen, but this is put beyond doubt by direct
experiments: In the first place, we cannot change wine into vinegar
without the contact of air containing oxygen; secondly, this process is
accompanied by a diminution of the volume of the air in which it is
carried on from the absorption of its oxygen; and, thirdly, wine may be
changed into vinegar by any other means of oxygenation.

Independent of the proofs which these facts furnish of the acetous acid
being produced by the oxygenation of wine, an experiment made by Mr
Chaptal, Professor of Chemistry at Montpellier, gives us a distinct view
of what takes place in this process. He impregnated water with about its
own bulk of carbonic acid from fermenting beer, and placed this water in
a cellar in vessels communicating with the air, and in a short time the
whole was converted into acetous acid. The carbonic acid gas procured
from beer vats in fermentation is not perfectly pure, but contains a
small quantity of alkohol in solution, wherefore water impregnated with
it contains all the materials necessary for forming the acetous acid.
The alkohol furnishes hydrogen and one portion of charcoal, the carbonic
acid furnishes oxygen and the rest of the charcoal, and the air of the
atmosphere furnishes the rest of the oxygen necessary for changing the
mixture into acetous acid. From this observation it follows, that
nothing but hydrogen is wanting to convert carbonic acid into acetous
acid; or more generally, that, by means of hydrogen, and according to
the degree of oxygenation, carbonic acid may be changed into all the
vegetable acids; and, on the contrary, that, by depriving any of the
vegetable acids of their hydrogen, they may be converted into carbonic
acid.

Although the principal facts relating to the acetous acid are well
known, yet numerical exactitude is still wanting, till furnished by more
exact experiments than any hitherto performed; wherefore I shall not
enlarge any farther upon the subject. It is sufficiently shown by what
has been said, that the constitution of all the vegetable acids and
oxyds is exactly conformable to the formation of vinegar; but farther
experiments are necessary to teach us the proportion of the constituent
elements in all these acids and oxyds. We may easily perceive, however,
that this part of chemistry, like all the rest of its divisions, makes
rapid progress towards perfection, and that it is already rendered
greatly more simple than was formerly believed.

FOOTNOTES:

[29] The word Wine, in this chapter, is used to signify the liquor
produced by the vinous fermentation, whatever vegetable substance may
have been used for obtaining it.--E.




CHAP. XVI.

_Of the Formation of Neutral Salts, and of their different Bases._


We have just seen that all the oxyds and acids from the animal and
vegetable kingdoms are formed by means of a small number of simple
elements, or at least of such as have not hitherto been susceptible of
decomposition, by means of combination with oxygen; these are azote,
sulphur, phosphorus, charcoal, hydrogen, and the muriatic radical[30].
We may justly admire the simplicity of the means employed by nature to
multiply qualities and forms, whether by combining three or four
acidifiable bases in different proportions, or by altering the dose of
oxygen employed for oxydating or acidifying them. We shall find the
means no less simple and diversified, and as abundantly productive of
forms and qualities, in the order of bodies we are now about to treat
of.

Acidifiable substances, by combining with oxygen, and their consequent
conversion into acids, acquire great susceptibility of farther
combination; they become capable of uniting with earthy and metallic
bodies, by which means neutral salts are formed. Acids may therefore be
considered as true _salifying_ principles, and the substances with which
they unite to form neutral salts may be called _salifiable_ bases: The
nature of the union which these two principles form with each other is
meant as the subject of the present chapter.

This view of the acids prevents me from considering them as salts,
though they are possessed of many of the principal properties of saline
bodies, as solubility in water, &c. I have already observed that they
are the result of a first order of combination, being composed of two
simple elements, or at least of elements which act as if they were
simple, and we may therefore rank them, to use the language of Stahl, in
the order of _mixts_. The neutral salts, on the contrary, are of a
secondary order of combination, being formed by the union of two _mixts_
with each other, and may therefore be termed _compounds_. Hence I shall
not arrange the alkalies[31] or earths in the class of salts, to which
I allot only such as are composed of an oxygenated substance united to
a base.

I have already enlarged sufficiently upon the formation of acids in the
preceding chapter, and shall not add any thing farther upon that
subject; but having as yet given no account of the salifiable bases
which are capable of uniting with them to form neutral salts, I mean, in
this chapter, to give an account of the nature and origin of each of
these bases. These are potash, soda, ammoniac, lime, magnesia, barytes,
argill[32], and all the metallic bodies.


Sec. 1. _Of Potash._

We have already shown, that, when a vegetable substance is submitted to
the action of fire in distilling vessels, its component elements,
oxygen, hydrogen, and charcoal, which formed a threefold combination in
a state of equilibrium, unite, two and two, in obedience to affinities
which act conformable to the degree of heat employed. Thus, at the
first application of the fire, whenever the heat produced exceeds the
temperature of boiling water, part of the oxygen and hydrogen unite to
form water; soon after the rest of the hydrogen, and part of the
charcoal, combine into oil; and, lastly, when the fire is pushed to the
red heat, the oil and water, which had been formed in the early part of
the process, become again decomposed, the oxygen and charcoal unite to
form carbonic acid, a large quantity of hydrogen gas is set free, and
nothing but charcoal remains in the retort.

A great part of these phenomena occur during the combustion of
vegetables in the open air; but, in this case, the presence of the air
introduces three new substances, the oxygen and azote of the air and
caloric, of which two at least produce considerable changes in the
results of the operation. In proportion as the hydrogen of the
vegetable, or that which results from the decomposition of the water, is
forced out in the form of hydrogen gas by the progress of the fire, it
is set on fire immediately upon getting in contact with the air, water
is again formed, and the greater part of the caloric of the two gasses
becoming free produces flame. When all the hydrogen gas is driven out,
burnt, and again reduced to water, the remaining charcoal continues to
burn, but without flame; it is formed into carbonic acid, which carries
off a portion of caloric sufficient to give it the gasseous form; the
rest of the caloric, from the oxygen of the air, being set free,
produces the heat and light observed during the combustion of charcoal.
The whole vegetable is thus reduced into water and carbonic acid, and
nothing remains but a small portion of gray earthy matter called ashes,
being the only really fixed principles which enter into the constitution
