
25. The gastric juice is the proper solvent of certain articles of food,
especially those belonging to the albuminoid class. This solvent power is
due to its peculiar ingredient, _pepsin_; in digestion, this substance acts
like a ferment; that is, it induces changes in the food simply by its
presence, but does not itself undergo change. The acidity of the gastric
juice, which is due to _lactic acid_, is not accidental; for we find that
the pepsin cannot act in an alkaline solution--that is, one which is not
acid or neutral. The quantity of gastric juice secreted daily is very
large, probably not less than three or four pints at each meal. Though this
fluid is at once used in the reduction of the food, it is not lost; since
it is soon re-absorbed by the stomach, together with those parts of the
food which it has digested and holds in solution.

[Sidenote: 26. Muscular coat of the stomach? Expansion and contraction of
its fibres? Action of the fibres?]

26. MOVEMENTS OF THE STOMACH.--The inner coating of the stomach is the
mucous membrane, which, as we have seen, furnishes the gastric juice. Next
to this coating lies another, called the muscular coat, composed of
involuntary muscular fibres, some of which run circularly, and others in a
longitudinal direction. These expand to accommodate the food as it is
introduced, and contract as it passes out. In addition, these fibres are in
continual motion while food remains in the stomach, and they act in such
manner that the contents are gently turned round from side to side, or from
one end of it to the other.

[Sidenote: 27. Peristaltic movements? What is said of our consciousness of
and power over these movements? Describe the movements of the pylorus.]

27. By these incessant movements of the stomach, called the _peristaltic_
movements, the gastric juice comes in contact with all parts of the food.
We are, however, not conscious that these movements take place, nor have we
the power to control them. When such portions of the food as are
sufficiently digested approach the pylorus, it {93} expands to allow them
to pass out, and it closes again to confine the residue for further
preparation.

[Sidenote: 28. How has the knowledge and the workings of the stomach been
ascertained? St. Martin? How else?]

28. The knowledge of these and other interesting and instructive facts has
been obtained by actual observation; the workings of the stomach of a
living human being have been laid open to view and examined--the result of
a remarkable accident. Alexis St. Martin, a Canadian _voyageur_, received a
gun-shot wound which laid open his stomach, and which, in healing, left a
permanent orifice nearly an inch in diameter. Through this opening the
observer could watch the progress of digestion, and experiment with
different articles of food. Since that occurrence, artificial openings into
the stomach of the inferior animals have been repeatedly made, so that the
facts of stomach-digestion are very well ascertained and verified.

[Sidenote: 29. What was formerly thought? What do we now know? What else do
we now know? Water, salt, and sugar? Absorption?]

29. GASTRIC DIGESTION.--What portions of the food are digested in the
stomach? It was formerly thought that all the great changes of digestion
were wrought here, but later investigation has taught us better. We now
know that the first change in digestion takes place in the mouth, in the
partial conversion of starch into sugar. We also know that, of the three
organic food principles (considered in Chapter IV.) two--the fats and the
sugars--are but slightly affected by the stomach; but that its action is
confined to that third and very important class, from which the tissues are
renewed, the albuminoids. A few articles need no preparation before
entering the system, as water, salt, and grape-sugar. These are rapidly
taken up by the blood-vessels of the stomach, which everywhere underlie its
mucous membrane in an intricate and most delicate network. In this way the
function of absorption begins.

[Sidenote: 30. Albuminose? The process? Chyme?]

30. The albuminoid substances are speedily attacked and {94} digested by
the gastric juice. From whatever source they are derived, vegetable or
animal, they are all transformed into the same digestive product, called
_albuminose_. This is very soluble in water, and is readily absorbed by the
blood-vessels of the stomach. After a longer or shorter time, varying from
one to five hours, according to the individual and the quantity and quality
of his food, the stomach will be found empty. Not only has the digested
food passed out, but also those substances which the stomach could not
digest or absorb have passed little by little through the pylorus, to
undergo further action in the intestines. At the time of its exit, the
digested food is of a pulpy consistence, and dark color, and is then known
as the _chyme_.

[Sidenote: 31. What are the intestines? The small intestines? The large
intestines? Their structure?]

31. THE INTESTINES.--The intestines, or "bowels," are continuous with the
stomach, and consist of a fleshy tube, or canal, twenty-five feet in
length. The small intestine, whose diameter is about one inch and a half,
is twenty feet long and very tortuous. The large intestine is much wider
than the former, and five feet long (Fig. 23). The general structure of
these organs resembles that of the stomach. Like it, they are provided with
a mucous membrane, or inner lining, whence flow their digestive juices;
and, just outside of this, a muscular coat, which propels the food onward
from one point to another.

[Sidenote: 32. Peritoneum? The work of digestion?]

32. Moreover, both the intestines and stomach are enveloped in the folds of
the same outer tunic or membrane, called the _peritoneum_. This is so
smooth and so well lubricated, that the intestines have the utmost freedom
of motion. In the small intestines, the work of digestion is completed, the
large intestine receiving from them the indigestible residue of the food,
and in time expelling it from the body.

[Sidenote: 33. The presence of food in the intestines? Bile?]

33. INTESTINAL DIGESTION.--As soon as the food passes the pylorus and
begins to accumulate in the upper {95} part of the intestines, it excites
the flow of a new digestive fluid, which enters through a small tube, or
_duct_, about three inches below the stomach. It is formed by the union of
two distinct fluids--the _bile_ and the _pancreatic_ juice. The bile is
secreted by the liver, which is the largest gland of the body, and is
situated on the right side and upper part of the abdomen (Fig. 22). The
bile is constantly formed, but it flows most rapidly during digestion.
During the intervals of digestion it is stored in the _gall-bladder_, a
small membranous bag attached to the under side of the liver. This fluid is
of a greenish-yellow color, having a peculiar smell, and a very bitter
taste.

[Sidenote: 34. The pancreatic juice? The joint action of these fluids?]

34. The pancreatic juice is the product of a gland called the _pancreas_,
situated behind the stomach. This fluid is colorless, viscid, and without
odor. Like the digestive juices previously described, it owes its solvent
power to its peculiar ferment principle, called _pancreatin_. By the joint
action of these fluids, the fatty parts of the food are prepared for
absorption. By previous steps of digestion the fats are merely separated
from the other components of the food; but here, within the intestines,
they are reduced to a state of minute division, or _emulsion_, resembling
the condition of butter in milk, before it has been churned. There results
from this action a white and milky fluid, termed the _chyle_, which holds
in solution the digestible portions of the food, and is spread over the
extensive absorbent surface of the small intestines.

[Sidenote: 35. The mucous membrane? Experiments on inferior animals?]

35. The mucous membrane of the intestines, also, secretes or produces, a
digestive fluid by means of numerous "follicles," or minute glands; this is
called the intestinal juice. From experiments on the inferior animals, it
has been ascertained that this fluid exerts a solvent influence over each
of the three organic food principles, and in this way may supplement and
complete the action of the {96} fluids previously mentioned, viz.:--of the
saliva in converting starch into sugar, of the gastric juice in digesting
the albuminoids, and of the pancreatic juice and bile in emulsifying the
fats.

[Sidenote: 36, 37. How much thus far has been done with the food? The next
process? Give the first way.]

36. ABSORPTION.--With the elaboration of the chyle, the work of digestion
is completed; but, in a certain sense, the food is yet outside of the body;
that is, the blood is not yet enriched by it, and it is not in a position
to nourish the tissues. The process by which the liquefied food passes out
of the alimentary canal into the blood is called absorption. This is
accomplished in two ways; first, by the _blood-vessels_. We have seen how
the inner membrane of the stomach is underlaid by a tracery of minute and
numerous vessels, and how some portions of the food are by them absorbed.
The supply of blood-vessels to the intestines is even greater; particularly
to the small intestines, where the work of absorption is more actively
carried on.

37. The absorbing surface of the small intestines, if considered as a plane
surface, amounts to not less than half a square yard. Besides, the mucous
membrane is formed in folds with an immense number of thread-like
prolongations, called _villi_, which indefinitely multiply its absorbing
capacity. These minute processes, the villi, give the surface the
appearance and smoothness of velvet; and during digestion, they dip into
the canal, and, by means of their blood-vessels, absorb its fluid contents,
just as the _spongioles_ which terminate the rootlets of plants, imbibe
moisture from the surrounding soil.

[Sidenote: 38. How is absorption effected in another way? Describe it. Name
of the lacteals? Thoracic duct?]

38. Secondly, absorption is also effected by the _lacteals_, a set of
vessels peculiar to the small intestines. These have their beginnings in
the little villi just mentioned, side by side with the blood-vessels. These
two sets of absorbents run in different courses, but their destination is
the same, {97} which is the right side of the heart. The lacteals receive
their name from their milky-white appearance. After a meal containing a
portion of fat, they are then distended with chyle, which they are
specially adapted to receive: at other times they are hardly discernible.
The lacteals all unite to form one tube, the _thoracic duct_, which passes
upward through the _thorax_, or chest, and empties into a large vein,
situated just beneath the left collar-bone.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.--THE LACTEALS.

A, Small Intestine. B, Lacteals. C, Thoracic Duct. D, Absorbents.
E, Blood-vessel. ]

[Sidenote: 39. The absorbents? Lymph? What further of the lymph?]

39. THE ABSORBENTS.--The lacteals belong to a class of vessels known as
absorbents, or lymphatics, which ramify in nearly all parts of the body,
except the brain and spinal cord. The fluid which circulates through the
lymphatics of the limbs, and all the organs not concerned in digestion, is
called _lymph_. This fluid is clear and colorless, like water, and thus
differs from the milky chyle which the lacteals carry after digestion: it
consists chiefly of the watery part of the blood, which was not required by
the tissues, and is returned to the blood by the absorbents or lymphatics.

[Sidenote: 40. What can you state as to the time required for digestion?]

40. CIRCUMSTANCES AFFECTING DIGESTION.--What length of time is required for
the digestion of food? From observations made, in the case of St. Martin,
the Canadian {98} already referred to, it has been ascertained that, at the
end of two hours after a meal, the stomach is ordinarily empty. How much
time is needed to complete the digestion of food, within the small
intestines, is not certain; but, from what we have learned respecting their
functions, it must be evident that it largely depends upon the amount of
starch and fat which the food contains.

[Sidenote: 41. Circumstances affecting duration of digestion? Fresh food?]

41. In addition to the preparations which the food undergoes in cooking,
which we have already considered, many circumstances affect the duration of
digestion; such as the quality, quantity, and temperature of the food; the
condition of the mind and body; sleep, exercise, and habit. Fresh food,
except new bread and the flesh of animals recently slain, is more rapidly
digested than that which is stale; and animal food more rapidly than that
from the vegetable kingdom.

[Sidenote: 42. Food in concentrated form? A large quantity of food?
Experiment on the dog? Ice-water? Variety of articles?]

42. Food should not be taken in too concentrated a form, the action of the
stomach being favored when it is somewhat bulky; but a large quantity in
the stomach often retards digestion. If the white of one egg be given to a
dog, it will be digested in an hour, but if the white of eight eggs be
given it will not disappear in four hours. A wineglassful of ice-water
causes the temperature of the stomach to fall thirty degrees; and it
requires a half-hour before it will recover its natural warmth--about a
hundred degrees--at which the operations of digestion are best conducted. A
variety of articles, if not too large in amount, is more easily disposed of
than a meal made of a single article; although a single indigestible
article may interfere with the reduction of articles that are easily
digested.

[Sidenote: 43. Strong emotion? The tongue of the patient?]

43. Strong emotion, whether of excitement or depression, checks digestion,
as do also a bad temper, anxiety, long fasting, and bodily fatigue. The
majority of these {99} conditions make the mouth dry, that is, they
restrain the flow of the saliva; and without doubt they render the stomach
dry also, by preventing the flow of the gastric juice. And, as a general
rule, we may decide, from a parched and coated tongue, that the condition
of the stomach is not very dissimilar, and that it is unfit for the
performance of digestive labor. This is one of the points which the
physician bears in mind when he examines the tongue of his patient.

[Sidenote: 44. Eating between meals? Severe exercise? Sleep after meals?]

44. The practice of eating at short intervals, or "between meals," as it is
called, has its disadvantage, as well as rapid eating and over-eating,
since it robs the stomach of its needed period of entire rest, and thus
overtasks its power. With the exception of infants and the sick, no persons
require food more frequently than once in four hours. Severe exercise
either directly before or directly after eating retards digestion; a period
of repose is most favorable to the proper action of the stomach. The
natural inclination to rest after a hearty meal may be indulged, but should
not be carried to the extent of sleeping; since in that state the stomach,
as well as the brain and the muscles, seeks release from labor.

{100}

QUESTIONS FOR TOPICAL REVIEW.

                                                                      PAGE

  1. What do you understand by nutrition?                               80
  2. How is the process of nutrition carried on?                        80
  3. What further can you state on the subject?                     80, 81
  4. Describe the general plan of digestion.                            81
  5. How is the process of mastication carried on?                  80, 82
  6. State what you can in relation to the formation of the
        teeth.                                                      82, 86
  7. What, in relation to their arrangement?                        83, 84
  8. What, in relation to the process of "shedding?"            82, 83, 84
  9. In relation to the different forms of teeth in different
        animals?                                                        85
  10. What causes operate to injure or destroy the teeth?           85, 86
  11. What suggestions and directions are given for the
        preservation of the teeth?                                  85, 86
  12. What do you understand by insalivation?                       80, 86
  13. How is the process of insalivation carried on?            86, 87, 88
  14. Of what importance is the saliva to the process?              87, 88
  15. Of what importance are mastication and insalivation?          88, 89
  16. Describe the consequences of rapid eating.                    89, 90
  17. What becomes of the food directly after it has undergone
        mastication and insalivation?                                   90
  18. Describe the location and formation of the stomach.       90, 91, 92
  19. Describe the process by which the gastric juice is formed.        91
  20. What are the properties and uses of the gastric juice?            92
  21. What are the movements of the stomach, and what their
        uses?                                                       92, 93
  22. What further can you state on the subject?                        93
  23. What portions of the food are digested in the stomach?        93, 94
  24. What are the first changes of digestion?                          93
  25. Describe the location and formation of the stomach.               94
  26. What further can you state in relation to the stomach?            94
  27. Describe the process of intestinal digestion.             94, 95, 96
  28. What do you understand by absorption?                         80, 96
  29. How is the process of absorption effected?                    96, 97
  30. What are the lacteals and of what use are they?               96, 97
  31. What length of time is required for the digestion of
        food?                                                       97, 98
  32. What circumstances, of food, affect digestion?                    98
  33. What circumstances, of emotion, affect digestion?             98, 99
  34. What suggestions and directions are given upon the subject of
        eating and drinking?                                        98, 99

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: CIRCULATION OF THE BLOOD.

[Heart, Lungs, Arteries & Veins.]

{101}

CHAPTER VII.

THE CIRCULATION.

_The Blood--Its Plasma and Corpuscles--Coagulation of the Blood--The Uses
of the Blood--Transfusion--Change of Color--The Organs of the
Circulation--The Heart, Arteries, and Veins--The Cavities and Valves of the
Heart--Its Vital Energy--Passage of the Blood through the Heart--The
Frequency and Activity of its Movements--The Pulse--The Sphygmograph--The
Capillary Blood-vessels--The Rate of the
Circulation--Assimilation--Injuries to the Blood-vessels._

[Sidenote: 1. What is required by every living organism? In plants?
Insects? Reptiles? Man?]

1. THE BLOOD.--Every living organism of the higher sort, whether animal or
vegetable, requires for the maintenance of life and activity, a circulatory
fluid, by which nutriment is distributed to all its parts. In plants, this
fluid is the sap; in insects, it is a watery and colorless blood; in
