mighty father, or your royal uncle."

"It is said that you never lie, Norman of Torn," spoke the girl, "and I
believe you, but tell me why you thus befriend a De Montfort."

"It is not for love of your father or your brothers, nor yet hatred of
Peter of Colfax, nor neither for any reward whatsoever. It pleases me to
do as I do, that is all. Come."

He led her in silence to the courtyard and across the lowered
drawbridge, to where they soon discovered a group of horsemen, and in
answer to a low challenge from Shandy, Norman of Torn replied that it
was he.

"Take a dozen men, Shandy, and search yon hellhole. Bring out to me,
alive, Peter of Colfax, and My Lady's cloak and a palfrey--and Shandy,
when all is done as I say, you may apply the torch! But no looting,
Shandy."

Shandy looked in surprise upon his leader, for the torch had never been
a weapon of Norman of Torn, while loot, if not always the prime object
of his many raids, was at least a very important consideration.

The outlaw noticed the surprised hesitation of his faithful subaltern
and signing him to listen, said:

"Red Shandy, Norman of Torn has fought and sacked and pillaged for
the love of it, and for a principle which was at best but a vague
generality. Tonight we ride to redress a wrong done to My Lady Bertrade
de Montfort, and that, Shandy, is a different matter. The torch, Shandy,
from tower to scullery, but in the service of My Lady, no looting."

"Yes, My Lord," answered Shandy, and departed with his little
detachment.

In a half hour he returned with a dozen prisoners, but no Peter of
Colfax.

"He has flown, My Lord," the big fellow reported, and indeed it was
true. Peter of Colfax had passed through the vaults beneath his castle
and, by a long subterranean passage, had reached the quarters of some
priests without the lines of Norman of Torn. By this time, he was
several miles on his way to the coast and France; for he had recognized
the swordsmanship of the outlaw, and did not care to remain in England
and face the wrath of both Norman of Torn and Simon de Montfort.

"He will return," was the outlaw's only comment, when he had been fully
convinced that the Baron had escaped.

They watched until the castle had burst into flames in a dozen places,
the prisoners huddled together in terror and apprehension, fully
expecting a summary and horrible death.

When Norman of Torn had assured himself that no human power could now
save the doomed pile, he ordered that the march be taken up, and the
warriors filed down the roadway behind their leader and Bertrade de
Montfort, leaving their erstwhile prisoners sorely puzzled but unharmed
and free.

As they looked back, they saw the heavens red with the great flames
that sprang high above the lofty towers. Immense volumes of dense smoke
rolled southward across the sky line. Occasionally it would clear away
from the burning castle for an instant to show the black walls pierced
by their hundreds of embrasures, each lit up by the red of the raging
fire within. It was a gorgeous, impressive spectacle, but one so common
in those fierce, wild days, that none thought it worthy of more than a
passing backward glance.

Varied emotions filled the breasts of the several riders who wended
their slow way down the mud-slippery road. Norman of Torn was both
elated and sad. Elated that he had been in time to save this girl
who awakened such strange emotions in his breast; sad that he was a
loathesome thing in her eyes. But that it was pure happiness just to be
near her, sufficed him for the time; of the morrow, what use to think!
The little, grim, gray, old man of Torn nursed the spleen he did not
dare vent openly, and cursed the chance that had sent Henry de Montfort
to Torn to search for his sister; while the followers of the outlaw
swore quietly over the vagary which had brought them on this long ride
without either fighting or loot.

Bertrade de Montfort was but filled with wonder that she should owe her
life and honor to this fierce, wild cut-throat who had sworn especial
hatred against her family, because of its relationship to the house of
Plantagenet. She could not fathom it, and yet, he seemed fair spoken
for so rough a man; she wondered what manner of countenance might lie
beneath that barred visor.

Once the outlaw took his cloak from its fastenings at his saddle's
cantel and threw it about the shoulders of the girl, for the night air
was chilly, and again he dismounted and led her palfrey around a bad
place in the road, lest the beast might slip and fall.

She thanked him in her courtly manner for these services, but beyond
that, no word passed between them, and they came, in silence, about
midday within sight of the castle of Simon de Montfort.

The watch upon the tower was thrown into confusion by the approach of
so large a party of armed men, so that, by the time they were in hailing
distance, the walls of the great structure were crowded with fighting
men.

Shandy rode ahead with a flag of truce, and when he was beneath the
castle walls Simon de Montfort called forth:

"Who be ye and what your mission? Peace or war?"

"It is Norman of Torn, come in peace, and in the service of a De
Montfort," replied Shandy. "He would enter with one companion, my Lord
Earl."

"Dares Norman of Torn enter the castle of Simon de Montfort--thinks he
that I keep a robbers' roost!" cried the fierce old warrior.

"Norman of Torn dares ride where he will in all England," boasted the
red giant. "Will you see him in peace, My Lord?"

"Let him enter," said De Montfort, "but no knavery, now, we are a
thousand men here, well armed and ready fighters."

Shandy returned to his master with the reply, and together, Norman of
Torn and Bertrade de Montfort clattered across the drawbridge beneath
the portcullis of the castle of the Earl of Leicester, brother-in-law of
Henry III of England.

The girl was still wrapped in the great cloak of her protector, for it
had been raining, so that she rode beneath the eyes of her father's men
without being recognized. In the courtyard, they were met by Simon de
Montfort, and his sons Henry and Simon.

The girl threw herself impetuously from her mount, and, flinging aside
the outlaw's cloak, rushed toward her astounded parent.

"What means this," cried De Montfort, "has the rascal offered you harm
or indignity?"

"You craven liar," cried Henry de Montfort, "but yesterday you swore
upon your honor that you did not hold my sister, and I, like a fool,
believed." And with his words, the young man flung himself upon Norman
of Torn with drawn sword.

Quicker than the eye could see, the sword of the visored knight flew
from its scabbard, and, with a single lightning-like move, sent the
blade of young De Montfort hurtling cross the courtyard; and then,
before either could take another step, Bertrade de Montfort had sprung
between them and placing a hand upon the breastplate of the outlaw,
stretched forth the other with palm out-turned toward her kinsmen as
though to protect Norman of Torn from further assault.

"Be he outlaw or devil," she cried, "he is a brave and courteous knight,
and he deserves from the hands of the De Montforts the best hospitality
they can give, and not cold steel and insults." Then she explained
briefly to her astonished father and brothers what had befallen during
the past few days.

Henry de Montfort, with the fine chivalry that marked him, was the first
to step forward with outstretched hand to thank Norman of Torn, and to
ask his pardon for his rude words and hostile act.

The outlaw but held up his open palm, as he said,

"Let the De Montforts think well ere they take the hand of Norman of
Torn. I give not my hand except in friendship, and not for a passing
moment; but for life. I appreciate your present feelings of gratitude,
but let them not blind you to the fact that I am still Norman the Devil,
and that you have seen my mark upon the brows of your dead. I would
gladly have your friendship, but I wish it for the man, Norman of
Torn, with all his faults, as well as what virtues you may think him to
possess."

"You are right, sir," said the Earl, "you have our gratitude and our
thanks for the service you have rendered the house of Montfort, and ever
during our lives you may command our favors. I admire your bravery and
your candor, but while you continue the Outlaw of Torn, you may not
break bread at the table of De Montfort as a friend would have the right
to do."

"Your speech is that of a wise and careful man," said Norman of Torn
quietly. "I go, but remember that from this day, I have no quarrel with
the House of Simon de Montfort, and that should you need my arms, they
are at your service, a thousand strong. Goodbye." But as he turned to
go, Bertrade de Montfort confronted him with outstretched hand.

"You must take my hand in friendship," she said, "for, to my dying day,
I must ever bless the name of Norman of Torn because of the horror from
which he has rescued me."

He took the little fingers in his mailed hand, and bending upon one knee
raised them to his lips.

"To no other--woman, man, king, God, or devil--has Norman of Torn bent
the knee. If ever you need him, My Lady Bertrade, remember that his
services are yours for the asking."

And turning, he mounted and rode in silence from the courtyard of
the castle of Leicester. Without a backward glance, and with his five
hundred men at his back, Norman of Torn disappeared beyond a turning in
the roadway.

"A strange man," said Simon de Montfort, "both good and bad, but from
today, I shall ever believe more good than bad. Would that he were other
than he be, for his arm would wield a heavy sword against the enemies of
England, an he could be persuaded to our cause."

"Who knows," said Henry de Montfort, "but that an offer of friendship
might have won him to a better life. It seemed that in his speech was a
note of wistfulness. I wish, father, that we had taken his hand."




CHAPTER XI

Several days after Norman of Torn's visit to the castle of Leicester,
a young knight appeared before the Earl's gates demanding admittance to
have speech with Simon de Montfort. The Earl received him, and as the
young man entered his presence, Simon de Montfort, sprang to his feet in
astonishment.

"My Lord Prince," he cried. "What do ye here, and alone?"

The young man smiled.

"I be no prince, My Lord," he said, "though some have said that I favor
the King's son. I be Roger de Conde, whom it may have pleased your
gracious daughter to mention. I have come to pay homage to Bertrade de
Montfort."

"Ah," said De Montfort, rising to greet the young knight cordially, "an
you be that Roger de Conde who rescued my daughter from the fellows of
Peter of Colfax, the arms of the De Montforts are open to you.

"Bertrade has had your name upon her tongue many times since her return.
She will be glad indeed to receive you, as is her father. She has told
us of your valiant espousal of her cause, and the thanks of her brothers
and mother await you, Roger de Conde.

"She also told us of your strange likeness to Prince Edward, but until I
saw you, I could not believe two men could be born of different mothers
and yet be so identical. Come, we will seek out my daughter and her
mother."

De Montfort led the young man to a small chamber where they were greeted
by Princess Eleanor, his wife, and by Bertrade de Montfort. The girl was
frankly glad to see him once more and laughingly chide him because he
had allowed another to usurp his prerogative and rescue her from Peter
of Colfax.

"And to think," she cried, "that it should have been Norman of Torn who
fulfilled your duties for you. But he did not capture Sir Peter's head,
my friend; that is still at large to be brought to me upon a golden
dish."

"I have not forgotten, Lady Bertrade," said Roger de Conde. "Peter of
Colfax will return."

The girl glanced at him quickly.

"The very words of the Outlaw of Torn," she said. "How many men be ye,
Roger de Conde? With raised visor, you could pass in the King's court
for the King's son; and in manner, and form, and swordsmanship, and your
visor lowered, you might easily be hanged for Norman of Torn."

"And which would it please ye most that I be?" he laughed.

"Neither," she answered, "I be satisfied with my friend, Roger de
Conde."

"So ye like not the Devil of Torn?" he asked.

"He has done me a great service, and I be under monstrous obligations
to him, but he be, nathless, the Outlaw of Torn and I the daughter of an
earl and a king's sister."

"A most unbridgeable gulf indeed," commented Roger de Conde, drily. "Not
even gratitude could lead a king's niece to receive Norman of Torn on a
footing of equality."

"He has my friendship, always," said the girl, "but I doubt me if Norman
of Torn be the man to impose upon it."

"One can never tell," said Roger de Conde, "what manner of fool a man
may be. When a man's head be filled with a pretty face, what room be
there for reason?"

"Soon thou wilt be a courtier, if thou keep long at this turning of
pretty compliments," said the girl coldly; "and I like not courtiers,
nor their empty, hypocritical chatter."

The man laughed.

"If I turned a compliment, I did not know it," he said. "What I think, I
say. It may not be a courtly speech or it may. I know nothing of courts
and care less, but be it man or maid to whom I speak, I say what is in
my mind or I say nothing. I did not, in so many words, say that you are
beautiful, but I think it nevertheless, and ye cannot be angry with
my poor eyes if they deceive me into believing that no fairer woman
breathes the air of England. Nor can you chide my sinful brain that it
gladly believes what mine eyes tell it. No, you may not be angry so long
as I do not tell you all this."

Bertrade de Montfort did not know how to answer so ridiculous a
sophistry; and, truth to tell, she was more than pleased to hear from
the lips of Roger de Conde what bored her on the tongues of other men.

De Conde was the guest of the Earl of Leicester for several days, and
before his visit was terminated, the young man had so won his way into
the good graces of the family that they were loath to see him leave.

Although denied the society of such as these throughout his entire life,
yet it seemed that he fell as naturally into the ways of their kind as
though he had always been among them. His starved soul, groping through
the darkness of the empty past, yearned toward the feasting and the
light of friendship, and urged him to turn his back upon the old life,
and remain ever with these people, for Simon de Montfort had offered the
young man a position of trust and honor in his retinue.

"Why refused you the offer of my father?" said Bertrade to him as he
was come to bid her farewell. "Simon de Montfort is as great a man in
England as the King himself, and your future were assured did you attach
your self to his person. But what am I saying! Did Roger de Conde not
wish to be elsewhere, he had accepted and, as he did not accept, it is
proof positive that he does not wish to bide among the De Montforts."

"I would give my soul to the devil," said Norman of Torn, "would it buy
me the right to remain ever at the feet of Bertrade Montfort."

He raised her hand to his lips in farewell as he started to speak,
but something--was it an almost imperceptible pressure of her little
fingers, a quickening of her breath or a swaying of her body toward
him?--caused him to pause and raise his eyes to hers.

For an instant they stood thus, the eyes of the man sinking deep into
the eyes of the maid, and then hers closed and with a little sigh that
was half gasp, she swayed toward him, and the Devil of Torn folded the
King's niece in his mighty arms and his lips placed the seal of a great
love upon those that were upturned to him.

The touch of those pure lips brought the man to himself.

"Ah, Bertrade, my Bertrade," he cried, "what is this thing that I have
done! Forgive me, and let the greatness and the purity of my love for
you plead in extenuation of my act."

She looked up into his face in surprise, and then placing her strong
white hands upon his shoulders, she whispered:

"See, Roger, I am not angry. It is not wrong that we love; tell me it is
not, Roger."

"You must not say that you love me, Bertrade. I am a coward, a craven
poltroon; but, God, how I love you."

"But," said the girl, "I do love--"

"Stop," he cried, "not yet, not yet. Do not say it till I come again.
You know nothing of me, you do not know even who I be; but when next I
come, I promise that ye shall know as much of me as I myself know, and
then, Bertrade, my Bertrade, if you can then say, 'I love you' no power
on earth, or in heaven above, or hell below shall keep you from being
mine!"

"I will wait, Roger, for I believe in you and trust you. I do not
understand, but I know that you must have some good reason, though
it all seems very strange to me. If I, a De Montfort, am willing to
acknowledge my love for any man, there can be no reason why I should
not do so, unless," and she started at the sudden thought, wide-eyed and
paling, "unless there be another woman, a--a--wife?"

"There is no other woman, Bertrade," said Norman of Torn. "I have
no wife; nor within the limits of my memory have my lips ever before
touched the lips of another, for I do not remember my mother."

She sighed a happy little sigh of relief, and laughing lightly, said:

"It is some old woman's bugaboo that you are haling out of a dark corner
of your imagination to frighten yourself with. I do not fear, since I
know that you must be all good. There be no line of vice or deception
upon your face and you are very brave. So brave and noble a man, Roger,
has a heart of pure gold."

"Don't," he said, bitterly. "I cannot endure it. Wait until I come again
and then, oh my flower of all England, if you have it in your heart
to speak as you are speaking now, the sun of my happiness will be at
zenith. Then, but not before, shall I speak to the Earl, thy father.
Farewell, Bertrade, in a few days I return."

"If you would speak to the Earl on such a subject, you insolent young
