seat with curving outlines rose from the floor, apparently made of the
same rubbery material as the floor itself. A metallic track ended just
in front of the seat; following back, his eye caught the outline of a
kind of lectern, now pushed back against the wall of the cell, with
spaces below the reading flat and handles attached. Against the back
wall of the cell stood a similar device, but larger and without any
metal track. Beside it two handles dangled from the wall on cords of
flexible wire.

This was all his brief glance told him about the confines of his new
home. Looking beyond it, he saw that he was in one of a row of similar
cells, stretching back in both directions. In front of the row of cells
was a corridor along which ran a brightly-burnished metal track, and
this was lined by another row of cells on the farther side.

The cell at Sherman's right was empty, but he observed that the one on
the left had a tenant--a metal man, like himself in all respects and
yet--somehow unlike. He stepped over to the grating that separated them.

"What is this place, anyway?" he inquired.

His neighbor, who had been sitting in the rubber chair, turned toward
him a round and foolish face with a long, naked upper lip, and burst
into a flood of conversation of which Sherman could not understand one
word. He held up his hand. "Wait a minute, partner," he said. "Go slow.
I don't get you."

The expression on the fellow's face changed to one of wonderment. He
made another effort at conversation, accompanying it with gestures.
"Wait," said the aviator, "_Sprechen Sie Deutsch?... Francais?... Habla
Espanol?..._ No? Dammit what does the guy talk? I don't know any
Italian--Spaghetti, macaroni, Mussolini!"

No use. The metal face remained blankly uninspired. Well, there is one
thing men of all races have in common. Sherman went through the motions
of drawing from his pocket a phantom cigarette, applying to it an
imaginary match, and blowing the smoke in the air.

It is impossible for a man whose forehead is composed of a series of
lateral metal bands to frown. If it were the other would have done so.
Then comprehension appeared to dawn on him. He stepped across to his
lectern, and _with his toes_, pulled the bottom slide open, extracted
from it a round rubber container and reaching through the bars, handed
it to Sherman.

The aviator understood the difference that had puzzled him in the
beginning. Instead of the graceful back-sweeping curve that sets a man's
head vertical with his body, this individual had the round-curved neck
and low-hung head of the ape.




CHAPTER XII

The Poisoned Paradise


To hide his surprise Sherman bent his head to examine the object the
ape-man had handed him. It was about the size of a baseball with little
holes in it. He inserted a finger in one of the holes, and a stream of
oil squirted out and struck him in the eye. His neighbor gave a cry of
annoyance at his clumsiness and reached through the bars to have the
ball returned. As he received it there came sudden flickerings of lights
along the hall from somewhere high up, like the trails of blue and green
rockets. The mechanical ape-man dropped the oil-ball and dashed to the
front of his cell.

Sherman saw a vehicle proceeding down the line of cells; a kind of truck
that rode on the track of the corridor and was so wide it just missed
the gratings. It had a long series of doors in its sides, and as it came
opposite an occupied cell, stopped. Something invisible happened; the
bars of the cell opened inward and the inmate emerged to step into a
compartment which at once closed behind him.

When it stopped at the ape-man's cage Sherman watched the procedure
closely. A little arm appeared from beneath the door of the compartment
and did something to one of the lower bars of the cell. But the truck
passed Sherman by, moving silently along to other cells beyond him.

He turned to examine the room more closely, and as he did so, saw that a
second truck was following the first. This one, with an exactly reversed
procedure, was returning robots to their cells. This second truck
dropped an inmate in the cell at his right (another ape-man) and
trundled along down the line, but as it reached the end of the corridor,
turned back and running along till it came to his cell, stopped, flung
out the metal arm, and opened the bars in invitation.

Sherman had no thought of disobeying; as long as he was in this queerest
of all possible worlds, he thought, one might as well keep to the rules.
But he was curious about the joint of the cage and how it unlocked and
he paused a moment to examine it. The machine before him buzzed
impatiently. He lingered. There came a sudden clang of metal from inside
the car, a vivid beam of blue light called his attention, and looking
up, he saw the word "EXIT" printed in letters of fire at the top of the
compartment.

With a smile he stepped in. A soft light was turned on and he found
himself in a tiny cubbyhole with just room for the single seat it
provided and on which he seated himself. There was no window.

The machine carried him along smoothly for perhaps five minutes, stopped
and the door opened before him. He issued into another blue-domed hall.
A small one this time, containing a rubber seat like that in his cell,
but with an extended arm on which rested a complex apparatus of some
kind. The seat faced a white screen like those in movie theaters.

He seated himself and at once a series of words appeared in dark green
on the screen. "Dominance was not complete," it said. "Communication?"
Then below, in smaller type, as though it were the body of a newspaper
column. "Lassans service man. Flier writing information through
communication excellent. Dinner bed, book. No smoking. Yours very
truly."

As he gazed in astonishment at this cryptic collection of words it was
erased and its place was taken by a picture which he recognized as a
likeness of himself in his present metallic state. A talking picture,
which made a few remarks in the same incomprehensible gibberish the
ape-man had used, then sat down in a chair like that in which he now
rested, and proceeded to write on the widespread arm with a stylus which
was attached to it. The screen went blank.... Evidently he was supposed
to communicate something by writing.

The stylus was a metal pencil, and the material of the arm, though not
apparently metallic, must be, he argued from the fact that it seemed to
have electric connections attached. As he examined it, the blue lights
flickered at him impatiently. "The white knight," he wrote in a fit of
impish perversity, "is climbing up the poker." Instantly the words
flashed on the screen.

Pause. "IS CLIMBING" declared the screen, in capitals; then below it
appeared a fairly creditable picture of a knight in armor followed by a
not very creditable picture of a poker. Sherman began to comprehend.
Whoever it was behind this business had managed a correspondence course
of a sort in English, but had failed to learn the verbs and he was
being asked to explain.

For answer he produced a crude drawing of a monkey climbing a stick and
demonstrated the action by getting up and going through the motions of
climbing. Immediately the screen flashed a picture of the knight in
armor ascending the poker by the same means, but it had hardly appeared
before it was wiped out to be replaced by a flickering of blue lights
and an angry buzz. His interlocutor had seen the absurdity of the
sentence and was demanding a more serious approach to the problem. For
answer Sherman wrote, "Where am I and who are you?"

A longer pause. "Dominance not complete," said the screen. Then came the
picture of the first page of a child's ABC book with "A was an Archer
who shot at a frog" below the usual childish picture. Then came the word
"think." With the best will in the world Sherman was puzzled to
illustrate this idea, but by tapping his forehead and drawing a crude
diagram of the brain as he remembered it from books, he managed to give
some satisfaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

The process went on for three or four hours as nearly as Sherman could
judge the time, ending with a flash of the word "Exit" in red from the
screen and a dimming of the blue-dome light. He turned toward the door
and found the car that had brought him, ready for the return journey. As
it rumbled back to his cell he ruminated on the fact that none of the
men (or whatever it was) behind this place had yet made themselves
visible, for it was incredible that beings of the type of the metallic
ape-man who occupied the next cell to his should have intelligence
enough to operate such obviously highly-developed machinery.

But what next? He pondered the question as the car deposited him in his
cell. Obviously, he was being kept a prisoner. He didn't like it,
however comfortable the imprisonment.

The first thing that suggested itself was a closer inspection of his
cell. The lectern yielded an oil-ball like that the ape-man had given
him and another, similar device, containing grease. There were various
tools of uncertain purpose and in the last drawer he examined a complete
duplicate set of wrist and finger joints. The larger cupboard had deep
drawers, mostly empty, though one of them contained a number of books,
apparently selected at random from a good-sized sized library--"Mystery
of Oldmixon Hall," "Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1903," "The
Poems of Jerusha G. White"--a depressing collection.

This seemed to exhaust the possibilities of the cell and Sherman looked
about for further amusement. His ape neighbor had pressed himself close
to the bars on that side, indicating his interest in what Sherman was
doing by chuckling bubbles of amusement. Further down the line one of
the ape-men was holding the pair of handles that projected from the wall
beside his cabinet. Sherman grasped his also; there was a pleasant
little electric shock and in the center of the wall before him a slide
moved back to disclose a circle of melting light that changed color and
form in pleasing variations. The sensation was enormously invigorating
and it struck the aviator with surprise that this must be the way these
creatures.... "These creatures!" he thought, "I'm one of them...." the
way these creatures acquired nourishment. The thought gave him an
inspiration.

"Hey!" he called in a voice loud enough to carry throughout the room.
"Is there anyone here that can understand what I'm saying?"

There was a clank of metal as faces turned in his direction all down the
line of cages. "Yes, I guess so," called a voice from about thirty feet
away. "What do you want to say?"

Sherman felt an overwhelming sense of relief. He would not have believed
it possible to be so delighted with a human voice. "Who's got us here
and why are they keeping us here?" he shouted back.

A moment's silence. Then--"Near's I can make out it's a passel of
elephants and they've got us here to work."

"What?" Sherman shouted back, not sure he had heard aright.

"Work!" came the answer. "Make you punch the holes on these goddam light
machines. It wears your fingers off and you have to screw new ones in at
night."

"No, I mean about the elephants."

"That's what I said--elephants. They wear pants, and they're right
smart, too."

Insoluble mystery. "Who are you?" called the aviator.

"Mellen. Harve Mellen. I had a farm right here where they set up this
opry house of theirs."

Along the edge of Sherman's cell a blue light began to blink. He had an
uncomfortable sensation of being watched. "Is there any way of getting
out of here?" he shouted to his unseen auditor.

"Sssh," answered the other. "Them blue lights mean they want you to shut
up. You'll get a paste in the eye with the yaller lights if you don't."

So that was it! They were being held as the servants--slaves--of some
unseen and powerful and very watchful intelligence. As for "elephants
with pants" they might resemble that and they might not; it was entirely
possible that the phrase represented merely a picturesque bit of
metaphor on the part of the farmer.

Why it must be an actual invasion of the earth, as in H. G. Wells' "War
of the Worlds," a book he had read in his youth. The comet could have
been no comet then, and.... Yet the whole thing--this transformation of
himself into a metal machine, the crash of the Roamer and his subsequent
bath in the painful red light. It was all too fantastic--then he
remembered that one does not feel pain in dreams....

They were giving him books, food--if this electrical thing was indeed
the food his new body required--little to do; keeping him a prisoner in
a kind of poisoned paradise.

... At all events the locks on these bars should offer no great
difficulty to a competent mechanic. He set himself to a further
examination of the tools in the lectern.

       *       *       *       *       *

The main difficulty in the way of any plan of escape lay in his complete
lack of both information and the means of obtaining it. The mechanical
ape-men were hopeless; they merely babbled incoherent syllables and
seemed incapable of fixing their attention on any object for as long as
five minutes. As for the New York farmer his cage was so far away that
the conversation could be carried on only in shouts, and every shout
brought a warning flicker of the blue lights. On the second day, out of
curiosity, Sherman kept up the conversation after the blue lights went
on. A vivid stream of yellow light promptly issued from one corner of
the cage, striking him fully in the eyes, and apparently it was
accompanied by some kind of a force-ray for he found himself stretched
flat on the floor. After that he did not repeat the experiment.

The next question was that of the lock on the cell-bars. The closest
inspection he could give did not reveal the joints; they were
extraordinarily well fitted. On the other hand, he remembered that the
arm of the truck had reached under one of the lower bars. Lying flat on
his back, Sherman pulled himself along from bar to bar, inspecting each
in turn. About mid-way along the front of the cell, he perceived a tiny
orifice in the base of one bar--a mere pin-hole. Marvelling at the
delicacy of the adjustment which could use so tiny a hole as a lock he
sat down to consider the question.

He was completely naked and had nothing but the objects that had been
placed in his cell by his jailers. However--

Among the assortment of tools in his bureau was a curve-bladed knife
with the handle set parallel to the blade as though it were meant for
chopping, and forming the wall of the same drawer was a strip of a
material like emery cloth. After some experimenting he found a
finger-hole which, when squeezed, caused this emery-cloth to revolve,
giving a satisfactory abrasive.

Thus armed with a tool and a means of keeping an edge on it, he took one
of the metal bands from the drawer that contained the duplicate set of
hands and set to work on it....

Producing a needle that would penetrate the hole in the bars was all of
three days' work, though he had no means of marking the time accurately.
The metal band was pliable, light, and for all its pliability and
lightness, incredibly hard. His tool would barely scratch it and
required constant sharpenings. Moreover, he had little time to himself;
his unseen scholar required constant lessons in English. But at last the
task was done. Choosing a moment when one of the cages at his side was
empty and the occupant of the other was busy over some silly sport of
his own--tossing a ball from one hand to another--Sherman lay down on
the floor, found the opening and drove his needle home. Nothing
happened.

He surveyed the result with disappointment. It was disheartening, after
so much labor to attain no result at all. But it occurred to him that
perhaps he had not learned the whole secret of the arm, and the next
time the car came down the corridor for him, he was lying on the floor,
carefully watching the opening.

As he had originally surmised, a needle-like point was driven home. But
he noted that on either side of the point the arm gripped the bar
tightly, pressing it upward.

This presented another difficulty. He had only two hands; if one of them
worked the needle he could grip the bar in only one place. But he
remembered, fortunately, that his toes had showed a remarkable power of
prehension since the change that had made him into a machine.

He finally succeeded in bracing himself in a curiously twisted attitude
and driving the needle home under the proper auspices. To his delight
it worked--when the needle went in the bars opened in the proper place,
swinging back into position automatically as the pressure was withdrawn.

With a new sense of freedom Sherman turned to the next step. This was
obviously to find out more of the place in which he was confined and of
the possibilities of escape. It seemed difficult.

But even on this point he was not to be long without enlightenment. His
unseen pupil in English was making most amazing progress. The white
screen which was their means of communication now bore complicated
messages about such subjects as what constituted philosophy. Sherman
felt himself in contact with an exceptionally keen and active mind,
though one to which the simplest earthly ideas were unfamiliar. There
were queer misapprehensions--for instance, no process of explanation he
could give seemed to make the unseen scholar understand the use and
value of money, and they labored for a whole day over the words
"president" and "political."

In technical matters it was otherwise; Sherman had barely to express the
idea before the screen made it evident that the auditor had grasped its
whole purport. When he wrote the word "atom" for instance, and tried to
give a faint picture of the current theory of the atom, it was hardly a
second before the screen flashed up with a series of diagrams and
mathematical formulae, picturing and explaining atoms of different
types.

After four weeks or more (as nearly as Sherman could estimate it in that
nightless, sleepless place where time was an expression rather than a
reality) the car that came for him one day discharged him into a room
entirely different from the school-room. Like the school-room it was
small, and some twenty feet across. Against the wall opposite the door
stood a huge machine, the connections of which seemed to go back through
the wall. Its vast complex of pulleys, valves and rods, conveyed no hint
of its purpose, even to his mechanically-trained mind.

Across the front of it was a long, black board, four feet or more across
and somewhat like the instrument board of an airplane in general
character. At the top of this board was a band of ground glass, set off
in divisions. Beneath this band a series of holes, each just large
enough to admit a finger, and each marked off by a character of some
kind though in no language Sherman had ever seen.

To complete the picture, one of the mechanical ape-men stood before the
board as though expecting him. On the ape-man's head was a tight-fitting
helmet, connecting with some part of the machine by a flexible tube. As
Sherman entered the room the ape-man motioned him over to the board,
pointed to the holes and in thick, but intelligible English, said
"Watsch!" A flash of purple light appeared behind the first of the
ground-glass screens. The ape-man promptly thrust his finger into the
first of the holes. The light went out, and the ape-man turned to
Sherman. "Do," he said. The light flashed on again, and Sherman, not
unwilling to learn the purpose of the maneuver, did as his instructor
had done.

He was rewarded by a tearing pain in the finger-tip and withdrew the
member at once. Right at the end it had become slightly grey. The
ape-man smiled. Behind the second ground-glass a red light now appeared
and the ape-man thrust his finger into another of the apertures,
indicating that Sherman should imitate him. This time the aviator was
more cautious, but as he delayed the light winked angrily. Again he
received the jerk of pain in the finger-tip and withdrew it to find
that the grey spot had spread.

[Illustration: He was rewarded by a tearing pain in his fingertip.
Behind the ground glass a red light now appeared.]

When the third light flashed on he refused to copy the motion of his
instructor. The light blinked at him insistently. He placed both hands
behind his back and stepped away from the machine. The ape-man, looking
at him with something like panic, beckoned him forward again. Sherman
shook his head; the ape-man threw back his head and emitted a long,
piercing howl. Almost immediately the door slid back and the car
appeared. As Sherman stepped to its threshold, instead of admitting him,
it thrust forth a gigantic folding claw which gripped him firmly around
the waist and held him while a shaft of the painful yellow light was
thrown into his eyes; then tossed him back on the floor and slammed shut
vengefully.

Dazed by the light and the fall, Herbert Sherman rolled on the floor,
thoughts of retaliation flashing through his head. But he was no fool,
and before he had even picked himself up, he realized that his present
cast was hopeless. Gritting his teeth, he set himself to follow the
ape-man's instructions, looking him over carefully to recognize him
again in case--.

The course of instruction was not particularly difficult to memorize. It
seemed that for each color of light behind the ground-glass panels one
must thrust a finger into a different one of the holes below; hold it
