
There was no reason why they should. Yet, since that time there had been
a new kind of thing growing among the innumerable moulds and rusts and
toadstools of the lowlands. Burl had seen them on his travels, and the
expeditionary force against the clotho spider had seen them on the
journey up to the cliff-edge. Red puffballs, developing first
underground, were now pushing the soil aside to expose taut, crimson
parchment spheres to the open air. The tribesmen left them alone because
they were strange; and strange things were always dangerous. Puffballs
they were familiar with--big, misshapen things which shot at a touch a
powder into the air. The particles of powder were spores--the seed from
which they grew. Spores had remained infinitely small even on the
forgotten planet where fungi grew huge. Only their capacity for growth
had increased. The red growths were puffballs, but of a new and
different kind.

As the tribe ate and admired, the hunters boasting of their courage, one
of the new red mushrooms reached maturity.

This particular growing thing was perhaps two feet across, its main part
spherical. Almost eighteen inches of the thing rose above-ground. A
tawny and menacing red, the sphere was contained in a parchment-like
skin that was pulled taut. There was internal tension. But the skin was
tough and would not yield, yet the inexorable pressure of life within
demanded that it stretch. It was growing within, but the skin without
had ceased to grow.

This one happened to be on a low hillside a good half-mile from the
place where Burl and his fellows banqueted. Its tough, red parchment
skin was tensed unendurably. Suddenly it ripped apart with an explosive
tearing noise. The dry spores within billowed out and up like the smoke
of a shell-explosion, spurting skyward for twenty feet and more. At the
top of their ascent they spread out and eddied like a cloud of reddish
smoke. They hung in the air. They drifted in the sluggish breeze. They
spread as they floated, forming a gradually extending, descending
dust-cloud in the humid air.

A bee, flying back toward its hive, droned into the thin mass of dust.
It was preoccupied. The dust-cloud was not opaque, but only a thick
haze. The bee flew into it.

For half a dozen wing-beats nothing happened. Then the bee veered
sharply. Its deep-toned humming rose in pitch. It made convulsive
movements in mid-air. It lost balance and crashed heavily to the ground.
There its legs kicked and heaved violently but without purpose. The
wings beat furiously but without rhythm or effect. Its body bent in
paroxysmic flexings. It stung blindly at nothing.

After a little while the bee died. Like all insects, bees breathe
through spiracles--breathing-holes in their abdomens. This bee had flown
into the cloud of red dust which was the spore-cloud of the new
mushrooms.

The cloud drifted slowly along over the surface of yeasts and moulds,
over toadstools and variegated fungus monstrosities. It moved steadily
over a group of ants at work upon some bit of edible stuff. They were
seized with an affliction like that of the bee. They writhed, moved
convulsively. Their legs thrashed about. They died.

The cloud of red dust settled as it moved. By the time it had travelled
a quarter-mile, it had almost all settled to the ground.

But a half-mile away there was another skyward-spurting uprush of red
dust which spread slowly with the breeze. A quarter-mile away another
plumed into the air. Farther on, two of them spouted their spores toward
the clouds almost together.

Living things that breathed the red dust writhed and died. And the
red-dust puffballs were scattered everywhere.

Burl and his tribesmen feasted, chattering in hushed tones of the
remarkable fact that men ate meat of their own killing.




_6. RED DUST_


It was very fortunate indeed that the feast took place when it did. Two
days later it would probably have been impossible, and three days later
it would have been too late to do any good. But coming when it did, it
made the difference which was all the difference in the world.

Only thirty hours after the feasting which followed the death of the
clotho spider, Burl's fellows--from Jon to Dor to Tet and Dik and
Saya--had come to know a numb despair which the other creatures of his
world were simply a bit too stupid to achieve.

It was night. There was darkness over all the lowlands, and over all the
area of perhaps a hundred square miles which the humans of Burl's
acquaintance really knew. He, alone of his tribe, had been as much as
forty miles from the foraging-ground over which they wandered. At any
given time the tribe clung together for comfort, venturing only as far
as was necessary to find food. Although the planet possessed continents,
they knew less than a good-sized county of it. The planet owned oceans,
and they knew only small brooks and one river which, where they knew it,
was assuredly less than two hundred yards across. And they faced stark
disaster that was not strictly a local one, but beyond their experience
and hopelessly beyond their ability to face.

They were superior to the insects about them only in the fact they
realized what was threatening them.

The disaster was the red puffballs.

But it was night. The soft, blanketing darkness of a cloud-wrapped world
lay all about. Burl sat awake, wrapped in his magnificent velvet cloak,
his spear beside him and the yard-long golden plumes of a moth's
antennae bound to his forehead for a headdress. About him and his
tribesmen were the swollen shapes of fungi, hiding the few things that
could be seen in darkness. From the low-hanging clouds the nightly rain
dripped down. Now a drop and then another drop; slowly, deliberately,
persistently moisture fell from the skies.

There was other sounds. Things flew through the blackness
overhead--moths with mighty wing-beats that sometimes sent rhythmic
wind-stirrings down to the tribe in its hiding-place. There were the
deep pulsations of sound made by night-beetles aloft. There were the
harsh noises of grasshoppers--they were rare--senselessly advertising
their existence to nearby predators. Not too far from where Burl brooded
came bright chirrupings where relatively small beetles roamed among the
mushroom-forests, singing cheerfully in deep bass voices. They were
searching for the underground tidbits which took the place of truffles
their ancestors had lived on back on Earth.

All seemed to be as it had been since the first humans were cast away
upon this planet. And at night, indeed, the new danger subsided. The red
puffballs did not burst after sunset. Burl sat awake, brooding in a new
sort of frustration. He and all his tribe were plainly doomed--yet Burl
had experienced too many satisfying sensations lately to be willing to
accept the fact.

The new red growths were everywhere. Months ago a storm-wind blew while
somewhere, not too far distant, other red puffballs were bursting and
sending their spores into the air. Since it was only a windstorm, there
was no rain to wash the air clean of the lethal dust. The new kind of
puffball--but perhaps it was not new: it could have thriven for
thousands of years where it was first thrown as a sport from a
genetically unstable parent--the new kind of puffball would not normally
be spread in this fashion. By chance it had.

There were dozens of the things within a quarter-mile, hundreds within a
mile, and thousands upon thousands within the area the tribe normally
foraged in. Burl had seen them even forty miles away, as yet immature.
They would be deadly at one period alone--the time of their bursting.
But there were limitations even to the deadliness of the red puffballs,
though Burl had not yet discovered the fact. But as of now, they doomed
the tribe.

One woman panted and moaned in her exhausted sleep, a little way from
where Burl tried to solve the problem presented by the tribe. Nobody
else attempted to think it out. The others accepted doom with fatalistic
hopelessness. Burl's leadership might mean extra food, but nothing could
counter the doom awaiting them--so their thoughts seemed to run.

But Burl doggedly reviewed the facts in the darkness, while the humans
about him slept the sleep of those without hope and even without
rebellion. There had been many burstings of the crimson puffballs. As
many as four and five of the deadly dust-clouds had been seen spouting
into the air at the same time. A small boy of the tribe had breathlessly
told of seeing a hunting-spider killed by the red dust. Lana, the
half-grown girl, had come upon one of the gigantic rhinoceros-beetles
belly-up on the ground, already the prey of ants. She had snatched a
huge, meat-filled joint and run away, faster than the ants could follow.
A far-ranging man had seen a butterfly, with wings ten yards across, die
in a dust-cloud. Another woman--Cori--had been nearby when a red cloud
settled slowly over long, solid lines of black worker-ants bound on some
unknown mission. Later she saw other workers carrying the dead bodies
back to the ant-city to be used for food.

Burl still sat wakeful and frustrated and enraged as the slow rain fell
upon the toadstools that formed the tribe's lurking-place. He doggedly
went over and over the problem. There were innumerable red puffballs.
Some had burst. The others undoubtedly would burst. Anything that
breathed the red dust died. With thousands of the puffballs around them
it was unthinkable that any human in this place could escape breathing
the red dust and dying. But it had not always been so. There had been a
time when there were no red puffballs here.

Burl's eyes moved restlessly over the sleeping forms limned by a patch
of fox-fire. The feathery plumes rising from his head were outlined
softly by the phosphorescence. His face was lined with a frown as he
tried to think his own and his fellows' way out of the predicament.
Without realizing it, Burl had taken it upon himself to think for his
tribe. He had no reason to. It was simply a natural thing for him to do
so, now that he had learned to think--even though his efforts were crude
and painful as yet.

Saya woke with a start and stared about. There had been no
alarm,--merely the usual noises of distant murders and the songs of
singers in the night. Burl moved restlessly. Saya stood up quietly, her
long hair flowing about her. Sleepy-eyed, she moved to be near Burl. She
sank to the ground beside him, sitting up--because the hiding-place was
crowded and small--and dozed fitfully. Presently her head drooped to one
side. It rested against his shoulder. She slept again.

This simple act may have been the catalyst which gave Burl the solution
to the problem. Some few days before, Burl had been in a far-away place
where there was much food. At the time he'd thought vaguely of finding
Saya and bringing her to that place. He remembered now that the red
puffballs flourished there as well as here--but there had been other
dangers in between, so the only half-formed purpose had been abandoned.
Now, though, with Saya's head resting against his shoulder, he
remembered the plan. And then the stroke of genius took place.

He formed the idea of a journey which was not a going-after-food. This
present dwelling-place of the tribe had been free of red puffballs until
only recently. There must be other places where there were no red
puffballs. He would take Saya and his tribesmen to such a place.

It was really genius. The people of Burl's tribe had no purposes, only
needs--for food and the like. Burl had achieved abstract thought--which
previously had not been useful on the forgotten planet and, therefore,
not practised. But it was time for humankind to take a more fitting
place in the unbalanced ecological system of this nightmare world, time
to change that unbalance in favor of humans.

When dawn came, Burl had not slept at all. He was all authority and
decision. He had made plans.

He spoke sternly, loudly--which frightened people conditioned to be
furtive--holding up his spear as he issued commands. His timid
tribesfolk obeyed him meekly. They felt no loyalty to him or confidence
in his decisions yet, but they were beginning to associate obedience to
him with good things. Food, for one.

Before the day fully came, they made loads of the remaining edible
mushroom and uneaten meat. It was remarkable for humans to leave their
hiding-place while they still had food to eat, but Burl was implacable
and scowling. Three men bore spears at Burl's urging. He brandished his
long shaft confidently as he persuaded the other three to carry clubs.
They did so reluctantly, even though previously they had killed ants
with clubs. Spears, they felt, would have been better. They wouldn't be
so close to the prey then.

The sky became gray over all its expanse. The indefinite bright area
which marked the position of the sun became established. It was part-way
toward the center of the sky when the journey began. Burl had, of
course, no determined course, only a destination--safety. He had been
carried south, in his misadventure on the river. There were red
puffballs to southward, therefore he ruled out that direction. He could
have chosen the east and come upon an ocean, but no safety from the red
spore-dust. Or he could have chosen the north. It was pure chance that
he headed west.

He walked confidently through the gruesome world of the lowlands,
holding his spear in a semblance of readiness. Clad as he was, he made a
figure at once valiant and rather pathetic. It was not too sensible for
one young man--even one who had killed two spiders--to essay leading a
tiny tribe of fearful folk across a land of monstrous ferocity and
incredible malignance, armed only with a spear from a dead insect's
armor. It was absurd to dress up for the enterprise in a velvety cloak
made of a moth's wing, blue moth-fur for a loin-cloth, and merely
beautiful golden plumes bobbing above his forehead.

Probably, though, that gorgeousness had a good effect upon his
followers. They surely could not reassure each other by their numbers!
There was a woman with a baby in her arms--Cori. Three children of nine
or ten, unable to resist the instinct to play even on so perilous a
journey, ate almost constantly of the lumps of foodstuff they had been
ordered to carry. After them came Dik, a long-legged adolescent boy with
eyes that roved anxiously about. Behind him were two men. Dor with a
short spear and Jak hefting a club, both of them badly frightened at the
idea of fleeing from dangers they knew and were terrified by, to other
dangers unknown and, consequently, more to be feared. The others trailed
after them. Tet was rear-guard. Burl had separated the pair of boys to
make them useful. Together they were worthless.

It was a pathetic caravan, in a way. In all the rest of the Galaxy, man
was the dominant creature. There was no other planet from one rim to the
other where men did not build their cities or settlements with
unconscious arrogance--completely disregarding the wishes of lesser
things. Only on this planet did men hide from danger rather than destroy
it. Only here could men be driven from their place by lower life-forms.
And only here would a migration be made on foot, with men's eyes
fearful, their bodies poised to flee at sight of something stronger and
more deadly than themselves.

They marched, straggling a little, with many waverings aside from a
fixed line. Once Dik saw the trap-door of a trapdoor-spider's lair. They
halted, trembling, and went a long way out of their intended path to
avoid it. Once they saw a great praying-mantis a good half-mile off, and
again they deviated from their proper route.

Near midday their way was blocked. As they moved onward, a great,
high-pitched sound could be heard ahead of them. Burl stopped; his face
grew pinched. But it was only a stridulation, not the cries of creatures
being devoured. It was a horde of ants by the thousands and hundreds of
thousands, and nothing else.

Burl went ahead to scout. And he did it because he did not trust anybody
else to have the courage or intelligence to return with a report,
instead of simply running away if the news were bad. But it happened to
be a sort of action which would help to establish his position as leader
of his tribe.

Burl moved forward cautiously and presently came to an elevation from
which he could see the cause of the tremendous waves of sound that
spread out in all directions from the level plain before him. He waved
to his followers to join him, and stood looking down at the
extraordinary sight.

When they reached his side--and Saya was first--the spectacle had not
diminished. For quite half a mile in either direction the earth was
black with ants. It was a battle of opposing armies from rival
ant-cities. They snapped and bit at each other. Locked in vise-like
embraces, they rolled over and over upon the ground, trampled underfoot
by hordes of their fellows who surged over them to engage in equally
suicidal combat. There was, of course, no thought of surrender or of
quarter. They fought by thousands of pairs, their jaws seeking to crush
each other's armor, snapping at each other's antennae, biting at each
other's eyes....

The noise was not like that of army-ants. This was the agonizing sound
of ants being dismembered while still alive. Some of the creatures had
only one or two or three legs left, yet struggled fiercely to entangle
another enemy before they died. There were mad cripples, fighting
insanely with head and thorax only, their abdomens sheared away. The
whining battle-cry of the multitude made a deafening uproar.

From either side of the battleground a wide path led back toward
separate ant-cities which were invisible from Burl's position. These
highways were marked by hurrying groups of ants--reinforcements rushing
