when she refused the ordeal in her youth. The little one now, whatever
her name was, she would make a _fine_ vessel for the power when she was
gathered to the goddess. If her sister or her niece didn't hold her head
under water too long, or have a spear shoved too deep into her gut or
hit her on the head with too heavy a rock.

These were degenerate days. She had poisoned her own mother to become
the vessel of power.

The spearmen to her right and left shifted uneasily. She heard a faint
mumble of the two smithymen talking. Let them talk! Doubtless they were
cursing the goddess obscenely; doubtless that was what the smithymen all
did when their mouths were not stuffed with food.

She thought of the man called Kennedy who forged spearheads and
arrowpoints for her people--he was a strange one, touched by the
goddess, which proved her infinite power. She could touch and turn the
head of even a smithyman. He was a strange one. Well now, to get on with
it. She wished the power were working stronger in her; she was tired and
could hardly see. But by the grace of the goddess there would be two new
heads over her holy hut come dawn. She could hardly see, but the goddess
wouldn't fail her....

She quavered like a screech-owl, and the spearmen began to slip forward
through the brush. She was not allowed to eat honey lest its sweetness
clash with the power in her, but the taste of power was sweeter than the
taste of honey.

       *       *       *       *       *

With frightful suddenness there was an ear-splitting shriek and a
trampling rush of feet. By sheer reflex, Orsino clamped down on the
trigger of his fifty, and his brain rocked at its thunder. Shadowy
figures were blotted out by the orange muzzle-flash. You're supposed to
fire neat, spaced bursts of eight he told himself. I wonder what old
Gilby would say if he could see his star pupil burning out a barrel and
swinging his gun like a fire hose?

The gun stopped firing; end of the belt. Twenty, fifty or a hundred
rounds? He didn't remember. He clawed for another belt and smoothly, in
the dark, loaded again and listened.

"You all right, gangster?" the jaygee said behind him, making him jump.

"Yes," he said. "Will they come back?"

"I don't know."

"You filthy swine," an agonized voice wheezed from the darkness. "Me
back is broke, you stinking lice." The voice began to sob.

They listened to it in silence for perhaps a minute. At last he said to
the jaygee: "If the rest are gone maybe we can at least--make him
comfortable."

"Too risky," the jaygee said after a long pause.

The sobbing went on. As the excitement of the attack drained from
Orsino, he felt deathly tired, cramped and thirsty. The thirst he could
do something about. He scooped water from the muddy runnel by his knee
and sucked it from his palms twice. The third time, he thought of the
thirst that the sobbing creature out in the dark must be feeling, and
his hand wouldn't go to his mouth.

"I'm going to get him," he whispered to the jaygee.

"Stay where you are! That's an order!"

He didn't answer, but began to work his cramped and aching body from
under the jeep. The jaygee, a couple of years younger and lither than
he, slid out first from his own side. Orsino sighed and relaxed as he
heard his footsteps cautiously circle the jeep.

"Finish me off!" the wounded man was sobbing. "For the love of the
goddess, finish me off, you bitches' bastards! You've broke me
back--_ah!_" That was a cry of savage delight.

There was a strangled noise from the jaygee and then only a soft, deadly
thrashing noise from the dark. Hell, Orsino thought bitterly. It was my
idea. He snaked out from under the jeep and raced through wet brush.

The two of them were a tangled knot of darkness rolling on the ground. A
naked back came uppermost; Orsino fell on it and clawed at its head. He
felt a huge beard, took two hand-fulls of it and pulled as hard as he
could. There was a wild screech and a flailing of arms. The jaygee broke
away and stood up, panting hoarsely. Charles heard a sharp crunch and a
snap, and the flailing sweaty figure, beneath him lay still.

"Back to the guns," the jaygee choked. He swayed, and Orsino took him by
the arm.... On the way back to the jeep, they stumbled over something
that was certainly a body.

Orsino's flesh shrank from lying down again in the mud behind his gun,
but he did, shivering. He heard the jaygee thud wearily into position.
"What did you do to him?" he asked. "Is he dead?"

"Kicked him," the jaygee choked. "His head snapped back and there was
that crack. I guess he's dead. I never heard of that broken-wing trick
before. I guess he wanted to take one more with him. They have a kind of
religion."

The jaygee sounded as though he was teetering on the edge of breakdown.
Make him mad, intuition said to Orsino. He might go howling off among
the trees unless he snaps out of it.

"It's a hell of way to run an island," he said nastily. "You beggars
were chased out of North America because you couldn't run it right and
now you can't even control a lousy little island for more than five
miles inland." He added with deliberate, superior amusement: "Of course,
they've got witches."

"Shut your mouth, gangster--_I'm warning you._" The note of hysteria was
still there. And then the jaygee said dully: "I didn't mean that. I'm
sorry. You did come out and help me after all."

"Surprised?"

"Yes. Twice. First time when you wanted to go out yourself. I suppose
you can't help being born where you were. Maybe if you came over to us
all the way, the Government would forgive and forget. But no--I suppose
not." He paused, obviously casting about for a change of subject. He
still seemed sublimely confident that they'd get back to the naval base
with him in charge of the detail. "What ship did you cross in?"

"Atom sub _Taft_," Orsino said. He could have bitten his tongue out.

"_Taft?_ That's my father's pigboat! Captain Van Dellen. How is he? I
was going down to the dock when--"

"He's dead," Orsino said flatly. "He was caught on deck during an
emergency dive."

The jaygee said nothing for a while and then uttered an unconvincing
laugh of disbelief. "You're lying," he said. "His crew'd never let that
happen. They'd let the ship be blown to hell before they took her down
without the skipper."

"Grinnel had the con. He ordered the dive and roared down the crew when
they wanted to get your father inboard. I'm sorry."

"Grinnel," the jaygee whispered. "Grinnel. Yes, I know Commander
Grinnel. He's--he's a good officer. He must have done it because he had
to. Tell me about it, please."

It was more than Orsino could bear. "Your father was murdered," he said
harshly. "I know because Grinnel put me on radar watch--and I don't know
a God-damned thing about reading a radarscope. He told me to sing out
'enemy planes' and I did because I didn't know what the hell was going
on. He used that as an excuse to crash-dive while your father was
sleeping on deck. Your good officer murdered him."

He heard the jaygee sobbing hoarsely. At last he asked Orsino in a dry,
choked voice: "Politics?"

"Politics," Orsino said.

Orsino jumped wildly as the jaygee's machine gun began to roar a long
burst of twenty, but he didn't fire himself. He knew that there was no
enemy out there in the dark, and that the bullets were aimed only at an
absent phantom.

"We've got to get to Iceland," the jaygee said at last, soberly. "It's
our only chance."

"Iceland?"

"This is one for the C.C. of the Constitutionists. The Central
Committee. It's a breach of the Freiberg Compromise. It means we call
the Sociocrats, and if they don't make full restitution--war."

"What do you mean, _we_?"

"You and I. You're the source of the story; you're the one who'd be
lie-tested."

You've got him, Orsino told himself, but don't be fool enough to count
on it. He's been light-headed from hunger and no sleep and the shock of
his father's death. You helped him in a death struggle and there's team
spirit working on him. The guy covering my back, how can I fail to trust
him, how could I dare not to trust him? But don't be fool enough to
count on it after he's slept. Meanwhile, push it for all it's worth.

"What are your plans?" he asked gravely.

"We've got to slip out of Ireland by sub or plane," the jaygee brooded.
"We can't go to the New Portsmouth or Com-Surf organizations; they're
Sociocrat, and Grinnel will have passed the word to the Sociocrats that
you're out of control."

"What does that mean?"

"Death," the jaygee said.




XII


Commander Grinnel, after reporting formally, had gone straight to a
joint. It wasn't until midnight that he got The Word, from a friendly
O.N.I. lieutenant who had dropped into the house.

"What?" Grinnel roared. "Who is this woman? Where is she? Take me to her
at once!"

"Commander!" the lieutenant said aghast. "I just got here!"

"You heard me, mister! At once!"

While Grinnel dressed he demanded particulars. The lieutenant dutifully
scoured his memory. "Brought in on some cloak-and-dagger deal,
Commander. The kind you usually run. Lieutenant-Commander Jacobi was in
Syndic Territory on a recruiting, sabotage and reconnaissance mission
and one of the D.A.R. passed the girl on him. A real Syndic member.
Priceless. And, as I said, she identified this fellow as Charles Orsino,
another Syndic. Why are you so interested, if I may ask?"

The Commander dearly wanted to give him a grim: "You may not," but
didn't dare. Now was the time to be frank and open. One hint that he had
anything to hide or cover up would put his throat to the knife. "The
man's my baby, lieutenant," he said. "Either your girl's mistaken or Van
Dellen and his polygraph tech and I were taken in by a brand-new
technique." _That_ was nice work, he congratulated himself. Got in Van
Dellen and the tech.... Maybe, come to think of it, the tech _was_
crooked? No; there was the way Wyman had responded perfectly under scop.

O.N.I.'s building was two stories and an attic, wood-framed, beginning
to rot already in the eternal Irish damp.

"We've got her on the third floor, Commander," the lieutenant said. "You
get there by a ladder."

"In God's name, why?" They walked past the Charge of Quarters, who
snapped to a guilty and belated attention, and through the deserted
offices of the first and second floors.

"Frankly, we've had a little trouble hanging on to her."

"She runs away?"

"No, nothing like that--not yet, at least. Marine G-2 and Guard
Intelligence School have both tried to snatch her from us. First with
requisitions, then with muscle. We hope to keep her until the word gets
to Iceland. Then, naturally, _we'll_ be out in the cold."

The lieutenant laughed. Grinnel, puffing up the ladder, did not.

The door and lock on Lee Bennet's quarters were impressive. The
lieutenant rapped. "Are you awake, Lee? There's an officer here who
wants to talk to you."

"Come in," she said.

The lieutenant's hands flew over the lock and the door sprang open. The
girl was sitting in the dark.

"I'm Commander Grinnel, my dear," he said. After eight hours in the
joint, he could feel authentically fatherly to her. "If the time isn't
quite convenient--"

"It's all right," she said listlessly. "What do you want to know?"

"The man you identify as Orsino--it was quite a shock to me. Commander
Van Dellen, who died a hero's death only days ago accepted him as
authentic and so, I must admit, did I. He passed both scop and
polygraph."

"I can't help that," she said. "He came right up to me and told me who
he was. I recognized him, of course. He's a polo player. I've seen him
play on Long Island often enough, the damned snob. He's not much in the
Syndic, but he's close to F. W. Taylor. Orsino's an orphan. I don't know
whether Taylor's actually adopted him or not. I think not."

"No--possible--mistake?"

"No possible mistake." She began to tremble. "My God, Commander
Whoever-You-Are, do you think I could forget one of those damned
sneering faces. Or what those people did to me? Get the lie detector
again! Strap me into the lie detector! I insist on it! I won't be called
a liar! Do you hear me? Get the lie detector!"

"Please," the Commander soothed. "I do believe you, my dear. Nobody
could doubt your sincerity. Thank you for helping us, and good night."
He backed out of the room with the lieutenant. As the door closed he
snapped at him: "Well, mister?"

The lieutenant shrugged. "The lie detector always bears her out. We've
stopped using it on her. We're convinced that she's on our side. Almost
deserving of citizenship."

"Come, now," the Commander said. "You know better than that."

Behind the locked door, Lee Bennet had thrown herself on the bed,
dry-eyed. She wished she could cry, but tears never came. Not since
those three roistering drunkards had demonstrated their virility as
males and their immunity as Syndics on her ... she couldn't cry any
more.

[Illustration]

Charles Orsino--another one of them. She hoped they caught him and
killed him, slowly. She knew all this was true. Then why did she feel
like a murderess? Why did she think incessantly of suicide? Why, why,
why?

       *       *       *       *       *

Dawn came imperceptibly. First Charles could discern the outline of
treetops against the sky and then a little of the terrain before him and
at last two twisted shadows that slowly became sprawling half-naked
bodies. One of them was a woman's, mangled by fifty-caliber slugs. The
other was the body of a bearded giant--the one with whom they had
struggled in the dark.

Charles crawled out stiffly. The woman was--had been--a stringy, white
haired crone. Some animal's skull was tied to her pate with sinews as a
head-dress, and she was tattooed with blue crescents. The jaygee joined
him standing over her and said: "One of their witches. Part of the
religion, if you can call it that."

"A brand-new religion?" Charles asked dubiously. "Made up out of whole
cloth?"

"No," the jaygee said. "I understand it's an _old_
religion--pre-Christian. It kept going underground until the Troubles.
Then it flared up again all over Europe. A filthy business. Animal
sacrifices every new moon. Human sacrifices twice a year. What can you
