his soul do not early drop off, nor do its pores become clogged
with the earthy particles blown from the dusty highways of vulgar
life.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Presidential Address to the British
                         Association; Collected Mathematical
                         Papers, Vol. 2 (1908), p. 658._


=840.= The game of chess has always fascinated mathematicians,
and there is reason to suppose that the possession of great
powers of playing that game is in many features very much like
the possession of great mathematical ability. There are the
different pieces to learn, the pawns, the knights, the bishops,
the castles, and the queen and king. The board possesses certain
possible combinations of squares, as in rows, diagonals, etc. The
pieces are subject to certain rules by which their motions are
governed, and there are other rules governing the players....
One has only to increase the number of pieces, to enlarge the
field of the board, and to produce new rules which are to govern
either the pieces or the player, to have a pretty good idea of
what mathematics consists.--SHAW, J. B.

                         _What is Mathematics? Bulletin American
                         Mathematical Society Vol. 18 (1912), pp.
                         386-387._


=841.= Every man is ready to join in the approval or condemnation
of a philosopher or a statesman, a poet or an orator, an artist
or an architect. But who can judge of a mathematician? Who will
write a review of Hamilton's Quaternions, and show us wherein it
is superior to Newton's Fluxions?--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Imagination in Mathematics; North
                         American Review, Vol. 85, p. 224._


=842.= The pursuit of mathematical science makes its votary
appear singularly indifferent to the ordinary interests and cares
of men. Seeking eternal truths, and finding his pleasures in the
realities of form and number, he has little interest in the
disputes and contentions of the passing hour. His views on social
and political questions partake of the grandeur of his favorite
contemplations, and, while careful to throw his mite of influence
on the side of right and truth, he is content to abide the
workings of those general laws by which he doubts not that the
fluctuations of human history are as unerringly guided as are the
perturbations of the planetary hosts.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Imagination in Mathematics; North
                         American Review, Vol. 85, p. 227._


=843.= There is something sublime in the secrecy in which the
really great deeds of the mathematician are done. No popular
applause follows the act; neither contemporary nor succeeding
generations of the people understand it. The geometer must be tried
by his peers, and those who truly deserve the title of geometer or
analyst have usually been unable to find so many as twelve living
peers to form a jury. Archimedes so far outstripped his
competitors in the race, that more than a thousand years elapsed
before any man appeared, able to sit in judgment on his work, and
to say how far he had really gone. And in judging of those men
whose names are worthy of being mentioned in connection with
his,--Galileo, Descartes, Leibnitz, Newton, and the mathematicians
created by Leibnitz and Newton's calculus,--we are forced to
depend upon their testimony of one another. They are too far above
our reach for us to judge of them.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Imagination in Mathematics; North
                         American Review, Vol. 85, p. 223._


=844.= To think the thinkable--that is the mathematician's aim.

                                                  --KEYSER, C. J.

                         _The Universe and Beyond; Hibbert
                         Journal, Vol. 3 (1904-1905), p. 312._


=845.= Every common mechanic has something to say in his craft
about good and evil, useful and useless, but these practical
considerations never enter into the purview of the mathematician.

                                     --ARISTIPPUS THE CYRENAIC.

                         _Quoted in Hicks, R. D., Stoic and
                         Epicurean, (New York, 1910) p. 210._




  CHAPTER IX

  PERSONS AND ANECDOTES

  (A-M)


=901.= Alexander is said to have asked Menaechmus to teach him
geometry concisely, but Menaechmus replied: "O king, through the
country there are royal roads and roads for common citizens, but
in geometry there is one road for all."

                         _Stoboeus (Edition Wachsmuth, Berlin,
                         1884), Ecl. 2, p. 30._


=902.= Alexander the king of the Macedonians, began like a wretch
to learn geometry, that he might know how little the earth was,
whereof he had possessed very little. Thus, I say, like a wretch
for this, because he was to understand that he did bear a false
surname. For who can be great in so small a thing? Those things
that were delivered were subtile, and to be learned by diligent
attention: not which that mad man could perceive, who sent his
thoughts beyond the ocean sea. Teach me, saith he, easy things.
To whom his master said: These things be the same, and alike
difficult unto all. Think thou that the nature of things saith
this. These things whereof thou complainest, they are the same
unto all: more easy things can be given unto none; but whosoever
will, shall make those things more easy unto himself. How? With
uprightness of mind.--SENECA.

                         _Epistle 91 [Thomas Lodge_].


=903.= Archimedes ... had stated that given the force, any given
weight might be moved, and even boasted, we are told, relying on
the strength of demonstration, that if there were another earth,
by going into it he could remove this. Hiero being struck with
amazement at this, and entreating him to make good this problem by
actual experiment, and show some great weight moved by a small
engine, he fixed accordingly upon a ship of burden out of the
king's arsenal, which could not be drawn out of the dock without
great labor and many men; and, loading her with many passengers
and a full freight, sitting himself the while far off with no
great endeavor, but only holding the head of the pulley in his
hand and drawing the cords by degrees, he drew the ship in a
straight line, as smoothly and evenly, as if she had been in the
sea. The king, astonished at this, and convinced of the power
of the art, prevailed upon Archimedes to make him engines
accommodated to all the purposes, offensive and defensive, of a
siege ... the apparatus was, in most opportune time, ready at hand
for the Syracusans, and with it also the engineer himself.

                                                      --PLUTARCH.

                         _Life of Marcellus_ [_Dryden_].


=904.= These machines [used in the defense of the Syracusans
against the Romans under Marcellus] he [Archimedes] had designed
and contrived, not as matters of any importance, but as mere
amusements in geometry; in compliance with king Hiero's desire
and request, some time before, that he should reduce to practice
some part of his admirable speculation in science, and by
accommodating the theoretic truth to sensation and ordinary use,
bring it more within the appreciation of people in general.
Eudoxus and Archytas had been the first originators of this
far-famed and highly-prized art of mechanics, which they employed
as an elegant illustration of geometrical truths, and as means of
sustaining experimentally, to the satisfaction of the senses
conclusions too intricate for proof by words and diagrams. As,
for example, to solve the problem, so often required in
constructing geometrical figures, given the two extremes, to find
the two mean lines of a proportion, both these mathematicians had
recourse to the aid of instruments, adapting to their purpose
certain curves and sections of lines. But what with Plato's
indignation at it, and his invectives against it as the mere
corruption and annihilation of the one good of geometry,--which
was thus shamefully turning its back upon the unembodied objects
of pure intelligence to recur to sensation, and to ask help (not
to be obtained without base supervisions and depravation) from
matter; so it was that mechanics came to be separated from
geometry, and, repudiated and neglected by philosophers, took its
place as a military art.--PLUTARCH.

                         _Life of Marcellus_ [_Dryden_].


=905.= Archimedes was not free from the prevailing notion that
geometry was degraded by being employed to produce anything
useful. It was with difficulty that he was induced to stoop from
speculation to practice. He was half ashamed of those inventions
which were the wonder of hostile nations, and always spoke of
them slightingly as mere amusements, as trifles in which a
mathematician might be suffered to relax his mind after intense
application to the higher parts of his science.--MACAULAY.

                         _Lord Bacon; Edinburgh Review, July
                         1837; Critical and Miscellaneous Essays
                         (New York, 1879), Vol. 1, p. 380._


=906.=

        Call Archimedes from his buried tomb
        Upon the plain of vanished Syracuse,
        And feelingly the sage shall make report
        How insecure, how baseless in itself,
        Is the philosophy, whose sway depends
        On mere material instruments--how weak
        Those arts, and high inventions, if unpropped
        By virtue.
                                               --WORDSWORTH.

                         _The Excursion._


=907.=

        Zu Archimedes kam einst ein wissbegieriger
            Juengling.
        "Weihe mich," sprach er zu ihm, "ein in die
            goettliche Kunst,
        Die so herrliche Frucht dem Vaterlande
            getragen,
        Und die Mauern der Stadt vor der Sambuca
            beschuetzt!"
        "Goettlich nennst du die Kunst? Sie ists,"
            versetzte der Weise;
        "Aber das war sie, mein Sohn, eh sie dem
            Staat noch gedient.
        Willst du nur Fruechte von ihr, die kann auch
            die Sterbliche zeugen;
        Wer um die Goettin freit, suche in ihr nicht
            das Weib."
                                                 --SCHILLER.

                         _Archimedes und der Schueler._

        [To Archimedes once came a youth intent upon
            knowledge.
        Said he "Initiate me into the Science divine,
        Which to our country has borne glorious fruits
            in abundance,
        And which the walls of the town 'gainst the
            Sambuca protects."
        "Callst thou the science divine? It is so,"
            the wise man responded;
        "But so it was, my son, ere the state by her
            service was blest.
        Would'st thou have fruit of her only? Mortals
            with that can provide thee,
        He who the goddess would woo, seek not the
            woman in her."]


=908.= Archimedes possessed so high a spirit, so profound a soul,
and such treasures of highly scientific knowledge, that though
these inventions [used to defend Syracuse against the Romans] had
now obtained him the renown of more than human sagacity, he yet
would not deign to leave behind him any commentary or writing on
such subjects; but, repudiating as sordid and ignoble the whole
trade of engineering, and every sort of art that lends itself to
mere use and profit, he placed his whole affection and ambition
in those purer speculations where there can be no reference to
the vulgar needs of life; studies, the superiority of which to
all others is unquestioned, and in which the only doubt can be
whether the beauty and grandeur of the subjects examined, or the
precision and cogency of the methods and means of proof, most
deserve our admiration.--PLUTARCH.

                         _Life of Marcellus_ [_Dryden_].


=909.= Nothing afflicted Marcellus so much as the death of
Archimedes, who was then, as fate would have it, intent upon
working out some problem by a diagram, and having fixed his mind
alike and his eyes upon the subject of his speculation, he never
noticed the incursion of the Romans, nor that the city was taken.
In this transport of study and contemplation, a soldier,
unexpectedly coming up to him, commanded him to follow to
Marcellus, which he declined to do before he had worked out his
problem to a demonstration; the soldier, enraged, drew his sword
and ran him through. Others write, that a Roman soldier, running
upon him with a drawn sword, offered to kill him; and that
Archimedes, looking back, earnestly besought him to hold his hand
a little while, that he might not leave what he was at work upon
inconclusive and imperfect; but the soldier, nothing moved by his
entreaty, instantly killed him. Others again relate, that as
Archimedes was carrying to Marcellus mathematical instruments,
dials, spheres, and angles, by which the magnitude of the sun
might be measured to the sight, some soldiers seeing him, and
thinking that he carried gold in a vessel, slew him. Certain it
is, that his death was very afflicting to Marcellus; and that
Marcellus ever after regarded him that killed him as a murderer;
and that he sought for his kindred and honoured them with signal
favours.--PLUTARCH.

                         _Life of Marcellus_ [_Dryden_].


=910.= [Archimedes] is said to have requested his friends and
relations that when he was dead, they would place over his tomb a
sphere containing a cylinder, inscribing it with the ratio which
the containing solid bears to the contained.--PLUTARCH.

                         _Life of Marcellus_ [_Dryden_].


=911.= Archimedes, who combined a genius for mathematics with a
physical insight, must rank with Newton, who lived nearly two
thousand years later, as one of the founders of mathematical
physics.... The day (when having discovered his famous principle
of hydrostatics he ran through the streets shouting Eureka!
Eureka!) ought to be celebrated as the birthday of mathematical
physics; the science came of age when Newton sat in his orchard.

                                               --WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _An Introduction to Mathematics (New
                         York, 1911), p. 38._


=912.= It is not possible to find in all geometry more difficult and
more intricate questions or more simple and lucid explanations
[than those given by Archimedes]. Some ascribe this to his natural
genius; while others think that incredible effort and toil
produced these, to all appearance, easy and unlaboured results.
No amount of investigation of yours would succeed in attaining the
proof, and yet, once seen, you immediately believe you would have
discovered it; by so smooth and so rapid a path he leads you to
the conclusion required.--PLUTARCH.

                         _Life of Marcellus [Dryden]._


=913.= One feature which will probably most impress the
mathematician accustomed to the rapidity and directness secured
by the generality of modern methods is the _deliberation_ with
which Archimedes approaches the solution of any one of his main
problems. Yet this very characteristic, with its incidental
effects, is calculated to excite the more admiration because the
method suggests the tactics of some great strategist who foresees
everything, eliminates everything not immediately conducive to
the execution of his plan, masters every position in its order,
and then suddenly (when the very elaboration of the scheme has
almost obscured, in the mind of the spectator, its ultimate
object) strikes the final blow. Thus we read in Archimedes
proposition after proposition the bearing of which is not
immediately obvious but which we find infallibly used later on;
and we are led by such easy stages that the difficulties of the
original problem, as presented at the outset, are scarcely
appreciated. As Plutarch says: "It is not possible to find in
geometry more difficult and troublesome questions, or more simple
and lucid explanations." But it is decidedly a rhetorical
exaggeration when Plutarch goes on to say that we are deceived by
the easiness of the successive steps into the belief that anyone
could have discovered them for himself. On the contrary, the
studied simplicity and the perfect finish of the treatises
involve at the same time an element of mystery. Though each step
depends on the preceding ones, we are left in the dark as to how
they were suggested to Archimedes. There is, in fact, much truth
in a remark by Wallis to the effect that he seems "as it were of
set purpose to have covered up the traces of his investigation as
if he had grudged posterity the secret of his method of inquiry
while he wished to extort from them assent to his results."
Wallis adds with equal reason that not only Archimedes but nearly
all the ancients so hid away from posterity their method of
Analysis (though it is certain that they had one) that more
modern mathematicians found it easier to invent a new Analysis
than to seek out the old.--HEATH, T. L.

                         _The Works of Archimedes (Cambridge,
                         1897), Preface._


=914.= It is a great pity Aristotle had not understood
mathematics as well as Mr. Newton, and made use of it in his
natural philosophy with good success: his example had then
authorized the accommodating of it to material things.

                                                   --LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _Second Reply to the Bishop of
                         Worcester._


=915.= The opinion of Bacon on this subject [geometry] was
diametrically opposed to that of the ancient philosophers. He
valued geometry chiefly, if not solely, on account of those uses,
which to Plato appeared so base. And it is remarkable that the
longer Bacon lived the stronger this feeling became. When in 1605
he wrote the two books on the Advancement of Learning, he dwelt
on the advantages which mankind derived from mixed mathematics;
but he at the same time admitted that the beneficial effect
produced by mathematical study on the intellect, though a
collateral advantage, was "no less worthy than that which was
principal and intended." But it is evident that his views
underwent a change. When near twenty years later, he published
the _De Augmentis_, which is the Treatise on the Advancement of
Learning, greatly expanded and carefully corrected, he made
important alterations in the part which related to mathematics.
He condemned with severity the pretensions of the mathematicians,
"_delicias et fastum mathematicorum_." Assuming the well-being of
the human race to be the end of knowledge, he pronounced that
mathematical science could claim no higher rank than that of an
appendage or an auxiliary to other sciences. Mathematical
science, he says, is the handmaid of natural philosophy; she
ought to demean herself as such; and he declares that he cannot
conceive by what ill chance it has happened that she presumes to
claim precedence over her mistress.--MACAULAY.

                         _Lord Bacon: Edinburgh Review, July,
                         1837; Critical and Miscellaneous Essays
                         (New York, 1879), Vol. 1, p. 380._


=916.= If Bacon erred here [in valuing mathematics only for its
uses], we must acknowledge that we greatly prefer his error to
the opposite error of Plato. We have no patience with a
philosophy which, like those Roman matrons who swallowed
abortives in order to preserve their shapes, takes pains to be
barren for fear of being homely.--MACAULAY.

                         _Lord Bacon, Edinburgh Review, July,
                         1837; Critical and Miscellaneous Essays
                         (New York, 1879), Vol. 2, p. 381._


=917.= He [Lord Bacon] appears to have been utterly ignorant of
the discoveries which had just been made by Kepler's calculations
... he does not say a word about Napier's Logarithms, which had
been published only nine years before and reprinted more than
once in the interval. He complained that no considerable advance
had been made in Geometry beyond Euclid, without taking any
notice of what had been done by Archimedes and Apollonius. He saw
the importance of determining accurately the specific gravities
of different substances, and himself attempted to form a table of
them by a rude process of his own, without knowing of the more
scientific though still imperfect methods previously employed by
Archimedes, Ghetaldus and Porta. He speaks of the [Greek: eureka]
of Archimedes in a manner which implies that he did not clearly
appreciate either the problem to be solved or the principles upon
which the solution depended. In reviewing the progress of
Mechanics, he makes no mention either of Archimedes, or Stevinus,
Galileo, Guldinus, or Ghetaldus. He makes no allusion to the
theory of Equilibrium. He observes that a ball of one pound
weight will fall nearly as fast through the air as a ball of two,
without alluding to the theory of acceleration of falling bodies,
which had been made known by Galileo more than thirty years
before. He proposed an inquiry with regard to the lever,--namely,
whether in a balance with arms of different length but equal
weight the distance from the fulcrum has any effect upon the
inclination--though the theory of the lever was as well
understood in his own time as it is now.... He speaks of the
poles of the earth as fixed, in a manner which seems to imply
that he was not acquainted with the precession of the equinoxes;
and in another place, of the north pole being above and the
south pole below, as a reason why in our hemisphere the north
winds predominate over the south.--SPEDDING, J.

                         _Works of Francis Bacon (Boston),
                         Preface to De Interpretatione Naturae
                         Prooemium._


=918.= Bacon himself was very ignorant of all that had been done
by mathematics; and, strange to say, he especially objected to
astronomy being handed over to the mathematicians. Leverrier and
Adams, calculating an unknown planet into a visible existence by
enormous heaps of algebra, furnish the last comment of note on
this specimen of the goodness of Bacon's view.... Mathematics was
beginning to be the great instrument of exact inquiry: Bacon
threw the science aside, from ignorance, just at the time when
his enormous sagacity, applied to knowledge, would have made him
see the part it was to play. If Newton had taken Bacon for his
master, not he, but somebody else, would have been Newton.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), pp.
                         53-54._


=919.= Daniel Bernoulli used to tell two little adventures, which
he said had given him more pleasure than all the other honours he
had received. Travelling with a learned stranger, who, being
pleased with his conversation, asked his name; "I am Daniel
Bernoulli," answered he with great modesty; "and I," said the
stranger (who thought he meant to laugh at him) "am Isaac
Newton." Another time, having to dine with the celebrated
Koenig, the mathematician, who boasted, with some degree of
self-complacency, of a difficult problem he had solved with much
trouble, Bernoulli went on doing the honours of his table, and
when they went to drink coffee he presented Koenig with a
solution of the problem more elegant than his own.

                                               --HUTTON, CHARLES.

                         _A Philosophical and Mathematical
                         Dictionary (London, 1815), Vol. 1, p.
                         226._


=920.= Following the example of Archimedes who wished his tomb
decorated with his most beautiful discovery in geometry and
ordered it inscribed with a cylinder circumscribed by a sphere,
James Bernoulli requested that his tomb be inscribed with his
logarithmic spiral together with the words, "_Eadem mutata
resurgo_," a happy allusion to the hope of the Christians, which
is in a way symbolized by the properties of that curve.

                                                    --FONTENELLE.

                         _Eloge de M. Bernoulli; Oeuvres de
                         Fontenelle, t. 5 (1758), p. 112._


=921.= This formula [for computing Bernoulli's numbers] was first
given by James Bernoulli. He gave no general demonstration; but
was quite aware of the importance of his theorem, for he boasts
that by means of it he calculated _intra semi-quadrantem horae!_
the sum of the 10th powers of the first thousand integers, and
found it to be

           91,409,924,241,424,243,424,241,924,242,500.
                                                   --CHRYSTAL, G.

                         _Algebra, Part 2 (Edinburgh, 1879), p.
                         209._


=922.= In the year 1692, James Bernoulli, discussing the logarithmic
spiral [or equiangular spiral, [rho] = [alpha]^[theta]] ... shows
that it reproduces itself in its evolute, its involute, and its
caustics of both reflection and refraction, and then adds: "But
since this marvellous spiral, by such a singular and wonderful
peculiarity, pleases me so much that I can scarce be satisfied
with thinking about it, I have thought that it might not be
inelegantly used for a symbolic representation of various matters.
For since it always produces a spiral similar to itself, indeed
precisely the same spiral, however it may be involved or evolved,
or reflected or refracted, it may be taken as an emblem of a
progeny always in all things like the parent, _simillima filia
matri_. Or, if it is not forbidden to compare a theorem of eternal
truth to the mysteries of our faith, it may be taken as an emblem
of the eternal generation of the Son, who as an image of the
Father, emanating from him, as light from light, remains [Greek:
homoousios] with him, howsoever overshadowed. Or, if you prefer,
since our _spira mirabilis_ remains, amid all changes, most
persistently itself, and exactly the same as ever, it may be used
as a symbol, either of fortitude and constancy in adversity, or,
of the human body, which after all its changes, even after death,
will be restored to its exact and perfect self, so that, indeed,
if the fashion of Archimedes were allowed in these days, I should
gladly have my tombstone bear this spiral, with the motto,
"Though changed, I arise again exactly the same, _Eadem numero
mutata resurgo_."--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _The Uses of Mathesis; Bibliotheca
                         Sacra, Vol. 32, pp. 515-516._


=923.= Babbage was one of the founders of the Cambridge
Analytical Society whose purpose he stated was to advocate "the
principles of pure _d_-ism as opposed to the _dot_-age of the
university."--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 451._


=924.= Bolyai [Janos] when in garrison with cavalry officers, was
provoked by thirteen of them and accepted all their challenges on
condition that he be permitted after each duel to play a bit on
his violin. He came out victor from his thirteen duels, leaving
his thirteen adversaries on the square.--HALSTED, G. B.

                         _Bolyai's Science Absolute of Space
                         (Austin, 1896), Introduction, p. 29._


=925.= Bolyai [Janos] projected a universal language for speech
as we have it for music and mathematics.--HALSTED, G. B.

                         _Bolyai's Science Absolute of Space
                         (Austin, 1896), Introduction, p. 29._


=926.= [Bolyai's Science Absolute of Space]--the most
extraordinary two dozen pages in the history of thought!

                                                 --HALSTED, G. B.

                         _Bolyai's Science Absolute of Space
                         (Austin, 1896), Introduction, p. 18._


=927.= [Wolfgang Bolyai] was extremely modest. No monument, said
he, should stand over his grave, only an apple-tree, in memory of
the three apples: the two of Eve and Paris, which made hell out
of earth, and that of Newton, which elevated the earth again into
the circle of the heavenly bodies.--CAJORI, F.

                         _History of Elementary Mathematics (New
                         York, 1910), p. 273._


=928.= Bernard Bolzano dispelled the clouds that throughout all
the foregone centuries had enveloped the notion of Infinitude in
darkness, completely sheared the great term of its vagueness
without shearing it of its strength, and thus rendered it forever
available for the purposes of logical discourse.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 42._


=929.= Let me tell you how at one time the famous mathematician
_Euclid_ became a physician. It was during a vacation, which I
spent in Prague as I most always did, when I was attacked by an
illness never before experienced, which manifested itself in
chilliness and painful weariness of the whole body. In order to
ease my condition I took up _Euclid's Elements_ and read for the
first time his doctrine of _ratio_, which I found treated there
in a manner entirely new to me. The ingenuity displayed in
Euclid's presentation filled me with such vivid pleasure, that
forthwith I felt as well as ever.--BOLZANO, BERNARD.

                         _Selbstbiographie (Wien, 1875), p. 20._


=930.= Mr. Cayley, of whom it may be so truly said, whether the
matter he takes in hand be great or small, "_nihil tetigit quod
non ornavit_,"....--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Philosophic Transactions of the Royal
                         Society, Vol. 17 (1864), p. 605._


=931.= It is not _Cayley's_ way to analyze concepts into their
ultimate elements.... But he is master of the _empirical_
utilization of the material: in the way he combines it to form a
single abstract concept which he generalizes and then subjects to
computative tests, in the way the newly acquired data are made to
yield at a single stroke the general comprehensive idea to the
subsequent numerical verification of which years of labor are
devoted. _Cayley_ is thus the _natural philosopher_ among
mathematicians.--NOETHER, M.

                         _Mathematische Annalen, Bd. 46 (1895),
                         p. 479._


=932.= When Cayley had reached his most advanced generalizations
he proceeded to establish them directly by some method or other,
though he seldom gave the clue by which they had first been
obtained: a proceeding which does not tend to make his papers
easy reading....

His literary style is direct, simple and clear. His legal training
had an influence, not merely upon his mode of arrangement but also
upon his expression; the result is that his papers are severe and
present a curious contrast to the luxuriant enthusiasm which
pervades so many of Sylvester's papers. He used to prepare his
work for publication as soon as he carried his investigations in
any subject far enough for his immediate purpose.... A paper once
written out was promptly sent for publication; this practice he
maintained throughout life.... The consequence is that he has left
few arrears of unfinished or unpublished papers; his work has been
given by himself to the world.--FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Proceedings of London Royal Society,
                         Vol. 58 (1895), pp. 23-24._


=933.= Cayley was singularly learned in the work of other men,
and catholic in his range of knowledge. Yet he did not read a
memoir completely through: his custom was to read only so much as
would enable him to grasp the meaning of the symbols and
understand its scope. The main result would then become to him a
subject of investigation: he would establish it (or test it) by
algebraic analysis and, not infrequently, develop it so to obtain
other results. This faculty of grasping and testing rapidly the
work of others, together with his great knowledge, made him an
invaluable referee; his services in this capacity were used
through a long series of years by a number of societies to which
he was almost in the position of standing mathematical advisor.

                                                 --FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Proceedings London Royal Society, Vol.
                         58 (1895), pp. 11-12._


=934.= Bertrand, Darboux, and Glaisher have compared Cayley to
Euler, alike for his range, his analytical power, and, not least,
for his prolific production of new views and fertile theories.
There is hardly a subject in the whole of pure mathematics at
which he has not worked.--FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Proceedings London Royal Society, Vol.
                         58 (1895), p. 21._


=935.= The mathematical talent of Cayley was characterized by
clearness and extreme elegance of analytical form; it was
re-enforced by an incomparable capacity for work which has
caused the distinguished scholar to be compared with Cauchy.

                                                    --HERMITE, C.

                         _Comptes Rendus, t. 120 (1895), p. 234._


=936.= J. J. Sylvester was an enthusiastic supporter of reform
[in the teaching of geometry]. The difference in attitude on this
question between the two foremost British mathematicians, J. J.
Sylvester, the algebraist, and Arthur Cayley, the algebraist and
geometer, was grotesque. Sylvester wished to bury Euclid "deeper
than e'er plummet sounded" out of the schoolboy's reach; Cayley,
an ardent admirer of Euclid, desired the retention of Simson's
