"Has any one turned on the heat?" he asked.

"It's shut off," replied Mark, looking at the electric stove.

"Then what makes it so hot?" asked the scientist.

He pointed to the little silvery column in the tiny tube of the
instrument. It registered close to one hundred degrees, though a few
minutes before it had been but sixty. And the starting of the machinery
could not account for the rise in temperature, since most of the
apparatus was run by electricity and developed little heat save in the
immediate proximity. The thermometer was fully ten feet away from any
machine.

"It's the fiery furnace that's doing it!" cried Washington. "We're
falling into th' terrible pit an' we're goin' t' be roasted alive!"

"It certainly is getting warmer," observed Mark, as he took off his
coat. Soon he had to shed his vest, and Jack and the professor followed
his example. The others too, also found all superfluous garments a
burden, and, in a little while they were going about in scanty attire.

Still the heat increased, until it was almost torture to remain in the
engine room. Nor was it much cooler elsewhere. In vain did the professor
set a score of big electric fans to whirring. He even placed cakes of
ice, from the small ice machine that was carried, in front of the
revolving blades, to cool off the air. But the ice was melted almost as
soon as it was taken from the apparatus.

"Them flames is gittin worser!" Washington cried a little later. "We's
comin' nearer!"

From the bottom window the professor and the boys looked down. True
enough the curious, changing, vari-colored lights seemed brighter. They
could almost see the tongues of flame shooting upward in anticipation of
what they were soon to devour.

The heat was increasing every minute. The sides of the ship were hot.
The heads of the travelers were getting dizzy. They could hardly talk or
move about.

"I must save our lives! I must trust to the----" The professor, who was
muttering to himself started toward the storeroom. As in a dream Mark
watched him. He remembered afterward that he had speculated on what
might be the outcome of the mystery the professor threw about the place.
"I will have to use it," he heard the scientist say softly.

Just as Mr. Henderson was about to open the door there came a fiercer
blast of heat than any that had preceded. At the same instant the
conditions in the _Mermaid_ became so fearful that each of the travelers
felt himself fainting away.

"Go to--storeroom--get cylinder--get in----" the professor murmured, and
then he fell forward in a faint.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                              THE NEW LAND


"What is it? Tell us!" exclaimed Jack, almost in his last breath, for, a
few seconds later he too toppled over senseless. Then Washington went
down, while Andy, Bill and Tom succumbed to the terrible heat.

Mark felt his head swimming. His eyes were almost bulging from their
sockets. He dimly remembered trying to force himself to go to the
storeroom and see what was there. He started toward it with that
intention, but fell half way to it.

As he did so he saw something which impressed itself on his mind, half
unconscious as he was.

The door of the storeroom suddenly opened, and from it came a giant
shape, that seemed to expand until it filled the whole of the apartment
where the stricken ones lay. It was like the form of some monster, half
human, half beast. Mark shuddered, and then, closing his eyes, he felt
himself sinking down into some terrible deep and black pit. A second
later the whole ship was jarred as though it had hit something.

How long he and the others remained unconscious Mark did not know. He
was the first to revive, and his first sensation was one as though he
had slept hard and long, and did not want to get up. He felt very
comfortable, although he was lying flat on the floor, with his head
jammed against the side of a locker. It was so dark that he could not
distinguish his hand held close to his face.

"I wonder if I'm dead, and if all the others are dead too," he thought
to himself. "What has happened? Let's see, the last I remember was some
horrible shape rushing from the storeroom. I wonder what it could have
been? Surely that was not the secret the professor referred to."

Mark shuddered as he recalled the monster that seemed to have grown more
terrible as each second passed. Then the boy raised himself up from his
prostrate position.

"Well, at any rate, some one has turned off the heat," he murmured.
"It's very comfortable in here now. I wish I could strike a light."

He listened intently, to learn if any of the others were moving about.
He could hear them breathing, but so faintly as to indicate they were
insensible. Mark stretched out his hand and felt that some one was lying
close to him, but who of the adventurers it was he could not determine.

"If only the dynamo was working we could have light," he said. "But it
seems to have stopped," and, indeed there was a lacking of the familiar
purr and hum of the electrical machine. In fact none of the apparatus in
the ship was working.

"The storage battery!" exclaimed Mark. "That would give light for a
while, if I can only find the switch in the dark."

He began crawling about on his hands and knees. It was so intensely
black that he ran into many things and received severe bruises. At last
he came to a doorway, and as he did so his hand came in contact with an
easy chair. It was the only one aboard, and by that he knew he had
passed into the sitting room. He had his general direction now, and knew
if he kept straight on he would come to the engine room. There he was
familiar enough with the apparatus and levers to be able to turn the
electric switch.

Crawling slowly and cautiously, he reached the room where all the
engines were. Then he had to feel around the sides to locate the switch.
At length he found it. There was a click, a little flash of greenish
fire, and the copper conductors came together, and the ship was flooded
with the glow from the incandescents.

Mark hurried back to where the others were lying. They were still
unconscious, but an uneasy movement on the part of Jack told that he was
coming out of the stupor. Mark got some ammonia and held it beneath his
comrade's nose. The strong fumes completed the work that nature had
started and Jack opened his eyes.

"Where am I? What has happened? Are any of them dead?" he asked quickly.

"I hope no one is dead," Mark replied. "As to the other question, I
can't answer. I don't know whether we are a thousand miles underground,
or floating on the ocean, though I'm more inclined to the former theory.
But never mind that now. Help me to bring the others back to their
senses. I'll work on the professor and you can begin on Bill or Tom.
Washington seems to be all right," for at that moment the colored man
opened his eyes, stared about him and then got up.

"I thought I was dead for suah!" he exclaimed.

"Some of the others may be if we don't hurry," said Mark. "Get to work,
Wash!"

With the colored man to help them the two boys, by the use of the
ammonia, succeeded in reviving Bill, Tom and old Andy. But the
professor, probably on account of his advanced age, did not respond so
readily to the treatment. The boys were getting quite alarmed, as even
some of the diluted ammonia, forced between his lips, did not cause him
to open his eyes, or increase his heart action.

"If he should die, and leave us all alone with the ship in this terrible
place, what would we do?" asked Jack.

"He's not going to die!" exclaimed Mark. "Here I have another plan.
Washington bring that medical electrical battery from the engine room."
This was a small machine the professor had brought along for
experimental purposes.

Quickly adjusting it, Mark placed the handles in the nerveless fingers
of Mr. Henderson. Then he started the current. In about a minute the
eyelids of the aged inventor began to quiver, and, in less than five
minutes he had been revived sufficiently to enable him to sit up. He
passed his hand across his forehead.

"What has happened?" he asked in a faint voice.

"I don't know; none of us knows," Mark answered. "We all lost our senses
when it got so hot, and there seemed to be some peculiar vapor in the
air. The last I remember was seeing some horrible shape rush from the
storeroom, soon after the ship struck. Then I fainted away. When I woke
up I managed to turn the lights on, and then I came back here."

"I wonder where we are," the old man murmured. "I must find out. We must
take every precaution. Washington, go and look at the gage indicating
our depth."

The colored man was gone but a few seconds. When he returned his eyes
were bulging in terror.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Henderson, who, thanks to the battery, had
almost completely recovered.

"It ain't possible!" gasped Washington. "I'll never believe it!"

"What is it?" asked Mr. Henderson, while the others waited in anxiety
for the answer.

"We're five hundred miles down!" declared Washington.

"Five hundred miles!" muttered the inventor. "It does not seem possible,
but it must be so. We fell very rapidly and the terrible draught sucked
us down with incredible rapidity. But come, we must see what our
situation is, and where we are. We are stationary, and are evidently on
some solid substance."

They all felt much recovered now, and, as the terrible fright of being
consumed in a fiery furnace had passed, they all were in better spirits.

At the suggestion of the professor, the boys and Washington made a tour
of the ship. They found, for some unaccountable reason, that nearly all
the engines and apparatuses were out of gear. In some the parts had
broken, and others were merely stopped, from the failure of some other
machine, on which they were dependent.

"I'm afraid this is the end of the _Mermaid,"_ said Mark, in a sorrowful
tone.

"Nonsense!" replied Jack, who was of a more cheerful nature. "Things are
not so bad as they look. The professor can fix everything."

"I'm sure I hope so," Mark went on, not much encouraged, however, by
Jack's philosophy. "It would be no joke to have to stay five hundred
miles underground the rest of our lives."

"You don't know," retorted Jack. "Don't judge of a country you've never
seen. This may be as fine a place as it is on the surface of the earth.
I want a chance to see it," and Jack began to whistle a cheerful tune.

They completed the tour of the ship, and found, that, aside from the
damage to the machinery, the _Mermaid_ had not sustained any harm. The
hull was in good order, though of course they could not tell about the
gas holder. It was not possible to see this except by going into the
conning tower or out on the small deck, and this they did not venture to
do. The connections between the holder and the main ship seemed to be
all right, and there was still a small quantity of gas in the big tank,
as Mark found on opening a stop-cock.

They went back to the professor and told him what they had observed. He
seemed somewhat alarmed, the more so as the experience he had just
passed through had weakened him considerably.

"I hope I shall be able to make the repairs," he said. "It is our only
hope."

As he spoke he looked up at the electric lights that shone overhead from
wall brackets.

"Who is shutting down the power?" he asked.

"There is no power on, Professor," replied Mark. "I am running the
lights from the storage battery. But something is the matter, for they
are growing dim."

The filaments were now mere dull red wires, and the ship was being
shrouded in gloom again.

"The battery is failing!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "We shall be left in
darkness, and there is no other way to produce light. I ought to have
brought some lamps or candles along in case of emergency."

The next instant the _Mermaid_ became as black as Egypt is popularly
supposed to be, and something like an exclamation of terror came from
the professor.

For several minutes they all sat there in the blackness and gloom,
waiting for they knew not what. Then, suddenly, there sounded throughout
the ship, a creaking as of metal sliding along metal. Some big lever
creaked, and, a second later the whole place was flooded with light.

"What has happened?" cried the professor, starting to his feet in alarm.

"We are going to be burned up!" exclaimed old Andy.

"It's all right! It's all right!" yelled Washington from the engine room
where the boys had left him. "Don't git skeered! I done it! I opened the
port holes, by yanking on the lever. Golly, but we's arrived at the new
land! Look out, everybody!"




                              CHAPTER XVII

                           A STRANGE COUNTRY


They all ran to the port holes, which were openings in the side of the
ship. They were fitted with thick, double glass, and covered on the
outside with steel shutters. These shutters were worked by a single
lever from the engine room, so that one person could open or close them
in a second or two. Washington, by accident, it appeared later, had slid
back the protecting pieces of steel, and the rest followed.

As the adventurers looked from the glass ports they saw that the light
which had flooded the ship came from without. They were in the midst of
a beautiful glow, which seemed to be diffused about them like rays from
a sun.

Only, in place of being a yellow or white light, such as the sun gives
off at varying times, the glow was of violet hue. And, as they watched,
they saw the light change color, becoming a beautiful red, then blue,
and again green.

"Well, this is certainly remarkable!" the professor said. "I wonder what
causes that."

"We've arrived! We're here, anyhow!" Washington cried, coming into the
room. "See the country!"

Then, for the first time, the travelers, taking their attention from the
curious light that was all around them, saw that they had indeed
arrived. They were on a vast plain, one, seemingly, boundless in extent,
though off to the left there was a range of lofty mountains, while to
the right there was the glimmer of what might be a big lake or inland
sea.

"See, we are resting on the ground!" exclaimed Jack. He pointed out of
the window, and the others, looking close at hand, noted that the
_Mermaid_ had settled down in the midst of what seemed to be a field of
flowers. Big red and yellow blossoms were all in front, and some grew so
tall as to almost be up to the edge of the port.

"I wonder if we can be seeing aright," the professor muttered. "Is this
really the interior of the earth; such a beautiful place as this?"

There could be little doubt of it. The ship had descended through the
big shaft, had been sucked down by the terrible air current, and had
really landed in a strange country.

Of its size, shape and general conditions the adventurers, as yet, could
but guess. They could see it was a pleasant place, and one where there
might be the means to sustain life. For, as the professor said
afterward, he felt that where there were flowers there would be fruits,
and where both of these provisions of nature were to be found there
would likely be animal life, and even, perhaps, human beings.

But, for the time, they were content to look from the port on the
beautiful scene that lay stretched out before them. The ship rested on
an even keel and had landed so softly that none of the plates were
strained.

"We have plenty of air, at all events," said the professor as he took a
deep breath. "I was afraid of that, but it seems there was no need. The
air appears to be as good and fresh as that on the surface of the earth,
only there is a curious property to it. It makes one feel larger. I
imagine it must be thinner than the air of the earth, which is a rather
strange thing, since the higher one goes the more rarefied the air
becomes, and the lower, the more dense. Still we can not apply natural
philosophy to conditions under the earth. All the usual theories may be
upset. However, we should be content to take things as we find them, and
be glad we were not dashed to pieces when the ship was caught in the
