But Mona was scarcely listening.

"Turn back!" she screamed. "I want to go back to my home! I don't
want to live in Holl. Turn back, I tell you!"

Fort's face went white. He looked up at her appealingly. "You don't
mean that, Mona! Say you don't!"

"I do! I want to go back!" She glanced down at the ever-widening
gap. "Hurry! Turn back, or I'll do it myself!"

Fort gazed straight into her eyes for an instant; then, his face
whiter than ever, he brought the craft to an abrupt halt in mid air.
He looked at his watch for the last time, and said, in a strangely
hollow voice:

"Just as you wish, Mona. There's plenty of time to get back before
the air gets too thin in the gap.

"The point is, though, that if you go, you go alone!" They looked at
one another unwaveringly. "So far as I'm concerned, I shall spend
the rest of my life on Holl! No Hafen for mine! From now on I live
with the workers. Come--what do you say, Mona?"

She answered instantly and stubbornly: "I go back. What about you?"

He took a parachute from a locker. "Holl is below." He buckled the
thing across his chest and stepped up on the edge of the cockpit.

"Do you mean it, dear?" said he softly.

She stared at him stonily. He turned away, his mouth shaking
slightly, then held out his hand.

"Good-by, then, for the last time!"

Mona suddenly grasped his hand. For an instant hope flared in Fort's
eyes, then faded, leaving his face gray and drawn. He poised hiself,
letting go her hand reluctantly. Then he turned resolutely.

"It's the only thing for a man to do, Mona! As for you--turn about
and go as fast as you canl You've got just time enough. Good-by!"

And with Mona unable to utter a single word, able only to watch and
to feel, the athlete leaned to one side so as to clear the wing,
pulled his cap down tightly, and jumped into space.






XVIII

THE SILVER HEART





Mona leaped to the controls. She turned the craft about
automatically and started toward Hafen. Then she glanced over the
side. What she saw brought her heart to her throat.

About a mile below, and under Fort as he sank through the air, was
another flying machine which neither had noticed before. In it was
the figure of a man standing; he was maneuvering his craft so as to
intercept the falling aviator. And the clear air of the high
altitudes carried the sound of his voice faintly but surely to
Mona's ears.

"Thought you'd get away, did you, Fort?" in heavy, insolent tones.
"Well, you get--left, my boy!"

"Eklan Norbith!" cried Fort at the same instant. Next second he had
landed on the deputy's machine.

"Norbith!" thought Mona, immediately recalling her patient at the
hospital. She hesitated only an instant, then dove in a steep spiral
down toward the two.

Fort had fouled his parachute on a stanchion, in landing.
Breathless, he lay in a tangle heap, looking up at the towering bulk
of the deputy.

"You're not going to get clear this time, Fort, like you did that
night with the Cobulus and Ernol's gang!" Norbith was saying
savagely, gloating over the man at his feet. "Thought the lad killed
me, I suppose. I was barely stunned. And I've been on your
tail--ever since."

His eyes glowed with anger. Mona watched him in silence as she
circled nearer. Norbith! The commission's deputy in Calastia; he
represented all that was evil and cruel in the government. It was he
who did the nasty work, the things which Powart himself was too much
of a gentleman to do. Norbith--the strong, cruel right arm on an
unjust law!

"Well"--Fort had regained his breath somewhat--"now that you've got
me, Norbith, what do you intend to do about it?"

"Do!" The man's voice fairly boomed. "I'm going to tear that
parachute off your back and pitch you overboard, you infernal
outlaw! And I'm going to claim that you resisted arrest!"

At that instant he noted Mona for the first time. He started as he
recognized her. "The surgeon!"

Then his rage came on him again. "You hold your tongue, young woman,
or I shall have it--pulled out! Do you understand?" he demanded,
thrusting his face up toward hers.

And then Fort was upon him. All he cared for now was to get his
fingers in Norbith's throat. And next moment Mona was desperately
steering his machine clear of the other as it swayed and thrashed
about under the struggling of the two men.

The advantage was with the deputy. Powerful man that he was, he was
more than a match for even Fort's great strength, while the
athlete's agility did him no good in the restricted space of the
cockpit. The parachute hindered him, too. Down on the ground, on a
clear spot, it would have been different. As it was, Fort was
quickly thrust to his knees, and, despite all that he could do, he
could not fight off the deputy's grip. In a moment it had shifted to
the athlete's throat.

"You would, would you!" roared the deputy. "By--you'll be dead even
before you reach the ground!"

Fort struggled wildly. In a moment he was strangling; Mona could see
his protruding eyes and lolling tongue. She could not help. She was
not athlete enough to leap to his aid. But all of a sudden, just as
Fort had once come to her own rescue, her tongue came to his.

"Boy! Boy! Tear open his shirt! Tear open his shirt!"

Fort heard. For a second he hesitated, dull wonder in his starting
eyes; then he reached up, and with a spasmodic jerk of his hands,
ripped Norbith's shirt wide open. The man's bare chest was exposed.

"Don't you see?" shrieked Mona hysterically. "Look, boy! Look!"

And Fort saw. Saw the two silver tubes leading from the brown scar
in the breast of this man--the man whose heart had been replaced by
a silver instrument. Saw the tubes, leading to a belt around the
man's middle, where the pumping mechanism was concealed. And as Fort
saw, he understood.

With a final burst of strength he raised his quivering fingers and
clutched one of the little pipes. A jerk, an exclamation from
Norbith; and then, even as Fort's head fell back insensate, his hand
snapped the little tube in two.

"Good God!" swore the deputy. "You--you've--" He gasped and
spluttered; he let go of Fort. The athlete dropped like a log into
the bottom of the craft.

But Eklan Norbith stood upright, his hands thrashing wildly, his
mouth twitching horribly. One end of the broken tube hissed with
escaping air; the other end spouted blood. The deputy swayed; his
head dropped to his shoulders.

And then the air rushed into his lungs for the last time; he gave a
single piercing shriek, tottered, and fell backward out of the
machine.

Fort opened his eyes to see Mona bending over him, bathing his head.
He looked around dully, blinked once or twice, frowned as though
trying to remember, and then said:

"How--did I get here?"

"I waited until Norbith's machine steadied," said she in a
wonderfully soft voice, "and then flew down close enough to pick you
up."

He remembered. Suddenly he grasped at her arm and tried to get up.
"Hurry!" he cried. "You've only got time enough to make it! The
gap--don't take any chances!"

But the girl was paying no attention to where the machine was going.
She was looking at the man and seeming to be perfectly satisfied.

"I don't care," she declared a little shakily. "Holl looks good
enough to me, dear--if you're going to be living on it!"

The craft rocked perilously.

Back on the earth, three of the four stirred in their chairs. The
doctor was the first to arouse. He sounded the gong to warn his
wife, and the action helped to awaken the others; Billie first, then
Smith. But Van Emmon did not rouse. Still connected with the
dictator, Billie's husband was twisting and turning in his chair,
moaning slightly under his breath. In his subconscious mind some
terrible scene was being enacted. Suddenly his mouth flew open, and
the words fairly tumbled forth:

"Ernol--at the contact--he's telephoned! Everybody knows now!" Next:
"Billie: Why didn't you tell me? I could have warned Powart!" And
then, in a voice of agony:

"God, what a mob! They'll kill him!"

But he was still unconscious. The doctor exclaimed in fear.

"Quick!" he ordered. "Into the connection again!" And he threw
himself back into his chair.

In a minute the three were still. Except for two great tears from
Billie's eyes, there were no signs of life. Two minutes passed, then
three. Finally all four roused together.

"Well!" Van Emmon was the first to speak. His voice was harsh and
strained. "By George, that was a narrow squeak! I thought sure I was
a goner! They threw Powart--out of his yacht!"

Billie caught his hand and patted it. Her lips were trembling; she
could not trust herself to speak. Her husband stared at her with
eyes that were still bewildered and tried hard to understand.

Smith could say nothing. The doctor, however, got to his feet and
stretched.

"Phew!" taking off the brass bracelets and reaching for a handful of
the Venusian books. "That was--going some!"

He located a passage in one of the books. "I guess we've had enough
of people like ourselves. What do you say," eagerly, "to visiting a
place where they're not even the same sort of animals as we are?"

He looked around enthusiastically. Smith made a brief sound of
agreement, and remained in his chair. Both he and the doctor looked
to Billie and Van Emmon for comment.

But the man and the woman were content to look at one another. Their
minds had room for only one problem; their eyes saw nothing, cared
to see nothing, save that which love seeks and, having found, is
satisfied with.

Did it make any difference to Billie that her husband had
sympathized with Capellette's greatest despot and worst failure? Did
it make any difference to Van that Billie approved when the woman
she was allied with discarded the despot for the devolutionist?

Or was Billie still his chief reason for existing, and was Van hers?

That was the real question! Small matters like life in other
worlds--they could wait!






THE EMANCIPATRIX

I

THE MENTAL EXPEDITION





The doctor closed the door behind him, crossed to the table,
silently offered the geologist a cigar, and waited until smoke was
issuing from it. Then he said:

"Well," bluntly, "what's come between you and your wife, Van?"

The geologist showed no surprise. Instead, he frowned severely at
the end of his cigar, and carefully seated himself on the corner of
the table. When he spoke there was a certain rigor in his voice,
which told the doctor that his friend was holding himself tightly in
rein.

"It really began when the four of us got together to investigate
Capellette, two months ago." Van Emmon was a thorough man in
important matters. "Maybe I ought to say that both Billie and I were
as much interested as either you or Smith; she often says that even
the tour of Mercury and Venus was less wonderful.

"What is more, we are both just as eager to continue the
investigations. We still have all kinds of faith in the Venusian
formula; we want to 'visit' as many more worlds as the science of
telepathy will permit. It isn't that either of us has lost
interest."

The doctor rather liked the geologist's scientific way of stating
the case, even though it meant hearing things he already knew.
Kinney watched and waited and listened intently.

"You remember, of course, what sort of a man I got in touch with.
Powart was easily the greatest Capellan of them all; a magnificent
intellect, which I still think was intended to have ruled the rest.
I haven't backed down from my original position."

"Van! You still believe," incredulously, "in a government of the
sort he contemplated?"

Van Emmon nodded aggressively. "All that we learned merely
strenthens my conviction. Remember what sort of people the working
classes of Capellette were? Smith's 'agent' was typical--a helpless
nincompoop, not fit to govern himself!" The geologist strove to keep
his patience.

"However," remarked Kinney, "the chap whose mind I used was no
fool."

"Nor was Billie's agent, the woman surgeon," agreed Van Emmon, "even
if she did prefer 'the Devolutionist' to Powart. But you'll have to
admit, doc, that the vast majority of the Capellans were
incompetents; the rest were exceptions."

The doctor spoke after a brief pause. "And--that's what is wrong,
Van?"

"Yes," grimly. "Billie can't help but rejoice that things turned out
the way they did. She is sure that the workers, now that they've
been separated from the ruling class, will proceed to make a perfect
paradise out of their land." He could not repress a certain amount
of sarcasm. "As well expect a bunch of monkeys to build a steam
engine!

"Well," after a little hesitation, "as I said before, doc, I've no
reason to change my mind. You may talk all you like about it--I
can't agree to such ideas. The only way to get results on that
planet is for the upper classes to continue to govern."

"And this is what you two have--quarreled about?"

Van Emmon nodded sorrowfully. He lit another cigar absent-mindedly
and cleared his throat twice before going on:

"My fault, I guess. I've been so darned positive about everything
I've said, I've probably caused Billie to sympathize with her
friends more solidly than she would otherwise."

"But just because you've championed the autocrats so heartily--"

"I'm afraid so!" The geologist was plainly relieved to have stated
the case in full. He leaned forward in his eagerness to be
understood. He told the doctor things that were altogether too
personal to be included in this account.

Meanwhile, out in the doctor's study, Smith had made no move
whatever to interrogate the geologist's young wife. Instead, the
engineer simply remained standing after Billie had sat down, and
gave her only an occasional hurried glance. Shortly the silence got
on her nerves; and--such was her nature, as contrasted with Van
Emmon's--whereas he had stated causes first, she went straight to
effects.

"Well," explosively, "Van and I have split!"

Smith was seldom surprised at anything. This time was no exception.
He merely murmured "Sorry" under his breath; and Billie rushed on,
her pent-up feelings eager to escape.

"We haven't mentioned Capellette for weeks, Smith! We don't dare! If
we did, there'd be such a rumpus that we--we'd separate!" Something
came up into her throat which had to be choked back before she could
go on. Then--

"I don't know why it is, but every time the subject is brought up
Van makes me so WILD!" She controlled herself with a tremendous
effort. "He blames me, of course, because of what I did to help the
Devolutionist. But I can't be blamed for sympathizing with the under
dog, can I? I've always preferred justice to policy, any time.
Justice first, I say! And I think we've seen--there on Capellette--how
utterly impossible it is for any such system as theirs to last
indefinitely."

But before she could follow up her point the door opened and the
doctor returned with her husband. Kinney did not allow any tension
to develop; instead, he said briskly:

"There's only a couple of hours remaining between now and dinner
time; I move we get busy." He glanced about the room, to see if all
was in place. The four chairs, each with its legs tipped with glass;
the four footstools, similarly insulated from the floor; the
electrical circuit running from the odd group of machinery in the
corner, and connecting four pair of brass bracelets--all were ready
for use. He motioned the others to the chairs in which they had
already accomplished marvels in the way of mental traveling.

"Now," he remarked, as he began to fit the bracelets to his wrists,
an example which the rest straightway followed; "now, we want to
make sure that we all have the same purpose in mind. Last time, we
were simply looking for four people, such as had view-points similar
to our own. To-day, our object is to locate, somewhere among the
planets attached to one of the innumerable sun-stars of the
universe, one on which the conditions are decidedly different from
anything we have known before."

Billie and Van Emmon, their affair temporarily forgotten, listened
eagerly.

"As I recall it," Smith calmly observed, "we agreed that this
attempt would be to locate a new kind of--well, near-human. Isn't
that right?"

The doctor nodded. "Nothing more or less"--speaking very
distinctly--"than a creature as superior as we are, but NOT IN HUMAN
FORM."

Smith tried hard not to share the thrill. He had been reading
biology the previous week. "I may as well protest, first as last,
that I don't see how human intelligence can ever be developed
outside the human form. Not--possibly!"

Van Emmon also was skeptical, but his wife declared the idea merely
unusual, not impossible. "Is there any particular reason against
it?" she demanded of the doctor.

"I will say this much," cautiously. "Given certain conditions, and
inevitably the human form will most certainly become the supreme
creature, superior to all the others.

"However, suppose the planetary conditions are entirely different. I
conceive it entirely possible for one of the other animals to forge
ahead of the man-ape; quite possible, Smith," as the engineer
started to object, "if only the conditions are different ENOUGH.

"At any rate, we shall soon find out. I have been reading further in
the library the Venusians gave us, and I assure you that I've found
some astonishing things." He fingered one of the diminutive volumes.
"There is one planet in particular, whose name I have forgotten,
where all animal life has disappeared entirely. There are none but
vegetable forms on the land, and all of them are the rankest sort of
weeds. They have literally choked off everything else!

"And the highest form of life there is a weed; a hideous
monstrosity, shaped something like an octopus, and capable of the
most horrible--" He stopped abruptly, remembering that one of his
hearers was a woman. "Never mind about that now."

He indicated another of the little books. "I think we will do well
to investigate a planet which the Venusians call 'Sanus.' It belongs
to the tremendous planetary family of the giant star Arcturus. I
haven't read any details at all; I didn't want to know more than
you. We can proceed with our discoveries on an equal footing."

"But," objected Smith, recalling the previous methods, "how are we
to put our minds in touch with any of theirs, unless we know enough
