
Then, his hand resting on the card in his pocket, he added:

"What luck!"





CHAPTER XIII

HIRAM DOBBS AND THE BIPLANE


Dave walked straight along the fence.  By the shortest route
possible he reached the gateway entrance to the factory yard.

The tramp had put nimbly in the opposite direction.  He was headed
for the nearest business street, where he could spend some of the
money that he had earned so easily.

The young aviator was very much excited.  He had made certain
discoveries that had amazed him.  He could not help but mentally
rejoice over the strange fortune that had come from his stray
meeting with the tramp.

"It's a clew--a sure clew," said Dave to himself.  "Now to move just
right in this affair and make no mistake."

The youth crossed the grounds of the plant and again entered the
office building.  He did not wait to announce himself, but, as he
reached the door of the manager's room and found it closed, he
tapped briskly.

"Come in," spoke Mr. Randolph.  "Hello, you, Dashaway?"

"Yes, Sir," bowed Dave, removing his cap.

"You are back soon."

"Sooner than I planned," replied Dave,  "But I--"

"You've thought the affair over, I hope?"

"Something more than that, Sir," responded Dave.  "I have come to
tell you that I think I can be of some service to you about that
stolen aero-hydroplane."

"Good for you!"

"I've thought out a plan, Sir," went on Dave.  "I feel certain that
the people who raided the aerodrome and made off with the Drifter
are bound for a distant and unsettled section."

"But why?  What benefit can they hope to secure way off from
civilization?"

"That we have to guess at and work out," replied Dave.  "I will say,
Mr. Randolph, that I think I have a faint clew to the disappearance
of the airship."

"You don't say so!"

"I shall know more inside of twenty-four hours.  In fact, Mr.
Randolph, I feel pretty certain that I can soon submit a plan that
will satisfy you that I know what I am about."

"We already think that of you, Dashaway."

"And that I can bring results."

"Capital!  I knew we were not mistaken in you.  Now, see here, I see
you have something working in your mind.  I don't want to even
hamper you by asking what it is."

"I would like to go back to Columbus on the first train, Mr.
Randolph."

"Very well."

"I want to look up some affairs there, consult with Mr. King, and
come back here the next day."

"And then?"

"I shall perhaps want to use the very best aircraft you have in your
factory."

"To hunt for the Drifter?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Dashaway, the whole plant and everything in it is at your service."

"Thank you, Sir."

"I consider this theft of the Drifter even more important than I at
first thought."

"How is that, Mr. Randolph?"

"I have been thinking that if some competitor was concerned in the
affair, he might steal and utilize many points in our new model
which are not yet protected by patents."

"I feel pretty sure that no business rival had anything to do with
the theft," observed the young aviator confidently.

"Well, you work this affair out in your own way.  Remember, as I
told you, expense is no point whatever.  When shall we see you
again?"

"To-morrow evening, or the next morning at the latest."

Something in Dave's manner seemed to convince the shrewd manager of
the Interstate Aeroplane Company that their young employee was
started on the right track.  He shook hands cordially with Dave
when the latter left the office.

Dave went at once to the railroad depot.  He learned that a train
left in two hours.

"That will bring me to Columbus before dark," he reflected.  "I
wonder what Mr. King will say?"

The young aviator had a good deal on his mind, enough to make the
average lad impatient.  He had, however, learned a hard lesson of
discipline with his tyrannical guardian, old Silas Warner.  Then,
too, since coming under the helpful influence of Mr. King, he had
acquired a certain self reliance that now stood him in good stead.

Running an airship took nerve, steadiness of purpose, a definite,
concrete way of looking at things.  Dave knew in his own mind that
the Drifter was each hour speeding farther and farther away from the
haunts of men.  He recalled the old adage, however, which says "the
more haste the less speed," and he determined to stick to the plan
he had mentally outlined at the start.

"I'm going to work on this affair slow but sure," he told himself.
"I think I can guess where the Drifter is headed for.  If I am
right, I know that I shall find it."

Dave reached Columbus about dark.  He went straight from the depot
to the aero grounds.  The plan he had formed in his mind took in a
talk with Mr. King right away.  The Baby Racer hangar, however, was
on his way to the Aegis quarters.  As he neared it he saw a light in
the shed where the little biplane was housed.  Dave went to the half
open door of the place to find Hiram Dobbs with a lantern puttering
about the machine.

"What have you been up to, Hiram?" challenged Dave.

"Why, hello!  Got back?  Good!" cried Hiram, rushing forward to
warmly welcome his best friend.

"Yes, just arrived," answered Dave.

"I've been cleaning up the machine," explained Hiram.  "It's old
Grimshaw's fault."

"What is?"

"Taking the Baby Racer out."

"Oh, the machine has been out, then, has it?" remarked Dave.

"Yes, and up.  Say, Dave, I made the five hundred feet level.  I
hope you're not put out.  It was a chance to make fifty dollars."

"Fifty dollars?"

"Uh-huh," bobbed Hiram in a broad grin.

"How was that?"

"Why, Grimshaw was piloting a party over the grounds.  Rich man and
his family-wife, son and two daughters.  The youngest one was a
daring little miss.  She wanted to fly, and would fly.  Grimshaw got
to bragging about what you had done with the Baby Racer.  Well,
nothing would do but I must roll the little beauty out."

"That was all right, Hiram," the young aviator hastened to say.  "I
should always feel that the biplane is safe in your hands."

"Well, finally the father consented to let his daughter try a fly
along the ground.  I settled her in a comfortable seat, and away we
went.  I made it a good stiff run, and there was some jolting, but
the girl was wild over it.  She begged for a second run.  We got
such a fine start that I lifted about twenty feet in the air."

"And then, of course, she screamed out in fear?" said Dave, with a
smile.

"Screamed nothing," dissented Hiram.  "She just spoke one delighted
'O-oh!' and then: 'Higher, oh, please keep on going!'  Say, Dave,
she looked so bright and brave I couldn't help it--Z--I--P!"

"What does 'Z--I--P!' mean, Hiram?" asked Dave.

"A slide, a swoop, then a circle, another, a shoot upwards, and the
girl laughing out, 'Oh, this is just grand!'  Her sister shrieked,
her mother fainted away, and her father was shaking his cane at us
and yelling for us to come back.  The Racer did her prettiest in two
grand circles of the grounds, and came down light as a feather.  The
girl jumped out, one big smile.  'Just think of it!' I heard her cry
to her sister, 'when I've told my seminary chums that I've been up
in a real airship!'  Then, seeing that she was safe, I think her
folks were just as proud of her exploit as she was.  Anyhow, she ran
up to her father in a coaxing way, and came back to place a bank
note in my hand.  When they were gone, and I found that it was a
fifty dollar bill, old Grimshaw chuckled and said he had hinted to
the party that the regular fee for a ride in an airship was one
hundred dollars.  I'm mighty glad you're back, Dave."

"Why, you seem to have got along finely without me," said Dave.

"We've missed you, all the same.  Where you going, Dave?" asked
Hiram, as his friend moved out of the shed.

"Why, I'm anxious to see Mr. King as soon as I can.  I have
something very important to talk about with him."

"It's about that rush telegram?"

"Yes, Hiram."

"What did it mean?"

"When we meet with Mr. King you shall, hear all about it, Hiram."

"Well, Mr. King isn't home yet," explained Hiram.

Dave looked disappointed.

"That is," continued Hiram, "he hadn't got back when I was last up
at the Aegis hangar."

"When was that?"

"About four o'clock this afternoon.  Mr. Grimshaw, though, said he
expected him on the six o'clock train."

"We'll go and see if he has returned," said Dave.

They started for the aviator's headquarters.  Half the distance
covered, they met him coming in search of them.  Mr. King looked
pale and worried.  Dave knew that something had happened to upset
him.

"I'm glad you're back, Dashaway," said Mr. King.  "Grimshaw told me
you had been called to headquarters by the Interstate people.  I
should have wired you to return right away if you had not returned.
Something very important has transpired."

"About Mr. Dale--about my father's old friend, Mr. King?" asked
Dave.

"That's it exactly.  Bad news, Dashaway, I'm sorry to say,"
announced the aviator in a very serious tone.





CHAPTER XIV

THE MISSING AIRCRAFT


The aviator led the way back to the Aegis hangar.  Dave saw that Mr.
King was not inclined to explain any further until they were off the
public course, so he asked no more questions, for the present.  Dave
had a good deal to tell himself.  His mind had been full of it all
day.  Something in the grave, thoughtful manner of Mr. King,
however, caused him to defer his own anxiety and impatience.

When they were inside the comfortable room where the aviator made
his office, Mr. King turned to Dave with a very sober face.

"I said I had bad news, Dashaway," he spoke, "and that's no
mistake."

"Then you failed to find Mr. Dale at Warrenton?" inquired Dave.

"He has not been there for over a week."

"Why, I thought he lived there?"

"He did.  He went away, or was kidnapped, nearly ten days ago."

"Kidnapped?" exclaimed Dave in surprise.

"That's what I think.  Mr. Dale lived alone, except for a very old
man servant.  As near as I can figure it out, that young thief,
Gregg, appeared at Warrenton two days after I had him arrested.  I
did a very foolish thing in dealing with the young scamp."

"You mean letting him go free?" inquired Dave.

"Yes, I feared at the time that I was unwise in not punishing him,
to serve as a lesson against more mischief.  He acted so scared,
though, he helped me get back the property he had stolen from you,
he signed a confession telling that he was not the real Dave
Dashaway and had imposed on Mr. Dale, so I thought he would proceed
to at once make himself very scarce.  I felt sure that he would not
be able to play any more tricks on Mr. Dale, for I expected that you
and I would go the very next day and see this old friend of your
father.  You know we were rushed from Dayton to the next meet, and
had no chance to get to Warrenton and explain matters to Mr. Dale.  I
blame myself for not sending you at, once to him at the time. As I
told you, I wrote to a friend, a lawyer at Warrenton, to learn what I
could about Mr. Dale.  He reported Mr. Dale was absent on a trip.
When I got to Warrenton yesterday and met the old Dale servant, I saw
at once that something was wrong."

"How do you mean, Mr. King?" asked Dave quite anxiously.

"Well, I learned that this young scamp, Gregg, had appeared at
Warrenton two days after I let him go."

"Still pretending to be Dave Dashaway?"

"So the old servant says.  Gregg and Mr. Dale went away together.
There is no doubt in my mind that Gregg put up a plot to get Mr.
Dale away from Warrenton before we could expose him."

"But he could not keep Mr. Dale away from home forever?"
