Project Gutenberg's The Kiltartan History Book, by Lady I. A. Gregory

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Kiltartan History Book

Author: Lady I. A. Gregory

Release Date: February 24, 2004 [EBook #11260]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KILTARTAN HISTORY BOOK ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Garrett Alley, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





THE KILTARTAN HISTORY BOOK.

BY LADY GREGORY.


ILLUSTRATED

BY ROBERT GREGORY



_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_

Seven Short Plays

Cuchulain of Muirthemne

Gods and Fighting Men

Poets and Dreamers

A Book of Saints and Wonders



DEDICATED AND RECOMMENDED TO THE HISTORY CLASSES IN THE NEW UNIVERSITY




CONTENTS

  The Ancient Times
  Goban, the Builder
  A Witty Wife
  An Advice She Gave
  Shortening the Road
  The Goban's Secret
  The Scotch Rogue
  The Danes
  The Battle of Clontarf
  The English
  The Queen of Breffny
  King Henry VIII.
  Elizabeth
  Her Death
  The Trace of Cromwell
  Cromwell's Law
  Cromwell in Connacht
  A Worse than Cromwell
  The Battle of Aughrim
  The Stuarts
  Another Story
  Patrick Sarsfield
  Queen Anne
  Carolan's Song
  'Ninety-Eight
  Denis Browne
  The Union
  Robert Emmet
  O'Connell's Birth
  The Tinker
  A Present
  His Strategy
  The Man was Going to be Hanged
  The Cup of the Sassanach
  The Thousand Fishers
  What the Old Women Saw
  O'Connell's Hat
  The Change He Made
  The Man He Brought to Justice
  The Binding
  His Monument
  A Praise Made for Daniel O'Connell by Old Women and They Begging
    at the Door
  Richard Shiel
  The Tithe War
  The Fight at Carrickshock
  The Big Wind
  The Famine
  The Cholera
  A Long Remembering
  The Terry Alts
  The '48 Time
  A Thing Mitchell Said
  The Fenian Rising
  A Great Wonder
  Another Wonder
  Father Mathew
  The War of the Crimea
  Garibaldi
  The Buonapartes
  The Zulu War
  The Young Napoleon
  Parnell
  Mr. Gladstone
  Queen Victoria's Religion
  Her Wisdom
  War and Misery
  The Present King
  The Old Age Pension
  Another Thought
  A Prophecy

NOTES




THE KILTARTAN HISTORY BOOK


THE ANCIENT TIMES

"As to the old history of Ireland, the first man ever died in Ireland
was Partholan, and he is buried, and his greyhound along with him, at
some place in Kerry. The Nemidians came after that and stopped for a
while, and then they all died of some disease. And then the Firbolgs
came, the best men that ever were in Ireland, and they had no law but
love, and there was never such peace and plenty in Ireland. What
religion had they? None at all. And there was a low-sized race came that
worked the land of Ireland a long time; they had their time like the
others. Many would tell you Grania slept under the cromlechs, but I
don't believe that, and she a king's daughter. And I don't believe she
was handsome either. If she was, why would she have run away? In the old
time the people had no envy, and they would be writing down the stories
and the songs for one another. But they are too venemous now to do that.
And as to the people in the towns, they don't care for such things now,
they are too corrupted with drink."


GOBAN, THE BUILDER

"The Goban was the master of sixteen trades. There was no beating him;
he had got the gift. He went one time to Quin Abbey when it was
building, looking for a job, and the men were going to their dinner, and
he had poor clothes, and they began to jibe at him, and the foreman said
'Make now a cat-and-nine-tails while we are at our dinner, if you are
any good.' And he took the chisel and cut it in the rough in the stone,
a cat with nine tails coming from it, and there it was complete when
they came out from their dinner. There was no beating him. He learned no
trade, but he was master of sixteen. That is the way, a man that has the
gift will get more out of his own brain than another will get through
learning. There is many a man without learning will get the better of a
college-bred man, and will have better words too. Those that make
inventions in these days have the gift, such a man now as Edison, with
all he has got out of electricity."


A WITTY WIFE

"The Goban Saor was a mason and a smith, and he could do all things, and
