Project Gutenberg's The History of Puerto Rico, by R.A. Van Middeldyk

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The History of Puerto Rico
       From the Spanish Discovery to the American Occupation

Author: R.A. Van Middeldyk

Release Date: May 5, 2004 [EBook #12272]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF PUERTO RICO ***




Produced by Jayam Subramanian and PG Distributed Proofreaders




  The Expansion of the Republic Series.



  THE HISTORY OF PUERTO RICO



  FROM THE SPANISH DISCOVERY TO THE AMERICAN OCCUPATION



  BY R.A. VAN MIDDELDYK



  EDITED BY MARTIN G. BRUMBAUGH, PH.D., LL.D. PROFESSOR OF PEDAGOGY,
  UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA AND FIRST COMMISSIONER OF EDUCATION FOR
  PUERTO RICO



COPYRIGHT, 1903

[Illustration: Columbus statue, San Juan.]




EDITOR'S PREFACE

The latest permanent possession of the United States is also the
oldest in point of European occupation. The island of Puerto Rico was
discovered by Columbus in 1493. It was occupied by the United States
Army at Guanica July 25, 1898. Spain formally evacuated the island
October 18, 1898, and military government was established until
Congress made provision for its control. By act of Congress, approved
April 12, 1900, the military control terminated and civil government
was formally instituted May 1,1900.

Puerto Rico has an interesting history. Its four centuries under
Spanish control is a record of unusual and remarkable events. This
record is unknown to the American people. It has never been written
satisfactorily in the Spanish language, and not at all in the English
language. The author of this volume is the first to give to the reader
of English a record of Spanish rule in this "pearl of the Antilles."
Mr. Van Middeldyk is the librarian of the Free Public Library of San
Juan, an institution created under American civil control. He has had
access to all data obtainable in the island, and has faithfully and
conscientiously woven this data into a connected narrative, thus
giving the reader a view of the social and institutional life of the
island for four hundred years.

The author has endeavored to portray salient characteristics of the
life on the island, to describe the various acts of the reigning
government, to point out the evils of colonial rule, and to figure the
general historical and geographical conditions in a manner that
enables the reader to form a fairly accurate judgment of the past and
present state of Puerto Rico.

No attempt has been made to speculate upon the setting of this record
in the larger record of Spanish life. That is a work for the future.
But enough history of Spain and in general of continental Europe is
given to render intelligible the various and varied governmental
activities exercised by Spain in the island. There is, no doubt, much
omitted that future research may reveal, and yet it is just to state
that the record is fairly continuous, and that no salient factors in
the island's history have been overlooked.

The people of Puerto Rico were loyal and submissive to their parent
government. No record of revolts and excessive rioting is recorded.
The island has been continuously profitable to Spain. With even
ordinarily fair administration of government the people have been
self-supporting, and in many cases have rendered substantial aid to
other Spanish possessions. Her native life--the Boriquen
Indians--rapidly became extinct, due to the "gold fever" and the
intermarriage of races. The peon class has always been a faithful
laboring class in the coffee, sugar, and tobacco estates, and the
slave element was never large. A few landowners and the professional
classes dominate the island's life. There is no middle class. There is
an utter absence of the legitimate fruits of democratic institutions.
The poor are in every way objects of pity and of sympathy. They are
the hope of the island. By education, widely diffused, a great unrest
will ensue, and from this unrest will come the social, moral, and
civic uplift of the people.

These people do not suffer from the lack of civilization. They suffer
from the kind of civilization they have endured. The life of the
people is static. Her institutions and customs are so set upon them
that one is most impressed with the absence of legitimate activities.
The people are stoically content. Such, at least, was the condition in
1898. Under the military government of the United States much was done
to prepare the way for future advance. Its weakness was due to its
effectiveness. It did for the people what they should learn to do for
themselves. The island needed a radically new governmental
activity--an activity that would develop each citizen into a
self-respecting and self-directing force in the island's uplift. This
has been supplied by the institution of civil government. The outlook
of the people is now infinitely better than ever before. The progress
now being made is permanent. It is an advance made by the people for
themselves. Civil government is the fundamental need of the island.

Under civil government the entire reorganization of the life of the
people is being rapidly effected. The agricultural status of the
island was never so hopeful. The commercial activity is greatly
increased. The educational awakening is universal and healthy.
Notwithstanding the disastrous cyclone of 1898, and the confusion
incident to a radical governmental reorganization, the wealth per
capita has increased, the home life is improved, and the illiteracy of
the people is being rapidly lessened.

President McKinley declared to the writer that it was his desire "to
put the conscience of the American people into the islands of the
sea." This has been done. The result is apparent. Under wise and
conservative guidance by the American executive officers, the people
of Puerto Rico have turned to this Republic with a patriotism, a zeal,
an enthusiasm that is, perhaps, without a parallel.

In 1898, under President McKinley as commander-in-chief, the army of
the United States forcibly invaded this island. This occupation, by
the treaty of Paris, became permanent. Congress promptly provided
civil government for the island, and in 1901 this conquered people,
almost one million in number, shared in the keen grief that attended
universally the untimely death of their conqueror. The island on the
occasion of the martyr's death was plunged in profound sorrow, and at
a hundred memorial services President McKinley was mourned by
thousands, and he was tenderly characterized as "the founder of human
liberty in Puerto Rico."

The judgment of the American people relative to this island is based
upon meager data. The legal processes attending its entrance into the
Union have been the occasion of much comment. This comment has
invariably lent itself to a discussion of the effect of judicial
decision upon our home institutions. It has been largely a speculative
concern. In some cases it has become a political concern in the
narrowest partizan sense. The effect of all this upon the people of
Puerto Rico has not been considered. Their rights and their needs have
not come to us. We have not taken President McKinley's broad, humane,
and exalted view of our obligation to these people. They have
implicitly entrusted their life, liberty, and property to our
guardianship. The great Republic has a debt of honor to the island
which indifference and ignorance of its needs can never pay. It is
hoped that this record of their struggles during four centuries will
be a welcome source of insight and guidance to the people of the
United States in their efforts to see their duty and do it.

M. G. BRUMBAUGH. PHILADELPHIA, _January 1, 1903_.




AUTHOR'S PREFACE

Some years ago, Mr. Manuel Elzaburu, President of the San Juan
Provincial Atheneum, in a public speech, gave it as his opinion that
the modern historian of Puerto Rico had yet to appear. This was said,
not in disparagement of the island's only existing history, but rather
as a confirmation of the general opinion that the book which does duty
as such is incorrect and incomplete.

This book is Friar Inigo Abbad's Historia de la Isla San Juan
Bautista, which was written in 1782 by disposition of the Count of
Floridablanca, the Minister of Colonies of Charles III, and published
in Madrid in 1788. In 1830 it was reproduced in San Juan without any
change in the text, and in 1866 Mr. Jose Julian Acosta published a new
edition with copious notes, comments, and additions, which added much
data relative to the Benedictine monks, corrected numerous errors, and
supplemented the chapters, some of which, in the original, are
exceedingly short, the whole history terminating abruptly with the
nineteenth chapter, that is, with the beginning of the eighteenth
century. The remaining 21 chapters are merely descriptive of the
country and people.

Besides this work there are others by Puerto Rican authors, each one
elucidating one or more phases of the island's history. With these
separate and diverse materials, supplemented by others of my own, I
have constructed the present history.

The transcendental change in the island's social and political
conditions, inaugurated four years ago, made the writing of an English
history of Puerto Rico necessary. The American officials who are
called upon to guide the destinies and watch over the moral, material,
and intellectual progress of the inhabitants of this new accession to
the great Republic will be able to do so all the better when they have
a knowledge of the people's historical antecedents.

I have endeavored to supply this need to the best of my ability, and
herewith offer to the public the results of an arduous, though
self-imposed task.

R.A.V.M.

SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO, _November 3, 1902._




CONTENTS


PART I

HISTORICAL

     CHAPTER

      I.--THE DEPARTURE. 1493

     II.--THE DISCOVERY. 1493

    III.--PONCE AND CERON. 1500-1511

     IV.--FIRST DISTRIBUTION OF INDIANS. "REPARTIMIENTOS" 1510

      V.--THE REBELLION. 1511

     VI.--THE REBELLION (_continued_.) 1511

    VII.--NUMBER OF ABORIGINAL INHABITANTS AND SECOND
            DISTRIBUTION OF INDIANS. 1511-1515

   VIII.--LAWS AND ORDINANCES. 1511-1515

     IX.--THE RETURN OF CERON AND DIAZ. PONCE'S FIRST
            EXPEDITION TO FLORIDA. 1511-1515

      X.--DISSENSIONS. TRANSFER OF THE CAPITAL. 1515-1520

     XI.--CALAMITIES. PONCE'S SECOND EXPEDITION TO FLORIDA
            AND DEATH. 1520-1537

    XII.--INCURSIONS OF FUGITIVE BORIQUEN INDIANS AND CARIBS. 1520-1582

   XIII.--DEPOPULATION OF THE ISLAND. PREVENTIVE MEASURES.
            INTRODUCTION OF NEGRO SLAVES. 1515-1534

    XIV.--ATTACKS BY FRENCH PRIVATEERS. CAUSE OF THE WAR WITH
              FRANCE. CHARLES V. RUIN OF THE ISLAND. 1520-1556

     XV.--SEDESO. CHANGES IN THE SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT 1534-1555

    XVI.--DEFENSELESS CONDITION OF THE ISLAND. CONSTRUCTION
              OF FORTIFICATIONS AND CIRCUMVALLATION
              OF SAN JUAN. 1555-1641
   XVII.--DRAKE'S ATTACK ON SAN JUAN. 1595

  XVIII.--OCCUPATION AND EVACUATION OF SAN JUAN BY
              LORD GEORGE CUMBERLAND. CONDITION OF
              THE ISLAND AT THE END OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

    XIX.--ATTACK ON SAN JUAN BY THE HOLLANDERS UNDER BOWDOIN. 1625

     XX.--DECLINE OF SPAIN'S POWER. BUCCANEERS AND
               FILIBUSTERS. 1625-1780

    XXI.--BRITISH ATTACKS ON PUERTO RICO. SIEGE OF SAN
               JUAN BY SIR RALPH ABERCROMBIE. 1678-1797

   XXII.--BRITISH ATTACKS ON PUERTO RICO (_continued_).
               INVASIONS BY COLOMBIAN INSURGENTS. 1797-1829

  XXIII.--REVIEW OF THE SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN PUERTO RICO AND THE
               POLITICAL EVENTS IN SPAIN FROM 1765 TO 1820

   XXIV.--GENERAL CONDITION OF THE ISLAND FROM 1815 TO 1833

    XXV.--POLITICAL EVENTS IN SPAIN AND THEIR INFLUENCE ON AFFAIRS
               IN PUERTO RICO. 1833-1874

   XXVI.--GENERAL CONDITIONS OF THE ISLAND, THE DAWN OF FREEDOM.
               1874-1898

PART II

THE PEOPLE AND THEIR INSTITUTIONS

  XXVII.--SITUATION AND GENERAL APPEARANCE OF PUERTO RICO

 XXVIII.--ORIGIN, CHARACTER, AND CUSTOMS OF THE PRIMITIVE
               INHABITANTS OF BORIQUEN

   XXIX.--THE "JIBARO" OR PUERTO RICAN PEASANT

    XXX.--ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE MODERN INHABITANTS OF PUERTO
               RICO

   XXXI.--NEGRO SLAVERY IN PUERTO RICO

   XXII.--INCREASE OF POPULATION

  XXIII.--AGRICULTURE IN PUERTO RICO

  XXXIV.--COMMERCE AND FINANCES
