The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Argonautica, by Apollonius Rhodius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Argonautica

Author: Apollonius Rhodius

Release Date: November 8, 2004 [EBook #13977]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ARGONAUTICA ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Aaron A. Reed and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at www.pgdp.net






                    APOLLONIUS RHODIUS

                     THE ARGONAUTICA


              With An English Translation By

                     R.C. SEATON, M.A.

        Formerly Fellow Of Jesus College, Cambridge



                        _ 1912 _





CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BOOK I
BOOK II
BOOK III
BOOK IV
STEMMA MEDEAE
INDEX




INTRODUCTION


Much has been written about the chronology of Alexandrian literature and
the famous Library, founded by Ptolemy Soter, but the dates of the chief
writers are still matters of conjecture. The birth of Apollonius Rhodius
is placed by scholars at various times between 296 and 260 B.C., while
the year of his death is equally uncertain. In fact, we have very little
information on the subject. There are two "lives" of Apollonius in the
Scholia, both derived from an earlier one which is lost. From these we
learn that he was of Alexandria by birth,[1] that he lived in the time
of the Ptolemies, and was a pupil of Callimachus; that while still a
youth he composed and recited in public his _Argonautica_, and that the
poem was condemned, in consequence of which he retired to Rhodes; that
there he revised his poem, recited it with great applause, and hence
called himself a Rhodian. The second "life" adds: "Some say that he
returned to Alexandria and again recited his poem with the utmost
success, so that he was honoured with the libraries of the Museum[2] and
was buried with Callimachus." The last sentence may be interpreted by
the notice of Suidas, who informs us that Apollonius was a contemporary
of Eratosthenes, Euphorion and Timarchus, in the time of Ptolemy
Euergetes, and that he succeeded Eratosthenes in the headship of the
Alexandrian Library. Suidas also informs us elsewhere that Aristophanes
at the age of sixty-two succeeded Apollonius in this office. Many modern
scholars deny the "bibliothecariate" of Apollonius for chronological
reasons, and there is considerable difficulty about it. The date of
Callimachus' _Hymn to Apollo,_ which closes with some lines (105-113)
that are admittedly an allusion to Apollonius, may be put with much
probability at 248 or 247 B.C. Apollonius must at that date have been at
least twenty years old. Eratosthenes died 196-193 B.C. This would make
Apollonius seventy-two to seventy-five when he succeeded Eratosthenes.
This is not impossible, it is true, but it is difficult. But the
difficulty is taken away if we assume with Ritschl that Eratosthenes
resigned his office some years before his death, which allows us to put
the birth of Apollonius at about 280, and would solve other
difficulties. For instance, if the Librarians were buried within the
precincts, it would account for the burial of Apollonius next to
Callimachus--Eratosthenes being still alive. However that may be, it is
rather arbitrary to take away the "bibliothecariate" of Apollonius,
which is clearly asserted by Suidas, on account of chronological
calculations which are themselves uncertain. Moreover, it is more
probable that the words following "some say" in the second "life" are a
remnant of the original life than a conjectural addition, because the
first "life" is evidently incomplete, nothing being said about the end
of Apollonius' career.

[Footnote 1: "Or of Naucratis," according to Aelian and Athenaeus.]

[Footnote 2: [Greek: hos kai ton bibliothekon tou mouseiou axiothenai
auton.]]

The principal event in his life, so far as we know, was the quarrel with
his master Callimachus, which was most probably the cause of his
condemnation at Alexandria and departure to Rhodes. This quarrel appears
to have arisen from differences of literary aims and taste, but, as
literary differences often do, degenerated into the bitterest personal
strife. There are references to the quarrel in the writings of both.
Callimachus attacks Apollonius in the passage at the end of the _Hymn to
Apollo_, already mentioned, also probably in some epigrams, but most of
all in his _Ibis_, of which we have an imitation, or perhaps nearly a
translation, in Ovid's poem of the same name. On the part of Apollonius
there is a passage in the third book of the _Argonautica_ (11. 927-947)
which is of a polemical nature and stands out from the context, and the
well-known savage epigram upon Callimachus.[1] Various combinations have
been attempted by scholars, notably by Couat, in his _Poesie
Alexandrine_, to give a connected account of the quarrel, but we have
not _data_ sufficient to determine the order of the attacks, and
replies, and counter-attacks. The _Ibis_ has been thought to mark the
termination of the feud on the curious ground that it was impossible for
abuse to go further. It was an age when literary men were more inclined
to comment on writings of the past than to produce original work.
Literature was engaged in taking stock of itself. Homer was, of course,
professedly admired by all, but more admired than imitated. Epic poetry
was out of fashion and we find many epigrams of this period--some by
Callimachus--directed against the "cyclic" poets, by whom were meant at
that time those who were always dragging in conventional and commonplace
epithets and phrases peculiar to epic poetry. Callimachus was in
accordance with the spirit of the age when he proclaimed "a great book"
to be "a great evil," and sought to confine poetical activity within the
narrowest limits both of subject and space. Theocritus agreed with him,
both in principle and practice. The chief characteristics of
Alexandrianism are well summarized by Professor Robinson Ellis as
follows: "Precision in form and metre, refinement in diction, a learning
often degenerating into pedantry and obscurity, a resolute avoidance of
everything commonplace in subject, sentiment or allusion." These traits
are more prominent in Callimachus than in Apollonius, but they are
certainly to be seen in the latter. He seems to have written the
_Argonautica_ out of bravado, to show that he _could_ write an epic
poem. But the influence of the age was too strong. Instead of the unity
of an Epic we have merely a series of episodes, and it is the great
beauty and power of one of these episodes that gives the poem its
permanent value--the episode of the love of Jason and Medea. This
occupies the greater part of the third book. The first and second books
are taken up with the history of the voyage to Colchis, while the fourth
book describes the return voyage. These portions constitute a metrical
guide book, filled no doubt with many pleasing episodes, such as the
rape of Hylas, the boxing match between Pollux and Amycus, the account
of Cyzicus, the account of the Amazons, the legend of Talos, but there
is no unity running through the poem beyond that of the voyage itself.

[Footnote 1: Anth. Pal. xi. 275.]

The Tale of the Argonauts had been told often before in verse and prose,
and many authors' names are given in the Scholia to Apollonius, but
their works have perished. The best known earlier account that we have
is that in Pindar's fourth Pythian ode, from which Apollonius has taken
many details. The subject was one for an epic poem, for its unity might
have been found in the working out of the expiation due for the crime of
Athamas; but this motive is barely mentioned by our author.

As we have it, the motive of the voyage is the command of Pelias to
bring back the golden fleece, and this command is based on Pelias'
desire to destroy Jason, while the divine aid given to Jason results
from the intention of Hera to punish Pelias for his neglect of the
honour due to her. The learning of Apollonius is not deep but it is
curious; his general sentiments are not according to the Alexandrian
standard, for they are simple and obvious. In the mass of material from
which he had to choose the difficulty was to know what to omit, and much
skill is shewn in fusing into a tolerably harmonious whole conflicting
mythological and historical details. He interweaves with his narrative
local legends and the founding of cities, accounts of strange customs,
descriptions of works of art, such as that of Ganymede and Eros playing
with knucklebones,[1] but prosaically calls himself back to the point
from these pleasing digressions by such an expression as "but this would
take me too far from my song." His business is the straightforward tale
and nothing else. The astonishing geography of the fourth book reminds
us of the interest of the age in that subject, stimulated no doubt by
the researches of Eratosthenes and others.

[Footnote 1: iii. 117-124.]

The language is that of the conventional epic. Apollonius seems to have
carefully studied Homeric glosses, and gives many examples of isolated
uses, but his choice of words is by no means limited to Homer. He freely
avails himself of Alexandrian words and late uses of Homeric words.
Among his contemporaries Apollonius suffers from a comparison with
Theocritus, who was a little his senior, but he was much admired by
Roman writers who derived inspiration from the great classical writers
of Greece by way of Alexandria. In fact Alexandria was a useful bridge
between Athens and Rome. The _Argonautica_ was translated by Varro
Atacinus, copied by Ovid and Virgil, and minutely studied by Valerius
Flaccus in his poem of the same name. Some of his finest passages have
been appropriated and improved upon by Virgil by the divine right of
superior genius.[1] The subject of love had been treated in the romantic
spirit before the time of Apollonius in writings that have perished, for
instance, in those of Antimachus of Colophon, but the _Argonautica_ is
perhaps the first poem still extant in which the expression of this
spirit is developed with elaboration. The Medea of Apollonius is the
direct precursor of the Dido of Virgil, and it is the pathos and passion
of the fourth book of the Aeneid that keep alive many a passage of
Apollonius.

[Footnote 1: e.g. compare _Aen._ iv. 305 foll, with Ap. Rh. iv. 355
foll., _Aen._ iv. 327-330 with Ap. Rh. i. 897, 898, _Aen._ iv. 522
foll., with Ap. Rh. iii. 744 foll.]




BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Two editions of the Argonautica were published by Apollonius. Of these
we have only the second. The Scholia preserve a few passages of the
first edition, from which the second seems to have differed only
slightly. The old opinion that our MSS. preserve any traces of the first
edition has long been given up. The principal MSS. are the following:--

     The Laurentian, also called the Medicean, XXXII. 9, of the early
     eleventh century, the excellent MS. at Florence which contains
     Sophocles, Aeschylus and Apollonius Rhodius. This is far the best
     authority for the text (here denoted by L).

     The Guelferbytanus of the thirteenth century, which closely agrees
     with another Laurentian, XXXII. 16, of the same date (here denoted
     by G and L^2 respectively).

There were in the early eleventh century two types of text, the first
being best known to us by L, the second by G and L^2 and the corrections
made in L. Quotations in the Etymologicum Magnum agree with the second
type and show that this is as old as the fifth century. Besides these
there are, of inferior MSS., four Vatican and five Parisian which are
occasionally useful. Most of them have Scholia; the best Scholia are
those of L.

The principal editions are:--

Florence, 1496, 4to. This is the _editio princeps_, by Lascaris, based
on L, with Scholia, a very rare book.

Venice, 1521, 8vo. The Aldine, by Franciscus Asulanus, with Scholia.

Paris, 1541, 8vo, based on the Parisian MSS.

Geneva, 1574, 4to, by Stephanus, with Scholia.

Leyden, 1641, 2 vols., 8vo, by J. Hoelzlin, with a Latin version.

Oxford, 1777, 2 vols., 4to, by J. Shaw, with a Latin version.

Strassburg, 1780, 8vo and 4to, by R.F.P. Brunck.

Rome, 1791-1794, 2 vols., 4to, by Flangini, with an Italian translation.

Leipzig, 1797, 8vo, by Ch. D. Beck, with a Latin version. A second
volume, to contain the Scholia and a commentary, was never published.

Leipzig, 1810-1813, 2 vols., 8vo. A second edition of Brunck by G.H.
Schaefer, with the Florentine and Parisian Scholia, the latter printed
for the first time.

Leipzig, 1828, 8vo, by A. Wellauer, with the Scholia, both Florentine
and Parisian.

Paris, 1811, 4to, by F.S. Lehrs, with a Latin version. In the Didot
series.

Leipzig, 1852, 8vo, by R. Merkel, "ad cod. MS. Laurentianum." The
Teubner Text.

Leipzig, 1854, 2 vols., 8vo, by R. Merkel. The second volume contains
Merkel's prolegomena and the Scholia to L, edited by H. Keil.

Oxford, 1900, 8vo, by R.C. Seaton. In the "Scriptorum Classicorum
Bibliotheca Oxoniensis" series.

The text of the present edition is, with a few exceptions, that of the
Oxford edition prepared by me for the Delegates of the Clarendon Press,
whom I hereby thank for their permission to use it.

The English translations of Apollonius are as follows:--

By E.B. Greene, by F. Fawkes, both 1780; by W. Preston, 1803. None of
these are of value. There is a prose translation by E.P. Coleridge in
the Bohn Series. The most recent and also the best is a verse
translation by Mr. A.S. Way, 1901, in "The Temple Classics."

I may also mention the excellent translation in French by Prof. H. de La
Ville de Mirmont of the University of Bordeaux, 1892.

Upon Alexandrian literature in general Couat's _Poesie Alexandrine, sous
les trois premiers Ptoletmees_, 1882, may be recommended. Susemihl's
_Geschichte der Griechischen Litteratur in der Alexandinerzeit_, 2
vols., 1891, is a perfect storehouse of facts and authorities, but more
adapted for reference than for general reading. Morris' _Life and Death
of Jason_ is a poem that in many passages singularly resembles
Apollonius in its pessimistic tone and spirit.




APOLLONIUS RHODIUS

THE ARGONAUTICA

BOOK I


SUMMARY OF BOOK I

     Invocation of Phoebus and cause of the expedition
     (1-22).--Catalogue of the Argonauts (23-233).--March of the heroes
     to the port: farewell of Jason and Alcimede
     (234-305).--Preparations for departure and launching of Argo:
     sacrifice to Apollo: prediction of Idmon (306-447).--The festival,
     insolence of Idas, song of Orpheus and departure (448-558).--Voyage
     along the coast of Thessaly and across to Lemnos (559-608).--Recent
     history of Lemnos and stay of the Argonauts there: farewell of
     Jason and Hypsipyle (609-909).--Voyage from Lemnos by Samothrace to
     the Propontis: reception by the Doliones of Cyzicus
     (910-988).--Fight against the Giants: departure and return of the
     Argonauts to Cyzicus: sacrifice to Rhea on Mt. Dindymum
     (989-1152).--Arrival among the Mysians: rape of Hylas, which is
     announced to Heracles (1153-1260).--While Heracles and Polyphemus
     search for Hylas they are left behind (1261-1328).--The fate of
     Heracles and Polyphemus: arrival of Argo among the Bebrycians
     (1329-1362).



APOLLONIUS RHODIUS THE ARGONAUTICA

BOOK I


Beginning with thee, O Phoebus, I will recount the famous deeds of men
of old, who, at the behest of King Pelias, down through the mouth of
Pontus and between the Cyanean rocks, sped well-benched Argo in quest of
the golden fleece.

Such was the oracle that Pelias heard, that a hateful doom awaited
him--to be slain at the prompting of the man whom he should see coming
forth from the people with but one sandal. And no long time after, in
accordance with that true report, Jason crossed the stream of wintry
Anaurus on foot, and saved one sandal from the mire, but the other he
left in the depths held back by the flood. And straightway he came to
Pelias to share the banquet which the king was offering to his father
Poseidon and the rest of the gods, though he paid no honour to Pelasgian
Hera. Quickly the king saw him and pondered, and devised for him the
toil of a troublous voyage, in order that on the sea or among strangers
he might lose his home-return.

The ship, as former bards relate, Argus wrought by the guidance of
Athena. But now I will tell the lineage and the names of the heroes, and
of the long sea-paths and the deeds they wrought in their wanderings;
may the Muses be the inspirers of my song!

First then let us name Orpheus whom once Calliope bare, it is said,
wedded to Thracian Oeagrus, near the Pimpleian height. Men say that he
by the music of his songs charmed the stubborn rocks upon the mountains
and the course of rivers. And the wild oak-trees to this day, tokens of
that magic strain, that grow at Zone on the Thracian shore, stand in
ordered ranks close together, the same which under the charm of his lyre
he led down from Pieria. Such then was Orpheus whom Aeson's son welcomed
to share his toils, in obedience to the behest of Cheiron, Orpheus ruler
of Bistonian Pieria.

Straightway came Asterion, whom Cometes begat by the waters of eddying
