The Project Gutenberg EBook of Six Lectures on Light, by John Tyndall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Six Lectures on Light
       Delivered In The United States In 1872-1873

Author: John Tyndall

Release Date: November 10, 2004 [EBook #14000]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIX LECTURES ON LIGHT ***




Produced by Clare Boothby, Stephen Schulze and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.









SIX LECTURES ON LIGHT

DELIVERED IN THE UNITED STATES
IN
1872-1873

BY

JOHN TYNDALL, D.C.L., LL,D., F.R.S.

LATE PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE
ROYAL INSTITUTION OF GREAT BRITAIN



[Illustration: Sir Thomas Laurence PRA Pinx

Henry Adlarc. Sc.

Signature: Thomas Young]


London: Longmans & Co.

_SIXTH IMPRESSION_

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON

NEW YORK AND BOMBAY

1906




PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION.


In these Lectures I have sought to render clear a difficult but
profoundly interesting subject. My aim has been not only to describe
and illustrate in a familiar manner the principal laws and phenomena
of light, but to point out the origin, and show the application, of
the theoretic conceptions which underlie and unite the whole, and
without which no real interpretation is possible.

The Lectures, as stated on the title-page, were delivered in the
United States in 1872-3. I still retain a vivid and grateful
remembrance of the cordiality with which they were received.

My scope and object are briefly indicated in the 'Summary and
Conclusion,' which, as recommended in a former edition, might be, not
unfitly, read as an introduction to the volume.

J.T.

ALP LUSGEN: _October_ 1885.




CONTENTS.


LECTURE I.

  Introductory
  Uses of Experiment
  Early Scientific Notions
  Sciences of Observation
  Knowledge of the Ancients regarding Light
  Defects of the Eye
  Our Instruments
  Rectilineal Propagation of Light
  Law of Incidence and Reflection
  Sterility of the Middle Ages
  Refraction
  Discovery of Snell
  Partial and Total Reflection
  Velocity of Light
  Roemer, Bradley, Foucault, and Fizeau
  Principle of Least Action
  Descartes and the Rainbow
  Newton's Experiments on the Composition of Solar Light
  His Mistake regarding Achromatism
  Synthesis of White Light
  Yellow and Blue Lights produce White by their Mixture
  Colours of Natural Bodies
  Absorption
  Mixture of Pigments contrasted with Mixture of Lights


LECTURE II.

  Origin of Physical Theories
  Scope of the Imagination
  Newton and the Emission Theory
  Verification of Physical Theories
  The Luminiferous Ether
  Wave-theory of Light
  Thomas Young
  Fresnel and Arago
  Conception of Wave-motion
  Interference of Waves
  Constitution of Sound-waves
  Analogies of Sound and Light
  Illustrations of Wave-motion
  Interference of Sound Waves
  Optical Illustrations
  Pitch and Colour
  Lengths of the Waves of Light and Rates of Vibration of the
    Ether-particles
  Interference of Light
  Phenomena which first suggested the Undulatory Theory
  Boyle and Hooke
  The Colours of thin Plates
  The Soap-bubble
  Newton's Rings
  Theory of 'Fits'
  Its Explanation of the Rings
  Overthrow of the Theory
  Diffraction of Light
  Colours produced by Diffraction
  Colours of Mother-of-Pearl.


LECTURE III.

  Relation of Theories to Experience
  Origin of the Notion of the Attraction of Gravitation
  Notion of Polarity, how generated
  Atomic Polarity
  Structural Arrangements due to Polarity
  Architecture of Crystals considered as an Introduction to their
    Action upon Light
  Notion of Atomic Polarity applied to Crystalline Structure
  Experimental Illustrations
  Crystallization of Water
  Expansion by Heat and by Cold
  Deportment of Water considered and explained
  Bearings of Crystallization on Optical Phenomena
  Refraction
  Double Refraction
  Polarization
  Action of Tourmaline
  Character of the Beams emergent from Iceland Spar
  Polarization by ordinary Refraction and Reflection
  Depolarization.


LECTURE IV.

  Chromatic Phenomena produced by Crystals in Polarized Light
  The Nicol Prism
  Polarizer and Analyzer
  Action of Thick and Thin Plates of Selenite
  Colours dependent on Thickness
  Resolution of Polarized Beam into two others by the Selenite
  One of them more retarded than the other
  Recompounding of the two Systems of Waves by the Analyzer
  Interference thus rendered possible
  Consequent Production of Colours
  Action of Bodies mechanically strained or pressed
  Action of Sonorous Vibrations
  Action of Glass strained or pressed by Heat
  Circular Polarization
  Chromatic Phenomena produced by Quartz
  The Magnetization of Light
  Rings surrounding the Axes of Crystals
  Biaxal and Uniaxal Crystals
  Grasp of the Undulatory Theory
  The Colour and Polarization of Sky-light
  Generation of Artificial Skies.


LECTURE V.

  Range of Vision not commensurate with Range of Radiation
  The Ultra-violet Rays
  Fluorescence
  The rendering of invisible Rays visible
  Vision not the only Sense appealed to by the Solar and Electric Beam
  Heat of Beam
  Combustion by Total Beam at the Foci of Mirrors and Lenses
  Combustion through Ice-lens
  Ignition of Diamond
  Search for the Rays here effective
  Sir William Herschel's Discovery of dark Solar Rays
  Invisible Rays the Basis of the Visible
  Detachment by a Ray-filter of the Invisible Rays from the Visible
  Combustion at Dark Foci
  Conversion of Heat-rays into Light-rays
  Calorescence
  Part played in Nature by Dark Rays
  Identity of Light and Radiant Heat
  Invisible Images
  Reflection, Refraction, Plane Polarization, Depolarization,
    Circular Polarization, Double Refraction, and Magnetization of
    Radiant Heat


LECTURE VI.

  Principles of Spectrum Analysis
  Prismatic Analysis of the Light of Incandescent Vapours
  Discontinuous Spectra
  Spectrum Bands proved by Bunsen and Kirchhoff to be characteristic
    of the Vapour
  Discovery of Rubidium, Caesium, and Thallium
  Relation of Emission to Absorption
  The Lines of Fraunhofer
  Their Explanation by Kirchhoff
  Solar Chemistry involved in this Explanation
  Foucault's Experiment
  Principles of Absorption
  Analogy of Sound and Light
  Experimental Demonstration of this Analogy
  Recent Applications of the Spectroscope
  Summary and Conclusion


APPENDIX.

On the Spectra of Polarized Light

Measurement of the Waves of Light

INDEX




ON LIGHT




LECTURE I.

  INTRODUCTORY
  USES OF EXPERIMENT
  EARLY SCIENTIFIC NOTIONS
  SCIENCES OF OBSERVATION
  KNOWLEDGE OF THE ANCIENTS REGARDING LIGHT
  DEFECTS OF THE EYE
  OUR INSTRUMENTS
  RECTILINEAL PROPAGATION OF LIGHT
  LAW OF INCIDENCE AND REFLECTION
  STERILITY OF THE MIDDLE AGES
  REFRACTION
  DISCOVERY OF SNELL
  PARTIAL AND TOTAL REFLECTION
  VELOCITY OF LIGHT
  ROEMER, BRADLEY, FOUCAULT, AND FIZEAU
  PRINCIPLE OF LEAST ACTION
  DESCARTES AND THE RAINBOW
  NEWTON'S EXPERIMENTS ON THE COMPOSITION OF SOLAR LIGHT
  HIS MISTAKE AS REGARDS ACHROMATISM
  SYNTHESIS OF WHITE LIGHT
  YELLOW AND BLUE LIGHTS PRODUCE WHITE BY THEIR MIXTURE
  COLOURS OF NATURAL BODIES
  ABSORPTION
  MIXTURE OF PIGMENTS CONTRASTED WITH MIXTURE OF LIGHTS.


Sec. 1. _Introduction_.

Some twelve years ago I published, in England, a little book entitled
the 'Glaciers of the Alps,' and, a couple of years subsequently, a
second book, entitled 'Heat a Mode of Motion.' These volumes were
followed by others, written with equal plainness, and with a similar
aim, that aim being to develop and deepen sympathy between science and
the world outside of science. I agreed with thoughtful men[1] who
deemed it good for neither world to be isolated from the other, or
unsympathetic towards the other, and, to lessen this isolation, at
least in one department of science, I swerved, for a time, from those
original researches which have been the real pursuit and pleasure of
my life.

The works here referred to were, for the most part, republished by the
Messrs. Appleton of New York,[2] under the auspices of a man who is
untiring in his efforts to diffuse sound scientific knowledge among
the people of the United States; whose energy, ability, and
single-mindedness, in the prosecution of an arduous task, have won for
him the sympathy and support of many of us in 'the old country.' I
allude to Professor Youmans. Quite as rapidly as in England, the aim
of these works was understood and appreciated in the United States,
and they brought me from this side of the Atlantic innumerable
evidences of good-will. Year after year invitations reached me[3] to
visit America, and last year (1871) I was honoured with a request so
cordial, signed by five-and-twenty names, so distinguished in science,
in literature, and in administrative position, that I at once resolved
to respond to it by braving not only the disquieting oscillations of
the Atlantic, but the far more disquieting ordeal of appearing in
person before the people of the United States.

This invitation, conveyed to me by my accomplished friend Professor
Lesley, of Philadelphia, and preceded by a letter of the same purport
from your scientific Nestor, the celebrated Joseph Henry, of
Washington, desired that I should lecture in some of the principal
cities of the Union. This I agreed to do, though much in the dark as
to a suitable subject. In answer to my inquiries, however, I was given
to understand that a course of lectures, showing the uses of
experiment in the cultivation of Natural Knowledge, would materially
promote scientific education in this country. And though such lectures
involved the selection of weighty and delicate instruments, and their
transfer from place to place, I determined to meet the wishes of my
friends, as far as the time and means at my disposal would allow.


Sec. 2. _Subject of the Course. Source of Light employed._

Experiments have two great uses--a use in discovery, and a use in
tuition. They were long ago defined as the investigator's language
addressed to Nature, to which she sends intelligible replies. These
replies, however, usually reach the questioner in whispers too feeble
for the public ear. But after the investigator comes the teacher,
whose function it is so to exalt and modify the experiments of his
predecessor, as to render them fit for public presentation. This
secondary function I shall endeavour, in the present instance, to
fulfil.

Taking a single department of natural philosophy as my subject, I
propose, by means of it, to illustrate the growth of scientific
knowledge under the guidance of experiment. I wish, in the first
place, to make you acquainted with certain elementary phenomena; then
to point out to you how the theoretical principles by which phenomena
are explained take root in the human mind, and finally to apply these
principles to the whole body of knowledge covered by the lectures. The
science of optics lends itself particularly well to this mode of
treatment, and on it, therefore, I propose to draw for the materials
of the present course. It will be best to begin with the few simple
facts regarding light which were known to the ancients, and to pass
from them, in historic gradation, to the more abstruse discoveries of
modern times.

All our notions of Nature, however exalted or however grotesque, have
