Project Gutenberg's The Last Days of Pompeii, by Edward George Bulwer-Lytton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Last Days of Pompeii

Author: Edward George Bulwer-Lytton

Release Date: February 18, 2006 [EBook #1565]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST DAYS OF POMPEII ***




Produced by John T. Horner and David Widger





THE LAST DAYS OF POMPEII

by Edward George Bulwer-Lytton




BOOK THE FIRST



Chapter I.

THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF POMPEII.

'HO, Diomed, well met!  Do you sup with Glaucus to-night?' said a young
man of small stature, who wore his tunic in those loose and effeminate
folds which proved him to be a gentleman and a coxcomb.

'Alas, no! dear Clodius; he has not invited me,' replied Diomed, a man
of portly frame and of middle age.  'By Pollux, a scurvy trick! for they
say his suppers are the best in Pompeii'.

'Pretty well--though there is never enough of wine for me.  It is not
the old Greek blood that flows in his veins, for he pretends that wine
makes him dull the next morning.'

'There may be another reason for that thrift,' said Diomed, raising his
brows.  'With all his conceit and extravagance he is not so rich, I
fancy, as he affects to be, and perhaps loves to save his amphorae
better than his wit.'

'An additional reason for supping with him while the sesterces last.
Next year, Diomed, we must find another Glaucus.'

'He is fond of the dice, too, I hear.'

'He is fond of every pleasure; and while he likes the pleasure of giving
suppers, we are all fond of him.'

'Ha, ha, Clodius, that is well said!  Have you ever seen my wine-cellars,
by-the-by?'

'I think not, my good Diomed.'

'Well, you must sup with me some evening; I have tolerable muraenae in
my reservoir, and I ask Pansa the aedile to meet you.'

'O, no state with me!--Persicos odi apparatus, I am easily contented.
Well, the day wanes; I am for the baths--and you...'

'To the quaestor--business of state--afterwards to the temple of Isis.
Vale!'

'An ostentatious, bustling, ill-bred fellow,' muttered Clodius to
himself, as he sauntered slowly away.  'He thinks with his feasts and
his wine-cellars to make us forget that he is the son of a freedman--and
so we will, when we do him the honour of winning his money; these rich
plebeians are a harvest for us spendthrift nobles.'

Thus soliloquising, Clodius arrived in the Via Domitiana, which was
crowded with passengers and chariots, and exhibited all that gay and
animated exuberance of life and motion which we find at this day in the
streets of Naples.

The bells of the cars as they rapidly glided by each other jingled
merrily on the ear, and Clodius with smiles or nods claimed familiar
acquaintance with whatever equipage was most elegant or fantastic: in
fact, no idler was better known in Pompeii.

'What, Clodius! and how have you slept on your good fortune?' cried, in
a pleasant and musical voice, a young man, in a chariot of the most
fastidious and graceful fashion.  Upon its surface of bronze were
elaborately wrought, in the still exquisite workmanship of Greece,
reliefs of the Olympian games; the two horses that drew the car were of
the rarest breed of Parthia; their slender limbs seemed to disdain the
ground and court the air, and yet at the slightest touch of the
charioteer, who stood behind the young owner of the equipage, they
paused motionless, as if suddenly transformed into stone--lifeless, but
lifelike, as one of the breathing wonders of Praxiteles. The owner
himself was of that slender and beautiful symmetry from which the
sculptors of Athens drew their models; his Grecian origin betrayed
itself in his light but clustering locks, and the perfect harmony of his
features.  He wore no toga, which in the time of the emperors had indeed
ceased to be the general distinction of the Romans, and was especially
ridiculed by the pretenders to fashion; but his tunic glowed in the
richest hues of the Tyrian dye, and the fibulae, or buckles, by which it
was fastened, sparkled with emeralds: around his neck was a chain of
gold, which in the middle of his breast twisted itself into the form of
a serpent's head, from the mouth of which hung pendent a large signet
ring of elaborate and most exquisite workmanship; the sleeves of the
tunic were loose, and fringed at the hand with gold: and across the
waist a girdle wrought in arabesque designs, and of the same material as
the fringe, served in lieu of pockets for the receptacle of the
handkerchief and the purse, the stilus and the tablets.

'My dear Glaucus!' said Clodius, 'I rejoice to see that your losses have
so little affected your mien.  Why, you seem as if you had been inspired
by Apollo, and your face shines with happiness like a glory; any one
might take you for the winner, and me for the loser.'

'And what is there in the loss or gain of those dull pieces of metal
that should change our spirit, my Clodius?  By Venus, while yet young,
we can cover our full locks with chaplets--while yet the cithara sounds
on unsated ears--while yet the smile of Lydia or of Chloe flashes over
our veins in which the blood runs so swiftly, so long shall we find
delight in the sunny air, and make bald time itself but the treasurer of
our joys.  You sup with me to-night, you know.'

'Who ever forgets the invitation of Glaucus!'

'But which way go you now?'

'Why, I thought of visiting the baths: but it wants yet an hour to the
usual time.'

'Well, I will dismiss my chariot, and go with you.  So, so, my Phylias,'
stroking the horse nearest to him, which by a low neigh and with
backward ears playfully acknowledged the courtesy: 'a holiday for you
to-day.  Is he not handsome, Clodius?'

'Worthy of Phoebus,' returned the noble parasite--'or of Glaucus.'



Chapter II

THE BLIND FLOWER-GIRL, AND THE BEAUTY OF FASHION.  THE ATHENIAN'S
CONFESSION.  THE READER'S INTRODUCTION TO ARBACES OF EGYPT.

TALKING lightly on a thousand matters, the two young men sauntered
through the streets; they were now in that quarter which was filled with
the gayest shops, their open interiors all and each radiant with the
gaudy yet harmonious colors of frescoes, inconceivably varied in fancy
and design. The sparkling fountains, that at every vista threw upwards
their grateful spray in the summer air; the crowd of passengers, or
rather loiterers, mostly clad in robes of the Tyrian dye; the gay groups
collected round each more attractive shop; the slaves passing to and fro
with buckets of bronze, cast in the most graceful shapes, and borne upon
their heads; the country girls stationed at frequent intervals with
baskets of blushing fruit, and flowers more alluring to the ancient
Italians than to their descendants (with whom, indeed, "latet anguis in
herba," a disease seems lurking in every violet and rose); the numerous
haunts which fulfilled with that idle people the office of cafes and
clubs at this day; the shops, where on shelves of marble were ranged the
vases of wine and oil, and before whose thresholds, seats, protected
from the sun by a purple awning, invited the weary to rest and the
indolent to lounge--made a scene of such glowing and vivacious
excitement, as might well give the Athenian spirit of Glaucus an excuse
for its susceptibility to joy.

'Talk to me no more of Rome,' said he to Clodius.  'Pleasure is too
stately and ponderous in those mighty walls: even in the precincts of
the court--even in the Golden House of Nero, and the incipient glories
of the palace of Titus, there is a certain dulness of magnificence--the
eye aches--the spirit is wearied; besides, my Clodius, we are
discontented when we compare the enormous luxury and wealth of others
with the mediocrity of our own state.  But here we surrender ourselves
easily to pleasure, and we have the brilliancy of luxury without the
lassitude of its pomp.'

'It was from that feeling that you chose your summer retreat at
Pompeii?'

'It was.  I prefer it to Baiae: I grant the charms of the latter, but I
love not the pedants who resort there, and who seem to weigh out their
pleasures by the drachm.'

'Yet you are fond of the learned, too; and as for poetry, why, your
house is literally eloquent with AEschylus and Homer, the epic and the
drama.'

'Yes, but those Romans who mimic my Athenian ancestors do everything so
heavily.  Even in the chase they make their slaves carry Plato with
them; and whenever the boar is lost, out they take their books and their
papyrus, in order not to lose their time too. When the dancing-girls
swim before them in all the blandishment of Persian manners, some drone
of a freedman, with a face of stone, reads them a section of Cicero "De
Officiis".  Unskilful pharmacists! pleasure and study are not elements
to be thus mixed together, they must be enjoyed separately: the Romans
lose both by this pragmatical affectation of refinement, and prove that
they have no souls for either. Oh, my Clodius, how little your
countrymen know of the true versatility of a Pericles, of the true
witcheries of an Aspasia!  It was but the other day that I paid a visit
to Pliny: he was sitting in his summer-house writing, while an
unfortunate slave played on the tibia.  His nephew (oh! whip me such
philosophical coxcombs!) was reading Thucydides' description of the
plague, and nodding his conceited little head in time to the music,
while his lips were repeating all the loathsome details of that terrible
delineation. The puppy saw nothing incongruous in learning at the same
time a ditty of love and a description of the plague.'

'Why, they are much the same thing,' said Clodius.

'So I told him, in excuse for his coxcombry--but my youth stared me
rebukingly in the face, without taking the jest, and answered, that it
was only the insensate ear that the music pleased, whereas the book (the
description of the plague, mind you!) elevated the heart.  "Ah!" quoth
the fat uncle, wheezing, "my boy is quite an Athenian, always mixing the
utile with the dulce." O Minerva, how I laughed in my sleeve!  While I
was there, they came to tell the boy-sophist that his favorite freedman
was just dead of a fever.  "Inexorable death!" cried he; "get me my
Horace.  How beautifully the sweet poet consoles us for these
misfortunes!"  Oh, can these men love, my Clodius?  Scarcely even with
the senses.  How rarely a Roman has a heart!  He is but the mechanism of
genius--he wants its bones and flesh.'

Though Clodius was secretly a little sore at these remarks on his
countrymen, he affected to sympathize with his friend, partly because he
was by nature a parasite, and partly because it was the fashion among
the dissolute young Romans to affect a little contempt for the very
birth which, in reality, made them so arrogant; it was the mode to
imitate the Greeks, and yet to laugh at their own clumsy imitation.

Thus conversing, their steps were arrested by a crowd gathered round an
open space where three streets met; and, just where the porticoes of a
light and graceful temple threw their shade, there stood a young girl,
with a flower-basket on her right arm, and a small three-stringed
instrument of music in the left hand, to whose low and soft tones she
was modulating a wild and half-barbaric air.  At every pause in the
music she gracefully waved her flower-basket round, inviting the
loiterers to buy; and many a sesterce was showered into the basket,
either in compliment to the music or in compassion to the
songstress--for she was blind.

'It is my poor Thessalian,' said Glaucus, stopping; 'I have not seen her
since my return to Pompeii.  Hush! her voice is sweet; let us listen.'

          THE BLIND FLOWER-GIRL'S SONG

                    I.

         Buy my flowers--O buy--I pray!
           The blind girl comes from afar;
         If the earth be as fair as I hear them say,
           These flowers her children are!
         Do they her beauty keep?
           They are fresh from her lap, I know;
         For I caught them fast asleep
           In her arms an hour ago.
           With the air which is her breath--
          Her soft and delicate breath--
          Over them murmuring low!

        On their lips her sweet kiss lingers yet,
        And their cheeks with her tender tears are wet.
        For she weeps--that gentle mother weeps--
       (As morn and night her watch she keeps,
        With a yearning heart and a passionate care)
        To see the young things grow so fair;
           She weeps--for love she weeps;
           And the dews are the tears she weeps
           From the well of a mother's love!

                    II.

         Ye have a world of light,
           Where love in the loved rejoices;
         But the blind girl's home is the House of Night,
           And its beings are empty voices.

           As one in the realm below,
           I stand by the streams of woe!
           I hear the vain shadows glide,
           I feel their soft breath at my side.
             And I thirst the loved forms to see,
           And I stretch my fond arms around,
           And I catch but a shapeless sound,
           For the living are ghosts to me.

            Come buy--come buy?--
          (Hark! how the sweet things sigh
           For they have a voice like ours),
           `The breath of the blind girl closes
           The leaves of the saddening roses--
          We are tender, we sons of light,
           We shrink from this child of night;
           From the grasp of the blind girl free us--
          We yearn for the eyes that see us--
         We are for night too gay,
           In your eyes we behold the day--
             O buy--O buy the flowers!'

'I must have yon bunch of violets, sweet Nydia,' said Glaucus, pressing
through the crowd, and dropping a handful of small coins into the
basket; 'your voice is more charming than ever.'

The blind girl started forward as she heard the Athenian's voice; then
as suddenly paused, while the blood rushed violently over neck, cheek,
and temples.

'So you are returned!' said she, in a low voice; and then repeated half
to herself, 'Glaucus is returned!'

'Yes, child, I have not been at Pompeii above a few days.  My garden
wants your care, as before; you will visit it, I trust, to-morrow.  And
mind, no garlands at my house shall be woven by any hands but those of
the pretty Nydia.'

Nydia smiled joyously, but did not answer; and Glaucus, placing in his
breast the violets he had selected, turned gaily and carelessly from the
crowd.

'So she is a sort of client of yours, this child?' said Clodius.

'Ay--does she not sing prettily?  She interests me, the poor slave!
Besides, she is from the land of the Gods' hill--Olympus frowned upon
her cradle--she is of Thessaly.'

'The witches' country.'

'True: but for my part I find every woman a witch; and at Pompeii, by
Venus! the very air seems to have taken a love-philtre, so handsome does
every face without a beard seem in my eyes.'

'And lo! one of the handsomest in Pompeii, old Diomed's daughter, the
rich Julia!' said Clodius, as a young lady, her face covered by her
veil, and attended by two female slaves, approached them, in her way to
the baths.

'Fair Julia, we salute thee!' said Clodius.

Julia partly raised her veil, so as with some coquetry to display a bold
Roman profile, a full dark bright eye, and a cheek over whose natural
olive art shed a fairer and softer rose.

'And Glaucus, too, is returned!' said she, glancing meaningly at the
Athenian.  'Has he forgotten,' she added, in a half-whisper, 'his
friends of the last year?'

'Beautiful Julia! even Lethe itself, if it disappear in one part of the
earth, rises again in another.  Jupiter does not allow us ever to forget
for more than a moment: but Venus, more harsh still, vouchsafes not even
a moment's oblivion.'

'Glaucus is never at a loss for fair words.'

'Who is, when the object of them is so fair?'

'We shall see you both at my father's villa soon,' said Julia, turning
to Clodius.

'We will mark the day in which we visit you with a white stone,'
answered the gamester.

Julia dropped her veil, but slowly, so that her last glance rested on
the Athenian with affected timidity and real boldness; the glance
bespoke tenderness and reproach.

The friends passed on.

'Julia is certainly handsome,' said Glaucus.

'And last year you would have made that confession in a warmer tone.'

'True; I was dazzled at the first sight, and mistook for a gem that
which was but an artful imitation.'

'Nay,' returned Clodius, 'all women are the same at heart.  Happy he who
weds a handsome face and a large dower.  What more can he desire?'

Glaucus sighed.

They were now in a street less crowded than the rest, at the end of
which they beheld that broad and most lovely sea, which upon those
delicious coasts seems to have renounced its prerogative of terror--so
soft are the crisping winds that hover around its bosom, so glowing and
so various are the hues which it takes from the rosy clouds, so fragrant
are the perfumes which the breezes from the land scatter over its
depths.  From such a sea might you well believe that Aphrodite rose to
take the empire of the earth.

'It is still early for the bath,' said the Greek, who was the creature
of every poetical impulse; 'let us wander from the crowded city, and
look upon the sea while the noon yet laughs along its billows.'

'With all my heart,' said Clodius; 'and the bay, too, is always the most
animated part of the city.'

Pompeii was the miniature of the civilization of that age. Within the
narrow compass of its walls was contained, as it were, a specimen of
every gift which luxury offered to power.  In its minute but glittering
shops, its tiny palaces, its baths, its forum, its theatre, its
circus--in the energy yet corruption, in the refinement yet the vice, of
its people, you beheld a model of the whole empire. It was a toy, a
plaything, a showbox, in which the gods seemed pleased to keep the
representation of the great monarchy of earth, and which they afterwards
hid from time, to give to the wonder of posterity--the moral of the
maxim, that under the sun there is nothing new.

Crowded in the glassy bay were the vessels of commerce and the gilded
galleys for the pleasures of the rich citizens.  The boats of the
fishermen glided rapidly to and fro; and afar off you saw the tall masts
of the fleet under the command of Pliny.  Upon the shore sat a Sicilian
who, with vehement gestures and flexile features, was narrating to a
group of fishermen and peasants a strange tale of shipwrecked mariners
and friendly dolphins--just as at this day, in the modern neighborhood,
you may hear upon the Mole of Naples.

Drawing his comrade from the crowd, the Greek bent his steps towards a
solitary part of the beach, and the two friends, seated on a small crag
which rose amidst the smooth pebbles, inhaled the voluptuous and cooling
breeze, which dancing over the waters, kept music with its invisible
feet. There was, perhaps, something in the scene that invited them to
silence and reverie.  Clodius, shading his eyes from the burning sky,
was calculating the gains of the last week; and the Greek, leaning upon
his hand, and shrinking not from that sun--his nation's tutelary
deity--with whose fluent light of poesy, and joy, and love, his own
veins were filled, gazed upon the broad expanse, and envied, perhaps,
every wind that bent its pinions towards the shores of Greece.

'Tell me, Clodius,' said the Greek at last, 'hast thou ever been in
love?'

'Yes, very often.'

'He who has loved often,' answered Glaucus, 'has loved never. There is
but one Eros, though there are many counterfeits of him.'

'The counterfeits are not bad little gods, upon the whole,' answered
Clodius.

'I agree with you,' returned the Greek.  'I adore even the shadow of
Love; but I adore himself yet more.'

'Art thou, then, soberly and honestly in love?  Hast thou that feeling
which the poets describe--a feeling that makes us neglect our suppers,
forswear the theatre, and write elegies?  I should never have thought
it.  You dissemble well.'

'I am not far gone enough for that,' returned Glaucus, smiling, 'or
rather I say with Tibullus--

He whom love rules, where'er his path may be, Walks safe and sacred.

In fact, I am not in love; but I could be if there were but occasion to
see the object.  Eros would light his torch, but the priests have given
him no oil.'

'Shall I guess the object?--Is it not Diomed's daughter?  She adores
you, and does not affect to conceal it; and, by Hercules, I say again
and again, she is both handsome and rich.  She will bind the door-posts
of her husband with golden fillets.'

'No, I do not desire to sell myself.  Diomed's daughter is handsome, I
grant: and at one time, had she not been the grandchild of a freedman, I
might have...  Yet no--she carries all her beauty in her face; her
manners are not maiden-like, and her mind knows no culture save that of
pleasure.'

'You are ungrateful.  Tell me, then, who is the fortunate virgin?'

'You shall hear, my Clodius.  Several months ago I was sojourning at
Neapolis, a city utterly to my own heart, for it still retains the
manners and stamp of its Grecian origin--and it yet merits the name of
Parthenope, from its delicious air and its beautiful shores. One day I
entered the temple of Minerva, to offer up my prayers, not for myself
more than for the city on which Pallas smiles no longer. The temple was
empty and deserted. The recollections of Athens crowded fast and
meltingly upon me: imagining myself still alone in the temple, and
absorbed in the earnestness of my devotion, my prayer gushed from my
heart to my lips, and I wept as I prayed. I was startled in the midst of
my devotions, however, by a deep sigh; I turned suddenly round, and just
behind me was a female.  She had raised her veil also in prayer: and
when our eyes met, methought a celestial ray shot from those dark and
smiling orbs at once into my soul.  Never, my Clodius, have I seen
mortal face more exquisitely molded: a certain melancholy softened and
yet elevated its expression: that unutterable something, which springs
from the soul, and which our sculptors have imparted to the aspect of
Psyche, gave her beauty I know not what of divine and noble; tears were
rolling down her eyes.  I guessed at once that she was also of Athenian
lineage; and that in my prayer for Athens her heart had responded to
mine. I spoke to her, though with a faltering voice--"Art thou not, too,
Athenian?" said I, "O beautiful virgin!" At the sound of my voice she
blushed, and half drew her veil across her face.--"My forefathers'
ashes," said she, "repose by the waters of Ilissus: my birth is of
Neapolis; but my heart, as my lineage, is Athenian."--"Let us, then,"
said I, "make our offerings together": and, as the priest now appeared,
we stood side by side, while we followed the priest in his ceremonial
prayer; together we touched the knees of the goddess--together we laid
our olive garlands on the altar. I felt a strange emotion of almost
sacred tenderness at this companionship. We, strangers from a far and
fallen land, stood together and alone in that temple of our country's
deity: was it not natural that my heart should yearn to my countrywoman,
for so I might surely call her?  I felt as if I had known her for years;
and that simple rite seemed, as by a miracle, to operate on the
sympathies and ties of time.  Silently we left the temple, and I was
about to ask her where she dwelt, and if I might be permitted to visit
her, when a youth, in whose features there was some kindred resemblance
to her own, and who stood upon the steps of the fane, took her by the
hand.  She turned round and bade me farewell.  The crowd separated us: I
saw her no more.  On reaching my home I found letters, which obliged me
to set out for Athens, for my relations threatened me with litigation
concerning my inheritance. When that suit was happily over, I repaired
once more to Neapolis; I instituted inquiries throughout the whole city,
I could discover no clue of my lost countrywoman, and, hoping to lose in
gaiety all remembrance of that beautiful apparition, I hastened to
plunge myself amidst the luxuries of Pompeii.  This is all my history.
I do not love; but I remember and regret.'

As Clodius was about to reply, a slow and stately step approached them,
and at the sound it made amongst the pebbles, each turned, and each
recognized the new-comer.

It was a man who had scarcely reached his fortieth year, of tall
stature, and of a thin but nervous and sinewy frame.  His skin, dark and
bronzed, betrayed his Eastern origin; and his features had something
Greek in their outline (especially in the chin, the lip, and the brow),
save that the nose was somewhat raised and aquiline; and the bones, hard
and visible, forbade that fleshy and waving contour which on the Grecian
physiognomy preserved even in manhood the round and beautiful curves of
youth.  His eyes, large and black as the deepest night, shone with no
varying and uncertain lustre. A deep, thoughtful, and half-melancholy
calm seemed unalterably fixed in their majestic and commanding gaze.
His step and mien were peculiarly sedate and lofty, and something
foreign in the fashion and the sober hues of his sweeping garments added
to the impressive effect of his quiet countenance and stately form.
Each of the young men, in saluting the new-comer, made mechanically, and
with care to conceal it from him, a slight gesture or sign with their
fingers; for Arbaces, the Egyptian, was supposed to possess the fatal
gift of the evil eye.

'The scene must, indeed, be beautiful,' said Arbaces, with a cold though
courteous smile, 'which draws the gay Clodius, and Glaucus the all
admired, from the crowded thoroughfares of the city.'

'Is Nature ordinarily so unattractive?' asked the Greek.

'To the dissipated--yes.'

'An austere reply, but scarcely a wise one.  Pleasure delights in
contrasts; it is from dissipation that we learn to enjoy solitude, and
from solitude dissipation.'

'So think the young philosophers of the Garden,' replied the Egyptian;
'they mistake lassitude for meditation, and imagine that, because they
are sated with others, they know the delight of loneliness.  But not in
such jaded bosoms can Nature awaken that enthusiasm which alone draws
from her chaste reserve all her unspeakable beauty: she demands from
you, not the exhaustion of passion, but all that fervor, from which you
only seek, in adoring her, a release.  When, young Athenian, the moon
revealed herself in visions of light to Endymion, it was after a day
passed, not amongst the feverish haunts of men, but on the still
mountains and in the solitary valleys of the hunter.'

'Beautiful simile!' cried Glaucus; 'most unjust application! Exhaustion!
that word is for age, not youth.  By me, at least, one moment of satiety
has never been known!'

Again the Egyptian smiled, but his smile was cold and blighting, and
even the unimaginative Clodius froze beneath its light.  He did not,
however, reply to the passionate exclamation of Glaucus; but, after a
pause, he said, in a soft and melancholy voice:

'After all, you do right to enjoy the hour while it smiles for you; the
