The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ontario Teachers' Manuals: History
by Ontario Ministry of Education

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Ontario Teachers' Manuals: History

Author: Ontario Ministry of Education

Release Date: December 9, 2005 [EBook #17268]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONTARIO TEACHERS' MANUALS: HISTORY ***




Produced by Suzanne Lybarger and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)






ONTARIO TEACHERS' MANUALS

HISTORY


AUTHORIZED BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION

TORONTO
THE COPP, CLARK COMPANY, LIMITED

COPYRIGHT, CANADA, 1915, BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION FOR ONTARIO




CONTENTS

                                                      PAGE

PUBLIC AND SEPARATE SCHOOL COURSE OF STUDY               1

CHAPTER I
THE AIMS AND STAGES OF STUDY                            13

CHAPTER II
GENERAL METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF HISTORY              21

CHAPTER III
CORRELATION OF SUBJECTS                                 40

CHAPTER IV
SPECIAL TOPICS                                          49
  Current Events                                        49
  Local Material                                        51
  Civics                                                52
  The Teacher of History                                57

CHAPTER V
ILLUSTRATIVE LESSONS                                    60
  Forms I and II                                        60
  Form II                                               62
  Form III                                              66
  Forms III and IV                                      75
  Form IV                                               78
  For Teachers' Reference                              119

DEVICES                                                127

BIBLIOGRAPHY                                           130

APPENDIX                                               136




MANUAL OF SUGGESTIONS FOR TEACHERS OF HISTORY




PUBLIC AND SEPARATE SCHOOL COURSE OF STUDY


DETAILS

The course in literature and composition includes the telling by the
teacher of suitable stories from the Bible, stories of primitive
peoples, of child life in other lands, of famous persons and peoples;
and the oral reproduction of these stories by the pupils. In this way
history, literature, and composition are combined.

     For Method in telling stories, consult _How to Tell Stories to
     Children_, by Sara Cone Bryant, Houghton, Mifflin Company, Boston,
     $1.00.




FORM I


BIBLE STORIES:

Moses in the Bulrushes, his Childhood, the Burning Bush, the Crossing of
the Red Sea, the Tables of Stone; Joseph's Boyhood Dreams, Joseph sold
into Egypt, the Famine, the Visits of his Brethren; David and Goliath;
Samson.

STORIES OF CHILD LIFE:

The Eskimo Girl, the Andean Girl, the Arabian Girl, the Little Syrian
Girl, the Swiss Girl, the Chinese Girl, the African Girl, the German
Girl, the Canadian Girl; the Little Red Child, the Little White Child,
the Little Black Child, the Little Yellow Child, the Little Brown Child.

     Consult _The Seven Little Sisters_, by Jane Andrews, Ginn & Co.,
     Boston, 50c.; _The Little Cousin Series_, by Mary Hazelton Wade,
     The Page Co., Boston, 60c. each; _Five Little Strangers_, Julia
     Augusta Schwarz, American Book Co., New York; _Each and All_, Jane
     Andrews (sequel to _The Seven Little Sisters_), 50 cents.

SPECIAL DAYS:

Christmas: The Birth of Christ, the First Christmas Tree (see Appendix);
Arbor Day; Constructive work suggested by St. Valentine's Day and
Thanksgiving Day; Stories of these Days.

     NOTE: Advantage should be taken of every opportunity to
     teach obedience to authority and respect for the property and
     rights of others.




FORM II


BIBLE STORIES:

Abraham and Lot, Joshua, David and Jonathan, David and Saul, Ruth and
Naomi, Daniel, Miriam and Moses, Abraham and Isaac, Boyhood of Christ,
the Shipwreck of St. Paul.

STORIES OF CHILD LIFE:

The Aryan Boy, the Persian Boy, the Greek Boy, the Roman Boy, the Saxon
Boy, the Page Boy, the English Boy, the Puritan Boy, the Canadian Boy of
To-day, Child Life in Canada (_a_) in the early days, (_b_) to-day on
the farm and in the city or town; occupations, games, and plays, etc.

     Consult _Ten Little Boys Who Lived on the Road from Long Ago till
     Now_, by Jane Andrews, Ginn & Co., 50c.

STORIES OF FAMOUS PEOPLE:

Boadicea, Alfred, Harold, First Prince of Wales, Sir Francis Drake, Sir
Walter Raleigh, Columbus, Cabot, Cartier, Champlain, Madeleine de
Vercheres, Pontiac, Brock, Laura Secord, Florence Nightingale.

     Consult _The Story of the British People_, Thomas Nelson & Sons,
     Toronto, 35c. (For Florence Nightingale, see Appendix.)

PIONEER LIFE:

In Ancient Britain: See _Second Reader_, p. 109; _Ontario Public School
History of England_, p. 10.

In Roman Britain: See _The Story of The British People_, pp. 18-24.

Old English Life: See _Third Reader_, p. 325; _Ontario High School
History of England_, pp. 33-40.

At the Close of the French Period in Canada: See _Fourth Reader_, p. 65.

In Upper Canada in the "Thirties": See _Fourth Reader_, p. 122.

Our Forefathers: Where they lived before coming here, how they got here,
hardships in travel, condition of the country at that time, how they
cleared the land, their homes, their difficulties, danger from wild
animals, the natives of the country, modes of travel, implements and
tools, etc.

     Consult _Pen Pictures of Early Pioneer Life in Upper Canada_,
     Briggs, $2.00; _Ontario High School History of Canada_.

INVENTORS:

Watt, Stephenson, Fulton, Bell, Edison, Marconi.

CIVICS:

Elementary lessons in local government:

(_a_) In cities, towns, and incorporated villages--the postmaster, (see
Illustrative Lesson, p. 65), the postman and policeman; city or town
hall, post-office, mail boxes, school-houses.

(_b_) For rural districts--postmaster, trustees, roads and bridges,
rural mail delivery.

SPECIAL DAYS:

Empire Day, Victoria Day, Dominion Day; local occasions such as Fair
Day, Election Day; review of those Days taken in Form I.




FORMS III AND IV


PRELIMINARY NOTE

Below are the topics and sub-topics of the Course in History for Forms
III and IV.

In dealing with the subject in both Forms, the teacher should keep
constantly in mind the chief aims suited to this stage of the pupil's
development. (See pp. 16, 17.) The most vital of these is "to create and
foster a liking for historical study." The teacher should make use of
simple map drawing to illustrate the subject. This is especially
necessary in dealing with the history of Canada. There should be much
illustration by means of maps and pictures. See Educational Pamphlet No.
4, _Visual Aids in the Teaching of History_.

The chapter numbers in the Course for Form III are those of the chapters
in _The Story of the British People_ prescribed for the Form. These
chapters should be carefully read and, in Form IV, the authorized
text-books should be followed for the main account. _Having regard to
the time available for the Course, only the most important details
should be taken up._




FORM III

JUNIOR GRADE


CANADIAN HISTORY

     Columbus--The Discovery of America (Chap. XX)
     John Cabot and the New World (Chap. XXI)
     Jacques Cartier (Chap. XXIII)
     Raleigh and Gilbert (Chap. XXVI)
     The Beginnings of Acadia (Chap. XXVII)
     Champlain, the Father of New France (Chap. XXVIII)
     The Pilgrim Fathers (Chap. XXIX)
     The Jesuits in Canada (Chap. XXXI)
     The Settlement of French Canada (Chap. XXXI)
     La Salle (Chap. XXXIV)
     Henry Hudson--New York and Hudson Bay (Chap. XXXV)
     Frontenac (Chaps. XXXIV, XXXVII)
     The Conquest of Canada--Wolfe and Montcalm, Pontiac (Chap. XLI)
     The Coming of the Loyalists (Chap. XLII)
     How Canada Fought for the Empire (Chap. XLIV)
     William Lyon Mackenzie (Chap. XLVI)
     The Great North-West--Selkirk, Mackenzie, Strathcona, Riel
       (Chap. XLVII)
     Canada and the Empire--Royal Visitors (Chap. L)




FORM III

SENIOR GRADE


BRITISH HISTORY

     The First Britons (Chap. I)
     The Coming of the Romans (Chap. II)
     A Day in Roman Britain (Chap. III)
     The Coming of the English (Chap. IV)
     The Coming of Christianity (Chap. V)
     The Vikings (Chap. VI)
     Alfred the Great (Chap. VII)
     Rivals for a Throne (Chap. VIII)
     The Coming of the Normans (Chap. IX)
     A Norman Castle (Chap. X)
     A Glance at Scotland (Chap. XI)
     Henry the Second and Ireland (Chap. XII)
     Richard the Lion Heart (Chap. XIII)
     King John and the Great Charter (Chap. XIV)
     The First Prince of Wales (Chap. XV)
     Wallace and Bruce (Chaps. XVI, XVII)
     The Black Prince (Chap. XVIII)
     The Father of the British Navy (Chap. XXII)
     The New Worship (Chap. XXIV)
     Francis Drake, Sea-dog (Chap. XXV)
     King Charles the First (Chap. XXX)
     The Rule of Cromwell (Chap. XXXII)
     The King Enjoys his Own again (Chap. XXXIII)
     The Revolution and After (Chap. XXXVI)
     The Greatest Soldier of his Time (Chap. XXXVIII)
     Bonnie Prince Charlie (Chap. XXXIX)
     Robert Clive, the Daring in War (Chap. XL)
     The Terror of Europe (Chap. XLIII)
     Waterloo (Chap. XLV)
     Victoria the Good (Chaps. XLVI, XLVIII, XLIX)

CIVICS

Review of the work in Form II; election of town or township council;
taxes--the money people pay to keep up schools and roads, etc.; how
local taxes are levied for the support of the school; election of
members of County Council, of members of Provincial Legislature; duties
of citizenship.




FORM IV

JUNIOR GRADE


CANADIAN HISTORY

Before the British Conquest--an introductory account:

The French settlements: Extent, life of the seignior, habitant, and
coureur de bois; system of trade; government at Quebec--governor,
bishop, intendant; territorial claims (Chaps. VII, VIII, IX, XI)

The English settlements--Hudson's Bay Company, English colonies in New
York, New England, Acadia, and Newfoundland; population, life, trade,
government, territorial claims (Chaps. VIII, X, XI)

British Conquest of New France--fall of Quebec (Chap. XI)

Conspiracy of Pontiac (Chap. XII)

Quebec Act (Chap. XII)

Canada and the American Revolution; U.E. Loyalists (Chaps. XIII, XV)

Constitutional Act--Representative Government (Chap. XIV)

Social Conditions, 1763-1812 (Chap. XV)

Hudson's Bay Company (Chaps. VIII, XVI, XXI)

North-West Company (Chap. XVI)

Exploration in North-West--Hearne, Mackenzie, Fraser, Thompson (Chap.
XVI)

War of 1812-14 (Chap. XVII)

Family Compact (Chap. XVII)

Clergy Reserves (Chap. XVII)

William Lyon Mackenzie (Chap. XVII)

Lord Durham, Act of Union, 1840--Responsible Government (Chap. XVIII)

Social Progress, 1812-1841 (Chap. XIX)

Settlement of the North-West--Selkirk (Chaps. XVI, XX)

Confederation of the Provinces, 1867 (Chap. XXII)

Intercolonial Railway (Chap. XXIV)

Expansion of the Dominion by addition of new provinces (Chap. XXII)

Social Progress, 1841-1867 (Chap. XXIII)

Canadian Pacific Railway (Chap. XXIV)

Riel Rebellion (Chap. XXIV)

Disputes between Canada and the United States since 1814 settled by
treaty or arbitration. The Hundred Years of Peace

Canada, at the opening of the twentieth century; transportation,
industry, means of defence, education (Chap. XXV)

Ontario since Confederation: John Sandfield Macdonald, Sir Oliver Mowat,
Arthur Sturgis Hardy, Sir George W. Ross, Sir James P. Whitney (Chap.
XXVI)

An account of how Canada is governed, simple and concrete and as far as
possible related to the experience of the pupils; Municipal Government,
Provincial Government, Federal Government (Chap. XXVII)




FORM IV

SENIOR GRADE


BRITISH HISTORY

A

_A Course of about Two Months_


The Early Inhabitants--The Britons

The Coming of the Romans

The Coming of the Saxons

The Coming of Christianity

Alfred the Great

The Coming of the Normans--The Feudal System

Richard I and the Crusaders

John and Magna Charta

The Scottish War of Independence

The Hundred Years' War--Crecy, Agincourt, Joan of Arc.

The Wars of the Roses (no lists of battles or details of fighting)

Caxton and Printing

Separation between the English Church and Rome


B

_A Course of about Eight Months_


Brief account of the British Isles, territorial, political, and
religious, as an introduction to the reign of Elizabeth.

Elizabeth and Mary Queen of Scots; the Spanish Armada; Drake, Hawkins,
Gilbert, Raleigh, Shakespeare.

The Stuarts: "Divine Right of Kings" supported by majority of gentry and
landowners (cavaliers), opposed by the commercial and trading classes
and yeomen (roundheads). The Kings strove for absolute power, the
Parliament for constitutional government.

James I: Union of the English and Scottish Crowns.

Charles I: Struggle between King and Parliament; Petition of Right, Ship
Money, rebellion, execution of Charles.

Commonwealth: nominally a republic, really a dictatorship under
Cromwell. He gave Britain a strong government at home, and made her
respected abroad, and laid the foundations of Britain's foreign trade
and colonial empire.

Charles II: The Restoration: Reaction in state, church, and society;
King striving for absolute power; Nonconformists persecuted; society
profligate in its revolt against the strictness of Puritanism; Habeas
Corpus Act; Test Act; Plague and Great Fire.

James II: Revolution of 1688, the death-knell of "divine right";
Parliament supreme; Declaration of Rights.

William and Mary: Party government--Whigs and Tories; King to act by
advice of his ministers; each parliament limited to three years; Bill of
Rights; Act of Settlement.

Anne: Marlborough; Union between England and Scotland, 1707; the
Jacobites, 1715 and 1745.

George II: Walpole, the great peace minister--home and colonial trade
fostered and material wealth of the nation greatly increased; Pitt, the
great war minister; territorial expansion in Canada and India--Wolfe,
Clive; the Methodist Movement, Wesley.

George III: The American Revolution, 1776-83: loss of the American
Colonies; Pitt; Washington; acquisition of Australia by Great Britain,
1788; legislative union of Ireland with Great Britain, 1801; Napoleonic
wars; Nelson, Wellington, Aboukir, Trafalgar, and Waterloo; industrial
revolution--the change from an agricultural to an industrial country.

William IV: Reform Act of 1832, a great forward movement in democratic
government; abolition of slavery, 1833; railways and steamships.

Victoria: First British settlement in New Zealand, 1839; Repeal of the
Corn Laws, 1846--free trade, the commercial policy of England;
Elementary Education Act, 1870, education compulsory; parliamentary
franchise extended--vote by ballot; Crimean war; Indian Mutiny; Egypt
and the Suez Canal; Boer War--Orange Free State and South African
Republic annexed; social progress.

Edward VII: Irish Land Act of 1903; pensions for aged labourers; King
Edward, "the Peace-maker."


CIVICS

Taxation--direct and indirect; how the revenue of the Dominion,
provinces, and municipalities, respectively, is collected.

Federal Government--Governor-general, Senate, House of Commons, Premier,
Cabinet.

Imperial Government--King, House of Lords, House of Commons, Premier,
Cabinet.




HISTORY

CHAPTER I

THE AIMS AND STAGES OF STUDY


AIMS

History may be made, in several ways, an important factor in forming
intelligent, patriotic citizens:

(_a_) It must be remembered that society, with all its institutions, is
a growth, not a sudden creation. It follows that, if we wish to
understand the present and to use that knowledge as a guide to future
action, we must know the story of how our present institutions and
conditions have come to be what they are; we must know the ideals of our
forefathers, the means they took to realize them, and to what extent
they succeeded. It is only in this way that we become capable of passing
judgment, as citizens, on what is proposed by political and social
reformers, and thus justify and guarantee our existence as a democracy.

(_b_) Patriotism, which depends largely on the associations formed in
childhood, is intensified by learning how our forefathers fought and
laboured and suffered to obtain all that we now value most in our homes
and social life. The courage with which the early settlers of Upper
Canada faced their tremendous labours and hardships should make us
appreciate our inheritance in the Ontario of to-day, and determine, as
they did, to leave our country better than we found it.

    To-morrow yet would reap to-day,
    As we bear blossom of the dead.

(_c_) "History teaches that right and wrong are real distinctions." The
study of history, especially in the sphere of biography, has a moral
value, and much may be done, even in the primary classes, to inspire
children to admire the heroic and the self-sacrificing, and to despise
the treacherous and the self-seeking. The constant struggle to right
what is wrong in the world may be emphasized in the senior classes to
