The Project Gutenberg eBook, Halil the Pedlar, by Mór Jókai, Translated by
R. Nisbet Bain


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Halil the Pedlar
       A Tale of Old Stambul


Author: Mór Jókai



Release Date: January 24, 2006  [eBook #17597]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HALIL THE PEDLAR***


E-text prepared by Barbara Tozier, Janet B., Bill Tozier, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



HALIL THE PEDLAR

A Tale of Old Stambul

by

MAURUS JOKAI

Author of
"The Green Book," "Black Diamonds," "The Poor Plutocrats," etc.

Authorised Edition, Translated by R. Nisbet Bain







[Illustration]




SANS PEUR ET
SANS REPROCHE
Third Edition
London
Jarrold & Sons, 10 & 11, Warwick Lane, E.C.
[All Rights Reserved]
1901
Copyright
London: Jarrold & Sons
New York: McClure, Phillips, & Co.



Translated from the Hungarian, "A feher rozsa,"
by R. Nisbet Bain.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

          INTRODUCTION                                              7

      I.  THE PEDLAR                                               11

     II.  GUEL-BEJAZE--THE WHITE ROSE                               36

    III.  SULTAN ACHMED                                            49

     IV.  THE SLAVE OF THE SLAVE-GIRL                              69

      V.  THE CAMP                                                 99

     VI.  THE BURSTING FORTH OF THE STORM                         123

    VII.  TULIP-BULBS AND HUMAN HEADS                             134

   VIII.  A TOPSY-TURVY WORLD                                     153

     IX.  THE SETTING AND THE RISING SUN                          179

      X.  THE FEAST OF HALWET                                     203

     XI.  GLIMPSES INTO THE FUTURE                                216

   XII.  HUMAN HOPES                                              240

   XIII.  THE EMPTY PLACE                                         270




INTRODUCTION.


On September 28th, 1730, a rebellion burst forth in Stambul against
Sultan Achmed III., whose cowardly hesitation to take the field against
the advancing hosts of the victorious Persians had revolted both the
army and the people. The rebellion began in the camp of the Janissaries,
and the ringleader was one Halil Patrona, a poor Albanian sailor-man,
who after plying for a time the trade of a petty huckster had been
compelled, by crime or accident, to seek a refuge among the mercenary
soldiery of the Empire. The rebellion was unexpectedly, amazingly
successful. The Sultan, after vainly sacrificing his chief councillors
to the fury of the mob, was himself dethroned by Halil, and Mahmud I.
appointed Sultan in his stead. For the next six weeks the
ex-costermonger held the destiny of the Ottoman Empire in his hands
till, on November 25th, he and his chief associates were treacherously
assassinated in full Divan by the secret command, and actually in the
presence of, the very monarch whom he had drawn from obscurity to set
upon the throne.

This dramatic event is the historical basis of Jokai's famous story, "A
Feher Rozsa," now translated into English for the first time. No doubt
the genial Hungarian romancer has idealised the rough, outspoken,
masterful rebel-chief, Halil Patrona, into a great patriot-statesman, a
martyr for justice and honour; yet, on the other hand, he has certainly
preserved the salient features of Halil's character and, so far as I am
competent to verify his authorities, has not been untrue to history
though, as I opine, depending too much on the now somewhat obsolete
narrative of Hammer-Purgstall ("Geschichte des osmanischen Reichs").
Almost incredible as they seem to us sober Westerns, such incidents as
the tame surrender of Achmed III., the elevation of the lowliest
demagogues to the highest positions in the realm, and the curious and
characteristically oriental episode of the tulip-pots, are absolute
facts. Naturally Jokai's splendid fancy has gorgeously embellished the
plain narrative of the Turkish chroniclers. Such a subject as Halil's
strange career must irresistibly have appealed to an author who is
nothing if not vivid and romantic, and ever delights in startling
contrasts. On the other hand, the unique episode of Guel-Bejaze, "The
White Rose," and her terrible experiences in the Seraglio are largely,
if not entirely, of Jokai's own invention, and worthy, as told by him,
of a place in The Thousand and One Nights.

Finally--a bibliographical note.

Originally "A Feher Rozsa," under the title of "Halil Patrona," formed
the first part of "A Janicsarok vegnapjai," a novel first published at
Pest in three volumes in 1854. The two tales are, however, quite
distinct, and have, since then, as a matter of fact, frequently been
published separately. The second part of "A Janicsarok vegnapjai" was
translated by me from the Hungarian original, some years ago, under the
title of "The Lion of Janina," and published by Messrs. Jarrold and Sons
as one of their "Jokai" Series in 1898. The striking favour with which
that story was then received justifies my hope that its counterpart,
which I have re-named "Halil the Pedlar," from its chief character, may
be equally fortunate.

  R. NISBET BAIN.

  _September, 1901._




HALIL THE PEDLAR.




CHAPTER I.

THE PEDLAR.


Time out of mind, for hundreds and hundreds of years, the struggle
between the Shiites and the Sunnites has divided the Moslem World.

Persia and India are the lands of the Shiites; Turkey, Arabia, Egypt,
and the realm of Barbary follow the tenets of the Sunna.

Much blood, much money, many anathemas, and many apostasies have marked
the progress of this quarrel, and still it has not even yet been made
quite clear whether the Shiites or the Sunnites are the true believers.
The question to be decided is this: which of the four successors of the
Prophet, Ali, Abu Bekr, Osmar, and Osman, was the true Caliph. The
Shiites maintain that Ali alone was the true Caliph. The Sunnites, on
the other hand, affirm that all four were true Caliphs and equally holy.
And certainly the Shiites must be great blockheads to allow themselves
to be cut into mince-meat by thousands, rather than admit that God would
enrich the calendar with three saints distasteful to them personally.

The head Mufti had already hurled three fetvas at the head of Shah
Mahmud, and just as many armies of valiant Sunnites had invaded the
territories of the Shiites. The redoubtable Grand Vizier, Damad Ibrahim,
had already wrested from them Tauris, Erivan, Kermandzasahan, and
Hamadan, and the good folks of Stambul could talk of nothing else but
these victories--victories which they had extra good reason to remember,
inasmuch as the Janissaries, at every fresh announcement of these
triumphs, all the more vigorously exercised their martial prowess on the
peaceful inhabitants they were supposed to protect, and not only upon
them, but likewise upon the still more peaceful Sultan who, it must be
admitted, troubled himself very little either about the Sunnites, or the
victories of his Grand Vizier, being quite content with the
contemplation of his perpetually blooming tulips and of the damsels of
the Seraglio, who were even fairer to view than the tulips whose blooms
they themselves far outshone.

       *       *       *       *       *

The last rays of sunset were about to depart from the minarets of
Stambul. The imposing shape of the City of the Seven Hills loomed forth
like a majestic picture in the evening light. Below, all aflame from the
reflection of the burning sky, lies the Bosphorus, wherein the Seraglio
and the suburbs of Pera and Galata, with their tiers upon tiers of
houses and variegated fairy palaces, mirror themselves tranquilly. The
long, winding, narrow streets climb from one hill to another, and every
single hill is as green as if mother Nature had claimed her due portion
of each from the inhabitants, so different from our western cities, all
paved and swept clean, and nothing but hard stone from end to end. Here,
on the contrary, nothing but green meets the eye. The bastions are
planted with vines and olive-trees, pomegranate and cypress trees stand
before the houses of the rich. The poorer folks who have no gardens
plant flowers on their house-tops, or at any rate grow vines round their
windows which in time run up the whole house, and from out of the midst
of this perennial verdure arise the shining cupolas of eighty mosques.
At the end of every thoroughfare, overgrown with luxuriant grass and
thick-foliaged cypresses, only the turbaned tombstones show that here is
the place of sad repose. And the effect of the picture is heightened by
the mighty cupola of the all-dominating Aja Sofia mosque, which looks
right over all these palaces into the golden mirror of the Bosphorus.
Soon this golden mirror changes into a mirror of bronze, the sun
disappears, and the tranquil oval of the sea borrows a metallic shimmer
from the dark-blue sky. The kiosks fade into darkness; the vast outlines
of the Rumili Hisar and the Anatoli Hisar stand out against the starry
heaven; and excepting the lamps lit here and there in the khans of the
foreign merchants and a few minarets, the whole of the gigantic city is
wrapped in gloom.

The muezzin intone the evening _noomat_ from the slender turrets of the
mosques; everyone hastens to get home before night has completely set
in; the mule-drivers urge on their beasts laden on both sides with
leather bottles, and their tinkling bells resound in the narrow streets;
the shouting water-carriers and porters, whose long shoulder-poles block
up the whole street, scare out of their way all whom they meet; whole
troops of dogs come forth from the cemeteries to fight over the offal of
the piazzas. Every true believer endeavours as soon as possible to get
well behind bolts and bars, and would regard it as a sheer tempting of
Providence to quit his threshold under any pretext whatsoever before the
morning invocation of the muezzin. He especially who at such a time
should venture to cross the piazza of the Etmeidan would have been
judged very temerarious or very ill-informed, inasmuch as three of the
gates of the barracks of the Janissaries open upon this piazza; and the
Janissaries, even when they are in a good humour, are not over
particular as to the sort of jokes they choose to play, for their own
private amusement, upon those who may chance to fall into their hands.
Every faithful Mussulman, therefore, guards his footsteps from any
intrusion into the Etmeidan, as being in duty bound to know and observe
that text of the Koran which says, "A fool is he who plunges into peril
that he might avoid."

The tattoo had already been beaten with wooden sticks on a wooden board,
when two men encountered each other in one of the streets leading into
the Etmeidan.

One of them was a stranger, dressed in a Wallachian _gunya_, long shoes,
and with a broad reticule dangling at his side. He looked forty years
old and, so far as it was possible to distinguish his figure and
features in the twilight, seemed to be a strong, well-built man, with a
tolerably plump face, on which at that moment no small traces of fear
could be detected and something of that uncomfortable hesitation which
is apt to overtake a man in a large foreign city which he visits for the
very first time.

The other was an honest Mussulman about thirty years old, with a thick,
coal-black beard and passionate, irritable features, whose true
character was very fairly reflected in his pair of flashing black eyes.
His turban was drawn deep down over his temples, obliterating his
eyebrows completely, which made him look more truculent than ever.

The stranger seemed to be going towards the Etmeidan, the other man to
be coming from it. The former let the latter pass, by squeezing himself
against the wall, and only ventured to address him when he perceived
that he had no evil intentions towards him.

"I prythee, pitiful Mussulman, be not wrath with me, but tell me where
the Etmeidan piazza is."

The person so accosted instantly stopped short, and fixing the
interrogator with a stony look, replied angrily:

"Go straight on and you'll be there immediately."

At these words the knees of the questioner smote together.

"Woe is me! worthy Mussulman, I prythee be not wrath, I did not ask thee
where the Etmeidan was because I wanted to go there, but to avoid
straying into it. I am a stranger in this city, and in my terror I have
been drawing near to the very place I want to avoid. I prythee leave me
not here all by myself. Every house is fast closed. Not one of the khans
will let me in at this hour. Take me home with you, I will not be a
burden upon you, I can sleep in your courtyard, or in your cellar, if
only I may escape stopping in the streets all night, for I am greatly
afraid."

The Turk so addressed was carrying in one hand a knapsack woven out of
rushes. This he now opened and cast a glance into it, as if he were
taking counsel with himself whether the fish and onions he had just
bought in the market-place for his supper would be sufficient for two
people. Finally he nodded his head as if he had made up his mind at
last.

"Very well, come along!" said he, "and follow me!"

The stranger would have kissed his hand, he could not thank his new
friend sufficiently.

"You had better wait to see what you are going to get before you thank
me," said the Turk; "you will find but scanty cheer with me, for I am
only a poor man."

"Oh, as for that, I also am poor, very poor indeed," the new-comer
hastened to reply with the crafty obsequiousness peculiar to the Greek
race. "My name is Janaki, and I am a butcher at Jassy. The kavasses
have laid their hands upon my apprentice and all my live-stock at the
same time, and that is why I have come to Stambul. I shall be utterly
beggared if I don't get them back."

"Well, Allah aid thee. Let us make haste, for it is already dark."

And then, going on in front to show the way, he led the stranger through
the narrow winding labyrinth of baffling lanes and alleys which lead to
the Hebdomon Palace, formerly the splendid residence of the Greek
Emperors, but now the quarter where the poorest and most sordid classes
of the populace herd together. The streets here are so narrow that the
tendrils of the vines and gourds growing on the roofs of the opposite
houses meet together, and form a natural baldachino for the benefit of
the foot-passenger below.

Suddenly, on reaching the entrance of a peculiarly long and narrow lane,
the loud-sounding note of a song, bawled by someone coming straight
towards them, struck upon their ears. It was some drunken man evidently,
but whoever the individual might be, he was certainly the possessor of a
tremendous pair of lungs, for he could roar like a buffalo, and not
content with roaring, he kept thundering at the doors of all the houses
he passed with his fists.

"Alas! worthy Mussulman, I suppose this is some good-humoured
Janissary, eh?" stammered the new-comer with a terrified voice.

"Not a doubt of it. A peace-loving man would not think of making such a
bellowing as that."

"Would it not be as well to turn back?"

"We might meet a pair of them if we went another way. Take this lesson
from me: Never turn back from the path you have once taken, as otherwise
you will only plunge into still greater misfortunes."

Meanwhile they were drawing nearer and nearer to the bellowing
gentleman, and before long his figure came full into view.

And certainly his figure was in every respect worthy of his voice. He
was an enormous, six-foot high, herculean fellow, with his shirt-sleeves
rolled up to his shoulders, and the disorderly appearance of his dolman
and the crooked cock of his turban more than justified the suspicion
that he had already taken far more than was good for him of that fluid
which the Prophet has forbidden to all true believers.

"Gel, gel! Ne miktar dir, gel!" ("Come along the whole lot of you!")
roared the Janissary with all his might, staggering from one side of the
lane to the other, and flourishing his naked rapier in the air.

"Woe is me, my brave Mussulman!" faltered the Wallachian butcher in a
terrified whisper, "wouldn't it be as well if you were to take my
stick, for he might observe that I had it, and fancy I want to fight him
with it."

