The Project Gutenberg eBook, Dio's Rome, Volume 1 (of 6), by Cassius Dio,
Translated by Herbert Baldwin Foster


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Dio's Rome, Volume 1 (of 6)
       An Historical Narrative Originally Composed in Greek during the Reigns of Septimius Severus, Geta and Caracalla, Macrinus, Elagabalus and Alexander Severus: and Now Presented in English Form


Author: Cassius Dio



Release Date: March 24, 2006  [eBook #18047]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIO'S ROME, VOLUME 1 (OF 6)***


E-text prepared by Ted Garvin, Linda Cantoni, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



DIO'S ROME

An
Historical Narrative Originally Composed in Greek During the Reigns of
Septimius Severus, Geta and Caracalla, Macrinus, Elagabalus and
Alexander Severus:
And
Now Presented in English Form

by

HERBERT BALDWIN FOSTER,

A.B. (Harvard), Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins),
Acting Professor of Greek in Lehigh University

FIRST VOLUME

_Gleanings from the Lost Books_

I. The Epitome of Books 1-21 arranged by Ioannes Zonaras, Soldier and
Secretary, in the Monastery of Mt. Athos, about 1130 A.D.

II. Fragments of Books 22-35.







Troy New York
Pafraets Book Company
1905
Copyright 1905
Pafraets Book Company
Troy New York




_To

My Friend Teacher and Inspirer

Mr. Gildersleeve of Baltimore

Who Has Won to the Age of Greek Lore even as to the Youth of Greek
Life

I Offer a Redundant Tribute_




VOLUME CONTENTS


                                                              PAGE

Concerning the Translation                                     vii

Concerning the Original                                          1

  (a) The Writing                                                3

  (b) The Writer                                                33

A Select List of Dissertations on Dio                           43

Magazine Articles and Notes on Dio (1884-1904)                  49

Plan of the Entire Work (as Conjectured by A. von Gutschmid)    61

An Epitome of the Lost Books 1-21 (by Ioannes Zonaras)          67

Fragments of Books 22-35 (from various sources)                329

Fragment LXXIII                                                331

Fragment LXXIV                                                 332

Fragment LXXV                                                  332

Fragment LXXVI                                                 333

Fragment LXXVII                                                333

Fragment LXXVIII                                               334

Fragment LXXIX                                                 335

Fragment LXXX                                                  335

Fragment LXXXI                                                 336

Fragment LXXXII                                                337

Fragment LXXXIII                                               339

Fragment LXXXIV                                                340

Fragment LXXXV                                                 341

Fragment LXXXVI                                                342

Fragment LXXXVII                                               342

Fragment LXXXVIII                                              345

Fragment LXXXIX                                                345

Fragment XC                                                    346

Fragment XCI                                                   346

Fragment XCII                                                  347

Fragment XCIII                                                 349

Fragment XCIV                                                  349

Fragment XCV                                                   350

Fragment XCVI                                                  352

Fragment XCVII                                                 353

Fragment XCVIII                                                353

Fragment XCIX                                                  354

Fragment C                                                     354

Fragment CI                                                    357

Fragment CII                                                   359

Fragment CIII                                                  359

Fragment CIV                                                   360

Fragment CV                                                    361

Fragment CVI                                                   366

Fragment CVII                                                  366

Fragment CVIII                                                 368




CONCERNING THE TRANSLATION


Cassius Dio, one of the three original sources for Roman history to be
found in Greek literature, has been accessible these many years to the
reader of German, of French, and even of Italian, but never before has
he been clothed complete in English dress. In the Harvard College
Library is deposited the fruit of a slight effort in that direction, a
diminutive volume dated two centuries back, the title page of which
(agog with queer italics) reads as follows:


THE

HISTORY

OF

DION CASSIUS

ABBRIDG'D BY XIPHILIN

CONTAINING

The most considerable Passages under the _Roman_ emperors from the
time of _Pompey_ the Great, to the Reign of _Alexander Severus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Two Volumes

       *       *       *       *       *

Done from the _Greek_, by Mr. Manning

       *       *       *       *       *

Tametsi haudquaquam par gloria sequatur Scriptorem, & Authorem rerum,
tamen in primis arduum videtur res gestas scribere. Salust.

       *       *       *       *       *

_London_: Printed for _A._ and _J. Churchill_, in _Paternoster Row_,
1704.


Four hundred and seven small pages, over and above the Epistle
Dedicatory, are contained in Volume One. Really, however, this is not
the true Dio at all, but merely his shadow, seized and distorted to
satisfy the ideas of his epitomizer, the monk Xiphilinus, who was
separated from him by a thousand years in the flesh and another
thousand in the spirit. Of the little specimens here and there
translated for this man's or that man's convenience no mention need
here be made. Hence, practically speaking, Dio now for the first time
emerges in his impressive stature before the English-speaking public
after there has elapsed since his own day a period twice as long as
then constituted the extent of that history which was his theme.

The present version, begun while I was serving as Acting Professor of
Greek at St. Stephen's College, Annandale, N.Y., has been carried
forward during such intervals of leisure as I could snatch from an
overflowing schedule at the University of South Dakota. It has been my
companion on many journeys and six states have witnessed its progress
toward completion. In spite of the time consumed it seems in
retrospect not far short of presumptuous to have tried in three or
four years to put into acceptable English what Dio spent twelve in
writing down. Yet the task was not quite the same, for half of this
historian's books have been caught up and whirled away in the cyclone
of time; and who knows whether they still possess any resting-place
above or beneath the earth?

The text originally chosen as the basis for the translation was that
of Melber, the idea of the translator being that the Teubner edition
would be the most convenient and readily obtainable standard of
reference for any one who wished to compare the Greek and the English.
Hence the numbering of the Fragments is that of Melber (subdivisions
are distinguished by a notation simpler than that of the original
"sections"). Since no Teubner volumes beyond the second proved to be
forthcoming, the rest of the work followed the stereotyped Tauchnitz
edition, which also enjoys a large circulation. This text, however,
contained so many cases of corruption and clumsiness that it seemed
best to work over carefully nearly all of the latter portion of the
English and to embody as many as possible of the improvements of
Boissevain. Incidentally Boissevain's interior arrangement of all the
later books was adopted, though it was deemed preferable (for mere
readiness of reference) to adhere to the old external division of
books established by Leunclavius. (Boissevain's changes are, however,
indicated.) The Tauchnitz text with all its inaccuracies endeavors to
present a coherent and readable narrative, and this is something which
the exactitude of Boissevain does not at all times permit. In the
translation I have striven to follow a conservative course, and at
some points a straightforward narrative interlarded with brackets will
give evidence of its origin in Tauchnitz, whereas at others loose,
disjointed paragraphs betray the hand of Boissevain who would not
willingly let Xiphilinus and Dio ride in the same compartment. My main
desire through it all has been not so much to attain a logical unity
of form as to present a history which shall look well and read well in
English. For this reason also I have banished most of the Fragments
(which must have only a comparatively limited interest) to the last
volume and have replaced them in my first by portions of Zonaras
(taken from Melber) which have their origin in Dio and are at the same
time clear, comprehensible, and connected.

Should any person object that even so my text does not offer eye and
ear a pellucid field for smooth advance, I must reply that the
original is likewise very far from being a serene and joyous highway;
and it has not appeared to me necessary or desirable to improve upon
the form of Dio's record further than the difference in the genius of
the two languages demanded. I am reminded here of what Francisque
Reynard says regarding the difficulties of Boccaccio, and because of a
similarity in the situation I venture to quote from the preface of his
(French) version of the Decameron:

"Dans son admiration exclusive des anciens, Boccace a pris pour modele
Ciceron et sa longue periode academique, dans laquelle les incidences
se greffent sur les incidences, poursuivant l'idee jusqu'au bout, et
ne la laissant que lorsqu'elle est epuisee, comme le souffle ou
l'attention de celui qui lit.... Aussi le plus souvent sa phraseologie
est-elle fort complexe, et pour suivre le fil de l'idee premiere,
faut-il apporter une attention soutenue. Ce qui est deja une
difficulte de lecture dans le texte italien, devient un obstacle
tres serieux quand on a a traduire ces interminables phrases en
francais moderne, prototype de precision, de clarte, de logique
grammaticale.... Je sais bien qu'il y a un moyen commode de
l'eluder...: c'est de couper les phrases et d'en faire, d'une seule,
deux, trois, quatre, autant qu'il est besoin. Mais a ce jeu on change
notablement la physionomie de l'original, et c'est ce que je ne puis
admettre."

As is Boccaccio to Cicero, so is Cassius Dio, _mutatis mutandis_, to
Thukydides; and of course the imitator improves upon the model.
Imagine a man who out-Paters Pater when Pater shall be but a memory,
and you begin to secure a vision of the style of this Roman senator,
who accentuates every peculiarity of the tragic historian's packed
periods; and whereas his great predecessor made sentences so long as
to cause mediaeval scholars heartily to wish him in the Barathron,
books and all, comes forward six hundred years later marshaling phrase
upon phrase, clause upon clause, till a modern is forced to exclaim:
