The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pathfinders of the West, by A. C. Laut

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Pathfinders of the West
       Being the Thrilling Story of the Adventures of the Men Who
       Discovered the Great Northwest: Radisson, La Verendrye,
       Lewis and Clark

Author: A. C. Laut

Release Date: April 20, 2006 [EBook #18216]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PATHFINDERS OF THE WEST ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: Stealing from the Fort by Night.]






Pathfinders of the West



BEING

THE THRILLING STORY OF THE ADVENTURES

OF THE MEN WHO DISCOVERED THE GREAT NORTHWEST

RADISSON, LA VERENDRYE, LEWIS AND CLARK





BY

A. C. LAUT



AUTHOR OF "LORDS OF THE NORTH," "HERALDS
  OF EMPIRE," "STORY OF THE TRAPPER"




ILLUSTRATIONS BY

REMINGTON, GOODWIN, MARCHAND

AND OTHERS




NEW YORK

GROSSET & DUNLAP

PUBLISHERS




COPYRIGHT, 1904,

By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.




Set up and electrotyped.  Published November, 1904.  Reprinted February,
1906.




WILDWOOD PLACE, WASSAIC, N.Y.

August 15, 1904.


DEAR MR. SULTE:

A few years ago, when I was a resident of the Far West and tried to trace
the paths of early explorers, I found that all authorities--first,
second, and third rate--alike referred to one source of information for
their facts.  The name in the tell-tale footnote was invariably your own.

While I assume _all_ responsibility for upsetting the apple cart of
established opinions by this book, will you permit me to dedicate it to
you as a slight token of esteem to the greatest living French-Canadian
historian, from whom we have all borrowed and to whom few of us have
rendered the tribute due?

Faithfully,

AGNES C. LAUT.


 MR. BENJAMIN SULTE,
 PRESIDENT ROYAL SOCIETY,
 OTTAWA, CANADA.




  THE GREAT NORTHWEST

  I love thee, O thou great, wild, rugged land
  Of fenceless field and snowy mountain height,
  Uprearing crests all starry-diademed
  Above the silver clouds!  A sea of light
  Swims o'er thy prairies, shimmering to the sight
  A rolling world of glossy yellow wheat
  That runs before the wind in billows bright
  As waves beneath the beat of unseen feet,
  And ripples far as eye can see--as far and fleet!

  Here's chances for every man!  The hands that work
  Become the hands that rule!  Thy harvests yield
  Only to him who toils; and hands that shirk
  Must empty go!  And here the hands that wield
  The sceptre work!  O glorious golden field!
  O bounteous, plenteous land of poet's dream!
  O'er thy broad plain the cloudless sun ne'er wheeled
  But some dull heart was brightened by its gleam
  To seize on hope and realize life's highest dream!

  Thy roaring tempests sweep from out the north--
  Ten thousand cohorts on the wind's wild mane--
  No hand can check thy frost-steeds bursting forth
  To gambol madly on the storm-swept plain!
  Thy hissing snow-drifts wreathe their serpent train,
  With stormy laughter shrieks the joy of might--
  Or lifts, or falls, or wails upon the wane--
  Thy tempests sweep their stormy trail of white
  Across the deepening drifts--and man must die, or fight!

  Yes, man must sink or fight, be strong or die!
  That is thy law, O great, free, strenuous West!
  The weak thou wilt make strong till he defy
  Thy bufferings; but spacious prairie breast
  Will never nourish weakling as its guest!
  He must grow strong or die!  Thou givest all
  An equal chance--to work, to do their best--
  Free land, free hand--thy son must work or fall
  Grow strong or die!  That message shrieks the storm-wind's call!

  And so I love thee, great, free, rugged land
  Of cloudless summer days, with west-wind croon,
  And prairie flowers all dewy-diademed,
  And twilights long, with blood-red, low-hung moon
  And mountain peaks that glisten white each noon
  Through purple haze that veils the western sky--
  And well I know the meadow-lark's far rune
  As up and down he lilts and circles high
  And sings sheer joy--be strong, be free; be strong or die!




Foreword

The question will at once occur why no mention is made of Marquette and
Jolliet and La Salle in a work on the pathfinders of the West.  The
simple answer is--they were _not_ pathfinders.  Contrary to the notions
imbibed at school, and repeated in all histories of the West,
Marquette, Jolliet, and La Salle did not discover the vast region
beyond the Great Lakes.  Twelve years before these explorers had
thought of visiting the land which the French hunter designated as the
_Pays d'en Haut_, the West had already been discovered by the most
intrepid _voyageurs_ that France produced,--men whose wide-ranging
explorations exceeded the achievements of Cartier and Champlain and La
Salle put together.

It naturally rouses resentment to find that names revered for more than
two centuries as the first explorers of the Great Northwest must give
place to a name almost unknown.  It seems impossible that at this late
date history should have to be rewritten.  Such is the fact _if we
would have our history true_.  Not Marquette, Jolliet, and La Salle
discovered the West, but two poor adventurers, who sacrificed all
earthly possessions to the enthusiasm for discovery, and incurred such
bitter hostility from the governments of France and England that their
names have been hounded to infamy.  These were Sieur Pierre Esprit
Radisson and Sieur Medard Chouart Groseillers, fur traders of Three
Rivers, Quebec. [1]

The explanation of the long oblivion obscuring the fame of these two
men is very simple.  Radisson and Groseillers defied, first New France,
then Old France, and lastly England.  While on friendly terms with the
church, they did not make their explorations subservient to the
propagation of the faith.  In consequence, they were ignored by both
Church and State.  The _Jesuit Relations_ repeatedly refer to two young
Frenchmen who went beyond Lake Michigan to a "Forked River" (the
Mississippi), among the Sioux and other Indian tribes that used coal
for fire because wood did not grow large enough on the prairie.
Contemporaneous documents mention the exploits of the young Frenchmen.
The State Papers of the Marine Department, Paris, contain numerous
references to Radisson and Groseillers.  But, then, the _Jesuit
Relations_ were not accessible to scholars, let alone the general
public, until the middle of the last century, when a limited edition
was reprinted of the Cramoisy copies published at the time the priests
sent their letters home to France.  The contemporaneous writings of
Marie de l'Incarnation, the Abbe Belmont, and Dollier de Casson were
not known outside the circle of French savants until still later; and
it is only within recent years that the Archives of Paris have been
searched for historical data.  Meantime, the historians of France and
England, animated by the hostility of their respective governments,
either slurred over the discoveries of Radisson and Groseillers
entirely, or blackened their memories without the slightest regard to
truth.  It would, in fact, take a large volume to contradict and
disprove half the lies written of these two men.  Instead of consulting
contemporaneous documents,--which would have entailed both cost and
labor,--modern writers have, unfortunately, been satisfied to serve up
a rehash of the detractions written by the old historians.  In 1885
came a discovery that punished such slovenly methods by practically
wiping out the work of the pseudo-historians.  There was found in the
British Museum, the Bodleian Library, and Hudson's Bay House, London,
unmistakably authentic record of Radisson's voyages, written by
himself.  The Prince Society of Boston printed two hundred and fifty
copies of the collected Journals.  The Canadian Archives published the
journals of the two last voyages.  Francis Parkman was too
conscientious to ignore the importance of the find; but his history of
the West was already written.  He made what reparation he could to
Radisson's memory by appending a footnote to subsequent editions of two
of his books, stating that Radisson and Groseillers' travels took them
to the "Forked River" before 1660.  Some ten other lines are all that
Mr. Parkman relates of Radisson; and the data for these brief
references have evidently been drawn from Radisson's enemies, for the
explorer is called "a renegade."  It is necessary to state this,
because some writers, whose zeal for criticism was much greater than
their qualifications, wanted to know why any one should attempt to
write Radisson's life when Parkman had already done so.

Radisson's life reads more like a second Robinson Crusoe than sober
history.  For that reason I have put the corroborative evidence in
footnotes, rather than cumber the movement of the main theme.  I am
sorry to have loaded the opening parts with so many notes; but
Radisson's voyages change the relative positions of the other explorers
so radically that proofs must be given.  The footnotes are for the
student and may be omitted by the general reader.  The study of
Radisson arose from, using his later exploits on Hudson Bay as the
subject of the novel, _Heralds of Empire_.  On the publication of that
book, several letters came from the Western states asking how far I
thought Radisson had gone beyond Lake Superior before he went to Hudson
Bay.  Having in mind--I am sorry to say--mainly the early records of
Radisson's enemies, I at first answered that I thought it very
difficult to identify the discoverer's itinerary beyond the Great
Lakes.  So many letters continued to come on the subject that I began
to investigate contemporaneous documents.  The path followed by the
explorer west of the Great Lakes--as given by Radisson himself--is here
written.  Full corroboration of all that Radisson relates is to be
found--as already stated--in chronicles written at the period of his
life and in the State Papers.  Copies of these I have in my possession.
Samples of the papers bearing on Radisson's times, copied from the
Marine Archives, will be found in the Appendix.  One must either accept
the explorer's word as conclusive,--even when he relates his own
trickery,--or in rejecting his journal also reject as fictions the
_Jesuit Relations_, the _Marine Archives_, _Dollier de Casson_, _Marie
de l'Incarnation_, and the _Abbe Belmont_, which record the same events
as Radisson.  In no case has reliance been placed on second-hand
chronicles.  Oldmixon and Charlevoix must both have written from
hearsay; therefore, though quoted in the footnotes, they are not given
as conclusive proof.  The only means of identifying Radisson's routes
are (1) by his descriptions of the countries, (2) his notes of the
Indian tribes; so that personal knowledge of the territory is
absolutely essential in following Radisson's narrative.  All the
regions traversed by Radisson--the Ottawa, the St. Lawrence, the Great
Lakes, Labrador, and the Great Northwest--I have visited, some of them
many times, except the shores of Hudson Bay, and of that region I have
some hundreds of photographs.

Material for the accounts of the other pathfinders of the West has been
drawn directly from the different explorers' journals.

For historical matter I wish to express my indebtedness to Dr. N. E.
Dionne of the Parliamentary Library, Quebec, whose splendid sketch of
Radisson and Groseillers, read before the Royal Society of Canada, does
much to redeem the memory of the discoverers from ignominy; to Dr.
George Bryce of Winnipeg, whose investigation of Hudson's Bay Archives
adds a new chapter to Radisson's life; to Mr. Benjamin Sulte of Ottawa,
whose destructive criticism of inaccuracies in old and modern records
has done so much to stop people writing history out of their heads and
to put research on an honest basis; and to M. Edouard Richard for
scholarly advice relating to the Marine Archives, which he has
exploited so thoroughly.  For transcripts and archives now out of
print, thanks are due Mr. L. P. Sylvain of the Parliamentary Library,
Ottawa, the officials of the Archives Department, Ottawa, Mr. F. C.
Wurtele of Quebec, Professor Andrew Baird of Winnipeg, Mr. Alfred
Matthews of the Prince Society, Boston, the Hon. Jacob V. Brower and
Mr. Warren Upham of St. Paul.  Mr. Lawrence J. Burpee of Ottawa was so
good as to give me a reading of his exhaustive notes on La Verendrye
and of data found on the Radisson family.  To Mrs. Fred Paget of
Ottawa, the daughter of a Hudson's Bay Company officer, and to Mr. and
Mrs. C. C. Farr of the Northern Ottawa, I am indebted for interesting
facts on life in the fur posts.  Miss Talbot of Winnipeg obtained from
retired officers of the Hudson's Bay Company a most complete set of
photographs relating to the fur trade.  To her and to those officers
who loaned old heirlooms to be photographed, I beg to express my
cordial appreciation.  And the thanks of all who write on the North are
permanently due Mr. C. C. Chipman, Chief Commissioner of the Hudson's
Bay Company, for unfailing courtesy in extending information.


WILDWOOD PLACE,

WASSAIC, N.Y.


[1] I of course refer to the West as beyond the Great Lakes; for
Nicotet, in 1634, and two nameless Frenchmen--servants of Jean de
Lauzon--in 1654, had been beyond the Sault.




Just as this volume was going to the printer, I received a copy of the
very valuable Minnesota _Memoir_, Vol. VI, compiled by the Hon. J. V.
Brower of St. Paul, to whom my thanks are due for this excellent
