Project Gutenberg's The Poems and Fragments of Catullus, by Catullus

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Poems and Fragments of Catullus

Author: Catullus

Translator: Robinson Ellis

Release Date: July 19, 2006 [EBook #18867]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CATULLUS ***




Produced by Melissa Er-Raqabi, Ted Garvin, Taavi Kalju and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










THE
POEMS AND FRAGMENTS
OF
CATULLUS,

TRANSLATED IN THE METRES OF THE ORIGINAL


BY

ROBINSON ELLIS,

FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, OXFORD,
PROFESSOR OF LATIN IN UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON.


LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
1871.


LONDON:
BRADBURY, EVANS, AND CO., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS.




TO ALFRED TENNYSON.




[Transcriber's note: The preface uses macrons and breves above some
letters to indicate stresses. I have rendered the letters with breve
inside parenthesis (like th(i)s) and the letters with macron inside
square brackets (like th[i]s).]




PREFACE.


The idea of translating Catullus in the original metres adopted by the
poet himself was suggested to me many years ago by the admirable,
though, in England, insufficiently known, version of Theodor Heyse
(Berlin, 1855). My first attempts were modelled upon him, and were so
unsuccessful that I dropt the idea for some time altogether. In 1868,
the year following the publication of my larger critical edition[A] of
Catullus, I again took up the experiment, and translated into English
glyconics the first Hymenaeal, _Collis o Heliconici_. Tennyson's Alcaics
and Hendecasyllables had appeared in the interval, and had suggested to
me the new principle on which I was to go to work. It was not sufficient
to reproduce the ancient metres, unless the ancient quantity was
reproduced also. Almost all the modern writers of classical metre had
contented themselves with making an accented syllable long, an
unaccented short; the most familiar specimens of hexameter,
Longfellow's _Evangeline_ and Clough's _Bothie of Tober-na-Vuolich_ and
_Amours de Voyage_ were written on this principle, and, as a rule,
stopped there. They almost invariably disregarded position, perhaps the
most important element of quantity. In the first line of _Evangeline_--

    _This is the forest primeval, the murmuring pines and the hemlocks,_

there are no less than five violations of position, to say nothing of
the shortening of a syllable so distinctly long as the _i_ in
_primeval_. Mr. Swinburne, in his Sapphics and Hendecasyllables, while
writing on a manifestly artistic conception of those metres, and, in my
judgment, proving their possibility for modern purposes by the superior
rhythmical effect which a classically trained ear enabled him to make in
handling them, neglects position as a rule, though his nice sense of
metre leads him at times to observe it, and uniformly rejects any
approach to the harsh combinations indulged in by other writers. The
nearest approach to quantitative hexameters with which I am acquainted
in modern English writers is the _Andromeda_ of Mr. Kingsley, a poem
which has produced little effect, but is interesting as a step to what
may fairly be called a new development of the metre. For the experiments
of the Elizabethan writers, Sir Philip Sidney and others, by that
strange perversity which so often dominates literature, were as
decidedly unsuccessful from an accentual, as the modern experiments from
a quantitative point of view. Sir Philip Sidney has given in his
_Arcadia_ specimens of hexameters, elegiacs, sapphics, asclepiads,
anacreontics, hendecasyllables. The following elegiacs will serve as a
sample.

    _Unto a caitif wretch, whom long affliction holdeth,
      And now fully believ's help to bee quite perished;
    Grant yet, grant yet a look, to the last moment of his anguish,
      O you (alas so I finde) caus of his onely ruine:
    Dread not awhit (O goodly cruel) that pitie may enter
      Into thy heart by the sight of this Epistle I send:
    And so refuse to behold of these strange wounds the recitall,
      Lest it might m' allure home to thyself to return._

In these the classical laws of position are most carefully observed;
every dactyl ending in a consonant is followed by a word beginning with
a vowel or _h_--_affl[i]ct(i)(o)n holdeth_, _mom[e]nt (o)f h(i)s
anguish_, _ca[u]se (o)f h(i)s onely_; _affliction wasteth_, _moment of
his dolour_, _cause of his dreary_, would have been as impossible to Sir
Philip Sidney as _mo[e]r(o)r t(e)nebat_, _mom[e]nt(a) p(e)r curae_,
_ca[u]s(a) v(e)l sola_ in a Latin writer of hexameters. Similarly where
the dactyl is incided after the second syllable, the third syllable
beginning a new word, the utmost care is taken that that word shall
begin not only with a syllable essentially short, but, when the second
syllable ends in a consonant, with a vowel: _[o]f th(i)s (e)pistle_,
but not _[o]f th(i)s d(i)saster_, still less _[o]f th(i)s d(i)rection._
The other element of quantity is less rigidly defined; for (1) syllables
strictly long, as _I_, _thy_, _so_, are allowed to be short; (2)
syllables made long by the accent falling upon them are in some cases
shortened, as _r(u)[i]ne_, _p(e)r(i)sh[e]d_, _cr(u)[e]l_; (3) syllables
which the absence of the accent only allows to be long _in thesi_, are,
in virtue of the classical laws of position, permitted to rank as long
elsewhere--_mom[e]nt of his_, _[o]f this epistle_. It needs little
reflection to see that it is to one or other of these three
peculiarities that the failure of the Elizabethan writers of classical
metres must be ascribed. Pentameters like

    _Gratefulness, sweetness, holy love, hearty regard,
    That the delights of life shall be to him dolorous,
    And even in that love shall I reserve him a spite;_

sapphics like

    _Are then humane mindes privileg'd so meanly
    As that hateful death can abridg them of power
    With the vow of truth to record to all worlds
                    That we bee her spoils?_

hexameters like

    _F[i]re n(o) l(i)quor can cool: Nept[u]ne's re[a]lm would not avail us.
    Nurs inw[a]rd m(a)l(a)di[e]s, which have not scope to bee breath'd out.
    Oh n(o) n(o), worthie sheph[e]rd, worth c[a]n never enter a title;_

are too alien from ordinary pronunciation to please either an average
reader or a classically trained student. The same may be said of the
translation into English hexameters of the two first Eclogues of Virgil,
appended by William Webbe to his _Discourse of English Poetrie_ (1586,
recently reprinted by Mr. Arber). Here is his version of Ecl. I., 1-10.

              MELIBAEUS.

    _Tityrus, happilie then lyste tumbling under a beech tree,
    All in a fine oate pipe these sweete songs lustilie chaunting:
    We, poore soules goe to wracke, and from these coastes be remoued,
    And fro our pastures sweete: thou Tityr, at ease in a shade plott
    Makst thicke groues to resound with songes of brave Amarillis._

              TITYRUS.

    _O Melibaeus, he was no man, but a God who releeude me:
    Euer he shalbe my God: from this same Sheepcot his alters
    Neuer, a tender lambe shall want, with blood to bedew them.
    This good gift did he giue, to my steeres thus freelie to wander,
    And to my selfe (thou seest) on pipe to resound what I listed._

      _ib._ 50-56.

    _Here no unwoonted foode shall grieue young theaues who be laded,
    Nor the infections foule of neighbours flocke shall annoie them.
    Happie olde man. In shaddowy bankes and coole prettie places,
    Heere by the quainted floodes and springs most holie remaining.
    Here, these quicksets fresh which lands seuer out fro thy neighbors
    And greene willow rowes which Hiblae bees doo rejoice in,
    Oft fine whistring noise, shall bring sweete sleepe to thy sences._

The following stanzas are from a Sapphic ode into which Webbe
translated, or as we should say, transposed the fourth Eclogue of
Spenser's _Sheepheardes Calendar_.

    _Say, behold did ye euer her Angelike face,
    Like to Phoebe fayre? or her heauenly hauour
    And the princelike grace that in her remaineth?
                        haue yee the like seene?_

    _Vnto that place Caliope dooth high her,
    Where my Goddesse shines: to the same the Muser
    After her with sweete Violines about them
                        cheerefully tracing._

    _All ye Sheepheardes maides that about the greene dwell,
    Speede ye there to her grace, but among ye take heede
    All be Virgins pure that aproche to deck her,
                        dutie requireth._

    _When ye shall present ye before her in place,
    See ye not your selues doo demeane too rudely:
    Bynd the fillets: and to be fine the waste gyrt
                        fast with a tawdryne._

    _Bring the Pinckes therewith many Gelliflowres sweete,
    And the Cullambynes: let vs haue the Wynesops,
    With the Coronation that among the loue laddes
                        wontes to be worne much._

    _Daffadowndillies all a long the ground strowe,
    And the Cowslyppe with a prety paunce let heere lye.
    Kyngcuppe and Lillies so beloude of all men
                        and the deluce flowre._

There are many faults in these verses; over quaintnesses of language,
constructions impossible in English, quantities of doubtful
correctness, harsh elisions, for Webbe has tried even elisions. Yet, if
I may trust my judgment, all of them can still be read with pleasure;
the sapphics may almost be called a success. This is even more true of
metres, where these faults are less perceptible or more easily avoided,
for instance, Asclepiads. Take the verses on solitariness, Arcadia, B.
II. fin.

    _O sweet woods, the delight [o]f s(o)l(i)t[a]riness!
    O how much I do like your solitariness!
    Where man's mind hath a freed consideration
    Of goodness to receive lovely direction._

or the hendecasyllables immediately preceding,

    _Reason tell me thy minde, if here be reason,
    In this strange violence, to make resistance,
    Where sweet graces erect the stately banner._

It is obvious that a very little more trouble would have converted these
into very perfect and very pleasing poems. Had Sir Philip Sidney written
every asclepiad on the model of _Where man's mind hath a freed
consideration_, every hendecasyllable like _Where sweet graces erect the
stately banner_, the adjustment of accent and quantity thus attained
might, I think, have induced greater poets than he to make the
experiment on a larger scale. But neither he nor his contemporaries
were permitted to grasp as a principle a regularity which they sometimes
secured by chance; nor, so far as I am aware, have the various revivals
of ancient metre in this country or Germany in any case consistently
carried out the _whole_ theory, without which the reproduction is
partial, and cannot look for a more than partial success. Even the four
specimens given in the posthumous edition of Clough's poems, two of them
elegiac, one alcaic, one in hexameters, though professedly constructed
on a quantitative basis, and, in one instance (_Trunks the forest
yielded, with gums ambrosial oozing, &c._) combining legitimate quantity
(in which accent and position are alike observed) with illegitimate (in
which position is observed, but accent disregarded) into a not
unpleasing rhythm, cannot be considered as more than imperfect
realizations of the true positional principle. Tennyson's three
specimens are, at least in English, still unique. It is to be hoped that
he will not suffer them to remain so. Systems of Glyconics and
Asclepiads are, if I mistake not, easily manageable, and are only
thought foreign to the genius of our language because they have never
been written on strict principles of art by a really great master.

What, then, are the rules on which such rhythms become possible? They
are, briefly, these:--(1) accented syllables, _as a general rule_, are
long, though some syllables which count as long need not be accented,
as in

    _All that on earth's leas blooms, what blossoms Thessaly nursing,_

_blossoms_, though only accented on the first syllable, counts for a
spondee, the shortness of the second _o_ being partly helped out by the
two consonants which follow it; partly by the fact that the syllable is
_in thesi_; (2) the laws of position are to be observed, according to
the general rules of classical prosody: (_a_) dactyls terminating in a
consonant like _beautiful_, _bounteous_, or ending in a double vowel or
a diphthong like _all of you, surely may, come to thee_, must be
followed by a word beginning with a vowel or _y_ or _h_; dactyls
terminating in a vowel or _y_, like _slippery_, should be followed,
except in rare cases, by words beginning with a consonant; trochees,
whether composed of one word or more, should, if ending in a consonant,
be followed by a vowel, if ending in the vowel _a_, by a consonant,
thus, _planted around_ not _planted beneath_, _Aurora the sun's_ not
_Aurora a sun's_ (see however, lxiv. 253), but _unto a wood, any again,
sorry at all, you be amused_. (_b_) Syllables made up of a vowel
followed by two or more consonants, each of which is distinctly heard in
pronunciation, as _long_, _sins_, _part_, _band_, _waits_, _souls_,
_ears_, _must_, _heart_, _bright_, _strength_, _end_, _and_, _rapt_,
_hers_, _dealt_, mo_ment_, bo_soms_, _answers_, moun_tains_, bear_est_,
tum_bling_, gi_ving_, com_ing_, harbour_ing_, diffi_cult_, immi_nent_,
strata_gems_, utter_ance_, happi_est_, trem_bling_ly, can never rank as
short, even if unaccented and followed by a vowel, _h_ or _y_. Thus, to
go back to Longfellow's line,

    _This is the forest primeval, the murmuring pines and the hemlocks,_

_for(e)st_, _murmur(i)ng_, _pines (a)nd the_, are all inadmissible. But
where a vowel is followed by two consonants, one of which is unheard or
only heard slightly, as in _acc_use, sh_all_, _ass_emble, _diss_emble,
kind_ness_, com_pass_, _aff_ect, _app_ear, _ann_oy, or when the second
or third consonant is a liquid, as in _betray_, _beslime_, _besmear_,
_depress_, _dethrone_, _agree_, the vowel preceding is so much more
short than long as to be regularly admissible as short, rarely
admissible as long. On this principle I have allowed _dis[o]rd(e)rl(y)_,
_t[e]n(a)ntl(e)ss_, _heav(e)nl(y)_, to rank as dactyls.

These rules are after all only an outline, and perhaps can never be made
more. It will be observed that they are more negative than positive. The
reason of this is not far to seek. The main difference between my verses
and those of other contemporary writers--the one point on which I claim
for myself the merit of novelty--is the strict observance throughout of
the rules of position. But the strict observance of position is in
effect the strict avoidance of unclassical collocations of syllables: it
is almost wholly negative. To illustrate my meaning I will instance the
poems written in pure iambics, the _Phaselus ille_ and _Quis hoc potest
uidere_. Heyse translates the first line of the former of these poems by

    _Die Galeotte, die ihr schauet, liebe Herrn,_

and this would be a fair representation of a pure iambic line, according
to the views of most German and most English writers. Yet not only is
_Die_ no short syllable, but _ihr_, itself long, is made more hopelessly
long by preceding three consonants in _schauet_, just as the last
syllable of _schauet_, although in itself short, loses its right to
stand for a true short in being followed by the first consonant of
_liebe_. My own translation,

    _The puny pinnace yonder you, my friends, discern,_

whatever its defects, is at least a pretty exact representation of a
pure iambic line. xxix. 6-8, are thus translated by Heyse:--

    _Und jener soll in Uebermuthes Ueberfluss
    Von einem Bett zum andern in die Runde gehn?_

by me thus,

    _Shall he in o'er-assumption, o'er-repletion he,
    Sedately saunter every dainty couch along?_

The difference is purely negative; I have bound myself to avoid certain
positions forbidden by the laws of ancient prosody. To some I may seem
to have lost in vigour by the process; yet I believe the sense of
triumph over the difficulties of our language, the satisfaction of
approaching in a novel and perceptibly felt manner one of those
excellences which, as much as anything, contributes to the permanent
charm of Catullus, his dainty versification, will more than compensate
for any shortcomings which the difficulty of the task has made
inevitable. The same may be said of the elaborately artificial poem to
Camerius (c. lv.), and the almost unapproachable Attis (c. lxiii.).
Here, at least half the interest lies in the varied turns of the metre;
if these can be represented with anything like faithfulness, the gain in
exactness of prosody is enough, in my judgment, to counterbalance the
possible loss of freedom in expression.

There is another circumstance which tends to make modern rules of
prosody necessarily negative. Quantity, in English revivals of ancient
metre, depends not only on position, but on accent. But accent varies
greatly in different words; _heavy level ever cometh any_, have the same
accent as _empty evil either boometh penny_; but the first syllable in
the former set of words is lighter than in the latter. Hence, though
accented, they may, on occasion, be considered and used as short; as, on
the same principle, _dolorous stratagem echoeth family_, usually
dactyls, may, on occasion, become tribrachs. But how lay down any
positive rule in matter necessarily so fluctuating? We cannot. All we
can do is to refuse admission as short syllables to any heavier accented
syllable. Here, then, much must be left to individual discretion. My
translation of the Attis will best show my own feeling in the matter.
But I am fully aware that in this respect I have fallen far short of
consistency. I have made _any_ sometimes short, more often long; _to_,
usually short, is lengthened in lxi. 26, lxvii. 19, lxviii. 143; _with_
is similarly long, though not followed by a consonant, in lxi. 36;
_given_ is long in xxviii. 7, short in xi. 17, lxiv. 213; _are_ is short
in lxvii. 14; and more generally many syllables allowed to pass for
short in the Attis are elsewhere long. Nor have I scrupled to forsake
the ancient quantity in proper names; following Heyse, I have made the
first syllable of _Verona_ short in xxxv. 3, lxvii. 34, although it
retains its proper quantity in lxviii. 27. Again, _Pheneos_ is a dactyl
in lxviii. 111, while _Satrachus_ is an anapaest in xcv. 5. In many of
these instances I have acted consciously; if the writers of Greece and
Rome allowed many syllables to be doubtful, and almost as a principle
avoid perfect uniformity in the quantity of proper names, a greater
freedom may not unfairly be claimed by their modern imitators. If
Catullus could write _Phars(a)liam coeunt, Phars(a)lia regna
frequentant_, similar license may surely be extended to me. I believe,
indeed, that nothing in my translation is as violent as the double
quantity just mentioned in Catullus; but if there is, I would remind my
readers of Goethe's answer to the boy who told him he had been guilty of
a hexameter with seven feet, and applying the remark to any seeming
irregularities in my own translation would say, _Lass die Bestie
stehen_.

It would not be difficult to swell this Preface by enlarging on the
novelty of the attempt, and indirectly panegyrising my own undertaking.
I doubt whether any real advantage would thus be gained. If I have
merely produced an elaborate failure, however much I might expatiate on
the principles which guided me, my work would be an elaborate failure
still. I shall therefore say no more, and shall be contented if I please
the, even in this classically trained country, too limited number of
readers who can really hear with their ears--if, to use the borrowed
language of a great poet, I succeed in making myself vocal to the
intelligent alone.

[Footnote A: The translation follows this edition (Oxford, 1867), in the
constitution of the text, as well as in the sectional division of the
poems.]




CATULLUS.


I.

    Who shall take thee, the new, the dainty volume,
      Purfled glossily, fresh with ashy pumice?

    You, Cornelius; you of old did hold them
      Something worthy, the petty witty nothings,

    While you venture, alone of all Italians,                          5
      Time's vast chronicle in three books to circle,
