The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Cliff Ruins of Canyon de Chelly, Arizona,
by Cosmos Mindeleff


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Cliff Ruins of Canyon de Chelly, Arizona
       Sixteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, 1894-95, Government Printing Office, Washington, 1897, pages 73-198


Author: Cosmos Mindeleff



Release Date: November 6, 2006  [eBook #19723]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CLIFF RUINS OF CANYON DE
CHELLY, ARIZONA***


E-text prepared by Louise Hope, Carlo Traverso, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/) from psge
images generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France
(BnF/Gallica) (http://gallica.bnf.fr/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 19723-h.htm or 19723-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/7/2/19723/19723-h/19723-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/7/2/19723/19723-h.zip)

      This document is taken from the _Sixteenth Annual Report of
      the Bureau of Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian
      Institution_, 1894-95, Government Printing Office,
      Washington, 1897, pages 73-198. Images of the original pages
      are available through the Bibliotheque nationale de France
      (BnF/Gallica) (http://gallica.bnf.fr/).


Transcriber's Note:

      Typographical errors are listed at the end of the text.
      Brackets within quotations are in the original.





THE CLIFF RUINS OF CANYON DE CHELLY, ARIZONA

by

COSMOS MINDELEFF







CONTENTS
                                                                Page
  Introduction                                                    79
    History and literature                                        79
    Geography                                                     82
  Classification and descriptions                                 89
    Ruins of the pueblo region                                    89
      I--Old villages on open sites                               93
     II--Home villages on bottom lands                            94
    III--Home villages located for defense                       111
     IV--Cliff outlooks or farming shelters                      142
  Details                                                        153
    Sites                                                        153
    Masonry                                                      159
    Openings                                                     164
    Roofs, floors, and timber work                               165
    Storage and burial cists (Navaho)                            166
    Defensive and constructive expedients                        170
    Kivas or sacred chambers                                     174
    Chimney-like structures                                      182
    Traditions                                                   190
  Conclusions                                                    191


ILLUSTRATIONS

Plate                                                           Page
   XLI. Map of the ancient pueblo region,
            showing location of Canyon de Chelly                  79
  XLII. Map of Canyon de Chelly and its branches                  85
 XLIII. Detailed map of part of Canyon de Chelly,
            showing areas of cultivable land                      93
  XLIV. Section of old walls, Canyon de Chelly                    95
   XLV. General view of ruin on bottom land,
            Canyon del Muerto                                     97
  XLVI. Village ruin in Canyon de Chelly                         103
 XLVII. Casa Blanca ruin, Canyon de Chelly                       105
XLVIII. Mummy cave, central and eastern part                     112
  XLIX. Eastern cove of Mummy cave                               115
     L. Reservoir in ruin No. 10                                 127
    LI. Small village, ruin No. 16, Canyon de Chelly             129
   LII. Walls resting on refuse in ruin No. 16                   131
  LIII. Cliff outlook in lower Canyon de Chelly                  149
   LIV. Cliff ruin No. 14                                        151
    LV. Site marked by pictographs                               153
   LVI. Site difficult of approach                               159
  LVII. Masonry in Canyon de Chelly                              161
 LVIII. Chinked walls in Canyon de Chelly                        163
   LIX. A partly plastered wall                                  165
    LX. Plastered wall in Canyon de Chelly                       167
   LXI. Storage cist in Canyon de Chelly                         169
  LXII. Navaho burial cists                                      171
 LXIII. Kivas in ruin No. 10,
            showing second-story walls                           173

Figure                                                          Page
    1. Ground plan of an old ruin in Canyon del Muerto            95
    2. Ground plan of a ruin on bottom land
           in Canyon del Muerto                                   96
    3. Ground plan of small ruin in Canyon de Chelly              96
    4. Granary in the rocks, connected with a ruin                97
    5. Ground plan of a ruin in a cave                            98
    6. Ground plan of Pakashi-izini ruin, Canyon del Muerto       99
    7. Ground plan of a ruin in Canyon del Muerto                100
    8. Ground plan of a ruin in Tseonitsosi canyon               100
    9. Ground plan of a much obliterated ruin                    101
   10. Ground plan of a ruin in Canyon de Chelly                 101
   11. Ground plan of a village ruin                             103
   12. Ground plan of kivas in Canyon de Chelly                  103
   13. Ground plan of a small ruin on bottom land                104
   14. Ground plan of the upper part of Casa Blanca ruin         105
   15. Ground plan of the lower part of Casa Blanca ruin         106
   16. Ground plan of Mummy Cave ruin                            113
   17. Ruin in a rock cove                                       117
   18. Ground plan of a ruin in a rock cove                      117
   19. Ground plan of a ruin on a ledge                          118
   20. Ground plan of ruin No. 31, Canyon de Chelly              119
   21. Ground plan of ruin No. 32, Canyon de Chelly              120
   22. Section of a kiva wall                                    122
   23. Ruin No. 10 on a ledge in a cove                          123
   24. Ground plan of ruin No. 10                                124
   25. Oven-like structure in ruin No. 10                        127
   26. Plan of oven-like structure                               128
   27. Ground plan of a small village, ruin No. 16               129
   28. Ruins on a large rock                                     130
   29. Ground plan of ruins No. 49                               131
   30. Ruins on an almost inaccessible site                      133
   31. Ground plan of a large ruin in Canyon del Muerto          134
   32. Ground plan of a small ruin in Canyon del Muerto          135
   33. Ground plan of a small ruin                               135
   34. Plan of a ruin of three rooms                             136
   35. Ground plan of a small ruin, with two kivas               136
   36. Ground plan of a small ruin, No. 44                       137
   37. Ground plan of a ruin on a rocky site                     137
   38. Rock with cups and petroglyphs                            138
   39. Ground plan of a ruin in Canyon de Chelly                 139
   40. Site showing recent fall of rock                          140
   41. Ruin No. 69 in a branch canyon                            140
   42. Ground plan of a small ruin in Canyon del Muerto          140
   43. Ground plan of a small ruin                               141
   44. Plan of a ruin with curved inclosing wall                 141
   45. Ground plan of ruin No. 34                                142
   46. Ground plan of cliff outlook No. 35                       143
   47. Plan of a cliff outlook                                   143
   48. Plan of cliff ruin No. 46                                 144
   49. Plan of cliff room with partitions                        145
   50. Plan of a large cliff outlook in Canyon del Muerto        145
   51. Plan of a cluster of rooms in Canyon del Muerto           146
   52. White House ruin in Tseonitsosi canyon                    146
   53. Ground plan of a ruin in Tseonitsosi canyon               147
   54. Plan of rooms against a convex cliff                      147
   55. Small ruin with curved wall                               147
   56. Ground plan of a cliff outlook                            148
   57. Plan of cliff outlook No. 14, in Canyon de Chelly         148
   58. Ground plan of outlooks in a cleft                        149
   59. Plan of a single-room outlook                             149
   60. Three-room outlook in Canyon del Muerto                   150
   61. Plan of a two-room outlook                                150
   62. Plan of outlook and burial cists, No. 64                  150
   63. Plan of rectangular room, No. 45                          151
   64. Rectangular single room                                   151
   65. Single-room remains                                       152
   66. Site apparently very difficult of access                  158
   67. Notched doorway in Canyon de Chelly                       164
   68. Cist composed of upright slabs                            169
   69. Retaining walls in Canyon de Chelly                       172
   70. Part of a kiva in ruin No. 31                             175
   71. Plan of part of a kiva in ruin No. 10                     176
   72. Kiva decoration in white                                  177
   73. Pictograph in white                                       178
   74. Markings on cliff wall, ruin No. 37                       178
   75. Decorative band in kiva in Mummy Cave ruin                179
   76. Design employed in decorative band                        180
   77. Pictographs in Canyon de Chelly                           181
   78. Plan of chimney-like structure in ruin No. 15             182
   79. Section of chimney-like structure in ruin No. 15          183
   80. Plan of chimney-like structure in ruin No. 16             184
   81. Section of chimney-like structure in ruin No. 16          185
   82. Plan of the principal kiva in Mummy Cave ruin             186
   83. Chimney-like structure in Mummy Cave ruin                 187


  [Illustration: Plate XLI (Map)
  Ancient Pueblo Region
  Showing Location of Canyon De Chelly]




THE CLIFF RUINS OF CANYON DE CHELLY, ARIZONA


By Cosmos Mindeleff




INTRODUCTION


HISTORY AND LITERATURE

Although Canyon de Chelly is one of the best cliff-ruin regions of the
United States, it is not easily accessible and is practically unknown.
At the time of the conquest of this country by the "Army of the West" in
1846, and of the rush to California in 1849, vague rumors were current
of wonderful "cities" built in the cliffs, but the position of the
canyon in the heart of the Navaho country apparently prevented
exploration. In 1849 it was found necessary to make a demonstration
against these Indians, and an expedition was sent out under the command
of Colonel Washington, then governor of New Mexico. A detachment of
troops set out from Santa Fe, and was accompanied by Lieutenant
(afterward General) J. H. Simpson, of the topographical engineers, to
whose indefatigable zeal for investigation and carefulness of
observation much credit is due. He was much interested in the archeology
of the country passed over and his descriptions are remarkable for their
freedom from the exaggerations and erroneous observations which
characterize many of the publications of that period. His journal was
published by Congress the next year[1] and was also printed privately.

    [Footnote 1: Thirty-first Congress, first session, Senate Ex. Doc.
    No. 64, Washington, 1850.]

The expedition camped in the Chin Lee valley outside of Canyon de
Chelly, and Lieutenant Simpson made a side trip into the canyon itself.
He mentions ruins noticed by him at 41/2, 5, and 7 miles from the mouth;
the latter, the ruin subsequently known as Casa Blanca, he describes at
some length. He also gives an illustration drawn by R. H. Kern, which is
very bad, and pictures some pottery fragments found near or in the ruin.
The name De Chelly was apparently used before this time. Simpson
obtained its orthography from Vigil, secretary of the province (of New
Mexico), who told him it was of Indian origin and was pronounced
_chay-e_. Possibly it was derived from the Navaho name of the place,
Tse-gi.

Simpson's description, although very brief, formed the basis of all the
succeeding accounts for the next thirty years. The Pacific railroad
surveys, which added so much to our knowledge of the Southwest, did not
touch this field. In 1860 the Abbe Domenech published his "Deserts of
North America," which contains a reference to Casa Blanca ruin, but his
knowledge was apparently derived wholly from Simpson. None of the
assistants of the Hayden Survey actually penetrated the canyon, but one
of them, W. H. Jackson, examined and described some ruins on the Rio de
Chelly, in the lower Chin Lee valley. But in an article in Scribner's
Magazine for December, 1878, Emma C. Hardacre published a number of
descriptions and illustrations derived from the Hayden corps, among
others figures one entitled "Ruins in Canon de Chelly," from a drawing
by Thomas Moran. The ruin can not be identified from the drawing.

This article is worth more than a passing notice, as it not only
illustrates the extent of knowledge of the ruins at that time (1878),
but probably had much to do with disseminating and making current
erroneous inferences which survive to this day. In an introductory
paragraph the author says:

  Of late, blown over the plains, come stories of strange newly
  discovered cities of the far south-west; picturesque piles of
  masonry, of an age unknown to tradition. These ruins mark an era
  among antiquarians. The mysterious mound-builders fade into
  comparative insignificance before the grander and more ancient
  cliff-dwellers, whose castles lift their towers amid the sands of
  Arizona and crown the terraced slopes of the Rio Mancos and the
  Hovenweap.

Of the Chaco ruins it is said:

  In size and grandeur of conception, they equal any of the present
  buildings of the United States, if we except the Capitol at
  Washington, and may without discredit be compared to the Pantheon
  and the Colosseum of the Old World.

In the same year Mr J. H. Beadle gave an account[2] of a visit he made
to the canyon. He entered it over the Bat trail, near the junction of
Monument canyon, and saw several ruins in the upper part. His
descriptions are hardly more than a mention. Much archeologic data were
secured by the assistants of the Wheeler Survey, but it does not appear
that any of them, except the photographer, visited Canyon de Chelly. In
the final reports of the Survey there is an illustration of the ruin
visited by Lieutenant Simpson about thirty years before.[3] The
illustration is a beautiful heliotype from a fine photograph made by
T. H. O'Sullivan, but one serious defect renders it useless; through
some blunder of the photographer or the engraver, the picture is
reversed, the right and left sides being interchanged, so that to see it
properly it must be looked at in a mirror. The illustration is
accompanied by a short text, apparently prepared by Prof. F. W. Putnam,
who edited the volume. The account by Simpson is quoted and some
additional data are given, derived from notes accompanying the
photograph. The ruin is said to have "now received the name of the Casa
Blanca, or White House," but the derivation of the name is not stated.

    [Footnote 2: Western Wilds, and the Men who Redeem Them:
    Cincinnati, Philadelphia, Chicago, Memphis, 1878.]

    [Footnote 3: U.S. Geog. Surveys West of the 100th Meridian,
    Lieutenant George M. Wheeler in charge; reports, vol. VII,
    Archaeology; Washington, 1879, pp. 372-373, pl. xx.]

In 1882 Bancroft could find no better or fuller description than
Simpson's, which he uses fully, and reproduces also Simpson's (Kern's)
illustration. In the same year investigation by the assistants of the
Bureau of Ethnology was commenced. Colonel James Stevenson and a party
visited the canyon, and a considerable amount of data was obtained. In
all, 46 ruins were visited, 17 of which were in Del Muerto; and
sketches, ground plans, and photographs were obtained. The report of the
Bureau for that year contains an account of this expedition, including a
short description of a large ruin in Del Muerto, subsequently known as
Mummy Cave. A brief account of the trip was also published elsewhere.[4]
The next year a map of the canyon was made by the writer and many new
ruins were discovered, making the total number in the canyon and its
branches about 140. Since 1883 two short visits have been made to the
place, the last late in 1893, and on each trip additional material was
obtained. In 1890 Mr F. T. Bickford[5] published an account of a visit
to the canyon, illustrated with a series of woodcuts made from the
photographs of the Bureau. The illustrations are excellent and the text
is pleasantly written, but the descriptions of ruins are too general to
be of much value to the student.

    [Footnote 4: Bull. Am. Geog. Soc., 1886, No. 4; Ancient
    Habitations of the Southwest, by James Stevenson.]

    [Footnote 5: Century Magazine, October, 1890, vol. XL, No. 6, p.
    806 et seq.]

In recent years several publications have appeared which, while not
bearing directly on the De Chelly ruins, are of great interest, as they
treat of analogous remains--the cliff ruins of the Mancos canyon and the
Mesa Verde. These ruins were discovered in 1874 by W. H. Jackson and
were visited and described in 1875 by W. H. Holmes,[6] both of the
Hayden Survey. This region was roamed over by bands of renegade Ute and
Navaho, who were constantly making trouble, and for fifteen years was
apparently not visited by whites. Recent exploration appears to have
been inaugurated by Mr F. H. Chapin, who spent two summers in the Mesa
Verde country. Subsequently he published the results of some of his
observations in a handsome little volume.[7] In 1891 Dr W. R. Birdsall
made a flying trip to this region and published an account[8] of the
ruins he saw the same year. At the time of this visit a more elaborate
exploration was being carried on by the late G. Nordenskioeld, who made
some excavations and obtained much valuable data which formed the basis
of a book published in 1893.[9] This is the most important treatise on
the cliff ruins that has ever been published, and the illustrations can
only be characterized as magnificent. All of these works, and especially
the last named, are of great value to the student of the cliff ruins
wherever located, or of pueblo architecture.

    [Footnote 6: U.S. Geol. Survey, F. V. Hayden in charge; 10th Ann.
    Rept. (for 1876), Washington, 1878.]

    [Footnote 7: The Land of the Cliff Dwellers, by Frederick H.
    Chapin; Boston, 1892.]

    [Footnote 8: Bull. Am. Geog. Soc., vol. XXIII, No. 4, 1891; The
    Cliff Dwellings of the Canons of the Mesa Verde.]

    [Footnote 9: The Cliff Dwellers of the Mesa Verde, by
    G. Nordenskioeld; Stockholm and Chicago, 1894.]


GEOGRAPHY

The ancient pueblo culture was so intimately connected with and
dependent on the character of the country where its remains are found
that some idea of this country is necessary to understand it. The limits
of the region are closely coincident with the boundaries of the plateau
country except on the south, so much so that a map of the latter,[10]
slightly extended around its margin, will serve to show the former. The
area of the ancient pueblo region may be 150,000 square miles; that of
the plateau country, approximately, 130,000.

    [Footnote 10: See Major C. E. Dutton's map of the plateau country
    in 6th Ann. Rept. U.S. Geol. Survey, pl. xi. His report on "Mount
    Taylor and the Zuni plateau," of which this map is a part,
    presents a vivid picture of the plateau country, and his
    descriptions are so clear and expressive that any attempt to
    better them must result in failure. The statement of the geologic
    and topographic features which is incorporated herein is derived
    directly from Major Dutton's description, much of it being taken
    bodily.]

The plateau country is not a smooth and level region, as its name might
imply; it is extremely rugged, and the topographic obstacles to travel
are greater than in many wild mountain regions. It is a country of
cliffs and canyons, often of considerable magnitude and forming a bar to
extended progress in any direction. The surface is generally smooth or
slightly undulating and apparently level, but it is composed of a series
of platforms or mesas, which are seldom of great extent and generally
terminate at the brink of a wall, often of huge dimensions. There are
mesas everywhere; it is the mesa country.

Although the strata appear to be horizontal, they are slightly tilted.
The inclination, although slight, is remarkably persistent, and the
thickness of the strata remains almost constant. The beds, therefore,
extend from very high altitudes to very low ones, and often the
formation which is exposed to view at the summit of an incline is lost
to view after a few miles, being covered by some later formation, which
in turn is covered by a still later one. Each formation thus appears as
a terrace, bounded on one side by a descending cliff carved out of the
edges of its own strata and on the other by an ascending cliff carved
out of the strata which overlie it. This is the more common form,
although isolated mesas, bits of tableland completely engirdled by
cliffs, are but little less common.

The courses of the margins of the mesas are not regular. The cliffs
sometimes maintain an average trend through great distances, but in
detail their courses are extremely crooked; they wind in and out,
forming alternate alcoves and promontories in the wall, and frequently
they are cut through by valleys, which may be either narrow canyons or
interspaces 10 or even 20 miles wide.

The whole region has been subjected to many displacements, both flexures
of the monoclinal type and faults. Some of these flexures attain a
length of over 80 miles and a displacement of 3,000 feet, and the faults
reach even a greater magnitude. There is also an abundance of volcanic
rocks and extinct volcanoes, and while the principal eruptions have
occurred about the borders of the region, extending but slightly into
it, traces of lesser disturbances can be found throughout the country.
It has been said that if a geologist should actually make the circuit of
the plateau country, he could so conduct his route that for
three-fourths of the time he would be treading upon volcanic materials
and could pitch his camp upon them every night. The oldest eruptions do
not go back of Tertiary time, while some are so recent as probably to
come within the historic period--within three or four centuries.

The strata of the plateau country are remarkable for their homogeneity,
when considered with reference to their horizontal extensions; hardly
less so for their diversity when considered in their vertical relation.
Although the groups differ radically from each other, still each
preserves its characteristics with singularly slight degrees of
variation from place to place. Hence we have a certain amount of
similarity and monotony in the landscape which is aided rather than
diminished by the vegetation; for the vegetation, like the human
occupants of this country, has come under its overpowering influence.
The characteristic landscape consists of a wide expanse of featureless
plains, bounded by far-off cliffs in gorgeous colors; in the foreground
a soil of bright yellow or ashy gray; over all the most brilliant
sunlight, while the distant features are softened by a blue haze.

The most conspicuous formation of the whole region is a massive
bright-red sandstone out of which have been carved "the most striking
and typical features of those marvelous plateau landscapes which will be
subjects of wonder and delight to all coming generations of men. The
most superb canyons of the neighboring region, the Canyon de Chelly and
the Del Muerto, the lofty pinnacles and towers of the San Juan country,
the finest walls in the great upper chasms of the Colorado, are the
vertical edges of this red sandstone."

Of the climate of the plateau country it has been said that in the large
valleys it is "temperate in winter and insufferable in summer; higher up
the summers are temperate and the winters barely sufferable." It is as
though there were two distinct regions covering the same area, for there
are marked differences throughout, except in topographic configuration,
between the lowlands and the uplands or high plateaus. The lowlands
present an appearance which is barren and desolate in the extreme,
although the soil is fertile and under irrigation yields good crops.
Vegetation is limited to a scanty growth of grass during a small part of
the year, with small areas here and there scantily covered by the
prickly greasewood and at intervals by clumps of sagebrush; but even
these prefer a higher level, and develop better on the neighboring mesas
than in the valleys proper. The arborescent growth consists of sparsely
distributed cottonwoods and willows, closely confined to the river
bottoms. On intermediate higher levels junipers and cedars appear, often
standing so closely together as to seriously impede travel, but they are
confined to the tops of mesas and other high ground, the valleys being
generally clear or covered with sagebrush. Still higher up yellow pines
become abundant and in places spread out into magnificent forests, while
in some mountain regions scrub oak, quaking asp, and even spruce trees
are abundant.

In the mountain regions there is often a reasonable amount of moisture,
and some crops, potatoes for example, are grown there without
irrigation; but the season is short. In the Tunicha mountains the Navaho
raise corn at an altitude of nearly 8,000 feet, but they often lose the
crop from drought or from frost. On the intermediate levels and in the
lowlands cultivation by modern methods is practically impossible without
irrigation, except in a few favored localities, where a crop can be
obtained perhaps two years or three years in five. But with a minute
knowledge of the climatic conditions, and with methods adapted to meet
these conditions, scanty crops can be and are raised by the Indians
without irrigation throughout the whole region; but everywhere that
water can be applied the product of the soil is increased many fold.

Near the center of the plateau country, in the northeastern corner of
Arizona, a range of mountains crosses diagonally from northwest to
southeast, extending into New Mexico. In the north an irregular cluster
of considerable size, separated from the remainder of the range, is
called the Carrizo; and the range proper has no less than three names
applied to different parts of it. The northern end is known as the
Lukachukai, the central part as the Tunicha, and the southern part as
the Chuska or Choiskai mountains, all Navaho names. The two former
clusters attain an altitude of 9,500 feet; the Tunicha and the Chuska
are about 9,000 feet high, the latter having a flat top of considerable
area.

On the east these mountains break down rather abruptly into the broad
valley of the Chaco river, or the Chaco wash, as it is more commonly
designated; on the west they break down gradually, through a series of
slopes and mesas, into the Chin Lee valley. Canyon de Chelly has been
cut in the western slope by a series of small streams, which, rising
near the crest of the mountain, combine near its head and flow in a
general westerly direction. The mouth of the canyon is on the eastern
border of the Chin Lee valley. It is 60 miles south of the Utah boundary
and 25 miles west of that of New Mexico; hence it is 60 miles east and a
little north from the old province of Tusayan, the modern Moki, and 85
miles northwest from the old province of Cibola, the modern Zuni. Its
position is almost in the heart of the ancient pueblo region; the Chaco
ruins lie about 80 miles east, and the ruins of the San Juan from 60 to
80 miles north and northeast.

  [Illustration: Plate XLII
  Map of Canyon De Chelly and Its Branches
  Surveyed by Cosmos Mindeleff]

The geographic position of Canyon de Chelly has had an important effect
on its history, forming as it does an available resting place in any
migratory movement either on the north and south line or east and west.
The Tunicha mountains are a serious obstacle to north and south movement
at the present day, but less so than the arid valleys which border them.
Except at one place, and that place is difficult, it is almost
impossible to cross the mountains with a wheeled vehicle, but there are
innumerable trails running in all directions, and these trails are in
constant use by the Navaho, except in the depths of winter. The mountain
route is preferable, however, to the valley roads, where the traveler
for several days is without wood, with very little water and forage, and
his movements are impeded by deep sand.

To the traveler on foot, or even on horseback, Canyon de Chelly is
easily accessible from almost any direction. Good trails run northward
to the San Juan and northeastward over the Tunicha mountains to the
upper part of that river; Fort Defiance is but half a day's journey to
the southeast; Tusayan and Zuni are but three days distant to the
traveler on foot; the Navaho often ride the distance in a day or a day
and a half. The canyon is accessible to wagons, however, only at its
mouth.

The main canyon, shown on the map (plate XLII) as Canyon de Chelly and
known to the Navaho as Tse-gi, is about 20 miles long. It heads near
Washington pass, within a few miles of the crest of the mountain, and
extends almost due west to the Chin Lee valley. The country descends by
a regular slope from an altitude of about 7,500 feet at the foot of the
main crest to about 5,200 feet in the Chin Lee valley, 25 miles west,
and is so much cut up locally by ravines and washes that it is
impassable to wagons, but it preserves throughout its mesa-like
character.

About 3 miles from its mouth De Chelly is joined by another canyon
almost as long, which, heading also in the Tunicha mountains, comes in
from the northeast. It is over 15 miles long, and is called on the map
Canyon del Muerto; the Navaho know it as En-a-tse-gi. About 13 miles
above the mouth of the main canyon a small branch comes in from the
southeast. It is about 10 miles long, and has been called Monument
canyon, on account of the number of upright natural pinnacles of rock in
it. In addition to those named there are innumerable small branches,
ranging in size from deep coves to real canyons a mile or two long.
Outside of De Chelly, and independent of it, there is a little canyon
about 4 miles long, called Tse-on-i-tso-si by the Navaho. At one point
near its head it approaches so near to De Chelly that but a few feet of
rock separate them.
