The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer (1873), by Homer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Iliad of Homer (1873)

Author: Homer

Translator: Theodore Alois Buckley

Release Date: August 23, 2007 [EBook #22382]
Last updated: December 8, 2012

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER (1873) ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Renald Levesque and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net.







[Illustration: Homer by Hinchliff]

                                 THE
                           ILIAD OF HOMER,


                       Literally Translated,
                      WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES.

                                 BY

                   THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY, B.A.
                         OF CHRIST CHURCH.


                              LONDON:
          BELL AND DALDY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
                               1873.

    LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET
                        AND CHARING CROSS.




                             PREFACE.


The present translation of the Iliad will, it is hoped, be found to
convey, more accurately than any which has preceded it, the words and
thoughts of the original. It is based upon a careful examination of
whatever has been contributed by scholars of every age towards the
elucidation of the text, including the ancient scholiasts and
lexicographers, the exegetical labours of Barnes and Clarke, and the
elaborate criticisms of Heyne, Wolf, and their successors.

The necessary brevity of the notes has prevented the full discussion of
many passages where there is great room for difference of opinion, and
hence several interpretations are adopted without question, which, had
the editor's object been to write a critical commentary, would have
undergone a more lengthened examination. The same reason has compelled
him, in many instances, to substitute references for extracts,
indicating rather than quoting those storehouses of information, from
whose abundant contents he would gladly have drawn more copious
supplies. Among the numerous works to which he has had recourse, the
following deserve particular mention-Alberti's invaluable edition of
Hesychius, the Commentary of Eustathius, and Buttmann's Lexilogus.

In the succeeding volume, the Odyssey, Hymns, and minor poems will be
produced in a similar manner.


THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY,
_Ch. Ch., Oxford._




                        THE ILIAD OF HOMER.




                          BOOK THE FIRST.


                             ARGUMENT.

Apollo, enraged at the insult offered to his priest, Chryses, sends a
pestilence upon the Greeks. A council is called, and Agamemnon, being
compelled to restore the daughter of Chryses, whom he had taken from
him, in revenge deprives Achilles of Hippodameia. Achilles resigns her,
but refuses to aid the Greeks in battle, and at his request, his mother,
Thetis, petitions Jove to honour her offended son at the expense of the
Greeks. Jupiter, despite the opposition of Juno, grants her request.


Sing, O goddess, the destructive wrath of Achilles, son of Peleus, which
brought countless woes upon the Greeks,[1] and hurled many valiant souls
of heroes down to Hades, and made themselves[2] a prey to dogs and to
all birds [but the will of Jove was being accomplished], from the time
when Atrides, king of men, and noble Achilles, first contending, were
disunited.

   [Footnote 1: Although, as Ernesti observes, the verb [Greek:
   proiapsen] does not necessarily contain the idea of a _premature_
   death, yet the ancient interpreters are almost unanimous in
   understanding it so. Thus Eustathius, p. 13, ed. Bas.: [Greek:
   meta blazes eis Aioen pro to deontos epemphen, os tes protheseos]
   (_i.e._ pro) [Greek: kairikon ti delouses, e aplos epemphen, os
   pleonazouses tes protheseos.] Hesych. t. ii. p. 1029, s. n.:
   [Greek: proiapsen--deloi de dia tes lezeos ten met' odunes auton
   apoleian]. Cf. Virg. AEn. xii. 952: "Vitaque cum gemitu fugit
   _indignata_ sub umbras," where Servius well observes, "quia
   discedebat a juvene: nam volunt philosophi, invitam animam
   discedere a corpore, cum quo adhuc habitare legibus naturae
   poterat." I have, however, followed Ernesti, with the later
   commentators.]

   [Footnote 2: _I.e._ their bodies. Cf. AE. i. 44, vi. 362, where
   there is a similar sense of the pronoun.]

Which, then, of the gods, engaged these two in strife, so that they
should fight?[3] The son of Latona and Jove; for he, enraged with the
king, stirred up an evil pestilence through the army [and the people
kept perishing][4]; because the son of Atreus had dishonoured the
priest Chryses: for he came to the swift ships of the Greeks to ransom
his daughter, and bringing invaluable ransoms, having in his hands the
fillets of far-darting Apollo on his golden sceptre. And he supplicated
all the Greeks, but chiefly the two sons of Atreus, the leaders of the
people:

"Ye sons of Atreus, and ye other well-greaved Greeks, to you indeed may
the gods, possessing the heavenly dwellings, grant to destroy the city
of Priam, and to return home safely: but for me, liberate my beloved
daughter, and accept the ransoms, reverencing the son of Jove,
far-darting Apollo."

   [Footnote 3: Rut see Anthon.]

   [Footnote 4: Observe the full force of the imperfect tense.]

Upon this, all the other Greeks shouted assent, that the priest should
be reverenced, and the splendid ransoms accepted; yet was it not
pleasing in his mind to Agamemnon, son of Atreus; but he dismissed him
evilly, and added a harsh mandate:

"Let me not find thee, old man, at the hollow barks, either now
loitering, or hereafter returning, lest the staff and fillet of the god
avail thee not.[5] For her I will not set free; sooner shall old age
come upon her, at home in Argos, far away from her native land, employed
in offices of the loom, and preparing[6] my bed. But away! irritate me
not, that thou mayest return the safer."

   [Footnote 5: Of [Greek: chraismein], Buttmann, Lexil. p. 546,
   observes that "it is never found in a positive sense, but
   remained in ancient usage in negative sentences only; as, '_it is
   of no use to thee_,' or, '_it helps thee not_,' and similar
   expressions."]

   [Footnote 6: The old mistake of construing [Greek: antioosan]
   "sharing," which still clings to the translations, is exploded by
   Buttm. Lex. p. 144. Eust. and Heysch. both give [Greek:
   eutrepizonsan] as one of the interpretations; and that such is
   the right one is evident from the collateral phrase [Greek:
   porsynein lechos] in Od. iii. 403. [Greek: Lyphizezkas] is the
   perfect tense, but with the force of the present.]

Thus he spoke; but the old man was afraid, and obeyed the command. And
he went in silence along the shore of the loud-resounding sea; but then,
going apart, the aged man prayed much to king Apollo, whom fair-haired
Latona bore:

"Hear me, god of the silver bow, who art wont to protect Chrysa and
divine Cilla, and who mightily rulest over Tenedos: O Sminthius,[7] if
ever I have roofed[8] thy graceful temple, or if, moreover, at any time
I have burned to thee the fat thighs of bulls or of goats, accomplish
this entreaty for me. Let the Greeks pay for my tears, by thy arrows."

   [Footnote 7: An epithet derived from [Greek: sminthos], the
   Phrygian name for a _mouse_: either because Apollo had put an end
   to a plague of mice among that people, or because a mouse was
   thought emblematical of augury.--Grote, Hist. of Greece, vol. i.
   p. 68, observes that this "worship of Sminthian Apollo, in
   various parts of the Troad and its neighbouring territory, dates
   before the earliest period of AEolic colonization." On the Homeric
   description of Apollo, see Mueller, Dorians, vol. i. p. 315.]

   [Footnote 8: Not "crowned," as Heyne says; for this was a later
   custom.--See Anthon and Arnold.]

Thus he spoke praying; but to him Phoebus Apollo hearkened. And he
descended from the summits of Olympus, enraged in heart, having upon his
shoulders his bow and quiver covered on all sides. But as he moved, the
shafts rattled forthwith[9] upon the shoulders of him enraged; but he
went along like unto the night. Then he sat down apart from the ships,
and sent among them an arrow, and terrible arose the clang of the silver
bow. First he attacked the mules, and the swift[10] dogs; but afterwards
despatching a pointed arrow against [the Greeks] themselves, he smote
them, and frequent funeral-piles of the dead were continually burning.
Nine days through the army went the arrows of the god; but on the tenth,
Achilles called the people to an assembly; for to his mind the
white-armed goddess Juno had suggested it; for she was anxious
concerning the Greeks, because she saw them perishing. But when they
accordingly were assembled, and were met together, swift-footed
Achilles, rising up amidst them, [thus] spoke:

"O son of Atreus! now do I think that we would consent to return, having
been defeated in our purpose, if we should but escape death, since at
the same time[11] war and pestilence subdue the Greeks. But come now,
let us consult some prophet, or priest, or even one who is informed by
dreams (for dream also is from Jove),[12] who would tell us on what
account Phoebus Apollo is so much enraged with us: whether he blames us
on account of a vow [unperformed], or a hecatomb [unoffered]; and
whether haply he may be willing, having partaken of the savour of lambs
and unblemished goats, to avert from us the pestilence."

   [Footnote 9: The force of [Greek: ara] is noticed by Naegelsbach.]

   [Footnote 10: Or "white." Hesych. [Greek: tacheis, leykous].]

   [Footnote 11: Ammonius, p. 14, foolishly supposes that [Greek:
   amou] here denotes place, [Greek: in Troia]. Valcknaer justly
   supports the ordinary interpretation.]

   [Footnote 12: Cf. Plin. Ep. i. 18, and Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 3,
   sq.]

He indeed, thus having spoken, sat down; but to them there arose by far
the best of augurs, Calchas, son of Thestor, who knew the present, the
future, and the past,[13] and who guided the ships of the Greeks to
Ilium, by his prophetic art, which Phoebus Apollo gave him, who, being
well disposed,[14] addressed them, and said:

"O Achilles, dear to Jove, thou biddest me to declare the wrath of
Apollo, the far-darting king. Therefore will I declare it; but do thou
on thy part covenant, and swear to me, that thou wilt promptly assist me
in word and hand. For methinks I shall irritate a man who widely rules
over all the Argives, and whom the Greeks obey. For a king is more
powerful[15] when he is enraged with an inferior man; for though he may
repress his wrath[16] for that same day, yet he afterwards retains his
anger in his heart, until he accomplishes it; but do thou consider
whether thou wilt protect me."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed: "Taking full
confidence, declare the divine oracle, whatsoever thou knowest. For, by
Apollo, dear to Jove, to whom thou, praying, O Calchas, dost disclose
predictions to the Greeks, no one of all the Greeks, while I am alive
and have sight upon the earth, shall lay heavy hands upon thee at the
hollow ships; not even if thou wast to name Agamemnon, who now boasts
himself to be much the most powerful of the Greeks." [17]

   [Footnote 13: A common formula in the ancient poets to express
   the eternity of things. Empedocles apud Pseud. Arist. de Mundo:
   [Greek: Panth' osa t' en, osa t' esti, kai ossa te estai opiso].
   Virg. Georg. iv. 392: "Novit namque omnia vates, Quae sint, quae
   fuerint, quae mox ventura trahantur."]

   [Footnote 14: See Abresch. on AEschyl. p. 287. Ernesti.]

   [Footnote 15: [Greek: anagaktousi gar dia ten yperochen].
   A--rist. Rhet. ii. 2, quoting this verse.]

   [Footnote 16: Lit. "digest his bile". Homer's distinction between
   [Greek: cholos] and [Greek: kotos] is observed by Nemesius, de
   Nat. Hom. Sec. 21.]

   [Footnote 17: I have used "Greeks" wherever the whole army is
   evidently meant. In other instances I have retained the specific
   names of the different confederate nations.]

And upon this, the blameless prophet then took confidence, and spoke:
"Neither is he enraged on account of a vow [unperformed], nor of a
hecatomb [unoffered], but on account of his priest, whom Agamemnon
dishonoured; neither did he liberate his daughter, nor did he receive
her ransom. Wherefore has the Far-darter given woes, and still will he
give them; nor will he withhold his heavy hands from the pestilence,
before that [Agamemnon] restore to her dear father the bright-eyed[18]
maid, unpurchased, unransomed, and conduct a sacred hecatomb to Chrysa;
then, perhaps, having appeased, we might persuade him."

   [Footnote 18: See Arnold.]

He indeed, having thus spoken, sat down. But to them arose the hero, the
son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon,[19] agitated; and his all-gloomy
heart was greatly filled with wrath, and his eyes were like unto
gleaming fire. Sternly regarding Calchas most of all, he addressed
[him]:

"Prophet of ills, not at any time hast thou spoken anything good for me;
but evils are always gratifying to thy soul to prophesy,[20] and never
yet hast thou offered one good word, nor accomplished [one]. And now,
prophesying amongst the Greeks, thou haranguest that forsooth the
Far-darter works griefs to them upon this account, because I was
unwilling to accept the splendid ransom of the virgin daughter of
Chryses, since I much prefer to have her at home; and my reason is, I
prefer her even to Clytemnestra, my lawful wife; for she is not inferior
to her, either in person, or in figure, or in mind, or by any means in
accomplishments. But even thus I am willing to restore her, if it be
better; for I wish the people to be safe rather than to perish. But do
thou immediately prepare a prize for me, that I may not alone, of the
Argives, be without a prize; since it is not fitting. For ye all see
this, that my prize is going elsewhere."

   [Footnote 19: "In the assembly of the people, as in the courts of
   justice, the nobles alone speak, advise, and decide, whilst the
   people merely listen to their ordinances and decisions, in order
   to regulate their own conduct accordingly; being suffered,
   indeed, to follow the natural impulse of evincing, to a certain
   extent, their approbation or disapprobation of their superiors,
   but without any legal means of giving validity to their opinion."
   Mueller, Gk. Lit. p. 30.]

   [Footnote 20: But we must not join [Greek: manteyesthai] with
   [Greek: kika].--Naegelsbach.]

But him swift-footed godlike Achilles then answered: "Most noble son of
Atreus, most avaricious of all! for how shall the magnanimous Greeks
assign thee a prize? Nor do we know of many common stores laid up
anywhere. But what we plundered[21] from the cities, these have been
divided, and it is not fitting that the troops should collect these
brought together again. But do thou now let her go to the God, and we
Greeks will compensate thee thrice, or four-fold, if haply Jove grant to
us to sack the well-fortified city of Troy."

   [Footnote 21: More closely: "took from the cities, when we
   destroyed them."]

But him answering, king Agamemnon addressed: "Do not thus, excellent
though thou be, godlike Achilles, practise deceit in thy mind; since
thou shalt not overreach, nor yet persuade me. Dost thou wish that thou
thyself mayest have a prize, whilst I sit down idly,[22] wanting one?
And dost thou bid me to restore her? If, however, the magnanimous Greeks
will give me a prize, having suited it to my mind, so that it shall be
an equivalent, [it is well]. But if they will not give it, then I myself
coming, will seize your prize, or that of Ajax,[23] or Ulysses,[24] and
will bear it away; and he to whom I may come shall have cause for anger.
On these things, however, we will consult afterwards. But now come, let
us launch a sable ship into the boundless sea, and let us collect into
it rowers in sufficient number, and place on board a hecatomb; and let
us make the fair-cheeked daughter of Chryses to embark, and let some one
noble man be commander, Ajax or Idomeneus, or divine Ulysses; or
thyself, son of Peleus, most terrible of all men, that thou mayest
appease for us the Far-darter, having offered sacrifices."

   [Footnote 22: Buttmann would take [Greek: autos] as = frustra.]

   [Footnote 23: Tecmessa.]

   [Footnote 24: Laodice, daughter of Cyenus.]

But him swift-footed Achilles sternly regarding, addressed: "Ha![25]
thou clad in impudence, thou bent on gain, how can any of the Greeks
willingly obey thy orders, either to undertake a mission, or to fight
bravely with men? For I did not come hither to fight on account of the
warlike Trojans, seeing that they are blameless as respects me. Since
they have never driven away my oxen, nor my horses either nor ever
injured my crops in fertile and populous Phthia: for very many shadowy
mountains, and the resounding sea, are between us. But thee, O most
shameless man, we follow, that thou mayest rejoice; seeking satisfaction
from the Trojans for Menelaus, and for thy pleasure, shameless one! for
which things thou hast neither respect nor care. And now thou hast
threatened that thou wilt in person wrest from me my prize, for which I
have toiled much, and which the sons of the Greeks have given me.
Whenever the Greeks sacked a well-inhabited city of the Trojans, I never
have had a prize equal to thine; although my hands perform the greater
portion of the tumultuous conflict, yet when the division [of spoil] may
come, a much greater prize is given to thee, while I come to my ships,
when I am fatigued with fighting, having one small and agreeable. But
now I will go to Phthia, for it is much better to return home with our
curved ships; for I do not think that thou shalt amass wealth and
treasures while I am dishonoured here."

   [Footnote 25: See my note on Od. i. p. 2, n. 11, ed. Bohn.]

But him, the king of men, Agamemnon, then answered: "Fly, by all means,
if thy mind urges thee; nor will I entreat thee to remain on my account:
there are others with me who will honour me, but chiefly the all-wise
Jove. For to me thou art the most odious of the Jove-nourished princes,
for ever is contention agreeable to thee, and wars and battles. If thou
be very bold, why doubtless a deity has given this to thee. Going home
with thy ships and thy companions, rule over the Myrmidons; for I do not
regard thee, nor care for thee in thy wrath; but thus will I threaten
thee: Since Phoebus Apollo is depriving me of the daughter of
Chryses,[26] her indeed I will send, with my own ship, and with my own
friends; but I myself, going to thy tent, will lead away the
fair-cheeked daughter of Brises,[27] thy prize; that thou mayest well
know how much more powerful I am than thou, and that another may dread
to pronounce himself equal to me, and to liken himself openly [to me]."

   [Footnote 26: Astynome. Cf. Eustath. fol. 58]

   [Footnote 27: Hippodameia.]

Thus he spoke, and grief arose to the son of Peleus, and the heart
within, in his hairy breast, was pondering upon two courses; whether,
drawing his sharp sword from his thigh, he should dismiss them,[28] and
should kill the son of Atreus, or should put a stop to his wrath, and
restrain his passion. While he was thus pondering in his heart and soul,
and was drawing his mighty sword from the scabbard, came Minerva from
heaven; for her the white-armed goddess Juno had sent forward, equally
loving and regarding both from her soul. And she stood behind, and
caught the son of Peleus by his yellow hair, appearing to him alone; but
none of the others beheld her. But Achilles was amazed, and turned
himself round, and immediately recognized Pallas Minerva; and
awe-inspiring her eyes appeared to him. And addressing her, he spoke
winged words:

"Why, O offspring of aegis-bearing Jove, hast thou come hither? Is it
that thou mayest witness the insolence of Agamemnon, the son of Atreus?
But I tell thee, what I think will be accomplished, that he will
probably soon lose his life by his haughtiness."

   [Footnote 28: The princes assembled.]

But him in turn the azure-eyed goddess Minerva addressed: "I came from
heaven to assuage thy wrath, if thou wilt obey me; for the white-armed
goddess Juno sent me forward, equally loving and regarding both from her
soul. But come, cease from strife, nor draw the sword with thine hand.
But reproach by words, as the occasion may suggest; for thus I declare,
and it shall be accomplished, that thrice as many splendid gifts shall
be presented to thee, because of this insolent act; only restrain
thyself, and obey us."

But her answering,[29] swift-footed Achilles addressed: "It behoves me
to observe the command of you both, O goddess, although much enraged in
my soul; for so it is better. Whosoever obeys the gods, to him they
hearken propitiously."

   [Footnote 29: Columna on Ennius, p. 17, ed. Hessel., compares
   "Ollei respondet Rex Albai longai," and "Ollei respondet suavis
   sonus Egeriaei," observing that this formula was probably as
   common in the heroic annals of Ennius as [Greek: ton d'
   apameixomenos] is in Homer.]

He spoke, and held still his heavy hand upon the silvery hilt, and
thrust back the great sword into the scabbard, nor did he disobey the
mandate of Minerva; but she had gone to Olympus, to the mansions of
aegis-bearing Jove, amongst the other deities. But the son of Peleus
again addressed Atrides with injurious[30] words, nor as yet ceased from
anger:

"Wine-bibber, having the countenance of a dog, but the heart of a stag,
never hast thou at any time dared in soul to arm thyself with the
people for war, nor to go to ambuscade with the chiefs of the Greeks;
for this always appears to thee to be death. Certainly it is much better
through the wide army of the Achaeans, to take away the rewards of
whoever may speak against thee. A people-devouring king [art thou],
since thou rulest over fellows of no account; for assuredly, son of
Atreus, thou [otherwise] wouldst have insulted now for the last time.
But I will tell thee, and I will further swear a great oath: yea, by
this sceptre, which will never bear leaves and branches, nor will bud
again, after it has once left its trunk on the mountains; for the axe
has lopped it all around of its leaves and bark; but now the sons of the
Greeks, the judges, they who protect the laws [received] from Jove, bear
it in their hands; and this will be a great oath to thee; surely will a
longing desire for Achilles come upon all the sons of the Achaeans at
some future day, and thou, although much grieved, wilt be unable to
assist them, when many dying shall fall by the hand of man-slaying
Hector. Then enraged, wilt thou inwardly fret thy soul, that thou didst
in no way honour the bravest of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 30: Epimerism. Hom. in Cramer's Anecdott. vol. i. p.
   24. [Greek: atarteros, e para ten aten, o semainei ten blaxen,
   ateros].--Hesych. [Greek: blaxros, ateros].]

Thus spoke the son of Peleus; and he cast upon the earth his sceptre
studded with golden nails, and sat down. But on the other hand, the son
of Atreus was enraged; therefore to them arose the sweet-voiced
Nestor,[31] the harmonious orator of the Pylians, from whose tongue
flowed language sweeter than honey. During his life two generations of
articulately-speaking men had become extinct, who, formerly, were reared
and lived with him in divine Pylus, but he was now ruling over the
third; who, wisely counselling, addressed them, and said:

   [Footnote 31: I must refer the reader to a most happy sketch of
   Nestor's exploits and character in Crete's Hist, of Greece, vol.
   i. p. 153.]

"O gods! surely a great sorrow comes upon the Grecian land. Verily,
Priam would exult, and the sons of Priam, and the other Trojans, would
greatly rejoice in their souls, if they were to hear these things of you
twain contending: you who in council and in fighting surpass the Greeks.
But be persuaded; for ye are both younger than I am. For already, in
former times, I have associated with men braver than you, and they
never disdained me. I never saw, nor shall I see, such men as Pirithous,
and Dryas, shepherd of the people, and Caeneus, and Exadius, and god-like
Polyphemus,[32] and Theseus, the son of AEgeus, like unto the immortals.
Bravest indeed were they trained up of earthly men; bravest they were,
and they fought with the bravest Centaurs of the mountain caves, and
terribly slew them. With these was I conversant, coming from Pylus, far
from the Apian land; for they invited me, and I fought to the best of my
power; but with them none of these who now are mortals upon the earth
could fight. And even they heard my counsels, and obeyed my words. But
do ye also obey, since it is better to be obedient; nor do thou,
although being powerful, take away the maid from him, but leave it so,
seeing that the sons of the Greeks first gave [her as] a prize on him.
Nor do thou, O son of Peleus, feel inclined to contend against the king;
since never yet has any sceptre-bearing king, to whom Jove has given
glory, been allotted an equal share of dignity. But though thou be of
superior strength, and a goddess mother has given thee birth, yet he is
superior in power, inasmuch as he rules more people. Do thou, son of
Atreus, repress thine anger; for it is I that[33] entreat thee to forego
thy resentment on behalf of Achilles, who is the great bulwark of
destructive war to all the Achaeans."

   [Footnote 32: A prince of the Lapithae, not the Cyclops.]

   [Footnote 33: See Anthon, who has well remarked the force of the
   particles.]

But him king Agamemnon answering addressed: "Of a truth thou hast said
all these things, old man, according to what is right. But this man is
desirous to be above all other men; he wishes to have the mastery, and
lord it over all, and to prescribe to all; with which his desires I
think some one will not comply. But if the ever-existing gods have made
him a warrior, do they therefore give him the right to utter insults?"

But him noble Achilles interruptingly answered: "Yea, forsooth,[34] I
may be called a coward and a man of no worth, if now I yield to thee in
everything, whatever thou mayest say. Enjoin these things to other men;
for dictate not to me, for I think that I shall no longer obey thee. But
another thing will I tell thee, and do thou store it in thy mind: I
will not contend with my hands, neither with thee, nor with others, on
account of this maid, since ye, the donors, take her away. But of the
other effects, which I have at my swift black ship, of those thou shalt
not remove one, taking them away, I being unwilling. But if [thou wilt],
come, make trial, that these also may know: quickly shall thy black
blood flow around my lance."

   [Footnote 34: Properly elliptical--_I have done right; for_,
   &c.--Crusius.]

Thus these twain, striving with contrary words, arose, and they broke up
the assembly at the ships of the Greeks. The son of Peleus on his part
repaired to his tents and well-proportioned[35] ships, with the son of
Menoetius,[36] and his companions. But the son of Atreus[37] launched
his swift ship into the sea, and selected and put into it twenty rowers,
and embarked a hecatomb for the god. And he led the fair daughter of
Chryses and placed her on board, and the very wise Ulysses embarked as
conductor. They then embarking, sailed over the watery paths. But the
son of Atreus ordered the armies to purify themselves;[38] and they were
purified, and cast forth the ablutions into the sea. And they sacrificed
to Apollo perfect hecatombs of bulls and goats, along the shore of the
barren sea; and the savour involved in[39] smoke ascended to heaven.
Thus were they employed in these things through the army. Nor did
Agamemnon cease from the contention which at first he threatened against
Achilles. But he thus addressed Talthybius and Eurybates, who were his
heralds and zealous attendants:[40]

   [Footnote 35: Equal on both sides, so as to preserve a balance.
   But Blomfield, Obs. on Matth. Gr. Sec. 124, prefers to render it
   "ships of due size," as [Greek: dais eise], ver. 468, "an
   equalized meal."]

   [Footnote 36: Patroclus.]

   [Footnote 37: So Anthon, comparing ver. 142.]

   [Footnote 38: Not a mere medicinal measure, but a symbolical
   putting away of the guilt, which, through Agamemnon's
   transgression, was brought upon the army also.--Wolf.]

   [Footnote 39: Not _about_ the smoke, but _in_ the smoke; for
   [Greek: peri] denotes also the staying within the compass of an
   object.--Naegelsbach.]

   [Footnote 40: [Greek: therapon] is a voluntary servant, as
   opposed to [Greek: doulos].--See Arnold.]

"Going to the tent of Achilles, the son of Peleus, lead away fair
Briseis, having taken her by the hand; but if he will not give her, then
I myself, coming with great numbers, will take her, and this will be
more grievous[41] to him."

Thus speaking, he despatched them, having added[42] a harsh command. But
they reluctantly went along the shore of the barren sea, and came to the
tents and ships of the Myrmidons. And they found him sitting at his tent
and his black ship: nor did Achilles, seeing them, rejoice. But they,
confused, and reverencing the king, stood still, nor addressed him at
all, nor spoke [their bidding]. But he perceived [it] in his mind, and
said:

"Hail, heralds, messengers of Jove,[43] and also of men, come near, for
ye are not blamable to me in the least, but Agamemnon, who has sent you
on account of the maid Briseis. However, come, noble Patroclus, lead
forth the maid, and give her to them to conduct; but let these be
witnesses [of the insult offered me], both before the blessed gods, and
before mortal men, and before the merciless king. But if ever again
there shall be need of me to avert unseemly destruction from the rest,
[appeal to me shall be in vain],[44] for surely he rages with an
infatuated mind, nor knows at all how to view the future and the past,
in order that the Greeks may fight in safety at their ships."

Thus he spoke. And Patroclus obeyed his dear companion, and led forth
fair-cheeked Briseis from the tent, and gave her to them to conduct; and
they returned along by the ships of the Greeks. But the woman went with
them reluctantly, whilst Achilles, weeping,[45] immediately sat down,
removed apart from his companions, upon the shore of the hoary sea,
gazing on the darkling main; and much he be sought his dear mother,
stretching forth his hands:

   [Footnote 41: Hesych. [Greek: rigion phoberoteron chalepoteron].]

   [Footnote 42: "Misit eos, minaci jusso dato."--Heyne.]

   [Footnote 43: So called from their inviolability,--[Greek: asylon
   gar kai theion to genos to kerykon].--Schol. [Greek: Kai ezen
   antois pantachose adeos ienai].--Pollux, viii. They were properly
   sacred to Mercury (id. iv. 9. Cf. Feith, Antiq. Homer, iv. 1),
   but are called the messengers of Jove, as being under his special
   protection, with a reference to the supporting of regal
   authority.]

   [Footnote 44: Observe the aposiopesis.]

   [Footnote 45: Not for the loss of Briseis, but on account of the
   affront.]

"O mother, since thou hast borne me, to be but short-lived, at least
then ought high-thundering Olympian Jove to have vouchsafed honour to
me; but now he has not honoured me ever so little; for the son of
Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, has dishonoured me; for he, taking away
