The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Story of the Greeks, by H. A. Guerber


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Story of the Greeks


Author: H. A. Guerber



Release Date: December 5, 2007  [eBook #23495]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE GREEKS***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Dave Macfarlane, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23495-h.htm or 23495-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/4/9/23495/23495-h/23495-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/4/9/23495/23495-h.zip)





Eclectic School Readings

THE STORY OF THE GREEKS

by

H. A. GUERBER







[Illustration]

New York .:. Cincinnati .:. Chicago
American Book Company

Copyright, 1896, by
American Book Company.



STORY OF THE GREEKS.

W.P. 15


[Illustration: Theseus and the Minotaur.

_Frontispiece_]


DEDICATED
TO
ARNOLD, HELEN, AND EDWARD




PREFACE.


This elementary history of Greece is intended for supplementary reading
or as a first history text-book for young pupils. It is therefore made
up principally of stories about persons; for, while history proper is
largely beyond the comprehension of children, they are able at an early
age to understand and enjoy anecdotes of people, especially of those in
the childhood of civilization. At the same time, these stories will give
a clear idea of the most important events that have taken place in the
ancient world, and, it is hoped, will arouse a desire to read further.
They also aim to enforce the lessons of perseverance, courage,
patriotism, and virtue that are taught by the noble lives described.

A knowledge of ancient history, however superficial, is of very great
value; and the classic legends are almost equally worth knowing, because
of the prominent part they play in the world's literature. These tales
make a deep impression on the minds of children, and the history thus
learned almost in play will cling to the memory far more tenaciously
than any lessons subsequently conned.

Many children leave school unacquainted with any history except that of
the United States; which, dealing with less simple and primitive times
than that of Greece, is apt to be so unattractive that the child never
afterwards reads any historical works. It has been my intention to write
a book which will give children pleasure to read, and will thus
counteract the impression that history is uninteresting.

A few suggestions to teachers may not be considered superfluous. In the
first place, I have found historical anecdotes an excellent aid in
teaching English. Pupils find it far from irksome to relate the stories
in their own words, and to reproduce them in compositions. Secondly,
whenever a city or country is mentioned, every pupil should point out
its location on the map. By such means only can any one properly
understand an historical narrative; and in the present case there is the
added reason that the practice will go far towards increasing the
child's interest in geography. Lastly, the teacher should take great
care that the proper names are correctly pronounced. The most common
errors are provided against in the text; for, on the first occurrence of
such a word, it is divided into syllables, with the accent marked. It
remains for the teacher to enforce the ordinary rules as to the proper
sounds of vowels and consonants.


H.A.G.




CONTENTS.



                                                       PAGE
    Map                                 _between 10 and 11_
      I. Early Inhabitants of Greece                    11
     II. The Deluge of Ogyges                           13
    III. The Founding of Many Important Cities          15
     IV. Story of Deucalion                             19
      V. Story of Daedalus and Icarus                    21
     VI. The Adventures of Jason                        24
    VII. Theseus visits the Labyrinth                   26
   VIII. The Terrible Prophecy                          29
     IX. The Sphinx's Riddle                            30
      X. Blindness and Death of OEdipus                 34
     XI. The Brothers' Quarrel                          37
    XII. The Taking of Thebes                           39
   XIII. The Childhood of Paris                         41
    XIV. The Muster of the Troops                       44
     XV. The Sacrifice of Iphigenia                     46
    XVI. The Wrath of Achilles                          48
   XVII. Death of Hector and Achilles                   50
  XVIII. The Burning of Troy                            52
    XIX. Heroic Death of Codrus                         55
     XX. The Blind Poet                                 57
    XXI. The Rise of Sparta                             61
   XXII. The Spartan Training                           62
  XXIII. The Brave Spartan Boy                          64
   XXIV. Public Tables in Sparta                        67
    XXV. Laws of Lycurgus                               69
   XXVI. The Messenian War                              71
  XXVII. The Music of Tyrtaeus                           73
 XXVIII. Aristomenes' Escape                            76
   XXIX. The Olympic Games                              77
    XXX. Milo of Croton                                 81
   XXXI. The Jealous Athlete                            83
  XXXII. The Girls' Games                               84
 XXXIII. The Bloody Laws of Draco                       86
  XXXIV. The Laws of Solon                              89
   XXXV. The First Plays                                92
  XXXVI. The Tyrant Pisistratus                         95
 XXXVII. The Tyrant's Insult                            97
XXXVIII. Death of the Conspirators                      99
  XXXIX. Hippias driven out of Athens                  100
     XL. The Great King                                104
    XLI. Hippias visits Darius                         105
   XLII. Destruction of the Persian Host               108
  XLIII. The Advance of the Second Host                110
   XLIV. The Battle of Marathon                        113
    XLV. Miltiades' Disgrace                           115
   XLVI. Aristides the Just                            117
  XLVII. Two Noble Spartan Youths                      119
 XLVIII. The Great Army                                121
   XLIX. Preparations for Defense                      124
      L. Leonidas at Thermopylae                        127
     LI. Death of Leonidas                             128
    LII. The Burning of Athens                         131
   LIII. The Battles of Salamis and Plataea             133
    LIV. The Rebuilding of Athens                      136
     LV. Death of Pausanias                            138
    LVI. Cimon improves Athens                         141
   LVII. The Earthquake                                143
  LVIII. The Age of Pericles                           146
    LIX. The Teachings of Anaxagoras                   151
     LX. Beginning of the Peloponnesian War            152
    LXI. Death of Pericles                             155
   LXII. The Philosopher Socrates                      157
  LXIII. Socrates' Favorite Pupil                      159
   LXIV. Youth of Alcibiades                           163
    LXV. Greek Colonies in Italy                       165
   LXVI. Alcibiades in Disgrace                        167
  LXVII. Death of Alcibiades                           169
 LXVIII. The Overthrow of the Thirty Tyrants           171
   LXIX. Accusation of Socrates                        173
    LXX. Death of Socrates                             175
   LXXI. The Defeat of Cyrus                           180
  LXXII. The Retreat of the Ten Thousand               182
 LXXIII. Agesilaus in Asia                             185
  LXXIV. A Strange Interview                           186
   LXXV. The Peace of Antalcidas                       189
  LXXVI. The Theban Friends                            190
 LXXVII. Thebes Free once more                         192
LXXVIII. The Battle of Leuctra                         195
  LXXIX. Death of Pelopidas                            197
   LXXX. The Battle of Mantinea                        199
   XXXI. The Tyrant of Syracuse                        201
  XXXII. Story of Damon and Pythias                    204
 XXXIII. The Sword of Damocles                         208
  XXXIV. Dion and Dionysius                            210
   XXXV. Civil War in Syracuse                         212
  XXXVI. Death of Dion                                 214
 XXXVII. Philip of Macedon                             217
XXXVIII. Philip begins his Conquests                   219
  XXXIX. The Orator Demosthenes                        221
     XC. Philip masters Greece                         224
    XCI. Birth of Alexander                            227
   XCII. The Steed Bucephalus                          229
  XCIII. Alexander as King                             232
   XCIV. Alexander and Diogenes                        234
    XCV. Alexander's Brilliant Beginning               236
   XCVI. The Gordian Knot                              238
  XCVII. Alexander's Royal Captives                    241
  CVIII. Alexander at Jerusalem                        242
   XCIX. The African Desert                            244
      C. Death of Darius                               247
     CI. Defeat of Porus                               249
    CII. The Return to Babylon                         251
   CIII. Death of Alexander the Great                  252
    CIV. The Division of the Realm                     255
     CV. Death of Demosthenes                          257
    CVI. The Last of the Athenians                     260
   CVII. The Colossus of Rhodes                        262
  CVIII. The Battle of Ipsus                           265
    CIX. Demetrius and the Athenians                   266
     CX. The Achaean League                             268
    CXI. Division in Sparta                            270
   CXII. Death of Agis                                 274
  CXIII. The War of the Two Leagues                    276
   CXIV. The Last of the Greeks                        278
    CXV. Greece a Roman Province                       280
  INDEX                                                283


[Illustration]




THE STORY OF THE GREEKS.




I. EARLY INHABITANTS OF GREECE.


Although Greece (or Hel'las) is only half as large as the State of New
York, it holds a very important place in the history of the world. It is
situated in the southern part of Europe, cut off from the rest of the
continent by a chain of high mountains which form a great wall on the
north. It is surrounded on nearly all sides by the blue waters of the
Med-it-er-ra'ne-an Sea, which stretch so far inland that it is said no
part of the country is forty miles from the sea, or ten miles from the
hills. Thus shut in by sea and mountains, it forms a little territory by
itself, and it was the home of a noted people.

The history of Greece goes back to the time when people did not know how
to write, and kept no record of what was happening around them. For a
long while the stories told by parents to their children were the only
information which could be had about the country and its former
inhabitants; and these stories, slightly changed by every new teller,
grew more and more extraordinary as time passed. At last they were so
changed that no one could tell where the truth ended and fancy began.

The beginning of Greek history is therefore like a fairy tale; and while
much of it cannot, of course, be true, it is the only information we
have about the early Greeks. It is these strange fireside stories, which
used to amuse Greek children so many years ago, that you are first going
to hear.

About two thousand years before the birth of Christ, in the days when
Isaac wanted to go down into Egypt, Greece was inhabited by a savage
race of men called the Pe-las'gi-ans. They lived in the forests, or in
caves hollowed out of the mountain side, and hunted wild beasts with
great clubs and stone-tipped arrows and spears. They were so rude and
wild that they ate nothing but raw meat, berries, and the roots which
they dug up with sharp stones or even with their hands.

For clothing, the Pelasgians used the skins of the beasts they had
killed; and to protect themselves against other savages, they gathered
