The Project Gutenberg EBook Uarda by Georg Ebers, Volume 8.
#8 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Uarda, Volume 8.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5446]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on April 29, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UARDA BY GEORG EBERS, V8 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





UARDA

Volume 8.

By Georg Ebers



CHAPTER XXXIII.

An hour later, Ani, in rich attire, left his father's tomb, and drove his
brilliant chariot past the witch's cave, and the little cottage of
Uarda's father.

Nemu squatted on the step, the dwarf's usual place.  The little man
looked down at the lately rebuilt hut, and ground his teeth, when,
through an opening in the hedge, he saw the white robe of a man,
who was sitting by Uarda.

The pretty child's visitor was prince Rameri, who had crossed the Nile in
the early morning, dressed as a young scribe of the treasury, to obtain
news of Pentaur--and to stick a rose into Uarda's hair.

This purpose was, indeed, the more important of the two, for the other
must, in point of time at any rate, be the second.

He found it necessary to excuse himself to his own conscience with a
variety of cogent reasons.  In the first place the rose, which lay
carefully secured in a fold of his robe, ran great danger of fading if he
first waited for his companions near the temple of Seti; next, a hasty
return from thence to Thebes might prove necessary; and finally, it
seemed to him not impossible that Bent-Anat might send a master of the
ceremonies after him, and if that happened any delay might frustrate his
purpose.

His heart beat loud and violently, not for love of the maiden, but
because he felt he was doing wrong.  The spot that he must tread was
unclean, and he had, for the first time, told a lie.  He had given
himself out to Uarda to be a noble youth of Bent-Anat's train, and, as
one falsehood usually entails another, in answer to her questions he had
given her false information as to his parents and his life.

Had evil more power over him in this unclean spot than in the House of
Seti, and at his father's?  It might very well be so, for all disturbance
in nature and men was the work of Seth, and how wild was the storm in his
breast!  And yet!  He wished nothing but good to come of it to Uarda.
She was so fair and sweet--like some child of the Gods: and certainly the
white maiden must have been stolen from some one, and could not possibly
belong to the unclean people.

When the prince entered the court of the hut, Uarda was not to be seen,
but he soon heard her voice singing out through the open door.  She came
out into the air, for the dog barked furiously at Rameri.  When she saw
the prince, she started, and said:

"You are here already again, and yet I warned you.  My grandmother in
there is the wife of a paraschites."

"I am not come to visit her," retorted the prince, "but you only; and you
do not belong to them, of that I am convinced.  No roses grow in the
desert."

"And yet: am my father's child," said Uarda decidedly, "and my poor dead
grandfather's grandchild.  Certainly I belong to them, and those that do
not think me good enough for them may keep away."

With these words she turned to re-enter the house; but Rameri seized her
hand, and held her back, saying:

"How cruel you are!  I tried to save you, and came to see you before I
thought that you might--and, indeed, you are quite unlike the people whom
you call your relations.  You must not misunderstand me; but it would be
horrible to me to believe that you, who are so beautiful, and as white as
a lily, have any part in the hideous curse.  You charm every one, even my
mistress, Bent-Anat, and it seems to me impossible--"

"That I should belong to the unclean!--say it out," said Uarda softly,
and casting down her eyes.

Then she continued more excitedly: "But I tell you, the curse is unjust,
for a better man never lived than my grandfather was."

Tears sprang from her eyes, and Rameri said: "I fully believe it; and
it must be very difficult to continue good when every one despises and
scorns one; I at least can be brought to no good by blame, though I can
by praise.  Certainly people are obliged to meet me and mine with
respect."

"And us with contempt!"  exclaimed Uarda.  "But I will tell you
something.  If a man is sure that he is good, it is all the same to
him whether he be despised or honored by other people.  Nay--we may be
prouder than you; for you great folks must often say to yourselves that
you are worth less than men value you at, and we know that we are worth
more."

"I have often thought that of you," exclaimed Rameri, "and there is one
who recognizes your worth; and that is I.  Even if it were otherwise, I
must always--always think of you."

"I have thought of you too," said Uarda.  "Just now, when I was sitting
with my sick grandmother, it passed through my mind how nice it would be
if I had a brother just like you.  Do you know what I should do if you
were my brother?"

"Well?"

"I should buy you a chariot and horse, and you should go away to the
king's war."

"Are you so rich?"  asked Rameri smiling.

"Oh yes!"  answered Uarda.  "To be sure, I have not been rich for more
than an hour.  Can you read?"

"Yes."

"Only think, when I was ill they sent a doctor to me from the House of
Seti.  He was very clever, but a strange man.  He often looked into my
eyes like a drunken man, and he stammered when he spoke."

"Is his name Nebsecht?"  asked the prince.

"Yes, Nebsecht.  He planned strange things with grandfather, and after
Pentaur and you had saved us in the frightful attack upon us he
interceded for us.  Since then he has not come again, for I was already
much better.  Now to-day, about two hours ago, the dog barked, and an old
man, a stranger, came up to me, and said he was Nebsecht's brother, and
had a great deal of money in his charge for me.  He gave me a ring too,
and said that he would pay the money to him, who took the ring to him
from me.  Then he read this letter to me."

Rameri took the letter and read.  "Nebsecht to the fair Uarda."

"Nebsecht greets Uarda, and informs her that he owed her grandfather in
Osiris, Pinem--whose body the kolchytes are embalming like that of a
noble--a sum of a thousand gold rings.  These he has entrusted to his
brother Teta to hold ready for her at any moment.  She may trust Teta
entirely, for he is honest, and ask him for money whenever she needs it.
It would be best that she should ask Teta to take care of the money for
her, and to buy her a house and field; then she could remove into it, and
live in it free from care with her grandmother.  She may wait a year, and
then she may choose a husband.  Nebsecht loves Uarda much.  If at the end
of thirteen months he has not been to see her, she had better marry whom
she will; but not before she has shown the jewel left her by her mother
to the king's interpreter."

"How strange!"  exclaimed Rameri.  "Who would have given the singular
physician, who always wore such  dirty clothes, credit  for such
generosity?  But what is this jewel that you have?"

Uarda opened her shirt, and showed the prince the sparkling ornament.

"Those are diamonds---it is very valuable!"  cried the prince; "and there
in the middle on the onyx there are sharply engraved signs.  I cannot
read them, but I will show them to the interpreter.  Did your mother wear
that?"

"My father found it on her when she died," said Uarda.  "She came to
Egypt as a prisoner of war, and was as white as I am, but dumb, so she
could not tell us the name of her home."

"She belonged to some great house among the foreigners, and the children
inherit from the mother," cried the prince joyfully.  "You are a
princess, Uarda!  Oh! how glad I am, and how much I love you!"

The girl smiled and said, "Now you will not be afraid to touch the
daughter of the unclean."

"You are cruel," replied the prince.  "Shall I tell you what I determined
