The Project Gutenberg EBook An Egyptian Princess,  by Georg Ebers, v8
#19 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: An Egyptian Princess, Volume 8.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5457]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 7, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS, BY EBERS, V8 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS, Part 2.

By Georg Ebers

Volume 8.



CHAPTER VIII.

The sun was already trying to break a path for his rays through the thick
curtains, that closed the window of the sick-room, but Nebenchari had not
moved from the Egyptian girl's bedside.  Sometimes he felt her pulse, or
spread sweet-scented ointments on her forehead or chest, and then he
would sit gazing dreamily into vacancy.  Nitetis seemed to have sunk into
a deep sleep after an attack of convulsions.  At the foot of her bed
stood six Persian doctors, murmuring incantations under the orders of
Nebenchari, whose superior science they acknowledged, and who was seated
at the bed's head.

Every time he felt the sick girl's pulse he shrugged his shoulders, and
the gesture was immediately imitated by his Persian colleagues.  From
time to time the curtain was lifted and a lovely head appeared, whose
questioning blue eyes fixed at once on the physician, but were always
dismissed with the same melancholy shrug.  It was Atossa.  Twice she had
ventured into the room, stepping so lightly as hardly to touch the thick
carpet of Milesian wool, had stolen to her friend's bedside and lightly
kissed her forehead, on which the pearly dew of death was standing, but
each time a severe and reproving glance from Nebenchari had sent her back
again into the next room, where her mother Kassandane was lying, awaiting
the end.

Cambyses had left the sick-room at sunrise, on seeing that Nitetis had
fallen asleep; he flung himself on to his horse, and accompanied by
Phanes, Prexaspes, Otanes, Darius, and a number of courtiers, only just
aroused from their sleep, took a wild ride through the game-park.  He
knew by experience, that he could best overcome or forget any violent
mental emotion when mounted on an unmanageable horse.

Nebenchari started on hearing the sound of horses' hoofs in the distance.
In a waking dream he had seen Cambyses enter his native land at the head
of immense hosts; he had seen its cities and temples on fire, and its
gigantic pyramids crumbling to pieces under the powerful blows of his
mighty hand.  Women and children lay in the smouldering ruins, and
plaintive cries arose from the tombs in which the very mummies moved like
living beings; and all these-priests, warriors, women, and children--the
living and the dead--all had uttered his,--Nebenchari's,--name, and had
cursed him as a traitor to his country.  A cold shiver struck to his
heart; it beat more convulsively than the blood in the veins of the dying
girl at his side.  Again the curtain was raised; Atossa stole in once
more and laid her hand on his shoulder.  He started and awoke.
Nebenchari had been sitting three days and nights with scarcely any
intermission by this sick-bed, and such dreams were the natural
consequence.

Atossa slipped back to her mother.  Not a sound broke the sultry air of
the sick-room, and Nebenchiari's thoughts reverted to his dream.  He told
himself that he was on the point of becoming a traitor and a criminal,
the visions he had just beheld passed before him again, but this time it
was another, and a different one which gained the foremost place.  The
forms of Amasis, who had laughed at and exiled him,--of Psamtik and the
priests,--who had burnt his works,--stood near him; they were heavily
fettered and besought mercy at his hands.  His lips moved, but this was
not the place in which to utter the cruel words which rose to them.  And
then the stern man wiped away a tear as he remembered the long nights, in
which he had sat with the reed in his hand, by the dull light of the
lamp, carefully painting every sign of the fine hieratic character in
which he committed his ideas and experience to writing.  He had
discovered remedies for many diseases of the eye, spoken of in the sacred
books of Thoth and the writings of a famous old physician of Byblos as
incurable, but, knowing that he should be accused of sacrilege by his
colleagues, if he ventured on a correction or improvement of the sacred
writings, he had entitled  his  work, "Additional  writings on the
treatment of diseases of the eye, by the great god Thoth, newly
discovered by the oculist Nebenchari."

He had resolved on bequeathing his works to the library at Thebes, that
his experience might be useful to his successors and bring forth fruit
for the whole body of sufferers.  This was to be his reward for the long
nights which he had sacrificed to science--recognition after death, and
fame for the caste to which he belonged.  And there stood his old rival
Petammon, by the side of the crown-prince in the grove of Neith, and
stirred the consuming fire, after having stolen his discovery of the
operation of couching.  Their malicious faces were tinged by the red glow
of the flames, which rose with their spiteful laughter towards heaven, as
if demanding vengeance.  A little further off he saw in his dream Amasis
receiving his father's letters from the hands of the high-priest.
Scornful and mocking words were being uttered by the king; Neithotep
looked exultant.--In these visions Nebenchari was so lost, that one of
the Persian doctors was obliged to point out to him that his patient was
awake.  He nodded in reply, pointing to his own weary eyes with a smile,
felt the sick girl's pulse, and asked her in Egyptian how she had slept.

"I do not know," she answered, in a voice that was hardly audible.  "It
seemed to me that I was asleep, and yet I saw and heard everything that
had happened in the room.  I felt so weak that I hardly knew whether I
was awake or asleep.  Has not Atossa been here several times?"

"Yes."

"And Cambyses stayed with Kassandane until sunrise; then he went out,
mounted his horse Reksch, and rode into the game-park."

"How do you know that?"

"I saw it."

Nebenchari looked anxiously into the girl's shining eyes.  She went on:
"A great many dogs have been brought into the court behind this house."

"Probably the king has ordered a hunt, in order to deaden the pain which
he feels at seeing you suffer."

"Oh, no.  I know better what it means.  Oropastes taught me, that
whenever a Persian dies dogs' are brought in, that the Divs may enter
into them."

"But you are living, my mistress, and .  .  ."

"Oh, I know very well that I shall die.  I knew that I had not many hours
more to live, even if I had not seen how you and the other physicians
shrugged your shoulders whenever you looked at me.  That poison is
deadly."

"You are speaking too much, my mistress, it will hurt you."

"Oh let me speak, Nebenchari! I must ask you to do something for me
before I die."

"I am your servant."

"No, Nebenchari, you must be my friend and priest.  You are not angry
with me for having prayed to the Persian gods?  Our own Hathor was always
my best friend still.  Yes, I see by your face that you forgiven me.
Then you must promise not to allow my corpse to be torn in pieces by dogs
and vultures.  The thought is so very dreadful.  You will promise to
embalm my body and ornament it with amulets?"

"If the king allows."

"Of course he will.  How could Cambyses possibly refuse my last request?"

"Then my skill is at your service."

"Thank you; but I have still something else to ask."

"You must be brief.  My Persian colleagues are already making signs to
me, to enjoin silence on you."

"Can't you send them away for a moment?"

"I will try to do so."

Nebenchari then went up and spoke to the Magi for a few minutes, and they
left the room.  An important incantation, at which no one but the two
concerned might be present, and the application of a new and secret
antidotal poison were the pretexts which he had used in order to get rid
of them.

When they were alone, Nitetis drew a breath of relief and said: "Give me
your priestly blessing on my long journey into the nether world, and
prepare me for my pilgrimage to Osiris."

Nebenchari knelt down by her bed and in a low voice repeated hymns,
Nitetis making devotional responses.

The physician represented Osiris, the lord of the nether world--Nitetis
the soul, justifying itself before him.

When these ceremonies were ended the sick girl breathed more freely.
Nebenchari could not but feel moved in looking at this young suicide.  He
felt confident that he had saved a soul for the gods of his native land,
had cheered the last sad and painful hours of one of God's good
creatures.  During these last moments, compassion and benevolence had
excluded every bitter feeling; but when he remembered that this lovely
creature owed all her misery to Amasis too, the old black cloud of
thought darkened his mind again.--Nitetis, after lying silent for some
time, turned to her new friend with a pleasant smile, and said: "I shall
find mercy with the judges of the dead now, shall not I?"

"I hope and believe so."

"Perhaps I may find Tachot before the throne of Osiris, and my father..."

"Your father and mother are waiting for you there.  Now in your last hour
bless those who begot you, and curse those who have robbed you of your
parents, your crown and your life."

"I do not understand you."

"Curse those who robbed you of your parents, crown and life, girl!"
cried the physician again, rising to his full height, breathing hard as
he said the words, and gazing down on the dying girl.  "Curse those
wretches, girl! that curse will do more in gaining mercy from the judges
of the dead, than thousands of good works!"  And as he said this he
seized her hand and pressed it violently.
