The Project Gutenberg EBook The Bride of the Nile, by Georg Ebers, v8
#85 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Bride of the Nile, Volume 8.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5524]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 4, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIDE OF THE NILE, BY EBERS, V8 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 8.



CHAPTER V.

After that interview with Orion, Philippus hurried off through the town,
paying so little heed to the people he met and to the processions
besieging Heaven with loud psalms to let the Nile at last begin to rise,
that he ran up against more than one passer-by, and had many a word of
abuse shouted after him.  He went into two or three houses, and neither
his patients nor their attendants could recognize, in this abrupt and
hasty visitor, the physician and friend who was usually so sympathetic to
the  sufferer:  who  would  speak  with  a cordiality that brought new
life to his heart, who would toss the children in the air, kiss one and
nod merrily to another.  To-day their elders even felt shy and anxious in
his presence.  For the first time he found the duty he loved a wearisome
burthen; the sick man was a tormenting spirit in league with the world
against his peace of mind.  What possessed him, that he should feel such
love of his fellow-men as to deprive himself of all comfort in life and
of his night's rest for their sake?  Rufinus was right.  In these times
each man lived solely to spite his neighbor, and he who could be most
brazenly selfish, looking neither to the right hand nor to the left, was
the most certain to get on in life.  Fool that he was to let other folks'
woes destroy his peace and hinder him in his scientific advancement!

Tormented by such bitter thoughts as these, he went into a neat little
house by the harbor where a worthy pilot lay dying, surrounded by his
wife and children; and there, at once, he was himself again, putting
forth all his knowledge and heartfelt kindliness, quitting the scene with
a bleeding heart and an empty purse; but no sooner was he out of doors
than his former mood closed in upon him with double gloom.  The case was
plain: Even with the fixed determination not to sacrifice himself for
others he could not help doing it; the impulse was too strong for him.
He could no more help suffering with the sufferer, and giving the best
he had to give with no hope of a return, than the drunkard can help
drinking.  He was made to be plundered; it was his fate!

With a drooping head he returned to his old friend's work-room.
Horapollo was sitting, just as he had sat the night before, at his
writing-table with his scrolls and his three lamps, a slave below,
snoring while he awaited his master's pleasure.

The leech's pretty Greek greeting "Rejoice !"  sounded rather like "May
you choke!" as he flung aside his upper garment; and to the old man's
answer and anxious exclamation: "How badly you look, Philip!"  he
answered crossly: "Like a man who deserves a kick rather than a welcome;
a booby who has submitted to have his nose pulled; a cur who has licked
the hand of the lout who has thrashed him!"

He threw himself on the divan and told Horapollo all that had passed
between him and Orion.  "And the maddest part of it all," he ended,
"is that I almost like the man; that he really seems to me to be on the
high road to become a capital fellow; and that I no longer feel inclined
to pitch him into a lime-kiln at the mere thought of his putting out a
hand to Paula.  At the same time," and he started to his feet, "even if
I help him to bring the poor little girl away from that demented old hag,
I cannot and will not continue to be her physician.  There are plenty of
quacks about in this corpse of a town, and they may find one of them.

"You will continue to treat the child," interrupted the old man quietly.

"To have my heart daily flogged with nettles!" exclaimed the leech, going
towards Horapollo with wild gesticulations.  "And do you believe that I
have any desire to meet that young fellow's sweetheart day after day,
often twice a day, that the barb may be twisted round and round in my
bleeding wound?"

"I expect a quite different result from your frequent meeting," said the
other.  "You will get accustomed to see her under the aspect which alone
she can hence forth bear to you: that of a handsome girl--there are
thousands such in Egypt,--and the betrothed of another."

"Certainly, if my heart were like a hunting-dog that lies down the moment
it is bid," said Philippus with a scornful laugh.  "The end of it is that
I must go away, away from Memphis--away from this miserable world for all
I care!  I?--Recover my peace of mind within reach of her?  Alas, for my
blissful, lost peace!"

"And why not?  To every man a thing is only as he conceives of it.  Only
listen to me: I had finished a treatise on the old and new Calendars, and
my master desired me to deliver a lecture on it in the Museum--if the
school of pedants in Alexandria now deserves the name; but I did not wish
to do so because I knew that the presence of such a large and learned
audience would embarrass me.  But my master advised me to imagine that my
hearers were not men, but mere cabbages.  This gave me new light; I took
his advice, got over my shyness, and my speech flowed like oil."

"A very good story," said Philippus, "but I do not see..."

"The moral of it for you," interrupted the old man, "is that you must
regard the supremely adorable lady of your love as one among a dozen
others--I will not say as a cabbage--as one with whom your heart has no
more concern.  Put a little strength of will into it, and you will
succeed."

"If a heart were a cipher, and if passion were calendar-making! . . ."
retorted Philippus.  "You are a very wise man, and your manuscripts and
tables have stood like walls between you and passion."

"Who can tell?"  said Horapollo.  "But at any rate, it never should have
had such power over me as to make me embitter the few remaining days
under the sun yet granted to my father and friend for the sake of a woman
who scorned my devotion.  Will you promise me to talk no more nonsense
about flying from Memphis, or anything of the kind?"

"Teach me first to measure my strength of will."

"Will you try, at any rate?"

"Yes, for your sake."

"Will you promise to continue your treatment of that poor little girl,
whom I love dearly in spite of her forbears?"

"As long as I can endure the daily meeting with her--you know.  .  ."

"That, then, is a bargain.--Now, come and let us translate a few more
chapters."

The friends sat at work together till a late hour, and when the old man
was alone again he reflected: "So long as he can be of use to the child
he will not go away, and by that time I shall have dug a pit for that
damned siren."

                    .........................

Orion had his hands full of work for the next morning.  Before it was
light he sent off two trustworthy messengers to Doomiat, giving each of
them a letter with instructions that a sailing vessel should be held in
readiness for the fugitives.  One was to start three hours after the
other, so that the business in hand should not fail if either of them
should come to grief.

He then went out; first to the harbor, where he succeeded in hiring a
large, good Nile-boat from Doomiat, whose captain, a trustworthy and
experienced man, promised to keep their agreement a secret and to be
prepared to start by noon next day.  Next, after taking council with
himself, he went to the treasurer's office, and there, with the
assistance of Nilus, made his will, to be ratified and signed next
morning in the presence of a notary and witnesses.  His mother, little
Mary, and Paula were to inherit the bulk of his property.  He also
bequeathed a considerable sum as a legacy to the hospitals and orphan
asylums, as well as to the Church, to the end that they might pray for
his soul; and a legacy to Nilus "as the most just judge of his
household."  Eudoxia, Mary's Greek governess, was not forgotten; and
finally he commanded that all his house-slaves should be liberated, and
to the end that they might not suffer from want he bequeathed to them one
of his largest estates in Upper Egypt, where they might settle and labor
for their common good.  He increased the handsome sums already devised by
his father to the freedmen of his family.

This business occupied several hours.  Nilus, who wrote while Orion
dictated, giving the document a legal form, was deeply touched by
the young man's fore thought and kindness;  for in truth, since his
desecration of the judgment-seat, he had given him up for a lost soul.

By Orion's orders this will was to be opened after four weeks, in case he
should not have returned from a journey on which he proposed starting on
the morrow, and this injunction revealed to the faithful steward, who had
grown grey in the service, that the last scion of the house expected to
run considerable risk; however, he was too modest to ask any questions,
and his master did not take him into his confidence.

When, after all this, the two men went back into the anteroom, Anubis,
the young clerk and Katharina's ally, was standing there.  Nilus took no
notice of him, and while he, with tearful eyes, stooped to kiss the hand
Orion held out to him as he bid him come to take leave of him once more
next evening, Anubis, who had withdrawn respectfully to a little
distance, keeping his ears open, however, officiously opened the heavy
iron-plated door.

Orion was exhausted and hungry; he enquired for his mother, and hearing
that she had gone to lie down, he went into the dining-room to get some
food.  Although breakfast had but just been served, Eudoxia was awaiting
him with evident impatience.  Her heart was bursting with a great piece
of news, and as Orion entered, greeting her, she cried out:

"Have you heard?  Do you know?"  Then she began, encouraged by his curt
negative, to pour out to him how that Neforis, by the desire of the
physician who had lately been to see her, had decided on sending her,
Eudoxia, away with her granddaughter to enjoy better air under the roof
of a friend of the leech's; they were to go this very day, or to-morrow
at latest.

Orion was disagreeably startled by this intelligence.  He had not
expected that Philippus would come so early, and he himself had been the
first to promote a scheme which now no longer seemed advisable.

"How very provoking!"  he muttered between his teeth, as a slave offered
him a roast fowl and asparagus.

"Is it not?  And perhaps we shall have to go quite far into the country,"
said the Greek, with a languishing look, as she drew one of the long
stems between her teeth.
