The Project Gutenberg EBook The Bride of the Nile, by Georg Ebers, v4
#81 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Bride of the Nile, Volume 4.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5520]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 4, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIDE OF THE NILE, BY EBERS, V4 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 4.



CHAPTER XIII.

Paula's report of the day's proceedings, of Orion's behavior, and of
the results of the trial angered the leech beyond measure; he vehemently
approved the girl's determination to quit this cave of robbers, this
house of wickedness, of treachery, of imbecile judges and false
witnesses, as soon as possible.  But she had no opportunity for a quiet
conversation with him, for Philippus soon had his hands full in the care
of the sufferers.

Rustem, the Masdakite, who till now had been lying unconscious, had been
roused from his lethargy by some change of treatment, and loudly called
for his master Haschim.  When the Arab did not appear, and it was
explained to him that he could not hope to see him before the morning,
the young giant sat up among his pillows, propping himself on his arms
set firmly against the couch behind him, looked about him with a
wandering gaze, and shook his big head like an aggrieved lion--but that
his thick mane of hair had been cut off--abusing the physician all the
time in his native tongue, and in a deep, rolling, bass voice that rang
through the rooms though no one understood a word.  Philippus, quite
undaunted, was trying to adjust the bandage over his wound, when Rustem
suddenly flung his arms round his body and tried with all his might, and
with foaming lips, to drag him down.  He clung to his antagonist, roaring
like a wild beast; even now Philippus never for an instant lost his
presence of mind but desired the nun to fetch two strong slaves.  The
Sister hurried away, and Paula remained the eyewitness of a fearful
struggle.  The physician had twisted his ancles round those of the
stalwart Persian, and putting forth a degree of strength which could
hardly have been looked for in a stooping student, tall and large-boned
as he was, he wrenched the Persian's hands from his hips, pressed his
fingers between those of Rustem, forced him back on to his pillows, set
his knees against the brazen frame of the couch, and so effectually held
him down that he could not sit up again.  Rustem exerted every muscle to
shake off his opponent; but the leech was the stronger, for the Masdakite
was weakened by fever and loss of blood.  Paula watched this contest
between intelligent force and the animal strength of a raving giant with
a beating heart, trembling in every limb.  She could not help her friend,
but she followed his every movement as she stood at the head of the bed;
and as he held down the powerful creature before whom her frail uncle had
cowered in abject terror, she could not help admiring his manly beauty;
for his eyes sparkled with unwonted fire, and the mean chin seemed to
lengthen with the frightful effort he was putting forth, and so to be
brought into proportion with his wide forehead and the rest of his
features.  Her spirit quaked for him; she fancied she could see something
great and heroic in the man, in whom she had hitherto discovered no merit
but his superior intellect.

The struggle had lasted some minutes before Philip felt the man's arms
grow limp, and he called to Paula to bring him a sheet--a rope--what not
--to bind the raving man.  She flew into the next room, quite collected;
fetched her handkerchief, snatched off the silken girdle that bound her
waist, rushed back and helped the leech to tie the maniac's hands.  She
understood her friend's least word, or a movement of his finger; and when
the slaves whom the nun had fetched came into the room, they found Rustem
with his hands firmly bound, and had only to prevent him from leaping out
of bed or throwing himself over the edge.  Philippus, quite out of
breath, explained to the slaves how they were to act, and when he opened
his medicine-chest Paula noticed that his swollen, purple fingers were
trembling.  She took out the phial to which he pointed, mixed the draught
according to his orders, and was not afraid to pour it between the teeth
of the raving man, forcing them open with the help of the slaves.

The soothing medicine calmed him in a few minutes, and the leech himself
could presently wash the wound and apply a fresh dressing with the
practised aid of the Sister.

Meanwhile the crazy girl had been waked by the ravings of the Persian,
and was anxiously enquiring if the dog--the dreadful dog--was there.
But she soon allowed herself to be quieted by Paula, and she answered the
questions put to her so rationally and gently, that her nurse called the
physician who could confirm Paula in her hope that a favorable change had
taker place in her mental condition.  Her words were melancholy and mild;
and when Paula remarked on this Philippus observed:

"It is on the bed of sickness that we learn to know our fellow-
creatures.  The frantic girl, who perhaps fell on the son of this house
with murderous intent, now reveals her true, sweet nature.  And as for
that poor fellow, he is a powerful creature, an honest one too; I would
stake my ten fingers on it!"

"What makes you so sure of that?"

"Even in his delirium he did hot once scratch or bite, but only defended
himself like a man.--Thank you, now, for your assistance.  If you had not
flung the cord round his hands, the game might have ended very
differently."

"Surely not!"  exclaimed Paula decidedly.  "How strong you are, Philip.
I feel quite alarmed!"

"You?"  said the leech laughing.  "On the contrary, you need never be
alarmed again now that you have seen by chance that your champion is no
weakling.--Pfooh!  I shall be glad now of a little rest."  She offered
him her handkerchief, and while he thankfully used it to wipe his brow--
controlling with much difficulty the impulse to press it to his lips, he
added lightly:

"With such an assistant everything must go well.  There is no merit in
being strong; every one can be strong who comes into the world with
healthy blood and well-knit bones, who keeps all his limbs well
exercised, as I did in my youth, and who does not destroy his inheritance
by dissipated living.--However, I still feel the struggle in my hands;
but there is some good wine in the next room yet, and two or three cups
of it will do me good."  They went together into the adjoining room
where, by this time, most of the lamps were extinguished.  Paula poured
out the wine, touched the goblet with her lips, and he emptied it at a
draught; but he was not to be allowed to drink off a second, for he had
scarcely raised it, when they heard voices in the Masdakite's room, and
Neforis came in.  The governor's careful wife had not quitted her
husband's couch--even Rustem's storming had not induced her to leave
her post; but when she was informed by the slaves what had been going on,
and that Paula was still up-stairs with the leech, she had come to the
strangers' rooms as soon as her husband could spare her to speak to
Philippus, to represent to Paula what the proprieties required, and to
find out what the strange noises could be which still seemed to fill the
house--at this hour usually as silent as the grave.  They proceeded from
the sick-rooms, but also from Orion, who had just come in, and from Nilus
the treasurer, who had been called by the former into his room, though
the night was fast drawing on to morning.  To the governor's wife
everything seemed ominous at the close of this terrible day, marked in
the calendar as unlucky; so she made her way up-stairs, escorted by her
husband's night watcher, and holding in her hand a small reliquary to
which she ascribed the power of banning vile spirits.

She came into the sick-room swiftly and noiselessly, put the nun through
a strict cross-examination with the fretful sharpness of a person
disturbed in her night's rest.  Then she went into the sitting-room where
Philippus was on the point of pledging Paula in his second cup of wine,
while she stood before him with dishevelled hair and robe ungirt.  All
this was an offence against good manners such as she would not suffer in
her house, and she stoutly ordered her husband's niece to go to bed.
After all the offences that had been pardoned her this day--no,
yesterday--she exclaimed, it would have been more becoming in the girl
to examine herself in silence, in her own room, to exorcise the lying
spirits which had her in their power, and implore her Saviour for
forgiveness, than to pretend to be nursing the sick while she was
carrying on, with a young man, an orgy which, as the Sister had just told
her, had lasted since mid-day.

Paula spoke not a word, though the color changed in her face more than
