The Project Gutenberg EBook Barbara Blomberg, by Georg Ebers, Vol. 4.
#125 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Barbara Blomberg, Volume 4.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5564]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on August 6, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BARBARA BLOMBERG, BY EBERS, V4 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





BARBARA BLOMBERG

By Georg Ebers

Volume 4.




CHAPTER XVI.

"Poor Wolf!" old Ursel had exclaimed.  But whoever had met the young
knight the following morning, as he went up the stairs to the Blombergs'
rooms, would have deemed him, like Baron Malfalconnet, the happiest of
mortals.

He had obeyed Dr. Hiltner's summons, and remained a long time with him.
Then he went home at a rapid pace, for he longed to tell Barbara how fair
a prospect for their future was opening before him.

She had showed her liking for him plainly enough yesterday when they
parted.  What should prevent her from becoming his now that he could
promise an ample income?

There was some one stirring in the private chapel as he passed, but he
paid no heed; in former days many people from the neighbourhood prayed
here frequently.

He found no one in the Blombergs' home except the father.

Barbara would certainly return immediately, the old man said.  She had
gone down to the chapel a short time before.  She was not in the habit of
doing so at this hour, but the great favour shown her by the Emperor had
probably gone to her head, and who could wonder?

Wolf also thought it natural that so great a success should excite her
powerfully: but he, too, had a similar one to relate, and, with joyful
emotion, he now told the old gentleman what the syndic had offered.

The Council, which, by the establishment of the "Convivium," had already
provided for the fostering of the noble art of music, wished to do still
more.  The project had been dear to the recently deceased Martin Luther,
and the Ratisbon syndic, who had enjoyed his friendship, thought he was
carrying out his wishes----

Here Wolf was interrupted, for the table groaned under the blow of the
old warrior's still powerful fist, coupled with the exclamation: "So
there is still to be no rest from the accursed disturber of the peace,
although he is dead!  No offence, my lad; but there can be nothing
edifying to a good Christian where that Wittenberg fellow is concerned."

"Only have patience," Wolf interposed here, secure of victory, and now,
slightly vexed with himself for his imprudence in mentioning Martin
Luther's name to the old hater of Turks and heretics, he explained that
Dr. Hiltner, in the name of the Council, had offered him the position of
Damian Feys, Barbara's teacher.  The Netherlander was going home, and the
magistrate was glad to have found in him, Wolf, a native of Ratisbon who
would be no less skilled in fostering music in this good city.  To bind
him securely, and avoid the danger of a speedy invitation elsewhere,
the position offered was provided with an annual salary hitherto
unprecedented in this country, and which far exceeded that of many an
imperial councillor.  This had been rendered possible through a bequest,
whose interest was to be devoted to the development of music, and--if he
should accept the place--to him and his future wife.

When he heard this, he would fain have instantly bestowed the most
beautiful candles upon the Holy Virgin, but the scruple concerning
religion had prevented his rejoicing fully; and when he told the syndic
that under no circumstances could he abandon the old faith, it was done
with the fear that the glittering bird would fly away from him.  But the
result had been different, for Dr. Hiltner replied that religion did not
enter into the matter.  He knew Wolf and his peaceful nature, and
therefore hoped that he would be advised that music was a language
equally intelligible to all persons of feeling, whatever tongue they
spoke and whatever creed they preferred.  This opinion was also that of
the Catholic maestro Feys, and he had therefore escaped all difficulty.
Wolf must, of course, consider the circumstances which he would find
here.  If he would accommodate himself to them, the Council would be
willing to overlook his faith; besides, Hiltner, on his own authority,
had given him the three days' time to reflect, for which he had asked
on Barbara's account.

A long-drawn "H'm" from Blomberg followed this disclosure.  Then he
shook his clumsy head, and, grasping his mustache with his hand, as if he
wanted in that way to stop the motion of his head, he said thoughtfully:
"Not a whole thing, Wolf, rather a double one, or--if we look at it
differently--it is only a half, for an honest friend of our Holy Church.
The way into which they tempt you is paved with gold, but--but--I see the
snares and pitfalls----"

He rose as he spoke, muttering all sorts of unintelligible things, until
he finally exclaimed, "Yet perhaps one might----"

Then he looked impatiently toward the door, and asked: "Where is the girl
loitering?  Would Eve probably bite the apple of temptation also?"

"Shall I call her?" cried Wolf eagerly.

"No, no," said the captain.  "It is sinful to disturb even our nearest
relatives at prayer.  Besides, you would not believe how the maestro's
praises and the imperial gift have excited the vanity in her woman's
nature.  For the first time in I know not how many years, she overslept
the hour of mass.  It was probably ten o'clock when I knocked at her
chamber door.  Toward eleven there was a movement in her room.  Then I
opened the door to bid her good-morning, but she neither heard nor saw
anything, and knelt at the priedieu as if turned to stone.  Before going
to sleep and early in the morning I expect such things, but when it is
almost noon!  Her porridge still stood untouched on the table here, and
to-day there is no occasion for fasting.  But I did not like to disturb
her, and perhaps she would still be kneeling before the Virgin's image if
the maid-servant hadn't blundered in to carry a bouquet which Herr Peter
Schlumperger's servant had brought.  Then Barbara started up as if a
hornet had stung her.  And how she looked at me!  Once--I knew it
instantly--I had gazed into such a matvellously beautiful face, such
helpless blue eyes.  Afterward I remembered who and where it had been.
God guard me from sinning against my own child, but that was exactly the
way the young girl looked who they--it was farther back in the past than
you can remember--burned here for a witch, as the halberdiers and monks
led her to the place of execution.  Susanne Schindler--that was her name
--was the daughter of a respectable notary's clerk, who was obliged to
wander about the world a great deal, and perished in Hungary just as she
reached womanhood.  Her mother had died when she was born, and an old
woman had taken care of her out of friendship.  People called the lass
'beautiful Susel,' and she was wonderfully charming.  Pink and white,
like the maiden in the fairy tale, and with glittering golden hair just
like my Wawerl's.  The old woman with whom she lived--her aunt or some
other relative--had long practised the healing of all sorts of
infirmities, and when a young Spanish count, who had come here with the
Emperor Charles to the Reichstag in the year '31, fell under his horse in
leaping a ditch, his limbs were injured so that he could not use them.
As he did not recover under the care of the Knights of St. John, who
first nursed him, he went to the herb doctress, and she took charge of
him, and cured him, too, although the skill of the most famous doctors
and surgeons had failed to help him.

"But, to make amends, Satan, who probably had the largest share in the
miracle, visited him with the sorest evil, for 'beautiful Susel,' who was
the old woman's assistant, had so bewitched the young count that he not
only fell in love with her, but actually desired to make her his wife.

"Then all the noble relatives at home interfered.  The Holy Inquisition
commanded the investigation of the case, and sent a stern vicar general
to direct the proceedings of the Dominicans, who had seized the
temptress.  Then it came to light that 'beautiful Susel' had bewitched
the luckless young count and robbed him of reason by her wicked arts.

"The old woman, whom they had also examined, escaped her just punishment
because she died of the plague, which was raging here at that time, but
'beautiful Susel' was burned, and I looked on while it was done.

"When the Dominicans had led her to the stake, she turned toward the
people who had flocked here from all quarters.  Many doubtless pitied her
on account of her marvellous beauty, and because the devil had given her
the mask of the most touching kindness of heart; but she gazed directly
into my face with her large, blue eyes as I stood close by, and for years
I saw the witch's look distinctly before me.  Yet what do we not at last
forget?  And now it must happen that what reminded me of her again is my
own innocent child!  Wawerl just looked into my eyes as if 'beautiful
Susel' had risen from her grave.  It was not long, yet it seemed as if
she shrank in terror from me, her own clear father.  She gazed up at me
in helpless despair, as if she feared God and the world.

"I have learned little about shivering, but a chill ran down my spine.
Of course, I did not let her notice anything.  Poor child!  after the
honour bestowed yesterday, I thought there would be nothing to-day except
laughter and loud singing.  But my grandmother used to say that the grief
which tortures a young girl--she herself knows not why--is the hardest
to bear, and then Barbara must now make up her mind about marriage, for,
besides you, there are Peter Schlumperger and young Crafft to be
considered.

"I remembered all this, and so, as usual, I took her face between my
hands to give her her morning kiss.  She always offers me her lips, but
to-day she turned away so that my mouth barely brushed her cheeks.
'Women's whims!' I thought, and therefore let it pass.  You can imagine
how glad I should have been to hear something more about yesterday
evening, but I made no objection when she wished to go to the chapel
at once, because she had overslept the hour of mass.  She would be back
again before the porridge was heated.  But the little bowl has stood
there probably three quarters of an hour, and we are still waiting in
vain."

Here he paused in his voluble flow of speech, and then burst forth
angrily: "The devil may understand such a girl's soul!  Usually Wawerl
