The Project Gutenberg EBook In The Blue Pike, by Georg Ebers, v2
#146 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: In The Blue Pike, Volume 2.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5585]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on August 17, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE BLUE PIKE, BY EBERS, V2 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





IN THE BLUE PIKE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 2.



CHAPTER IV.

The ropedancer, Kuni, really had been with the sick mother and her babes,
and had toiled for them with the utmost diligence.

The unfortunate woman was in great distress.

The man who had promised to take her in his cart to her native village of
Schweinfurt barely supported himself and his family by the tricks of his
trained poodles.  He made them perform their very best feats in the
taverns, under the village lindens, and at the fairs.  But the children
who gazed at the four-footed artists, though they never failed to give
hearty applause, frequently paid in no other coin.  He would gladly have
helped the unfortunate woman, but to maintain the wretched mother and her
twins imposed too heavy a burden upon the kind-hearted vagabond, and he
had withdrawn his aid.

Then the ropedancer met her.  True, she herself was in danger of being
left lying by the wayside; but she was alone, and the mother had her
children.  These were two budding hopes, while she had nothing more to
expect save the end--the sooner the better.  There could be no new
happiness for her.

And yet, to have found some one who was even more needy than she, lifted
her out of herself, and to have power to be and do something in her
behalf pleased her, nay, even roused an emotion akin to that which, in
better days, she had felt over a piece of good fortune which others
envied.  Perhaps she herself might be destined to die on the highway,
without consolation, the very next day; but she could save this unhappy
woman from it, and render her end easier.  Oh, how rich Lienhard's gold
coins made her!  Yet if, instead of three, there had been as many dozens,
she would have placed the larger portion in the twins' pillows.  How it
must soothe their mother's  heart!  Each one was a defence against hunger
and want.  Besides, the gold had been fairly burning her hand.  It came
from Lienhard.  Had it not been for Cyriax and the crowd of people in the
room, she would have made him take it back--she alone knew why.

How did this happen?

Why did every fibre of her being rebel against receiving even the
smallest trifle from the man to whom she would gladly have given the
whole world?  Why, after she had summoned up courage and approached
Lienhard to restore his gift, had she felt such keen resentment and
bitter suffering when the landlord of The Blue Pike stopped her?

As she now seized his gold, it seemed as though she saw Lienhard before
her.  She had already told Cyriax how she met the aristocratic Nuremberg
patrician, a member of the ancient and noble Groland family, whom his
native city had now made an ambassador so young.  But what secretly bound
her to him had never passed her lips.

Once in her life she had felt something which placed her upon an equal
footing with the best and purest of her sex--a great love for one from
whom she asked nothing, nothing at all, save to be permitted to think of
him and to sacrifice everything, everything for him--even life.  So
strange had been the course of this love, that people would have doubted
her sanity or her truthfulness had she described it to them.

While standing before St. Sebald's church in Nuremberg, the vision of the
young Councillor's bride at first made a far stronger impression upon her
mind than his own.  Then her gaze rested on Lienhard.  As he had chosen
the fairest of women, the bride had also selected the tallest, most
stately, and certainly the best and wisest of men.  During her
imprisonment the image of this rare couple had been constantly before
her.  Not until, through the young husband's intercession, she had
regained her liberty, after he prevented her kissing his hand and,
to soothe her, had stroked her hair and cheeks in the magistrate's room,
did the most ardent gratitude take possession of her soul.  From this
emotion, which filled heart and mind, a glowing wealth of other feelings
had blossomed like buds upon a rosebush.  Everything in her nature had
attracted her toward him, and the desire to devote herself to him, body
and soul, shed the last drop of blood in her heart for him, completely
ruled her.  His image rose before her day and night, sometimes alone,
sometimes with his beautiful bride.  Not only to him, but to her also she
would joyfully have rendered the most menial service, merely to be near
them and to be permitted to show that the desire to prove her gratitude
had become the object of her life.

When, with good counsel for the future, he dismissed her from the chief
magistrate's room, he had asked her where she was to be found in case he
should have anything to say to her.  It seemed as though, from mingled
alarm and joy, her heart would stop beating.  If her lodgings, instead of
an insignificant tavern, had been her own palace, she would gladly have
opened all its gates to him, yet a feverish thrill ran through her limbs
at the thought that he might seek her among her vagabond companions, and
ask in return for his kindness what he would never have presumed to seek
had she been the child of reputable parents, yet which, with mingled
anger and happiness, she resolved not to refuse.

During the day and the night when she expected his visit, she had become
aware that she, who had never cared for any man save for the gifts he
bestowed, was fired with love for Lienhard.  Such ardent yearning could
torture only a loving heart, yet what she felt was very unlike the love
with which she was familiar in songs, and had seen in other girls; for
she by no means thought with jealous rancour of the woman to whom he
belonged, body and soul--his beautiful wife.  It rather seemed to her
that she was his, and he would no longer be the same if he were separated
from her, nay, as if her very love was hers also.  When she heard a noise
outside of her little room she started, and eagerly as she yearned to see
him, blissful as she thought it must be to sink upon his breast and offer
him her lips to kiss, the bold ropedancer, who never cared for the
opinions of others, could not shake off, even for a moment, the fear of
wronging the fair wife who had a better right to him.  Instead of hating
her, or even wishing to share the heart of the man she loved with his
bride, she shrank from the approaching necessity of clouding her young
happiness as though it were the direst misfortune.  Yet she felt that its
prevention lay, not in her own hands, but in those of Fate.  Should it
please Destiny to lead Lienhard to her and inspire him with a desire for
her love, all resistance, she knew, would be futile.  So she began to
repeat several paternosters that he might remain away from her.  But her
yearning was so great that she soon desisted, and again and again went to
the window with a fervent wish that he might come.

In the terrible tumult of her heart she had forgotten to eat or to drink
since early morning, and at last, in the afternoon, some one knocked at
the door, and the landlady called her.

While she was hurriedly smoothing her thick black hair and straightening
her best gown, which she had put on for him in the morning, she heard the
hostess say that Herr Groland of the Council was waiting for her
downstairs.  Every drop of blood left her glowing cheeks, and the knees
which never trembled on the rope shook as she descended the narrow steps.

He came forward to meet her in the entry, holding out his hand with open-
hearted frankness.  How handsome and how good he was!  No one wore that
look who desired aught which must be hidden under the veil of darkness.
Ere her excited blood had time to cool, he had beckoned to her to follow
him into the street, where a sedan chair was standing.

An elderly lady of dignified bearing looked out and met her eyes with a
