The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Scottish Chiefs, by Jane Porter

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Scottish Chiefs

Author: Jane Porter

Release Date: October 12, 2011 [EBook #6086]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCOTTISH CHIEFS ***




Produced by Carrie








The Scottish Chiefs
by Miss Jane Porter




Chapter I.

Scotland.


Bright was the summer of 1296.  The war which had desolated Scotland
was then at an end.  Ambition seemed satiated; and the vanquished,
after having passed under the yoke of their enemy, concluded they might
wear their chains in peace.  Such were the hopes of those Scottish
noblemen who, early in the preceding spring, had signed the bond of
submission to a ruthless conqueror, purchasing life at the price of all
that makes life estimable-liberty and honor.

Prior to this act of vassalage, Edward I., King of England, had entered
Scotland at the head of an immense army.  He seized Berwick by
stratagem; laid the country in ashes; and, on the field of Dunbar,
forced the Scottish king and his nobles to acknowledge him their liege
lord.

But while the courts of Edward, or of his representatives, were crowded
by the humbled Scots, the spirit of one brave man remained unsubdued.
Disgusted alike at the facility with which the sovereign of a warlike
nation could resign his people and his crown into the hands of a
treacherous invader, and at the pusillanimity of the nobles who had
ratified the sacrifice, William Wallace retired to the glen of
Ellerslie.  Withdrawn from the world, he hoped to avoid the sight of
oppressions he could not redress, and the endurance of injuries beyond
his power to avenge.

Thus checked at the opening of life in the career of glory that was his
passion-secluded in the bloom of manhood from the social haunts of
men--he repressed the eager aspirations of his mind, and strove to
acquire that resignation to inevitable evils which alone could
reconcile him to forego the promises of his youth, and enable him to
view with patience a humiliation of Scotland, which blighted her honor,
menaced her existence, and consigned her sons to degradation or
obscurity.  The latter was the choice of Wallace.  Too noble to bend
his spirit to the usurper, too honest to affect submission, he resigned
himself to the only way left of maintaining the independence of a true
Scot; and giving up the world at once, all the ambitions of youth
became extinguished in his breast, since nothing was preserved in his
country to sanctify their fires.  Scotland seemed proud of her chains.
Not to share in such debasement, appeared all that was now in his
power; and within the shades of Ellerslie he found a retreat and a
home, whose sweets beguiling him of every care, made him sometimes
forget the wrongs of his country in the tranquil enjoyments of wedded
love.

During the happy mouths of the preceding autumn, while Scotland was yet
free, and the path of honorable distinction still open before her young
nobility, Wallace married Marion Braidfoot, the beautiful heiress of
Lammington.  Nearly of the same age, and brought up from childhood
together, reciprocal affection had grown with their growth; and
sympathy of tastes and virtues, and mutual tenderness, made them so
entirely one, that when at the age of twenty-two the enraptured lover
was allowed to pledge that faith publicly at the altar, which he had so
often vowed in secret to his Marion, he clasped her to his heart, and
softly whispered: "Dearer than life! part of my being! blessed is this
union, that mingles thy soul with mine, now, and forever!"

Edward's invasion of Scotland broke in upon their innocent joys.
Wallace threw aside the wedding garment for the cuirass and the sword.
But he was not permitted long to use either--Scotland submitted to her
enemies; and he had no alternative but to bow to her oppressors, or to
become an exile from man, amid the deep glens of his country.

The tower of Ellerslie was henceforth the lonely abode of himself and
his bride.  The neighboring nobles avoided him, because the principles
he declared were a tacit reproach on their proceedings; and in the
course of a short time, as he forbore to seek them, they even forgot
that he was in existence.  Indeed, all occasions of mixing with society
he now rejected.  The hunting-spear with which he had delighted to
follow the flying roebuck from glade to glade, the arrows with which he
used to bring down the heavy ptarmigan or the towering eagle, all were
laid aside.  Scottish liberty was no more; and Wallace would have
blushed to have shown himself to the free-born deer of his native
hills, in communion of sports with the spoilers of his country.  Had he
pursued his once favorite exercises, he must have mingled with the
English, now garrisoned in every town, and who passed their hours of
leisure in the chase.

Being resigned to bury his youth--since its strength could no longer be
serviceable to his country-books, his harp, and the sweet converse of
his tender Marion, became the occupations of his days.  Ellerslie was
his hermitage; and there, closed from the world, with an angel his
companion, he might have forgotten Edward was lord in Scotland, had not
that which was without his little paradise made a way to its gates, and
showed him the slavery of the nobles and the wretchedness of the
people.  In these cases, his generous hand gave succor where it could
not bring redress.  Those whom the lawless plunderer had driven from
their houses or stripped of their covering, found shelter, clothing,
and food at the house of Sir William Wallace.

Ellerslie was the refuge of the friendless, and the comfort of the
unhappy.  Wherever Lady Wallace moved--whether looking out from her
window on the accidental passenger, or taking her morning or moonlight
walks through the glen, leaning on the arm of her husband--she had the
rapture of hearing his steps greeted and followed by the blessings of
the poor destitute, and the prayers of them who were ready to perish.
It was then that this happy woman would raise her husband's hands to
her lips, and in silent adoration, thank God for blessing her with a
being made so truly in his own image.

Several months of this blissful and uninterrupted solitude had elapsed,
when Lady Wallace saw a chieftain at her gate.  He inquired for its
master--requested a private conference--and retired with him into a
remote room.  They remained together for an hour.  Wallace then came
forth, and ordering his horse, with four followers, to be in readiness,
said he meant to accompany his guest to Douglas Castle.  When he
embraced his wife at parting, he told her that as Douglas was only a
few miles distant, he should be at home again before the moon rose.

She passed the tedious hours of his absence with tranquillity, till the
appointed signal of his return appeared from behind the summits of the
opposite mountains.  So bright were its beams, that Marion did not need
any other light to show her the stealing sands of her hour-glass, as
they numbered the prolonged hours of her husband's stay.  She dismissed
her servants to their rest; all, excepting Halbert, the gray-haired
harper of Wallace; and he, like herself, was too unaccustomed to the
absence of his master to find sleep visit his eyes while Ellerslie was
bereft of its joy and its guard.

As the night advanced, Lady Wallace sat in the window of her
bed-chamber, which looked toward the west.  She watched the winding
pathway that led from Lanark down the opposite heights, eager to catch
a glimpse of the waving plumes of her husband when he should emerge
from behind the hill, and pass under the thicket which overhung the
road.  How often, as a cloud obscured for an instant the moon's light,
and threw a transitory shade across the path, did her heart bound with
the thought that her watching was at an end!  It was he whom she had
seen start from the abrupt rock!  They were the folds of his tartan
that darkened the white cliff!  But the moon again rolled through her
train of clouds and threw her light around.  Where then was her
Wallace?  Alas! it was only a shadow she had seen! the hill was still
lonely, and he whom she sought was yet far away!  Overcome with
watching, expectation, and disappointment, unable to say whence arose
her fears, she sat down again to look; but her eyes were blinded with
tears, and in a voice interrupted by sighs she exclaimed, "Not yet, not
yet!  Ah, my Wallace, what evil hath betided thee?"

Trembling with a nameless terror, she knew not what to dread.  She
believed that all hostile recounters had ceased, when Scotland no
longer contended with Edward.  The nobles, without remonstrance, had
surrendered their castles into the hands of the usurper; and the
peasantry, following the example of their lords, had allowed their
homes to be ravaged without lifting an arm in their defense.
Opposition being over, nothing could then threaten her husband from the
enemy; and was not the person who had taken him from Ellerslie a friend?

Before Wallace's departure he had spoken to Marion alone; he told her
that the stranger was Sir John Monteith, the youngest son of the brave
Walter Lord Monteith,** who had been treacherously put to death by the
English in the early part of the foregoing year.  This young man was
bequeathed by his dying father to the particular charge of his friend
William Lord Douglas, at that time governor of Berwick.  After the fall
of that place and the captivity of its defender, Sir Jon Monteith had
retired to Douglas Castle, in the vicinity of Lanark, and was now the
sole master of that princely residence: James Douglas, the only son of
its veteran lord, being still at Paris, whither he had been dispatched,
before the defeat at Dunbar, to negotiate a league between the French
monarch and the then King of Scots.

**Walter Stewart, the father of Sir John Monteith, assumed the name and
earldom of Monteith in right of his wife, the daughter and heiress of
the preceding earl.  When his wife died he married an Englishwoman of
rank, who, finding him ardently attached to the liberties of his
country, cut him off by poison, and was rewarded by the enemies of
Scotland for this murder with the hand of a British nobleman.-(1809.)

Informed of the privacy in which Wallace wished to live, Monteith had
never ventured to disturb it until this day; but knowing the steady
honor of his old school-companion, he came to entreat him, by the
respect he entertained for the brave Douglas, and by his love for his
country, that he would not refuse to accompany him to the brave exile's
castle.

"I have a secret to disclose to you," said he, "which cannot be
divulged on any other spot."

Unwilling to deny so small a favor, Wallace, as has been said before,
consented; and accordingly was conducted by Monteith toward Douglas.

While descending the heights which led to the castle, Monteith kept a
profound silence; and when crossing the drawbridge toward it, he put
his finger to his lips, in token to the servants for equal caution.
This was explained as they entered the gate and looked around.  It was
guarded by English soldiers.  Wallace would have drawn back; but
Monteith laid his hand on his arm, and whispered, "For your country!"
At these words, a spell to the ear of Wallace, he proceeded; and his
attendants followed into the courtyard.

The sun was just setting as Monteith led his friend into the absent
earl's room.  Its glowing reflection on the distant hills reminded
Wallace of the stretch he had to retread to reach his home before
midnight; and thinking of his anxious Marion, he awaited with
impatience the development of the object of his journey.

Monteith closed the door, looked fearfully around for some time; then,
trembling at every step, approached Wallace.  When drawn quite near, in
a low voice he said, "You must swear upon the cross that you will keep
inviolate the secret I am going to reveal."

Wallace put aside the hilt of the sword which Monteith presented to
receive his oath.  "No," said he, with a smile; "in these times I will
not bind my conscience on subjects I do not know.  If you dare trust
the word of a Scotsman and a friend, speak out; and if the matter be
honest, my honor is your pledge."

"You will not swear?"

"No."

"Then I must not trust you."

"Then our business is at an end," returned Wallace, rising, "and I may
return home."

"Stop!" cried Monteith.  "Forgive me, my old companion, that I have
dared to hesitate.  These are, indeed, times of such treason to honor,
that I do not wonder you should be careful how you swear; but the
nature of the confidence reposed in me will.  I hope, convince you that
I ought not to share it rashly.  Of any one but you, whose truth stands
unsullied, amidst the faithlessness of the best, I would exact oaths on
oaths; but your words is given, and on that I rely.  Await me here."

Monteith unlocked a door which had been concealed by the tapestry, and
after a short absence re-entered with a small iron box.  He set it on
the table near his friend, then went to the great door, which he had
before so carefully closed, tried that the bolts were secure, and
returned, with a still more pallid countenance, toward the table.
Wallace, surprised at so much actions, awaited with wonder the promised
explanation.  Monteith sat down with his hand on the box, and fixing
his eyes on it, began:

"I am going to mention a name, which you may hear with patience, since
its power is no more.  The successful rival of Bruce, and the enemy of
your family, is now a prisoner in the Tower of London."

"Baliol?"

"Yes," answered Monteith; "and his present sufferings will, perhaps,
avenge to you his vindictive resentment of the injury he received from
Sir Ronald Crawford."

"My grandfather never injured him, nor any man!" interrupted Wallace:
"Sir Ronald Crawford was as incapable of injustice as of flattering the
minions of his country's enemy. But Baliol is fallen, and I forgive
him."

"Did you witness his degradation," returned Monteith, "you would even
pity him."

"I always pity the wicked," continued Wallace; "and as you seem
ignorant of the cause of his enmity against Sir Ronald and myself, in
justice to the character of that most venerable of men, I will explain
it. I first saw Baliol four years ago, when I accompanied my
grandfather to witness the arbitration of the King of Scotland between
the two contending claimants for the Scottish crown.  Sir Ronald came
on the part of Bruce.  I was deemed too young to have a voice in the
council; but I was old enough to understand what was passing there, and
to perceive, that it was the price for which he sold his country.
However, as Scotland acknowledged him sovereign, and as Bruce
submitted, my grandfather silently acquiesced.  But Baliol did not
forget former opposition.  His behavior to Sir Ronald and myself at the
beginning of this year, when, according to the privilege of our birth,
we appeared in the field against the public enemy, fully demonstrated
what was the injury Baliol complains of, and how unjustly he drove us
from the standard of Scotland.  'None,' said he, 'shall serve under me,
who presumed to declare themselves the friends of Bruce.'  Poor weak
man.  The purchased vassal of England; yet so vain of his ideal throne,
he hated all who had opposed his elevation, even while his own
treachery sapped its foundation!  Edward having made use of him, all
these sacrifices of honor and of conscience are insufficient to retain
his favor; and Baliol is removed from his kingdom to an English prison!
Can I feel anything so honoring as indignation against a wretch so
abject?  No!  I do indeed pity him.  And now that I have cleared my
grandfather's name of such calumny, I am ready to hear you further."

Monteith, after remarking on the well-known honor of Sir Ronald
Crawford, resumed.

"During the massacre at the capture of Berwick, Lord Douglas, wounded,
and nearly insensible, was taken by a trusty band of Scots out of the
citadel and town.  I followed him to Dunbar, and witnessed with him
that dreadful day's conflict, which completed the triumph of the
English.  When the few nobles who survived the battle dispersed,
Douglas took the road to Forfar, hoping to meet King Baliol there, and
to concert with him new plans of resistance.  When we arrived, we found
his majesty in close conversation with the Earl of Athol, who had
persuaded him the disaster at Dunbar was decisive, and that if he
wished to save his life, he must immediately go to the King of England,
then at Montrose, and surrender himself to his mercy.**

**This treacherous Scot, who persuaded Baliol to his ruin, was John
Cummin of Strathbogie, Earl of Athol in right of his wife, the heiress
of that earldom.-(1809.)

"Douglas tried to alter Baliol's resolution, but without effect. The
king could not return any reasonable answers to the arguments which
were offered to induce him to remain, but continued to repeat, with
groans and tears.  'It is my fate.'  Athol sat knitting his black brows
during this conversation; and at last throwing out some sullen remarks
to Lord Douglas on exhorting the king to defy his liege lord, he
abruptly left the room.

"As soon as he was gone, Baliol rose from his seat with a very anxious
countenance, and taking my patron into an adjoining room, they
continued there a few minutes, and then reentered.  Doublas brought
with him this iron box.  'Monteith,' said he, 'I confide this to your
care.'  Putting the box under my arm and concealing it with my
cloak--'Carry it,' continued he, 'directly to my castle in Lanarkshire.
I will rejoin you there, in four-and-twenty hours after your arrival.
Meanwhile, by your affection for me and fidelity to your king, breathe
not a word of what has passed.'

"'Look on that, and be faithful!' said Baliol, putting this ruby ring
on my finger.  I withdrew, with the haste his look dictated; and as I
crossed the outward hall, was met by Athol.  He eyed me sternly, and
inquired whither I was going.  I replied, 'To Douglas, to prepare for
the coming of its lord.'  The hall was full of armed men in Athol's
colors.  Not one of the remnant who had followed my patron from the
bloody field of Dunbar was visible.  Athol looked round on his
myrmidons: 'Here,' cried he, 'see that you speed this fellow on his
journey.  We shall provide lodgings for his master.'  I foresaw danger
to Lord Douglas, but I durst not attempt to warn him of it; and, to
secure my charge, which a return to the room might have hazarded, I
hastened into the courtyard, and being permitted to mount my horse, set
off at full speed.

"On arriving at this place, I remembered the secret closet, and
carefully deposited the box within it.  A week passed, without any
tidings of Lord Douglas.  At last a pilgrim appeared at the gate, and
requested to see me alone; fearing nothing from a man in so sacred a
habit, I admitted him.  Presenting me with a packet which had been
intrusted to him by Lord Douglas, he told me my patron had been
forcibly carried on board a vessel at Montrose, to be conveyed with the
unhappy Baliol to the Tower of London.  Douglas, on this outrage, sent
to the monastery at Aberbrothick, and under the pretense of making a
religious confession before he sailed, begged a visit from the
sub-prior.  'I am that prior,' continued the pilgrim; 'and having been
born on the Douglas lands, he well knew the claim he had to my
fidelity.  He gave me this packet, and conjured me to lose no time in
conveying it to you.  The task was difficult; and, as in these
calamitous seasons we hardly know whom to trust, I determined to
execute it myself.'

"I inquired whether Lord Douglas had actually sailed. 'Yes,' replied
the father; 'I stood on the beach till the ship disappeared.'"

A half-stifled groan burst from the indignant breast of Wallace.  It
interrupted Monteith for an instant, but without noticing it he
proceeded:

"Not only the brave Douglas was then wrested from his country, with our
king, but also that holy pillar of Jacob** which prophets have declared
to be the palladium of Scotland!"

**The tradition respecting this stone is as follows: Hiber, or Iber,
the Phoenician, who came from the Holy Land to inhabit the coast of
Spain, brought this sacred relic along with him.  From Spain he
transplanted it with the colony he sent to people the south of Ireland;
and from Ireland it was brought into Scotland by the great Fergus, the
son of Ferchard.  He placed it in Argyleshire; but MacAlpine removed it
to Scone, and fixed it in the royal chair in which all the succeeding
kings of Scotland were inaugurated.  Edward I. of England caused it to
be carried to Westminster Abbey, where it now stands.  The tradition
is, that empire abides where it stays.-(1809.)

"What!" inquired Wallace, with a yet darker frown, "has Baliol robbed
Scotland of that trophy of one of her best kings? Is the sacred gift of
Fergus to be made the spoil of a coward?"

"Baliol is not the robber," rejoined Monteith; "the halloed pillar was
taken from Scone by the command of the King of England, and, with the
sackings of Iona, was carried on board the same vessel with the
betrayed Douglas.  The archives of the kingdom have also been torn from
their sanctuary, and were thrown by Edward's own hands into the fire."

"Tyrant!" murmured Wallace, "thou mayest fill the cup too full."

"His depredations," continued Monteith, "the good monk told me, have
been wide as destructive.  He has not left a parchment, either of
public records or of private annals, in any of the monasteries or
castles round Montrose; all have been searched and plundered.  And
besides, the faithless Earl of March and Lord Sculis are such
parricides of their country, as to have performed the like robberies,
in his name, from the eastern shores of the Highlands to the furthiest
of the Western Isles."

"Do the traitors think," cried Wallace, "that by robbing Scotland of
her annals and of that stone they really deprive her of her palladium?
Scotland's history is in the memories of her sons; her palladium is in
their hearts; and Edward may one day find that she remembers the
victory of Largs,** and needs not talismans to give her freedom."

**This battle was fought by Alexander III, on the 1st of August, 1263,
against Acho, King of Norway.  That monarch invaded Scotland with a
large army, and drew up his forces before Largs, a town in Ayrshire.
He met with a great defeat, and, covered with disgrace, retired to his
own country.  Wallace's father signalized himself on that field.-(1809.)

"Alas! not in our time!" answered Monteith.  "The spear is at our
breasts, and we must submit.  You see this castle is full of Edward's
soldiers.  Every house is a garrison for England--but more of this by
and by; I have yet to tell you the contents of the packet which the
monk brought.  It contained two others.  One directed to Sir James
Douglas, at Paris, and the other to me. I read as follows:

"'Athol has persuaded Baliol to his ruin, and betrayed me into the
hands of Edward.  I shall see Scotland no more.  Send the inclosed to
my son at Paris; it will inform him what is the last wish of William
Douglas for his country.  The iron box I confided to you, guard as your
life, until you can deposit it with my son.  But should he remain
abroad, and you ever be in extremity, commit the box in strict charge
to the worthiest Scot you know; and tell him that it will be at the
peril of his soul, who dares to open it, till Scotland be again free!
When that hour comes, then let the man by whose valor God restores her
rights, receive the box as his own; for by him only it is to be opened.
Douglas.'"

Monteith finished reading the letter, and remained silent.  Wallace,
who had listened to it with increasing indignation against the enemies
of Scotland, spoke first: "Tell me in what I can assist you: or how
serve these last wishes of the imprisoned Douglas."

Monteith replied by reading over again this sentence-"'Should my son
remain abroad, and you ever be in extremity, commit the box in strict
charge to the worthiest Scot you know.'  I am in that extremity now.
Edward determined on desolation, when he placed English governors
throughout our towns; and the rapacious Heselrigge, his representative
in Lanark, not backward to execute the despot's will, has just issued
an order, for the houses of all the absent chiefs to be searched for
records and secret correspondence.  Two or three, in the neighborhood
have already gone through this ordeal; but the even has proved that it
was not papers they sought, but plunder, and an excuse for dismantling
the castles, or occupying them with English officers.

"The soldiers you saw were sent, by daybreak this morning, to guard
this castle until Heselrigge could in person be present at the
examination.  This ceremony is to take place to-morrow; and as Lord
Douglas is considered a traitor to Edward, I am told the place will be
sacked to its walls.  In such an extremity, to you, noble Wallace, as
to the worthiest Scot I know, I apply to take charge of this box.
Within the remote cliffs of Ellerslie it must be safe; and when James
Douglas arrives from Paris, to him you will resign it.  Meanwhile, as I
cannot resist the plunderers, after delivering the keys of the state
apartments to Heselrigge to-morrow, I shall submit to necessity, and
beg his permission to retire to my lodge on Ben Venu."

Wallace made no difficulty in granting Monteith's request; and, there
being two iron rings on each side of his charge, the young chief took
off his leathern belt, and putting it through them, swung the box
easily under his left arm, while covering it with his plaid.

Monteith's eyes now brightened--the paleness left his cheek--and with a
firmer step, as if suddenly relieved of a heavy load, he called a
servant to prepare Sir William Wallace's attendants.

While Wallace shook him by the hand, Monteith, in a low and solemn
voice, exhorted him to caution respecting the box.  "Remember," added
he, "the penalty that hangs over him who looks into it."

"Be not afraid," answered Wallace; "even the outside shall never be
seen by other eyes than my own, unless the same circumstance which now
induces you, mortal extremity, should force me to confide it to safer
hands."

"Beware of that!" exclaimed Monteith; "for who is there that would
adhere to the prohibition as I have done--as you will do? and besides,
as I have no doubt it contains holy relics, who knows what new
calamities a sacrilegious look might bring upon our already devoted
country?"

"Relics or no relics," replied Wallace, "it would be an equal sin
against good faith to invade what is forbidden: but from the weight I
am rather inclined to suspect it contains gold; probably a treasure,
with which the sordid Baliol thinks to compensate the hero who may free
his country from all the miseries a traitor king and a treacherous
usurper have brought upon it."

"A treasure!" repeated Monteith; "I never thought of that;-it is indeed
heavy!-and, as we are responsible for the contents of the box, I wish
we were certain of what it contains; let us consider that!"

"It is no consideration of ours," returned Wallace.  "With what is in
the box we have no concern; all we have to do is, to preserve the
contents unviolated by even our own eyes; and to that, as you have now
transferred the charge to me, I pledge myself--farewell."

"But why this haste?" rejoined Monteith, "indeed, I wish I had
thought--stay only a little."

"I thank you," returned Wallace, proceeding to the courtyard; "but it
is now dark, and I promised to be at home before the moon rises.  If
you wish me to serve you further, I shall be happy to see you at
Ellerslie to-morrow.  My Marion will have pleasure in entertaining, for
days or weeks, the friend of her husband."

While Wallace spoke, he advanced to his horse, to which he was lighted
by the servants of the castle.  A few English soldiers lingered about
in idle curiosity.  As he put his foot in the stirrup, he held the
sword in his hand, which he had unbuckled from his side to leave space
for his charge.  Monteith, whose dread of detection was ever awake,
whispered: "Your loosened weapon may excite suspicion!" Fear incurred
what it sought to avoid.  He hastily pulled aside Wallace's plaid to
throw it over the glittering hilt of the sword, and thus exposed the
iron box.  The light of the torches striking upon the polished rivets,
displayed it to all lookers on, but no remark was made.  Wallace, not
observing what was done, again shook hands with Monteith, and calling
his servants about him, galloped away.  A murmur was heard, as if of
some intention to follow him; but deeming it prudent to leave the open
and direct road, because of the English marauders who swarmed there, he
was presently lost amid the thick shades of Clydesdale.




Chapter II.

Lanark.


The darkness was almost impenetrable.  Musing on what had passed with
Monteith, and on the likelihood of any hero appearing, who, by freeing
his country, could ever claim the privilege of investigating the
mystery which was now his care.  Wallace rode on till, crossing the
bridge of Lanark, he saw the rising moon silver the tops of the distant
hills; and then his meditations embraced a gentler subject.  This was
the time he had promised Marion he should be returned, and he had yet
five long miles to go, before he could reach the glen of Ellerslie; he
thought of her being alone--of watching, with an anxious heart, the
minutes of his delay.  Scotland and its wrongs he now forgot, in the
idea of her whose happiness was dearer to him than life.  He could not
achieve the deliverance of the one, but it was his bliss to preserve
the peace of the other; and putting spurs to his horse, under the now
bright beams of the moon he hastened through the town.

Abruptly turning an angle leading to the Mouse River, a cry of murder
arrested his ear.  He checked his horse and listened.  The clashing of
arms told him the sound had issued from an alley to the left.  He
alighted in an instant, and drawing his sword, threw away the scabbard
(prophetic omen!), then, leaving his horse with one of his servants
hastened, with the other three, to the spot whence the noise proceeded.

On arriving he discovered two men in tartans, with their backs to the
opposite wall, furiously assaulted by a throng of Edward's soldiers.
At this sight, the Scots who accompanied Wallace were so enraged that,
blowing their bugles to encourage the assailed, they joined hand to
hand with their gallant leader, and attacking the banditti, each man
cut his opponent to the ground.

Such unexpected assistance reanimated the drooping strength of one of
the two, with whom the cry had issued.  He sprung from the wall with
the vigor of a tiger, but at the moment received a wound in his back,
which would have thrown him at the feet of his enemies, had not Wallace
caught him in his left arm, and with his right, cleared the way, while
he cried to his men who were fighting near him-"To the Glen!"  As he
spoke, he threw the now insensible stranger into their arms.  The other
man, whose voice had first attracted Wallace, at the instant sunk,
covered with blood, on the pavement.

Two of the servants, obeying their master, carried their senseless
burden toward the horses; but the third, being hemmed in by the furious
soldiers, could not move.  Wallace made a passage to his rescue, and
effected it; but one base wretch, while the now wounded Scot was
retreating, made a stroke which would have severed his head from his
body, had not the trusty claymore of Wallace struck down the pending
weapon of the coward, and received his rushing body upon its point.  He
fell with bitter imprecations, calling aloud for vengeance.

A dreadful cry was now raised by the whole band of assassins:
"Murder!-treason!-Arthur Heselrigge is slain!"  The uproar became
general.  The windows of the adjoining houses were thrown open; people
armed and unarmed issued from their doors and pressed forward to
inquire the cause of the alarm.  Wallace was nearly overpowered; a
hundred swords flashed in the torchlight; but at the moment he expected
they would be sheathed in his heart, the earth gave way under his feet,
and he sunk into utter darkness.

He fell upon a quantity of gathered broom; and concluding that the
weight of the thronging multitude had burst his way through the arch of
a cellar, he sprung to his feet; and though he heard the curses of
several wretches, who had fallen with him and fared worse, he made but
one step to a half-opened door, pointed out to him by a gleam from an
inner passage.  The men uttered a shout as they saw him darken the
light which glimmered through it; but they were incapable of pursuit;
and Wallace, aware of his danger, darting across the adjoining
apartment, burst open a window, and leaped out to the foot of the
Lanark hills.

The oaths of the soldiers, enraged at his escape, echoed in his ears,
till distance sunk them into hoarse murmurs.  He pursued his way over
the craigs; through the valley, and across the river, to the cliffs
which embattle the garden of Ellerslie.  Springing on the projecting
point of the nearest, he leaped into a thicket of honeysuckles.  This
was the favorite bower of his Marion!  The soft perfume, as it saluted
his senses, seemed to breathe peace and safety; and as he emerged from
its fragrant embrace, he walked with a calmer step toward the house.
He approached a door which led into the garden.  It was open.  He
beheld his beloved leaning over a couch, on which was laid the person
he had rescued.  Halbert was dressing his wounds.

Wallace paused for a moment, to contemplate his lovely wife in this
more lovely act of charity.  Her beautiful hands held a cup to the lips
of the stranger; while her long hair, escaped from its band, fell in
jetty ringlets, and mingled with his silver locks.

"Marion!" exclaimed the overflowing soul of her husband.  She looked up
at the well-known sound, and with a cry of joy, rushing forward, threw
herself into his arms; her tears flowed, she sobbed--she clung to his
breast.  It was the first time Wallace had been from her; she had
feared it would have been the last.  The hour--the conflict--the bleeding
stranger!  But now he was returned--he was safe!

"Art thou indeed here!" exclaimed she.  Blood fell from his forehead
upon her face and bosom: "O, my Wallace!" cried she, in agony.

"Fear not, my love! all is well, since our wounded countryman is safe."

"But you, bleed!" returned she.  No tears now impeded her voice.
Terror had checked their joyful currents; and she felt as if she
expected his life-blood to issue from the wound on which she gazed.

"I hope my preserver is not hurt?" inquired the stranger.

"Oh, no!" replied Wallace, putting back the hair from his forehead; "a
mere trifle!"  That the action had discovered the gash to be wider than
he thought, he saw in the countenance of his wife!  She turned deadly
pale.  "Marion," said he, "to convince you how causeless your fears
are, you shall cure me yourself; and with no other surgery than your
girdle!"

When Lady Wallace heard his gay tone, and saw the unforced smiles on
his lips, she took courage; and, remembering the deep wounds on the
stranger, whom she had just assisted to dress, without any alarm for
his life, she began to hope that she need not now fear for the object
dearest to her in existence.  Rising from her husband's arms, with a
languid smile she unbound the linen fillet from her waist; and Halbert
having poured some balsam into the wound, she prepared to apply the
bandage; but when she lifted her husband's hair from his temple--that
hair which had so often been the object of her admiration, as it hung
in shining masses over his arching brows!-when the clotted blood met
her fingers, a mist seemed to pass over her sight; she paused for a
moment; but rallying her strength, as the cheerful sound of his voice
conversing with his guest assured her fear was needless, she tied the
fillet; and, stealing a soft kiss on his cheek when she had finished,
she seated herself, yet trembling, by his side.

"Gallant Wallace!" continued the stranger-agitation had prevented her
hearing what had preceded this-"it is Donald Earl of Mar, who owes his
life to you."

"Then blessed be my arm," exclaimed Wallace, "that has preserved a life
so precious to my country!"

"May it indeed be blessed!" cried Lord Mar; "for this night it has made
the Southrons feel there is yet one man in Scotland who does not fear
to resist oppression, and to punish treachery."

"What treachery?" inquired Lady Wallace, her alarmed spirit still
hovering about her soul's far dearer part; "is any meant to my husband?"

"None to Sir William Wallace, more than to any other brave Scot,"
replied the earl: "but we all see the oppression of our country; we all
know the treachery by which it was subjugated; and this night, in my
own person, I have felt the effects of both.  The English at Lanark
dispatched a body of men to Bothwell Castle (where my family now are),
on a plea, that as its lord is yet absent, they presume he is adverse
to Edward, and therefore they must search his dwelling for documents to
settle the point.  Considering myself the representative of my
brother-in-law, Lord Bothwell, and suspecting that this might be only a
private marauding party, I refused to admit the soldiers; and saw them
depart, swearing to return next day with a stronger force, and storm
the castle.  To be ascertained of their commission, and to appeal
against such unprovoked tyranny, should it be true, I followed the
detachment to Lanark.

"I saw Heselrigge the governor.  He avowed the transaction; but awed by
the power which he thinks I possess in the country, he consented to
spare Bothwell while I and my family remain in it.  It being nearly
dark, I took my leave, and was proceeding toward my servants in the
courtyard when a young man accosted me.  I recognized him to be the
officer who had commanded the party I had driven from the castle.
Heselrigge having told me that he was his nephew, I made no hesitation
to go back with him, when he informed me that his uncle had forgotten
something of importance, and begged me to return.  I followed his
steps; but instead of conducting me to the room in which I had
conversed with Heselrigge, he led me along a dark passage into a small
apartment, where telling me his uncle would attend me, he suddenly
retreated out of the door, and before I could recollect myself I heard
him bolt it after him.

"I now saw myself a prisoner; and alarmed at what might be intended to
my defenseless family, I made every essay to force the door, but it was
in vain.  Driven to despair, I remained in a state of mind not to be
described, when the bolt was withdrawn, and two men entered, with
manacles in their hands.  They attempted to seize me, telling me I was
the prisoner of King Edward.  I did not listen further, but wounding
one with my dagger, felled the other to the ground; and darting past
him, made my way through what passages I cannot tell, till I found
myself in a street leading from behind the governor's house.  I ran
against some one as I rushed from the portal; it was my servant Neil.
I hastily told him to draw his sword and follow me.  We then hurried
forward; he telling me he had stepped out to observe the night, while
the rest of my men were awaiting me in the house, wondering at my delay.

"Rejoiced at my escape, and fearing the worst of consequences from the
treachery of Heselrigge, I was hastening onward, determined to pursue
my way on foot to the protection of my family, when, at the turning of
an angle which leads to the Bothwell road, we were suddenly surrounded
by armed men.  The moon shone full on their faces, and I discovered
they were Southrons, and that young Heselrigge was at their head.

"He aimed a blow at my head with his battle-ax, and in a voice of
triumph exclaimed to his soldiers, 'The plunder of Bothwell, my lads!
Down with its lord! All but the lady Helen shall be yours!"

"In a moment every sword was directed toward me.  They wounded me in
several places; but the thought of my daughter gave supernatural vigor
to my arm, and I defended myself till the cries of my servant brought
you, my brave deliverer, to my rescue.  But, while I am safe, perhaps
my treacherous pursuer has marched toward Bothwell, too sure to commit
the horrid violence he meditates; there are none to guard my child but
a few domestics, the unpracticed sword of my stripling nephew, and the
feeble arms of my wife."

"Be easy on that head," interrupted Wallace: "I believe the infamous
leader of the banditti fell by my hand, for the soldiers made an outcry
that Arthur Heselrigge was killed; and then pressing on me to take
revenge, their weight broke a passage into a vault, through which I
escaped-"

"Save, save yourself, my master!" cried a man rushing in from the
garden. "You are pursued-"

While he spoke he felt insensible at Wallace's feet.  It was
Dugald whom he had rescued from the blow of Heselrigge, and who, from
the state of his wound had been thus long in reaching Ellerslie.

Wallace had hardly time to give him to the care of Halbert, when the
voice of war assailed his ears.  The tumult of men demanding admittance
and the terrible sound of spears rattling against the shields of their
owners, told the astonished group within that the house was beset by
armed foes.

"Blood for blood!" cried a horrid voice, which penetrated the almost
palsied senses of Lady Marion.  "Vengence on Wallace, for the murder of
Heselrigge!"

"Fly, fly!" cried she, looking wildly at her husband.

"Whither?" answered he, supporting her in his arms.  "Would this be a
moment to leave you, and our wounded guest?  I must meet them."

"Not now!" cried Lord Mar.  "Hear you not how numerous they are?  Mark
that shout! they thirst for blood.  If you have love, pity, for your
wife, delay not a moment.  Again-"

The uproar redoubled, and the room was instantly filled with shrieking
women in their night-clothes, the attendants of Lady Wallace.  She
almost expiring, on her husband's breast.

"O my lord!" cried the terrified creatures, wringing their hands, "what
will become of us!  The Southrons are at the gates, and we shall be
lost forever!"

"Fear not," replied Wallace; "retire to your chambers.  I am the person
they seek: none else will meet with injury."

Appeased by this assurance, the women retreated to their apartments;
and Wallace, turning to the earl, who continued to enforce the
necessity of his flight, repeated, that he would not consent to leave
his wife in such a tumult.

"Leave me," cried she, in an inarticulate voice, "or see me die."

As she spoke, there was a violent crash, and a tremendous burst of
imprecations.  Three of Wallace's men ran panting into the room.  Two
of the assailants had climbed to the hall window; and had just been
thrown back upon the cliffs, where one was killed.  "Conceal yourself,"
said the Scots to Wallace; "for in a few minutes more your men will not
be able to maintain the gates."

"Yes, my dear lord," cried Halbert, "there is a dry well at the end of
the garden; at the bottom of that you will be safe."

"By your love for me, Wallace--by all you owe to the tender affections
of your grandfather, hearken to him!" cried Lady Marion, falling at his
feet, and clasping his knees.  "I kneel for my life in kneeling for
yours!  Pity the gray hairs of Sir Ronald, whom your untimely death
would bring to the grave!  Pity your unborn child!  Fly, Wallace, fly
if you would have me live!"  She was pale and breathless.

"Angel of my life," exclaimed Wallace, straining her to his heart, "I
obey thee.  But if the hand of one of the desperate robbers dares to
touch thy hallowed person-"

"Think not so, my lord," interrupted Halbert; "it is you they seek.
Not finding you, they will be too eager in pursuit to molest your lady."

"I shall be safe," whispered Marion; "only fly--while you are here,
their shouts kill me."

"But thou shalt go with me," returned he; "the well will contain us
all.  But first let our faithful Halbert and these honest fellows lower
Lord Mar into the place of refuge.  He being the cause of the affray,
if discovered, would be immediately sacrificed."

Lord Mar acquiesced; and while the contention was so loud without, as
to threaten the tearing down of the walls, the earl was carried into
the garden.  He was followed by Sir William Wallace, to whose arm his
wife yet fondly clung.  At every cry of the enemy, at every shock they
gave to his yet impregnable gates, she breathed the shorter, and was
clasped by the lord of her heart still more closely to his bosom.

At the well-side they found the earl bound with rope that was to lower
him to the bottom.  By great care it was safely done; and the cord
being brought up again, before it was tied round Wallace (for his
agonized wife insisted he should descend next), he recollected that the
iron box at his side might hurt the wounded nobleman by striking him in
his descent; and, unbuckling it, he said it contained matters of great
value, and ordered it to be lowered first.

Lord Mar, beneath, was releasing it from the rope, when a shout of
triumph pierced their ears.  A party of the English, having come round
the heights, had leaped the wall of the garden, and were within a few
yards of the well.  For Wallace to descend now was impossible.  "That
tree!" whispered Marion, pointing to an oak-tree near which they stood.
As she spoke, she slid from his arms, and along with the venerable
Halbert, who had seized her hand, disappeared amid the adjoining
thicket.  The two servants fled also.

Wallace, finding himself alone, the next instant, like one of his
native eagles, was looking down from the towering top of the wood upon
his enemies.  They passed beneath him, denouncing vengeance upon the
assassin of Arthur Heselrigge!  One, who by the brightness of his armor
seemed to be their leader, stopped under the tree, and complained he
had so sprained his ankle in leaping the wall, he must wait a few
minutes to recover himself.  Several soldiers drew toward him; but he
ordered them to pursue their duty, search the house, and bring Wallace,
dead or alive, before him.

They obeyed; but others, who had gained admittance to the tower through
the now forced gates, soon ran to him with information that the
murderer could nowhere be found.

"But here is a gay ladie," cried one; "perhaps she can tell of his
hiding-place." And at moment Marion, with Halbert, appeared amongst a
band of men.  The lighted torches which the soldiers held, shone full
on her face.  Though pale as monumental marble, the exquisite beauty of
her features, and the calm dignity which commanded from her eyes, awed
the officer into respect and admiration.

"Soldiers, stand back!" cried he, advancing to Lady Wallace.  "Fear
not, madam."  As the words passed his lips, a flight of arrows flew
into the bosom of the tree.  A piercing shriek from Marion was her only
answer.  "Hah! my lady's falcon!" cried Halbert alarmed, doubly, for
the fate of his master.  A sudden agitation of the branches having
excited an indefinite suspicion in a body of archers who stood near,
with one impulse they had discharged their arrows to the spot.
Halbert's ready excuse, both for the disturbance in the tree and his
lady's shriek, was prompted and warranted true by the appearance of a
large bird, which the rushing of the arrows had frighted from her nest;
she rose suddenly from amongst the branches, and soared away, far to
the east, with loud screams.

All being again still, Marion hoped that her husband had escaped any
serious injury from the arrows; and turning with recovered composure to
the officer, heard him, with a glow of comfort, reprimand his men for
daring to draw their bows without his orders.  Then addressing her, "I
beg your pardon, madam," said he, "both for the alarm these hot-headed
men have occasioned you, and for the violence they have committed in
forcing one of your sex and beauty before me.  Had I expected to have
found a lady here, I should have issued orders to have prevented this
outrage; but I am sent hither in quest of Sir William Wallace, who, by
a mortal attack made on the person of the Governor of Lanark's nephew,
has forfeited his life.  The scabbard of his sword, found beside the
murdered Heselrigge, is an undeniable proof of his guilt.  Direct us to
find him, and not only your release, but the favor of the English
monarch will await your allegiance."

"I am Sir William Wallace's wife," returned the gentle Marion, in a
firm tone; "and by what authority you seek him thus, and presume to
call him guilty, I cannot understand."

"By the authority of the laws, madam, which he has violated."

"What laws?" rejoined she; "Sir William Wallace acknowledges none but
those of God and his country.  Neither of these has he transgressed."

The officer replied, "This night he assassinated Arthur Heselrigge in
the streets of Lanark; and that condemns him, by the last declaration
of King Edward: Whatever Scot maltreats any one of the English
soldiers, or civil officers garrisoned in the towns of Scotland, shall
thereby forfeit his life, as the penalty of his crime."

"A tyrant's law, sir, to which no freeborn Scot will submit!  But even
were it allowed by my countrymen, in this case it can have no hold on
my husband.  That he is a Scot, he glories: and not that he maltreated
any Englishman in the streets of Lanark, do I glory; but because, when
he saw two defenseless men borne down by a band of armed soldiers, he
exposed his unshielded breast in their defense; one of the two died,
covered with wounds.  That the governor's nephew also fell, was a just
retribution for his heading so unequal a contest, and no crime in Sir
William Wallace; for he slew him to preserve a feeble old man, who had
a hundred English swords leveled at his life."

The officer paused for a moment, and then, ordering his soldiers to
fall further back, when they were at a sufficient distance, he offered
to take Lady Wallace's hand.  She withstood his motion with a reserved
air, and said, "Speak, sir, what you would say, or allow me to retire."

"I mean not to offend you, noble lady," continued he; "had I a wife
lovely as yourself, and I in like circumstances, I hope in the like
manner would defend my life and honor.  I knew not the particulars of
the affair in which Arthur Heselrigge fell, till I heard it from your
lips.  I can easily credit them, for I know his unmanly character.
Wallace is a Scot, and acted in Scotland as Gilbert Hambledon would
have done in England, were it possible for any vile foreigner to there
put his foot upon the neck of a countryman of mine. Wherever you have
concealed your husband, let it be a distant asylum.  At present no
tract within the jurisdiction of Lanark will be left unsearched by the
governor's indefatigable revenge."

Lady Wallace, overcome with gratitude at this generous speech of the
English officer, uttered some inarticulate words, expressive more in
sound than clearness, of her grateful feelings.  Hambledon continued,
"I will use my influence with Heselrigge, to prevent the interior of
your house from being disturbed again; but it being in the course of
military operations, I cannot free you from the disagreeable ceremony
of a guard being placed to-morrow morning round the domains.  This I
know will be done to intercept Sir William Wallace should he attempt to
return."

"Oh! That he were indeed far distant!" thought the anxious Marion.

The officer then added, "However, you shall be relieved of my
detachment directly."  And as he spoke, he waved his sword to them who
had seized the harper.  They advanced, still holding their prisoner.
He ordered them to commit the man to him, and to sound.  The trumpeter
obeyed; and in a few seconds the whole detachment were assembled before
their commander.

"Soldiers!" cried he, "Sir William Wallace has escaped our hands.
Mount your horses, that we may return to Lanark, and search the other
side of the town.  Lead forth, and I will follow."

The troops obeyed, and falling back through the open gates, left Sir
Gilbert Hambledon alone with Lady Wallace and the wondering Halbert.
The brave young man took the now no longer withdrawn hand of the
grateful Marion, who had stood trembling while so many of her husband's
mortal enemies were assembled under the place of his concealment.

"Noble Englishman," said she, as the last body of soldiers passed from
her sight, "I cannot enough thank you for this generous conduct; but
