The Project Gutenberg EBook Last Of The Barons, by Lytton, Volume 5.
#146 in our series by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Last Of The Barons, Volume 5.

Author: Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Release Date: March 2005  [EBook #7719]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 6, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAST OF THE BARONS, V5 ***


This eBook was produced by Tapio Riikonen
and David Widger





BOOK V.




CHAPTER I.

RURAL ENGLAND IN THE MIDDLE AGES--NOBLE VISITORS SEEK THE CASTLE OF
MIDDLEHAM.

Autumn had succeeded to summer, winter to autumn, and the spring of
1468 was green in England, when a gallant cavalcade was seen slowly
winding the ascent of a long and gradual hill, towards the decline of
day.  Different, indeed, from the aspect which that part of the
country now presents was the landscape that lay around them, bathed in
the smiles of the westering sun.  In a valley to the left, a full view
of which the steep road commanded (where now roars the din of trade
through a thousand factories), lay a long, secluded village.  The
houses, if so they might be called, were constructed entirely of wood,
and that of the more perishable kind,--willow, sallow, elm, and plum-
tree.  Not one could boast a chimney; but the smoke from the single
fire in each, after duly darkening the atmosphere within, sent its
surplusage lazily and fitfully through a circular aperture in the
roof.  In fact, there was long in the provinces a prejudice against
chimneys!  The smoke was considered good both for house and owner; the
first it was supposed to season, and the last to guard "from rheums,
catarrhs, and poses."  [So worthy Hollinshed, Book II. c. 22.--"Then
had we none but reredosses, and our heads did never ache.  For as the
smoke, in those days, was supposed to be a sufficient hardening for
the timber of the house, so it was reputed a far better medicine to
keep the goodman and his familie from the quacke, or pose, wherewith
as then very few were oft acquainted."]  Neither did one of these
habitations boast the comfort of a glazed window, the substitute being
lattice, or chequer-work,--even in the house of the franklin, which
rose statelily above the rest, encompassed with barns and outsheds.
And yet greatly should we err did we conceive that these deficiencies
were an index to the general condition of the working class.  Far
better off was the labourer when employed, than now.  Wages were
enormously high, meat extremely low; [See Hallam: Middle Ages, Chap.
xx. Part II.  So also Hollinsbed, Book XI., c. 12, comments on the
amazement of the Spaniards, in Queen Mary's time, when they saw "what
large diet was used in these so homelie cottages," and reports one of
the Spaniards to have said, "These English have their houses of sticks
and dirt, but they fare commonlie so well as the king!"] and our
motherland bountifully maintained her children.

On that greensward, before the village (now foul and reeking with the
squalid population whom commerce rears up,--the victims, as the
movers, of the modern world) were assembled youth and age; for it was
a holiday evening, and the stern Puritan had not yet risen to sour the
face of Mirth.  Well clad in leathern jerkin, or even broadcloth, the
young peasants vied with each other in quoits and wrestling; while the
merry laughter of the girls, in their gay-coloured kirtles and
ribboned hair, rose oft and cheerily to the ears of the cavalcade.
From a gentle eminence beyond the village, and half veiled by trees,
on which the first verdure of spring was budding (where now, around
the gin-shop, gather the fierce and sickly children of toil and of
discontent), rose the venerable walls of a monastery, and the chime of
its heavy bell swung far and sweet over the pastoral landscape.  To
the right of the road (where now stands the sober meeting-house) was
one of those small shrines so frequent in Italy, with an image of the
Virgin gaudily painted, and before it each cavalier in the procession
halted an instant to cross himself and mutter an ave.  Beyond, still
to the right, extended vast chains of woodland, interspersed with
strips of pasture, upon which numerous flocks were grazing, with
horses, as yet unbroken to bit and selle, that neighed and snorted as
they caught scent of their more civilized brethren pacing up the road.

In front of the cavalcade rode two, evidently of superior rank to the
rest,--the one small and slight, with his long hair flowing over his
shoulders; and the other, though still young, many years older, and
indicating his clerical profession by the absence of all love-locks,
compensated by a curled and glossy beard, trimmed with the greatest
care.  But the dress of the ecclesiastic was as little according to
our modern notions of what beseems the Church as can well be
conceived: his tunic and surcoat, of a rich amber, contrasted well
with the clear darkness of his complexion; his piked shoes, or
beakers, as they were called, turned up half-way to the knee; the
buckles of his dress were of gold, inlaid with gems; and the housings
of his horse, which was of great power, were edged with gold fringe.
By the side of his steed walked a tall greyhound, upon which he ever
and anon glanced with affection.  Behind these rode two gentlemen,
whose golden spurs announced knighthood; and then followed a long
train of squires and pages, richly clad and accoutred, bearing
