The Project Gutenberg EBook Last Of The Barons, by Lytton, Volume 7.
#148 in our series by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Last Of The Barons, Volume 7.

Author: Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Release Date: March 2005  [EBook #7721]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 6, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAST OF THE BARONS, V7 ***


This eBook was produced by Tapio Riikonen
and David Widger





BOOK VII.

THE POPULAR REBELLION.




CHAPTER I.

THE WHITE LION OF MARCH SHAKES HIS MANE.

"And what news?" asked Hastings, as he found himself amidst the king's
squires; while yet was heard the laugh of the tymbesteres, and yet
gliding through the trees might be seen the retreating form of Sibyll.

"My lord, the king needs you instantly.  A courier has just arrived
from the North.  The Lords St. John, Rivers, De Fulke, and Scales are
already with his highness."

"Where?"

"In the great council chamber."

To that memorable room [it was from this room that Hastings was
hurried to execution, June 13, 1483] in the White Tower, in which the
visitor, on entrance, is first reminded of the name and fate of
Hastings, strode the unprophetic lord.

He found Edward not reclining on cushions and carpets, not womanlike
in loose robes, not with his lazy smile upon his sleek beauty.  The
king had doffed his gown, and stood erect in the tight tunic, which
gave in full perfection the splendid proportions of a frame
unsurpassed in activity and strength.  Before him, on the long table,
lay two or three open letters, beside the dagger with which Edward had
cut the silk that bound them.  Around him gravely sat Lord Rivers,
Anthony Woodville, Lord St. John, Raoul de Fulke, the young and
valiant D'Eyncourt, and many other of the principal lords.  Hastings
saw at once that something of pith and moment had occurred; and by the
fire in the king's eye, the dilation of his nostril, the cheerful and
almost joyous pride of his mien and brow, the experienced courtier
read the signs of WAR.

"Welcome, brave Hastings," said Edward, in a voice wholly changed from
its wonted soft affectation,--loud, clear, and thrilling as it went
through the marrow and heart of all who heard its stirring and trumpet
accent,--"welcome now to the field as ever to the banquet!  We have
news from the North that bids us brace on the burgonet and buckle-to
the brand,--a revolt that requires a king's arm to quell.  In
Yorkshire fifteen thousand men are in arms, under a leader they call
Robin of Redesdale,--the pretext, a thrave of corn demanded by the
Hospital of St. Leonard's, the true design that of treason to our
realm.  At the same time, we hear from our brother of Gloucester, now
on the Border, that the Scotch have lifted the Lancaster Rose.  There
is peril if these two armies meet.  No time to lose,--they are
saddling our war-steeds; we hasten to the van of our royal force.  We
shall have warm work, my lords.  But who is worthy of a throne that
cannot guard it?"

"This is sad tidings indeed, sire," said Hastings, gravely.

"Sad!  Say it not, Hastings!  War is the chase of kings!  Sir Raoul de
Fulke, why lookest thou so brooding and sorrowful?"

"Sire, I but thought that had Earl Warwick been in England, this--"

"Ha!" interrupted Edward, haughtily and hastily, "and is Warwick the
sun of heaven that no cloud can darken where his face may shine?  The
rebels shall need no foe, my realm no regent, while I, the heir of the
Plantagenets, have the sword for one, the sceptre for the other.  We
depart this evening ere the sun be set."

"My liege," said the Lord St. John, gravely, "on what forces do you
count to meet so formidable an array?"

"All England, Lord of St. John!"

"Alack! my liege, may you not deceive yourself!  But in this crisis it
is right that your leal and trusty subjects should speak out, and
plainly.  It seems that these insurgents clamour not against yourself,
but against the queen's relations,--yes, my Lord Rivers, against you
and your House,--and I fear me that the hearts of England are with
them here."

"It is true, sire," put in Raoul de Fulke, boldly; "and if these--new
men are to head your armies, the warriors of Towton will stand aloof,
--Raoul de Fulke serves no Woodville's banner.  Frown not, Lord de
Scales! it is the griping avarice of you and yours that has brought
this evil on the king.  For you the commons have been pillaged; for
you the daughters of peers have been forced into monstrous marriages,
at war with birth and with nature herself; for you, the princely
Warwick, near to the throne in blood, and front and pillar of our
time-honoured order of seigneur and of knight, has been thrust from
our suzerain's favour.  And if now ye are to march at the van of war,
--you to be avengers of the strife of which ye are the cause,--I say
that the soldiers will lack heart, and the provinces ye pass through
will be the country of a foe!"

"Vain man!" began Anthony Woodville, when Hastings laid his hand on
his arm, while Edward, amazed at this outburst from two of the
supporters on whom he principally counted, had the prudence to
suppress his resentment, and remained silent,--but with the aspect of
one resolved to command obedience, when he once deemed it right to
interfere.

"Hold, Sir Anthony!" said Hastings, who, the moment he found himself
with men, woke to all the manly spirit and profound wisdom that had
rendered his name illustrious--"hold, and let me have the word; my
Lords St. John and De Fulke, your charges are more against me than
against these gentlemen, for I am a new man,--a squire by birth, and
proud to derive mine honours from the same origin as all true
nobility,--I mean the grace of a noble liege and the happy fortune of
a soldier's sword.  It may be" (and here the artful favourite, the
most beloved of the whole court, inclined himself meekly)--"it may be
that I have not borne those honours so mildly as to disarm blame.  In
the war to be, let me atone.  My liege, hear your servant: give me no
command,--let me be a simple soldier, fighting by your side.  My
example who will not follow?--proud to ride but as a man of arms along
the track which the sword of his sovereign shall cut through the ranks
of battle!  Not you, Lord de Scales, redoubtable and invincible with
lance and axe; let us new men soothe envy by our deeds; and you, Lords
St. John and De Fulke, you shall teach us how your fathers led
warriors who did not fight more gallantly than we will.  And when
rebellion is at rest, when we meet again in our suzerain's hall,
accuse us new men, if you can find us faulty, and we will answer you
as we best may."

This address, which could have come from no man with such effect as
from Hastings, touched all present.  And though the Woodvilles, father
and son, saw in it much to gall their pride, and half believed it a
snare for their humiliation, they made no opposition.  Raoul de Fulke,
ever generous as fiery, stretched forth his hand, and said,--

"Lord Hastings, you have spoken well.  Be it as the king wills."

"My lords," returned Edward, gayly, "my will is that ye be friends
while a foe is in the field.  Hasten, then, I beseech you, one and
all, to raise your vassals, and join our standard at Fotheringay.  I
will find ye posts that shall content the bravest."

The king made a sign to break up the conference, and dismissing even
the Woodvilles, was left alone with Hastings.

"Thou hast served me at need, Will;" said the king.  "But I shall
remember" (and his eye flashed a tiger's fire) "the mouthing of those
mock-pieces of the lords at Runnymede.  I am no John, to be bearded by
my vassals.  Enough of them now.  Think you Warwick can have abetted
this revolt?"

"A revolt of peasants and yeomen!  No, sire.  If he did so, farewell
forever to the love the barons bear him."

"Um! and yet Montagu, whom I dismissed ten days since to the Borders,
hearing of disaffection, hath done nought to check it.  But come what
may, his must be a bold lance that shivers against a king's mail.  And
now one kiss of my lady Bessee, one cup of the bright canary, and then
God and Saint George for the White Rose!"




CHAPTER II.

THE CAMP AT OLNEY.

It was some weeks after the citizens of London had seen their gallant
king, at the head of such forces as were collected in haste in the
metropolis, depart from their walls to the encounter of the rebels.
Surprising and disastrous had been the tidings in the interim.  At
first, indeed, there were hopes that the insurrection had been put
down by Montagu, who had defeated the troops of Robin of Redesdale,
near the city of York, and was said to have beheaded their leader.
But the spirit of discontent was only fanned by an adverse wind.  The
popular hatred to the Woodvilles was so great, that in proportion as
Edward advanced to the scene of action, the country rose in arms, as
Raoul de Fulke had predicted.  Leaders of lordly birth now headed the
rebellion; the sons of the Lords Latimer and Fitzhugh (near kinsmen of
the House of Nevile) lent their names to the cause and Sir John
Coniers, an experienced soldier, whose claims had been disregarded by
Edward, gave to the insurgents the aid of a formidable capacity for
war.  In every mouth was the story of the Duchess of Bedford's
witchcraft; and the waxen figure of the earl did more to rouse the
people than perhaps the earl himself could have done in person.  [See
"Parliamentary Rolls," vi. 232, for the accusation of witchcraft, and
the fabrication of a necromantic image of Lord Warwick, circulated
against the Duchess of Bedford.  She herself quotes and complains of
them.]  As yet, however, language of the insurgents was tempered with
all personal respect to the king; they declared in their manifestoes
that they desired only the banishment of the Woodvilles and the recall
of Warwick, whose name they used unscrupulously, and whom they
declared they were on their way to meet.  As soon as it was known that
the kinsmen of the beloved earl were in the revolt, and naturally
supposed that the earl himself must countenance the enterprise, the
tumultuous camp swelled every hour, while knight after knight, veteran
after veteran, abandoned the royal standard.  The Lord d'Eyncourt (one
of the few lords of the highest birth and greatest following over whom
the Neviles had no influence, and who bore the Woodvilles no grudge)
had, in his way to Lincolnshire,--where his personal aid was necessary
to rouse his vassals, infected by the common sedition,--been attacked
and wounded by a body of marauders, and thus Edward's camp lost one of
its greatest leaders.  Fierce dispute broke out in the king's
councils; and when the witch Jacquetta's practices against the earl
travelled from the hostile into the royal camp, Raoul de Fulke, St.
John, and others, seized with pious horror, positively declared they
would throw down their arms and retire to their castles, unless the
Woodvilles were dismissed from the camp and the Earl of Warwick was
recalled to England.  To the first demand the king was constrained to
yield; with the second he temporized.  He marched from Fotheringay to
Newark; but the signs of disaffection, though they could not dismay
him as a soldier, altered his plans as a captain of singular military
acuteness; he fell back on Nottingham, and despatched, with his own
hands, letters to Clarence, the Archbishop of York, and Warwick.  To
the last he wrote touchingly.

"We do not believe" (said the letter) "that ye should be of any such
disposition towards us as the rumour here runneth, considering the
trust and affection we bear you,--and cousin, we think ye shall be to
us welcome."  [Paston Letters, ccxcviii. (Knight's edition), vol. ii.
p. 59.  See also Lingard, vol. iii. p. 522 (4to edition), note 43, for
the proper date to be assigned to Edward's letter to Warwick, etc.]

But ere these letters reached their destination, the crown seemed
well-nigh lost. At Edgecote the Earl of Pembroke was defeated and
slain, and five thousand royalists were left on the field.  Earl
Rivers and his son, Sir John Woodville, [This Sir John Woodville was
