The Project Gutenberg EBook The Parisians, by E. B. Lytton, Book 5.
#168 in our series by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Parisians, Book 5.

Author: Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Release Date: March 2005  [EBook #7741]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 20, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PARISIANS, B5, LYTTON ***




Produced by David Widger




                              THE PARISIANS

                         By Edward Bulwer-Lytton


                                 BOOK V.


CHAPTER I.

The next day at noon M. Louvier was closeted in his study with M.
Gandrin.

"Yes," cried Louvier, "I have behaved very handsomely to the _beau
Marquis_.  No one can say to the contrary."

"True," answered Gandrin.  "Besides the easy terms for the transfer of
the mortgages, that free bonus of one thousand louis is a generous and
noble act of munificence."

"Is it not! and my youngster has already begun to do with it as I meant
and expected.  He has taken a fine apartment; he has bought a coupe and
horses; he has placed himself in the hands of the Chevalier de
Finisterre; he is entered at the Jockey Club.  Parbleu, the one thousand
louis will be soon gone."

"And then?"

"And then!  why, he will have tasted the sweets of Parisian life; he will
think with disgust of the _vieux manoir_.  He can borrow no more.  I must
remain sole mortgagee, and I shall behave as handsomely in buying his
estates as I have behaved in increasing his income."

Here a clerk entered and said that a monsieur wished to see M. Louvier
for a few minutes in private, on urgent business.

"Tell him to send in his card."

"He has declined to do so, but states that he has already the honour of
your acquaintance."

"A writer in the press, perhaps; or is he an artist?"

"I have not seen him before, Monsieur, but he has the air _tres comme il
faut_."

"Well, you may admit him.  I will not detain you longer, my dear Gandrin.
My homages to Madame.  Bonjour."

Louvier bowed out M. Gandrin, and then rubbed his hands complacently.  He
was in high spirits.  "Aha, my dear Marquis, thou art in my trap now.
Would it were thy father instead," he muttered chucklingly, and then took
his stand on the hearth, with his back to the fireless grate.  There
entered a gentleman exceedingly well dressed,--dressed according to the
fashion, but still as became one of ripe middle age, not desiring to pass
for younger than he was.

He was tall, with a kind of lofty ease in his air and his movements; not
slight of frame, but spare enough to disguise the strength and endurance
which belong to sinews and thews of steel, freed from all superfluous
flesh, broad across the shoulders, thin in the flanks.  His dark hair had
in youth been luxuriant in thickness and curl; it was now clipped short,
and had become bare at the temples, but it still retained the lustre of
its colour and the crispness of its ringlets.  He wore neither beard nor
mustache, and the darkness of his hair was contrasted by a clear fairness
of complexion, healthful, though somewhat pale, and eyes of that rare
gray tint which has in it no shade of blue,--peculiar eyes, which give a
very distinct character to the face.  The man must have been singularly
handsome in youth; he was handsome still, though probably in his forty-
seventh or forty-eighth year, doubtless a very different kind of
comeliness.  The form of the features and the contour of the face were
those that suit the rounded beauty of the Greek outline, and such beauty
would naturally have been the attribute of the countenance in earlier
days; but the cheeks were now thin, and with lines of care and sorrow
between nostril and lip, so that the shape of the face seemed lengthened,
and the features had become more salient.

Louvier gazed at his visitor with a vague idea that he had seen him
before, and could not remember where or when; but at all events he
recognized at the first glance a man of rank and of the great world.

"Pray be seated, Monsieur," he said, resuming his own easy-chair.

The visitor obeyed the invitation with a very graceful bend of his head,
drew his chair near to the financier's, stretched his limbs with the ease
of a man making himself at home, and fixing his calm bright eyes quietly
on Louvier, said, with a bland smile,--

"My dear old friend, do you not remember me?  You are less altered than I
am."

Louvier stared hard and long; his lip fell, his cheek paled, and at last
he faltered out, "Ciel! is it possible!  Victor, the Vicomte de Mauleon?"

"At your service, my dear Louvier."

There was a pause; the financier was evidently confused and embarrassed,
and not less evidently the visit of the "dear old friend" was unwelcome.

"Vicomte," he said at last, "this is indeed a surprise; I thought you had
long since quitted Paris for good."

"'L'homme propose,' etc.  I have returned, and mean to enjoy the rest of
my days in the metropolis of the Graces and the Pleasures.  What though
we are not so young as we were, Louvier,--we have more vigour in us than
the new generation; and though it may no longer befit us to renew the gay
carousals of old, life has still excitements as vivid for the social
temperament and ambitious mind.  Yes, the _roi des viveurs_ returns to
Paris for a more solid throne than he filled before."

"Are you serious?"

"As serious as the French gayety will permit one to be."

"Alas, Monsieur le Vicomte! can you flatter yourself that you will regain
the society you have quitted, and the name you have--"

Louvier stopped short; something in the Vicomte's eye daunted him.

"The name I have laid aside for convenience of travel.  Princes travel
incognito, and so may a simple _gentilhomme_.  'Regain my place in
society,' say you?  Yes; it is not that which troubles me."

"What does?"

"The consideration whether on a very modest income I can be sufficiently
esteemed for myself to render that society more pleasant than ever.  Ah,
_mon cher_! why recoil? why so frightened?  Do you think I am going to
ask you for money?  Have I ever done so since we parted; and did I ever
do so before without repaying you?  Bah! you _roturiers_ are worse than
the Bourbons.  You never learn or unlearn.  'Fors non mutat genus.'"

The magnificent _millionaire_, accustomed to the homage of grandees from
the Faubourg and _lions_ from the Chaussee d'Antin, rose to his feet in
superb wrath, less at the taunting words than at the haughtiness of mien
with which they were uttered.

"Monsieur, I cannot permit you to address me in that tone.  Do you mean
to insult me?"

"Certainly not.  Tranquillize your nerves, reseat yourself, and listen,--
reseat yourself, I say."

Louvier dropped into his chair.

"No," resumed the Vicomte, politely, "I do not come here to insult you,
neither do I come to ask money; I assume that I am in my rights when I
ask Monsieur Louvier what has become of Louise Duval?"

"Louise Duval! I know nothing about her."

"Possibly not now; but you did know her well enough, when we two parted,
to be a candidate for her hand.  You did know her enough to solicit my
good offices in promotion of your suit; and you did, at my advice, quit
Paris to seek her at Aix-la-Chapelle."

"What! have you, Monsieur de Mauleon, not heard news of her since that
day?"

"I decline to accept your question as an answer to mine.  You went to
Aix-la-Chapelle; you saw Louise Duval, at my urgent request she
condescended to accept your hand."

"No, Monsieur de Mauleon, she did not accept my hand.  I did not even see
her.  The day before I arrived at Aix-la-Chapelle she had left it,--not
alone,--left it with her lover."

"Her lover!  You do not mean the miserable Englishman who--"

"No Englishman," interrupted Louvier, fiercely.  "Enough that the step
she took placed an eternal barrier between her and myself.  I have never
even sought to hear of her since that day.  Vicomte, that woman was the
one love of my life.  I loved her, as you must have known, to folly, to
madness.  And how was my love requited?  Ah! you open a very deep wound,
Monsieur le Vicomte."

"Pardon me, Louvier; I did not give you credit for feelings so keen and
so genuine, nor did I think myself thus easily affected by matters
belonging to a past life so remote from the present.  For whom did Louise
forsake you?"

"It matters not; he is dead."

"I regret to hear that; I might have avenged you."

"I need no one to avenge my wrong.  Let this pass."

"Not yet.  Louise, you say, fled with a seducer?  So proud as she was, I
can scarcely believe it."

"Oh, it was not with a _roturier_ she fled; her pride would not have
allowed that."

"He must have deceived her somehow.  Did she continue to live with him?"

"That question, at least, I can answer; for though I lost all trace of
her life, his life was pretty well known to me till its end; and a very
few months after she fled he was enchained to another.  Let us talk of
her no more."

"Ay, ay," muttered De Mauleon, "some disgraces are not to be redeemed,
and therefore not to be discussed.  To me, though a relation, Louise
Duval was but little known, and after what you tell me, I cannot dispute
your right to say, 'Talk of her no more.'  You loved her, and she wronged
you.  My poor Louvier, pardon me if I made an old wound bleed afresh."

These words were said with a certain pathetic tenderness; they softened
Louvier towards the speaker.

After a short pause the Vicomte swept his hand over his brow, as if to
dismiss from his mind a painful and obtrusive thought; then with a
changed expression of countenance,--an expression frank and winning,--
with voice and with manner in which no vestige remained of the irony or
the haughtiness with which he had resented the frigidity of his
reception, he drew his chair still nearer to Louvier's, and resumed: "Our
situations, Paul Louvier, are much changed since we two became friends.
I then could say, 'Open sesame' to whatever recesses, forbidden to vulgar
footsteps, the adventurer whom I took by the hand might wish to explore.
In those days my heart was warm; I liked you, Louvier,--honestly liked
you.  I think our personal acquaintance commenced in some gay gathering
of young viveurs, whose behaviour to you offended my sense of good
breeding?"

Louvier coloured and muttered inaudibly.  De Mauleon continued: "I felt it
due to you to rebuke their incivilities, the more so as you evinced on
that occasion your own superiority in sense and temper, permit me to add,
with no lack of becoming spirit."

Louvier bowed his head, evidently gratified.

"From that day we became familiar.  If any obligation to me were
incurred, you would not have been slow to return it.  On more than one
occasion when I was rapidly wasting money--and money was plentiful with
you--you generously offered me your purse.  On more than one occasion I
accepted the offer; and you would never have asked repayment if I had not
insisted on repaying.  I was no less grateful for your aid."  Louvier
made a movement as if to extend his hand, but he checked the impulse.

"There was another attraction which drew me towards you.  I recognized in
your character a certain power in sympathy with that power which I
imagined lay dormant in myself, and not to be found among the
_freluquets_ and _lions_ who were my more habitual associates.  Do you
not remember some hours of serious talk we have had together when we
lounged in the Tuileries, or sipped our coffee in the garden of the
Palais Royal?--hours when we forgot that those were the haunts of idlers,
and thought of the stormy actions affecting the history of the world of
which they had been the scene; hours when I confided to you, as I
