The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Journals of Lewis and Clark, by
Meriwether Lewis and William Clark

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Journals of Lewis and Clark
       1804-1806

Author: Meriwether Lewis and William Clark

Release Date: July, 2005  [EBook #8419]
Last Updated: August 28, 2012

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNALS OF LEWIS AND CLARK ***




Produced by Bob Webster







THE JOURNALS OF LEWIS AND CLARK

By Meriwether Lewis and and William Clark

1804-1806



Transcriber's Note: These Journals are from May 14, 1804, the day the
expedition left the Mississippi River, to September 26, 1806, a day or
two after they arrived back in St. Louis. It includes all possible
Journal entries of Lewis and Clark. Most of the "courses and distances"
and "celestial observations" have been omitted. The notes and most of
the corrections of past editors have been removed. There are a few OCR
errors, but most of the misspellings are almost 200 years old. The dates
with the names in the brackets are a little redundent. They are included
to provide the correct date in a consistent format.

PG Editor's Note: Misspellings, inventive punctuation and lack of
punctuation along with variable capitalization, and not entirely clear
abbreviations have been left as is.  DW




[Clark, May 14, 1804]
May the 14th-Monday
Set out from Camp River a Dubois at 4 oClock P.M. and proceded up the
Missouris under Sail to the first Island in the Missouri and Camped on
the upper point opposit a Creek on the South Side below a ledge of
limestone rock Called Colewater, made 41/2 miles, the Party Consisted
of 2, Self one frenchman and 22 Men in the Boat of 20 ores, 1 Serjt. &
7 french in a large Perogue, a Corp and 6 Soldiers in a large Perogue.
a Cloudy rainey day. wind from the N E. men in high Spirits





[Clark, May 14, 1804]
Monday May 14th 1804
Rained the forepart of the day I determined to go as far as St. Charles
a french Village 7 Leags. up the Missourie, and wait at that place
untill Capt. Lewis Could finish the business in which he was obliged to
attend to at St Louis and join me by Land from that place 24 miles; by
this movement I calculated that if any alterations in the loading of
the Vestles or other Changes necessary, that they might be made at St.
Charles I Set out at 4 oClock P.M. in the presence of many of the
Neighbouring inhabitents, and proceeded on under a jentle brease up the
Missourie to the upper Point of the 1st Island 4 Miles and Camped on
the Island which is Situated Close on the right (or Starboard) Side,
and opposit the mouth of a Small Creek called Cold water, a heavy rain
this after-noon The Course of this day nearly West wind from N. E




[Lewis, May 15, 1804]
Tuesday May 15th
It rained during the greater part of last night and continued untill 7
OCk. A.M. after which the Prarty proceeded, passed two Islands and
incamped on the Stard. shore at Mr. Fifer's landing opposite an Island,
the evening was fair. some wild gees with their young brudes were seen
today. the barge run foul three several times--on logs, and in one
instance it was with much difficulty they could get her off; happily no
injury was sustained, tho the barge was several minutes in eminent
danger; this was cased by her being too heavily laden in the stern.
Persons accustomed to the navigation of the Missouri and the
Mississippi also below the mouth of this river, uniformly take the
precaution to load their vessels heavyest in the bow when they ascend
the stream in order to avoid the danger incedent to runing foul of the
concealed timber which lyes in great quantities in the beds of these
rivers.




[Clark, May 15, 1804]
Tuesday 15--rained all last night and this morning untill 7 oClock, all
our fire extinguished, Some Provisions on the top of the Perogus wet, I
sent two men to the Countrey to hunt, & proceed on at 9 oClock, and
proceeded on 9 miles and Camped at a Mr Pip. Landing just below a Coal
Bank on the South Side the prarie Comes with 1/4 of a mile of the river
on the N. Side I sent to the Setlements in the Pairie & purchased fowls
&. one of the Perogue are not Sufficently maned to Keep up.

Refurences from the 15th of May (2) a large Island to the Starboard;
(3) passed a Small Island in the bend to the Starbord, opposit Passage
De Soux and with 11/2 miles of the mississippi, observed a number of
Gosselins on the edge of the river many passing down, Strong water &
wind from the N E--Passed a Place Lbord Called the Plattes, a flat rock
projecting from the foot of a hill, where there is a farm, (5) pass an
Small Isld near the Center of the river, run on Several logs this after
noon, Camped at Mr. Pipers Landing.




[Clark, May 15, 1804]
May 15th Tuesday
Rained the greater part of the last night, and this morning untile 7
oClock--at 9 oClock Set out and proceeded on 9 miles passed two Islands
& incamped on the Starbd. Side at a Mr. Pipers Landing opposit an
Island, the Boat run on Logs three times to day, owing her being too
heavyly loaded a Sturn, a fair after noon, I Saw a number of Goslings
to day on the Shore, the water excessively rapid, & Banks falling in-.




[Clark, May 16, 1804]
Wednesday May 16th
A fair morning, Set out at 5 oClock passed the Coal hill (Call by the
natives Carbonear) this hill appears to Contain great quantytes of
Coal, and also ore of a rich appearance haveing greatly the resemblance
of Silver Arrived Opposit St Charles at 12 oClock, this Village is at
the foot of a Hill from which it takes its real name Peeteite Coete or
the little hill, it contains about 100 indefferent houses, and abot 450
Inhabetents principally frinch, those people appear pore and extreemly
kind, the Countrey around I am told is butifull. interspursed with
Praries & timber alturnetly and has a number of American Settlers

Took equal altituds with Sextion M a 68 deg.37'30" Dined with the Comdr. &
Mr. Ducetts family--(1) Passed an Island on the L Side just above the
bank one just above, two Small ones oposut under the St. Shore, one on
Lb. Side below St Charles, arrived at this place at 12 oClock a fine Day




[Clark, May 16, 1804]
May 16th Wednesday
a fair morning Set out at 5 oClk pass a remarkable Coal Hill on the
Larboard Side Called by the French Carbonere, this hill appear to
Contain great quantity of Coal & ore of a ____ appearance from this
hill the village of St Charles may be Seen at 7 miles distance--we
arrived at St. Charles at 12 oClock a number Spectators french &
Indians flocked to the bank to See the party. This Village is about one
mile in length, Situated on the North Side of the Missourie at the foot
of a hill from which it takes its name Petiete Coete or the Little hill
This village Contns. about 100 houses, the most of them Small and
indefferent and about 450 inhabitents Chiefly French, those people
appear pore, polite & harmonious--I was invited to Dine with a Mr.
Ducett this gentleman was once a merchant from Canadia, from
misfortunes aded to the loss of a Cargo Sold to the late judge Turner
he has become Somewhat reduced, he has a Charming wife an eligent
Situation on the hill Serounded by orchards & a excellent gardain.




[Clark, May 17, 1804]
Thursday the 17th 1804 a fine Day 3 men Confined for misconduct, I had
a Court martial & punishment Several Indians, who informed me that the
Saukees had lately Crossed to war against the Osage Nation Som
aplicasions, I took equal altitudes made the m a. to be 84 deg. 39' 15"
measured the Missouries at this place and made it 720 yards wide, in
Banks. a Boat came up this evening, I punished Hall agreeable to his
Sentence in part, a fine after noon; Suped with Mr. Ducett an agreeable
man more agreeable Lady, this Gentleman has a Delightfull Situation &
garden.




[Clark, May 17, 1804]
May the 17th Thursday 1804
a fair day Compelled to punish for misconduct. Several Kickapoos
Indians Visit me to day, George Drewyer arrive. Took equal altitudes of
Suns L L made it 84 deg. 39' 15" ap T. Measured the river found it to be 720
yards wide, a Keel Boat Came up to day--Several of the inhabitents Came
abord to day receved Several Speces of Vegatables from the inhabitents
to day

[Ordway, May 17, 1804]
Orders St. Charles Thursdy the 17th of May 1804-
a Sergeant and four men of the Party destined for the Missourri
Expidition will convene at 11 oClock to day on the quarter Deck of the
Boat, and form themselves into a Court martial to hear and determine
(in behalf of the Capt.) the evidences aduced against William Warner &
Hugh Hall for being absent last night without leave; contrary to
orders;-& John Collins 1st for being absent without leave--2nd for
behaveing in an unbecomeing manner at the Ball last night--3rdly for
Speaking in a language last night after his return tending to bring
into disrespect the orders of the Commanding officer

Signd. W. Clark Comdg.

Detail for Court martial

Segt. John Ordway Prs.

  members
  R. Fields
  R. Windsor
  J. Whitehouse
  Jo. Potts

The Court convened agreeable to orders on the 17th of May 1804 Sgt.
John Ordway P. members Joseph Whitehouse Rueben Fields Potts Richard
Windsor after being duly Sworn the Court proceded to the trial of
William Warner & Hugh Hall on the following Charges Viz: for being
absent without leave last night contrary to orders, to this Charge the
Prisoners plead Guilty. The Court one of oppinion that the Prisoners
Warner & Hall are Both Guilty of being absent from camp without leave
it being a breach of the Rules and articles of war and do Sentence them
Each to receive twentyfive lashes on their naked back, but the Court
recommend them from their former Good conduct, to the mercy of the
commanding officer.--at the Same court was tried John Collins Charged
1st for being absent without leave--2d. for behaveing in an unbecomming
manner at the ball last night idly for Speaking in a languguage after
his return to camp tending to bring into disrespect the orders of the
Commanding officer--The Prisoner Pleads Guilty to the first Charge but
not Guilty to the two last chrges.--after mature deliberation &
agreeable to the evidence aduced. The Court are of oppinion that the
Prisnair is Guilty of all the charges alledged against him it being a
breach of the rules & articles of War and do Sentence him to receive
fifty lashes on his naked back--The Commanding officer approves of the
proceedings & Desicon of the Court martial and orders that the
punishment of John Collins take place this evening at Sun Set in the
Presence of the Party.--The punishment ordered to be inflicted on
William Warner & Hugh Hall, is remitted under the assurence arriveing
from a confidence which the Commanding officer has of the Sincerity of
the recommendation from the Court.--after the punishment, Warner Hall &
Collins will return to their squads and Duty

The Court is Disolved.

Sign. Wm. Clark




[Clark, May 18, 1804]
Friday May the 18th 1804 a fine morning took equal altitude and made it
97 deg. 42' 37" M. A

I had the Boat & Pierogue reloded So as to Cause them to be heavyer in
bow than asturn recved of Mr. Lyon 136 lb. Tobacco on act. of Mr.
Choteau Gave out tin Cups & 3 Knives to the French hands, Mr. Lauriesme
returned from the Kickapoo Town to day delayed a Short time & Set out
for St. Louis, I Sent George Drewyer with Mr. Lauriesmus to St Louis &
wrote to Cap Lewis Mr. Ducett made me a present of rivr Catts & Some
Herbs our french hands bring me eggs milk &c. &. to day The wind hard
from the S. W. Two Keel Boats came up to this place to day from Kentucky




[Clark, May 18, 1804]
May the 18th Friday 1804
a fine morning, I had the loading in the Boat & perogue examined and
changed So as the Bow of each may be heavyer laded than the Stern, Mr.
Lauremus who had been Sent by Cap Lewis to the Kickapoo Town on public
business return'd and after a Short delay proceeded on to St Louis, I
Sent George Drewyer with a Letter to Capt Lewis Two Keel Boats arrive
from Kentucky to day loaded with whiskey Hats &c. &. the wind from the
SW. Took equal altitudes with Sexetn Made it 97 deg.42' 37" MT.




[Clark, May 19, 1804]
Satturday May the 19th 1804 a Violent Wind last night from the W. S W,
Suckceeded by rain with lasted Som hours, a Cloudy Morning, many
persons Came to the boat to day I took equal altitudes. mar time 76 deg. 33'
7"

I heard of my Brothers illness to day which has given me much Concurn,
I settle with the men and take receipts for Pay up to the 1st of Decr.
next, I am invited to a ball in the Village, let Several of the men
go,--R Fields Kill a Deer George Drewyear returned with a hundred
Dollars, he lost




[Clark, May 19, 1804]
May 19th Satturday 1804
A Violent Wind last night from the W. S. W. accompanied with rain which
lasted about three hours Cleared away this morn'g at 8 oClock, I took
receipt for the pay of the men up to the 1st. of Decr. next, R. Fields
Kill a Deer to day, I recve an invitation to a Ball, it is not in my
power to go. George Drewyer return from St Louis and brought 99
Dollars, he lost a letter from Cap Lewis to me, Seven Ladies visit me
to day




[Lewis, May 20, 1804]
Sunday May 20th 1804
The morning was fair, and the weather pleasent; at 10 oCk A M. agreably
to an appointment of the preceeding day, I was joined by Capt.
Stoddard, Lieuts. Milford & Worrell together with Messrs. A. Chouteau,
C. Gratiot, and many other respectable inhabitants of St. Louis, who
had engaged to accompany me to the Vilage of St. Charles; accordingly
at 12 Oclk after bidding an affectionate adieu to my Hostis, that
excellent woman the spouse of Mr. Peter Chouteau, and some of my fair
friends of St. Louis, we set forward to that village in order to join
my friend companion and fellow labourer Capt. William Clark who had
previously arrived at that place with the party destined for the
discovery of the interior of the continent of North America the first 5
miles of our rout laid through a beatifull high leavel and fertile
prarie which incircles the town of St. Louis from N. W. to S. E. the
lands through which we then passed are somewhat broken up fertile the
plains and woodlands are here indiscriminately interspersed untill you
arrive within three miles of the vilage when the woodland commences and
continues to the Missouri the latter is extreamly fertile. At half
after one P.M. our progress was interrupted the near approach of a
violent thunder storm from the N. W. and concluded to take shelter in a
little cabbin hard by untill the rain should be over; accordingly we
alighted and remained about an hour and a half and regailed ourselves
with a could collation which we had taken the precaution to bring with
us from St. Louis.

The clouds continued to follow each other in rapaid succession,
insomuch that there was but little prospect of it's ceasing to rain
this evening; as I had determined to reach St. Charles this evening and
knowing that there was now no time to be lost I set forward in the
rain, most of the gentlemen continued with me, we arrived at half after
six and joined Capt Clark, found the party in good health and sperits.
suped this evening with Monsr. Charles Tayong a Spanish Ensign & late
Commandant of St. Charles at an early hour I retired to rest on board
the barge--St. Charles is situated on the North bank of the Missouri 21
Miles above it's junction with the Mississippi, and about the same
distance N. W. from St. Louis; it is bisected by one principal street
about a mile in length runing nearly parrallel with the river, the
plain on which it stands-is narrow tho sufficiently elivated to secure
it against the annual inundations of the river, which usually happen in
the month of June, and in the rear it is terminated by a range of small
hills, hence the appellation of petit Cote, a name by which this vilage
is better known to the French inhabitants of the Illinois than that of
St. Charles. The Vilage contains a Chappel, one hundred dwelling
houses, and about 450 inhabitants; their houses are generally small and
but illy constructed; a great majority of the inhabitants are miserably
pour, illiterate and when at home excessively lazy, tho they are polite
hospitable and by no means deficient in point of natural genious, they
live in a perfect state of harmony among each other; and plase as
implicit confidence in the doctrines of their speritual pastor, the
Roman Catholic priest, as they yeald passive obedience to the will of
their temporal master the commandant. a small garden of vegetables is
the usual extent of their cultivation, and this is commonly imposed on
the old men and boys; the men in the vigor of life consider the
cultivation of the earth a degrading occupation, and in order to gain
the necessary subsistence for themselves and families, either undertake
hunting voyages on their own account, or engage themselves as hirelings
to such persons as possess sufficient capital to extend their traffic
to the natives of the interior parts of the country; on those voyages
in either case, they are frequently absent from their families or homes
the term of six twelve or eighteen months and alwas subjected to severe
and incessant labour, exposed to the ferosity of the lawless savages,
the vicissitudes of weather and climate, and dependant on chance or
accident alone for food, raiment or relief in the event of malady.
These people are principally the decendants of the Canadian French, and
it is not an inconsiderable proportian of them that can boast a small
dash of the pure blood of the aboriginees of America. On consulting
with my friend Capt. C. I found it necessary that we should pospone our
departure untill 2 P M. the next day and accordingly gave orders to the
party to hold themselves in readiness to depart at that hour.

Captn. Clark now informed me that having gotten all the stores on board
the Barge and perogues on the evening of the 13th of May he determined
to leave our winter cantainment at the mouth of River Dubois the next
day, and to ascend the Missouri as far as the Vilage of St. Charles,
where as it had been previously concerted between us, he was to wait my
arrival; this movement while it advanced us a small distance on our
rout, would also enable him to determine whether the vessels had been
judiciously loaded and if not timely to make the necessary alterations;
accordingly at 4 P.M. on Monday the 14th of May 1804, he embarked with
the party in the presence of a number of the neighbouring Citizens who
had assembled to witness his departure. during the fore part of this
day it rained excessively hard. In my last letter to the President
dated at St. Louis I mentioned the departure of Capt. Clark from River
Dubois on the 15th Inst, which was the day that had been calculated on,
but having completed the arrangements a day earlyer he departed on the
14th as before mentioned. On the evening of the 14th the party halted
and encamped on the upper point of the first Island which lyes near the
Larbord shore, on the same side and nearly opposite the center of this
Island a small Creek disimbogues called Couldwater.

The course and distance of this day was West 4 Miles the Wind from N. E.




[Clark, May 20, 1804]
Sunday 20th May
a Cloudy morning rained and a hard wind last night I continue to write
Rolls, Send 20 men to Church to day one man Sick Capt Lewis and Several
Gentlemen arrive from St Louis thro a violent Shoure of rain, the most
of the party go to the Church.




[Clark, May 20, 1804]
Sunday 20th May
A Cloudy morning rained and hard wind from the ____ last night, The
letter George lost yesterday found by a Country man, I gave the party
leave to go and hear a Sermon to day delivered by Mr. ____ a romon
Carthlick Priest at 3 oClock Capt. Lewis Capt. Stoddard accompanied by
the Officers & Several Gentlemen of St Louis arrived in a heavy Showr
of Rain Mssr. Lutenants Minford & Werness. Mr. Choteau Grattiot,
Deloney, Laber Dee Ranken Dr. SoDrang rained the greater part of this
evening. Suped with Mr. Charles Tayon, the late Comdt. of St Charles a
Spanish Ensign.




[Clark, May 21, 1804]
Monday 21st May
Dine with Mr. Ducete & Set out from St. Charles at three oClock after
getting every matter arranged, proceeded on under a jentle Breese, at
one mile a Violent rain with Wind from the S. W. we landed at the upper
point of the first Island on the Stbd Side & Camped, Soon after it
commenced raining & continued the greater part of the night; 3 french
men got leave to return to Town, and return early (refur to Fig. 2.)

25st refured to fig. 2 Left St. Charles May 21st 1804. Steered N. 15 deg. W
13/4 Ms N 52 deg.W to the upper point of the Island and Camped dureing a rain
which had been falling half an hour, opposit this Isd. Corns in a Small
creek on the St. Sd. and at the head one on the Ld. Side rains
powerfully.




[Clark, May 21, 1804]
May 21st 1804 Monday
All the forepart of the Day Arranging our party and prcureing the
different articles necessary for them at this place--Dined with Mr.
Ducett and Set out at half passed three oClock under three Cheers from
the gentlemen on the bank and proceeded on to the head of the Island
(which is Situated on the Stbd Side) 3 miles Soon after we Set out to
day a hard Wind from the W. S W accompanied with a hard rain, which
lasted with Short intervales all night, opposit our Camp a Small creek
corns in on the Lbd Side-




[Clark, May 22, 1804]
Tuesday May 22nd
delayed a Short time for the three french men who returned and we Set
out at 6 oClock a Cloudy morning rained Violently hard last night Saw
Several people on the bank to day & passed Several Small farms. Capt.
Lewis walk on Shore a little & passed a Camp of Kickapoo Indians, &
incamped in the mouth of a Small Creek in a large Bend on the Stbd Side.




[Clark, May 22, 1804]
May 22nd Tuesday 1804
a Cloudy morning Delay one hour for 4 french men who got liberty to
return to arrange Some business they had forgotten in Town, at 6 oClock
we proceeded on, passed Several Small farms on the bank, and a large
creek on the Lbd. Side Called Bonom a Camp of Kickapoos on the St. Side
Those Indians told me Several days ago that they would Come on & hunt
and by the time I got to their Camp they would have Some Provisions for
us, we Camped in a Bend at the Mo. of a Small creek, Soon after we came
too the Indians arrived with 4 Deer as a Present, for which we gave
them two qts. of whiskey-

This Day we passed Several Islands, and Some high lands on the
Starboard Side, Verry hard water.




[Clark, May 23, 1804]
Wednesday May 23rd 8 Indians Kick. Came to Camp with meat we recved
their pesents of 3 Deer & gave them Whisky.

Set out early run on a log under water and Detained one hour proceeded
on the Same Course of last night, (2 miles) passed the mouth of a creek
on the Sbd. Side called Woman of Osage River about 30 yds. over,
abounding in fish, Stoped one hour where their was maney people
assembled to See us, halted at an endented part of a Rock which juted
over the water, Called by the french the tavern which is a Cave 40 yds.
long with the river 4 feet Deep & about 20 feet high, this is a place
the Indians & french Pay omage to, many names are wrote up on the rock
Mine among others, at one mile above this rock coms in a small Creek
called Tavern Creek, abov one other Small Creek, camped at 6 oClock
(after expirencing great dificuselty in passing Some Drifts) on the Stb
Side, examined the mens arms found all in good order except the
Detachment of Solds in the Perogue--R Field Killed a Deer.




[Clark, May 23, 1804]
May 23rd Course of last night S 75 W Contined 2 miles to the Said point
St. Side passed the upper Point of the Island Thence S 52 deg. W. 7 Miles to
a pt. on St. Sd. passing Tavern Island two Small Isd. in a bend to the
St. side the Mo. of Oge womans River at 1 m. the Cave Called the
Tavern, Lbd Side at 5 m. Situated in the Clifts, opposit a Small Island
on the Stbd Side (R. & Jo. Fields came in) with many people, passed the
Tavern Cave, Capt Lewis assended the hill which has peninsulis
projecting in raged points to the river, and was near falling from a
Peninsulia hard water all Day Saved himself by the assistance of his
Knife, passed a Creek 15 yds. wide at 1 mile called Creek of the Tavern
on the Lbd. Side, Camped opposit the pt. which the Last Course was to.
one man Sick.




[Clark, May 23, 1804]
May 23rd Wednesday 1804
We Set out early ran on a Log and detained one hour, proceeded the
Course of Last night 2 Miles to the mouth of a Creek on the Stbd. Side
Called Osage Womans R, about 30 yds. wide, opposit a large Island and a
Settlement. (on this Creek 30 or 40 famlys are Settled) Crossed to the
Settlemt. and took in R & Jo. Fields who had been Sent to purchase Corn
& Butter &c. many people Came to See us, we passed a large Cave on the
Lbd. Side about 120 feet wide 40 feet Deep & 20 feet high many
different immages are Painted on the Rock at this place. the Inds &
French pay omage. many hams are wrote on the rock, Stoped about one
mile above for Capt Lewis who had assended the Clifts which is at the
Said Cave 300 fee high, hanging over the Water, the water excessively
Swift to day, we incamped below a Small Isld. in the Meadle of the
river, Sent out two hunters, one Killed a Deer

This evening we examined the arms and amunition found those mens arms
in the perogue in bad order a fair evening Capt. Lewis near falling
from the Pencelia of rocks 300 feet, he caught at 20 foot.




[Clark, May 24, 1804]
Thursday May the 24th 1804 Set out early passed a Small Isd in the
Midlle of the river, opposit the on the Lbd. Side is projecting Rock of
1/2 a mile in extent against which the Current runs, this place is
called the Devils race grounds,1 above this Coms in a Small Creek
called the little quiver, a Sand Island on the Stbd Side, passed
Several Islands & 2 creeks, on the Stbd Side a Small Island on the Lbd
Side above we wer verry near loseing our Boat in Toeing She Struck the
Sands the Violence of the Current was so great that the Toe roap Broke,
the Boat turned Broadside, as the Current Washed the Sand from under
her She wheeled & lodged on the bank below as often as three times,
before we got her in Deep water, nothing Saved her but




[Clark, May 24, 1804]
May 24th Set out early, Killed a Deer last night. examined the mens
arms, & Saw that all was prepared for action, passed an Island in the
M. R, opposit a hard place of water called the Devill race grown, S 63 deg. W
4 miles to a point on the Sd. Starboard Side N 68 W to a point on Lbd
Side 3 ms. Passd. a Small Willow Island on the Lbd. Side to the point
of a Isd. L Side--S 75 deg. W to a point on Stbd Side 3 Miles, Passed the
upper point of the Island. Crossed and in a verry bad place we got our
Boat a ground & She Bocke the Toe Roap & turned the Land, the in
Wheeling three times, got off returned to the head of the aforesaid
Island, and Came up under a falling Bank. hard water this place being
the worst I ever Saw, I call it the retregrade bend. Camped at an old
house.




[Clark, May 24, 1804]
May 24th Thursday 1804
Set out early passed a Verry bad part of the River Called the Deavels
race ground, this is where the Current Sets against Some projecting
rocks for half a mile on the Labd. Side, above this place is the mouth
of a Small Creek Called queivere, passed Several Islands, two Small
Creeks on the Stbd. Side, and passed between a Isld. an the Lbd. Shore
a narrow pass above this Isld is a Verry bad part of the river, we
attempted to pass up under the Lbd. Bank which was falling in So fast
that the evident danger obliged us to Cross between the Starbd. Side
and a Sand bar in the middle of the river, we hove up near the head of
the Sand bar, the Sand moveing & banking caused us to run on the Sand.
The Swiftness of the Current wheeled the boat, Broke our Toe rope, and
was nearly over Setting the boat, all hand jumped out on the upper Side
and bore on that Side untill the Sand washed from under the boat and
wheeled on the next bank by the time She wheeled a 3rd Time got a rope
fast to her Stern and by the means of Swimmers was Carred to Shore and
when her Stern was down whilst in the act of Swinging a third time into
Deep water near the Shore, we returned, to the Island where we Set out
and assended under the Bank which I have just mentioned, as falling in,
here George Drewyer & Willard, two of our men who left us at St.
Charles to Come on by land joined us, we Camped about 1 mile above
where we were So nearly being lost, on the Labd Side at a Plantation.
all in Spirits. This place I call the retragrade bend as we were
obliged to fall back 2 miles




[Clark, May 25, 1804]
25 May
Set out early Course West to a Point on Sbd. Side at 2 Miles passd a
Willow Isd. in a Bend to the Lbd. a creek called wood rivr Lbd. Side N
57 deg. W. to a pt. on the Sb. Side 3 Miles passed the Mouth of a Creek St.
Side Called Le quever, this Same course continued to a Point Ld. Side
21/2 Miles further. opposit a Isd. on Sd Side Passed a Creek Called R.
La freeau at the pt. N 20 deg. W 2 miles To a Small french Village called La
Charatt of five families only, in the bend to the Starbord This is the
Last Settlement of Whites, an Island opposit




[Clark, May 25, 1804]
May 25th Friday 1804
rain last night river fall Several inches, Set out early psd. Several
Islands passed wood River on the Lbd Side at 2 miles passed Creek on
the St. Side Called La Querer at 5 miles passed a Creek at 8 mile,
opsd. an Isd. on the Lbd Side, Camped at the mouth of a Creek called
River a Chauritte, above a Small french Village of 7 houses and as many
families, Settled at this place to be convt. to hunt, & trade with the
Indians, here we met with Mr. Louisell imedeately down from the Seeeder
Isld. Situated in the Countrey of the Suxex 400 Leagues up he gave us a
good Deel of information Some letters he informed us that he Saw no
Indians on the river below the Poncrars--Some hard rain this evening

The people at this Village is pore, houses Small, they Sent us milk &
eggs to eat.




[Clark, May 26, 1804]
May 26th 1804. Set out at 7 oClock after a hard rain & Wind, & proceed
on verry well under Sale. Wind from the E N E

The wind favourable to day we made 18 miles a Cloud rais & wind & rain
Closed the Day




[Clark, May 26, 1804]
May the 26th Sattarday 1804.
Set out at 7 oClock after a heavy Shour of rain (George Drewyer & John
Shields, Sent by Land with the two horses with directions to proceed on
one day & hunt the next) The wind favourable from the E N E passed Beef
Island and river on Lbd Side at 31/2 Ms Passed a Creek on the Lbd. Side
Called Shepperds Creek, passed Several Islands to day great Deal of
Deer Sign on the Bank one man out hunting, w Camped on an Island on the
Starboard Side near the Southern extrem of Luter Island.




[Lewis, May 26, 1804]
Detatchment Orders.
May 26th 1804.
The Commanding Officers direct, that the three Squads under the command
of Sergts. Floyd Ordway and Pryor heretofore forming two messes each,
shall untill further orders constitute three messes only, the same
being altered and organized as follows (viz)

     1 Sergt. Charles Floyd. (1)

     Privates:
     2 Hugh McNeal
     3 Patric Gass
     4 Reubin Fields (2)
     5 John B Thompson
     + 6 John Newman
     7 Richard Winsor
     + Francis Rivet &
     8 Joseph Fields (3)


     9 Sergt. John Ordway.

     Privates.
     10 William Bratton (4)
     11 John Colter (5)
     X 12 Moses B. Reed
     13 Alexander Willard
     14 William Warner
     15 Silas Goodrich
     16 John Potts &
     17 Hugh Hall

     18 Sergt. Nathaniel Pryor. (6)

     Privates.
     19 George Gibson (7)
     20 George Shannon (8)
     21 John Shields (9)
     22 John Collins
     23 Joseph Whitehouse
     24 Peter Wiser
     F 25 Peter Crusat &
     F 26 Francis Labuche

The commanding officers further direct that the remainder of the
detatchmen shall form two messes; and that the same be constituded as
follows. (viz)

     Patroon, Baptist Dechamps

     Engages
     Etienne Mabbauf
     Paul Primaut
     Charles Hebert
     Baptist La Jeunesse
     Peter Pinaut
     Peter Roi &
     Joseph Collin

     1 Corpl. Richard Warvington.

     Privates.
     2 Robert Frasier
     3 John Boleye
     4 John Dame
     5 Ebinezer Tuttle &
     6 Isaac White

The Commanding officers further direct that the messes of Sergts.
Floyd, Ordway and Pryor shall untill further orders form the crew of
the Batteaux; the Mess of the Patroon La Jeunesse will form the
permanent crew of the red Perogue; Corpl. Warvington's mess forming
that of the white perogue.

Whenever by any casualty it becomes necessary to furnish additional men
to assist in navigating the Perogues, the same shall be furnished by
daily detale from the Privates who form the crew of Batteaux, exempting
only from such detale, Thomas P. Howard and the men who are assigned to
the two bow and the two stern oars.--For the present one man will be
furnished daily to assist the crew of the white perogue; this man must
be an expert boatman.

The posts and duties of the Sergts. shall be as follows (viz)--when the
Batteaux is under way, one Sergt. shall be stationed at the helm, one
in the center on the rear of the Starboard locker, and one at the bow.
The Sergt. at the helm, shall steer the boat, and see that the baggage
on the quarterdeck is properly arranged and stowed away in the most
advantageous manner; to see that no cooking utensels or loos lumber of
any kind is left on the deck to obstruct the passage between the
burths--he will also attend to the compas when necessary.

The Sergt at the center will command the guard, manage the sails, see
that the men at the oars do their duty; that they come on board at a
proper season in the morning, and that the boat gets under way in due
time; he will keep a good lookout for the mouths of all rivers, creeks,
Islands and other remarkable places and shall immediately report the
same to the commanding officers; he will attend to the issues of
sperituous liquors; he shall regulate the halting of the batteaux
through the day to give the men refreshment, and will also regulate the
time of her departure taking care that not more time than is necessary
shall be expended at each halt--it shall be his duty also to post a
centinel on the bank, near the boat whenever we come too and halt in
the course of the day, at the same time he will (acompanied by two his
guard) reconnoiter the forrest arround the place of landing to the
distance of at least one hundred paces. when we come too for the
purpose of encamping at night, the Sergt. of the guard shall post two
centinels immediately on our landing; one of whom shal be posted near
the boat, and the other at a convenient distance in rear of the
encampment; at night the Sergt. must be always present with his guard,
and he is positively forbidden to suffer any man of his guard to absent
himself on any pretext whatever; he will at each relief through the
night, accompanyed by the two men last off their posts, reconnoiter in
every direction around the camp to the distance of at least one hundred
and fifty paces, and also examine the situation of the boat and
perogues, and see that they ly safe and free from the bank

It shall be the duty of the sergt. at the bow, to keep a good look out
for all danger which may approach, either of the enimy, or obstructions
which may present themselves to passage of the boat; of the first he
will notify the Sergt. at the center, who will communicate the
information to the commanding officers, and of the second or
obstructions to the boat he will notify the Sergt. at the helm; he will
also report to the commanding officers through the Sergt. at the center
all perogues boats canoes or other craft which he may discover in the
river, and all hunting camps or parties of Indians in view of which we
may pass. he will at all times be provided with a seting pole and
assist the bowsman in poling and managing the bow of the boat. it will
be his duty also to give and answer all signals, which may hereafter be
established for the government of the perogues and parties on shore.

The Sergts. will on each morning before our departure relieve each
other in the following manner--The Sergt. at the helm will parade the
new guard, relieve the Sergt. and the old guard, and occupy the middle
station in the boat; the Sergt. of the old guard will occupy the
station at the bow, and the Sergt. who had been stationed the
preceeding day at the bow will place himself at the helm.--The sergts.
in addition to those duties are directed each to keep a seperate
journal from day today of all passing occurences, and such other
observations on the country &c. as shall appear to them worthy of notice

The Sergts. are relieved and exempt from all labour of making fires,
pitching tents or cooking, and will direct and make the men of their
several messes perform an equal propotion of those duties.

The guard shall hereafter consist of one sergeant and six privates &
engages.

Patroon, Dechamp, Copl. Warvington, and George Drewyer, are exempt from
guad duty; the two former will attend particularly to their perogues at
all times, and see that their lading is in good order, and that the
same is kept perfectly free from rain or other moisture; the latter
will perform certain duties on shore which will be assigned him from
time to time. all other soldiers and engaged men of whatever
discription must perform their regular tour of guad duty.

All detales for guard or other duty will be made in the evening when we
encamp, and the duty to be performed will be entered on, by the
individuals so warned, the next morning.--provision for one day will be
issued to the party on each evening after we have encamped; the same
will be cooked on that evening by the several messes, and a proportion
of it reserved for the next day as no cooking will be allowed in the
day while on the mach

Sergt. John Ordway will continue to issue the provisions and make the
detales for guard or other duty.--The day after tomorrow lyed corn and
grece will be issued to the party, the next day Poark and flour, and
the day following indian meal and poark; and in conformity to that
ratiene provisions will continue to be issued to the party untill
further orders.--should any of the messes prefer indian meal to flour
they may recieve it accordingly--no poark is to be issued when we have
fresh meat on hand.

Labuche and Crusat will man the larboard bow oar alternately, and the
one not engaged at the oar will attend as the Bows-man, and when the
attention of both these persons is necessary at the bow, their oar is
to be maned by any idle hand on board.

Meriwether Lewis Capt.
Wm. Clark Cpt.




[Clark, May 27, 1804]
Sunday May 27th as we were Setting out this morning two Canoos loaded
with Bever elk Deer Skins & Buffalow Robes, from the Mahars nation,
they inform that they left that place 2 months, a gentle Breese from
the S. E, we camped on an Isd in the mouth of Gasconade R, this river
is 157 yards wide a butifull stream of clear water. 19 foot Deep Hills
on the lower Side




[Clark, May 27, 1804]
May 27th Sunday 1804
as we were pushing off this Morning two Canoos Loaded with fur &c. Came
to from the Mahars nation, which place they had left two months, at
about 10 oClock 4 Cajaux or rafts loaded with furs and peltres came too
one from the Paunees, the other from Grand Osage, they informed nothing
of Consequence, passed a Creek on the Lbd Side Called ash Creek 20 yds
wide, passed the upper point of a large Island on the Stbd Side back of
which Comes in three Creeks one Called Orter Creek, her the men we left
hunting Came in we camped on a Willow Island in the mouth of Gasconnade
River. George Shannon Killed a Deer this evening




[Clark, May 28, 1804]
Monday 28th May
rained hard all the last night Some wind from the S W, one Deer Killed
to day, one Man fell in with Six Indians hunting, onloaded the perogue,
& found Several articles Wet, Some Tobacco Spoiled. river begin to rise




[Clark, May 28, 1804]
May 28th Munday 1804 Gasconnade
Rained hard all last night Some thunder & lightening hard wind in the
forepart of the night from the S W. Ruben Fields Killed a Deer Several
hunter out to day I measured the river found the Gasconnade to be 157
yds. wide and 19 foot Deep the Course of this R. is S 29 deg. W, one of the
hunters fell in with 6 Inds. hunting, onloaded the large Perogue on
board of which was 8 french hands found many things wet by their
cearlenessness, put all the articles which was wet out to Dry--this day
So Cloudy that no observations could be taken, the river begin to rise,
examine the mens arms and equapage, all in Order




[Clark, May 29, 1804]
Tuesday 29th May Sent out hunters, got a morning obsvtn and one at 12
oClock, rained last night, the river rises fast The Musquetors are
verry bad, Load the pierogue




[Clark, May 29, 1804]
May 29th 1804 Set out from the mouth of the gasconnade, where we took
obsevn &c. left a Perogue for a man lost in the woods, Course N. 54 W 2
m to a point Lb. Side. Passed the Isd. on which we Camped, river still
rised, water verry muddey N. 78 deg. W 2 Ms. to a pt. on Lb Side passed two
willow Islands first Smaller and a Creek on Lbd. called Deer Creek one
oposit the point St. Side and incamped on the Lb Side rain all night
the tents together along the N; 76 W 25 Poles S 26 W, to the point
above--S 19 deg. to the pot below the River




[Clark, May 29, 1804]
May 29th Tuesday rained last night, Cloudy morning 4 hunters Sent out
with Orders to return at 12 oClock Took equal altitudes of Suns Lower
limb found it 105 deg. 31' 45"

Cap Lewis observed meridean altitude of sun U L-back observation with
the octant & artificeal horozen--gave for altitude on the Limb 38 deg. 44'
00" sun octant Error 2 0 0 +

had the Perogues loaded and all perpared to Set out at 4 oClock after
finishing the observations & all things necessary found that one of the
hunters had not returned, we deturmined to proceed on & leave one
perogue to wate for him, accordingly at half past four we Set out and
came on 4 miles & camped on the Lbd Side above a Small Creek Called
Deer Creek, Soon after we came too we heard Several guns fire down the
river, we answered them by a Discharge of a Swivile on the Bow




[Clark, May 30, 1804]
May 30th, Wednesday, Set out at 7 oClock after a heavy rain, rained all
last night, a little after Dark last night Several guns were herd
below, I expect the French men fireing for Whitehous who was lost in
the woods.




[Clark, May 30, 1804]
May 30th Wednesday 1804
Rained all last night Set out at 6 oClock after a heavy Shower, and
proceeded on, passed a large Island a Creek opposit on the St. Side
just abov a Cave Called Monbrun Tavern & River, passed a Creek on the
Lbd. Side Call Rush Creek at 4 Miles Several Showers of rain the
Current Verry Swift river riseing fast Passed Big Miry River at 11
Miles on the Starboard Side, at the lower point of a Island, this River
is about 50 yards Wide, Camped at the mouth of a Creek on Lbd Sd of abt
25 yds. Wide Called Grinestone Creek, opposit the head of a Isd. and
the mouth of Little Miry River on the St Side, a heavy wind accompanied
with rain & hail we Made 14 miles to day, the river Continue to rise,
the County on each Side appear full of Water.




[Clark, May 31, 1804]
May 31st Thursday 1804
rained the greater part of last night, the wind from the West raised
and blew with great force untile 5 oClock p.m.which obliged us to lay
by a Cajaux of Bear Skins and pelteries came down from the Grand
Osarge, one french man one Indian, and a Squar, they had letters from
the man Mr. Choteau Sent to that part of the Osarge Nation Settled on
Arkansa River mentioning that his letter was Commited to the flaims,
the Inds. not believeing that the Americans had possession of the
Countrey they disregarded St Louis & their Supplies &c.--Several rats
of Considerable Size was Cought in the woods to day--Capt Lewis went
out to the woods & found many curious Plants & Srubs, one Deer killed
this evening




[Clark, June 1, 1804]
June 1st Friday 1804 Set out early, the Same Course S 48 deg. W of Wednesday
contd. 4 ms passed the Mouth of Little Miry on the Stb & high rich Land
on the Lb Side, S. 45 deg.W to an Island opposit a hill on the S. Sd. 6 Ms.
this Isd is on the Lbd. passed the Mo. of Bear creek 25 yds wide at 2
ms. & three Small Isd., Some Swift water and banks falling in, Wind a
head from the West, S 39 deg. W 3 ms. to the Pt. above the mouth of Osage
River Larb Side, Camped fell a number of Trees in the Point to take
observation a fair after noon, Sit up untill 1 oClock to take Som
observations &c.




[Clark, June 1, 1804]
June 1st 1804 Friday
Set out early a fair morning Passed the mouth Bear Creek 25 yds. Wide
at 6 Miles, Several Small Islands in the river the wind a head from the
West the Current exceedingly rapid Came to on the point of the Osarges
River on the Labd Side of Missouries this osages river Verry high,
felled all the Trees in the point to Make observations Sit up untill 12
oClock taken oservation this night




[Clark, June 2, 1804]
June 2nd--Took the Dirts. of Son & moon &c &c. I measured the Osage &
Missouris at this place made ther width as follows, the Missoure 875
yd. wide The Osage R 397 yds. wide, the distance between the 2 rivers
80 poles up is 40 Ps. Took equal altitudes & Mredian altitude also-and
made them ____ I assended the hill in the point 80 ps. from the pt.
found it about 100 foot high, on the top is 2 graves, or mouns, a
Delightfull prospect from this hill which Comds. both rivers

Drewyer & Shields came to the opposit Side to day at SunSet we sent
across & brought them over, they had been absent 7 Days Swam many
creeks, much worsted. They informed us that the Countrey on both Sides
of muddy river's to the hill called by the french ____ 3 ms. below this
place, a Small Praries below the hill, 4 Deer Killed to day I assend a
hill &. after measuring the river &c. &c. &c.




[Clark, June 2, 1804]
June 2nd Satturday Cap Lewis Took the Time & Distance of suns & moons
nearest limbs, the Sun East--and Meridean altitude of Suns U. L. with
Octant, back observation gave for altitude 37 deg. 28"00".

Error of Octant 2 deg. 00' 00" +. made Several other observations--I made an
angle for the Wedth of the two rivers. The Missourie from the Point to
the N. Side is 875 yards wide the Osage River from the point to the S.
E Side is 397 yards wide, the destance between the two rivers at the
pt. of high Land (ioo foot above the bottom) and 80 poles up the
Missouries from the point is 40 poles, on the top of this high land
under which is a limestone rock two Mouns or graves are raised--from
this pt. which Comds both rivers I had a delightful) prospect of the
Missouries up & down, also the Osage R. up. George Drewyer & John
Shields who we had Sent with the horses by Land on the N Side joined us
this evening much worsted, they being absent Seven Days depending on
their gun, the greater part of the time rain, they were obliged to raft
or Swim many Creeks, those men gave a flattering account of the
Countrey Commencing below the first hill on the N Side and extendg
Parrelal with the river for 30 or 40 Ms. The Two Muddey river passing
Thro & som fine Springs & Streams our hunters kill Several Deer to day,
Some Small licks on the S E of the Osage River.




[Clark, June 3, 1804]
June Sunday 3rd 1804
the fore part of the day fair I attempted to take equal alltitudes, & M
Altitudes, but was disapointed, the Clouds obsured the Sun, took the D.
of sun & moon Capt Lewis & George Drewyer went out & Killed a Deer, We
Set out at 5 oClock P M Cloudy & rain, West 5 Ms. to the mo. of Murrow
Creek Lb Sd. a pt. St. Side Keeping along the Lbd Side 1 Ms., passed
the mouth of a Creek on Lbd Side 3 ms., I call Cupboard, Creek, mouths
behind a rock which projects into the river, Camped in the mouth of the
Creek aforesaid, at the mouth of this Creek I saw much fresh Signs of
Indians, haveing Crossed 2 Deer Killed to day. I have a verry Sore
Throat, & am Tormented with Musquetors & Small ticks.




[Clark, June 3, 1804]
June 3rd Sunday 1804
The forepart of the day fair Took meridional altitude of suns U:L with
the Octant and Glass Horrison adjusted back observation. the instrument
gave 38 deg. 2' 00"--it was Cloudy and the Suns disk much obsured, and Cannot
be Depended on.

We made other Observations in the evening after the return of Capt
Lewis from a walk of three or four ms. round--We Set out at 5 oClock
P.M. proceeded on five miles to the mouth of a Creek on the L. S. 20
yds. wide Called Murow, passed a Creek at 3 ms. which I call Cupbord
Creek as it Mouths above a rock of that appearance. Several Deer Killed
to dayat the mouth of the Murow Creek I Saw much Sign of war parties of
Inds. haveing Crossed from the mouth of this Creek. I have a bad Cold
with a Sore throat. Near West 5 Miles




[Clark, June 4, 1804]
June 4th 1804 Monday, a fair Day Sent out 3 hunters, our mast broke by
the boat running under a tree Passed an Islands on Stbd Side on which
grow Seeder a Creek at ____ miles on the Starbd Sd. Course N. 30 deg. W 4 ms.
to pt. on St. Side below 2d Isd. passed a Creek on Lbd Side 15 yd.
wide, I call Nightingale Creek. this Bird Sang all last night and is
the first of the kind I ever herd, below this Creek and the last Passed
a Small Isd on the Stbd. N. 25 W. 3 ms. to a pt. on St. Sd. passed a
Sm. Isd. on St. Sd. and Seeder Creek on the Same Side 20 yds wide
passed a Creek on Lbd Sd. 20 yd wide, I call Mast Creek, this is a
Short Creek, fine land above & below the mouth. Jentle rise of about 50
foot, Delightfull Timber of Oake ash walnut hickory &c. &c. wind from N
W. by W. N. 58 deg. W. 71/2 ms. passed a Creek Called Zoncar on the Lbd Side,
N 75 W 3 me. to a pt, S. Sd. called Batue a De charm, a plain on the
hill opposit. I got out & walked on the L Sd. thro a Charming Bottom of
rich Land about one mile then I assended a hill of about 170 foot on
the top of which is a Moun and about 100 acres of Land of Dead timber
on this hill one of the party says he has found Lead ore a verry
extensive Cave under this hill next the river, the Land on the top is
fine, This is a very bad part of the river Seven Deer Killed to day by
our hunters--one of the horses is Snaged, the other lost his Shous to
day the Bottom on the St. Side to day is covered with rushes, not verry
good ____ the high land Comes to the bank on the Labd Side and good 2d
rate land.




[Clark, June 4, 1804]
June 4th Monday 1804
a fair day three men out on the right flank passed a large Island on
the St. Side Called Seeder Island, this Isd. has a great Deel of Ceedar
on it, passed a Small Creek at 1 ms. 15 yd. Wide which we named
Nightingale Creek from a Bird of that discription which Sang for us all
last night, and is the first of the Kind I ever heard. passed the mouth
of Seeder Creek at 7 ms. on the S. S. abt. 20 yds. Wide above Some
Small Isds. passed a Creek on the L. S. abt. 15 yds. wide. Mast Creek,
here the Sergt. at the helm run under a bending Tree & broke the mast,
Some delightful) Land, with a jentle assent about the Creek, well
timbered, Oake, Ash, walnut &c. &c. passed, wind N W. by W. passed a
Small Creek Called Zan Can C on the L. S; at this last point I got out
and walked on the L. Sd. thro a rush bottom for 1 Miles & a Short
Distance thro Nettles as high as my brest assended a hill of about 170
foot to a place where the french report that Lead ore has been found, I
saw no mineral of that description, Capt Lewis Camped imediately under
this hill, to wate which gave me Some time to examine the hill, on the
top is a moun of about 6 foot high and about 100 Acres of land which
the large timber is Dead in Decending about 50 foot a projecting lime
Stone rock under which is a Cave at one place in this projecting rocks
I went on one which Spured up and hung over the Water from the top of
this rock I had a prospect of the river for 20 or 30 ms. up, from the
Cave which incumposed the hill I decended by a Steep decent to the
foot, a verry bad part of the river opposit this hill, the river
Continu to fall Slowly, our hunters killed 7 Deer to day The land our
hunters passed thro to day on the S. S. was Verry fine the latter part
of to day. the high land on the S. S. is about 2d rate




[Clark, June 5, 1804]
June 5th Tuesday, Jurked the Vennison Killed yesterday, after Seting
over the Scouting Party or hunder of 3 men Set out at 6 oClock Course N
57 deg. W to a pt. on S. Sd. 5 ms. passed a Creek on L. Sd. I call Lead C of
15 yds passed one on the S. Called Lit. good-womans Creek about 20 yds.
wide Passed a Willow Isd. a Butifull Prarie approaching near the river
above Lead C & extends to the Mine river in a westerly Derection,
passed the Mouth of the Creek of the Big Rock 15 yds Wide at 4 ms. on
the Lbd Sd. at 11 oClock brought a Caissie in which was 2 men, from 80
League up the Kansias River, where they wintered and caught a great qty
of Beever but unfortunatey lost it by the burning of the plains, the
Kansas Nation hunted on the Missourie last Winter and are now persueing
the Buffalow in the Plains, passed a Projecting Rock called the Manitou
a Painting from this Deavel to the Pt. on the Lbd Side N 23 deg. W 71/2 Ms.
The Same course 21/2 ms. Creek Cld. Manitou passed a on the Lbd. Side
about 40 yd. wide, a Sand bar in the middle of the River passed up
between the Sand & L. Shore one Mile to a Small Creek 10 yd. wide, (I
call Sand C). We run on the Sand and was obliged to return to the
Starbd Side, I am verry unwell with a Slight feever from a bad cold
caught three days ago at the Grand so R--passed a Small Willow Isd. on
S. Side, a large one in the Middle of the river, York Swam to the Isd.
to pick greens, and Swam back with his greens, the Boat Drew too much
water to cross the quick Sands which intervened, She draws 4 foot
water, a fair wind our mast being broke by accidence provented our
takeing the advantage of it passed the lower point of a large Island,
opposit the Current devides between 4 Small Isds on the St Side. we
found the water excessively hard for 12 Miles as we were oblged to pass
up the center of the Current between two of the Isds. & round the heads
of the other 2 the Current Setting imediately against the points which
was choked up with Drift for a mile--Above those Isd. on the St. Side
we camped altogether our Hunter or Spis discovered the sign of a war
party of abt. 10 Men




[Clark, June 5, 1804]
June 5th Tuesday 1804
after Jurking the meet Killed yesterday and Crossing the hunting party
we Set out at 6 oClock, from the last Course & distance, N 51 deg. W. 5 ms.
to a pt. on the St. Sd. passed a Small Creek on the Ld. S. I call Lead
C. passed a Creek on the S. S. of 20 yds. wide Cald. Lit. Good Womans
C. on the L. S. a Prarie extends from Lead C. parrelel with the river
to Mine river, at 4 ms. Passed the Creek of the big rock about 15 yds.
wide on the L. Sd. at 11 oClock brought too a Small Caissee in which
was two french men, from 80 Leagues up the Kansias R. where they
wintered, and Cought a great quantity of Beaver, the greater part of
which they lost by fire from the Praries, those men inform that the
Kansas Nation are now out in the plains hunting Buffalow, they hunted
last winter on this river Passed a projecting rock on which was painted
a figue and a Creek at 2 ms. above Called Little Manitou Creek from the
Painted rock this Creek 20 yds. wide on the L. Sd. passed a Small Creek
on L. S. opposit a Verry bad Sand bar of Several ms. in extent, which
we named Sand C here my Servent York Swam to the Sand bar to geather
greens for our Dinner and returnd with a Sufficent quantity wild
Creases or Teng grass, we passed up for 2 ms on the L. S. of this Sand
and was obliged to return, the Watr. uncertain the quick Sand Moveing
we had a fine wind, but could not make use of it, our Mast being broke,
we passed between 2 Small Islands in the Middle of the Current, & round
the head of three a rapid Current for one mile and Camped on the S. S.
opsd. a large Island in the middle of the river; one Perogue did not
get up for two hours, our Scout discovd. the fresh sign of about 10
Inds. I expect that those Indians are on their way to war against the
Osages nation probably they are the Saukees




[Clark, June 6, 1804]
Wednesday the 6th of June 1804.
Mended our mast this morning and Set out at 7 oClock, under a Jentle
Braise from the S, E by S N 28 deg. W 31/2 miles to a hill on St Sd. passg
the N. beige of the Island Called Split rock Island, the river rose
last night a foot the Countrey about this Isd. is delightfull large
rush bottom of rushes below on the St. Side N 49 deg. W, 11/2 Ms. to the
mouth of Split rock River ____ yds. wide on the Starboard Side opod.
the pt. of a Isd. passed a place in the projecting rock Called the hole
thro the rock, a round Cave pass thro the Pt. of rock's West 11/2 ms.
to a pt. on Std. Sd. opposit a Clift of rocks abt 200 foot N 31 deg. W. 4 ms
1/2 to a pt. on L. Side passed Saline Creek on the L. Side a large Salt
Lick & Spring 9 me. up the Creek, one bushel of water will make 7 lb.
of good Salt

(Information) Took Meridian altitude of sun Limb. 37 deg. 6' 0" equat to ____
of Lattidude.

on this Creek, So great a no of Salt Springs are on it that the water
is brackish N 51 deg. W to a Belge of an Isd on the S. Sd. at 3 ms. Passed a
Willow Isd. in Middle, Some wind in the after part of to day from the S
E, (the Banks are falling in greatly in this part of the river) as also
is one Side or the other in all the Course, we assended on the North
Side of the Isd. and finding that the perogues Could not Keep up Camped
2 hs. by Sun. on the Sd Sd the land below this is good.




[Clark, June 6, 1804]
June 6th Wednesday 1804
Mended our Mast this morning &, Set out at 7 oClock under a jentle
breise from S. E. by S passed the large Island, and a Creek Called
Split rock Creek at 5 ms. on the S. S. psd. a place to the rock from
which 20 yds we. this Creek takes its name, a projecting rock with a
hole thro a point of the rock, at 8 ms. passed the mouth of a Creek
Called Saline or Salt R on the L. Sd. this River is about 30 yds. wide,
and has So many Licks & Salt Springs on its banks that the Water of the
Creek is Brackish, one Verry large Lick is 9 ms. up on the left Side
the water of the Spring in this Lick is Strong as one bushel of the
water is said to make 7 lb. of good Salt passed a large Isd. & Several
Small ones, the water excessivly Strong, So much So that we Camped
Sooner than the usial time to waite for the pirogue, The banks are
falling in Verry much to day river rose last night a foot.

Capt. Lewis took meridean altd. of Suns U. L. with the octant above
Split Rock C. &made the altitude 37 deg. 6' 00 error of octt. as useal 2 deg. 0' 0"
+ The Countrey for Several miles below is good, on the top of the high
land back is also tolerable land Some buffalow Sign to day

I am Still verry unwell with a Sore throat & head ake




[Clark, June 7, 1804]
Thursday 7th of June 1804 Set out early passed the head of the Isd from
the Isd. N. 61 deg. W. to the mouth of a Creek Called big monitu on St. Sd.
41/2 ms. psd. a Sand bar in the river, Som Buffalow Sign Sent out
George Drewyer & Newmon to hunt Capt Lewis and 6 men went to a Lick up
this Creek on the right Side over 2 mes. & 2 other not far above the
water runs out of the bank & not verry Strong. 3 to 500 G for a bushell.

S 88 deg. W. 2 Miles to a pt. on Lbd. Side, high bluff on the Stbd. Side,
Monitou Creek is 30 yds. Wide at the mouth, passed a painted part of a
Projecting rock we found ther a Den of rattle Snakes, Killed 3
proceeded on passed, S 81 deg.W 4 ms. to apt. on S. Side passed an Island in
the Middle of the river, S. 87 deg. W. to a pt. of high Land on the L. S.
pass'g over the Middle of a willow Island, ms. 31/2 proceed on 1/2 a
mile on this Course a Camped at the mouth of Good womans river on the
S. S. about 35 yds wide, & navagable Som D. our hunters brought in 3
bear this evening-& infd. that the Countrey between this R. & the
Monitou R is rich and well watered, Capt. Lewis went out an hour this
evening




[Clark, June 7, 1804]
June 7th Thursday 1804
Set out early passed the head of the Island opposit which we Camped
last night, and brackfast at the Mouth of a large Creek on the S. S. Of
30 yds wide Called big Monetou, from the pt. of the Isd. or Course of
last night to the mouth of this Creek is N 61 deg. W 41/2 ms. a Short
distance above the mouth of this Creek, is Several Courious Paintings
and Carveing in the projecting rock of Limestone inlade with white red
& blue flint, of a verry good quallity, the Indians have taken of this
flint great quantities. We landed at this Inscription and found it a
Den of rattle Snakes, we had not landed 3 minutes before three verry
large Snakes wer observed on the Crevises of the rocks & Killed--at the
mouth of the last mentioned Creek Capt. Lewis took four or five men &
went to Some Licks or Springs of Salt water from two to four miles up
the Creek on Rt. Side the water of those Springs are not Strong, Say
from 4 to 600 Gs. of water for a Bushel of Salt passed Some Small
willow Islands and Camped at the Mouth of a Small river called Good
Womans River this river is about 35 yards wide and Said to be navagable
for Perogues Several Leagues Capt. Lewis with 2 men went up the Creek a
Short distance. our Hunters brought in three Bear this evening, and
informs that the Countrey thro which they passed from the last Creek is
fine rich land, & well watered.




[Clark, June 8, 1804]
June 8th Friday
Set out at Daylight proceeded on the Course of last night S 87 deg. W 3
ms passed a Willow Island, from the Point of last Course S 81 deg. W. 3 ms.
to a pt. on S. S. passd a ____ Isd. in the middle of the river, passd a
run
on the Ld S. above a pt. of rocks 3 ms. on which thir is a number of
Deer Licks, N 88 deg. W. 3 Ms. to a pt L S. N. 83 deg. W 2 ms. to the Mo of Mine
River, psd an Isd.--This river is 90 yards wide & navagable for
Perogues about 90 Ms. I went out on the L S. about 4 ms. below this R.
and found the Countrey for one mile back good Land and well watered the
hills not high with a gentle assent from the river, well timbered with
oake, walnit Hickory ash, &c. the land Still further back becoms thin
and open, with Black & rasp Berries, and Still further back the Plains
Commence, The french inform that Lead ore is found on this river in
Several places, it heads up between the Osagees & Kansas River the
right hand folk passes in a Short distance of the Missourie at the
antient Little Ozages Villages our hunter Killed, 2 Deer, after Staying
one hour at the mouth of this River, Cap Lewis went out & proceeded on
one Mile & came in, he fount the land in the point high and fine Course
N. 64 deg. W 1 Ms. to a pt. on S. S. N. 80 deg. W to the Lower pot a Id. on L. S.
passed a Small Isd. in the m. R. at (3 Ms.) met 3 men on a Caussee from
R Dis Soux, above The Mahar Nation loaded with fur. Camped on the Lower
point of an Id. L. S. called the Mills, here I found Kegs an Pummey
stone, and a place that fur or Skins had been burred by the hunters our
Hunters Killed 5 Deer, Some rain, the Countrey on the S. S. is Verry
fine




[Clark, June 8, 1804]
8th of June, Friday 1804
Set out this morning at Daylight proceeden on the Course of last night
Passed two willow Islands & a Small Creek above a Rock point on the L.
S. at 6 miles on which there is a number of Deer Licks, passed the Mine
River at 9 ms. this river is about 70 yards wide at its mouth and is
Said to be navagable for Perogues 80 or 90 ms. the main branch passes
near the place where the Little osage Village formerly Stood on the
Missouries, & heads between the Osarge & Kansias Rivers, the left hand
fork head with nearer Branches of the Osage River, The french inform
that Lead Ore has been found in defferent parts of this river, I took
Sjt. Floyd and went out 4 Ms. below this river, I found the land Verry
good for a Mile or 11/2 Ms. back and Sufficiently watered with Small
Streams which lost themselves in the Missouries bottom, the Land rose
gradeuelly from the river to the Summit of the high Countrey which is
not more that 120 foot above High Water mark, we joined the Boat &
Dined in the point above the mouth of this River, Capt. Lewis went out
above the river & proceeded on one mile, finding the Countrey rich, the
wedes & Vines So thick & high he came to the Boat--proceeded on passed
an Island and Camped at the lower point of an Island on the L. S.
Called the Island of mills about 4 ms. above Mine River at this place I
found Kanteens, Axs, Pumey Stone & peltrey hid & buried (I suppose by
some hunters) none of them (except the pumey Stone) was teched by one
of our party, our hunters Killed 5 Deer to day, Commenced raining Soon
after we Came too which prevented the party Cooking their provisions-
our Spies inform that the Countrey they passed thro on S. S. is a fine
high bottom, no water.

This day we met 3 men on a Cajaux from the River of the Soux above the
Mahar nation those men had been hunting 12 mo. & made about 900$ in
pelts. & furs they were out of Provesions and out of Powder. rained
this night




[Clark, June 9, 1804]
9th of June Satterday Set out early, water verry Swift got fast on a
log, detained us 1/4 hour Hard rain last night. N 39 deg. W 31/2 Ms. to a pt.
on the S. S. opposit the Commencement of the 1st Prarie, Called Prarie
of the Arrows,1 the river at this place about 300 yds. Wide passed a
Small Creek, Arrow Creek 8 yds. wide L. Sd. the Current exceedingly
Strong

N 34 deg. E 2 ms. to the Belg of a Small Island Situated on the L. Sd. Passed
the mo. of Arrow Creek N 83 deg.W 11/2 ms. to a pt on L. S. opposit Black
bird C Small passed the head of the Isd. & a small Willow one to the L.
S. (Os merdn. altd. back obsvn. 37 00' 00) N. 39 deg. W 2 Ms. to a pt. of
High Land on the L. Side opst. a pt. on St. S. River about 350 yds.
wide at this pt. a Wind from the S at 4 oClock (Handson Sutn) on the
High pt. a prarie & Small Lake below N 32 deg. E 31/2 Ms. to a pt. on L. S.
passed an Isld. in the mid R--in passing up on the S. S. opsd. the Isd.
the Sturn of the boat Struck a log which was not proceiveable the Curt.
Struck her bow and turn the boat against Some drift & Snags which below
with great force; This was a disagreeable and Dangerous Situation,
particularly as immense large trees were Drifting down and we lay
imediately in their Course,--Some of our men being prepared for all
Situations leaped into the water Swam ashore with a roap, and fixed
themselves in Such Situations, that the boat was off in a fiew minits,
I can Say with Confidence that our party is not inferior to any that
was ever on the waters of the Missoppie we Crossed to the Island and
Camped, our hunters lay on the S. S. the wind from the S. W. the river
continue to rise Slowly Current excessive rapid--The Countrey on the S.
S. high bottom & Delghtfull land that on the L. S. is up land or hills
of from 50 to 100 foot higher than the bottom & a thinly wooded,
Countrey, Lands tolerably Good; Comminced raining at 5 oClock and
continued by intervales the greater part of the night. We discovered
that one of our French hands had a Conpt.--We Commsd Doctering, I hope
the Success in this case, usial to




[Clark, June 9, 1804]
9th of June 1804 Satturday
a fair morning, the River rise a little we got fast on a Snag Soon
after we Set out which detained us a Short time passed the upper Point
of the Island Several Small Chanels running out of the River below a
Bluff & Prarie (Called the Prariee of Arrows) where the river is
confined within the width of 300 yds. Passed a Creek of 8 yds. wide
Called Creek of Arrows, this Creek is Short and heads in the Praries on
the L. S. passed a Small Creek Called Blackbird Creek S. S. and One
Islands below & a Prarie above on the L. S. a Small Lake above the
Prarie--opposit the Lower point of the 2d. Island on the S. S. we had
like to have Stove our boat, in going round a Snag her Stern Struck a
log under Water & She Swung round on the Snag, with her broad Side to
the Current expd. to the Drifting timber, by the active exertions of
our party we got her off in a fiew Mints. without engerey and Crossed
to the Island where we Campd. our hunters lay on the S. S. the Perogue
Crossed without Seeing them & the banks too uncertain to Send her over-
Some wind from the S accompanied with rain this evening--The Lands on
the S. S. is a high rich bottom the L. S. appears oven and of a good
quallity runing gradually to from fifty to 100 foot.




[Clark, June 10, 1804]
June 10th Sunday 1804 Some rain last night we set out early Saw a
number of Goslings this morning, Continued on the Course of last night,
thence N. 8 E. 21/2 ms. to a pt. on the L. S. passed a part of the
River that the banks are falling in takeing with them large trees of
Cotton woods which is the Common groth in the Bottoms Subject to the
flud North 1 Me along the L. Side N. 40 deg. W. 1 ms. along the L, S. opposit
the two Charletons, on the N. Side, those rivers mouth together, the
1st 40 yds. wide the next 90 yds. Wide and navagable Some distance in
the Countrey, the land below is high & not verry good. Came to and took
Mdnl. altd. of Sons U. L. back obsvn. with the octant Made it 37 deg. 12'
00", delayed 11/2 Hour. N. 70 deg. W 1/2 of a me. along the L. Sd.--S 60 deg. W 1/2
m. on L. S. the Same Course to the Pt. S. S. 11/2 Ms. We halted and
Capt Lewis Killed a Buck the Current is excessively Swift about this
place N. 80 deg. W. 3 ms to a pt. on S. S. passed a Isd. Called Sheeco Islan
wind from the N W Camped in a Prarie on the L. S., Capt Lewis & my Self
Walked out 3 ms. found the Country roleing open & rich, with plenty of
water, great qts of Deer I discovered a Plumb which grows on bushes the
hight of Hasle, those plumbs are in great numbers, the bushes beare
Verry full, about double the Sise of the wild plumb Called the Osage
Plumb & am told they are finely flavoured.




[Clark, June 10, 1804]
10th of June 1804
A hard rain last night, we Set out this morning verry early passed Some
bad placies in the river Saw a number of Goslings morning pass near a
Bank which was falling in at the time we passed, passed the two River
of Charletons which mouth together, above Some high land which has a
great quantity of Stone Calculated for whetstons the first of those
rivers is about 30 yds. Wide & the other is 70 yds wd. and heads Close
to the R.

Dumoin The Aieways Nation have a Village on the head of these River
they run through an even Countrey and is navagable for Perogues Cap
Lewis took Medn. altd. of sun U. L with Octant, back obsvn. made it 37 deg.
12' 00"--delayd 11/2 hours.

Capt. Lewis Killed a large Buck, passed a large Isd. called Shecco and
Camped in a Prarie on the L. S. I walked out three miles, found the
prarie composed of good Land and plenty of water roleing & interspursed
with points of timberd land, Those Praries are not like those, or a
number of those E. of the Mississippi Void of every thing except grass,
they abound with Hasel Grapes & a wild plumb of a Superior quallity,
called the Osages Plumb Grows on a bush the hight of a Hasel and hang
in great quantities on the bushes I Saw great numbers of Deer in the
Praries, the evening is Cloudy, our party in high Spirits.




[Clark, June 11, 1804]
11 June Monday--as the wind blew all this day from the N, W. which was
imedeately a head we Could not Stur, but took the advantage of the
Delay and Dried our wet articles examined provisons and Cleaned arms,
my Cold is yet verry bad--the river begining to fall our hunters killed
two Deer, G Drewry killed 2 Bear in the Prareie to day, men verry
lively Danceing & Singing &c.




[Clark, June 11, 1804]
11th June 1804 Monday
The N W. wind blew hard & Cold as this wind was imediately a head, we
Could not proceed we took the advantage of this Delay and Dried our wet
articles examin'd Provisions &c. &c. the river begining to fall the
hunters killed two Deer G. Drewyer Killed two Bear in the Prarie, they
were not fat. we had the meat Jurked and also the Venison, which is a
Constant Practice to have all the fresh meat not used, Dried in this
way.




[Clark, June 12, 1804]
12th of June, Tuesday We Set out early, passed thro a verry bad bend N.
25 deg. W. 31/2 to apt. L. S. N. 70 deg. W. 21/2 ms to apt. on S. S. passed a Sand
bar-N 60 deg. W 31/2 ms. to a pt. on S. S. passed Plumb. C at 1/2 a me. on L.
S. and halted to Dine, and 2 Caussease Came Down from the Soux nation,
we found in the party an old man who had been with the Soux 20 years &
had great influence with them, we provld. on this old man Mr. Duriaur
to return with us, with a view to get Some of the Soux Chiefs to go to
the U. S. purchased 300 lb. of Voyagers Grece @ 5$ Hd. made Some
exchanges & purchuses of Mockersons & found it Late & concluded to
incamp.

Those people inform that no Indians are on the river, The Countrey on
each Side of the river is good




[Clark, June 12, 1804]
12th of June, Tuesday 1804
Set out early passed Some bad Placies, and a Small Creek on the L. S.
Called plumb Creek at abt. 1 me. at 1 oClock we brought too two
Chaussies one Loaded with furs & Pelteries, the other with Greece
buffalow grease & tallow We purchased 300 lb. of Greese, and finding
that old Mr. Durioun was of the party we questioned him untill it was
too late to Go further and Concluded to Camp for the night, those
people inform nothing of much information Colcluded to take old Durioun
back as fur as the Soux nation with a view to get some of their Chiefs
to Visit the Presdt.

of the United S. (This man being a verry Confidential friend of those
people, he having resided with the nation 20 odd years) and to
accompany them on




[Clark, June 13, 1804]
13th June Wednesday we Set out early passed a verry round bend to L. S.
passed two Creeks 1 me. apt. Called Creeks of the round Bend, between
those Creeks Stbd S. is a butifull Prarie, in which the antient
Missourie Indians had a Village, at this place 300 of them were killed
by the Saukees, a fair Day. Passed the antient Missouries villages on
right Course N 40 deg. W 21/2 pt. L S., S 29 deg. W 3 ms. pt. S. S., this nation
once the Most Noumerous is now almost extinct, about 30 of them,
liveing with Otteaus on the R. Platt, the remainder all distroyed, took
altd. of S. U L with qdt. which gave N 28 W. 11/2 ms to a pt. S. S.
Passed some Charming land, I have not Seen any high hils above
Charliton and the hits below for Several days Cannot to turmed hills
but high Land, not exceeding 100 abov the high water mark N 30 deg. W, to a
pt. L. S. 2 ms. passed a verry bad Sand bar, where the boat was nearly
turning & fastening in the quick Sand and came too in the mouth of
Grand R. S. S. this River is about 120 yards wide and navigable for
Purogues a great distance, it heads with the River Dumoine, passing the
river Carlton. a Butifull open Prarie Coms to the river below its
mouth, we landed and walked to the hills which is abt. 1/2 a mile. the
Lower prarie over flows. the hunters Killd. a Bare & Dere, this is a
butifull place the Prarie rich & extinsive, Took Some Looner
Observations which Kept Cap L. & my Self up untill half past 11 oClock.




[Clark, June 13, 1804]
13th June Wednesday, 1804
We Set out early passed a round bend to the S. S. and two Creeks Called
the round bend Creeks between those two Creeks and behind a Small
willow Island in the bend is a Prarie in which the Missouries Indians
once lived and the Spot where 300 of them fell a Sacrifise to the fury
of the Saukees This nation (Missouries) once the most noumerous nation
in this part of the Continent now reduced to about 80 fes. and that
fiew under the protection of the Otteaus on R Platt who themselves are
declineing passed Som willow Isds. and bad Sand bars, Twook Medn.
altitude with Octent back observation it gave for altd. on its Low L 36 deg.
58' 0" the E Enstrement 2 deg. 00' 00" +. the Hills or high land for Several
days past or above the 2 Charletons does not exceed 100 foot passed a
Batteau or Sand roleing where the Boat was nearly turning over by her
Strikeing & turning on the Sand. We came too in the Mouth of Grand
River on S. S. and Camped for the night, this River is from 80 to 100
yards wide at its Mouth and navagable for Perogues a great distance
This river heads with the R. Dumoine below its mouth is a butifull
Plain of bbttom land the hills rise at 1/2 a mile back

The lands about this place is either Plain or over flown bottom Capt
Lewis and my Self walked to the hill from the top of which we had a
butifull prospect of Serounding Countrey in the open Prarie we Caught a
racoon, our hunters brought in a Bear & Deer we took Some Luner
observation this evening.




[Clark, June 14, 1804]
14th June, Thursday We set out at 6 oClock after a thick fog proceeded
on verry well S. 33 W 2 Ms. to the lower pt of an Isld. S. S. S. 60 deg. W.
thro a narrow 1 me channel to a Small prarie S. S. opposit this Isd. on
L. L. is a Butifull high Plain. from the Isd. S. 70'W. to a pt. L. S.
21/2 ms. just below a piec of High Land on the S. S. Called the place
of Snakes, passed the worst place I have Seen on L. S. a Sand bar
makeing out 2/3 Cross the river Sand Collecting &c forming Bars and
Bars washg a way, the boat Struck and turned, She was near oversetting
we saved her by Some extrodany exertions of our party (ever ready to
inconture any fatigue for the premotion of the enterpris), I went out
to walk on the Sand Beech, & Killed a Deer & Turky during the time I
was from the boat a Caussee came too from the Pania nation loaded with
furs We gave them Some whiskey and Tobacco & Settled Some desputes &
parted S. 5 E. 3 ms. to pt. on S. S. passed a Creek S. S. 25 yds. wd.
Called Snake Creek or (____) passed a bad Sand bar S. S. in passing
which we were obliged to run great Sesque of Loseing both Boat & men,
Camped above, G. Drewyer tels of a remarkable Snake inhabiting a Small
lake 5 ms. below which gobbles like a Turkey & may be herd Several
miles, This Snake is of Size.




[Clark, June 14, 1804]
14th, June Thursday we Set out at 6 oClock, after a thick fog passed
thro a narrow pass on the S. S. which forms a large Isd. opposit the
upper point of this Island on the L. S. is one of the worst quick or
moveing Sand bars which I have Seen not withstanding all our
precaustons to Clear the Sands & pass between them (which was the way
we were Compd. to pass from the immens Current & falling banks on the
S. S.) the Boat Struck the point of one from the active exertions of
the men, prevented her turning, if She had turned She must have
overset. we met a Causseu from the Pania on the River Platt, we
detained 2 hours with a view of engageing one of the hands to go to the
Pania nation with a View to get those people to meet us on the river. I
went out (Shot a Deer) we passd a highland &clay bluff on the S. S.
Called the Snake bluff from the number of Snakes about this place, we
passd a Creek above the Bluff about 18 yds. wide, This Creek is Called
Snake Creek, a bad Sand bar Just below which we found difficuelty in
passing & Campd above, our Hunters Came in. George Drewyer, gives the
following act. of a Pond, & at abt. 5 miles below the S. S. Passed a
Small Lake in which there was many Deer feeding he heard in this Pond a
Snake makeing Goubleing Noises like a turkey. he fired his gun & the
noise was increased, he has heard the indians Mention This Species of
Snake one Frenchman give a Similar account




[Clark, June 15, 1804]
15 June Friday 1804, we Set out early proceeded on about 1 me. and the
Boat turned on a Sawyer which was near doeing her great damage, the
river is riseing fast & the water exceedingly Swift, passd. a bad Sand
bar on which we Stuck for a Short time this is Said to be the worst
part of the river and Camped opsd. the bend in which the Antient
Villages of the little Osarge & Missouries, the lower or first of those
villagies (L. Osages) is Situated in Butifull Plain at the foot of Some
riseing land, in front of their Viliges next the river is a butifull
bottom Plain in which they raised their Corn &c. back of the Village
the high Prarie extends back to the Osarge River, about 3 Ms. above &
in view the Missouries Nation resided under the protection of the
Osarges, after their nation was riducd by the Saukees below, thos built
their Village in the Same low Prarie and lived there many years, the
war was So hot & both nations becom So reduced that the Little Osage &
a fiew of the Missoures moved & built a village 5 ms near the Grand
Osage, the rest of the Missoures went and took protection under the
Otteaus on Platt river




[Clark, June 15, 1804]
15th, June, Friday 1804 Set out early and had not proceeded far e'er we
wheeled on a Sawyer which was near injuring us Verry much, passed a
plain on the L. S. a Small Isd. in the midle the river riseing, water
verry Swift Passed a Creek on the L. S. passed between two Islands, a
verry bad place, Moveing Sands, we were nearly being Swallowed up by
the roleing Sands over which the Current was So Strong that we Could
not Stem it with our Sales under a Stiff breese in addition to our
ores, we were Compelled to pass under a bank which was falling in, and
use the Toe rope occasionally, Continued up pass two other Small
Islands and Camped on the S. S. Nearly opposit the Antient Village of
the Little Osarges and below the Antt. Village of the Missoures both
Situations in view an within three Ms. of each other, the Osage were
Settled at the foot a hill in a butifell Plain which extends back quite
to the Osage River, in front of the Vilg. Next to the river is an
ellegent bottom Plain which extends Several miles in length on the
river in this low Prarie the Missouries lived after They were reduced
by the Saukees at Their Town Some Dists. below. The little osage
finding themselves much oppressed by the Saukees & other nations, left
this place & built a village 5 ms. from the Grand Osarge Town about
____ years ago. a few of the Missoures accompanied them, the remainder
of that nation went to the Otteaus on the River Platt. The River at
this place is about 1 ms. wide our hunters did not Come in this evening
the river beginning to fall




[Clark, June 16, 1804]
16th June Satterday Set out at 7 oClock Proceed on N. 68 deg.W. 21/2 ms.
passed a Isd. close on the S. S. at the lower point Drewer & Willard
had camped & had with them 2 bear & 2 Deer we took in the meat &
proceeded on. Some rain this morning West 2 Ms. pass an Isd on S. S. &
prarie, to a Belge of Snag Isd. L. S. a butifull extensive Prarie on S.
S. Hills to about 9 ms. distant. Mr. Mackey has Laid down the rems. of
an old fort in this Prarie, which I cannot find S 85 W. 1 me. along the
Isd. L. S.--S 61 deg. W alg L. S. 1 me. S 30 deg. W, 3, ms. to pt. S. S. opsd. an
Isd. & head of the last S 40 deg. W 1 me. S. S. Passed a verry bad place
where the Sand was moving constantly, I walked on Shore obsd. fine high
Bottom land on S. S. Camped late this evening.




[Clark, June 16, 1804]
16th, June Satturday 1804
Set out at 7 oClock at about a mile 1/2 we Came to the Camp of our
hunters, they had two Bear & two Deer proceeded on pass a Island on the
S. S. a heavy rain came on & lasted a Short time, we came to on the S.
S. in a Prarie at the place where Mr. Mackey lay down a old french
fort, I could See no traces of a Settlement of any Kind, in this plain
I discovered a Kind of Grass resembling Timothey which appeared well
calculated for Hay, this Plain is verry extensive in the evening I
walked on the S. S. to see if any timber was Convt. to make Oars, which
we were much in want of, I found Som indifferent timber and Struck the
river above the Boat at a bad Sand bar the worst I had Seen which the
boat must pass or Drop back Several Miles & Stem a Swift Current on the
opsd Side of an Isd. the Boat however assended the middle of the Streem
which was diffucult Dangerious We Came to above this place at Dark and
Camped in a bad place, the misquitoes and Ticks are noumerous & bad.




[Clark, June 17, 1804]
June 17 1804 Rope walk Camp
The Current of the River at this place is a Stick will float 48 poles 6
feet in the rapidest part in 23 Seconds, further out is 34, Still
further 65--74--78 & 82 are the Trials we have made.




[Clark, June 17, 1804]
June 17 Sunday 1804 Cloudy Wind, S. E. Set out early S. 65 deg. W 1 Me. Came
too to Make ores, and a Cord for a Toe Rope all this day imployed in
getting out Ores, & makeing for the use of the Boat out of a large
Cable rope which we have, G Drewyer Came up a Bear & 2 Deer, also a
fine horse which he found in the woods, Supposed to have been left by
Some war party from the osages, The Ticks are numerous and large and
have been trousom all the way and the Musquetors are beginning to be
verry troublesome, my Cold Continues verry bad the French higherlins
Complain for the want of Provisions, Saying they are accustomed to eat
5 & 6 times a day, they are roughly rebuked for their presumption, the
Country about abounds in Bear Deer & Elk and the S. S. the lands are
well timbered and rich for 2 ms. to a butifull Prarie which risies into
hills At 8 or 9 ms. back--on the L. S a Prarie coms. on the bank which
is high and contines back rich & well watered as far




[Clark, June 17, 1804]
June 17th Sunday 1804 (S. 65 deg.W. me. S. Side-)
Cloudy morning wind from the S. E. we Set out early and proceeded on
one mile & came too to make oars, & repair our Cable & toe rope &c. &c.
which was necessary for the Boat & Perogues, Sent out Sjt. Pryor and
Some men to get ash timber for ores, and Set Some men to make a Toe
Rope out of the Cords of a Cable which had been provided by Capt Lewis
at Pitts burg for the Cable of the boat--George Drewyer our hunter and
one man came in with 2 Deer & a Bear, also a young Horse, they had
found in the Prarie, this horse has been in the Prarie a long time and
is fat, I suppose he has been left by Some war party against the Osage,
This is a Crossing place for the war partis against that nation from
the Saukees, Aiaouez, & Souix. The party is much aflicted with Boils
and Several have the Decissentary, which I contribute to the water

The Countrey about this place is butifull on the river rich & well
timbered on the S. S. about two miles back a Prarie coms. which is rich
and interspursud with groves of timber, the County rises at 7 or 8
miles Still further back and is roleing--on the L. S. the high lands &
Prarie Corns. in the bank of the river and Continus back, well watered
and abounds in Der Elk & Bear The Ticks & Musquetors are verry
troublesom.




[Clark, June 18, 1804]
June 18th Monday Some raind last night, Sent out 6 Hunters to day
across the R. they Killed 5 Deer & Colter a Bear verry fat we continue
to repare our ropes & make oars all day, heavy rain all the fore pt. of
the day, the party Drying meat & greesing themselves, Several men with
the Disentary, and two thirds of them with ulsers or Boils, Some with 8
or 10 of those Turners Mesquetors verry bad we finish our Cords & oars
this evening Men in Spirits




[Clark, June 18, 1804]
June 18th Monday
Some rain last night, and Some hard Showers this morning which delay
our work verry much, Send out Six hunters in the Prarie on the L S.
they kill 5 Deer & Coltr a Bear, which verry large & fat, the party to
wok at the oars, make rope, & jurk their meat all Day Dry our wet Sales
&c. in the evening, The misquiter verry bad




[Clark, June 19, 1804]
June 19th Tuesday
rain last night after fixing the new Oars and makeing all necessary
arrangements, we Set out under a jentle breese from the S. E. and
proceeded on passed two large Islands on the S. S. leaving J. Shields
and one man to go by land with the horses Some verry hard water, passed
Several Islands & Sand bars to day at the head of one we were obliged
to cleare away Driftwood to pass, passed a Creek on the L. Side Called
Tabboe 15 yds. wide passed a large Creek at the head of an Island
Called Tiger River on the S. S. The Island below this Isd. is large and
Called the Isle Of Panters, formed on the S. S. by a narrow Channel, I
observed on the Shore Goose & Rasp berries in abundance in passing Some
hard water round a Point of rocks on the L. S. we were obliged to take
out the roape & Draw up the Boat for 1/2 a mile, we Came too on the L.
S. near a Lake of the Sircumfrance of Several miles Situated on the L.
S. about two miles from the river this Lake is Said to abound in all
kinds of fowls, great quanties of Deer frequent this Lake dureing
Summer Season, and feed on the hows &c. &c. they find on the edgers the
Lands on the North Side of the river is rich and Sufficiently high to
afford Settlements, the Lds. on the South Side assends Gradually from
the river not So rich, but of a good quallity and appear well watered




[Clark, June 20, 1804]
June 20th, Wednesday
Set out after a heavy Shower of rain and proceeded on the Same Course
of last night passed a large butifull Prarie on the S. S. opposit a
large Island, Calld Saukee Prarie, a gentle breese from the S. W. Some
butiful high lands on the L. S. passed Som verry Swift water to day, I
saw Pelicans to day on a Sand bar, my servant York nearly loseing an
eye by a man throwing Sand into it, we came too at the lower Point of a
Small Island, the party on Shore we have not Seen Since we passed Tiger
R--The Land appeard verry good on each Side of the River to day and
well timbered, we took Some Loner observations, which detained us
untill 1 oClock a butifull night but the air exceedingly Damp, & the
mosquiters verry troublesom




[Clark, June 21, 1804]
21st June Thursday 1804 river raised 3 Inches last night after our bow
man Peter Crousat a half Mahar Indian examined round this Small Isd.
for the best water, we Set out determined to assd. on the North Side,
and Sometimes rowing Poleing & Drawing up with a Strong Rope we
assended without wheeling or receving any damige more than breakeing
one of my S. Windows, and looseing Some oars which were Swong under the
windows

Two men Sent out to hunt this afternoon Came in with a Deer, at Sun Set
The ellement had every appearance of wind, The hunters inform me that
the high Countrey on the S. S. is of a good quallity, and well timbd.
The High lands on the L. Side is equally good The bottom land on this
river is alike, 1st low and covd. with Cotton wood & willows Subject to
over flow the 2nd is higher groth Cotton Walnut ash Mulberry Linn &
Sycomore




[Clark, June 21, 1804]
21st June Thursday
The river rose 3 Inches last night after the Bows man Peter Crousat
viewed The water on each Side of the Island which presented a most
unfavourable prospect of Swift water over roleing Sands which rored
like an immence falls, we Concluded to assend on the right Side, and
with much dificuilty, with the assistance of a long Cord or Tow rope, &
the anchor we got the Boat up with out any furthr dang. than Bracking a
Cabbin window & loseing Some oars which were Swong under the windows,
passed four Isds to day two large & two Small, behind the first large
Island two Creeks mouth Called (1) Eue-bert Creek & River & Isd. the
upper of those Creeks head against the Mine River & is large, passed a
verry remarkable bend in the River to the S. forming an accute angle,
the high lands come to the river on the S. S. opposit the upper large
Island, this Isd. is formed by a narrow chanel thro. the Pt. of the
remarkable bend just mentiond below this Isd. on the L. S. is a
Couenter Current of about a mile--passed between Several Small Islands
Situated near the L. Side and camped above on the Same Side, Two men
Sent out to hunt this evening brought in a Buck & a pore Turkey.

at Sun Set the atmespier presented every appearance of wind, Blue &
white Streeks Centering at the Sun as She disappeared and the Clouds
Situated to the S. W, Guilded in the most butifull manner. The Countrey
and Lands on each Side of the river is various as usial and may be
classed as follows. viz: the low or over flown points or bottom land,
of the groth of Cotton & Willow, the 2nd or high bottom of rich furtile
Soils of the groth of Cotton, Walnut, Som ash, Hack berry, Mulberry,
Lynn & Sycamore. the third or high Lands risees gradually from the 2nd
bottom (cauht whin it Coms to the river then from the river) about 80
or 100 foot roleing back Supplied with water the Small runs of (which
losees themselves in the bottom land) and are covered with a variety of
timber Such as Oake of different Kinds Blue ash, walnut &c. &c. as far
as the Praries, which I am informed lie back from the river at some
places near & others a great Distance




[Clark, June 22, 1804]
22nd June Friday after a Violent gust of wind accompanied with rain
from the West, which commenced at Day brake, and lasted about one hour,
we Set out under a gentle Breeze from the N W. and proceeded on S. 14 deg.W.
21/2 ms. to pt. on L. S. Ord Killed a goose, S 25 W 3 Ms. to a pt. on
S. S. psd. Snags and Swift water on the S. S.--S. 66 deg. W. 1/2 a me. on S
pt. N 60 W 41/2 me. to pt. L. S. passed a large Isd. on the S. S.-
(Ferenthiers Thermometr at 3 oClock P.M. 87 d which is 11 d above Summr
heat) and one on the L. S. opposit against which there is a handsom
Prarie of high Bottom & up Land, Capt Lewis went out in this Prarie &
walked Several miles, Come to opposit the mouth of a large Creek on the
S. S. Called River of the Fire Prarie at the mouth of this creek the
party on Shore Shields & Collins was camped waiting for our arrival &
inform that they Pass'd thro Some fine Lands, and well watered G D.
Killed a fine Bear to day




[Clark, June 22, 1804]
22nd June Friday river rose 4 Inchs last night. I was waken'd before
day light this morning by the guard prepareing the boat to receve an
apparent Storm which threttened violence from the West at day light a
violent wind accompanied with rain cam from the W. and lasted about one
hour, it Cleared away, and we Set out and proceeded on under a gentle
breeze from the N. W. passed Some verry Swift water Crouded with Snags,
pass two large Island opposit each other, and immediately opposit a
large & extensive Prarie on the Labd Side, This Prarie is butifull a
high bottom for 11/2 a mile back and risees to the Common leavel of the
Countrey about 70 or 80 feet and extends back out of view. Capt. L
walked on Shore a few miles this after noon (at 3 oClock P M. Ferents
Thermometer Stood at 87 deg.: = to 11 d above Summer heat) we came to on the
L. Side opposit the mouth of a large Creek Called the River of the Fire
Prarie, at the mouth of this Creek the Party on Shore were waiting our
arrival, they informed that the Lands thro which they passed was fine &
well watered




[Clark, June 23, 1804]
23rd June Satturday Some wind this morning from the N W. Set out at 7
oC Proceeded on N. 70 d. W 2 Ms. to an Isd. Close on the S. S. I went
on Shore & walked up thro a rich bottom for about Six miles, Killed a
Deer & much fatigued N. 75 E. to a point in a bend L. S. 11/2 the river
fell 8 Inches last night.




[Clark, June 23, 1804]
23rd June Satturday Some wind this morning from the N. W. we Set out at
7 oClock, and proceeded on to the head of a Island on the S. S. the
wind blew hard and down the river which prevented the Pty moveing from
this Island the whole day, Cap. Lewis had the arms examined &c. at the
lower end of this Island I got out of the boat to walk on Shore, &
expected the party on Shore would overtake me at the head of the
Island, they did not & I proceeded on round a round and extensive bend
in the river, I Killed a Deer & made a fire expecting the boat would
Come up in the evening. the wind continueing to blow prevented their
moveing, as the distance by land was too great for me to return by
night I concluded to Camp, Peeled Some bark to lay on, and geathered
wood to make fires to Keep off the musquitor & Knats. Heard the party
on Shore fire, at Dark Drewyer came to me with the horses, one fat bear
& a Deer, river fell 8 Inches last night




[Lewis and Clark, June 24, 1804]
Sunday June 24th set out at 1/2 after six continuing the course on the
Lard. side N. 80 E 1/4 of a mile to point Lard. N. 551/4 of a mile to
point Lard. Due west to a point Stard 3 miles good water

(I joined the Boat theis morning with a fat Bear & two Deer, last
evining I Struck the river about 6 miles (by land) abov the Boat, and
finding it too late to get to the Boat, and the wind blowing So hard
Down the river that She could not assend, I concluded to Camp, altho I
had nothing but my hunting Dress, & the Musquitors Ticks & Knats verry
troublesom, I concid to hunt on a Willow Isd. Situated close under the
Shore, in Crossing from an Island, I got mired, and was obliged to
Craul oat, a disegreeable Situation & a Diverting one of any one who
Could have Seen me after I got out, all Covered with mud, I went my
Camp & Craped off the Mud and washed my Clothes, and fired off my gun
which was answered by George Drewyer who was in persute of me & came up
at Dark we feasted of meet & water the latter we made great use of
being much fatigued & thirsty--The meet which hung up near the water a
large Snake made Several attempts to get to it and was so Detirmined
that I Killed him in his attempt, the Snake appeared to make to that
part of the meet which Contained the milk of a Doe, On this part of the
River I observe great quantites of Bear Sign, they are after Mulbiries
which are in great quantities)

N 85 d W. 41/2 ms. to a pt. on L Side, Came to above the mouth of a
Creek on the L. S. abt. 20 yds. Wide Called Hay Cabbin Creek Latd. of
this place is 38 deg. 37'5" North--Capt. Lewis took Sergt. Floyd and walked
on Shore, George Drewyer Killed 2 Deer R Fields Killed a Deer dureing
the time we wer Jurking the meet I brought in, West 1/2 ml. along the
L. S.

S 21 deg. W. 3 ms. to a pt. on the S. S. pass 2 Creek on the S. S. just above
Some rocks Some distance from Shore 1 of These Creek is Called
Sharriton-Cartie, a Prarie on the L. S. near the river. Capt Lewis
Killed a Deer, & Collins 3. emince number of Deer on both Sides of the
river, we pass between two Sand bars at head of which we had to raise
the boat 8 Inch to get her over, Camped at the Lower point of a Isd. on
the L S. the Party in high Spirits.




[Clark, June 24, 1804]
24th, June Sunday Set out at half after Six. I joined the boat this
morng at 8 oClock (I will only remark that dureing the time I lay on
the band waiting for the boat, a large Snake Swam to the bank
imediately under the Deer which was hanging over the water, and no
great distance from it, I threw chunks and drove this Snake off Several
times. I found that he was So determined on getting to the meet I was
Compelld to Kill him, the part of the Deer which attracted this Snake I
think was the milk from the bag of the Doe.) I observed great quts. of
Bear Signs, where they had passed in all Directions thro the bottoms in
Serch of Mulberries, which were in great numbers in all the bottoms
thro which our party passed.)

Passed the mouth of a Creek 20 yds. wide name Hay Cabbin Creek from
camps of Straw built on it came to about 1/2 me. above this Creek &
jurked, the meet killed yesterday and this morning Lattitude of this
place 38 deg. 37' 5" N. Capt. Lewis walked on Shore & Killed a Deer, pass a
bad part of the river, on the S. S. the rocks projected into the river
Some distance, a Creek above Called Sharston Carta, in the evening we
Passed thro betwen two Sand bars at the head we had to raise the Boat 8
Inches together over, Camped near the lower point of an Island on the
L. Side, party in high Spirrits. The Countrey on each Side of the river
is fine interspersed with Praries, in which imence herds of Deer is
Seen, on the banks of the river we observe numbers of Deer watering and
feeding on the young willow, Several Killed to day




[Clark, June 25, 1804]
Monday June 25th a heavy fog Detaind us about an hour Set out passed
the Isd on a course from the last point S 49 deg. W, 3 Ms to a point on the
S. S. S 55 deg. W 1/2 Me. S. S. a Coal-Bank on the opposit or L. S Side, this
bank appears to Contain great quantity of excellente CoaL the wind from
the N. W a Small Creek Called Coal or (Chabonea)3 N 50 deg. W to the Pt, L.
S. 31/2 Miles Hard water & logs, Bank falling in, Passed a Small Creek
