Project Gutenberg EBook, Leila by Edward Bulwer Lytton, Volume 5
#200 in our series by Edward Bulwer Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****



Title: Leila or, The Siege of Granada, Book V.

Author: Edward Bulwer Lytton

Release Date: January 2006  [EBook #9760]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on October 9, 2003]


Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, LEILA, BY LYTTON, V5 ***




This eBook was produced by David Widger



Corrected and updated text and HTML PG Editions of the complete
5 volume set may be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/files/9761s/9761.txt

http://www.gutenberg.org/files/9761/9761-h/9761-h.htm






                             LEILA

                              OR,

                     THE SIEGE OF GRANADA

                              BY

                     EDWARD BULWER LYTTON


                            Book V.




CHAPTER I.

THE GREAT BATTLE.

The day slowly dawned upon that awful night; and the Moors, still upon
the battlements of Granada, beheld the whole army of Ferdinand on its
march towards their wails.  At a distance lay the wrecks of the blackened
and smouldering camp; while before them, gaudy and glittering pennons
waving, and trumpets sounding, came the exultant legions of the foe.  The
Moors could scarcely believe their senses.  Fondly anticipating the
retreat of the Christians, after so signal a disaster, the gay and
dazzling spectacle of their march to the assault filled them with
consternation and alarm.

While yet wondering and inactive, the trumpet of Boabdil was heard
behind; and they beheld the Moorish king, at the head of his guards,
emerging down the avenues that led to the gate.  The sight restored and
exhilarated the gazers; and, when Boabdil halted in the space before the
portals, the shout of twenty thousand warriors rose ominously to the ears
of the advancing Christians.

"Men of Granada!" said Boabdil, as soon as the deep and breathless
silence had succeeded to that martial acclamation,--"the advance of the
enemy is to their destruction!  In the fire of last night the hand of
Allah wrote their doom.  Let us forth, each and all!  We will leave our
homes unguarded--our hearts shall be their wall!  True, that our numbers
are thinned by famine and by slaughter, but enough of us are yet left for
the redemption of Granada.  Nor are the dead departed from us: the dead
fight with us--their souls animate our own.  He who has lost a brother,
becomes twice a man.  On this battle we will set all.  Liberty or chains!
empire or exile! victory or death!  Forward!"

He spoke, and gave the rein to his barb.  It bounded forward, and cleared
the gloomy arch of the portals, and Boabdil el Chico was the first Moor
who issued from Granada, to that last and eventful field.  Out, then,
poured, as a river that rushes from caverns into day, the burnished and
serried files of the Moorish cavalry.  Muza came the last, closing the
array.  Upon his dark and stern countenance there spoke not the ardent
enthusiasm of the sanguine king.  It was locked and rigid; and the
anxieties of the last dismal weeks had thinned his cheeks, and ploughed
deep lines around the firm lips and iron jaw which bespoke the obstinate
and unconquerable resolution of his character.

As Muza now spurred forward, and, riding along the wheeling ranks,
marshalled them in order, arose the acclamation of female voices; and the
warriors, who looked back at the sound, saw that their women--their wives
and daughters, their mothers and their beloved (released from their
seclusion, by a policy which bespoke the desperation of the cause)--were
gazing at them, with outstretched arms, from the battlements and towers.
The Moors knew that they were now to fight for their hearths and altars
in the presence of those who, if they failed, became slaves and harlots;
and each Moslem felt his heart harden like the steel of his own sabre.

While the cavalry formed themselves into regular squadrons, and the tramp
of the foemen came more near and near, the Moorish infantry, in
miscellaneous, eager, and undisciplined bands, poured out, until,
spreading wide and deep below the walls, Boabdil's charger was seen,
rapidly careering amongst them, as, in short but distinct directions, or
fiery adjurations, he sought at once to regulate their movements, and
confirm their hot but capricious valour.

Meanwhile the Christians had abruptly halted; and the politic Ferdinand
resolved not to incur the full brunt of a whole population, in the first
flush of their enthusiasm and despair.  He summoned to his side Hernando
del Pulgar, and bade him, with a troop of the most adventurous and
practised horsemen, advance towards the Moorish cavalry, and endeavour to
draw the fiery valour of Muza away from the main army.  Then, splitting
up his force into several sections, he dismissed each to different
stations; some to storm the adjacent towers, others to fire the
surrounding gardens and orchards; so that the action might consist rather
of many battles than of one, and the Moors might lose the concentration
and union, which made, at present, their most formidable strength.

Thus, while the Mussulmans were waiting in order for the attack, they
suddenly beheld the main body of the Christians dispersing, and, while
yet in surprise and perplexed, they saw the fires breaking out from their
delicious gardens, to the right and left of the walls, and hear the boom
of the Christian artillery against the scattered bulwarks that guarded
the approaches of that city.

At that moment a cloud of dust rolled rapidly towards the post occupied
in the van by Muza, and the shock of the Christian knights, in their
mighty mail, broke upon the centre of the prince's squadron.

Higher, by several inches, than the plumage of his companions, waved the
crest of the gigantic del Pulgar; and, as Moor after Moor went down
before his headlong lance, his voice, sounding deep and sepulchral
through his visor, shouted out--"Death to the infidel!"

The rapid and dexterous horsemen of Granada were not, however,
discomfited by this fierce assault: opening their ranks with
extraordinary celerity, they suffered the charge to pass comparatively
harmless through their centre, and then, closing in one long and
bristling line, cut off the knights from retreat.  The Christians wheeled
round, and charged again upon their foe.

"Where art thou, O Moslem dog! that wouldst play the lion'?--Where art
thou, Muza Ben Abil Gazan'?"

"Before thee, Christian!" cried a stern and clear voice; and from amongst
the helmets of his people, gleamed the dazzling turban of the Moor.

Hernando checked his steed, gazed a moment at his foe, turned back, for
greater impetus to his charge, and, in a moment more, the bravest
warriors of the two armies met, lance to lance.

The round shield of Muza received the Christian's weapon; his own spear
shivered, harmless, upon the breast of the giant.  He drew his sword,
whirled it rapidly over his head, and, for some minutes, the eyes of the
bystanders could scarcely mark the marvellous rapidity with which strokes
were given and parried by those redoubted swordsmen.

At length, Hernando, anxious to bring to bear his superior strength,
spurred close to Muza; and, leaving his sword pendant by a thong to his
wrist, seized the shield of Muza in his formidable grasp, and plucked it
away, with a force that the Moor vainly endeavoured to resist: Muza,
therefore, suddenly released his bold; and, ere the Spaniard had
recovered his balance (which was lost by the success of his own strength,
put forth to the utmost), he dashed upon him the hoofs of his black
charger, and with a short but heavy mace, which he caught up from the
saddlebow, dealt Hernando so thundering a blow upon the helmet, that the
giant fell to the ground, stunned and senseless.

To dismount, to repossess himself of his shield, to resume his sabre, to
put one knee to the breast of his fallen foe, was the work of a moment;
and then had Don Hernando del Pulgar been sped, without priest or
surgeon, but that, alarmed by the peril of their most valiant comrade,
twenty knights spurred at once to the rescue, and the points of twenty
lances kept the Lion of Granada from his prey.  Thither, with similar
speed, rushed the Moorish champions; and the fight became close and
deadly round the body of the still unconscious Christian.  Not an instant
of leisure to unlace the helmet of Hernando, by removing which, alone,
the Moorish blade could find a mortal place, was permitted to Muza; and,
what with the spears and trampling hoofs around him, the situation of the
Paynim was more dangerous than that of the Christian.  Meanwhile,
Hernando recovered his dizzy senses; and, made aware of his state,
watched his occasion, and suddenly shook off the knee of the Moor.  With
