Romans across the Ionian Sea, both in Europe and in Asia. The provinces
in Libya were held by Lepidus, and Sicily by Sextus.

[-29-] The government they divided anew in this way and the war against
Sextus they made a common duty, although Antony through messengers had
taken oaths before him against Caesar. And it was chiefly for this reason
that Caesar had schooled himself to receive under a general amnesty all
those who had gone over to the enemy in the war with Lucius, Antony's
brother, some among them, Domitius particularly, who had been of the
assassins, as well as all those whose names had been posted on the
tablets or had in any way cooeperated with Brutus and Cassius and later
embraced the cause of Antony. So great is the irony to be found in
factions and wars; for those in power decide nothing according to
justice, but determine on friend and foe as their temporary needs and
advantages demand. Therefore they regard the same men now as enemies, now
as useful helpers, according to the occasion.

[-30-] When they had reached this agreement in the camp outside
Brundusium, they entertained each other, Caesar in a soldierly, Roman
fashion, and Antony with Asiatic and Egyptian manners. As it appeared
that they had become reconciled, the soldiers who were at that time
following Caesar surrounded Antony and demanded of him the money which
they had promised them before the battle of Philippi. It was for this
he had been sent into Asia, to collect as much as possible. And when he
failed to give them anything, they would certainly have done him some
harm, if Caesar had not restrained them by feeding them with new hopes.
After this experience, to guard against further unruliness, they sent
those soldiers who were clearly disqualified by age into the colonies,
and then took up the war anew. For Sextus had come into Italy according
to the agreement made between himself and Antony, intending with the
latter's help to wage war against Caesar: when he learned that they had
settled their difficulties he himself went back into Sicily, but ordered
Menas, a freedman of his on whom he placed great reliance, to coast about
with a portion of the fleet and damage the interests of the other side.
He, accordingly, inflicted injury upon considerable of Etruria and
managed to capture alive Marcus Titius, the son of Titius who had been
proscribed and was then with Sextus; this son had gathered ships for
enterprises of his own and was blockading the province of Narbonensis.
Titius underwent no punishment, being preserved for his father's sake and
because his soldiers carried the name of Sextus on their shields: he did
not, however, recompense his benefactor fairly, but fought him to the
last ditch and finally slew him, so that his name is remembered among the
most prominent of his kind. Menas besides the exploits mentioned sailed
to Sardinia and had a conflict with Marcus Lurius, the governor there;
and at first he was routed, but later when the other was pursuing him
heedlessly he awaited the attack and contrary to expectations won a
victory in turn. Thereupon his enemy abandoned the island and he occupied
it. All the towns capitulated, save Caralis, which he took by siege:
it was there that many fugitives from the battle had taken refuge. He
released without ransom among others of the captives Helenus, a freedman
of Caesar in whom his master took especial delight: he thus laid up for
himself with that ruler a kindness long in advance by way of preparing a
refuge for himself, if he should ever need aught at Caesar's hands.

[-31-] He was occupied as above described. And the people in Rome refused
to remain quiet since Sardinia was in hostile hands, the coast was being
pillaged, and they had been cut off from importation of grain, while
famine and the great number of taxes of all sorts that were being imposed
and the "contributions," in addition, that were laid upon such as
possessed slaves irritated them greatly. As much as they were pleased
with the reconciliation of Antony and Caesar,--for thought that harmony
between these men meant peace for themselves,--they were equally or more
displeased at the war the two men were carrying on against Sextus. But
a short time previously they had brought the two rulers into the city
mounted on horses as if at a triumph, and had bestowed upon them the
triumphal robe precisely similar to that worn by persons celebrating, had
made them view the festivals from their chairs of state and had hastened
to espouse to Antony, when once her husband was dead, Octavia the sister
of Caesar, though she was then pregnant. Now, however, they changed their
behavior to a remarkable degree. At first forming in groups or gathering
at some spectacle they urged Antony and Caesar to secure peace, crying out
a great deal to this effect. When the men in power would not heed them,
they fell at odds with them and favored Sextus. They talked frequently in
his behalf, and at the horse-races honored by a loud clapping of hands
the statue of Neptune carried in the procession, evincing great pleasure
at it. When for some days it was not brought in, they took stones and
drove the officials from the Forum, threw down the images of Caesar and
Antony, and finally, on not accomplishing anything in this way even,
rushed violently upon them as if to kill them. Caesar, although his
followers were wounded, rent his clothes and betook himself to
supplicating them, whereas Antony presented a less yielding front. Hence,
because the wrath of the populace was aroused to the highest pitch and
it was feared that they would commit some violence, the two rulers were
forced unwillingly to make propositions of peace to Sextus.

[-32-] Meantime they removed the praetors and the consuls though it was
now near the close of the year, and appointed others instead, caring
little that these would have but a few days to hold office. (One of those
who at this time became consuls was Lucius Cornelius Balbus, of Gades,
who so much surpassed the men of his generation in wealth and munificence
that at his death he left a bequest of twenty-five denarii to each of the
Romans.) They not only did this, but when an aedile died on the last day
of the year, they chose another to fill out the closing hours. It was at
this same time that the so-called Julian supply of water was piped into
Rome and the festival that had been vowed for the successful completion
of the war against the assassins was held by the consuls. The duties
belonging to the so-called Septemviri were performed by the pontifices,
since none of the former was present: this was also done on many other
occasions.

[-33-] Besides these events which took place that year Caesar gave a
public funeral to his pedagogue Sphaerus, who had been freed by him. Also
he put to death Salvidienus Rufus, suspected of plotting against him.
This man was of most obscure origin, and while he was a shepherd a flame
had issued from his head. He had been so greatly advanced by Caesar that
he was made consul without even being a member of the senate, and his
brother who died before him had been laid to rest across the Tiber, a
bridge being constructed for this very purpose. But nothing human is
lasting, and he was finally accused in the senate by Caesar himself and
executed as an enemy of his and of the entire people; thanksgivings
were offered for his downfall and furthermore the care of the city was
committed to the triumvirs with the customary admonition, "that it should
suffer no harm."

[B.C. 41 (_a. u_. 713)]

In the year previous to this men belonging to the order of knights had
slaughtered wild beasts at the horse-race which came in the course of
the Ludi Apollinares, and an intercalary day was inserted, contrary to
custom, in order that the market held every nine days should not fall
on the first day of the following year,--something which was strictly
forbidden from very early times. Naturally the day had to be subtracted
again later, in order that the calendar should run according to the
system devised by the former Caesar. The domain of Attalus and of
Deiotarus, who had both died in Gaul, was given to a certain Castor. Also
the so-called Lex Falcidia, which has the greatest force even still
in regard to the succession to inheritances, was enacted by Publius
Falcidius, a tribune: its terms are that if an heir feels oppressed in
any way, he may secure at least a fourth, of the property left behind by
surrendering the rest.

[B.C. 39 (_a. u_. 715)]

[-34-] These were the events of the two years; the next season, when
Lucius Marcius and Gaius Sabinus held the consulship, the acts of the
triumvirs from the time they had formed a close combination received
ratification at the hands of the senate, and certain further taxes were
imposed by them, because the expenditures proved far greater than had
been allowed for in the time of the former Caesar. For they were expending
vast sums, especially upon the soldiers, and were ashamed of being the
only ones to lay out money contrary to custom. Then I might mention that
Caesar now for the first time shaved his beard, and held a magnificent
entertainment himself besides granting all the other citizens a festival
at public expense. He also kept his chin smooth afterward, like the rest;
he was already beginning to conceive a passion for Livia, and for this
reason divorced at once Scribonia, who had borne him a daughter. Hence,
as the expenditures grew far greater than before, and the revenues were
not anywhere sufficient but at this time came in in even smaller amounts
by reason of the factional disputes, they introduced certain new taxes;
and they enrolled in the senate as many persons as possible, not only
from among the allies or soldiers, or sons of freedmen, but even slaves.
At any rate one Maximus, when about to become quaestor, was recognized by
his master and taken away. And he incurred no injury through having dared
to stand for the office: but another who had been caught serving as a
praetor, was hurled down the rocks of the Capitol, having been
first freed, that there might be some legal justification for his
punishment[46].

[-35-] The expedition which Antony was getting in readiness against the
Parthians afforded them some excuse for the mass of prospective senators.
The same plea permitted them to extend all the offices for a number of
years and that of consul to eight full years, rewarding some of those who
had cooeperated with them, and bringing others to trial. They chose not
two annual consuls, as had been the custom, but now for the first time
several, and on the very day of the elections. Formerly, to be sure, some
had held office after others who had neither died nor been removed for
disenfranchisement or in any other way: but those persons had become
officials as suited those who had been elected for the entire year,
whereas now no magistrate was chosen to serve for a year, but first one,
then another would be appointed for different divisions of the entire
time. Also the men first to enter upon office were accustomed to hold the
title of the consulship through the entire year as is now done: the rest
were accorded the same title by the dwellers in the capital themselves
and by the people in the rest of Italy during each period of their office
(as is also now the custom), but those in outside nations knew few or
none of them and therefore called them lesser consuls.

[-36-] This was the situation at home when the leaders first made
proposals to Sextus through companions as to how and on what terms they
could effect a reconciliation; afterward the parties concerned held a
conference near Misenum. The two from the capital took their stand on the
land, the other on a kind of mound constructed for his safety in the sea,
by which it was purposely surrounded, not far from them. There was also
present the entire fleet of Sextus and the entire infantry force of the
other two; and not that merely, but the one command had been drawn up on
the shore and the other on the ships, both fully armed, so that this very
fact made it perfectly evident to all that it was from fear of their
accoutrement and from necessity, that the two rulers were making peace
because of the people and Sextus because of his adherents. The compact
was framed upon the following conditions,--that the deserters from
among the slaves should be free and that all those driven out, save
the assassins, should be restored. The latter, of course, they had to
exclude, but in reality several of them were destined to return. Sextus
himself, indeed, was thought to have been one of them. It was recorded,
at any rate, that all the rest save those mentioned should be allowed to
return under a general amnesty and with a right to a quarter of their
confiscated property; that tribuneships, praetorships and priesthoods
should be given to some of them immediately; that Sextus himself should
be chosen consul and be appointed augur, should obtain seventeen hundred
and fifty myriads of denarii from his paternal estate, and should govern
Sicily, Sardinia and Achaea for five years, not receiving deserters nor
acquiring more ships nor keeping any garrisons in Italy, but bending
his efforts to secure peace on the sea for the peninsula, and sending a
stated amount of grain to the people of the City. They limited him to
this period of time because they wished it to appear that they also were
holding merely a temporary and not an unending authority.

[-37-] After settling and drafting these compacts they deposited the
documents with the priestesses,--the vestal virgins,--and then exchanged
pledges and treated one another as friends. Upon this a tremendous and
inextinguishable shout arose from the mainland and the ships at once. For
many soldiers and many individuals who were present suddenly uttered a
cry in unison because they were terribly tired of the war and vehemently
desired peace. And the mountains resounded so that great panic and alarm
were spread, and many died of fright at the very reverberation, while
others perished by being trampled under foot and suffocated. Those who
were in the small boats did not wait to reach the land itself but jumped
out into the sea and the rest rushed out into the breakers. Meantime
they embraced one another while swimming and threw their arms around one
another's necks under water, making a diversified picture accompanied by
diversified sounds. Some knew that their relatives and associates were
living and seeing them present gave way to unrestrained joy. Others,
thinking that those dear to them had died previously, saw them now
unexpectedly and for a long time knew not what to do but were rendered
speechless, distrusting their sight yet praying that it might be true;
and they were not sure of them until they had called their names and had
heard them say something. They rejoiced as if the men had been brought
to life again, but as they were forced to share their pleasure with a
multitude they did not continue without tears. Again, some who were
unaware that their loved ones had perished and thought they were alive
and present sought for them and went about asking every one they met
regarding them. As long as they could learn nothing they were like
maniacs and were torn different ways, both hoping to find them and
fearing that they were dead,--not able to despair in view of their desire
nor to indulge in grief in view of their hope. On learning at last the
truth they would tear their hair and rend their clothing, calling upon
the lost by name as if they could hear anything and giving way to grief
as if their friends were just dead and lying there somewhere. And if any
of them were affected in no such way, they were at least disturbed by the
experiences of the rest. They either rejoiced with somebody in joy or
grieved with somebody in pain, and so, even if they were free from
personal interest, yet they could not remain indifferent on account of
their connection with the rest. As a result there was no possibility of
their being either sated or ashamed, because they were all affected in
the same way, and they spent the entire day as well as the greater part
of the night in this behavior.

[-38-] After this the parties chiefly concerned as well as the rest
received one another and inaugurated entertainments in turn, first
Sextus on the ship and then Caesar and Antony on the shore. Sextus so far
surpassed them in power that he would not disembark to meet them on the
mainland until they had gone aboard his boat. In the course of this
proceeding, however, he refused to murder them both in the small boat
with only a few followers, though he might easily have done so and Menas
advised it[47]. To Antony, who had possession of his ancestral home at
Carinae (the spot so named is in the city of Rome), he uttered a jest
in the happiest manner, saying that he was entertaining them at
Carinae,--that is, on the "keels of ships," which is the meaning of the
word in Latin. Nevertheless he did not act in any way as if he bore
malice toward them, and on the following day he was feasted in turn and
betrothed his daughter to Marcus Marcellus, the nephew of Caesar.

[-39-] This war, then, had been deferred: that of Labienus and the
Parthians came to an end in the following way. Antony himself returned
from Italy to Greece and delayed there a very long time, satisfying his
desires and harming the cities, to the end that they should be delivered
to Sextus in the weakest possible condition. He lived during this time in
many ways contrary to the customs of his country. He called himself the
younger Dionysus and insisted on being called so by others. When the
Athenians in view of this and his other behavior betrothed Athena to him,
he declared he accepted the marriage and he exacted from them a dowry of
one hundred myriads. While he was occupied in this way he sent Publius
Ventidius before him into Asia. The latter came upon Labienus before
his presence was announced and terrified him by the suddenness of his
approach and by his legions; for the Parthian leader was separated from
the members of his tribe and had only soldiers from the neighborhood.
Ventidius found that he would not even risk a conflict and so pushed him
back and pursued him into Syria, taking the lightest part of his fighting
force with him on the expedition. He overtook him near the Taurus range
and allowed him to proceed no farther, and they encamped there quietly
for several days. Labienus awaited the Parthians and Ventidius the
heavy-armed soldiers. [-40-] Both came at once during the same days and
Ventidius through fear of the barbarian cavalry remained on the high
ground, where he was encamped. The Parthians, because of their numbers
and because they had conquered once before, despised their opponents and
rode up to the hill at dawn, before joining Labienus; as no one came out
to meet them, they attacked it, charging straight up the incline. When
they were in that position the Romans rushed out and easily routed them,
as it was down-hill. Many of the assailants were killed in conflict, but
still more in turning back were confused with one another; for some had
already been routed and others were coming up. The survivors took refuge
not with Labienus but in Cilicia. Ventidius pursued them as far as the
camp, and there, seeing Labienus, stopped. The latter marshaled his
forces as if to offer him battle, but perceiving that his soldiers were
dejected by reason of the flight of the barbarians he did not then
venture any opposition and when night came he attempted to escape in
some direction. Ventidius learned beforehand from deserters of the
contemplated move and by posting ambushes killed many in the retreat and
took possession of the rest, who were abandoned by Labienus. The latter
by changing his dress reached safety and for some time escaped detection
in Cilicia. Later he was captured by Demetrius, a freedman of the former
Caesar, who had at this time been assigned to Cyprus by Antony. He learned
that Labienus was in hiding and made a search for him, which resulted in
the fugitive's arrest.

[-41-] After this Ventidius recovered Cilicia and attended himself to
the administration of this district, but sent ahead Pompaedius Silo with
cavalry to Amanus. This is a mountain on the border between Cilicia and
Syria, and contains a pass so narrow that a wall and gates were once
built across it and the place received its name from that fact. Silo,
however, found himself unable to occupy it and ran in danger of being
annihilated by Phranapates, lieutenant of Pacorus, who was guarding the
passage. And that would have been his fate, had not Ventidius by chance
come upon him when he was fighting and defended him. He attacked the
barbarians, who were not looking for his arrival and were likewise fewer
in number, and slew Phranapates and many others. In this way he gained
Syria deserted by the Parthians,--all except the district of the
Aradii,--and subsequently without effort occupied Palestine, by scaring
away from it King Antigonus. Besides accomplishing this he exacted large
sums of money from the rest individually, and large sums also from
Antigonus and Antiochus and Malchus the Nabathaean, because they had
given help to Pacorus. Ventidius himself received no reward for these
achievements from the senate, since he was acting not with full powers,
but as a lieutenant: Antony, however, obtained praise and thanksgivings.
As for the Aradii, they were afraid that they might have to pay the
penalty for what they had ventured against Antony, and would not come to
terms though they were besieged by him for a time; later they were with
difficulty captured by others.

[-40-] About this same time an uprising took place in Parthian Illyricum,
but was put down by Pollio after some conflicts. There was another on the
part of the Ceretani in Spain, and they were subjugated by Calvinus after
he had had some little preliminary successes and also a preliminary
setback; this last was occasioned by his lieutenant, who was ambuscaded
by the barbarians and deserted by his soldiers. Their leader undertook
no operation against the enemy until he had punished them. Calling
them together as if for some other purpose he had the rest of the army
surround them; and out of two companies of a hundred he chose out every
tenth man for punishment and chastised the centurion who was serving in
the so-called primus pilus as well as many others. After doing this and
gaining, like Marcus Crassus, a renown for his disciplining the army, he
set out against his opponents and with no great difficulty vanquished
them. He obtained a triumph in spite of the fact that Spain was assigned
to Caesar; for the rulers could at will grant the honors to those who
served as their lieutenants. The money customarily given by the cities
for the purpose Calvinus took only from the Spanish towns, and of it he
spent a part on the festival but the greater portion on the palace. It
had been burned down and he built it up, adorning it splendidly at the
dedication with various objects and with images, in particular, which he
asked from Caesar, implying that he would send them back. Though asked
for them later, he did not return them, excusing himself by a witticism.
Pretending that he had not enough assistants, he said: "Send some men and
take them." Caesar shrank from seizure of sacred things and hence allowed
them to remain as votive offerings.

[B.C. 38 (_a. u_. 716)]

[-43-] This is what happened at that time. Now in the consulship of
Appius Claudius and Gaius Norbanus, who were the first to have two
quaestors apiece as associates, the populace revolted against the tax
gatherers, who oppressed them severely, and came to blows with the men
themselves, their assistants, and the soldiers that helped them to exact
the money; and sixty-seven praetors one after another were appointed and
held office. One who was chosen to be quaestor while still reckoned as
a child then on the next day obtained the standing of a iuvenis: and
another person who had been enrolled in the senate desired to fight in
the arena. He was prevented, however, from doing this, and an act was
passed prohibiting any senator from taking part in gladiatorial combats,
any slave from serving as lictor, and any burning of dead bodies from
being carried on within fifteen stadia of the city.

Many things of a portentous nature had come to pass even before that time
(such as olive oil spouting beside the Tiber), and many, also, precisely
then. The tent of Romulus was burned as a result of some ritual which the
pontifices were performing in it; a statue of Virtus, standing before
some of the gates, fell upon its face; and certain persons rendered
inspired by the Mother of the Gods declared that the goddess was angry
with them. On this point the Sibylline books were consulted. They made
the same statements and prescribed that the statue be taken down to
the sea and purified with water from it. In obedience to the order the
goddess went very far indeed out into the surges, where she remained an
extremely long time and returned only quite late,--her action causing the
Romans no little fear, so that they did not recover courage until four
palm trees grew up round about her temple and in the Forum.

[-44-] Besides these occurrences at the time Caesar married Livia. She was
the daughter of Livius Drusus, who had been among those proscribed by the
tablet and had committed suicide after the defeat in Macedonia, and
the wife of Nero, whom she had accompanied in his flight, as has been
related. She was also in the sixth month with child from him. When Caesar
accordingly hesitated and enquired of the pontifices whether it was
permissible to wed her while pregnant, they answered that if the origin
of the foetus were doubtful, the marriage should be put off, but if it
were definitely admitted, nothing prevented an immediate consummation.
Perhaps they really found this among the ordinances of the forefathers,
but certainly they would have said so even had they not found it. The
woman was given in marriage by her husband himself, as some father might
do. And the following incident occurred at the marriage feast. One of the
prattling boys, such as women frequently keep about them naked to play
with,[48] on seeing Livia reclining in one place with Caesar and Nero in
another with some man, went up to her and said: "What are you doing here,
mistress? For your husband," pointing him out, "is reclining over there."
After these events, when the woman went to live with Caesar, she gave
birth to Claudius Drusus Nero. Caesar took him and sent him to his father,
making this entry in the records, that Caesar returned to its father Nero
the child borne by Livia, his own wife. Nero died not long after and left
Caesar himself as guardian to this boy and to Tiberius: the populace had a
good deal to say about this, among other things that the prosperous have
children in three months; and this saying passed into a proverb.

[-45-] At just about the same time that this was going on in the city
Bogud the Moor sailed to Spain, acting either on instructions from Antony
or on his own motion, and did much damage, receiving also considerable
injury in return: meantime the people of his own land in the neighborhood
of Tingi rose against him, and so he evacuated Spain but failed to win
back his own domain. For the adherents of Caesar in Spain and Bocchus came
to the aid of the rebels and proved too much for him. Bogud departed to
join Antony, while Bocchus forthwith took possession of his kingdom, and
this act was afterward confirmed by Caesar. The Tingitanians were given
citizenship.

At this time and even earlier Sextus and Caesar had broken out into war;
for since they had come to an agreement not of their own free will or
choice but under compulsion, they did not abide by it any time at all,
so to speak, but broke the truce at once and stood opposed. They were
destined to come to war under any conditions, even if they had found no
excuse; their alleged grievances, however, were the following. Menas, who
was at this time still in Sardinia, as if he were a kind of praetor, had
incurred the suspicion of Sextus by his release of Helenus and because he
had been in communication with Caesar, and he was slandered to some extent
by his peers, who envied his position of power. He was therefore summoned
by Sextus on the pretext that he should give an account of the grain and
money of which he had charge; instead of obeying he seized and killed
the men sent to him on this errand, and after negotiating with Caesar
