love till the doom of death fold us round."

Thus he spake; and her soul melted within her to hear his words;
nevertheless she shuddered to behold the deeds of destruction to come.
Poor wretch! Not long was she destined to refuse a home in Hellas. For
thus Hera devised it, that Aeaean Medea might come to Iolcus for a bane
to Pelias, forsaking her native land.

And now her handmaids, glancing at them from a distance, were grieving
in silence; and the time of day required that the maiden should return
home to her mother's side. But she thought not yet of departing, for her
soul delighted both in his beauty and in his winsome words, but Aeson's
son took heed, and spake at last, though late: "It is time to depart,
lest the sunlight sink before we know it, and some stranger notice all;
but again will we come and meet here."

So did they two make trial of one another thus far with gentle words;
and thereafter parted. Jason hastened to return in joyous mood to his
comrades and the ship, she to her handmaids; and they all together came
near to meet her, but she marked them not at all as they thronged
around. For her soul had soared aloft amid the clouds. And her feet of
their own accord mounted the swift chariot, and with one hand she took
the reins, and with the other the whip of cunning workmanship, to drive
the mules; and they rushed hasting to the city and the palace. And when
she was come Chalciope in grief for her sons questioned her; but Medea,
distraught by swiftly-changing thoughts, neither heard her words nor was
eager to speak in answer to her questions. But she sat upon a low stool
at the foot of her couch, bending down, her cheek leaning on her left
hand, and her eyes were wet with tears as she pondered what an evil deed
she had taken part in by her counsels.

Now when Aeson's son had joined his comrades again in the spot where he
had left them when he departed, he set out to go with them, telling them
all the story, to the gathering of the heroes; and together they
approached the ship. And when they saw Jason they embraced him and
questioned him. And he told to all the counsels of the maiden and showed
the dread charm; but Idas alone of his comrades sat apart biting down
his wrath; and the rest joyous in heart, at the hour when the darkness
of night stayed them, peacefully took thought for themselves. But at
daybreak they sent two men to go to Aeetes and ask for the seed, first
Telamon himself, dear to Ares, and with him Aethalides, Hermes' famous
son. So they went and made no vain journey; but when they came, lordly
Aeetes gave them for the contest the fell teeth of the Aonian dragon
which Cadmus found in Ogygian Thebes when he came seeking for Europa and
there slew--the warder of the spring of Ares. There he settled by the
guidance of the heifer whom Apollo by his prophetic word granted him to
lead him on his way. But the teeth the Tritonian goddess tore away from
the dragon's jaws and bestowed as a gift upon Aeetes and the slayer. And
Agenor's son, Cadmus, sowed them on the Aonian plains and founded an
earthborn people of all who were left from the spear when Ares did the
reaping; and the teeth Aeetes then readily gave to be borne to the ship,
for he deemed not that Jason would bring the contest to an end, even
though he should cast the yoke upon the oxen.

Far away in the west the sun was sailing beneath the dark earth, beyond
the furthest hills of the Aethiopians; and Night was laying the yoke
upon her steeds; and the heroes were preparing their beds by the
hawsers. But Jason, as soon as the stars of Helice, the bright-gleaming
bear, had set, and the air had all grown still under heaven, went to a
desert spot, like some stealthy thief, with all that was needful; for
beforehand in the daytime had he taken thought for everything; and Argus
came bringing a ewe and milk from the flock; and them he took from the
ship. But when the hero saw a place which was far away from the tread of
men, in a clear meadow beneath the open sky, there first of all he
bathed his tender body reverently in the sacred river; and round him he
placed a dark robe, which Hypsipyle of Lemnos had given him aforetime, a
memorial of many a loving embrace. Then he dug a pit in the ground of a
cubit's depth and heaped up billets of wood, and over it he cut the
throat of the sheep, and duly placed the carcase above; and he kindled
the logs placing fire beneath, and poured over them mingled libations,
calling on Hecate Brimo to aid him in the contests. And when he had
called on her he drew back; and she heard him, the dread goddess, from
the uttermost depths and came to the sacrifice of Aeson's son; and round
her horrible serpents twined themselves among the oak boughs; and there
was a gleam of countless torches; and sharply howled around her the
hounds of hell. All the meadows trembled at her step; and the nymphs
that haunt the marsh and the river shrieked, all who dance round that
mead of Amarantian Phasis. And fear seized Aeson's son, but not even so
did he turn round as his feet bore him forth, till he came back to his
comrades; and now early dawn arose and shed her light above snowy
Caucasus.

Then Aeetes arrayed his breast in the stiff corslet which Ares gave him
when he had slain Phlegraean Mimas with his own hands; and upon his head
he placed a golden helmet with four plumes, gleaming like the sun's
round light when he first rises from Ocean. And he wielded his shield of
many hides, and his spear, terrible, resistless; none of the heroes
could have withstood its shock now that they had left behind Heracles
far away, who alone could have met it in battle. For the king his
well-fashioned chariot of swift steeds was held near at hand by
Phaethon, for him to mount; and he mounted, and held the reins in his
hands. Then from the city he drove along the broad highway, that he
might be present at the contest; and with him countless multitude rushed
forth. And as Poseidon rides, mounted in his chariot, to the Isthmian
contest or to Taenarus, or to Lerna's water, or through the grove of
Hyantian Onchestus, and thereafter passes even to Calaureia with his
steeds, and the Haemonian rock or well-wooded Geraestus; even so was
Aeetes, lord of the Colchians, to behold.

Meanwhile, prompted by Medea, Jason steeped the charm in water and
sprinkled with it his shield and sturdy spear, and sword; and his
comrades round him made proof of his weapons with might and main, but
could not bend that spear even a little, but it remained firm in their
stalwart hands unbroken as before. But in furious rage with them Idas,
Aphareus' son, with his great sword hewed at the spear near the butt,
and the edge leapt back repelled by the shock, like a hammer from the
anvil; and the heroes shouted with joy for their hope in the contest.
And then he sprinkled his body, and terrible prowess entered into him,
unspeakable, dauntless; and his hands on both sides thrilled vigorously
as they swelled with strength. And as when a warlike steed eager for the
fight neighs and beats the ground with his hoof, while rejoicing he
lifts his neck on high with ears erect; in such wise did Aeson's son
rejoice in the strength of his limbs. And often hither and thither did
he leap high in air tossing in his hands his shield of bronze and ashen
spear. Thou wouldst say that wintry lightning flashing from the gloomy
sky kept on darting forth from the clouds what time they bring with them
their blackest rainstorm. Not long after that were the heroes to hold
back from the contests; but sitting in rows on their benches they sped
swiftly on to the plain of Ares. And it lay in front of them on the
opposite side of the city, as far off as is the turning-post that a
chariot must reach from the starting-point, when the kinsmen of a dead
king appoint funeral games for footmen and horsemen. And they found
Aeetes and the tribes of the Colchians; these were stationed on the
Caucasian heights, but the king by the winding brink of the river.

Now Aeson's son, as soon as his comrades had made the hawsers fast,
leapt from the ship, and with spear and shield came forth to the
contest; and at the same time he took the gleaming helmet of bronze
filled with sharp teeth, and his sword girt round his shoulders, his
body stripped, in somewise resembling Ares and in somewise Apollo of the
golden sword. And gazing over the field he saw the bulls' yoke of bronze
and near it the plough, all of one piece, of stubborn adamant. Then he
came near, and fixed his sturdy spear upright on its butt, and taking
his helmet off leant it against the spear. And he went forward with
shield alone to examine the countless tracks of the bulls, and they from
some unseen lair beneath the earth, where was their strong steading,
wrapt in murky smoke, both rushed out together, breathing forth flaming
fire. And sore afraid were the heroes at the sight. But Jason, setting
wide his feet, withstood their onset, as in the sea a rocky reef
withstands the waves tossed by the countless blasts. Then in front of
him he held his shield; and both the bulls with loud bellowing attacked
him with their mighty horns; nor did they stir him a jot by their onset.
And as when through the holes of the furnace the armourers' bellows anon
gleam brightly, kindling the ravening flame, and anon cease from
blowing, and a terrible roar rises from the fire when it darts up from
below; so the bulls roared, breathing forth swift flame from their
mouths, while the consuming heat played round him, smiting like
lightning; but the maiden's charms protected him. Then grasping the tip
of the horn of the right-hand bull, he dragged it mightily with all his
strength to bring it near the yoke of bronze, and forced it down on to
its knees, suddenly striking with his foot the foot of bronze. So also
he threw the other bull on to its knees as it rushed upon him, and smote
it down with one blow. And throwing to the ground his broad shield, he
held them both down where they had fallen on their fore-knees, as he
strode from side to side, now here, now there, and rushed swiftly
through the flame. But Aeetes marvelled at the hero's might. And
meantime the sons of Tyndareus--for long since had it been thus ordained
for them--near at hand gave him the yoke from the ground to cast round
them. Then tightly did he bind their necks; and lifting the pole of
bronze between them, he fastened it to the yoke by its golden tip. So
the twin heroes started back from the fire to the ship. But Jason took
up again his shield and cast it on his back behind him, and grasped the
strong helmet filled with sharp teeth, and his resistless spear,
wherewith, like some ploughman with a Pelasgian goad, he pricked the
bulls beneath, striking their flanks; and very firmly did he guide the
well fitted plough handle, fashioned of adamant.

The bulls meantime raged exceedingly, breathing forth furious flame of
fire; and their breath rose up like the roar of blustering winds, in
fear of which above all seafaring men furl their large sail. But not
long after that they moved on at the bidding of the spear; and behind
them the rugged fallow was broken up, cloven by the might of the bulls
and the sturdy ploughman. Then terribly groaned the clods withal along
the furrows of the plough as they were rent, each a man's burden; and
Jason followed, pressing down the cornfield with firm foot; and far from
him he ever sowed the teeth along the clods as each was ploughed,
turning his head back for fear lest the deadly crop of earthborn men
should rise against him first; and the bulls toiled onwards treading
with their hoofs of bronze.

But when the third part of the day was still left as it wanes from dawn,
and wearied labourers call for the sweet hour of unyoking to come to
them straightway, then the fallow was ploughed by the tireless
ploughman, four plough-gates though it was; and he loosed the plough
from the oxen. Them he scared in flight towards the plain; but he went
back again to the ship, while he still saw the furrows free of the
earthborn men. And all round his comrades heartened him with their
shouts. And in the helmet he drew from the river's stream and quenched
his thirst with the water. Then he bent his knees till they grew supple,
and filled his mighty heart with courage, raging like a boar, when it
sharpens its teeth against the hunters, while from its wrathful mouth
plenteous foam drips to the ground. By now the earthborn men were
springing up over all the field; and the plot of Ares, the death-dealer,
bristled with sturdy shields and double-pointed spears and shining
helmets; and the gleam reached Olympus from beneath, flashing through
the air. And as when abundant snow has fallen on the earth and the storm
blasts have dispersed the wintry clouds under the murky night, and all
the hosts of the stars appear shining through the gloom; so did those
warriors shine springing up above the earth. But Jason bethought him of
the counsels of Medea full of craft, and seized from the plain a huge
round boulder, a terrible quoit of Ares Enyalius; four stalwart youths
could not have raised it from the ground even a little. Taking it in his
hands he threw it with a rush far away into their midst; and himself
crouched unseen behind his shield, with full confidence. And the
Colchians gave a loud cry, like the roar of the sea when it beats upon
sharp crags; and speechless amazement seized Aeetes at the rush of the
sturdy quoit. And the Earthborn, like fleet-footed hounds, leaped upon
one another and slew with loud yells; and on earth their mother they
fell beneath their own spears, likes pines or oaks, which storms of wind
beat down. And even as a fiery star leaps from heaven, trailing a furrow
of light, a portent to men, whoever see it darting with a gleam through
the dusky sky; in such wise did Aeson's son rush upon the earthborn men,
and he drew from the sheath his bare sword, and smote here and there,
mowing them down, many on the belly and side, half risen to the air--and
some that had risen as far as the shoulders--and some just standing
upright, and others even now rushing to battle. And as when a fight is
stirred up concerning boundaries, and a husbandman, in fear lest they
should ravage his fields, seizes in his hand a curved sickle, newly
sharpened, and hastily cuts the unripe crop, and waits not for it to be
parched in due season by the beams of the sun; so at that time did Jason
cut down the crop of the Earthborn; and the furrows were filled with
blood, as the channels of a spring with water. And they fell, some on
their faces biting the rough clod of earth with their teeth, some on
their backs, and others on their hands and sides, like to sea-monsters
to behold. And many, smitten before raising their feet from the earth,
bowed down as far to the ground as they had risen to the air, and rested
there with the damp of death on their brows. Even so, I ween, when Zeus
has sent a measureless rain, new planted orchard-shoots droop to the
ground, cut off by the root--the toil of gardening men; but heaviness of
heart and deadly anguish come to the owner of the farm, who planted
them; so at that time did bitter grief come upon the heart of King
Aeetes. And he went back to the city among the Colchians, pondering how
he might most quickly oppose the heroes. And the day died, and Jason's
contest was ended.




BOOK IV


SUMMARY OF BOOK IV

     Invocation of the Muse (1-5).--Grief of Medea, who flies from the
     palace during the night and joins the Argonauts (6-91).--By the aid
     of Medea, Jason seizes and carries off the golden fleece, after
     which the Argonauts depart (92-211).--Pursued by the Colchians,
     they land in Paphlagonia, where Argus shows them the route to take
     (212-293).--The Argonauts sail up the Ister, by a branch of which
     they make their way into the Adriatic, where they find their
     progress barred by the Colchians, who had come by a shorter route
     (294-337).--Agreement between the Argonauts and the Colchians:
     Medea's reproaches to Jason (338-451).--Murder of Apsyrtus by
     Jason: the Colchians give up the pursuit (452-551).--The Argonauts
     sail along the Eridanus into the Rhone, and reach the abode of
     Circe in Italy (552-684).--Jason and Medea are purified by Circe:
     the Argonauts pass the isle of the Sirens, Scylla, Charybdis, and
     the Planctae (685-981).--Arrival among the Phaeacians: here other
     Colchians reclaim Medea, and, to prevent her surrender, her
     marriage with Jason is celebrated (982-1169).--Departure of the
     Argonauts, who are driven by a storm on to the Syrtes: they carry
     Argo on their shoulders to the Tritonian lake (1170-1484).--Deaths
     of Canthus and Mopsus (1485-1536).--The god Triton conducts Argo
     from the lake into the sea (1537-1637).--Episode of the giant Talos
     in Crete (1638-1693).--Arrival at the isle Anaphe: the dream of
     Euphemus, which is interpreted by Jason: arrival at Aegina and at
     Pagasae, the end of the voyage (1694-1781).


BOOK IV


Now do thou thyself, goddess Muse, daughter of Zeus, tell of the labour
and wiles of the Colchian maiden. Surely my soul within me wavers with
speechless amazement as I ponder whether I should call it the lovesick
grief of mad passion or a panic flight, through which she left the
Colchian folk.

Aeetes all night long with the bravest captains of his people was
devising in his halls sheer treachery against the heroes, with fierce
wrath in his heart at the issue of the hateful contest; nor did he deem
at all that these things were being accomplished without the knowledge
of his daughters.

But into Medea's heart Hera cast most grievous fear; and she trembled
like a nimble fawn whom the baying of hounds hath terrified amid the
thicket of a deep copse. For at once she truly forboded that the aid she
had given was not hidden from her father, and that quickly she would
fill up the cup of woe. And she dreaded the guilty knowledge of her
handmaids; her eyes were filled with fire and her ears rung with a
terrible cry. Often did she clutch at her throat, and often did she drag
out her hair by the roots and groan in wretched despair. There on that
very day the maiden would have tasted the drugs and perished and so have
made void the purposes of Hera, had not the goddess driven her, all
bewildered, to flee with the sons of Phrixus; and her fluttering soul
within her was comforted; and then she poured from her bosom all the
drugs back again into the casket. Then she kissed her bed, and the
folding-doors on both sides, and stroked the walls, and tearing away in
her hands a long tress of hair, she left it in the chamber for her
mother, a memorial of her maidenhood, and thus lamented with passionate
voice:

"I go, leaving this long tress here in my stead, O mother mine; take
this farewell from me as I go far hence; farewell Chalciope, and all my
home. Would that the sea, stranger, had dashed thee to pieces, ere thou
earnest to the Colchian land!"

Thus she spake, and from her eyes shed copious tears. And as a bondmaid
steals away from a wealthy house, whom fate has lately severed from her
native land, nor yet has she made trial of grievous toil, but still
unschooled to misery and shrinking in terror from slavish tasks, goes
about beneath the cruel hands of a mistress; even so the lovely maiden
rushed forth from her home. But to her the bolts of the doors gave way
self-moved, leaping backwards at the swift strains of her magic song.
And with bare feet she sped along the narrow paths, with her left hand
holding her robe over her brow to veil her face and fair cheeks, and
with her right lifting up the hem of her tunic. Quickly along the dark
track, outside the towers of the spacious city, did she come in fear;
nor did any of the warders note her, but she sped on unseen by them.
Thence she was minded to go to the temple; for well she knew the way,
having often aforetime wandered there in quest of corpses and noxious
roots of the earth, as a sorceress is wont to do; and her soul fluttered
with quivering fear. And the Titanian goddess, the moon, rising from a
far land, beheld her as she fled distraught, and fiercely exulted over
her, and thus spake to her own heart:

"Not I alone then stray to the Latmian cave, nor do I alone burn with
love for fair Endymion; oft times with thoughts of love have I been
driven away by thy crafty spells, in order that in the darkness of night
thou mightest work thy sorcery at ease, even the deeds dear to thee. And
now thou thyself too hast part in a like mad passion; and some god of
affliction has given thee Jason to be thy grievous woe. Well, go on, and
steel thy heart, wise though thou be, to take up thy burden of pain,
fraught with many sighs."

"Thus spake the goddess; but swiftly the maiden's feet bore her, hasting
on. And gladly did she gain the high bank of the river and beheld on the
opposite side the gleam of fire, which all night long the heroes were
kindling in joy at the contest's issue. Then through the gloom, with
clear-pealing voice from across the stream, she called on Phrontis, the
youngest of Phrixus' sons, and he with his brothers and Aeson's son
recognised the maiden's _voice_; and in silence his comrades wondered
when they knew that it was so in truth. Thrice she called, and thrice at
the bidding of the company Phrontis called out in reply; and meantime
the heroes were rowing with swift-moving oars in search of her. Not yet
were they casting the ship's hawsers upon the opposite bank, when Jason
with light feet leapt to land from the deck above, and after him
Phrontis and Argus, sons of Phrixus, leapt to the ground; and she,
clasping their knees with both hands, thus addressed them:

"Save me, the hapless one, my friends, from Aeetes, and yourselves too,
for all is brought to light, nor doth any remedy come. But let us flee
upon the ship; before the king mounts his swift chariot. And I will lull
to sleep the guardian serpent and give you the fleece of gold; but do
thou, stranger, amid thy comrades make the gods witness of the vows thou
hast taken on thyself for my sake; and now that I have fled far from my
country, make me not a mark for blame and dishonour for want of
kinsmen."

She spake in anguish; but greatly did the heart of Aeson's son rejoice,
and at once, as she fell at his knees, he raised her gently and embraced
her, and spake words of comfort: "Lady, let Zeus of Olympus himself be
witness to my oath, and Hera, queen of marriage, bride of Zeus, that I
will set thee in my halls my own wedded wife, when we have reached the
land of Hellas on our return."

Thus he spake, and straightway clasped her right hand in his; and she
bade them row the swift ship to the sacred grove near at hand, in order
that, while it was still night, they might seize and carry off the
fleece against the will of Aeetes. Word and deed were one to the eager
crew. For they took her on board, and straightway thrust the ship from
shore; and loud was the din as the chieftains strained at their oars,
but she, starting back, held out her hands in despair towards the shore.
But Jason spoke cheering words and restrained her grief.

Now at the hour when men have cast sleep from their eyes--huntsmen, who,
trusting to their bounds, never slumber away the end of night, but avoid
the light of dawn lest, smiting with its white beams, it efface the
track and scent of the quarry--then did Aeson's son and the maiden step
forth from the ship over a grassy spot, the "Ram's couch" as men call
it, where it first bent its wearied knees in rest, bearing on its back
the Minyan son of Athamas. And close by, all smirched with soot, was the
base of the altar, which the Aeolid Phrixus once set up to Zeus, the
aider of fugitives, when he sacrificed the golden wonder at the bidding
