'As thou hast learned!--Can wisdom attain so far?'

'Wilt thou prove my knowledge, Ione, and behold the representation of
thine own fate?  It is a drama more striking than those of AEschylus: it
is one I have prepared for thee, if thou wilt see the shadows perform
their part.'

The Neapolitan trembled; she thought of Glaucus, and sighed as well as
trembled: were their destinies to be united?  Half incredulous, half
believing, half awed, half alarmed by the words of her strange host, she
remained for some moments silent, and then answered:

'It may revolt--it may terrify; the knowledge of the future will perhaps
only embitter the present!'

'Not so, Ione.  I have myself looked upon thy future lot, and the ghosts
of thy Future bask in the gardens of Elysium: amidst the asphodel and
the rose they prepare the garlands of thy sweet destiny, and the Fates,
so harsh to others, weave only for thee the web of happiness and love.
Wilt thou then come and behold thy doom, so that thou mayest enjoy it
beforehand?'

Again the heart of Ione murmured 'Glaucus'; she uttered a half-audible
assent; the Egyptian rose, and taking her by the hand, he led her across
the banquet-room--the curtains withdrew as by magic hands, and the music
broke forth in a louder and gladder strain; they passed a row of
columns, on either side of which fountains cast aloft their fragrant
waters; they descended by broad and easy steps into a garden.  The eve
had commenced; the moon was already high in heaven, and those sweet
flowers that sleep by day, and fill, with ineffable odorous, the airs of
night, were thickly scattered amidst alleys cut through the star-lit
foliage; or, gathered in baskets, lay like offerings at the feet of the
frequent statues that gleamed along their path.

'Whither wouldst thou lead me, Arbaces?' said Ione, wonderingly.

'But yonder,' said he, pointing to a small building which stood at the
end of the vista.  'It is a temple consecrated to the Fates--our rites
require such holy ground.'

They passed into a narrow hall, at the end of which hung a sable
curtain. Arbaces lifted it; Ione entered, and found herself in total
darkness.

'Be not alarmed,' said the Egyptian, 'the light will rise instantly.'
While he so spoke, a soft, and warm, and gradual light diffused itself
around; as it spread over each object, Ione perceived that she was in an
apartment of moderate size, hung everywhere with black; a couch with
draperies of the same hue was beside her.  In the centre of the room was
a small altar, on which stood a tripod of bronze.  At one side, upon a
lofty column of granite, was a colossal head of the blackest marble,
which she perceived, by the crown of wheat-ears that encircled the brow,
represented the great Egyptian goddess.  Arbaces stood before the altar:
he had laid his garland on the shrine, and seemed occupied with pouring
into the tripod the contents of a brazen vase; suddenly from that tripod
leaped into life a blue, quick, darting, irregular flame; the Egyptian
drew back to the side of Ione, and muttered some words in a language
unfamiliar to her ear; the curtain at the back of the altar waved
tremulously to and fro--it parted slowly, and in the aperture which was
thus made, Ione beheld an indistinct and pale landscape, which gradually
grew brighter and clearer as she gazed; at length she discovered plainly
trees, and rivers, and meadows, and all the beautiful diversity of the
richest earth.  At length, before the landscape, a dim shadow glided; it
rested opposite to Ione; slowly the same charm seemed to operate upon it
as over the rest of the scene; it took form and shape, and lo!--in its
feature and in its form Ione beheld herself!

Then the scene behind the spectre faded away, and was succeeded by the
representation of a gorgeous palace; a throne was raised in the centre
of its hall, the dim forms of slaves and guards were ranged around it,
and a pale hand held over the throne the likeness of a diadem.

A new actor now appeared; he was clothed from head to foot in a dark
robe--his face was concealed--he knelt at the feet of the shadowy
Ione--he clasped her hand--he pointed to the throne, as if to invite her
to ascend it.

The Neapolitan's heart beat violently.  'Shall the shadow disclose
itself?' whispered a voice beside her--the voice of Arbaces.

'Ah, yes!' answered Ione, softly.

Arbaces raised his hand--the spectre seemed to drop the mantle that
concealed its form--and Ione shrieked--it was Arbaces himself that thus
knelt before her.

'This is, indeed, thy fate!' whispered again the Egyptian's voice in her
ear.  'And thou art destined to be the bride of Arbaces.'

Ione started--the black curtain closed over the phantasmagoria: and
Arbaces himself--the real, the living Arbaces--was at her feet.

'Oh, Ione!' said he, passionately gazing upon her, 'listen to one who
has long struggled vainly with his love.  I adore thee!  The Fates do
not lie--thou art destined to be mine--I have sought the world around,
and found none like thee.  From my youth upward, I have sighed for such
as thou art. I have dreamed till I saw thee--I wake, and I behold thee.
Turn not away from me, Ione; think not of me as thou hast thought; I am
not that being--cold, insensate, and morose, which I have seemed to
thee.  Never woman had lover so devoted--so passionate as I will be to
Ione.  Do not struggle in my clasp: see--I release thy hand.  Take it
from me if thou wilt--well be it so!  But do not reject me, Ione--do not
rashly reject--judge of thy power over him whom thou canst thus
transform.  I, who never knelt to mortal being, kneel to thee.  I, who
have commanded fate, receive from thee my own.  Ione, tremble not, thou
art my queen--my goddess--be my bride!  All the wishes thou canst form
shall be fulfilled. The ends of the earth shall minister to thee--pomp,
power, luxury, shall be thy slaves.  Arbaces shall have no ambition,
save the pride of obeying thee. Ione, turn upon me those eyes--shed upon
me thy smile. Dark is my soul when thy face is hid from it: shine over
me, my sun--my heaven--my daylight!--Ione, Ione--do not reject my love!'

Alone, and in the power of this singular and fearful man, Ione was not
yet terrified; the respect of his language, the softness of his voice,
reassured her; and, in her own purity, she felt protection.  But she was
confused--astonished: it was some moments before she could recover the
power of reply.

'Rise, Arbaces!' said she at length; and she resigned to him once more
her hand, which she as quickly withdrew again, when she felt upon it the
burning pressure of his lips.  'Rise! and if thou art serious, if thy
language be in earnest...'

'If!' said he tenderly.

'Well, then, listen to me: you have been my guardian, my friend, my
monitor; for this new character I was not prepared--think not,' she
added quickly, as she saw his dark eyes glitter with the fierceness of
his passion--'think not that I scorn--that I am untouched--that I am not
honored by this homage; but, say--canst thou hear me calmly?'

'Ay, though thy words were lightning, and could blast me!'

'I love another!' said Ione, blushingly, but in a firm voice.

'By the gods--by hell!' shouted Arbaces, rising to his fullest height;
'dare not tell me that--dare not mock me--it is impossible!--Whom hast
thou seen--whom known?  Oh, Ione, it is thy woman's invention, thy
woman's art that speaks--thou wouldst gain time; I have surprised--I
have terrified thee.  Do with me as thou wilt--say that thou lovest not
me; but say not that thou lovest another!'

'Alas!' began Ione; and then, appalled before his sudden and
unlooked-for violence, she burst into tears.

Arbaces came nearer to her--his breath glowed fiercely on her cheek; he
wound his arms round her--she sprang from his embrace.  In the struggle
a tablet fell from her bosom on the ground: Arbaces perceived, and
seized it--it was the letter that morning received from Glaucus.  Ione
sank upon the couch, half dead with terror.

Rapidly the eyes of Arbaces ran over the writing; the Neapolitan did not
dare to gaze upon him: she did not see the deadly paleness that came
over his countenance--she marked not his withering frown, nor the
quivering of his lip, nor the convulsions that heaved his breast.  He
read it to the end, and then, as the letter fell from his hand, he said,
in a voice of deceitful calmness:

'Is the writer of this the man thou lovest?'

Ione sobbed, but answered not.

'Speak!' he rather shrieked than said.

'It is--it is!

'And his name--it is written here--his name is Glaucus!'

Ione, clasping her hands, looked round as for succour or escape.

'Then hear me,' said Arbaces, sinking his voice into a whisper; 'thou
shalt go to thy tomb rather than to his arms!  What! thinkest thou
Arbaces will brook a rival such as this puny Greek?  What! thinkest thou
that he has watched the fruit ripen, to yield it to another!  Pretty
fool--no!  Thou art mine--all--only mine: and thus--thus I seize and
claim thee!' As he spoke, he caught Ione in his arms; and, in that
ferocious grasp, was all the energy--less of love than of revenge.

But to Ione despair gave supernatural strength: she again tore herself
from him--she rushed to that part of the room by which she had
entered--she half withdrew the curtain--he had seized her--again she
broke away from him--and fell, exhausted, and with a loud shriek, at the
base of the column which supported the head of the Egyptian goddess.
Arbaces paused for a moment, as if to regain his breath; and thence once
more darted upon his prey.

At that instant the curtain was rudely torn aside, the Egyptian felt a
fierce and strong grasp upon his shoulder.  He turned--he beheld before
him the flashing eyes of Glaucus, and the pale, worn, but menacing,
countenance of Apaecides.  'Ah,' he muttered, as he glared from one to
the other, 'what Fury hath sent ye hither?'

'Ate,' answered Glaucus; and he closed at once with the Egyptian.
Meanwhile, Apaecides raised his sister, now lifeless, from the ground;
his strength, exhausted by a mind long overwrought, did not suffice to
bear her away, light and delicate though her shape: he placed her,
therefore, on the couch, and stood over her with a brandishing knife,
watching the contest between Glaucus and the Egyptian, and ready to
plunge his weapon in the bosom of Arbaces should he be victorious in the
struggle.  There is, perhaps, nothing on earth so terrible as the naked
and unarmed contest of animal strength, no weapon but those which Nature
supplies to rage.  Both the antagonists were now locked in each other's
grasp--the hand of each seeking the throat of the other--the face drawn
back--the fierce eyes flashing--the muscles strained--the veins
swelled--the lips apart--the teeth set--both were strong beyond the
ordinary power of men, both animated by relentless wrath; they coiled,
they wound, around each other; they rocked to and fro--they swayed from
end to end of their confined arena--they uttered cries of ire and
revenge--they were now before the altar--now at the base of the column
where the struggle had commenced: they drew back for breath--Arbaces
leaning against the column--Glaucus a few paces apart.

'O ancient goddess!' exclaimed Arbaces, clasping the column, and raising
his eyes toward the sacred image it supported, 'protect thy
chosen--proclaim they vengeance against this thing of an upstart creed,
who with sacrilegious violence profanes thy resting-place and assails
thy servant.'

As he spoke, the still and vast features of the goddess seemed suddenly
to glow with life; through the black marble, as through a transparent
veil, flushed luminously a crimson and burning hue; around the head
played and darted coruscations of livid lightning; the eyes became like
balls of lurid fire, and seemed fixed in withering and intolerable wrath
upon the countenance of the Greek.  Awed and appalled by this sudden and
mystic answer to the prayer of his foe, and not free from the hereditary
superstitions of his race, the cheeks of Glaucus paled before that
strange and ghastly animation of the marble--his knees knocked
together--he stood, seized with a divine panic, dismayed, aghast, half
unmanned before his foe! Arbaces gave him not breathing time to recover
his stupor: 'Die, wretch!' he shouted, in a voice of thunder, as he
sprang upon the Greek; 'the Mighty Mother claims thee as a living
sacrifice!' Taken thus by surprise in the first consternation of his
superstitious fears, the Greek lost his footing--the marble floor was as
smooth as glass--he slid--he fell. Arbaces planted his foot on the
breast of his fallen foe.  Apaecides, taught by his sacred profession,
as well as by his knowledge of Arbaces, to distrust all miraculous
interpositions, had not shared the dismay of his companion; he rushed
forward--his knife gleamed in the air--the watchful Egyptian caught his
arm as it descended--one wrench of his powerful hand tore the weapon
from the weak grasp of the priest--one sweeping blow stretched him to
the earth--with a loud and exulting yell Arbaces brandished the knife on
high. Glaucus gazed upon his impending fate with unwinking eyes, and in
the stern and scornful resignation of a fallen gladiator, when, at that
awful instant, the floor shook under them with a rapid and convulsive
throe--a mightier spirit than that of the Egyptian was abroad!--a giant
and crushing power, before which sunk into sudden impotence his passion
and his arts. IT woke--it stirred--that Dread Demon of the
Earthquake--laughing to scorn alike the magic of human guile and the
malice of human wrath.  As a Titan, on whom the mountains are piled, it
roused itself from the sleep of years, it moved on its tortured
couch--the caverns below groaned and trembled beneath the motion of its
limbs. In the moment of his vengeance and his power, the self-prized
demigod was humbled to his real clay.  Far and wide along the soil went
a hoarse and rumbling sound--the curtains of the chamber shook as at the
blast of a storm--the altar rocked--the tripod reeled, and high over the
place of contest, the column trembled and waved from side to side--the
sable head of the goddess tottered and fell from its pedestal--and as
the Egyptian stooped above his intended victim, right upon his bended
form, right between the shoulder and the neck, struck the marble mass!
The shock stretched him like the blow of death, at once, suddenly,
without sound or motion, or semblance of life, upon the floor,
apparently crushed by the very divinity he had impiously animated and
invoked!

'The Earth has preserved her children,' said Glaucus, staggering to his
feet.  'Blessed be the dread convulsion!  Let us worship the providence
of the gods!' He assisted Apaecides to rise, and then turned upward the
face of Arbaces; it seemed locked as in death; blood gushed from the
Egyptian's lips over his glittering robes; he fell heavily from the arms
of Glaucus, and the red stream trickled slowly along the marble.  Again
the earth shook beneath their feet; they were forced to cling to each
other; the convulsion ceased as suddenly as it came; they tarried no
longer; Glaucus bore Ione lightly in his arms, and they fled from the
unhallowed spot.  But scarce had they entered the garden than they were
met on all sides by flying and disordered groups of women and slaves,
whose festive and glittering garments contrasted in mockery the solemn
terror of the hour; they did not appear to heed the strangers--they were
occupied only with their own fears.  After the tranquillity of sixteen
years, that burning and treacherous soil again menaced destruction; they
uttered but one cry, 'THE EARTHQUAKE!  THE EARTHQUAKE!' and passing
unmolested from the midst of them, Apaecides and his companions, without
entering the house, hastened down one of the alleys, passed a small open
gate, and there, sitting on a little mound over which spread the gloom
of the dark green aloes, the moonlight fell on the bended figure of the
blind girl--she was weeping bitterly.




BOOK THE THIRD

Chapter I

THE FORUM OF THE POMPEIANS.  THE FIRST RUDE MACHINERY BY WHICH THE NEW
ERA OF THE WORLD WAS WROUGHT.

IT was early noon, and the forum was crowded alike with the busy and the
idle.  As at Paris at this day, so at that time in the cities of Italy,
men lived almost wholly out of doors: the public buildings, the forum,
the porticoes, the baths, the temples themselves, might be considered
their real homes; it was no wonder that they decorated so gorgeously
these favorite places of resort--they felt for them a sort of domestic
affection as well as a public pride.  And animated was, indeed, the
aspect of the forum of Pompeii at that time!  Along its broad pavement,
composed of large flags of marble, were assembled various groups,
conversing in that energetic fashion which appropriates a gesture to
every word, and which is still the characteristic of the people of the
south.  Here, in seven stalls on one side the colonnade, sat the
money-changers, with their glittering heaps before them, and merchants
and seamen in various costumes crowding round their stalls.  On one
side, several men in long togas were seen bustling rapidly up to a
stately edifice, where the magistrates administered justice--these were
the lawyers, active, chattering, joking, and punning, as you may find
them at this day in Westminster.  In the centre of the space, pedestals
supported various statues, of which the most remarkable was the stately
form of Cicero.  Around the court ran a regular and symmetrical
colonnade of Doric architecture; and there several, whose business drew
them early to the place, were taking the slight morning repast which
made an Italian breakfast, talking vehemently on the earthquake of the
preceding night as they dipped pieces of bread in their cups of diluted
wine.  In the open space, too, you might perceive various petty traders
exercising the arts of their calling.  Here one man was holding out
ribands to a fair dame from the country; another man was vaunting to a
stout farmer the excellence of his shoes; a third, a kind of
stall-restaurateur, still so common in the Italian cities, was supplying
many a hungry mouth with hot messes from his small and itinerant stove,
while--contrast strongly typical of the mingled bustle and intellect of
the time--close by, a schoolmaster was expounding to his puzzled pupils
the elements of the Latin grammar.' A gallery above the portico, which
was ascended by small wooden staircases, had also its throng; though, as
here the immediate business of the place was mainly carried on, its
groups wore a more quiet and serious air.

Every now and then the crowd below respectfully gave way as some senator
swept along to the Temple of Jupiter (which filled up one side of the
forum, and was the senators' hall of meeting), nodding with ostentatious
condescension to such of his friends or clients as he distinguished
amongst the throng.  Mingling amidst the gay dresses of the better
orders you saw the hardy forms of the neighboring farmers, as they made
their way to the public granaries.  Hard by the temple you caught a view
of the triumphal arch, and the long street beyond swarming with
inhabitants; in one of the niches of the arch a fountain played,
cheerily sparkling in the sunbeams; and above its cornice rose the
bronzed and equestrian statue of Caligula, strongly contrasting the gay
summer skies.  Behind the stalls of the money-changers was that building
now called the Pantheon; and a crowd of the poorer Pompeians passed
through the small vestibule which admitted to the interior, with
panniers under their arms, pressing on towards a platform, placed
between two columns, where such provisions as the priests had rescued
from sacrifice were exposed for sale.

At one of the public edifices appropriated to the business of the city,
workmen were employed upon the columns, and you heard the noise of their
labor every now and then rising above the hum of the multitude: the
columns are unfinished to this day!

All, then, united, nothing could exceed in variety the costumes, the
ranks, the manners, the occupations of the crowd--nothing could exceed
the bustle, the gaiety, the animation--where pleasure and commerce,
idleness and labor, avarice and ambition, mingled in one gulf their
motley rushing, yet harmonius, streams.

Facing the steps of the Temple of Jupiter, with folded arms, and a knit
and contemptuous brow, stood a man of about fifty years of age. His
dress was remarkably plain--not so much from its material, as from the
absence of all those ornaments which were worn by the Pompeians of every
rank--partly from the love of show, partly, also, because they were
chiefly wrought into those shapes deemed most efficacious in resisting
the assaults of magic and the influence of the evil eye.  His forehead
was high and bald; the few locks that remained at the back of the head
were concealed by a sort of cowl, which made a part of his cloak, to be
raised or lowered at pleasure, and was now drawn half-way over the head,
as a protection from the rays of the sun. The color of his garments was
brown, no popular hue with the Pompeians; all the usual admixtures of
scarlet or purple seemed carefully excluded.  His belt, or girdle,
contained a small receptacle for ink, which hooked on to the girdle, a
stilus (or implement of writing), and tablets of no ordinary size.  What
was rather remarkable, the cincture held no purse, which was the almost
indispensable appurtenance of the girdle, even when that purse had the
misfortune to be empty!

It was not often that the gay and egotistical Pompeians busied
themselves with observing the countenances and actions of their
neighbors; but there was that in the lip and eye of this bystander so
remarkably bitter and disdainful, as he surveyed the religious
procession sweeping up the stairs of the temple, that it could not fail
to arrest the notice of many.

'Who is yon cynic?' asked a merchant of his companion, a jeweller.

'It is Olinthus,' replied the jeweller; 'a reputed Nazarene.'

The merchant shuddered.  'A dread sect!' said he, in a whispered and
fearful voice.  'It is said that when they meet at nights they always
commence their ceremonies by the murder of a new-born babe; they profess
a community of goods, too--the wretches!  A community of goods!  What
would become of merchants, or jewellers either, if such notions were in
fashion?'

'That is very true,' said the jeweller; 'besides, they wear no
jewels--they mutter imprecations when they see a serpent; and at Pompeii
all our ornaments are serpentine.'

'Do but observe,' said a third, who was a fabricant of bronze, 'how yon
Nazarene scowls at the piety of the sacrificial procession. He is
murmuring curses on the temple, be sure.  Do you know, Celcinus, that
this fellow, passing by my shop the other day, and seeing me employed on
a statue of Minerva, told me with a frown that, had it been marble, he
would have broken it; but the bronze was too strong for him.  "Break a
goddess!" said I.  "A goddess!" answered the atheist; "it is a demon--an
evil spirit!" Then he passed on his way cursing.  Are such things to be
borne?  What marvel that the earth heaved so fearfully last night,
anxious to reject the atheist from her bosom?--An atheist, do I say?
worse still--a scorner of the Fine Arts! Woe to us fabricants of bronze,
if such fellows as this give the law to society!'

'These are the incendiaries that burnt Rome under Nero,' groaned the
jeweller.

While such were the friendly remarks provoked by the air and faith of
the Nazarene, Olinthus himself became sensible of the effect he was
producing; he turned his eyes round, and observed the intent faces of
the accumulating throng, whispering as they gazed; and surveying them
for a moment with an expression, first of defiance and afterwards of
compassion, he gathered his cloak round him and passed on, muttering
audibly, 'Deluded idolaters!--did not last night's convulsion warn ye?
Alas! how will ye meet the last day?'

The crowd that heard these boding words gave them different
interpretations, according to their different shades of ignorance and of
fear; all, however, concurred in imagining them to convey some awful
imprecation.  They regarded the Christian as the enemy of mankind; the
epithets they lavished upon him, of which 'Atheist' was the most favored
and frequent, may serve, perhaps, to warn us, believers of that same
creed now triumphant, how we indulge the persecution of opinion Olinthus
then underwent, and how we apply to those whose notions differ from our
own the terms at that day lavished on the fathers of our faith.

As Olinthus stalked through the crowd, and gained one of the more
private places of egress from the forum, he perceived gazing upon him a
pale and earnest countenance, which he was not slow to recognize.

Wrapped in a pallium that partially concealed his sacred robes, the
young Apaecides surveyed the disciple of that new and mysterious creed,
to which at one time he had been half a convert.

'Is he, too, an impostor?  Does this man, so plain and simple in life,
in garb, in mien--does he too, like Arbaces, make austerity the robe of
the sensualist?  Does the veil of Vesta hide the vices of the
prostitute?'

Olinthus, accustomed to men of all classes, and combining with the
enthusiasm of his faith a profound experience of his kind, guessed,
perhaps, by the index of the countenance, something of what passed
within the breast of the priest.  He met the survey of Apaecides with a
steady eye, and a brow of serene and open candour.

'Peace be with thee!' said he, saluting Apaecides.

'Peace!' echoed the priest, in so hollow a tone that it went at once to
the heart of the Nazarene.

'In that wish,' continued Olinthus, 'all good things are
combined--without virtue thou canst not have peace.  Like the rainbow,
Peace rests upon the earth, but its arch is lost in heaven.  Heaven
bathes it in hues of light--it springs up amidst tears and clouds--it is
a reflection of the Eternal Sun--it is an assurance of calm--it is the
sign of a great covenant between Man and God.  Such peace, O young man!
is the smile of the soul; it is an emanation from the distant orb of
immortal light.  PEACE be with you!'

'Alas!' began Apaecides, when he caught the gaze of the curious
loiterers, inquisitive to know what could possibly be the theme of
conversation between a reputed Nazarene and a priest of Isis.  He
stopped short, and then added in a low tone: 'We cannot converse here, I
will follow thee to the banks of the river; there is a walk which at
this time is usually deserted and solitary.'

Olinthus bowed assent.  He passed through the streets with a hasty step,
but a quick and observant eye.  Every now and then he exchanged a
significant glance, a slight sign, with some passenger, whose garb
usually betokened the wearer to belong to the humbler classes; for
Christianity was in this the type of all other and less mighty
revolutions--the grain of mustard-seed was in the heart of the lowly.
Amidst the huts of poverty and labor, the vast stream which afterwards
poured its broad waters beside the cities and palaces of earth took its
neglected source.



Chapter II

THE NOONDAY EXCURSION ON THE CAMPANIAN SEAS.

'BUT tell me, Glaucus,' said Ione, as they glided down the rippling
Sarnus in their boat of pleasure, 'how camest thou with Apaecides to my
rescue from that bad man?'

'Ask Nydia yonder,' answered the Athenian, pointing to the blind girl,
who sat at a little distance from them, leaning pensively over her lyre;
'she must have thy thanks, not we.  It seems that she came to my house,
and, finding me from home, sought thy brother in his temple; he
accompanied her to Arbaces; on their way they encountered me, with a
company of friends, whom thy kind letter had given me a spirit cheerful
enough to join.  Nydia's quick ear detected my voice--a few words
sufficed to make me the companion of Apaecides; I told not my associates
why I left them--could I trust thy name to their light tongues and
gossiping opinion?--Nydia led us to the garden gate, by which we
afterwards bore thee--we entered, and were about to plunge into the
mysteries of that evil house, when we heard thy cry in another
direction.  Thou knowest the rest.'

Ione blushed deeply.  She then raised her eyes to those of Glaucus, and
he felt all the thanks she could not utter.  'Come hither, my Nydia,'
said she, tenderly, to the Thessalian.

'Did I not tell thee that thou shouldst be my sister and friend? Hast
thou not already been more?--my guardian, my preserver!'

'It is nothing,' answered Nydia coldly, and without stirring.

'Ah! I forgot,' continued Ione, 'I should come to thee'; and she moved
along the benches till she reached the place where Nydia sat, and
flinging her arms caressingly round her, covered her cheeks with kisses.

Nydia was that morning paler than her wont, and her countenance grew
even more wan and colorless as she submitted to the embrace of the
beautiful Neapolitan.  'But how camest thou, Nydia,' whispered Ione, 'to
surmise so faithfully the danger I was exposed to?  Didst thou know
aught of the Egyptian?'

'Yes, I knew of his vices.'

'And how?'

'Noble Ione, I have been a slave to the vicious--those whom I served
were his minions.'

'And thou hast entered his house since thou knewest so well that private
entrance?'

'I have played on my lyre to Arbaces,' answered the Thessalian, with
embarrassment.

'And thou hast escaped the contagion from which thou hast saved Ione?'
returned the Neapolitan, in a voice too low for the ear of Glaucus.

'Noble Ione, I have neither beauty nor station; I am a child, and a
slave, and blind.  The despicable are ever safe.'

It was with a pained, and proud, and indignant tone that Nydia made this
humble reply; and Ione felt that she only wounded Nydia by pursuing the
subject.  She remained silent, and the bark now floated into the sea.

'Confess that I was right, Ione,' said Glaucus, 'in prevailing on thee
not to waste this beautiful noon in thy chamber--confess that I was
right.'

'Thou wert right, Glaucus,' said Nydia, abruptly.

'The dear child speaks for thee,' returned the Athenian.  'But permit me
to move opposite to thee, or our light boat will be over-balanced.'

So saying, he took his seat exactly opposite to Ione, and leaning
forward, he fancied that it was her breath, and not the winds of summer,
that flung fragrance over the sea.

'Thou wert to tell me,' said Glaucus, 'why for so many days thy door was
closed to me?'

'Oh, think of it no more!' answered Ione, quickly; 'I gave my ear to
what I now know was the malice of slander.'

'And my slanderer was the Egyptian?'

Ione's silence assented to the question.

'His motives are sufficiently obvious.'

'Talk not of him,' said Ione, covering her face with her hands, as if to
shut out his very thought.

'Perhaps he may be already by the banks of the slow Styx,' resumed
Glaucus; 'yet in that case we should probably have heard of his death.
Thy brother, methinks, hath felt the dark influence of his gloomy soul.
