principal hotel in Boston. It could not possibly have found a situation,
where it would be more in the midst of business and bustle, or would
witness more important events, or be occupied by a greater variety of
persons."

Grandfather went on to tell the proceedings of the despotic king and
ministry of England, after the repeal of the Stamp Act. They could not
bear to think, that their right to tax America should be disputed by the
people. In the year 1767, therefore, they caused Parliament to pass an act
for laying a duty on tea, and some other articles that were in general
use. Nobody could now buy a pound of tea, without paying a tax to King
George. This scheme was pretty craftily contrived; for the women of
America were very fond of tea, and did not like to give up the use of it.

But the people were as much opposed to this new act of Parliament, as they
had been to the Stamp Act. England, however, was determined that they
should submit. In order to compel their obedience, two regiments,
consisting of more than seven hundred British soldiers, were sent to
Boston. They arrived in September, 1768, and were landed on Long Wharf.
Thence they marched to the Common, with loaded muskets, fixed bayonets,
and great pomp and parade. So now, at last, the free town of Boston was
guarded and over-awed by red-coats, as it had been in the days of old Sir
Edmund Andros.

In the month of November, more regiments arrived. There were now four
thousand troops in Boston. The Common was whitened with their tents. Some
of the soldiers were lodged in Faneuil Hall, which the inhabitants looked
upon as a consecrated place, because it had been the scene of a great many
meetings in favor of liberty. One regiment was placed in the town house,
which we now call the Old State House. The lower floor of this edifice had
hitherto been used by the merchants as an exchange. In the upper stories
were the chambers of the judges, the representatives, and the governor's
council. The venerable counsellors could not assemble to consult about the
welfare of the province, without being challenged by sentinels, and
passing among the bayonets of the British soldiers.

Sentinels, likewise, were posted at the lodgings of the officers, in many
parts of the town. When the inhabitants approached, they were greeted by
the sharp question--"Who goes there?" while the rattle of the soldier's
musket was heard, as he presented it against their breasts. There was no
quiet, even on the Sabbath day. The pious descendants of the Puritans were
shocked by the uproar of military music, the drum, fife, and bugle,
drowning the holy organ peal and the voices of the singers. It would
appear as if the British took every method to insult the feelings of the
people.

"Grandfather," cried Charley, impatiently, "the people did not go to
fighting half soon enough! These British red-coats ought to have been
driven back to their vessels, the very moment they landed on Long Wharf."

"Many a hot-headed young man said the same as you do, Charley," answered
Grandfather. "But the elder and wiser people saw that the time was not yet
come. Meanwhile, let us take another peep at our old chair."

"Ah, it drooped its head, I know," said Charley, "when it saw how the
province was disgraced. Its old Puritan friends never would have borne
such doings."

"The chair," proceeded Grandfather, "was now continually occupied by some
of the high tories, as the king's friends were called, who frequented the
British Coffee House. Officers of the custom-house, too, which stood on
the opposite side of King Street, often sat in the chair, wagging their
tongues against John Hancock."

"Why against him?" asked Charley.

"Because he was a great merchant, and contended against paying duties to
the king," said Grandfather.

"Well, frequently, no doubt, the officers of the British regiments, when
not on duty, used to fling themselves into the arms of our venerable
chair. Fancy one of them, a red nosed captain, in his scarlet uniform,
playing with the hilt of his sword, and making a circle of his brother
officers merry with ridiculous jokes at the expense of the poor Yankees.
And perhaps he would call for a bottle of wine, or a steaming bowl of
punch, and drink confusion to all rebels."

"Our grave old chair must have been scandalized at such scenes," observed
Laurence. "The chair that had been the Lady Arbella's, and which the holy
Apostle Eliot had consecrated."

"It certainly was little less than sacrilege," replied Grandfather; "but
the time was coming, when even the churches, where hallowed pastors had
long preached the word of God, were to be torn down or desecrated by the
British troops. Some years passed, however, before such things were done."

Grandfather now told his auditors, that, in 1769, Sir Francis Bernard went
to England, after having been governor of Massachusetts ten years. He was
a gentleman of many good qualities, an excellent scholar, and a friend to
learning. But he was naturally of an arbitrary disposition; and he had
been bred at the University of Oxford, where young men were taught that
the divine right of kings was the only thing to be regarded in matters of
government. Such ideas were ill adapted to please the people of
Massachusetts. They rejoiced to get rid of Sir Francis Bernard, but liked
his successor, Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson, no better than himself.

About this period, the people were much incensed at an act, committed by a
person who held an office in the custom-house. Some lads, or young men,
were snow-balling his windows. He fired a musket at them and killed a poor
German boy, only eleven years old. This event made a great noise in town
and country, and much increased the resentment that was already felt
against the servants of the crown.

"Now, children," said Grandfather, "I wish to make you comprehend the
position of the British troops in King Street. This is the same which we
now call State Street. On the south side of the town-house, or Old State
House, was what military men call a court of guard, defended by two brass
cannons, which pointed directly at one of the doors of the above edifice.
A large party of soldiers were always stationed in the court of guard. The
custom-house stood at a little distance down King Street, nearly where the
Suffolk bank now stands; and a sentinel was continually pacing before its
front."

"I shall remember this, to-morrow," said Charley; "and I will go to State
Street, so as to see exactly where the British troops were stationed."

"And, before long," observed Grandfather, "I shall have to relate an
event, which made King Street sadly famous on both sides of the Atlantic.
The history of our chair will soon bring us to this melancholy business."

Here Grandfather described the state of things, which arose from the
ill-will that existed between the inhabitants and the red-coats. The old
and sober part of the town's-people were very angry at the government, for
sending soldiers to overawe them. But those gray-headed men were cautious,
and kept their thoughts and feelings in their own breasts, without putting
themselves in the way of the British bayonets.

The younger people, however, could hardly be kept within such prudent
limits. They reddened with wrath at the very sight of a soldier, and would
have been willing to come to blows with them, at any moment. For it was
their opinion, that every tap of a British drum within the peninsula of
Boston, was an insult to the brave old town.

"It was sometimes the case," continued Grandfather, "that affrays happened
between such wild young men as these, and small parties of the soldiers.
No weapons had hitherto been used, except fists or cudgels. But, when men
have loaded muskets in their hands, it is easy to foretell, that they will
soon be turned against the bosoms of those who provoke their anger."

"Grandfather," said little Alice, looking fearfully into his face, "your
voice sounds as though you were going to tell us something awful!"




Chapter V


Little Alice, by her last remark, proved herself a good judge of what was
expressed by the tones of Grandfather's voice. He had given the above
description of the enmity between the town's-people and the soldiers, in
order to prepare the minds of his auditors for a very terrible event. It
was one that did more to heighten the quarrel between England and America,
than any thing that had yet occurred.

Without further preface, Grandfather began the story of



THE BOSTON MASSACRE


It was now the 3d of March, 1770. The sunset music of the British
regiments was heard, as usual, throughout the town. The shrill fife and
rattling drum awoke the echoes in King Street, while the last ray of
sunshine was lingering on the cupola of the town-house. And now, all the
sentinels were posted. One of them marched up and down before the
custom-house, treading a short path through the snow, and longing for the
time when he would be dismissed to the warm fire-side of the guard-room.
Meanwhile, Captain Preston was perhaps sitting in our great chair, before
the hearth of the British Coffee House. In the course of the evening,
there were two or three slight commotions, which seemed to indicate that
trouble was at hand. Small parties of young men stood at the corners of
the streets, or walked along the narrow pavements. Squads of soldiers, who
were dismissed from duty, passed by them, shoulder to shoulder, with the
regular step which they had learned at the drill. Whenever these
encounters took place, it appeared to be the object of the young men to
treat the soldiers with as much incivility as possible.

"Turn out, you lobster-backs!" one would say. "Crowd them off the
side-walks!" another would cry. "A red-coat has no right in Boston
streets."

"Oh, you rebel rascals!" perhaps the soldiers would reply, glaring
fiercely at the young men. "Some day or other, we'll make our way through
Boston streets, at the point of the bayonet!"

Once or twice, such disputes as these brought on a scuffle; which passed
off, however, without attracting much notice. About eight o'clock, for
some unknown cause, an alarm bell rang loudly and hurriedly.

At the sound, many people ran out of their houses, supposing it to be an
alarm of fire. But there were no flames to be seen; nor was there any
smell of smoke in the clear, frosty air; so that most of the townsmen went
back to their own fire-sides, and sat talking with their wives and
children about the calamities of the times. Others, who were younger and
less prudent, remained in the streets; for there seems to have been a
presentiment that some strange event was on the eve of taking place.

Later in the evening, not far from nine o'clock, several young men passed
by the town-house, and walked down King Street. The sentinel was still on
his post, in front of the custom-house, pacing to and fro, while, as he
turned, a gleam of light, from some neighboring window, glittered on the
barrel of his musket. At no great distance were the barracks and the
guard-house, where his comrades were probably telling stories of battle
and bloodshed.

Down towards the custom-house, as I told you, came a party of wild young
men. When they drew near the sentinel, he halted on his post, and took his
musket from his shoulder, ready to present the bayonet at their breasts.

"Who goes there?" he cried, in the gruff, peremptory tones of a soldier's
challenge.

The young men, being Boston boys, felt as if they had a right to walk
their own streets, without being accountable to a British red-coat, even
though he challenged them in King George's name. They made some rude
answer to the sentinel. There was a dispute, or, perhaps a scuffle. Other
soldiers heard the noise, and ran hastily from the barracks, to assist
their comrade. At the same time, many of the town's-people rushed into
King Street, by various avenues, and gathered in a crowd round about the
custom-house. It seemed wonderful how such a multitude had started up, all
of a sudden.

The wrongs and insults, which the people had been suffering for many
months, now kindled them into a rage. They threw snow-balls and lumps of
ice at the soldiers. As the tumult grew louder, it reached the ears of
Captain Preston, the officer of the day. He immediately ordered eight
soldiers of the main guard to take their muskets and follow him. They
marched across the street, forcing their way roughly through the crowd,
and pricking the town's-people with their bayonets.

A gentleman, (it was Henry Knox, afterwards general of the American
artillery,) caught Captain Preston's arm.

"For Heaven's sake, sir," exclaimed he, take heed what you do, or here
will be bloodshed."

"Stand aside!" answered Captain Preston, haughtily. "Do not interfere,
sir. Leave me to manage the affair."

Arriving at the sentinel's post, Captain Preston drew up his men in a
semi-circle, with their faces to the crowd and their rear to the
custom-house. "When the people saw the officer, and beheld the threatening
attitude with which the soldiers fronted them, their rage became almost
uncontrollable.

"Fire, you lobster-backs!" bellowed some.

"You dare not fire, you cowardly red-coats," cried others.

"Rush upon them!" shouted many voices. "Drive the rascals to their
barracks! Down with them! Down with them! Let them fire, if they dare!"

Amid the uproar, the soldiers stood glaring at the people, with the
fierceness of men whose trade was to shed blood.

Oh, what a crisis had now arrived! Up to this very moment, the angry
feelings between England and America might have been pacified. England had
but to stretch out the hand of reconciliation, and acknowledge that she
had hitherto mistaken her rights but would do so no more. Then, the
ancient bonds of brotherhood would again have been knit together, as
firmly as in old times. The habit of loyalty, which had grown as strong as
instinct, was not utterly overcome. The perils shared, the victories won,
in the Old French War, when the soldiers of the colonies fought side by
side with their comrades from beyond the sea, were unforgotten yet.
England was still that beloved country which the colonists called their
home. King George, though he had frowned upon America, was still
reverenced as a father.

But, should the king's soldiers shed one drop of American blood, then it
was a quarrel to the death. Never--never would America rest satisfied,
until she had torn down the royal authority, and trampled it in the dust.

"Fire, if you dare, villains!" hoarsely shouted the people, while the
muzzles of the muskets were turned upon them; "you dare not fire!"

They appeared ready to rush upon the levelled bayonets. Captain Preston
waved his sword, and uttered a command which could not be distinctly
heard, amid the uproar of shouts that issued from a hundred throats. But
his soldiers deemed that he had spoken the fatal mandate--"fire!" The flash
of their muskets lighted up the street, and the report rang loudly between
the edifices. It was said, too, that the figure of a man with a cloth
hanging down over his face, was seen to step into the balcony of the
custom-house, and discharge a musket at the crowd.

A gush of smoke had overspread the scene. It rose heavily, as if it were
loath to reveal the dreadful spectacle beneath it. Eleven of the sons of
New England lay stretched upon the street. Some, sorely wounded, were
struggling to rise again. Others stirred not, nor groaned, for they were
past all pain. Blood was streaming upon the snow; and that purple stain,
in the midst of King Street, though it melted away in the next day's sun,
was never forgotten nor forgiven by the people.



Grandfather was interrupted by the violent sobs of little Alice. In his
earnestness, he had neglected to soften down the narrative, so that it
might not terrify the heart of this unworldly infant. Since Grandfather
began the history of our chair, little Alice had listened to many tales of
war. But, probably, the idea had never really impressed itself upon her
mind, that men have shed the blood of their fellow-creatures. And now that
this idea was forcibly presented to her, it affected the sweet child with
bewilderment and horror.

"I ought to have remembered our dear little Alice," said Grandfather
reproachfully to himself. "Oh, what a pity! Her heavenly nature has now
received its first impression of earthly sin and violence. Well, Clara,
take her to bed, and comfort her. Heaven grant that she may dream away the
recollection of the Boston Massacre!"

"Grandfather," said Charley, when Clara and little Alice had retired, "did
not the people rush upon the soldiers, and take revenge?"

"The town drums beat to arms," replied Grandfather, "the alarm bells rang,
and an immense multitude rushed into King Street. Many of them had weapons
in their hands. The British prepared to defend themselves. A whole
regiment was drawn up in the street, expecting an attack; for the townsmen
appeared ready to throw themselves upon the bayonets."

"And how did it end?" asked Charley.

"Governor Hutchinson hurried to the spot," said Grandfather, "and besought
the people to have patience, promising that strict justice should be done.
A day or two afterward, the British troops were withdrawn from town, and
stationed at Castle William. Captain Preston and the eight soldiers were
tried for murder. But none of them were found guilty. The judges told the
jury that the insults and violence which had been offered to the soldiers,
justified them in firing at the mob."

"The Revolution," observed Laurence, who had said but little during the
evening, "was not such a calm, majestic movement as I supposed. I do not
love to hear of mobs and broils in the street. These things were unworthy
of the people, when they had such a great object to accomplish."

"Nevertheless, the world has seen no grander movement than that of our
Revolution, from first to last," said Grandfather. "The people, to a man,
were full of a great and noble sentiment. True, there may be much fault to
find with their mode of expressing this sentiment; but they knew no
better--the necessity was upon them to act out their feelings, in the best
manner they could. We must forgive what was wrong in their actions, and
look into their hearts and minds for the honorable motives that impelled
them."

"And I suppose," said Laurence, "there were men who knew how to act
worthily of what they felt."

"There were many such," replied Grandfather, "and we will speak of some of
them, hereafter."

Grandfather here made a pause. That night, Charley had a dream about the
Boston Massacre, and thought that he himself was in the crowd, and struck
down Captain Preston with a great club. Laurence dreamed that he was
sitting in our great chair, at the window of the British Coffee House, and
beheld the whole scene which Grandfather had described. It seemed to him,
in his dream, that if the town's-people and the soldiers would but have
heard him speak a single word, all the slaughter might have been averted.
But there was such an uproar that it drowned his voice.

The next morning, the two boys went together to State Street, and stood on
the very spot where the first blood of the Revolution had been shed. The
Old State House was still there, presenting almost the same aspect that it
had worn on that memorable evening, one-and-seventy years ago. It is the
sole remaining witness of the Boston Massacre.




Chapter VI


The next evening the astral lamp was lighted earlier than usual, because
Laurence was very much engaged in looking over the collection of portraits
which had been his New Year's gift from Grandfather.

Among them he found the features of more than one famous personage who had
been connected with the adventures of our old chair. Grandfather bade him
draw the table nearer to the fire-side; and they looked over the portraits
together, while Clara and Charley likewise lent their attention. As for
little Alice, she sat in Grandfather's lap, and seemed to see the very men
alive, whose faces were there represented.

Turning over the volume, Laurence came to the portrait of a stern,
grim-looking man, in plain attire, of much more modern fashion than that
of the old Puritans. But the face might well have befitted one of those
iron-hearted men. Beneath the portrait was the name of Samuel Adams.

"He was a man of great note in all the doings that brought about the
Revolution," said Grandfather. "His character was such, that it seemed as
if one of the ancient Puritans had been sent back to earth, to animate the
people's hearts with the same abhorrence of tyranny, that had
distinguished the earliest settlers. He was as religious as they, as stern
and inflexible, and as deeply imbued with democratic principles. He,
better than any one else, may be taken as a representative of the people
of New England, and of the spirit with which they engaged in the
revolutionary struggle. He was a poor man, and earned his bread by an
humble occupation; but with his tongue and pen, he made the king of
England tremble on his throne. Remember him, my children, as one of the
strong men of our country."

"Here is one whose looks show a very different character," observed
Laurence, turning to the portrait of John Hancock. "I should think, by his
splendid dress and courtly aspect, that he was one of the king's friends."

"There never was a greater contrast than between Samuel Adams and John
Hancock," said Grandfather. "Yet they were of the same side in politics,
and had an equal agency in the Revolution. Hancock was born to the
inheritance of the largest fortune in New England. His tastes and habits
were aristocratic. He loved gorgeous attire, a splendid mansion,
magnificent furniture, stately festivals, and all that was glittering and
pompous in external things. His manners were so polished, that there stood
not a nobleman at the footstool of King George's throne, who was a more
skilful courtier than John Hancock might have been. Nevertheless, he, in
his embroidered clothes, and Samuel Adams in his threadbare coat, wrought
together in the cause of liberty. Adams acted from pure and rigid
principle. Hancock, though he loved his country, yet thought quite as much
of his own popularity as he did of the people's rights. It is remarkable,
that these two men, so very different as I describe them, were the only
two exempted from pardon by the king's proclamation."

On the next leaf of the book, was the portrait of General Joseph Warren.
Charley recognized the name, and said that here was a greater man than
either Hancock or Adams.

"Warren was an eloquent and able patriot," replied Grandfather. "He
deserves a lasting memory for his zealous efforts in behalf of liberty. No
man's voice was more powerful in Faneuil Hall than Joseph Warren's. If his
death had not happened so early in the contest, he would probably have
gained a high name as a soldier."

The next portrait was a venerable man, who held his thumb under his chin,
and, through his spectacles, appeared to be attentively reading a
manuscript.

"Here we see the most illustrious Boston boy that ever lived," said
Grandfather. "This is Benjamin Franklin! But I will not try to compress,
into a few sentences, the character of the sage, who, as a Frenchman
expressed it, snatched the lightning from the sky, and the sceptre from a
tyrant. Mr. Sparks must help you to the knowledge of Franklin."

The book likewise contained portraits of James Otis and Josiah Quincy.
Both of them, Grandfather observed, were men of wonderful talents and true
patriotism. Their voices were like the stirring tones of a trumpet,
arousing the country to defend its freedom. Heaven seemed to have provided
a greater number of eloquent men than had appeared at any other period, in
