livers; an old whaler, which seemed to drip oil, back from a year of
cruising in the Arctic. Even, the tramp windjammers were deep-chested
craft, capable of rounding the Horn or of circumnavigating the globe;
and they came in streaked and picturesque from their long voyaging.


A MIXTURE OF RACES.


In the orange colored dawn which always comes through the mists of that
bay, the fishing fleet would crawl in under triangular lateen sails, for
the fishermen of San Francisco Bay are all Neapolitans, who have brought
their costumes and sail with lateen rigs shaped like the ear of a horse
when the wind fills them and stained an orange brown.

The "smelting pot of the races" Stevenson called the region along the
water front, for here the people of all these craft met, Italians,
Greeks, Russians, Lascars, Kanakas, Alaska Indians, black Gilbert
Islanders, Spanish-Americans, wanderers and sailors from all the world,
who came in and out from among the queer craft to lose themselves in the
disreputable shanties and saloons. The Barbary Coast was a veritable bit
of Satan's realm. The place was made up of three solid blocks of dance
halls, for the delectation of the sailors of the world. Within those
streets of peril the respectable never set foot; behind the swinging
doors of those saloons anything might be happening, crime was as common
here as drink, and much went on of which the law was blankly ignorant.

Not far removed from this haunt of crime was the world-famous Chinatown,
a district six blocks long and two wide, and housing when at its fullest
some 30,000 Chinese. Old business houses at first, the new inmates added
to them, rebuilt them, ran out their own balconies and entrances, and
gave them that feeling of huddled irregularity which makes all Chinese
built dwellings fall naturally into pictures. Not only this, they
burrowed to a depth equal to three stories under the ground, and through
this ran passages in which the Chinese transacted their dark and devious
affairs--as the smuggling of opium, the traffic in slave girls and the
settlement of their difficulties, by murder if they saw fit. The law was
powerless to prevent or discover and convict the murderers.

Chinatown is gone; the Barbary Coast is gone; the haunts of crime have
been swept by the devouring flames, and if the citizens can prevent
they will never be restored. The old San Francisco is dead. The gayest,
lightest-hearted, most pleasure-loving city of this continent, and
in many ways the most interesting and romantic, is a horde of huddled
refugees living among ruins. It may rebuild; it probably will; but those
who have known that peculiar city by the Golden Gate and have caught its
flavor of the Arabian Nights feel that it can never be the same. When it
rises out of its ashes it will probably doubtless resemble other modern
cities and have lost its old strange flavor.



CHAPTER XII.

Life in the Metropolis of the Pacific


Brought up in a bountiful country, where no one really has to work very
hard to live, nurtured on adventure, scion of a free and merry stock,
the real, native Californian is a distinctive type; as far from the
Easterner in psychology as the extreme Southern is from the Yankee. He
is easy going, witty, hospitable, lovable, inclined to be unmoral rather
than immoral in his personal habits, and above all easy to meet and to
know.

Above all there is an art sense all through the populace which sets it
off from any other part of the country. This sense is almost Latin in
its strength, and the Californian owes it to the leaven of Latin blood.


THE 'FRISCO RESTAURANTS.


With such a people life was always gay. If they did not show it on the
streets, as do the people of Paris, it was because the winds made
open cafes disagreeable at all seasons of the year. The gayety went on
indoors or out on the hundreds of estates that fringed the city. It was
noted for its restaurants. Perhaps people who cared not how they spent
their money could get the best they wished, but for a dollar down to as
low as fifteen cents the restaurants furnished the best fare to be had
anywhere at the price.

The country all about produced everything that a cook needs, and that
in abundance--the bay was an almost untapped fish-pond, the fruit
farms came up to the very edge of the town, and the surrounding country
produced in abundance fine meats, all cereals and all vegetables.

But the chefs who came from France in the early days and liked this land
of plenty were the head and front of it. They passed their art to other
Frenchmen or to the clever Chinese. Most of the French chefs at the
biggest restaurants were born in Canton, China. Later the Italians,
learning of this country where good food is appreciated, came and
brought their own style. Householders always dined out one or two
nights of the week, and boarding houses were scarce, for the unattached
preferred the restaurants. The eating was usually better than the
surroundings.


THE FAMOUS POODLE DOG.


Meals that were marvels were served in tumbledown little hotels. Most
famous of all the restaurants was the Poodle Dog. There have been no
less than four restaurants of this name, beginning with a frame shanty
where, in the early days, a prince of French cooks used to exchange
recipes for gold dust. Each succeeding restaurant of the name has moved
farther downtown; and the recent Poodle Dog stands--or stood--on the
edge of the Tenderloin in a modern five-story building. And it typified
a certain spirit that there was in San Francisco.

On the ground floor was a public restaurant where there was served the
best dollar dinner on earth. It ranked with the best and the others were
in San Francisco. Here, especially on Sunday night, almost everybody
went to vary the monotony of home cooking. Every one who was any one in
the town could be seen there off and on. It was perfectly respectable. A
man might take his wife and daughter there.

On the second floor there were private dining rooms, and to dine there,
with one or more of the opposite sex, was risque but not especially
terrible. But the third floor--and the fourth floor--and the fifth! The
elevator man of the Poodle Dog, who had held the job for many years and
never spoke unless spoken to, wore diamonds and was a heavy investor in
real estate.

There were others as famous in their way--Zinkaud's, where, at one time,
every one went after the theatre, and Tate's, which has lately bitten
into that trade; the Palace Grill, much like the grills of Eastern
hotels, except for the price; Delmonico's, which ran the Poodle Dog neck
and neck in its own line, and many others, humbler, but great at the
price.


THE BOHEMIAN CLUB.


To the visitor who came to see the city and who put himself in the hands
of one of its well-to-do citizens for the purpose, the few days that
followed were apt to be a whirl of mirth and sight-seeing, made up of
breakfasts, luncheons, dinners, drives, little trips across the bay,
dashes down the peninsula to the polo and country clubs, hours spent
in Bohemia, trips around the world among all the races of the habitable
globe, all of whom had their colonies in this most cosmopolitan of
American cities.

In club life the Bohemian stood first and foremost, the famous club
whose meeting place, with all its art treasures, is now a heap of ashes,
but which was formerly 'Frisco's head-centre of mirth. Founded by Henry
George, the world-famous single tax advocate, when he was an impecunious
scribbler on the San Francisco Post, it grew to be the choicest place of
resort in the Pacific metropolis.

Within its walls the possession of dollars was a bar rather than an
"open sesame," the master key to its circles being the knack of telling
a good story or the possession of quick and telling wit. Fun-making was
the rule there, and the only way to escape being made its victim was
the power to deliver a ready and witty retort. In this home of good
fellowship all the artists, actors, wits, literati, fiddlers, pianists
and bon vivants were members. Here an impoverished painter could square
his grill and buffet account by giving the club a daub to hang on its
walls. Here in days of old the Sheriff used to camp regularly once a
month until the members rustled up the money to replevin the furniture.
But these days of poverty passed away, and in later years the club came
to know prosperity beyond the dreams of the good fellows who founded it.


THE WICKEDEST AND GAYEST.


The Bohemian is gone, but the spirit that founded and made it still
exists, and we may look to see it rise, like the phoenix, from its
ashes.

San Francisco was often called the wickedest city in America. It was
hardly that, it was simply the gayest. It was not the home of purity;
neither is any other city. What other cities do behind closed doors San
Francisco did not hesitate to do in the open.

In Eastern cities the police have driven vice into tenements, lodging
houses and apartments. San Francisco did not do that. She had certain
quarters where, according to unwritten law, vice was allowed to abide,
and she did not try to hide the fact that it could be found there. She
was not secretly immoral; she was frankly unmoral.

She did not believe in driving her vice from the open where it could be
recognized and controlled--prevented from doing any more harm than it
was possible to stop--into districts of the city where good people dwell
and purity would feel its contaminating influence. There were regions in
which the respectable never set foot, haunts of acknowledged vice which
for virtue to enter would be to lose caste.

As for its gayety, San Francisco was proud of the reputation of being
the Paris of America. Its women were beautiful, and they knew it. They
liked to adorn their beauty with fine clothes and peacock along the
streets on matinee days. If you asked a San Francisco girl why she wore
such expensive clothes, she would say, frankly, "Because I like to have
the men admire me," and she would see no harm in saying it. There was
very little sham about the San Francisco women. Their men understood
them and worshiped them. They bore themselves with the freedom that
was theirs by right of their heritage of open-air living, the Bohemian
atmosphere they breathed, the unconventional character of their
surroundings. Their figures were strong and well moulded, their faces
bloomed with health like the roses in their gardens. They drew the wine
of laughter from their balmy California air. Sorrow and trouble sat
lightly on their shoulders.

There was no end of enjoyments. After the theatre they would go to
Zinkaud's, Tate's, the Palace or some other of the many places of
resort, for a snack to eat and a spell under the music, which was to be
heard everywhere.

Another part of the gay life of the city was for a private dance to keep
going all night in a fashionable residence, and at daylight, instead of
everybody going to bed, to jump into automobiles or carriages or take
the trolley cars and whizz off to the beach for a dip in the cold salt
water pool at Sutro's baths, and then, with ravenous appetites, sit down
on the Cliff House balcony to an open-air breakfast while watching the
ships sail in and out at the Golden Gate and hearing the seals barking
on the rocks. After that home and to rest.


AN ALL-NIGHT TOWN.


The city never went to sleep altogether. It was "an all-night" town. Few
of the restaurants ever closed, none of the saloons did. Always during
the whole twenty-four hours of the day there was "something doing" in
the Tenderloin. No hour of the night was ever free of revelry. It was
marvelous how they kept it up. The average San Franciscan could stay
awake all night at a card game, take a cold wash and a good breakfast
in the morning, and go straight downtown to business and feel none the
worse for it.

It was a gay town, a captivating, piquant, audacious, but not especially
wicked city. A Frenchy, a risque city it might justly have been called,
but it was not wicked in the sense that sordid vice, vulgar crime and
wretched squalor constitute wickedness.

It was a lovable place that everybody longed to get back to, once
having been there. A woman, leaving it for years, watched it from the
ferryboat, and, weeping, said, "San Francisco, oh, my San Francisco, I
am leaving thee."

Will those who left it after the fire ever get back to their old
city again? We have already expressed our doubt of this. The old San
Francisco is probably gone, never to return. The new San Francisco will
be a cleaner, saner and safer city, destitute of its rookeries, its
tenements and its Chinatown. It will be a greater and more sightly
city than that of the past, but to those who knew and loved the old San
Francisco--San Francisco the captivating, the maddest, gayest, liveliest
and most rollicking in the country--there must be something impressibly
sad to its old inhabitants in the reflection that the new city of the
Golden Gate can never be quite the same as the haven of their early
affections.



CHAPTER XIII.

Plans to Rebuild San Francisco.


Almost as soon as the terrible conflagration had been checked and gotten
under control by the heroic efforts of the soldiers and firemen, a
little group of the leading citizens of the desolated city had met
in the office of Mayor Eugene E. Schmitz and had begun to plan the
restoration of their municipality. It was an admirable courage, bred in
the stock of those men who in 1849 left comfortable homes in the East to
seek their fortune in the Golden State, that inspired the loyal leaders
of the present day citizens to provide with far-seeing eyes for
the rebuilding of their homes and business houses with more orderly
precision after the fire than had been possible during the hustle of
early days in a new city.

The old San Francisco was no more, and never could be recalled save as
a memory. The local color, atmosphere, that which might be termed the
feeling of the old city, vanished with the clustered houses, as rich
in tradition as the ancient missions in whose cloisters worshiped the
Spanish padre "before the Gringo came." Heartrending as it was to the
citizens who loved their homes and haunts to see them disappear into
smoke, there was an attraction about the city of the Golden Gate which
endeared it to all Americans.

One of San Francisco's charms was in its defiance of precedent. There
were hills to be conquered, and San Francisco' s expanding traffic
hurled itself at the face of them. It went up and up, with no thought
of finding a way around. So it happened that on some of the streets the
steepness was too great for horses. In the centre there are cable roads,
and on either side of the rails grass grows through the cobbles. The
earlier structures on the level were put together in haste. For the most
part they remained essentially unchanged until they fell with a
crash. True, they had become stained by time, unkempt, dwarfed by new
neighbors, but nobody desired to efface them. Away from the business
section houses appeared on the various hills, perched precariously near
the brink; houses reached by long flights and grown over with roses. The
bathing fogs touched them with gray. Moss grew on their roofs. In the
little, lofty yards calla lilies bloomed with the profusion of weeds.
The natural beauty of the site, the quaintness of the commercial and
social development of which it became the centre, attracted the poet
and the artist. It incited them to paint the attractions and to sing the
praises of their chosen home.

But the loyal sons of those brave pioneers who founded the metropolis
were not in the least daunted by the problem of raising from its ruins
the whole vast number of dwellings and business houses. The leaders of
the people, the men who had been identified with San Francisco since
its early days, and whose great fortunes were almost swept away by the
cataclysm, lent courage to all the wearied thousands by firm statements
of their optimism.

James D. Phelan, former Mayor of the city and one of its richest
capitalists, immediately announced his intention of rebuilding his
properties at Market and O'Farrell Streets, in the heart of the ruined
business district. William H. Crocker, one of the heaviest losers, a
nephew of Charles Crocker, who founded the Central Pacific Railroad with
Collis P. Huntington, Leland Stanford and others, stated emphatically
that he would put his shoulder to the wheel. On receiving the first news
of the disaster, and before he knew what his losses would amount to, he
said:

"Mark my words, San Francisco will arise from these ashes a greater and
more beautiful city than ever. I don't take any stock in the belief of
some people that investors and residents will be panicky and afraid to
build up again. This calamity, terrible as it is, will mean nothing less
than a new and grander San Francisco. It is preposterous to suggest the
abandonment of the city. It is the natural metropolis of the Pacific
coast. God made it so. D. O. Mills, the Spreckels family, everybody I
know, have determined to rebuild and to invest more than ever before.
Burnham, the great Chicago architect, has been at work for a year or
more on plans to beautify San Francisco. Terrible as this destruction
has been, it serves to clear the way for the carrying out of these
plans. Why, even now we are figuring on rebuilding. More than that, I am
confident that, except for what fire has absolutely laid waste, it
will be found that the buildings are less injured than was supposed.
Plastering, ornamental work, glass and more or less loose material has
been shaken down, but the framework, I am sure, will be found intact in
many big buildings."

D. Ogden Mills, of New York, who owned enormous properties in the
stricken city, was equally confident.

"We will go ahead," said he, "and build the city, and build it so that
earthquakes will not shake it down and so fire will not destroy it, and
we will have a water system which will enable us to draw water from the
sea for fire extinguishing service and other municipal purposes. We will
thus have less to fear from the destruction of the land mains. The whole
point with all of us who own property down there is that we have to
build. To let it lie idle, piled with its ruins, would mean the throwing
away of money, and I am sure none of us intends to do that. The city
will go up like Baltimore did, and Galveston, and Charleston, and
Chicago, and there will be no lack of capital. California spirit and
California enterprise, which are always associated with the State of
California, will rise superior to this calamity."

George Crocker, elder brother of William H. Crocker; Archer M.
Huntington, son of Collis P. Huntington; Mrs. Herman Oelrichs, Mrs. W.
K. Vanderbilt, Jr., members of the wealthy Spreckels family and others
all expressed, before the great conflagration had ceased burning, the
confident expectation that the city would rise, Phoenix-like, from its
ashes and become more beautiful and prosperous than it had ever been in
the past.

So complete was the calamity that the Government of the United States
lent a hand in the earliest work of restoration. On April 20th, two days
after the earthquake, Congress took immediate steps to repair or replace
all the public buildings damaged or destroyed in San Francisco. The
willingness of Congress to assist those in need of work by immediately
beginning the reconstruction of the Federal buildings was indicated
when Senator Scott, chairman of the Committee on Public Buildings and
Grounds, introduced a resolution calling upon the Secretary of the
Treasury for full information as to the exact condition of the various
government buildings in San Francisco, and instructing him to submit an
estimate showing the aggregate sum needed to repair or rebuild them.
The resolution suggested that steel frames be used in any new buildings.
This resolution was adopted. It was soon learned that the new Post
Office, the Mint and the old Customs House were practically undamaged.
The branch of the United States Mint, on Fifth Street, and the new Post
Office at Seventh and Mission Streets, were striking examples of the
superiority of workmanship put into Federal buildings. The old Mint
building, surrounded by a wide space of pavement, was absolutely
unharmed. The Mint made preparations to resume business at once.
The Post Office building also was virtually undamaged by fire. The
earthquake shock did some damage to the different entrances to the
building, but the walls were left standing in good condition. President
Roosevelt also sent a message to Congress asking that $300,000 be at
once appropriated to finish the Mare Island Navy Yard, in order that
employment might be given to the many workmen who were in extreme need
of money for the necessities of life.

It was a most fortunate circumstance that the property records in the
Hall of Records were unharmed either by earthquake or fire. Endless
disputes and litigation over the questions of ownerships would
undoubtedly have otherwise impeded the work of those sincerely
anxious to repair their shattered fortunes and opened the way for the
unscrupulous to take unfair advantage of the general chaos.

But the temper of the people was such that only the boldest would have
dared to use trickery for his own ends. Every man stood at the side of
his neighbor working for himself and for the good of all. Before the
embers were cool the owners of some of the damaged skyscrapers gave
commands to proceed instantly with their reconstruction. The Spreckels
Building, the Hayward Building, the St. Francis Hotel, the Merchants'
Exchange and structures that permitted it were ordered rushed into shape
as quickly as possible. And already contracts had been drawn up
for other steel-frame buildings to be erected with all speed. Many
substantial business men and property owners of San Francisco were in
consultation with the architects within a few days. While the work of
clearing away the debris went forward, a corps of draughtsmen was busily
occupied preparing plans for the new buildings to adorn the city.

Mayor Schmitz telegraphed to the Mayors of all leading cities, inquiring
how many architects or architectural draughtsmen could be induced to
leave for San Francisco at once, and hundreds of young men immediately
responded to the call. Experts of the several great contracting
companies hurried to the scene and were ready to deposit material and
labor on the ground for the work of restoration. Daniel H. Burnham,
a leading architect of Chicago, who had previously drawn plans for
beautifying the city, was summoned to superintend the work.

All the horses, mules and wagons obtainable were immediately pressed
into service to remove the debris and clear the streets so that traffic
could be resumed. Within a week after the first earthquake shock trolley
cars were running in the principal streets, telephone communication had
been re-established in the most needed quarters, electric lights were
available and business had begun again on a limited scale.

Yet, in spite of the indomitable courage of the citizens and the
efficient labor of the public officers and the utility companies, an
enormous amount of work remained. Virtually every bank in San Francisco
had to be rebuilt. Only the Market Street National Bank was left nearly
undamaged. An official list of the condition of the school buildings
throughout the city showed that twenty-nine school buildings were
destroyed and that forty-four were partially, at least, spared. Many
of the latter were so damaged that they had to be either pulled down or
thoroughly repaired, and arrangements were made to resume the short
term in tents erected in the parks, where thousands of the homeless had
already found temporary shelter. With these two vital classes of public
institutions prepared to care for the demands about to be made on them,
confidence was not lacking in other parts. Most of the foundries and
factories near the water front and south of Market Street immediately
called in all their employees and began to clear away the wreckage
and make ready for continuing business. Great credit is due to the
newspapers, nearly all of which continued their daily issues without
interruption, although their buildings, with offices and printing
plants, were entirely destroyed by the flames which followed the
earthquake. Those whose premises were early threatened with destruction
betook themselves to Oakland, seven miles distant across the bay, and
published their sheets from the establishments of the Oakland papers. A
thorough inspection shows that comparatively little damage was done in
the vicinity of the Cliff. The Cliff House, which was at first reported
to have been hurled into the sea, not only stood, but the damage
