Genoese are always doing us mischief."

"But I suppose you do them mischief sometimes, captain. I imagine it
isn't all one side."

"Of course, we pay them out when we get a chance," the captain replied.
"It isn't likely we are going to stand being always put upon, and not
take our chance when it comes. We only want fair trade and no favour,
while those rascals want it all to themselves. They know they have no
chance with us when it comes to fair trading."

"You know, captain, that the Genoese say just the same things about the
Venetians, that the Venetians do about them. So I expect that there are
faults on both sides."

The captain laughed.

"I suppose each want to have matters their own way, Messer Hammond, but
I don't consider the Genoese have any right to come interfering with
us, to the eastward of Italy. They have got France and Spain to trade
with, and all the western parts of Italy. Why don't they keep there?
Besides, I look upon them as landsmen. Why, we can always lick them at
sea in a fair fight."

"Generally, captain. I admit you generally thrash them. Still, you know
they have sometimes got the better of you, even when the force was
equal."

The captain grunted. He could not deny the fact.

"Sometimes our captains don't do their duty," he said. "They put a lot
of young patricians in command of the galleys, men that don't know one
end of a ship from the other, and then, of course, we get the worst of
it. But I maintain that, properly fought, a Venetian ship is always
more than a match for a Genoese."

"I think she generally is, captain, and I hope it will always prove so
in the future. You see, though I am English, I have lived long enough
in Venice to feel like a Venetian."

"I have never been to England," the captain said, "though a good many
Venetian ships go there every year. They tell me it's an island, like
Venice, only a deal bigger than any we have got in the Mediterranean.
Those who have been there say the sea is mighty stormy, and that,
sailing up from Spain, you get tremendous tempests sometimes, with the
waves ever so much bigger than we have here, and longer and more
regular, but not so trying to the ships as the short sharp gales of
these seas."

"I believe that is so, captain, though I don't know anything about it
myself. It is some years since I came out, and our voyage was a very
calm one."

Three days of quiet sailing, and the Bonito rounded the headlands of
the Morea, and shaped her course to Candia. The voyage was a very
pleasant one to Francis. Each day the captain brought out the list of
cargo, and instructed him in the prices of each description of goods,
told him of the various descriptions of merchandise which they would be
likely to purchase at the different ports at which they were to touch,
and the prices which they would probably have to pay for them. A
certain time, too, was devoted each day to the examination of the
charts of the various ports and islands, the captain pointing out the
marks which were to be observed on entering and leaving the harbours,
the best places for anchorage, and the points where shelter could be
obtained should high winds come on.

After losing sight of the Morea the weather changed, clouds banked up
rapidly in the southwest, and the captain ordered the great sails to be
furled.

"We are going to have a serious gale," he said to Francis, "which is
unusual at this period of the year. I have thought, for the last two
days, we were going to have a change, but I hoped to have reached
Candia before the gale burst upon us. I fear that this will drive us
off our course."

By evening it was blowing hard, and the sea got up rapidly. The ship
speedily justified the remarks of the captain on her power of rolling,
and the oars, at which the men had been labouring since the sails were
furled, were laid in.

"It is impossible to keep our course," the captain said, "and we must
run up among the islands, and anchor under the lee of one of them. I
should recommend you to get into your bed as soon as possible. You have
not learned to keep your legs in a storm. I see that lad of yours is
very ill already, but as you show no signs of suffering thus far, you
will probably escape."

It was some time, however, before Francis went below. The scene was
novel to him, and he was astonished at the sight of the waves, and at
the manner in which they tossed the great ship about, as if she were an
eggshell. But when it became quite dark, and he could see nothing but
the white crests of the waves and the foam that flew high in the air
every time the bluff bows of the ship plunged down into a hollow, he
took the captain's advice and retired to his cabin.

He was on deck again early. A gray mist overhung the water. The sea was
of a leaden colour, crested with white heads. The waves were far higher
than they had been on the previous evening, and as they came racing
along behind the Bonito each crest seemed as if it would rise over her
stern and overwhelm her. But this apprehension was soon dispelled, as
he saw how lightly the vessel rose each time. Although showing but a
very small breadth of sail, she was running along at a great rate,
leaving a white streak of foam behind her. The captain was standing
near the helm, and Francis made his way to him.

"Well, captain, and how are you getting on, and where are we?" he
asked, cheerfully.

"We are getting on well enough, Messer Francisco, as you can see for
yourself. The Bonito is as good a sea boat as ever floated, and would
not care for the wind were it twice as strong as it is. It is not the
storm I am thinking about, but the islands. If we were down in the
Mediterranean I could turn into my cot and sleep soundly; but here it
is another matter. We are somewhere up among the islands, but where, no
man can say. The wind has shifted a bit two or three times during the
night, and, as we are obliged to run straight before it, there is no
calculating to within a few miles where we are. I have tried to edge
out to the westward as much as I could, but with this wind blowing and
the height of the ship out of water, we sag away to leeward so fast
that nothing is gained by it.

"According to my calculation, we cannot be very far from the west coast
of Mitylene. If the clouds would but lift, and give us a look round for
two minutes, we should know all about it, as I know the outline of
every island in the Aegean; and as over on this side you are always in
sight of two or three of them, I should know all about it if I could
get a view of the land. Now, for aught we know, we may be running
straight down upon some rocky coast."

The idea was not a pleasant one, and Francis strained his eyes, gazing
through the mist.

"What should we do if we saw land, captain?" he asked presently.

"Get out the oars, row her head round, and try to work either to the
right or left, whichever point of land seemed easiest to weather. Of
course, if it was the mainland we were being driven on there would be
no use, and we should try and row into the teeth of the gale, so as to
keep her off land as long as possible, in the hope of the wind
dropping. When we got into shallow water we should drop our anchors,
and still keep on rowing to lessen the strain upon them. If they gave,
there would be an end to the Bonito. But if, as I think, we are driving
towards Mitylene, there is a safe harbour on this side of the island,
and I shall certainly run into it. It is well sheltered and
landlocked."

Two more hours passed, and then there was a startling transformation.
The clouds broke suddenly and cleared off, as if by magic, and the sun
streamed brightly out. The wind was blowing as strong as ever, but the
change in the hue of sky and sea would at once have raised the spirits
of the tired crew, had not a long line of land been seen stretching
ahead of them at a distance of four or five miles.

"Just as I thought," the captain exclaimed as he saw it. "That is
Mitylene, sure enough, and the entrance to the harbour I spoke of lies
away there on that beam."

The oars were at once got out, the sail braced up a little, and the
Bonito made for the point indicated by the captain, who himself took
the helm.

Another half hour and they were close to land. Francis could see no
sign of a port, but in a few minutes the Bonito rounded the end of a
low island, and a passage opened before her. She passed through this
and found herself in still water, in a harbour large enough to hold the
fleet of Venice. The anchor was speedily let drop.

"It seems almost bewildering," Francis said, "the hush and quiet here
after the turmoil of the storm outside. To whom does Mitylene belong?"

"The Genoese have a trading station and a castle at the other side of
the island, but it belongs to Constantinople. The other side of the
island is rich and fertile, but this, as you see, is mountainous and
barren. The people have not a very good reputation, and if we had been
wrecked we should have been plundered, if not murdered.

"You see those two vessels lying close to the shore, near the village?
They are pirates when they get a chance, you may be quite sure. In
fact, these islands swarm with them. Venice does all she can to keep
them down, but the Genoese, and the Hungarians, and the rest of them,
keep her so busy that she has no time to take the matter properly in
hand, and make a clean sweep of them."



Chapter 8: An Attack By Pirates.


A boat was lowered, and the captain went ashore with a strong crew, all
armed to the teeth. Francis accompanied him. The natives were sullen in
their manner, but expressed a willingness to trade, and to exchange
hides and wine for cloth.

"We may as well do a little barter," the captain said, as they rowed
back towards the ship. "The port is not often visited, and the road
across the island is hilly and rough, so they ought to be willing to
sell their goods cheaply."

"They did not seem pleased to see us, nevertheless," Francis said.

"No; you see the Genoese have got a footing in the island, and of
course they represent us to the natives as being robbers, who would
take their island if we got the chance. All round these coasts and
islands the people are partisans either of Venice or Genoa. They care
very little for Constantinople, although they form part of the empire.
Constantinople taxes them heavily, and is too weak to afford them
protection. Of course they are Greeks, but the Greeks of the islands
have very little in common, beyond their language, with the Greeks of
Constantinople. They see, too, that the Turks are increasing in power,
and they know that, if they are to be saved from falling into the hands
of the Moslem, it is Venice or Genoa who will protect them, and not
Constantinople, who will have enough to do to defend herself.

"As to themselves, they would naturally prefer Venice, because Venice
is a far better mistress than Genoa; but of course, when the Genoese
get a footing, they spread lies as to our tyranny and greed, and so it
comes that the people of the islands are divided in their wishes, and
that while we are gladly received in some of them, we are regarded with
hate and suspicion in others."

Trade at once began, and continued until evening.

"How long do you expect to stay here, captain?" Francis asked.

"That must depend upon the wind. It may go down tomorrow, it may
continue to blow strong for days, and it is no use our attempting to
work down to Candia until it changes its direction. I should hope,
however, that in a day or two we may be off. We are doing little more
than wasting our time here."

A strong watch was placed on deck at nightfall.

"Why, surely, captain, there is no fear of an attack! War has not yet
been proclaimed with Genoa, although there is little doubt it will be
so in a few weeks, or perhaps a few days."

"There is never a real peace between Venice and Genoa in these seas,"
the captain said, "and as war is now imminent, one cannot be too
watchful. State galleys would not be attacked, but merchant vessels are
different. Who is to inquire about a merchant ship! Why, if we were
attacked and plundered here, who would be any the wiser? We should
either have our throats cut, or be sent to rot in the dungeons of
Genoa. And not till there was an exchange of prisoners, perhaps years
hence, would any in Venice know what had befallen us. When weeks
passed, and no news came to Venice of our having reached Candia, it
would be supposed that we had been lost in the storm.

"Signor Polani would run his pen through the name of the Bonito, and
put her down as a total loss, and there would be an end of it, till
those of us who were alive, when the prison doors were opened, made
their way back to Venice. No, no, Messer Francisco. In these eastern
waters one must always act as if the republic were at war. Why, did not
Antonio Doria, in a time of profound peace, attack and seize eight
Venetian ships laden with goods, killing two of the merchants on board,
and putting the ships at a ransom? As to single vessels missing, and
never heard of, their number is innumerable.

"It is all put down to pirates; but trust me, the Genoese are often at
the bottom of it. They are robbers, the Genoese. In fair trade we can
always beat them, and they know it, and so they are always seeking a
pretext for a quarrel with us."

Francis smiled quietly at the bigoted hatred which the captain bore the
Genoese, but thought it useless to argue with him. The next morning he
came up on deck soon after daybreak.

"I see one of those vessels has taken her departure," he said, as he
glanced towards the spot where they had been lying.

"So she has," the captain said. "I had not noticed that before. I
wonder what that fellow has gone for? No good, you may be sure. Why, it
is blowing hard outside still, as you may see by the rate those light
clouds travel. He would never have put to sea without having a motive,
and he must have had a strong crew on board, to row out in the teeth of
the gale far enough to make off the land. That fellow is up to mischief
of some sort."

A few minutes later the captain ordered a boat to be lowered, and rowed
out to the rocky islet at the mouth of the harbour, and landing,
climbed up the rocks and looked out to sea. In half an hour he returned
to the ship.

"It is no use," he said to Francis. "The wind is blowing straight into
the passage, and we could not row the Bonito out against it. It was
different with that craft that went out yesterday evening, for I have
no doubt she started as soon as it became dark. She was low in the
water, and would not hold the wind; besides, no doubt they lowered the
masts, and with a strong crew might well have swept her out. But with
the Bonito, with her high sides and heavy tonnage, it could not be
done."

"What do you think she went out for, captain?"

"It is likely enough that she may have gone to one of the other
islands, and may return with a dozen other craft, pirates like herself.
The news that a Venetian merchant ship, without consorts, is weather
bound here, would bring them upon us like bees.

"It is a dangerous thing, this sailing alone. I have talked it over
several times with the master. Other merchants generally send their
ships in companies of eight or ten, and they are then strong enough to
beat off any attack of pirates. Messer Polani always sends his vessels
out singly. What he says is this: 'A single ship always travels faster
than a convoy, because these must go at the rate of the slowest among
them. Then the captain is free to go where he will, without consulting
others, according as he gets news where trade is to be done, and when
he gets there he can drive his own bargains without the competition of
other ships.

"So you see there are advantages both ways. The padrone's ships run
greater risks, but, if they get through them safely, they bring home
much larger profits than do those of others. As a rule, I prefer
sailing singly; but just at the present time I should be well pleased
to see half a dozen consorts lying alongside."

Three times during the day the captain paid a visit to the rocky
island. On his return for the last time before nightfall he said to
Francis:

"The wind is certainly falling. I hope that tomorrow morning we shall
be able to get out of this trap. I am convinced that there is danger."

"You see nothing else, do you, captain, beyond the departure of that
craft, to make you think that there is danger?"

"Yes, I have seen two things," the captain said. "In the first place,
the demeanour of the people has changed. They do not seem more
unfriendly than they were before, but as I moved about the place today,
it seemed to me that there was a suppressed excitement--people gathered
together and talked earnestly, and separated if any of our crew
happened to go near them; even laughed when they thought that none of
us were looking, and looked serious and sullen if we turned round. I am
convinced that they are expecting something to happen.

"I have another reason for suspecting it. I have kept a sharp watch on
that high hill behind the village; they tell me there is nothing at the
top except some curious stones, that look as if they had once been
trees, so there is nothing they can want to go up for. Several times
today I have made out the figures of men climbing that hill. When they
got to the top they stood for some time as if they were looking out
over the sea, and then came down again without doing anything. Now, men
do not climb such a hill as that merely for exercise. They went up
because they expected to see something, and that something could only
be a fleet of pirate boats from the other islands. I would give a
year's pay if we could get out of this place this evening, but it
cannot be done, and we must wait till tomorrow morning. I will try
then, even though I risk being driven on the rocks. However, if they do
come tonight they will not catch us asleep."

Orders were issued that the whole crew were to remain in readiness for
attack, and that those whose watch was below were to sleep with their
arms beside them. The lower ports were all closed, a strong watch was
kept on deck, and it was certain that, whatever happened, the Bonito
would not be taken by surprise.

Being assured by the captain that it was not probable that any attack
would be made before morning, as the pirates, not knowing their exact
position, would wait until the first gleam of daylight enabled them to
make out where she was lying, and to advance in order against her,
Francis lay down on his couch, leaving orders that, if asleep, he was
to be called two hours before daybreak. He slept but little, however,
getting up frequently and going out to ascertain if any sounds
indicated the presence of an enemy.

Upon one of these occasions he found that the person leaning next to
him against the bulwark, and gazing towards the mouth of the harbour,
was Giuseppi.

"Have you been here long, Giuseppi?"

"Since you were out last, Messer Francisco. I thought I would wait a
bit, and listen."

"And have you heard anything?"

"I have heard sounds several times."

"What sort of sounds, Giuseppi?"

"Such a sound as is made when the sails and yards are lowered. I have
heard it over and over again when out at night on the lagoons near the
port. There is no mistake in the creaking of the blocks as the halyards
run through them. I am sure, that since I have been here several
vessels have brought up inside the mouth of the harbour. Some of the
sailors have heard the same noises, so there cannot be any mistake
about it. If the captain likes, I will take a small boat and row out,
and find out all about them."

"I will ask the captain, Giuseppi."

The captain, however, said that there would be no use in this being
done.

"Whether there are few or whether there are many of them, we must wait
till morning before we go out. There will be no working out that
channel in the dark, even if we were unopposed."

"But they must have managed to come in," Francis said.

"No doubt some of their comrades in the other barque, or people from
the village, show a light out there to guide them in. Besides, the wind
is favourable to them and against us. No, young sir, there is nothing
to do but to wait. In the morning, if there are but few of them, we
will try to break through and gain the sea. If there are many we will
fight here, as then all hands will be available for the combat, while
if we were rowing, half of them would be occupied with the oars. If
your lad were to go as he proposes he might fall into the hands of the
enemy, and as the information he could gather would be in any case of
no use, it is best he should remain where he is."

The hours seemed long until the first tinge of daylight appeared in the
sky. All hands were on deck now, for the news that vessels had been
arriving in the port had convinced all that danger really threatened
them. It was not until half an hour later that they were able to make
out some dark objects, lying in under the shadow of the islet across
the mouth of the harbour.

"There they are, Messer Francisco," the captain said. "Ten of them, as
far as I can make out; but there may be more, for likely enough some of
them are lying side by side. There may, too, be some round a corner,
where we cannot see them. Another half hour we shall know all about
it."

Francis was half surprised that the captain did not order the oars to
be put out and lashed in that position, for it was a recognized plan
for preventing a ship from being boarded by an enemy, who could thus
only approach her at the lofty poop and forecastle.

"Are you not going to get out the oars to keep them off?"

"No, Messer Francisco. In the first place, our sides are so high out of
water that the pirates will have a difficulty in boarding us in any
case. In the second place, if we get the oars out and they row full at
them, sooner or later they will break them off; and it is all important
that we should be able to row. I have been thinking the matter over,
and my idea is, as soon as they advance, to get three or four oars at
