one might find herself stretched upon the stone of sacrifice. But I will
forget them, for your woman's pride is stung, and you know not what you
say. Do you forget them also, Teule, if you have understood.'

Then Marina turned and went, her bosom heaving with anger and outraged
love or pride, and as she passed me I heard her mutter, 'Yes, prince,
you may forget, but I shall not.'

Often since that day I have wondered if some vision of the future
entered into the girl's breast in that hour, or if in her wrath she
spoke at random. I have wondered also whether this scene between her and
Guatemoc had anything to do with the history of her after life; or did
Marina, as she avowed to me in days to come, bring shame and ruin on
her country for the love of Cortes alone? It is hard to say, and perhaps
these things had nothing to do with what followed, for when great events
have happened, we are apt to search out causes for them in the past that
were no cause. This may have been but a passing mood of hers and one
soon put out of mind, for it is certain that few build up the temples
of their lives upon some firm foundation of hope or hate, of desire or
despair, though it has happened to me to do so, but rather take chance
for their architect--and indeed whether they take him or no, he is still
the master builder. Still that Marina did not forget this talk I know,
for in after times I heard her remind this very prince of the words that
had passed between them, ay, and heard his noble answer to her.


Now I have but one more thing to tell of my stay in Tobasco, and then
let me on to Mexico, and to the tale of how Montezuma's daughter became
my wife, and of my further dealings with de Garcia.

On the day of our departure a great sacrifice of slaves was held upon
the teocalli to propitiate the gods, so that they might give us a safe
journey, and also in honour of some festival, for to the festivals of
the Indians there was no end. Thither we went up the sides of the
steep pyramid, since I must look upon these horrors daily. When all was
prepared, and we stood around the stone of sacrifice while the multitude
watched below, that fierce paba who once had felt the beatings of my
heart, came forth from the sanctuary of the god Quetzal and signed to
his companions to stretch the first of the victims on the stone. Then
of a sudden the prince Guatemoc stepped forward, and addressing the
priests, pointed to their chief, and said:

'Seize that man!'

They hesitated, for though he who commanded was a prince of the blood
royal, to lay hands upon a high priest was sacrilege. Then with a smile
Guatemoc drew forth a ring having a dull blue stone set in its bezel,
on which was engraved a strange device. With the ring he drew out also
a scroll of picture-writing, and held them both before the eyes of the
pabas. Now the ring was the ring of Montezuma, and the scroll was signed
by the great high priest of Tenoctitlan, and those who looked on the
ring and the scroll knew well that to disobey the mandate of him who
bore them was death and dishonour in one. So without more ado they
seized their chief and held him. Then Guatemoc spoke again and shortly:

'Lay him on the stone and sacrifice him to the god Quetzal.'

Now he who had taken such fierce joy in the death of others on this same
stone, began to tremble and weep, for he did not desire to drink of his
own medicine.

'Why must I be offered up, O prince?' he cried, 'I who have been a
faithful servant to the gods and to the Emperor.'

'Because you dared to try to offer up this Teule,' answered Guatemoc,
pointing to me, 'without leave from your master Montezuma, and because
of the other evils that you have done, all of which are written in this
scroll. The Teule is a son of Quetzal, as you have yourself declared,
and Quetzal will be avenged because of his son. Away with him, here is
your warrant.'

Then the priests, who till this moment had been his servants, dragged
their chief to the stone, and there, notwithstanding his prayers and
bellowings, one who had donned his mantle practised his own art upon
him, and presently his body was cast down the side of the pyramid. For
my part I am not sufficient of a Christian to pretend that I was sorry
to see him die in that same fashion by which he had caused the death of
so many better men.

When it was done Guatemoc turned to me and said, 'So perish all your
enemies, my friend Teule.'

Within an hour of this event, which revealed to me how great was the
power of Montezuma, seeing that the sight of a ring from his finger
could bring about the instant death of a high priest at the hands of
his disciples, we started on our long journey. But before I went I bid a
warm farewell to my friend the cacique, and also to Marina, who wept at
my going. The cacique I never saw again, but Marina I did see.


For a whole month we travelled, for the way was far and the road rough,
and sometimes we must cut our path through forests and sometimes we must
wait upon the banks of rivers. Many were the strange sights that I saw
upon that journey, and many the cities in which we sojourned in much
state and honour, but I cannot stop to tell of all these.

One thing I will relate, however, though briefly, because it changed
the regard that the prince Guatemoc and I felt one to the other into a
friendship which lasted till his death, and indeed endures in my heart
to this hour.

One day we were delayed by the banks of a swollen river, and in pastime
went out to hunt for deer. When we had hunted a while and killed three
deer, it chanced that Guatemoc perceived a buck standing on a hillock,
and we set out to stalk it, five of us in all. But the buck was in the
open, and the trees and bush ceased a full hundred yards away from where
he stood, so that there was no way by which we might draw near to him.
Then Guatemoc began to mock me, saying, 'Now, Teule, they tell tales of
your archery, and this deer is thrice as far as we Aztecs can make sure
of killing. Let us see your skill.'

'I will try,' I answered, 'though the shot is long.'

So we drew beneath the cover of a ceiba tree, of which the lowest
branches drooped to within fifteen feet of the ground, and having set
an arrow on the string of the great bow that I had fashioned after the
shape of those we use in merry England, I aimed and drew it. Straight
sped the arrow and struck the buck fair, passing through its heart, and
a low murmur of wonderment went up from those who saw the feat.

Then, just as we prepared to go to the fallen deer, a male puma, which
is nothing but a cat, though fifty times as big, that had been watching
the buck from above, dropped down from the boughs of the ceiba tree full
on to the shoulders of the prince Guatemoc, felling him to the ground,
where he lay face downwards while the fierce brute clawed and bit at his
back. Indeed had it not been for his golden cuirass and helm Guatemoc
would never have lived to be emperor of Anahuac, and perhaps it might
have been better so.

Now when they saw the puma snarling and tearing at the person of their
prince, though brave men enough, the three nobles who were with us were
seized by sudden panic and ran, thinking him dead. But I did not run,
though I should have been glad enough to do so. At my side hung one of
the Indian weapons that serve them instead of swords, a club of wood set
on both sides with spikes of obsidian, like the teeth in the bill of a
swordfish. Snatching it from its loop I gave the puma battle, striking a
blow upon his head that rolled him over and caused the blood to pour.
In a moment he was up and at me roaring with rage. Whirling the wooden
sword with both hands I smote him in mid air, the blow passing between
his open paws and catching him full on the snout and head. So hard was
this stroke that my weapon was shattered, still it did not stop the
puma. In a second I was cast to the earth with a great shock, and the
brute was on me tearing and biting at my chest and neck. It was well for
me at that moment that I wore a garment of quilted cotton, otherwise
I must have been ripped open, and even with this covering I was sadly
torn, and to this day I bear the marks of the beast's claws upon my
body. But now when I seemed to be lost the great blow that I had struck
took effect on him, for one of the points of glass had pierced to his
brain. He lifted his head, his claws contracted themselves in my flesh,
then he howled like a dog in pain and fell dead upon my body. So I
lay upon the ground unable to stir, for I was much hurt, until my
companions, having taken heart, came back and pulled the puma off me.
By this time Guatemoc, who saw all, but till now was unable to move from
lack of breath, had found his feet again.

'Teule,' he gasped, 'you are a brave man indeed, and if you live I swear
that I will always stand your friend to the death as you have stood
mine.'

Thus he spoke to me; but to the others he said nothing, casting no
reproaches at them.

Then I fainted away.



CHAPTER XV

THE COURT OF MONTEZUMA


Now for a week I was so ill from my wounds that I was unable to be
moved, and then I must be carried in a litter till we came to within
three days' journey of the city of Tenoctitlan or Mexico. After that,
as the roads were now better made and cared for than any I have seen in
England, I was able to take to my feet again. Of this I was glad, for
I have no love of being borne on the shoulders of other men after the
womanish Indian fashion, and, moreover, as we had now come to a cold
country, the road running through vast table-lands and across the tops
of mountains, it was no longer necessary as it had been in the hot
lands. Never did I see anything more dreary than these immense lengths
of desolate plains covered with aloes and other thorny and succulent
shrubs of fantastic aspect, which alone could live on the sandy and
waterless soil. This is a strange land, that can boast three separate
climates within its borders, and is able to show all the glories of the
tropics side by side with deserts of measureless expanse.

One night we camped in a rest house, of which there were many built
along the roads for the use of travellers, that was placed almost on
the top of the sierra or mountain range which surrounds the valley of
Tenoctitlan. Next morning we took the road again before dawn, for the
cold was so sharp at this great height that we, who had travelled from
the hot land, could sleep very little, and also Guatemoc desired if it
were possible to reach the city that night.

When we had gone a few hundred paces the path came to the crest of the
mountain range, and I halted suddenly in wonder and admiration. Below
me lay a vast bowl of land and water, of which, however, I could see
nothing, for the shadows of the night still filled it. But before me,
piercing the very clouds, towered the crests of two snow-clad mountains,
and on these the light of the unrisen sun played, already changing their
whiteness to the stain of blood. Popo, or the Hill that Smokes, is the
name of the one, and Ixtac, or the Sleeping Woman, that of the other,
and no grander sight was ever offered to the eyes of man than they
furnished in that hour before the dawn. From the lofty summit of Popo
went up great columns of smoke which, what with the fire in their heart
and the crimson of the sunrise, looked like rolling pillars of
flame. And for the glory of the glittering slopes below, that changed
continually from the mystery of white to dull red, from red to crimson,
and from crimson to every dazzling hue that the rainbow holds, who can
tell it, who can even imagine it? None, indeed, except those that have
seen the sun rise over the volcans of Tenoctitlan.

When I had feasted my eyes on Popo I turned to Ixtac. She is not so
lofty as her 'husband,' for so the Aztecs name the volcan Popo, and when
first I looked I could see nothing but the gigantic shape of a woman
fashioned in snow, and lying like a corpse upon her lofty bier, whose
hair streamed down the mountain side. But now the sunbeams caught her
also, and she seemed to start out in majesty from a veil of rosy mist,
a wonderful and thrilling sight. But beautiful as she was then, still I
love the Sleeping Woman best at eve. Then she lies a shape of glory on
the blackness beneath, and is slowly swallowed up into the solemn night
as the dark draws its veil across her.

Now as I gazed the light began to creep down the sides of the volcans,
revealing the forests on their flanks. But still the vast valley was
filled with mist that lay in dense billows resembling those of the sea,
through which hills and temple tops started up like islands. By slow
degrees as we passed upon our downward road the vapours cleared away,
and the lakes of Tezcuco, Chalco, and Xochicalco shone in the sunlight
like giant mirrors. On their banks stood many cities, indeed the
greatest of these, Mexico, seemed to float upon the waters; beyond them
and about them were green fields of corn and aloe, and groves of forest
trees, while far away towered the black wall of rock that hedges in the
valley.

All day we journeyed swiftly through this fairy land. We passed through
the cities of Amaquem and Ajotzinco, which I will not stay to describe,
and many a lovely village that nestled upon the borders of Lake Chalco.
Then we entered on the great causeway of stone built like a road resting
on the waters, and with the afternoon we came to the town of Cuitlahuac.
Thence we passed on to Iztapalapan, and here Guatemoc would have rested
for the night in the royal house of his uncle Cuitlahua. But when we
reached the town we found that Montezuma, who had been advised of
our approach by runners, had sent orders that we were to push on to
Tenoctitlan, and that palanquins had been made ready to bear us. So we
entered the palanquins, and leaving that lovely city of gardens, were
borne swiftly along the southern causeway. On we went past towns built
upon piles fixed in the bottom of the lake, past gardens that were laid
out on reeds and floated over the waters like a boat, past teocallis and
glistening temples without number, through fleets of light canoes and
thousands of Indians going to and fro about their business, till at
length towards sunset we reached the battlemented fort that is called
Xoloc which stands upon the dyke. I say stands, but alas! it stands no
more. Cortes has destroyed it, and with it all those glorious cities
which my eyes beheld that day.

At Xoloc we began to enter the city of Tenoctitlan or Mexico, the
mightiest city that ever I had seen. The houses on the outskirts,
indeed, were built of mud or adobe, but those in the richer parts were
constructed of red stone. Each house surrounded a courtyard and was
in turn surrounded by a garden, while between them ran canals, having
footpaths on either side. Then there were squares, and in the squares
pyramids, palaces, and temples without end. I gazed on them till I was
bewildered, but all seemed as nothing when at length I saw the great
temple with its stone gateways opening to the north and the south,
the east and the west, its wall carven everywhere with serpents, its
polished pavements, its teocallis decked with human skulls, thousands
upon thousands of them, and its vast surrounding tianquez, or market
place. I caught but a glimpse of it then, for the darkness was falling,
and afterwards we were borne on through the darkness, I did not know
whither.

A while went by and I saw that we had left the city, and were passing
up a steep hill beneath the shadow of mighty cedar trees. Presently we
halted in a courtyard and here I was bidden to alight. Then the prince
Guatemoc led me into a wondrous house, of which all the rooms were
roofed with cedar wood, and its walls hung with richly-coloured cloths,
and in that house gold seemed as plentiful as bricks and oak are with
us in England. Led by domestics who bore cedar wands in their hands,
we went through many passages and rooms, till at length we came to
a chamber where other domestics were awaiting us, who washed us with
scented waters and clothed us in gorgeous apparel. Thence they conducted
us to a door where we were bidden to remove our shoes, and a coarse
coloured robe was given to each of us to hide our splendid dress. The
robes having been put on, we were suffered to pass the door, and found
ourselves in a vast chamber in which were many noble men and some women,
all standing and clad in coarse robes. At the far end of this chamber
was a gilded screen, and from behind it floated sounds of sweet music.

Now as we stood in the great chamber that was lighted with
sweet-smelling torches, many men advanced and greeted Guatemoc the
prince, and I noticed that all of them looked upon me curiously.
Presently a woman came and I saw that her beauty was great. She was
tall and stately, and beneath her rough outer robe splendidly attired
in worked and jewelled garments. Weary and bewildered as I was, her
loveliness seized me as it were in a vice, never before had I seen such
loveliness. For her eye was proud and full like the eye of a buck, her
curling hair fell upon her shoulders, and her features were very noble,
yet tender almost to sadness, though at times she could seem fierce
enough. This lady was yet in her first youth, perchance she may have
seen some eighteen years, but her shape was that of a full-grown woman
and most royal.

'Greeting, Guatemoc my cousin,' she said in a sweet voice; 'so you are
come at last. My royal father has awaited you for long and will ask
questions as to your delay. My sister your wife has wondered also why
you tarried.'

Now as she spoke I felt rather than saw that this lady was searching me
with her eyes.

'Greeting, Otomie my cousin,' answered the prince. 'I have been delayed
by the accidents of travel. Tobasco is far away, also my charge and
companion, Teule,' and he nodded towards me, 'met with an accident on
the road.'

'What was the accident?' she asked.

'Only this, that he saved me from the jaws of a puma at the risk of
his life when all the others fled from me, and was somewhat hurt in the
deed. He saved me thus--' and in few words he told the story.

She listened and I saw that her eyes sparkled at the tale. When it was
done she spoke again, and this time to me.

'Welcome, Teule,' she said smiling. 'You are not of our people, yet my
heart goes out to such a man.' And still smiling she left us.

'Who is that great lady?' I asked of Guatemoc.

'That is my cousin Otomie, the princess of the Otomie, my uncle
Montezuma's favourite daughter,' he answered. 'She likes you, Teule, and
that is well for you for many reasons. Hush!'

As he spoke the screen at the far end of the chamber was drawn aside.
Beyond it a man sat upon a broidered cushion, who was inhaling the fumes
of the tobacco weed from a gilded pipe of wood after the Indian fashion.
This man, who was no other than the monarch Montezuma, was of a tall
build and melancholy countenance, having a very pale face for one of
his nation, and thin black hair. He was dressed in a white robe of the
purest cotton, and wore a golden belt and sandals set with pearls, and
on his head a plume of feathers of the royal green. Behind him were a
band of beautiful girls somewhat slightly clothed, some of whom played
on lutes and other instruments of music, and on either side stood four
ancient counsellors, all of them barefooted and clad in the coarsest
garments.

So soon as the screen was drawn all the company in the chamber
prostrated themselves upon their knees, an example that I hastened to
follow, and thus they remained till the emperor made a sign with the
gilded bowl of his pipe, when they rose to their feet again and stood
with folded hands and eyes fixed abjectly upon the floor. Presently
Montezuma made another signal, and three aged men whom I understood to
be ambassadors, advanced and asked some prayer of him. He answered them
with a nod of the head and they retreated from his presence, making
obeisance and stepping backward till they mingled with the crowd. Then
the emperor spoke a word to one of the counsellors, who bowed and came
slowly down the hall looking to the right and to the left. Presently his
eye fell upon Guatemoc, and, indeed, he was easy to see, for he stood a
head taller than any there.

'Hail, prince,' he said. 'The royal Montezuma desires to speak with you,
and with the Teule, your companion.'

'Do as I do, Teule,' said Guatemoc, and led the way up the chamber,
till we reached the place where the wooden screen had been, which, as we
passed it, was drawn behind us, shutting us off from the hall.

Here we stood a while, with folded hands and downcast eyes, till a
signal was made to us to advance.

'Your report, nephew,' said Montezuma in a low voice of command.

'I went to the city of Tobasco, O glorious Montezuma. I found the Teule
and brought him hither. Also I caused the high priest to be sacrificed
according to the royal command, and now I hand back the imperial
signet,' and he gave the ring to a counsellor.

'Why did you delay so long upon the road, nephew?'

'Because of the chances of the journey; while saving my life, royal
Montezuma, the Teule my prisoner was bitten by a puma. Its skin is
brought to you as an offering.'

Now Montezuma looked at me for the first time, then opened a picture
scroll that one of the counsellors handed to him, and read in it,
glancing at me from time to time.

'The description is good,' he said at length, 'in all save one thing--it
does not say that this prisoner is the handsomest man in Anahuac. Say,
Teule, why have your countrymen landed on my dominions and slain my
people?'

'I know nothing of it, O king,' I answered as well as I might with the
help of Guatemoc, 'and they are not my countrymen.'

'The report says that you confess to having the blood of these Teules in
your veins, and that you came to these shores, or near them, in one of
their great canoes.'

'That is so, O king, yet I am not of their people, and I came to the
shore floating on a barrel.'

'I hold that you lie,' answered Montezuma frowning, 'for the sharks and
crocodiles would devour one who swam thus.' Then he added anxiously,
'Say, are you of the descendants of Quetzal?'

'I do not know, O king. I am of a white race, and our forefather was
named Adam.'

'Perchance that is another name for Quetzal,' he said. 'It has long been
prophesied that his children would return, and now it seems that the
hour of their coming is at hand,' and he sighed heavily, then added: 'Go
now. To-morrow you shall tell me of these Teules, and the council of the
priests shall decide your fate.'

Now when I heard the name of the priests I trembled in all my bones and
cried, clasping my hands in supplication:

'Slay me if you will, O king, but I beseech you deliver me not again
into the hands of the priests.'

'We are all in the hands of the priests, who are the mouth of God,' he
answered coldly. 'Besides, I hold that you have lied to me.'

Then I went foreboding evil, and Guatemoc also looked downcast. Bitterly
did I curse the hour when I had said that I was of the Spanish blood and
yet no Spaniard. Had I known even what I knew that day, torture would
not have wrung those words from me. But now it was too late.

Now Guatemoc led me to certain apartments of this palace of Chapoltepec,
where his wife, the royal princess Tecuichpo, was waiting him, a very
lovely lady, and with her other ladies, among them the princess Otomie,
Montezuma's daughter, and some nobles. Here a rich repast was served to
us, and I was seated next to the princess Otomie, who spoke to me most
graciously, asking me many things concerning my land and the people of
the Teules. It was from her that I learned first that the emperor was
much disturbed at heart because of these Teules or Spaniards, for he was
superstitious, and held them to be the children of the god Quetzal, who
according to ancient prophecy would come to take the land. Indeed, so
gracious was she, and so royally lovely, that for the first time I felt
my heart stirred by any other woman than my betrothed whom I had left
far away in England, and whom, as I thought, I should never see again.
And as I learned in after days mine was not the only heart that was
stirred that night.

Near to us sat another royal lady, Papantzin, the sister of Montezuma,
but she was neither young nor lovely, and yet most sweet faced and sad
as though with the presage of death. Indeed she died not many weeks
after but could not rest quiet in her grave, as shall be told.

When the feast was done and we had drunk of the cocoa or chocolate,
and smoked tobacco in pipes, a strange but most soothing custom that I
learned in Tobasco and of which I have never been able to break myself,
though the weed is still hard to come by here in England, I was led to
my sleeping place, a small chamber panelled with cedar boards. For a
while I could not sleep, for I was overcome by the memory of all the
strange sights that I had seen in this wonderful new land which was so
civilised and yet so barbarous. I thought of that sad-faced king, the
absolute lord of millions, surrounded by all that the heart of man can
desire, by vast wealth, by hundreds of lovely wives, by loving children,
by countless armies, by all the glory of the arts, ruling over the
fairest empire on the earth, with every pleasure to his hand, a god in
all things save his mortality, and worshipped as a god, and yet a victim
to fear and superstition, and more heavy hearted than the meanest slave
about his palaces. Here was a lesson such as Solomon would have loved to
show, for with Solomon this Montezuma might cry:

'I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings
and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the
delights of the sons of men, and musical instruments, and that of all
sorts. And whatsoever my eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld
not my heart from any joy. And behold, all was vanity and vexation of
spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.'

So he might have cried, so, indeed, he did cry in other words, for, as
the painting of the skeletons and the three monarchs that is upon the
north wall of the aisle of Ditchingham Church shows forth so aptly,
kings have their fates and happiness is not to them more than to any
other of the sons of men. Indeed, it is not at all, as my benefactor
Fonseca once said to me; true happiness is but a dream from which we
awake continually to the sorrows of our short laborious day.

Then my thoughts flew to the vision of that most lovely maid, the
princess Otomie, who, as I believed, had looked on me so kindly, and I
found that vision sweet, for I was young, and the English Lily, my own
love, was far away and lost to me for ever. Was it then wonderful that
I should find this Indian poppy fair? Indeed, where is the man who would
not have been overcome by her sweetness, her beauty, and that stamp
