frightened by the messages sent by The Great King, that they humbly
yielded; but when the messengers came to Sparta and Athens, they met
with a different reception.

In both cities the people proudly replied that they were their own
masters, and would not yield to the demands of the Persian king. Then,
angered by the insolent command to give earth and water, the Spartans
entirely forgot that the life of an ambassador is sacred. In their rage,
they seized the Persians, flung one into a pit and the other into a
well, and told them to take all the earth and water they wanted.

This conduct made Darius all the more angry, and he hastened his
preparations as much as he could. He was so active that in a short time
he was able to start out again, with an army of a hundred and twenty
thousand men.

The generals of this force were Da'tis and Ar-ta-pher'-nes, who were
guided and advised by the traitor Hippias. The fleet was to land the
army on the plain of Mar'a-thon, close by the sea, and only one day's
journey from Athens.

When the Athenians heard that the Persians were coming, they immediately
decided to ask the Spartans, who were now their allies, to come to their
aid, and help them drive back the enemy. As there was no time to lose,
they chose as their messenger a fleet-footed Athenian, who made the
journey of a hundred and fifty miles in a few hours, running every step
of the way, and only seldom pausing to rest.

The Spartans listened breathlessly to his tidings, and promised that
they would help the Athenians; but they added, that they would not be
able to start until the moon was full, for they thought that they would
be beaten unless they set out at a certain time.

The Persians in the mean while were advancing rapidly, so the Athenians
started out to meet them with no other help than that of their neighbors
the Pla-tae'ans. The whole Greek force numbered only ten thousand men,
and was under the command of the ten Athenian generals who were each
entitled to the leadership for a day in turn.

Among these ten Athenian generals were three remarkable
men,--Mil-ti'a-des, Ar-is-ti'des, and The-mis'to-cles. They consulted
together, hoping to find a plan by which their small army could
successfully oppose the Persian host, which was twelve times greater.

At last Miltiades proposed a plan which might succeed, provided there
was but one chief, and all obeyed him well. Aristides, who was not only
a good man, but also remarkably just and wise, at once saw the
importance of such a plan, and offered to give up his day's command, and
to carry out his friend's orders just as if he were nothing but a common
soldier.

[Illustration: Themistocles.]

The other generals, not wishing to appear less generous than he, also
gave up their command to Miltiades, who thus found himself general in
chief of the Athenian and Plataean armies. So he speedily made his
preparations, and drew up his small force on the plain of Marathon,
between the mountains and the sea.




XLIV. THE BATTLE OF MARATHON.


The Greek army seemed so very small beside the huge host of invaders,
that the Persians felt perfectly sure that it would surrender as soon as
the fight began. Imagine their surprise, therefore, when the Greeks,
instead of waiting for them, gave the signal for battle, and rushed
furiously upon them.

The daring and force of the Greek attack so confused the Persians, that
they began to give way. This encouraged the Greeks still further, and
they fought with such bravery that soon the army of The Great King was
completely routed.

Hippias, fighting at the head of the Persian army, was one of the first
to die; and when the Persians saw their companions falling around them
like ripe grain under the mower's scythe, they were seized with terror,
rushed toward the sea, and embarked in their vessels in great haste.

The Athenians followed the enemy closely, killing all they could reach,
and trying to prevent them from embarking and so escaping their wrath.
One Greek soldier even rushed down into the waves, and held a Persian
vessel which was about to push off.

The Persians, anxious to escape, struck at him, and chopped off his
hand; but the Greek, without hesitating a moment, grasped the boat with
his other hand, and held it fast. In their hurry to get away, the
Persians struck off that hand too; but the dauntless hero caught and
held the boat with his strong teeth, and died beneath the repeated
blows of the enemy without having once let go. Thanks to him, not one of
those enemies escaped.

The victory was a glorious one. The whole Persian force had been routed
by a mere handful of men; and the Athenians were so proud of their
victory, that they longed to have their fellow-citizens rejoice with
them.

One of the soldiers, who had fought bravely all day, and who was covered
with blood, said he would carry the glad news, and, without waiting a
moment, he started off at a run.

Such was his haste to reassure the Athenians, that he ran at his utmost
speed, and reached the city in a few hours. He was so exhausted,
however, that he had barely time to gasp out, "Rejoice, we have
conquered!" before he sank down in the middle of the market place, dead.

The Greeks, having no more foes to kill, next began to rob the tents,
where they found so much booty that each man became quite rich. Then
they gathered up their dead, and buried them honorably on the
battlefield, at a spot where they afterward erected ten small columns
bearing the names of all who had lost their lives in the conflict.

Just as all was over, the Spartan force came rushing up, ready to give
their promised aid. They were so sorry not to have had a chance to fight
also, and to have missed a share in the glory, that they vowed they
would never again allow any superstition to prevent their striking a
blow for their native land whenever the necessity arose.

Miltiades, instead of permitting his weary soldiers to camp on the
battlefield, and celebrate their victory by a grand feast, next ordered
them to march on to the city, so as to defend it in case the Persian
fleet came to attack it.

The troops had scarcely arrived in town and taken up their post there,
when the Persian vessels came in; but when the soldiers attempted to
land, and saw the same men ready to meet them, they were so dismayed
that they beat a hasty retreat without striking another blow.




XLV. MILTIADES' DISGRACE.


The victory of Marathon was a great triumph for the Athenians; and
Miltiades, who had so successfully led them, was loaded with honors. His
portrait was painted by the best artist of the day, and it was placed in
one of the porticos of Athens, where every one could see it.

At his request, the main part of the booty was given to the gods, for
the Greeks believed that it was owing to divine favor that they had
conquered their enemies. The brazen arms and shields which they had
taken from the ten thousand Persians killed were therefore melted, and
formed into an immense statue of Athene, which was placed on the
Acropolis, on a pedestal so high that the glittering lance which the
goddess held could be seen far out at sea when the sunbeams struck its
point.

The Athenians vented their triumph and delight in song and dance, in
plays and works of art of all kinds; for they wished to commemorate the
glorious victory which had cost them only a hundred and ninety men,
while the enemy had lost ten thousand.

One of their choicest art treasures was made by Phidias, the greatest
sculptor the world has ever known, out of a beautiful block of marble
which Darius had brought from Persia. The Great King had intended to set
it up in Athens as a monument of his victory over the Greeks. It was
used instead to record his defeat; and when finished, the statue
represented Nem'e-sis, the goddess of retribution, whose place it was to
punish the proud and insolent, and to make them repent of their sins.

Miltiades was, as we have seen, the idol of the Athenian people after
his victory at Marathon. Unfortunately, however, they were inclined to
be fickle; and when they saw that Miltiades occupied such a high rank,
many began to envy him.

Themistocles was particularly jealous of the great honors that his
friend had won. His friends soon noticed his gloomy, discontented looks;
and when they inquired what caused them, Themistocles said it was
because the thought of the trophies of Miltiades would not let him
sleep. Some time after, when he saw that Miltiades was beginning to
misuse his power, he openly showed his dislike.

Not very far from Athens, out in the AEgean Sea, was the Island of
Pa'ros. The people living there were enemies of Miltiades; and he, being
sole head of the fleet, led it thither to avenge his personal wrongs.

The expedition failed, however; and Miltiades came back to Athens,
where Themistocles and the indignant citizens accused him of betraying
his trust, tried him, and convicted him of treason.

Had they not remembered the service that he had rendered his country in
defeating the Persians at Marathon, they would surely have condemned him
to death. As it was, the jury merely sentenced him to pay a heavy fine,
saying that he should remain in prison until it was paid.

Miltiades was not rich enough to raise this large sum of money, so he
died in prison. His son Ci'mon went to claim his body, so that he might
bury it properly; but the hard-hearted judges refused to let him have it
until he had paid his father's debt.

Thus forced to turn away without his father's corpse, Cimon visited his
friends, who lent him the necessary money. Miltiades, who had been the
idol of the people, was now buried hurriedly and in secret, because the
ungrateful Athenians had forgotten all the good he had done them, and
remembered only his faults.




XLVI. ARISTIDES THE JUST.


The Athenians were very happy, because they thought, that, having once
defeated the Persians, they need fear them no more. They were greatly
mistaken, however. The Great King had twice seen his preparations come
to naught and his plans ruined, but he was not yet ready to give up the
hope of conquering Greece.

On the contrary, he solemnly swore that he would return with a greater
army than ever, and make himself master of the proud city which had
defied him. These plans were suspected by Themistocles, who therefore
urged the Athenians to strengthen their navy, so that they might be
ready for war when it came.

Aristides, the other general, was of the opinion that it was useless to
build any more ships, but that the Athenians should increase their land
forces. As each general had a large party, many quarrels soon arose. It
became clear before long, that, unless one of the two leaders left the
town, there would be an outbreak of civil war.

All the Athenians, therefore, gathered together in the market place,
where they were to vote for or against the banishment of one of the
leaders. Of course, on this great occasion, all the workmen left their
labors, and even the farmers came in from the fields.

Aristides was walking about among the voters, when a farmer stopped him.
The man did not know who he was, but begged him to write his vote down
on the shell, for he had never even learned to read.

"What name shall I write?" questioned Aristides.

"Oh, put down 'Aristides,'" answered the farmer.

"Why do you want him sent away? Has he ever done you any harm?" asked
Aristides.

"No," said the man, "but I'm tired of hearing him called the Just."

Without saying another word, Aristides calmly wrote his own name on the
shell. When the votes were counted, they found six thousand against him:
so Aristides the Just was forced to leave his native city, and go away
into exile.

This was a second example of Athenian ingratitude; for Aristides had
never done anything wrong, but had, on the contrary, done all he could
to help his country. His enemies, however, were the men who were neither
honest nor just, and who felt that his virtues were a constant rebuke to
them; and this was the very reason why they were so anxious to get him
out of the city.




XLVII. TWO NOBLE SPARTAN YOUTHS.


Darius was in the midst of his preparations for a third expedition to
Greece, when all his plans were cut short by death. His son and
successor, Xerx'es I., now became King of Persia in his stead.

The new monarch was not inclined to renew the struggle with the Greeks;
but his courtiers and the exiled Greeks who dwelt in his palace so
persistently urged him to do it, that he finally consented. Orders were
then sent throughout the kingdom to get ready for war, and Xerxes said
that he would lead the army himself.

During eight years the constant drilling of troops, manufacture of arms,
collecting of provisions, and construction of roads, were kept up all
through Asia. A mighty fleet lay at anchor, and the king was almost
ready to start. Rumors of these great preparations had, of course, come
to the ears of the Greeks. All hearts were filled with trouble and fear;
for the coming army was far larger than the one the Athenians had
defeated at Marathon, and they could not expect to be so fortunate
again.

When the Spartans saw the terror of the people, they regretted having
angered the king by killing the Persian messengers, and wondered what
they could do to disarm his wrath. Two young men, Bu'lis and
Sper'thi-as, then nobly resolved to offer their lives in exchange for
those that had been taken.

They therefore set out for Persia, and, having obtained permission to
enter the palace, appeared before the king. Here the courtiers bade them
fall down before the monarch, and do homage to him, as they saw the
others do. But the proud young men refused to do so, saying that such
honor could be shown only to their gods, and that it was not the custom
of their country to humble themselves thus. Xerxes, to the surprise of
his courtiers did not at all resent their refusal to fall down before
him, but kindly bade them make their errand known.

Thus invited to speak, one of them replied, "King of Persia, some years
ago our people killed two of your father's messengers. It was wrong to
touch an ambassador, we know. You are about to visit our country to seek
revenge for this crime. Desist, O king! for we have come hither, my
friend and I, to offer our lives in exchange for those our people have
taken. Here we are! Do with us as you will."

Xerxes was filled with admiration when he heard this speech, and saw the
handsome youths standing quietly before him, ready to die to atone for
their country's wrong. Instead of accepting their offer, he loaded them
with rich gifts, and sent them home unharmed, telling them he would not
injure the innocent, for he was more just than the Lac-e-dae-mo'ni-ans.

But a few months later, when his preparations were complete, Xerxes set
