"I walked there once in three hours," said a collier, "but that was to
the wake. If you want to see divils carnal, there's your time of day.
They're no less than heathens, I be sure. I'd be sorry to see even our
butty among them, for he is a sort of a Christian when he has taken a
glass of ale."




Book 3 Chapter 2



Two days after the visit of Egremont to the cottage of Walter Gerard,
the visit of the Marney family to Mowbray terminated, and they returned
to the Abbey.

There is something mournful in the breaking up of an agreeable party,
and few are the roofs in which one has sojourned, which are quitted
without some feeling of depression. The sudden cessation of all those
sources of excitement which pervade a gay and well arranged mansion in
the country, unstrings the nervous system. For a week or so, we have
done nothing which was not agreeable, and heard nothing which was not
pleasant. Our self-love has been respected; there has been a total
cessation of petty cares; all the enjoyment of an establisnment without
any of its solicitude. We have beheld civilization only in its favoured
aspect, and tasted only the sunny side of the fruit. Sometimes there are
associations with our visit of a still sweeter and softer character, but
on these we need not dwell: glances that cannot be forgotten, and tones
that linger in the ear; sentiment that subdues the soul, and flirtation
that agitates the fancy. No matter, whatever may be the cause, one too
often drives away from a country-house, rather hipped. The specific
would be immediately to drive to another, and it is a favourite remedy.
But sometimes it is not in our power; sometimes for instance we must
return to our household gods in the shape of a nursery; and though this
was not the form assumed by the penates of Lord Marney, his presence,
the presence of an individual so important and so indefatigable, was
still required. His Lordship had passed his time at Mowbray to his
satisfaction. He had had his own way in everything. His selfishness had
not received a single shock. He had lain down the law and it had not
been questioned. He had dogmatised and impugned, and his assertions
had passed current, and his doctrines been accepted as orthodox. Lord
Mowbray suited him; he liked the consideration of so great a personage.
Lord Marney also really liked pomp; a curious table and a luxurious
life; but he liked them under any roof rather than his own. Not that he
was what is commonly called a Screw; that is to say he was not a
mere screw; but he was acute and malicious; saw everybody's worth and
position at a glance; could not bear to expend his choice wines and
costly viands on hangers-on and toad-eaters, though at the same time no
man encouraged and required hangers-on and toad-eaters more. Lord
Marney had all the petty social vices, and none of those petty social
weaknesses which soften their harshness or their hideousness. To receive
a prince of the blood or a great peer he would spare nothing. Had he to
fulfil any of the public duties of his station, his performance would
baffle criticism. But he enjoyed making the Vicar of Marney or Captain
Grouse drink some claret that was on the wane, or praise a bottle of
Burgundy that he knew was pricked.

Little things affect little minds. Lord Marney rose in no very good
humour; he was kept at the station, which aggravated his spleen. During
his journey on the railroad he spoke little, and though he more than
once laboured to get up a controversy he was unable, for Lady Marney,
who rather dreaded her dull home, and was not yet in a tone of mind that
could hail the presence of the little Poinsett as full compensation for
the brilliant circle of Mowbray, replied in amiable monosyllables, and
Egremont himself in austere ones, for he was musing over Sybil Gerard
and a thousand things as wild and sweet.

Everything went wrong this day. Even Captain Grouse was not at the Abbey
to welcome them back. He was playing in a cricket match, Marney against
Marham. Nothing else would have induced him to be absent. So it happened
that the three fellow-travellers had to dine together, utterly weary of
themselves and of each other. Captain Grouse was never more wanted; he
would have amused Lord Marney, relieved his wife and brother, reported
all that had been said and done in their neighbourhood during their
absence, introduced a new tone, and effected a happy diversion. Leaving
Mowbray, detained at the station, Grouse away, some disagreeable
letters, or letters which an ill-humoured man chooses to esteem
disagreeable, seemed to announce a climax. Lord Marney ordered the
dinner to be served in the small dining-room, which was contiguous to a
saloon in which Lady Marney, when they were alone, generally passed the
evening.

The dinner was silent and sombre; happily it was also short. Lord Marney
tasted several dishes, ate of none; found fault with his own claret,
though the butler had given him a choice bottle; praised Lord Mowbray's,
wondered where he got it, "all the wines at Mowbray were good;" then for
the twentieth time wondered what could have induced Grouse to fix the
cricket match the day he returned home, though he chose to forget that
he had never communicated to Grouse even the probable day on which he
might be expected.

As for Egremont it must be admitted that he was scarcely in a more
contented mood than his brother, though he had not such insufficient
cause for his dark humours. In quitting Mowbray, he had quitted
something else than merely an agreeable circle: enough had happened in
that visit to stir up the deep recesses of his heart, and to prompt
him to investigate in an unusual spirit the cause and attributes of
his position. He had found a letter on his return to the Abbey, not
calculated to dispel these somewhat morbid feelings; a letter from his
agent, urging the settlement of his election accounts, the primary cause
of his visit to his brother.

Lady Marney left the dining-room; the brothers were alone. Lord Marney
filled a bumper, which he drank off rapidly, pushed the bottle to his
brother, and then said again, "What a cursed bore it is that Grouse is
not here."

"Well, I cannot say, George, that I particularly miss the presence of
Captain Grouse," said his brother.

Lord Marney looked at Egremont pugnaciously, and then observed, "Grouse
is a capital fellow; one is never dull when Grouse is here."

"Well, for my part," said Egremont, "I do not much admire that amusement
which is dependent on the efforts of hangers-on."

"Grouse is no more a hanger-on than any one else," said Lord Marney,
rather fiercely.

"Perhaps not," said Egremont quietly; "I am no judge of such sort of
people."

"I should like to know what you are a judge of; certainly not of making
yourself agreeable to young ladies. Arabella cannot he particularly
charmed with the result of your visit to Mowbray, as far as Lady Joan is
concerned, Arabella's most intimate friend by the bye. If for no other
reason, you ought to have paid her more attention."

"I cannot pay attention unless I am attracted," said Egremont; "I have
not the ever-ready talent of your friend, Captain Grouse."

"I do not know what you mean by my friend Captain Grouse. Captain Grouse
is no more my friend than your friend. One must have people about the
house to do a thousand things which one cannot do oneself, and which one
cannot trust to servants, and Grouse does all this capitally."

"Exactly; he is just what I said, a capital hanger-on if you like, but
still a hanger-on."

"Well, and what then! Suppose he is a hanger-on; may I not have
hangers-on as well as any other man?"

"Of course you may; but I am not bound to regret their absence."

"Who said you were? But I will regret their absence, if I choose. And I
regret the absence of Grouse, regret it very much; and if he did happen
to be inextricably engaged in this unfortunate match, I say, and you
may contradict me if you please, that he ought to have taken care that
Slimsey dined here, to tell me all that had happened."

"I am very glad he omitted to do so," said Egremont; "I prefer Grouse to
Slimsey."

"I dare say you do," said Lord Marney, filling his glass and
looking very black; "you would like, I have no doubt, to see a fine
gentleman-saint, like your friend Mr St Lys, at Marney, preaching in
cottages, filling the people with discontent, lecturing me about low
wages, soliciting plots of grounds for new churches, and inveigling
Arabella into subscriptions to painted windows."

"I certainly should like to see a man like Aubrey St Lys at Marney,"
said Egremont quietly, but rather doggedly.

"And if he were here, I would soon see who should be master," said Lord
Marney; "I would not succumb like Mowbray. One might as well have a
jesuit in the house at once."

"I dare say St Lys would care very little about entering your house,"
said Egremont. "I know it was with great reluctance that he ever came to
Mowbray Castle."

"I dare say; very great reluctance indeed. And very reluctant he was,
I make no doubt, to sit next to Lady Maud. I wonder he does not fly
higher, and preach to Lady Joan; but she is too sensible a woman for
such fanatical tricks."

"St Lys thinks it his duty to enter all societies. That is the reason
why he goes to Mowbray Castle, as well as to the squalid courts and
cellars of the town. He takes care that those who are clad in purple
and fine linen shall know the state of their neighbours. They cannot
at least plead ignorance for the nonfulfilment of their duty. Before St
Lys's time, the family at Mowbray Castle might as well have not existed,
as far as benefiting their miserable vicinage. It would be well perhaps
for other districts not less wretched, and for other families as high
and favoured as the Mowbrays, if there were a Mr St Lys on the spot
instead of a Mr Slimsey."

"I suppose that is meant for a cut," said Lord Marney; "but I wish the
people were as well off in every part of the country as they are on
my estate. They get here their eight shillings a week, always at least
seven, and every hand is at this moment in employ, except a parcel of
scoundrels who prefer woodstealing and poaching, and who would prefer
wood-stealing and poaching if you gave them double the wages. The rate
of wages is nothing: certainty is the thing; and every man at Marney may
be sure of his seven shillings a-week for at least nine months in the
year; and for the other three, they can go to the House, and a very
proper place for them; it is heated with hot air, and has every comfort.
Even Marney Abbey is not heated with hot air. I have often thought of
it; it makes me mad sometimes to think of those lazy, pampered menials
passing their lives with their backs to a great roaring fire; but I am
afraid of the flues."

"I wonder, talking of fires, that you are not more afraid of burning
ricks," said Egremont.

"It's an infernal lie," said Lord Marney, very violently.

"What is?" said Egremont.

"That there is any incendiarism in this neighbourhood."

"Why, there was a fire the day after I came."

"That had nothing to do with wages; it was an accident. I examined into
it myself; so did Grouse, so did Slimsey; I sent them about everywhere.
I told them I was sure the fire was purely accidental, and to go and see
about it; and they came back and agreed that it was purely accidental."

"I dare say they did," said Egremont; "but no one has discovered the
accident."

"For my part, I believe it was spontaneous combustion," said Lord
Marney.

"That is a satisfactory solution." said Egremont, "but for my part, the
fire being a fact, and it being painfully notorious that the people of
Marney--"

"Well, sir, the people of Marney"--said his lordship fiercely.

"Are without question the most miserable population in the county."

"Did Mr St Lys tell you that?" interrupted Lord Marney, white with rage.

"No, not Mr Lys, but one better acquainted with the neighbourhood."

"I'll know your informant's name," said Lord Marney with energy.

"My informant was a woman," said Egremont.

"Lady Maud, I suppose; second-hand from Mr St Lys."

"Mv informant was a woman, and one of the people," said Egremont.

"Some poacher's drab! I don't care what women say, high or low, they
always exaggerate."

"The misery of a family who live upon seven or even eight shillings
a-week can scarcely be exaggerated."

"What should you know about it? Did you ever live on seven or eight
shillings a-week? What can you know about the people who pass your time
at London clubs or in fine country houses? I suppose you want the people
to live as they do at a house dinner at Boodle's. I say that a family
can live very well on seven shillings a-week, and on eight shillings
very well indeed. The poor are very well off, at least the agricultural
poor, very well off indeed. Their incomes are certain, that is a
great point, and they have no cares, no anxieties; they always have
a resource, they always have the House. People without cares do not
require as much food as those whose life entails anxieties. See how long
they live! Compare the rate of mortality among them with that of the
manufacturing districts. Incendiarism indeed! If there had been a proper
rural police, such a thing as incendiarism would never have been heard
of!"

There was a pause. Lord Marney dashed off another bumper; Egremont
sipped his wine. At length he said, "This argument made me forget the
principal reason, George, why I am glad that we are alone together
to-day. I am sorry to bore you, but I am bored myself deucedly. I find a
letter from my agent. These election accounts must be settled."

"Why, I thought they were settled."

"How do you mean?"

"I thought my mother had given you a thousand pounds."

"No doubt of that, but that was long ago disposed of."

"In my opinion quite enough for a seat in these times. Instead of paying
to get into Parliament, a man ought to be paid for entering it."

"There may be a good deal in what you say," said Egremont; "but it
is too late to take that view of the business. The expense has been
incurred and must be met."

"I don't see that," said Lord Marney, "we have paid one thousand pounds
and there is a balance unsettled. When was there ever a contest without
a balance being unsettled? I remember hearing my father often say that
when he stood for this county, our grandfather paid more than a
hundred thousand pounds, and yet I know to this day there are accounts
unsettled. Regularly every year I receive anonymous letters threatening
me with fearful punishment if I don't pay one hundred and fifty pounds
for a breakfast at the Jolly Tinkers."

"You jest: the matter indeed requires a serious vein. I wish these
accounts to be settled at once."

"And I should like to know where the funds are to come from! I have
none. The quantity of barns I am building now is something tremendous!
Then this rage for draining; it would dry up any purse. What think you
of two million tiles this year? And rents,--to keep up which we are
making these awful sacrifices--they are merely nominal, or soon will be.
They never will be satisfied till they have touched the land. That is
clear to me. I am prepared for a reduction of five-and-twenty per cent;
if the corn laws are touched, it can't be less than that. My mother
ought to take it into consideration and reduce her jointure accordingly.
But I dare say she will not; people are so selfish; particularly as she
has given you this thousand pounds, which in fact after all comes out of
my pocket."

"All this you have said to me before. What does it mean? I fought this
battle at the instigation of the family, from no feeling of my own. You
are the head of the family and you were consulted on the step. Unless
I had concluded that it was with your sanction, I certainly should not
have made my appearance on the hustings."

"I am very glad you did though," said Lord Marney; "Parliament is a
great point for our class: in these days especially, more even than in
the old time. I was truly rejoiced at your success, and it mortified the
whigs about us most confoundedly. Some people thought there was only one
family in the world to have their Richmond or their Malton. Getting you
in for the old borough was really a coup."

"Well now, to retain our interest," said Egremont, "quick payment of our
expenses is the most efficient way, believe me."

"You have got six years, perhaps seven," said Lord Marney, "and long
before that I hope to find you the husband of Lady Joan Fitz-Warene."

"I do not wish to connect the two contingencies," said Egremont firmly.

"They are inseparable," said Lord Marney.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that I think this pedantic acquittance of an electioneering
account is in the highest degree ridiculous, and that I cannot interfere
in it. The legal expenses are you say paid; and if they were not, I
should feel myself bound, as the head of the family, to defray them, but
I can go no further. I cannot bring myself to sanction an expenditure
for certainly very unnecessary, perhaps, and I much fear it, for illegal
and very immoral purposes."

"That really is your determination?"

"After the most mature reflection, prompted by a sincere solicitude for
your benefit."

"Well, George, I have often suspected it, but now I feel quite
persuaded, that you are really the greatest humbug that ever existed."

"Abuse is not argument, Mr Egremont."

"You are beneath abuse, as you are beneath every sentiment but one,
which I most entirely feel," and Egremont rose from the table.

"You may thank your own obstinacy and conceit," said Lord Marney. "I
took you to Mowbray Castle, and the cards were in your own hands if you
chose to play them."

"You have interfered with me once before on such a subject. Lord
Marney," said Egremont, with a kindling eye and a cheek pallid with
rage.

"You had better not say that again," said Lord Marney in a tone of
menace.

"Why not?" asked Egremont fiercely. "Who and what are you to dare to
address me thus?"

"I am your elder brother, sir, whose relationship to you is your only
claim to the consideration of society."

"A curse on the society that has fashioned such claims." said Egremont
in an heightened tone--"claims founded in selfishness, cruelty, and
fraud, and leading to demoralization, misery, and crime."

"Claims which I will make you respect, at least in this house, sir,"
said Lord Marney, springing from his chair.

"Touch me at your peril!" exclaimed Egremont, "or I will forget you are
my mother's son, and cleave you to the ground. You have been the blight
of my life; you stole from me my bride, and now you would rob me of my
honour."

"Liar and villain!" exclaimed Lord Marney, darting forward: but at
this moment his wife rushed into the apartment and clung to him. "For
heaven's sake," she exclaimed, "What is all this? George, Charles,
dearest George!"

"Let me go, Arabella."

"Let him come on."

But Lady Marney gave a piercing shriek, and held out her arms to keep
the brothers apart. A sound was heard at the other door; there was
nothing in the world that Lord Marney dreaded so much as that his
servants should witness a domestic scene. He sprang forward to the door
to prevent any one entering; partially opening it, he said Lady Marney
was unwell and desired her maid; returning, he found Arabella insensible
on the ground, and Egremont vanished!




Book 3 Chapter 3



It was a wet morning; there had been a heavy rain since dawn, which
impelled by a gusty south-wester came driving on a crowd of women and
girls who were assembled before the door of a still unclosed shop. Some
protected themselves with umbrellas; some sought shelter beneath a
row of old elms that grew alongside the canal that fronted the house.
Notwithstanding the weather, the clack of tongues was incessant.

"I thought I saw the wicket of the yard gates open," said a woman.

"So did I," said her neighbour; "but it was shut again immediately."

"It was only Master Joseph," said a third. "He likes to see us getting
wet through."

"If they would only let us into the yard and get under one of the
workshop sheds, as they do at Simmon's," said another.

"You may well say Simmon's, Mrs Page; I only wish my master served in
his field."

"I have been here since half-past four, Mrs Grigsby, with this chilt at
my breast all the time. It's three miles for me here, and the same back,
and unless I get the first turn, how are my poor boys to find their
dinner ready when they come out of the pit?"

"A very true word, Mrs Page; and by this token, that last Thursday I was
here by half-past eleven, certainly afore noon, having only called at my
mother-in-law's in the way, and it was eight o'clock before I got home.
Ah! it's cruel work, is the tommy shop."

"How d'ye do neighbour Prance?" said a comely dame with a large white
basket, "And how's your good man? They was saying at Belfy's he had
changed his service. I hear there's a new butty in Mr Parker's field;
but the old doggy kept on; so I always thought, he was always a
favourite, and they do say measured the stints very fair. And what
do you hear bacon is in town? They do tell me only sixpence and
real home-cured. I wonder Diggs has the face to be selling still at
nine-pence, and so very green! I think I see Dame Toddles; how wonderful
she do wear! What are you doing here, little dear; very young to fetch
tommy; keeping place for mother, eh! that's a good girl; she'd do well
to be here soon, for I think the strike's on eight. Diggs is sticking it
on yellow soap very terrible. What do you think--Ah! the doors are going
to open. No--a false alarm."

"How fare you neighbour?" said a pale young woman carrying an infant
to the comely dame. "Here's an awful crowd, surely. The women will be
fighting and tearing to get in, I guess. I be much afeard."

"Well, 'first come, first served,' all the world over," said the comely
dame. "And you must put a good heart on the business and tie your
bonnet. I dare guess there are not much less than two hundred here. It's
grand tommy day you know. And for my part I don't care so much for a
good squeedge; one sees so many faces one knows."

"The cheese here at sixpence is pretty tidy," said a crone to her
companion; "but you may get as good in town for fourpence."

"What I complain is the weights," replied her companion. "I weighed my
pound of butter bought last tommy day, and it was two penny pieces too
light. Indeed! I have been, in my time, to all the shops about here, for
the lads or their father, but never knew tommy so bad as this. I have
two children at home ill from their flour; I have been very poorly
myself; one is used to a little white clay, but when they lay it on
thick, it's very grave."

"Are your girls in the pit?"

"No; we strive to keep them out, and my man has gone scores of days on
bread and water for that purpose; and if we were not forced to take
so much tommy, one might manage--but tommy will beat anything; Health
first, and honesty afterwards, that's my say."

"Well, for my part," said the crone, "meat's my grievance: all the best
bits go to the butties, and the pieces with bone in are chopped off for
the colliers' wives."

"Dame, when will the door open?" asked a very little palefaced boy.
"I have been here all this morn, and never broke my fast."

"And what do you want, chilt?"

"I want a loaf for mother; but I don't feel I shall ever get home again,
I'm all in a way so dizzy."

"Liza Gray," said a woman with black beady eyes and a red nose, speaking
in a sharp voice and rushing up to a pretty slatternly woman in a straw
bonnet with a dirty fine ribbon, and a babe at her breast; "you know the
person I'm looking for."

"Well, Mrs Mullins, and how do you do?" she replied, "in a sweet sawney
tone."

"How do you do, indeed! How are people to do in these bad times?"

"They is indeed hard Mrs Mullins. If you could see my tommy book! How
I wish I knew figures! Made up as of last Thursday night by that little
divil, Master Joe Diggs. He has stuck it in here and stuck it in there,
till it makes one all of a-maze. I'm sure I never had the things; and
my man is out of all patience, and says I can no more keep house than a
natural born."

"My man is a-wanting to see your man," said Mrs Mullins, with a flashing
eye; "and you know what about."

"And very natural, too," said Liza Gray; "but how are we to pay the
money we owe him, with such a tommy-book as this, good neighbour
Mullins?"

"We're as poor as our neighbours Mrs Gray; and if we are not paid, we
must borrow. It's a scarlet shame to go to the spout because money lent
to a friend is not to be found. You had it in your need, Liza Gray, and
we want it in our need; and have it I will, Liza Gray."

"Hush, hush!" said Liza Gray; "don't wake the little-un, for she is very
fretful."

"I will have the five shillings, or I will have as good," said Mrs
Mullins.

"Hush, hush, neighbour; now, I'll tell you--you shall have it; but yet a
little time. This is great tommy-day, and settles our reckoning for five
weeks; but my man may have a draw after to-morrow, and he shall draw
five shillings, and give you half."

"And the other half?" said Mrs Mullins.

"Ah! the other half," said Liza Gray, with a sigh. "Well, then--we shall
have a death in our family soon--this poor babe can't struggle on much
longer; it belongs to two burial clubs--that will be three pounds from
each, and after the drink and the funeral, there will be enough to pay
all our debts and put us all square."

The doors of Mr Diggs' tommy-shop opened. The rush was like the advance
into the pit of a theatre when the drama existed; pushing, squeezing,
fighting, tearing, shrieking. On a high seat, guarded by rails from
all contact, sate Mr Diggs senior, with a bland smile on his sanctified
countenance, a pen behind his ear, and recommending his constrained
customers in honeyed tones to be patient and orderly. Behind the
substantial counter which was an impregnable fortification, was his
popular son, Master Joseph; a short, ill-favoured cur, with a spirit
of vulgar oppression and malicious mischief stamped on his visage. His
black, greasy lank hair, his pug nose, his coarse red face, and his
projecting tusks, contrasted with the mild and lengthened countenance of
his father, who looked very much like a wolf in sheep's clothing.

For the first five minutes Master Joseph Diggs did nothing but blaspheme
and swear at his customers, occasionally leaning over the counter and
cuffing the women in the van or lugging some girl by the hair.

"I was first, Master Joseph," said a woman eagerly.

"No; I was," said another.

"I was here," said the first, "as the clock struck four, and seated
myself on the steps, because I must be home early; my husband is hurt in
the knee."

"If you were first, you shall be helped last." said Master Joseph, "to
reward you for your pains!" and he began taking the orders of the other
woman.

"O! Lord have mercy on me!" said the disappointed woman; "and I got up
in the middle of the night for this!"

"More fool you! And what you came for I am sure I don't know," said
Master Joseph; "for you have a pretty long figure against you, I can
tell you that."

"I declare most solemnly--" said the woman.

"Don't make a brawling here," said Master Joseph, "or I'll jump over
this here counter and knock you down, like nothing. What did you say,
woman? are you deaf? what did you say? how much best tea do you want?"

"I don't want any, sir."

"You never want best tea; you must take three ounces of best tea, or you
shan't have nothing. If you say another word, I'll put you down four.
You tall gal, what's your name, you keep back there, or I'll fetch you
such a cut as'll keep you at home till next reckoning. Cuss you, you old
fool, do you think I am to be kept all day while you are mumbling here?
Who's pushing on there? I see you, Mrs Page. Won't there be a black mark
against you? Oh! its Mrs Prance, is it? Father, put down Mrs Prance for
a peck of flour. I'll have order here. You think the last bacon a little
too fat: oh! you do, ma'am, do you? I'll take care you shan't complain
in futur; I likes to please my customers. There's a very nice flitch
hanging up in the engine-room; the men wanted some rust for the
machinery; you shall have a slice of that; and we'll say ten-pence a
pound, high-dried, and wery lean--will that satisfy you!

"Order there, order; you cussed women, order, or I'll be among you. And
if I just do jump over this here counter, won't I let fly right and
left? Speak out, you ideot! do you think I can hear your muttering in
this Babel? Cuss them; I'll keep them quiet," and so he took up a yard
measure, and leaning over the counter, hit right and left.

"Oh! you little monster!" exclaimed a woman, "you have put out my
babby's eye."
