share the rule of a dwelling with my own daughter after she had taken
a husband, for such arrangements often end in bitterness and quarrels.
Therefore Jan determined to build them a new house in a convenient spot
not far away, and it was agreed that during the two or three months
while this house was building Ralph and his wife should pay a visit to a
cousin of mine, who owned a very fine farm on the outskirts of the dorp
which we used to visit from time to time to partake of _Nachtmahl_[*].
This seemed wise to us for several reasons beyond that of the building
of the new house. It is always best that young people should begin their
married life alone, as by nature they wish to do, and not under the eyes
of those who have bred and nurtured them, for thus face to face, with
none to turn to, they grow more quickly accustomed to each other's
faults and weaknesses, which, perhaps, they have not learned or taken
count of before.

     [*] That is, Holy Communion.

Moreover, in the case of Ralph and Suzanne we thought it safer that
they should be absent for a while from their own district and the
neighbourhood of Swart Piet, living in a peopled place where they could
not be molested, although, not knowing the wickedness of his heart, we
did not believe it possible that he _would_ molest them when once they
were married. Indeed, there was some talk of their going to the dorp
for the wedding, and I wish that they had done so, for then much trouble
might have been spared to us. But their minds were set against this
plan, for they desired to be married where they had met and lived so
long, so we did not gainsay them.

At length came the eve of the wedding day and with it the _predicant_,
who arrived hungry and thirsty but running over with smiles and
blessings. That night we all supped together and were full of joy, nor
were Ralph and Suzanne the least joyous of us, though they said little,
but sat gazing at each other across the table as though the moon had
struck them.

Before I went to bed I had occasion to go out of the house for I
remembered that some linen which Suzanne was to take with her had been
left drying upon bushes after the wash, and I feared that if it remained
there the Kaffir women might steal it. This linen was spread at a little
distance from the house, near the huts where Sihamba lived, but I took
no lantern with me, for the moon was bright.

As I drew near the spot I thought that I heard a sound of chanting which
seemed to come from a little circle of mimosa trees that grew a spear's
throw to my left, of chanting very low and sweet. Wondering who it was
that sung thus, and why she sang--for the voice was that of a woman--I
crept to the nearest of the trees, keeping in its shadow, and peeped
through the branches into the grassy space beyond, to perceive Sihamba
crouched in the centre of the circle. She was seated upon a low stone
in such fashion that her head and face shone strangely in the moonlight,
while her body was hidden in the shadow. Before her, placed upon another
stone, stood a large wooden bowl, such as the Kaffirs cut out of the
trunk of a tree, spending a month of labour, or more, upon the task,
and into this bowl, which I could see was filled with water, for it
reflected the moonrays, she was gazing earnestly, and, as she gazed,
chanting that low, melancholy song whereof I could not understand the
meaning.

Presently Sihamba ceased her singing, and turning from the bowl as
though she had seen in it something that frightened her, she covered her
eyes with her hands and groaned aloud, muttering words in which the name
of Suzanne was mixed up, or of Swallow, as she called her. Now I guessed
that Sihamba was practising that magic of which she was said to be so
great a mistress, although she denied always that she knew anything of
the art. At first I made up my mind to call to her to cease from such
wickedness, which, as the Holy Book tells us, is a sin in the eyes of
the Lord, and a cause of damnation to those who practise it. But I was
curious and longed greatly in my heart to know what it was that Sihamba
saw in the bowl, and what it had to do with my daughter Suzanne. So I
changed my mind, thereby making myself a partaker of the sin, and coming
forward said instead:

"What is it that you do here by night, in this solitary place, Sihamba?"

Now although, as I suppose, she had neither seen nor heard me, for I
came up from behind her, Sihamba did not start or cry out as any other
woman would have done; she did not even turn to look at me as she
answered in a clear and steady voice:

"Now while she is still a girl I read the fate of Swallow and of those
who love her according to my lore, O mother of Swallow. Look, I read it
there."

I looked and saw that the large bowl was filled to the brim with pure
water. At the bottom of it lay some white sand, and on the sand were
placed five pieces of broken looking-glass, all of which had been filed
carefully to a round shape. The largest of these pieces was of the size
of a crown of English money. This lay in the exact centre of the bowl.
Above it and almost touching its edge, was another piece the size of a
half-crown, then to the right and left at a little distance, two more
pieces of the size of a shilling, and below, but some way off, where the
bowl began to curve, a very small piece not larger than a six-penny bit.

"Swallow," said Sihamba, pointing to the two largest of the fragments,
"and husband of Swallow. There to the right and left father and mother
of Swallow, and here at her feet, a long way off and very small,
Sihamba, servant of Swallow, made all of them from the broken glass that
shows back the face, which she gave me, and set, as they must be set,
like the stars in the Cross of the Skies."

Now I shivered a little, for in myself I was afraid of this woman's
magic, but to her I laughed and said roughly:

"What fool's plaything made of bits of broken glass is this that you
have here, Sihamba?"

"It is a plaything that will tell a story to those who can read it," she
answered without anger, but like one who knows she speaks the truth.

"Make it tell its story to me, and I will believe you," I said laughing
again.

She shook her head and answered, "Lady, I cannot, for you have not the
Sight; but bring your husband here, and perhaps he will be able to read
the story, or some of it."

Now at this I grew angry, for it is not pleasant to a woman to hear that
a man whom all know to be but a child compared to her can see things in
water which she is not able to see, even though the things are born
only of the false magic of a witch-doctoress. Still, as at that moment
I chanced to hear Jan seeking me, for he wondered where I had gone, I
called to him and set out the matter, expecting that he would be very
angry and dismiss Sihamba, breaking up her magic bowl. But all the while
that I talked to him the little woman sat, her chin resting upon her
hand, looking into his face, and I think that she had some power over
him. At the least, he was not at all angry, although he said that I must
not mention the business to the _predicant_, who was well known to be
a prejudiced man. Then he asked Sihamba to show him the wonders of the
bowl. Replying that she would if she might, and always keeping her eyes
fixed upon his face, she bade him kneel down and look into the water in
such fashion that he did not shut the moonlight off from it, and to tell
us what he saw.

So he knelt and looked, whispering presently that on the midmost
piece of glass there appeared the image of Suzanne, and on the others
respectively those of Ralph, Jan himself, me his wife, and Sihamba. I
asked him what they were doing, but he could give me no clear answer, so
I suppose that they were printed there like the heads on postage stamps,
if indeed they existed anywhere except in Jan's brain, into which
Sihamba had conjured them.

"What do you see more?" asked Sihamba.

"I see a shadow in the water," he answered, "a dark shadow, and--it is
like the head of Swart Piet cut out of black paper--it spreads till it
almost hides all the faces on the bits of glass. Almost, I say, but
not quite, for things are passing beneath the shadow which I cannot
distinguish. Now it shrinks quite small, and lies only over your
likeness, Sihamba, which shows through it red--yes, and all the water
round it is red, and now there is nothing left;" and Jan rose pale
with fright, and wiped his brow with a coloured pocket-handkerchief,
muttering "Allemachter! this is magic indeed."

"Let me look," I said, and I looked for a long while and saw nothing
except the five bits of glass. So I told Jan outright that he was a fool
whom any conjurer could play with, but he waited until I had done and
then asked Sihamba what the vision meant.

"Father of Swallow," she answered, "what I saw in the water mirror you
have seen, only I saw more than you did because my sight is keener. You
ask me what it means, but I cannot tell you altogether, for such visions
are uncertain; they sum up the future but they do not show it all. This,
however, is sure, that trouble waits us every one because of Swart Piet,
for his shadow lay thick upon the image of each of us; only note
this, that while it cleared away from the rest, it remained upon mine,
staining it blood-red, which means that while in the end you will escape
him, I shall die at his hands, or through him. Well, so be it, but
meanwhile this is my counsel--because of other things that I saw in the
water which I cannot describe, for in truth I know not rightly what they
were--that the marriage of the Swallow and her husband should be put
off, and that when they are married it should be at the dorp yonder, not
here."

Now when I heard this my anger overflowed like water in a boiling pot.
"What!" I cried, "when all is settled and the _predicant_ has ridden for
two days to do the thing, is the marriage to be put off because forsooth
this little black idiot declares that she sees things on bits of glass
in a bowl, and because you, Jan, who ought to know better, take the lie
from her lips and make it your own? I say that I am mistress here and
that I will not allow it. If we are to be made fools of in this fashion
by the peepings and mutterings of Kaffir witch-doctors we had better
give up and die at once to go and live among the dead, whose business it
is to peep and mutter. Our business is to dwell in the world and to face
its troubles and dangers until such time as it pleases God to call us
out of the world, paying no heed to omens and magic and such like sin
and folly. Let that come which will come, and let us meet it like men
and women, giving glory to the Almighty for the ill as well as for the
good, since both ill and good come from His hands and are part of His
plan. For my part I trust to Him who made us and who watches us, and I
fear not Swart Piet, and therefore chance what may the marriage shall go
on."

"Good words," said Jan, "such as my heart approves of;" but he still
mopped his head with the coloured pocket-handkerchief and looked
troubled as he added, "I pray you, wife, say nothing of this to anybody,
and above all to the predicant, or he will put me out of the church as a
wizard."

"Yes, yes," said Sihamba, "good words, but the Sight is still the Sight
for those who have the power to see. Not that I wished you to see,
indeed I did not wish it, nor did I think that you would be turned from
your purpose by that which you have seen. Father and mother of Swallow,
you are right, and now I will tell you the truth. What you beheld in the
water was nothing but a trick, a clever trick of the little doctoress,
Sihamba, by the help of which and others like it, she earns her living,
and imposes on the foolish, though she cannot impose upon you, who are
wise, and have the Lord of the skies for a friend. So think no more of
it, and do not be angry with the little black monkey whose nature it
is to play tricks;" and with a motion of her foot she upset the bowl
of water, and collecting the pieces of mirror hid them away in her skin
pouch.

Then we went, but as I passed through the thorn trees I turned and
looked at Sihamba, and lo! she was standing in the moonlight, her face
lifted towards the sky, weeping softly and wringing her hands. Then for
the first time I felt a little afraid.



CHAPTER XIV

THE WEDDING

The marriage morning of Ralph and Suzanne broke brightly; never have I
seen a fairer. It was spring time, and the veldt was clothed with the
fresh green grass and starred everywhere with the lily blooms that
sprang among it. The wind blew softly, shaking down the dewdrops from
the growing corn, while from every bush and tree came the cooing
of unnumbered doves. Beneath the eave of the _stoep_ the pair of
red-breasted swallows which had built there for so many years were
finishing their nest, and I watched them idly, for to me they were old
friends, and would wheel about my head, touching my cheek with their
wings. Just then they paused from their task, or perhaps it was at
length completed, and flying to a bough of the peach tree a few yards
away, perched there together amidst the bright bloom, and nestling
against each other, twittered forth their song of joy and love.

It was at this moment that Sihamba walked up to the _stoep_ as though to
speak to me.

"The Swallow and the Swallow's mate," she said, following my eyes to
where the little creatures swung together on the beautiful bough.

"Yes," I answered, for her fancy seemed to me of good omen, "they have
built their nest, and now they are thanking God before they begin to
live together and rear their young in love."

As the words left my lips a quick shadow swept across the path of sunlit
ground before the house, two strong wings beat, and a brown hawk, small
but very fierce, being of a sort that preys upon small birds, swooped
downwards upon the swallows. One of them saw it, and slid from the
bough, but the other the hawk caught in its talons, and mounted with
it high into the air. In vain did its mate circle round it swiftly,
uttering shrill notes of distress; up it went steadily as pitiless as
death.

"Oh! my swallow," I cried aloud in grief, "the accursed hawk has carried
away my swallow."

"Nay, look," said Sihamba, pointing upwards.

I looked, and behold! a black crow that appeared from behind the house,
was wheeling about the hawk, striking at it with its beak until, that
it might have its talons free to defend itself, it let go the swallow,
which, followed by its mate, came fluttering to the earth, while the
crow and the falcon passed away fighting, till they were lost in the
blue depths of air.

Springing from the _stoep_ I ran to where the swallow lay, but Sihamba
was there before me and had it in her hands.

"The hawk's beak has wounded it," she said pointing to a blood stain
among the red feathers of the breast, "but none of its bones are broken,
and I think that it will live. Let us put it in the nest and leave it to
its mate and nature."

This we did, and there in the nest it stayed for some days, its mate
feeding it with flies as though it were still unfledged. After that they
vanished, both of them together, seeking some new home, nor did they
ever build again beneath our eaves.

"Would you speak with me, Sihamba?" I asked when this matter of the
swallows was done with.

"I would speak with the Baas, or with you, it is the same thing," she
answered, "and for this reason. I go upon a journey; for myself I have
the good black horse which the Baas gave me after I had ridden to warn
you in Tiger Kloof yonder, the one that I cured of sickness. But I
need another beast to carry pots and food and my servant Zinti, who
accompanies me. There is the brown mule which you use little because he
is vicious, but he is very strong and Zinti does not fear him. Will you
sell him to me for the two cows I earned from the Kaffir whose wife I
saved when the snake bit her? He is worth three, but I have no more to
offer."

"Whither do you wish to journey, Sihamba?" I asked.

"I follow my mistress to the dorp," she answered.

"Did she bid you follow her, Sihamba?"

"No! is it likely that she would think of me at such a time, or care
whether I come or go? Fear not, I shall not trouble her, or put her to
cost; I shall follow, but I shall not be seen until I am wanted."

Now I had made up my mind to gainsay Sihamba, not that I could find any
fault with her plan, but because if such arrangements are to be made, I
like to make them myself, as is the business of the head of the house. I
think Sihamba guessed this; at any rate she answered me before I spoke,
and that in an odd way, namely, by looking first at the swallow's nest,
then at the blooming bough of the peach tree, and lastly into the far
distances of air.

"It was the black crow that drove the hawk away," she said,
reflectively, as though she were thinking of something else, "though I
think, for my eyes are better than yours, that the hawk killed the crow,
or perhaps they killed each other; at the least I saw them falling to
the earth beyond the crest of the mountain."

At this I was about to break in angrily, for if there was one thing in
the world I hated it was Sihamba's nonsense about birds and omens and
such things, whereof, indeed, I had had enough on the previous night,
when she made that lump Jan believe that he saw visions in a bowl of
water. And yet I did not--for the black crow's sake. The cruel hawk had
seized the swallow which I loved, and borne it away to devour it in its
eyrie, and it was the crow that saved it. Well, the things that happened
among birds might happen among men, who also prey upon each other,
and--but I could not bear the thought.

"Take the mule, Sihamba," I said; "I will answer for it to the Baas. As
for the two cows, they can run with the other cattle till your return."

"I thank you, Mother of Swallow," she answered, and turned to go, when I
stopped her and asked:

"Have you heard anything that makes you afraid, Sihamba?"

"I have heard nothing," she replied, "still I am afraid."

"Then you are a fool for your pains, to be afraid of nothing," I
answered roughly; "but watch well, Sihamba."

"Fear not, I will watch till my knees are loosened and my eyes grow
hollow." Then she went away, and that was the last I saw of her for many
a weary month. Ah! Suzanne, child, had it not been for the watching of
little Sihamba, the walker-by-moonlight, you had not been sitting there
to-day, looking much as she used to look, the Suzanne of fifty years
ago.



The marriage was to take place at noon, and though I had much to see
to, never have I known a longer morning. Why it was I cannot say, but it
seemed to me as though twelve o'clock would never come. Then, wherever
I went there was Ralph in my way, wandering about in a senseless fashion
with his best clothes on, while after him wandered Jan holding his new
hat in his hand.

"In the name of Heaven," I cried at length as I blundered into both of
them in the kitchen, "be off out of this. Why are you here?"

"Allemachter!" said Jan, "because we have nowhere else to go. They are
making the sitting-room ready for the service and the dinner after it;
the _predicant_ is in Ralph's room writing; Suzanne is in yours trying
on her clothes, and the _stoep_ and even the stables are full of
Kaffirs. Where, then, shall we go?"

"Cannot you see to the waggon?" I asked.

"We have seen to it, mother," said Ralph; "it is packed, and the oxen
