receptions. We had one evening to which, as I said, came our poor exiled
countrymen, and there were other assemblies, to some of which we went
by invitation; but at the Hotel de Rambouillet, and one or two others we
knew we were always welcome. There we heard M. Corneille read the
Cid, on of his finest pieces, before it was put on the stage. I cannot
describe how those noble verses thrilled in our ears and heart, how
tears were shed and hands clasped, and how even Annora let herself be
carried along by the tide. Clement Darpent was often there, and once or
twice recited again, but Madame de Rambouillet always took care first
to know what he was going to say. A poem upon St. Monica was the work
of his that I liked bets, but it was not so much admired as verses more
concerned with the present.

The Prince of Conde came back to Paris for a few weeks, and my poor
Cecile was greatly disappointed that her husband remained in garrison
and did not come with him. 'But then,' as she said to console herself,
'every month made the children prettier, and she was trying to be a
little more nice and agreeable.'

Two appointments were made for which I was less grateful than was
my mother. My little son was made one of the King's gentlemen of
the bedchamber, and Mademoiselle requested me to be one of her
ladies-in-waiting. She was very good-natured, provided she thought
herself obeyed, and she promised that my turn should always come at
the same time as my son's, so that I might be at home with him. I was a
little laughed at, and my former name of Gildippe was made to alternate
with that of Cornelia; but French mothers have always been devoted to
their sons, and there was some sympathy with me among the ladies.

I owned that my presence was required at home, for Gaspard generally
came back a much naughtier boy than he went, and with a collection of
bad words that I had to proscribe. Before the Queen-Regent, the little
King and the Duke of Anjou were the best boys in the world, and as
stately and well-mannered as become the first gentlemen of France; but
when once out of her sight they were the most riotous and mischievous
children in the world, since nobody durst restrain, far less punish
them. They made attacks on the departments of the stewards and cooks,
kicking and biting any one who tried to stop them, and devouring fruit
and sweetmeats till their fine clothes were all bedaubed, and they
themselves indisposed, and then their poor valets suffered for it. The
first time this happened my poor Gaspard was so much shocked that he
actually told the King that it was dishonourable to let another suffer
for his fault.

'I would have you to know, Monsieur le Marquis,' said Louis XIV.,
drawing himself up, 'that the King of France is never in fault.'

However, I will say for His Majesty that it was the Duke of Anjou who
told the Queen that the little Nidemerle had been disrespectful, and
thus caused the poor child to be sent home, severely beaten, and with a
reprimand to me for not bringing him up better.

I leave you to guess how furious I was, and how I raged about the house
till I frightened my mother, Annora backing me up with all her might.
We were almost ready to take Gaspard in our hands and escape at once
to England. Even in its present sad state I should at least be able to
bring up my boy without having him punished for honourable sentiments
and brave speeches. Of course it was the Abbe on the one hand, and
Eustace on the other, who moderated me, and tried to show me, as well as
my son, that though the little Louis might be a naughty boy, the kingly
dignity was to be respected in him.

'Thou wouldst not blame thy mother even if she were in fault,' argued
Eustace.

'But my mother never is in fault,' said Gaspard, throwing himself into
my arms.

'Ah, there spoke thy loyal heart, and a Frenchman should have the same
spirit towards his King.'

'Yes,' broke out Annora; 'that is what you are all trying to force on
your children, setting up an idol to fall down and crush yourselves! For
shame, Walwyn, that you, an Englishman, should preach such a doctrine to
the poor child!'

'Nay, you little Frondeuse, there is right and safety in making a
child's tongue pay respect to dignities. He must separate the office
from the man, or the child.'

All that could be done was that I should write a humble apology for
my son. Otherwise they told me he would certainly be taken from so
dangerous a person, and such a dread always made me submissive to the
bondage in which we were all held.

Was it not strange that a Queen who would with her own hands minister to
the suffered in the hospital should be so utterly ignorant of her duties
in bringing up the heir of the great kingdom? Gaspard, who was much
younger, could read well, write, and knew a little Latin and English,
while the King and his brother were as untaught as peasants in the
fields. They could make the sign of the cross and say their prayers,
and their manners COULD be perfect, but that was all. They had no
instruction, and their education was not begun. I have the less
hesitation in recording this, as the King has evidently regretted it,
and has given first his son, then his grandsons, the most admirable
masters, besides having taken great pains with himself.

I suppose the Spanish dislike to instruction dominated the Queen, and
made her slow to inflict on her sons what she so much disliked, and she
was of course perfectly ignorant of their misbehaviour.

I am sorry to say that Gaspard soon ceased to be shocked. His aunt
declared that he was becoming a loyal Frenchman who he showed off his
Louvre manners by kicking the lackeys, pinching Armantine, and utterly
refusing to learn his lessons for the Abbe, declaring that he was
Monsieur le Marquis, and no one should interfere with him. Once when he
came home a day or two before me, he made himself quite intolerable to
the whole house, by insisting on making Armantine and her little brother
defend a fortress on the top of the stairs, which he attacked with the
hard balls of silk and wool out of our work-baskets. Annora tried to
stop him, but only was kicked for her pains. It was his HOTEL he said,
and he was master there, and so he went on, though he had given poor
Armantine a black eye, and broken two panes of glass, till his uncle
came home, and came upon him with a stern 'Gaspard.' The boy began again
with his being the Marquis and the master, but Eustace put him down at
once.

'Thou mayst be Marquis, but thou art not master of this house, nor of
thyself. Thou art not even a gentleman while thou actest thus. Go to thy
room. We will see what thy mother says to this.'

Gaspard durst not struggle with his uncle, and went off silent and
sulky; but Eustace had subdued him into penitence before I came home.
And I can hardly tell how, but from that time the principle of loyalty
to the sovereign, without imitation of the person, seemed to have been
instilled into the child, so that I feel, and I am sure he will agree
with me, that I owe my son, and he owes himself, to the influence of my
dear brother.

Had it not been for leaving him, my service to Mademoiselle would have
been altogether amusing. True, she was marvelously egotistical and
conceited, but she was very good-natured, and liked to make those about
her happy. Even to her stepmother and little sisters, whom she did not
love, she was never unkind, though she lived entirely apart, and kept
her own little court separately at the Louvre, and very odd things we
did there.

Sometimes we were all dressed up as the gods and goddesses, she being
always Minerva--unless as Diana she conducted us as her nymphs to
the chase in the park at Versailles. Sometimes we were Mademoiselle
Scudery's heroines, and we wrote descriptions of each other by these
feigned names, some of which appear in her memoirs. And all the time
she was hoping to marry the Emperor, and despising the suit of Queen
Henrietta for our Prince of Wales, who, for his part, never laughed so
much in secret as when he attended this wonderful and classical Court.




CHAPTER XV. -- A STRANGER THANKSGIVING DAY.



There was a curious scene in our salon the day after the news had come
of the great victory of Lens. Clement Darpent had been brought in by my
brother, who wished him to hear some English songs which my sister and
I had been practicing. He had been trying to learn English, and perhaps
understood it better than he could speak it, but he was somewhat
perplexed by those two gallant lines--


          'I could not love thee, dear, so much,
            Loved I not honour more.'


Annora's eyes flashed with disappointed anger as she said, 'You enter
not into the sentiment, Monsieur. I should have hoped that if any
Frenchman could, it would be you!'

'For my part,' observed my mother, 'I am not surprised at the question
not being appreciated by the gens de la robe.'

I saw Eustace look infinitely annoyed at this insult to his friend's
profession, and to make it worse, Gaspard, who had come home that
morning from the palace, exclaimed, having merely caught the word
'honour'--

'Yes, the gens de la robe hate our honour. That is why the King said,
when news of our great victory came, 'Oh, how sorry the Parliament will
be!'

'Did he?' exclaimed my mother. 'Is it true, my grandson?'

'True; yes indeed, Madame ma Grandmere,' replied Gaspard. 'And you
should have seen how all the world applauded him.'

'I would not have applauded him,' said Eustace sadly. 'I would have
tried to teach him that nothing can be of more sad omen for a king than
to regard his Parliament as his enemy.'

'My son,' returned my mother, 'if you must utter such absurdities, let
it not be before this child. Imagine the consequence of his repeating
them!'

'Ah! sighed Darpent, 'it would be well if only, through child lips or
any others, the King and his mother could learn that the Parliament can
heartily rejoice in all that is for the true glory and honour in justice
and in the well-being of her people, and that we love above all!'

'There,' said I, glad to turn the conversation from the dangerous
political turn it was taking, 'I knew it was merely the language and not
the sentiment of our song that Monsieur Darpent did not comprehend.'

And when it was translated and paraphrased, he exclaimed, 'Ah! truly
Mademoiselle may trust me that such sentiments are the breath of life
to those who are both French and of the robe. May ONE at least live to
prove it to her!'

The times were threatening in France as well as in England, for if in
the latter realm, the thunderbolt had fallen, in the former, the tempest
seemed to be gathering. They say that it dispersed after a few showers,
but there are others who say that it is only stored up to fall with
greater fury in later times. Ah, well! if it be so, I pray that none
of mine may be living to see it, for I cannot conceal from myself that
there is much among us that may well call down the vengeance of Heaven.
Yet, if our good Duke of Burgundy fulfil the promise of his youth, the
evil may yet be averted.

The Parliament of Paris had made an attempt to check the reckless
exactions of the Court by refusing to register the recent edicts for
taxation, and it was this that made the Queen so angry with them.
Eustace began to explain that it had been the unfortunate endeavour
to raise money without the consent of Parliament that had been the
immediate cause of the troubles in England for which they were still
suffering. This implied censure of King Charles so displeased my mother
that she declared that she would listen to such treason no longer,
started up and quitted the room, calling Annora with her. Poor Annora
gave one of her grim looks, but was obliged to obey; I did not feel
bound to do the same, as indeed I stood in the position of hostess: so
I remained, with Gaspard leaning on my lap, while my brother and M.
Darpent continued their conversation, and the latter began to describe
the actual matter in debate, the Paulette, namely, the right of
magistrates to purchase the succession to their offices for their sons,
provided a certain annual amount was paid to the Crown. The right had to
be continually renewed by fresh edicts for a certain term. This term was
now over, and the Crown refused to renew it except on condition that all
that salaries should be forfeited for four years. To our English notions
the whole system was a corruption, but the horrible ill faith of the
Court, which ruined and cheated so many families, was nevertheless
shocking to us. Clement Darpent, who had always looked on the Paulette
as a useful guarantee, and expected to succeed to his father's office as
naturally as Eustace had done to the baronies of Walwyn and Ribaumont,
could not then see it in the same light, and expatiated on the speeches
made by the Councillors Broussel, Blancmesnil, and others, on the
injustice of such a measure.

Gaspard caught the name of Blancmesnil, and looking up, he said
'Blancmesnil! It is he that the King says is a scoundrel to resist his
will; but he will soon be shut up. They are going to arrest him.'

'Pray how long have they taken little imps like thee into their
counsels?' demanded Eustace, as we all sat petrified at this
announcement.

'It was the Duke of Anjou who told me,' said Gaspard. 'He was sitting at
the foot of the Queen's bed when she settled it all with M. le Cardinal.
They will send to have coup de main made of all those rogues as soon as
the Te Deum is over tomorrow at Notre Dame, and then there will be no
more refusing of money for M. le Prince to beat the Spaniards with.'

'The Duke should choose his confidants better,' said Eustace. 'Look
here, my nephew. Remember from henceforth that whatever passes in secret
council is sacred, and even if told to thee inadvertently should never
be repeated. Now leave us; your mother needs you no longer.'

My little boy made his graceful bow at the door, looking much perplexed,
and departed. I rose likewise, saying I would forbid him to repeat his
dangerous communication, and I trusted that it would do him no harm.

'Madame,' said M. Darpent, 'I will not conceal from you that I shall
take advantage of what I have heard to warn these friends of my father.'

'You cannot be expected to do otherwise,' said Eustace; 'and truly the
design is so arbitrary and unjust that, Cavalier as I am, I cannot but
rejoice that it should be baffled.'

'And,' added Darpent, before I could speak, 'Madame may be secure that
no word shall pass my lips respecting the manner in which I received the
warning.'

I answered that I could trust him for that. I could not expect any more
from him, and indeed none of us were bound in honour. The fault was with
the Duke of Anjou, who, as we all know, was an incorrigible chatter-box
all his life, and never was trusted with any State secrets at all; but
his mother must have supposed him not old enough to understand what she
was talking about, when she let him overhear such a conversation.

Gaspard had, however, a private lecture from both of us on the need of
holding his tongue, both on this matter and all other palace gossip.
He was no longer in waiting, and I trusted that all would be forgotten
before his turn came again; but he was to join in the state procession
on the following day, a Sunday, when the King and Queen-Regent were
return thanks at Notre Dame for the victory at Lens.

Ah, children! we had victories then. Our Te Deums were not sung with
doubting hearts, to make the populace believe a defeat a victory--a
delusion to which this French nation of ours is only too prone. My
countryman, Marlborough, and the little truant Abbe, Eugene of Savoy,
were not then the leaders of the opposite armies; but at the head of
our own, we had M. le Prince and the Vicomte de Turenne in the flower
of their age, and our triumphs were such that they might well intoxicate
the King, who was, so to speak, brought up upon them. It was a
magnificent sight, which we all saw from different quarters--my mother
in the suite of the Queen of England, Gaspard among the little noblemen
who attended the King, I among the ladies who followed Mademoiselle,
while my brother and sister, though they might have gone among their own
Queen's train, chose to shift for themselves. They said they should see
more than if, like us, they formed part of the pageant; but I believe
the real reason was, that if they had one early to Queen Henrietta's
apartments in full dress, they must have missed their English prayers at
the Ambassador's, which they never chose to do on a Sunday.

The choir part of the nave was filled with tribunes for the royal
family and their suites; and as the most exalted in rank went the last,
Mademoiselle, and we ladies behind her, came to our places early enough
to see a great deal of the rest of the procession. The whole choir was
already a field of clergy and choristers, the white robes of the latter
giving relief to the richly-embroidered purple and lace-covered robes
of the Bishops, who wore their gold and jeweled mitres, while their
richly-gilded pastoral staves and crosses were borne before them. The
Coadjutor of Paris, who was to be the Celebrant, was already by the
Altar, his robes absolutely encrusted with gold; and just after we had
taken our places there passed up the Cardinal, with his pillars borne
before him, in his scarlet hat and his robes.

Every lady was, according to the Spanish fashion, which Queen Anne had
introduced, in black or in white--the demoiselles in white, the married
in black--and all with the black lace veil on their heads. The French
ladies had murmured much at this, but there is no denying that the
general effect was much better for the long lines of black above and
white below, and as there was no restriction upon their jewellery,
emeralds, rubies, and diamonds flashed wherever the light fell on them.

Beyond, a lane was preserved all down the length of the nave by
the tall, towering forms of the Scottish archers, in their rich
accoutrements, many of them gallant gentlemen, who had served under the
Marquess of Montrose; and in the aisles behind them surged the whole
multitude--gentlemen, ladies, bourgeois, fishwives, artisans, all sorts
of people, mixed up together, and treating one another with a civility
and forbearance of which my brother and sister confessed and English
crowd would have been incapable, though they showed absolutely no
reverence to the sacred place; and I must own the ladies showed as
little, for every one was talking, laughing, bowing to acquaintance,
or pointing out notorieties, and low whispers were going about of some
great and secret undertaking of the Queen-Regent. Low, did I say! Nay, I
heard the words 'Blancmesnil and Broussel' quite loud enough to satisfy
me that if the attempt had been disclosed, it would not be possible
to fix the blame of betraying it on my little son more than on twenty
others. Indeed the Queen of England observed to her niece, loud enough
for me to hear her, that it was only too like what she remembered only
seven years ago in England, when her dear King had gone down to arrest
those five rogues of members, and all had failed because of that vile
gossip Lady Carlisle.

'And who told my Lady Carlisle?' demanded Mademoiselle with some
archness; whereupon Queen Henrietta became very curious to know whether
the handsome Duke of Beaufort were, after his foolish fashion, in the
crowd, making himself agreeable to the ladies of the market-place.

Trumpets, however, sounded, and all rose from their seats, as up the
nave swept Queen Anne, her black mantilla descending over her fair hair
from a little diamond crown, her dress--white satin--with a huge long
blue velvet train worked with gold fleurs-de-lys, supported by four pair
of little pages in white satin. Most regal did she look, leading by the
hand the little Duke of Anjou; while the young King, who was now old
enough to form the climax of the procession, marched next after in blue
and gold, holding his plumed hat in his hand, and bowing right and left
with all his royal courtesy and grace, his beautiful fair hair on his
shoulders, shining with the sun. And there was my little Marquis among
the boys, who immediately followed him in all his bright beauty and
grace.

Most glorious was the High Mass that followed. Officer after officer
marched up and laid standard after standard before the Altar, heavy
with German blazonry, or with the red and gold stripes of Aragon, the
embattled castles of Castille, till they amounted to seventy-three. It
must have been strange to the Spanish Queen to rejoice over these as
they lay piled in a gorgeous heap before the high Altar, here and there
one dim with weather or stained with blood. The peals of the Te Deum
from a thousand voices were unspeakably magnificent, and yet through
them all it seemed to me that I heard the wail not only of the
multitudes of widowed wives and sonless parents, but of the poor
peasants of all the nation, crying aloud to Heaven for the bread which
they were forbidden to eat, when they had toiled for it in the sweat of
their brow. Yes, and which I was not permitted to let them enjoy!

Ah! which did the Almighty listen to? To the praise, or to the mourning,
lamentation, and woe? You have often wondered, my children, that I
absented myself from the Te Deums of victory while we had them. Now you
know the reason.

And then I knew that all this display was only an excuse under which the
Queen hid her real design of crushing all opposition to her will. She
wanted to commit an injustice, and silence all appeals against it, so
that the poor might be more and more ground down! How strange in the
woman whom I had seen bearing patiently, nay, joyfully, with the murmurs
of the faggot-seller in the hospital! Truly she knew not what she did!

As she left the Cathedral, and passed M. de Comminges, a lieutenant of
her Guards, she said: 'Go, and Heaven be with you.'

I was soon at home safely with my boys, to carry an account of our
doings to my dear little M. d'Aubepine, who, unable to bear the fatigue
and the crush of Notre Dame, had taken her little children to a Mass of
thanksgiving celebrated by our good Abbe at the nearest Church.

We waited long and long for the others to come. I was not uneasy for my
mother, who was with the Queen; but the servants brought reports that
the canaille had risen, and that the streets were in wild confusion. We
could see nothing, and only heard wild shouts from time to time. What
could have become of Eustace and Annora? My mother would have been
afraid that with their wild English notions they had rushed into
something most unsuitable to a French demoiselle, and I was afraid
for Eustace, if they were involved in any crowd or confusion, for his
strength was far from being equal to his spirit. We watched, sure that
we heard cries and shouts in the distance, the roar of the populace,
such as I remembered on that wedding day, but sharper and shriller, as
French voices are in a different key from the English roar and growl.

It passed, however, and there was long silence. Gaspard and Armantine
stood at the window, and at last, as evening twilight fell, cried out
that a carriage was coming in at the porte cochere. Presently Annora ran
into the room, all in a glow, and Eustace followed more slowly.

'Have you been frightened?' she cried. 'Oh, we have had such an
adventure! If they had not screamed and shrieked like peacocks, or
furies, I could have thought myself in England.'

'Alack! that a tumult should seem like home to you, sister,' said
Eustace gravely.

Then they told how at the ambassador's chapel they had heard that good
Lady Fanshawe, whom they had known in England, had arrived sick and sad,
after the loss of a young child. They determined, therefore, to steal
away from Notre Dame before the ceremony was over, and go to see whether
anything could be done for her. They could not, however, get out so
quickly as they expected, and they were in the Rue de Marmousets when
they saw surging towards them a tremendous crowd, shouting, screeching,
shrieking, roaring, trying to stop a carriage which was being urged
