
"As if you, also, had not lost your heart!" exclaimed Hyde.

"No, sir! I have exchanged mine for its full value. Where are you
going?"

"With you."

"In a word, no. For I am going to Aunt Angelica's."

"Upon my honour, it is to your Aunt Angelica's I desire to go most of
all!"

"Now I understand. You have found out that Cornelia Moran is going
there. Are you still harping on that string? And Cornelia never said
one word to me. I do not approve of such deceit. In my love affairs I
have always been open as the day."

"I assure you that I did NOT know Miss Moran was going there. I had not
a thought of Madame Jacobus until we met. To tell the very truth, I
came into town to look for you."

"For me? And why, pray?"

"I want to see Miss Moran. If I cannot see her, then I want to hear
about her. I thought you, of all people, could tell me the most and the
best. I assured myself that you had infinite good temper. Now, pray do
not disappoint me."

"Listen! We meet this afternoon at my aunt's, to discuss the dresses
and ceremonies proper for a very fine wedding."

"For your own wedding, in fact--Is not that so?"

"Well, then?"

"Well, then, who knows more on that subject than Joris Hyde? Was I not,
last year, at Lady Betty Somer's splendid nuptials; and at Fanny
Paget's, and the Countess of Carlisle's? Indeed, I maintain that in
such a discussion _I_ am an absolute necessity. And I wish to know
Madame Jacobus. I have long wished to know her. Upon my honour, I think
her to be one of the most interesting women in New York!"

"I will advise you a little. Save your compliments until you can say
them to my aunt. I never carry a word to any one."

"Then take me with you, and I will repeat them to her face."

"So? Well, then, here we are, at her very door. I know not what she
will say--you must make your own excuses, sir."

As she was speaking, they ascended the white steps leading to a very
handsome brick house on the west side of Broadway. It had wide iron
piazzas and a fine shady garden at the back, sloping down to the river
bank; and had altogether, on the outside, the very similitude of a
wealthy and fashionable residence. The door was opened by a very dark
man, who was not a negro, and who was dressed in a splendid and
outlandish manner--a scarlet turban above his straight black hair, and
gold-hooped earrings, and a long coat or tunic, heavily embroidered in
strange devices.

"He was an Algerine pirate," whispered Arenta. "My Uncle Jacob brought
him here--and my aunt trusts him--I would not, not for a moment."

As soon as the front door closed, Joris perceived that he was in an
unusual house. The scents and odours of strange countries floated about
it. The hall contained many tall jars, full of pungent gums and roots;
and upon its walls the weapons of savage nations were crossed in idle
and harmless fashion. They went slowly up the highly polished stairway
into a large, low parlour, facing the vivid, everyday business drama of
Broadway; but the room itself was like an Arabian Night's dream, for
the Eastern atmosphere was supplemented by divans and sofas covered
with rare cashmere shawls, and rugs of Turkestan, and with cushions of
all kinds of oriental splendour. Strange tables of wonderful mosaic
work held ivory carvings of priceless worth; and porcelain from unknown
lands. Gods and goddesses from the yellow Gehenna of China and the
utterable idolatry of India, looked out with brute cruelty, or
sempiternal smiles from every odd corner; or gazed with a fascinating
prescience from the high chimney-piece upon all who entered.

The effect upon Hyde was instantaneous and uncanny. His Saxon-Dutch
nature was in instant revolt against influences so foreign and
unnatural. Arenta was unconsciously in sympathy with him; for she said
with a shrug of her pretty shoulders, as she looked around, "I have
always bad dreams after a visit to this room. Do these things have a
life of their own? Look at the creature on that corner shelf! What a
serene disdain is in his smile! He seems to gaze into the very depths
of your soul. I see that there is a curtain to his shrine; and I shall
take leave to draw it." With these words she went to the scornful
divinity, and shut his offending eyes behind the folds of his
gold-embroidered curtain.

Hyde watched her flitting about the strange room, and thought of a
little brown wren among the poisonous, vivid splendours of tropical
swamp flowers. So out of place the pretty, thoughtless Dutch girl
looked among the spoils of far India, and Central America, and of
Arabian and African worship and workmanship. But when the door opened,
and Madame Jacobus, with soft, gliding footsteps entered, Hyde
understood how truly the soul, if given the wherewithal, builds the
habitation it likes best. Once possessed of marvellous beauty, and yet
extraordinarily interesting, she seemed the very genius of the room and
its strange, suggestive belongings. She was unusually tall, and her
figure had kept its undulating, stately grace. Her hair, dazzlingly
white, was piled high above her ample brow, held in place with jewelled
combs and glittering pins. Her face had lost its fine oval and youthful
freshness, but who of any feeling or intelligence would not have far
preferred the worn countenance, expressing in a thousand sensitive
shades and emotions the story of her life and love? And if every other
beauty had failed, Angelica's eyes would have atoned for the loss. They
were large, softly-black, slow-moving, or again, in a moment, flashing
with the fire that lay hidden in the dark pit of the iris.

It was said that her slaves adored her, and that no man who came within
her influence had been able to resist her power--no man, perhaps, but
Captain Jacobus; and he had not resisted, he had been content to
exercise over her a power greater than her own. He had made her his
wife; he had lavished on her for ten years the spoils of the four
quarters of the world; and his worship of her had only been equalled by
her passionate attachment to him. Ten years of love, and then parting
and silence--unbroken silence. Yet she still insisted that he was
alive, and would certainly come back to her. With this faith in her
heart, she had refused to put on any symbol of loss or mourning. She
kept his fine house open, his room ready, and herself constantly
adorned for his home-coming. Society, which insists on uniformity, did
not approve of this unreasonable hope. It expected her to adopt the
garments of widowhood for a time, and then make a match in accordance
with the great fortune Captain Jacobus had left her. But Angelica
Jacobus was a law unto herself; and society was compelled to take her
with those apologizing shrugs it gives to whatever is original and
individual.

She came in with a smile of welcome. She was always pleased that her
fine home should be seen by those strange to it; and perhaps was
particularly pleased that General Hyde's son should be her visitor. And
as Joris was determined to win her favour, there was an almost
instantaneous birth of good-will.

"Let me kiss your hand, madame," said the handsome young fellow,
lifting the jewelled fingers in his own. "I have heard that my father
had once that honour. Do not put me below him;" and with the words he
touched with his warm lips the long white fingers.

Her laugh rang merrily through the dim room, and she answered--"You are
Dick Hyde's own son--nothing else. I see that"--and she drew the young
man towards the light and looked with a steady pleasure into his
smiling face as she asked--

"What brought you here this morning, sir?"

"Madame, I have heard my father speak of you; I have seen you; can you
wonder that I desired to know you? This morning I met Miss Van Ariens,
and when she said she was coming here, I found myself unable to resist
the temptation of coming with her."

"Let me tell you something, aunt. I think Lieutenant Hyde can be of
great service to us. He took part in several noble English weddings
last year, and he offers his advice in our consultation to-day."

"But where is Cornelia? I thought she would come with you."

"She will be here in a few minutes. I saw her half-an-hour ago."

"What a beautiful girl she has become!" said madame.

"She is an angel," said Hyde.

Angelica laughed. "The man who calls a woman an angel has never had any
sisters," she answered; "but, however, she has beauty enough to set
young hearts ablaze. I like the girl, and I wonder not that others do
the same."

Even as she spoke Cornelia entered. There was a little flush and hurry
on her face; but oh, how innocent and joyous it was! Quick-glancing,
sweetly smiling, she entered the musky, scented parlour, and in her
white robe and white hat stood like a lily in its light and gloom. And
when she turned to Hyde an ineffable charm and beauty illumed her
countenance. "How glad I am to see you!" she said, and the very ring of
gladness was in her voice. "And how strange that we should meet here!"

"That is so," replied Madame Jacobus. "One can never see where the
second little bird comes from."

"Am I late, madame? Surely your clock is wrong."

"My clock is never wrong, Cornelia, A Dutch clock will always go just
about so. Come, now, sit down, and let us talk of such follies as
weddings and wedding gowns."

In this conversation Hyde triumphantly redeemed his promise of
assistance. He could describe with a delightful accuracy--or
inaccuracy--the lovely toilets and pretty accessories of the high
English wedding feasts of the previous year. And in some subtle way he
threw into these descriptions such a glamour of romance, such
backgrounds of old castles and chiming bells, of noble dames glittering
with gems, and village maids scattering roses, of martial heroes, and
rejoicing lovers, all moving in an atmosphere of song and sunshine,
that the little party sat listening, entranced, with sympathetic eyes
drinking in his wonderful descriptions.

Madame Jacobus was the first to interrupt these pretty reminiscences.
"All this is very fine," she said, "but the most of it is no good for
us. The satin and the lace and even the gems, we can have; the music
can be somehow managed, and we shall not make a bad show as to love and
beauty. But castles and lords and military pomp, and old cathedrals
hung with battle flags-- Such things are not to be had here, and, in
plain truth, they are not necessary for the wedding of a simple maid
like our Arenta."

"You forget, then, that my Athanase is of almost royal descent," said
Arenta. "A very old family are the Tounnerres--older, indeed, than the
royal Capets."

"No one is to-day so poor as to envy the royal Capets; and as for an
ancient family, Captain Jacobus used to speak of his forefathers as
'the old fellows whom the flood could not wash away.' Jacobus always
put his ideas in such clear, forcible words. What I want to know is
this--where is the ceremony to be performed?"

"The civil ceremony is to be at the French Embassy," answered Arenta
with some pride.

"Is that all there is to it?"

"Aunt! How could you imagine that I should be satisfied with a civil
ceremony? My father also insists upon a religious ceremony; and my
Athanase told him he was willing to marry me in every church in
America. I am not Gertrude Kippon! No, indeed! I insist on everything
being done in a moral and respectable manner. My father spoke of Doctor
Kunz for the religious part."

"I like not Doctor Kunz," answered madame. "Bishop Provoost and the
Episcopal service is the proper thing. Doctor Kunz will be sure to say
some sharp words--his tongue is full of them--he stands too stiff--he
does not use his hands gracefully--his walk and carriage is not
dignified--and he looks at you through spectacles--and I, for one, do
not like to be looked at through spectacles. We must decide for the
Episcopal church."

"And the little trip after it," continued Arenta. "Lieutenant Hyde says
that, in England, it is now the proper thing."

"But in America it is not the proper thing. It is a rude unmannerly way
to run off with a bride. We are not red Indians, nor is the Marquis
carrying you by force from some hostile tribe. The nuptial trip is a
barbarism. I am now weary. Lieutenant, take Miss Moran and show her my
garden. I tell you, it is worth walking through; and when you have seen
the flowers, Arenta and I will give you a cup of tea."

Arenta would gladly have gone into the garden also, but her aunt
detained her. "Can you not see," she asked, "that those two are in love
with each other? Give love its hour. They do not want your company."

"And for that very reason I wish to go with them. My brother is in love
with Cornelia, and I am for Rem, and not for a stranger--also, my
father and Cornelia's father are both for Rem; and, besides, Doctor
Moran hates the Hydes. He will not let Cornelia marry the man."

"HE WILL NOT LET! When did Doctor John become omnipotent? Love laughs
at fathers, as well as at locksmiths. And if Doctor John is against
young Hyde, then I shall the more cheerfully be for him--a pleasant,
handsome youth as ever I saw, is he; and Doctor John--well, he is
neither pleasant nor handsome."

"Aunt Angelica! I am astonished at you! Every one will contradict what
you say."

"For that reason, I will maintain it. It is not my way to shout with
the multitude."

With some hesitation, yet quite carried away by Hyde's personal longing
and impulse, Cornelia went into the garden with her lover. It was a
green, shady place, full of great maple-trees and flowering vines and
shrubs, and patches of green grass. All kinds of sweet old-fashioned
flowers grew there, mingling their scent with the strawberries' perfume
and the woody odours of the ripening cherries. They were alone in this
lovely place; the high privet hedges hid them from the outside world,
and the babble and rumble of Broadway came to them only as the murmur
of noise in a dream. Speechless with joy, Hyde clasped Cornelia's
slender fingers, and they went together down the few broad low steps
which led them into the green shadows of the trees. How soft was the
grassy turf! How exquisite the westering sunlight, sifting through the
maple leaves! They looked into each other's eyes and smiled, but were
too happy to speak. For they had suddenly come into that land, which is
east of the sun, and west of the moon; that land not laid down on any
chart, but which we feel to be our rightful heritage.

Slowly, as they stepped, they came at length to a little summerhouse.
It was covered with a thick jessamin vine; and the mysterious,
languorous perfume of its starlike flowers filled the narrow
resting-place with the very atmosphere of love. They sat down there,
and in a few moments the seal was broken and Hyde's heart found out all
the sweetest words that love could speak. Cornelia trembled; she
blushed, she smiled, she suffered herself to be drawn close to his
side; and, at last, in some sweet, untranslatable way, she gave him the
assurance of her love. Then they found in delicious silence the
eloquence that words were incompetent to translate; time was forgotten,
and on earth there was once more an interlude of heavenly harmony in
which two souls became one and Paradise was regained.

Arenta's voice, petulant and not pleasant, broke the charm. With a sigh
they rose, dropped each other's hand, and went out of their heaven on
earth to meet her.

"Tea is waiting," she said, "and Rem is waiting, and my aunt is tired,
and you two have forgotten that the clock moves." Then they laughed,
and laughter is always fatal to feeling; the magical land of love was
suddenly far away, and there was the sound of china, and the heavy
tones of Rem's voice--dissatisfied, if not angry--and Arenta's lighter
