
"Give me the volume, Lady," said young Glendinning. "They call me
idle--they call me dull--in this pursuit my industry shall not fail,
nor, with God's blessing, shall my understanding. Give me the volume."
The apparition again replied:

  "Many a fathom dark and deep
  I have laid the book to sleep;
  Ethereal fires around it glowing--
  Ethereal music ever flowing--
    The sacred pledge of Heav'n
      All things revere.
      Each in his sphere,
    Save man for whom 'twas giv'n:
  Lend thy hand, and thou shalt spy
  Things ne'er seen by mortal eye."

Halbert Glendinning boldly reached his hand to the White Lady.

"Fearest thou to go with me?" she said, as his hand trembled at the soft
and cold touch of her own--

  "Fearest thou to go with me?
  Still it is free to thee
    A peasant to dwell:
  Thou mayst drive the dull steer,
  And chase the king's deer,
  But never more come near
  This haunted well."

"If what thou sayest be true," said the undaunted boy, "my destinies are
higher than thine own. There shall be neither well nor wood which I dare
not visit. No fear of aught, natural or supernatural, shall bar my path
through my native valley."

He had scarce uttered the words, when they both descended through the
earth with a rapidity which took away Halbert's breath and every other
sensation, saving that of being hurried on with the utmost velocity. At
length they stopped with a shock so sudden, that the mortal journeyer
through this unknown space must have been thrown down with violence, had
he not been upheld by his supernatural companion.

It was more than a minute, ere, looking around him, he beheld a grotto,
or natural cavern, composed of the most splendid spars and crystals,
which returned in a thousand prismatic hues the light of a brilliant
flame that glowed on an altar of alabaster. This altar, with its fire,
formed the central point of the grotto, which was of a round form,
and very high in the roof, resembling in some respects the dome of a
cathedral. Corresponding to the four points of the compass, there went
off four long galleries, or arcades, constructed of the same brilliant
materials with the dome itself, and the termination of which was lost in
darkness.

No human imagination can conceive, or words suffice to describe, the
glorious radiance which, shot fiercely forth by the flame, was returned
from so many hundred thousand points of reflection, afforded by the
sparry pillars and their numerous angular crystals. The fire itself did
not remain steady and unmoved, but rose and fell, sometimes ascending
in a brilliant pyramid of condensed flame half way up the lofty expanse,
and again fading into a softer and more rosy hue, and hovering, as it
were, on the surface of the altar to collect its strength for another
powerful exertion. There was no visible fuel by which it was fed, nor
did it emit either smoke or vapour of any kind.

What was of all the most remarkable, the black volume so often mentioned
lay not only unconsumed, but untouched in the slightest degree, amid
this intensity of fire, which, while it seemed to be of force sufficient
to melt adamant, had no effect whatever on the sacred book thus
subjected to its utmost influence.

The White Lady, having paused long enough to let young Glendinning take
a complete survey of what was around him, now said in her usual chant,

  "Here lies the volume thou boldly hast sought;
  Touch it, and take it,--'twill dearly be bought!"

Familiarized in some degree with marvels, and desperately desirous of
showing the courage he had boasted, Halbert plunged his hand, without
hesitation, into the flame, trusting to the rapidity of the motion, to
snatch out the volume before the fire could greatly affect him. But he
was much disappointed. The flame instantly caught upon his sleeve, and
though he withdrew his hand immediately, yet his arm was so dreadfully
scorched, that he had well-nigh screamed with pain. He suppressed the
natural expression of anguish, however, and only intimated the agony
which he felt by a contortion and a muttered groan. The White Lady
passed her cold hand over his arm, and, ere she had finished the
following metrical chant, his pain had entirely gone, and no mark of the
scorching was visible:

          "Rash thy deed,
          Mortal weed
    To immortal flames applying;
          Rasher trust
          Has thing of dust,
    On his own weak worth relying:
  Strip thee of such fences vain,
  Strip, and prove thy luck, again."

Obedient to what he understood to be the meaning of his conductress,
Halbert bared his arm to the shoulder, throwing down the remains of
his sleeve, which no sooner touched the floor on which he stood than
it collected itself together, shrivelled itself up, and was without
any visible fire reduced to light tinder, which a sudden breath of wind
dispersed into empty space. The White Lady, observing the surprise of
the youth, immediately repeated--

  "Mortal warp and mortal woof.
  Cannot brook this charmed roof;
  All that mortal art hath wrought,
  In our cell returns to nought.
  The molten gold returns to clay,
  The polish'd diamond melts away.
  All is alter'd, all is flown,
  Nought stands fast but truth alone.
  Not for that thy quest give o'er:
  Courage! prove thy chance once more."

Imboldened by her words, Halbert Glendinning made a second effort, and,
plunging his bare arm into the flame, took out the sacred volume without
feeling either heat or inconvenience of any kind. Astonished, and almost
terrified at his own success, he beheld the flame collect itself, and
shoot up into one long and final stream, which seemed as if it would
ascend to the very roof of the cavern, and then, sinking as suddenly,
became totally extinguished. The deepest darkness ensued; but Halbert
had no time to consider his situation, for the White Lady had already
caught his hand, and they ascended to upper air with the same velocity
with which they had sunk into the earth.

They stood by the fountain in the Corri-nan-shian when they emerged from
the bowels of the earth; but on casting a bewildered glance around him,
the youth was surprised to observe, that the shadows had fallen far
to the east, and that the day was well-nigh spent. He gazed on his
conductress for explanation, but her figure began to fade before his
eyes--her cheeks grew paler, her features less distinct, her form became
shadowy, and blended itself with the mist which was ascending the hollow
ravine. What had late the symmetry of form, and the delicate, yet clear
hues of feminine beauty, now resembled the flitting and pale ghost of
some maiden who has died for love, as it is seen indistinctly and by
moonlight, by her perjured lover.

"Stay, spirit!" said the youth, imboldened by his success in the
subterranean dome, "thy kindness must not leave me, as one encumbered
with a weapon he knows not how to wield. Thou must teach me the art
to read, and to understand this volume; else what avails it me that I
possess it?"

But the figure of the White Lady still waned before his eye, until it
became an outline as pale and indistinct as that of the moon, when the
winter morning is far advanced, and ere she had ended the following
chant, she was entirely invisible:--

  "Alas! alas!
  Not ours the grace
  These holy characters to trace:
      Idle forms of painted air,
      Not to us is given to share
  The boon bestow'd on Adam's race!
      With patience bide.
      Heaven will provide
  The fitting time, the fitting guide."

The form was already gone, and now the voice itself had melted away in
melancholy cadence, softening, as if the Being who spoke had been slowly
wafted from the spot where she had commenced her melody.

It was at this moment that Halbert felt the extremity of the terror
which he had hitherto so manfully suppressed. The very necessity of
exertion had given him spirit to make it, and the presence of the
mysterious Being, while it was a subject of fear in itself, had
nevertheless given him the sense of protection being near to him. It
was when he could reflect with composure on what had passed, that a cold
tremor shot across his limbs, his hair bristled, and he was afraid to
look around lest he should find at his elbow something more frightful
than the first vision. A breeze arising suddenly, realized the beautiful
and wild idea of the most imaginative of our modern bards [Footnote:
Coleridge.]--

  It fann'd his cheek, it raised his hair,
    Like a meadow pale in spring;
  It mingled strangely with his fears,
    Yet it fell like a welcoming.

The youth stood silent and astonished for a few minutes. It seemed to
him that the extraordinary Being he had seen, half his terror, half his
protectress, was still hovering on the gale which swept past him, and
that she might again make herself sensible to his organs of sight.
"Speak!" he said, wildly tossing his arms, "speak yet again--be once
more present, lovely vision!--thrice have I now seen thee, yet the
idea of thy invisible presence around or beside me, makes my heart beat
faster than if the earth yawned and gave up a demon."

But neither sound nor appearance indicated the presence of the White
Lady, and nothing preternatural beyond what he had already witnessed,
was again audible or visible. Halbert, in the meanwhile, by the very
exertion of again inviting the presence of this mysterious Being, had
recovered his natural audacity. He looked around once more, and resumed
his solitary path down the valley into whose recesses he had penetrated.

Nothing could be more strongly contrasted than the storm of passion with
which he had bounded over stock and crag, in order to plunge himself
into the Corri-nan-shian, and the sobered mood in which he now returned
homeward, industriously seeking out the most practicable path, not from
a wish to avoid danger, but that he might not by personal toil distract
his attention, deeply fixed on the extraordinary scene which he had
witnessed. In the former case, he had sought by hazard and bodily
exertion to indulge at once the fiery excitation of passion, and to
banish the cause of the excitement from his recollection; while now he
studiously avoided all interruption to his contemplative walk, lest the
difficulty of the way should interfere with, or disturb, his own deep
reflections. Thus slowly pacing forth his course, with the air of a
pilgrim rather than of a deer-hunter, Halbert about the close of the
evening regained his paternal tower.




Chapter the Thirteenth.


  The Miller was of manly make,
    To meet him was na mows;
  There durst na ten come him to take,
    Sae noited he their pows.
            CHRIST'S KIRK ON THE GREEN.

It was after sunset, as we have already stated, when Halbert Glendinning
returned to the abode of his father. The hour of dinner was at noon, and
that of supper about an hour after sunset at this period of the year.
The former had passed without Halbert's appearing; but this was no
uncommon circumstance, for the chase, or any other pastime which
occurred, made Halbert a frequent neglecter of hours; and his mother,
though angry and disappointed when she saw him not at table, was so much
accustomed to his occasional absence, and knew so little how to teach
him more regularity, that a testy observation was almost all the censure
with which such omissions were visited.

On the present occasion, however, the wrath of good Dame Elspeth soared
higher than usual. It was not merely on account of the special tup's
head and trotters, the haggis and the side of mutton, with which her
table was set forth, but also because of the arrival of no less a person
than Hob Miller, as he was universally termed, though the man's name was
Happer.

The object of the Miller's visit to the Tower of Glendearg was like the
purpose of those embassies which potentates send to each other's courts,
partly ostensible, partly politic. In outward show, Hob came to visit
his friends of the Halidome, and share the festivity common among
country folk, after the barn-yard has been filled, and to renew old
intimacies by new conviviality. But in very truth he also came to have
an eye upon the contents of each stack, and to obtain such information
respecting the extent of the crop reaped and gathered in by each feuar,
as might prevent the possibility of _abstracted multures_.

All the world knows that the cultivators of each barony or regality,
temporal or spiritual, in Scotland, are obliged to bring their corn
to be grinded at the mill of the territory, for which they pay a heavy
charge, called the _intown multures_. I could speak to the thirlage
of _invecta et illata_ too, but let that pass. I have said enough
to intimate that I talk not without book. Those of the _Sucken_, or
enthralled ground, were liable in penalties, if, deviating from this
thirlage, (or thraldom,) they carried their grain to another mill. Now
such another mill, erected on the lands of a lay-baron, lay within a
tempting and convenient distance of Glendearg; and the Miller was so
obliging, and his charges so moderate, that it required Hob Miller's
utmost vigilance to prevent evasions of his right of monopoly.

The most effectual means he could devise was this show of good
fellowship and neighbourly friendship,--under colour of which he made
his annual cruise through the barony--numbered every corn-stack, and
computed its contents by the boll, so that he could give a shrewd hint
afterwards whether or not the grist came to the right mill.

Dame Elspeth, like her compeers, was obliged to take these domiciliary
visits in the sense of politeness; but in her case they had not occurred
since her husband's death, probably because the Tower of Glendearg was
distant, and there was but a trifling quantity of arable or _infield_
land attached to it. This year there had been, upon some speculation of
old Martin's, several bolls sown in the exit-field, which, the season
being fine, had ripened remarkably well. Perhaps this circumstance
occasioned the honest Miller's including Glendearg, on this occasion, in
his annual round Dame Glendinning received with pleasure a visit which
she used formerly only to endure with patience; and she had changed her
view of the matter chiefly, if not entirely, because Hob had brought
with him his daughter Mysie, of whose features she could give so slight
an account, but whose dress she had described so accurately to the
Sub-Prior.

Hitherto this girl had been an object of very trifling consideration in
the eyes of the good widow; but the Sub-Prior's particular and somewhat
mysterious inquiries had set her brains to work on the subject of Mysie
of the Mill; and she had here asked a broad question, and there she had
thrown out an innuendo, and there again she had gradually led on to a
conversation on the subject of poor Mysie. And from all inquiries
and investigations she had collected, that Mysie was a dark-eyed,
laughter-loving wench, with cherry-cheeks, and a skin as white as her
father's finest bolted flour, out of which was made the Abbot's own
wastel-bread. For her temper, she sung and laughed from morning to
night; and for her fortune, a material article, besides that which the
Miller might have amassed by means of his proverbial golden thumb, Mysie
was to inherit a good handsome lump of land, with a prospect of the mill
and mill-acres descending to her husband on an easy lease, if a fair
word were spoken in season to the Abbot, and to the Prior, and to the
Sub-Prior, and to the Sacristan, and so forth.

By turning and again turning these advantages over in her own mind,
Elspeth at length came to be of opinion, that the only way to save her
son Halbert from a life of "spur, spear, and snaffle," as they called
that of the border-riders, from the dint of a cloth-yard shaft, or the
loop of an inch-cord, was, that he should marry and settle, and that
Mysie Happer should be his destined bride.

As if to her wish, Hob Miller arrived on his strong-built mare, bearing
on a pillion behind him the lovely Mysie, with cheeks like a peony-rose,
(if Dame Glendinning had ever seen one,) spirits all afloat with rustic
coquetry, and a profusion of hair as black as ebony. The _beau-ideal_
which Dame Glendinning had been bodying forth in her imagination, became
unexpectedly realized in the buxom form of Mysie Happer, whom, in the
course of half an hour, she settled upon as the maiden who was to fix
the restless and untutored Halbert. True, Mysie, as the dame soon saw,
was like to love dancing round a May-pole as well as managing a domestic
establishment, and Halbert was like to break more heads than he would
grind stacks of corn. But then a miller should always be of manly
make, and has been described so since the days of Chaucer and James I.
[Footnote: The verse we have chosen for a motto, is from a poem imputed
to James I. of Scotland. As for the Miller who figures among the
Canterbury pilgrims, besides his sword and buckler, he boasted other
attributes, all of which, but especially the last, show that he relied
more on the strength of the outside than that of the inside of his
skull.

  The miller was a stout carl for the nones,
  Full big he was of brawn, and eke of bones;
  That proved well, for wheresoe'r he cam,
  At wrestling he wold bear away the ram;
  He was short shoulder'd, broad, a thick gnar;
  There n'as no door that he n'old heave of bar,
  Or break it at a running with his head, &c. ]

Indeed, to be able to outdo and bully the whole _Sucken_, (once more we
use this barbarous phrase,) in all athletic exercises, was one way to
render easy the collection of dues which men would have disputed with a
less formidable champion. Then, as to the deficiencies of the miller's
wife, the dame was of opinion that they might be supplied by the
activity of the miller's mother. "I will keep house for the young folk
myself, for the tower is grown very lonely," thought Dame Glendinning,
"and to live near the kirk will be mair comfortable in my auld age--and
then Edward may agree with his brother about the feu, more especially as
he is a favourite with the Sub-Prior, and then he may live in the auld
tower like his worthy father before him--and wha kens but Mary Avenel,
high-blood as she is, may e'en draw in her stool to the chimney-nook,
and sit down here for good and a'?--It's true she has no tocher, but the
like of her for beauty and sense ne'er crossed my een; and I have kend
every wench in the Halidome of St. Mary's--ay, and their mothers that
bore them--ay, she is a sweet and a lovely creature as ever tied snood
over brown hair--ay, and then, though her uncle keeps her out of her ain
for the present time, yet it is to be thought the gray-goose shaft will
find a hole in his coat of proof, as, God help us! it has done in many a
better man's--And, moreover, if they should stand on their pedigree and
gentle race, Edward might say to them, that is, to her gentle kith and
kin, 'whilk o' ye was her best friend, when she came down the glen to
Glendearg in a misty evening, on a beast mair like a cuddie than aught
else?'--And if they tax him with churl's blood, Edward might say, that,
forby the old proverb, how

  Gentle deed
  Makes gentle bleid;

yet, moreover, there comes no churl's blood from Glendinning or Brydone;
for, says Edward--"

The hoarse voice of the Miller at this moment recalled the dame from her
reverie, and compelled her to remember that if she meant to realize her
airy castle, she must begin by laying the foundation in civility to
her guest and his daughter, whom she was at that moment most strangely
neglecting, though her whole plan turned on conciliating their favour
and good opinion, and that, in fact, while arranging matters for
so intimate a union with her company, she was suffering them to sit
unnoticed, and in their riding gear, as if about to resume their
journey. "And so I say, dame," concluded the Miller, (for she had not
marked the beginning of his speech,) "an ye be so busied with your
housekep, or ought else, why, Mysie and I will trot our way down the
glen again to Johnnie Broxmouth's, who pressed us right kindly to bide
with him."

Starting at once from her dream of marriages and intermarriages, mills,
mill-lands, and baronies, Dame Elspeth felt for a moment like the
milk-maid in the fable, when she overset the pitcher, on the contents
of which so many golden dreams were founded. But the foundation of Dame
Glendinning's hopes was only tottering, not overthrown, and she hastened
to restore its equilibrium. Instead of attempting to account for her
absence of mind and want of attention to her guests, which she might
have found something difficult, she assumed the offensive, like an able
general when he finds it necessary, by a bold attack, to disguise his
weakness.

A loud exclamation she made, and a passionate complaint she set up
against the unkindness of her old friend, who could for an instant doubt
the heartiness of her welcome to him and to his hopeful daughter; and
then to think of his going back to Johnny Broxmouth's, when the auld
tower stood where it did, and had room in it for a friend or two in the
worst of times--and he too a neighbour that his umquhile gossip Simon,
blessed be his cast, used to think the best friend he had in
the Halidome! And on she went, urging her complaint with so much
seriousness, that she had well-nigh imposed on herself as well as upon
Hob Miller, who had no mind to take any thing in dudgeon; and as it
suited his plans to pass the night at Glendearg, would have been
equally contented to do so even had his reception been less vehemently
hospitable.

To all Elspeth's expostulations on the unkindness of his proposal to
leave her dwelling, he answered composedly, "Nay, dame, what could I
tell? ye might have had other grist to grind, for ye looked as if ye
scarce saw us--or what know I? ye might bear in mind the words Martin
and I had about the last barley ye sawed--for I ken dry multures
[Footnote: Dry multures were a fine, or compensation in money, for not
grinding at the mill of the thirl. It was, and is, accounted a vexatious
exaction.] will sometimes stick in the throat. A man seeks but his awn,
and yet folk shall hold him for both miller and miller's man, that is
millar and knave, [Footnote: The under miller is, in the language of
thirlage, called the knave, which, indeed, signified originally his lad.
(_Knabe_--German,) but by degrees came to be taken in a worse sense. In
the old translation of the Bible, Paul is made to term himself the knave
of our Saviour. The allowance of meal taken by the miller's servant was
called knave-ship.] all the country over."

"Alas, that you will say so, neighbour Hob," said Dame Elspeth, "or that
Martin should have had any words with you about the mill-dues! I will
chide him roundly for it, I promise you, on the faith of a true widow.
You know full well that a lone woman is sore put upon by her servants."

"Nay, dame," said the miller, unbuckling the broad belt which made
fast his cloak, and served, at the same time, to suspend by his side a
swinging Andrea Ferrara, "bear no grudge at Martin, for I bear none--I
take it on me as a thing of mine office, to maintain my right of
multure, lock, and gowpen. [Note: The multure was the regular exaction
for grinding the meal. The _lock_, signifying a small quantity, and the
_gowpen_, a handful, were additional perquisites demanded by the
miller, and submitted to or resisted by the _Suckener_ as circumstances
permitted. These and other petty dues were called in general the
_Sequels_.] And reason good, for as the old song says,

  I live by my mill. God bless her,
   She's parent, child, and wife.

The poor old slut, I am beholden to her for my living, and bound to
stand by her, as I say to my mill knaves, in right and in wrong. And so
should every honest fellow stand by his bread-winner.--And so, Mysie,
ye may doff your cloak since our neighbour is so kindly glad to see
us--why, I think, we are as blithe to see her--not one in the Halidome
pays their multures more duly, sequels, arriage, and carriage, and
mill-services, used and wont."

With that the Miller hung his ample cloak without farther ceremony upon
a huge pair of stag's antlers, which adorned at once the naked walls of
the tower, and served for what we vulgarly call cloak-pins.

In the meantime Dame Elspeth assisted to disembarrass the damsel whom
she destined for her future daughter-in-law, of her hood, mantle, and
the rest of her riding gear, giving her to appear as beseemed the buxom
daughter of the wealthy Miller, gay and goodly, in a white kirtle,
the seams of which were embroidered with green silken lace or fringe,
entwined with some silver thread. An anxious glance did Elspoth cast
upon the good-humoured face, which was now more fully shown to her, and
was only obscured by a quantity of raven black hair, which the maid
of the mill had restrained by a snood of green silk, embroidered with
silver, corresponding to the trimmings of her kirtle. The countenance
itself was exceedingly comely--the eyes black, large, and roguishly
good-humoured--the mouth was small--the lips well formed, though
somewhat full--the teeth were pearly white--and the chin had a very
seducing dimple in it. The form belonging to this joyous face was full
and round, and firm and fair. It might become coarse and masculine
some years hence, which is the common fault of Scottish beauty; but in
Mysie's sixteenth year she had the shape of a Hebe. The anxious Elspeth,
with all her maternal partiality, could not help admitting within
herself, that a better man than Halbert might go farther and fare worse.
She looked a little giddy, and Halbert was not nineteen; still it was
time he should be settled, for to that point the dame always returned;
and here was an excellent opportunity.

The simple cunning of Dame Elspeth now exhausted itself in commendations
of her fair guest, from the snood, as they say, to the single-soled
shoe. Mysie listened and blushed with pleasure for the first five
minutes; but ere ten had elapsed, she began to view the old lady's
compliments rather as subjects of mirth than of vanity, and was much
more disposed to laugh at than to be flattered with them, for Nature had
mingled the good-humour with which she had endowed the damsel with no
small portion of shrewdness. Even Hob himself began to tire of hearing
his daughter's praises, and broke in with, "Ay, ay, she is a clever
quean enough; and, were she five years older, she shall lay a loaded
sack on an _aver_ [Note: _Aver_--properly a horse of labour.] with e'er
a lass in the Halidome. But I have been looking for your two sons, dame.
Men say downby that Halbert's turned a wild springald, and that we may
have word of him from Westmoreland one moonlight night or another."

"God forbid, my good neighbour; God, in his mercy, forbid!" said Dame
Glendinning, earnestly; for it was touching the very key-note of her
apprehensions, to hint any probability that Halbert might become one of
the marauders so common in the age and country. But, fearful of having
betrayed too much alarm on this subject, she immediately added, "That
though, since the last rout at Pinkiecleuch, she had been all of a
tremble when a gun or a spear was named, or when men spoke of fighting;
yet, thanks to God and our Lady, her sons were like to live and die
honest and peaceful tenants to the Abbey, as their father might have
done, but for that awful hosting which he went forth to with mony a
brave man that never returned."

"Ye need not tell me of it, dame," said the Miller, "since I was there
myself, and made two pair of legs (and these were not mine, but my
mare's,) worth one pair of hands. I judged how it would be, when I
saw our host break ranks, with rushing on through that broken ploughed
field, and so as they had made a pricker of me, I e'en pricked off with
myself while the play was good."

"Ay, ay, neighbour," said the dame, "ye were aye a wise and a wary man;
if my Simon had had your wit, he might have been here to speak about
it this day; but he was aye cracking of his good blood and his high
kindred, and less would not serve him than to bide the bang to the last,
with the earls, and knights, and squires, that had no wives to greet for
them, or else had wives that cared not how soon they were widows; but
that is not for the like of us. But touching my son Halbert, there is no
fear of him; for if it should be his misfortune to be in the like case,
he has the best pair of heels in Halidome, and could run almost as fast
as your mare herself."

"Is this he, neighbour?" quoth the Miller.

"No," replied the mother; "that is my youngest son, Edward, who can read
and write like the Lord Abbot himself, if it were not a sin to say so."

"Ay," said the Miller; "and is that the young clerk the Sub-Prior thinks
so much of? they say he will come far ben that lad; wha kens but he may
come to be Sub-Prior himself?--as broken a ship has come to land."

"To be a Prior, neighbour Miller," said Edward, "a man must first be a
priest, and for that I judge I have little vocation."

"He will take to the pleugh-pettle, neighbour," said the good dame; "and
so will Halbert too, I trust. I wish you saw Halbert.--Edward, where is
your brother?"

"Hunting, I think," replied Edward; "at least he left us this morning to
join the Laird of Colmslie and his hounds. I have heard them baying in
the glen all day."

"And if I had heard that music," said the Miller, "it would have done my
heart good, ay, and may be taken me two or three miles out of my road.
When I was the Miller of Morebattle's knave, I have followed the hounds
from Eckford to the foot of Hounam-law--followed them on foot, Dame
Glendinning, ay, and led the chase when the Laird of Cessford and his
gay riders were all thrown out by the mosses and gills. I brought the
stag on my back to Hounam Cross, when the dogs had pulled him down. I
think I see the old gray knight, as he sate so upright on his strong
war-horse, all white with foam; and 'Miller,' said he to me, 'an thou
wilt turn thy back on the mill, and wend with me, I will make a man of
thee.' But I chose rather to abide by clap and happer, and the better
luck was mine; for the proud Percy caused hang five of the Laird's
henchmen at Alnwick for burning a rickle of houses some gate beyond
Fowberry, and it might have been my luck as well as another man's."

"Ah, neighbour, neighbour," said Dame Glendinning, "you were aye wise
and wary; but if you like hunting, I must say Halbert's the lad to
please you. He hath all those fair holiday terms of hawk and hound as
ready in his mouth as Tom with the tod's tail, that is the Lord Abbot's
ranger."

"Ranges he not homeward at dinner-time, dame," demanded the Miller; "for
we call noon the dinner-hour at Kennaquhair?"

The widow was forced to admit that, even at this important period of the
day, Halbert was frequently absent; at which the Miller shook his
head, intimating, at the same time, some allusion to the proverb of
MacFarlane's geese, which "liked their play better than their meat."
[Footnote: A brood of wild-geese, which long frequented one of the
uppermost islands in Loch-Lomond, called Inch-Tavoe, were supposed to
have some mysterious connexion with the ancient family of MacFarlane of
that ilk, and it is said were never seen after the ruin and extinction
of that house. The MacFarlanes had a house and garden upon that same
island of Inch-Tavoe. Here James VI. was, on one occasion, regaled by
the chieftain. His Majesty had been previously much amused by the geese
pursuing each other on the Loch. But, when one which was brought
to table, was found to be tough and ill fed, James observed--"that
MacFarlane's geese liked their play better than their meat," a proverb
which has been current ever since.]

That the delay of dinner might not increase the Miller's disposition to
prejudge Halbert, Dame Glendinning called hastily on Mary Avenel to take
her task of entertaining Mysie Happer, while she herself rushed to
the kitchen, and, entering at once into the province of Tibb Tacket,
rummaged among trenchers and dishes, snatched pots from the fire, and
placed pans and gridirons on it, accompanying her own feats of personal
activity with such a continued list of injunctions to Tibb, that Tibb at
length lost patience, and said, "Here was as muckle wark about meating
an auld miller, as if they had been to banquet the blood of Bruce." But
this, as it was supposed to be spoken aside, Dame Glendinning did not
think it convenient to hear.

       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Fourteenth.


  Nay, let me have the friends who eat my victuals,
  As various as my dishes.--The feast's naught,
  Where one huge plate predominates. John Plaintext,
  He shall be mighty beef, our English staple;
  The worthy Alderman, a butter'd dumpling;
  Yon pair of whisker'd Cornets, ruffs and rees:
  Their friend the Dandy, a green goose in sippets.
  And so the hoard is spread at once and fill'd
  On the same principle--Variety.
                           NEW PLAY.

"And what brave lass is this?" said Hob Miller, as Mary Avenel entered
the apartment to supply the absence of Dame Elspeth Glendinning.

"The young Lady of Avenel, father," said the Maid of the Mill, dropping
as low a curtsy as her rustic manners enabled her to make. The Miller,
