
I woke to spy through my bunghole the faint light of day struggling down
the hatches. Above, I heard a clanking noise, and the voices of the men
hiccoughing a dismal chant. They were lifting anchor. I crawl'd forth
and woke Delia, who was yet sleeping: and together we ate the breakfast
that lay ready set for us on the head of a barrel.

Presently the sailors broke off their song, and we heard their feet
shuffling to and fro on deck.

"Sure," cried Delia, "we are moving!"

And surely we were, as could be told by the alter'd sound of the water
beneath us, and the many creakings that the _Godsend_ began to keep.
Once more I tasted freedom again, and the joy of living, and could have
sung for the mirth that lifted my heart. "Let us but gain open sea,"
said I, "and I'll have tit-for-tat with these rebels!"

But alas! before we had left Avon mouth twenty minutes, 'twas another
tale. For I lay on my side in that dark hold and long'd to die: and
Delia sat up beside me, her hands in her lap, and her great eyes fix'd
most dolefully. And when Captain Billy came down with news that we were
safe and free to go on deck, we turn'd our faces from him, and said we
thank'd him kindly, but had no longer any wish that way--too wretched,
even, to remember his deafness.

Let me avoid, then, some miserable hours, and come to the evening, when,
faint with fasting and nausea, we struggled up to the deck for air, and
look'd about us.

'Twas grey--grey everywhere: the sky lead-colored, with deeper shades
toward the east, where a bank of cloud blotted the coast line: the
thick rain descending straight, with hardly wind enough to set the
sails flapping; the sea spread like a plate of lead, save only where,
to leeward, a streak of curded white crawled away from under the
_Godsend's_ keel.

On deck, a few sailors mov'd about, red eyed and heavy. They show'd
no surprise to see us, but nodded very friendly, with a smile for our
strange complexions. Here again, as ever, did adversity mock her own
image.

But what more took our attention was to see a row of men stretch'd on
the starboard side, like corpses, their heads in the scuppers, their
legs pointed inboard, and very orderly arranged. They were a dozen and
two in all, and over them bent Captain Billy with a mop in his hand, and
a bucket by his side: who beckon'd that we should approach.

"Array'd in order o' merit," said he, pointing with his mop like a
showman to the line of figures before him.

We drew near.

"This here is Matt. Soames, master o' this vessel--an' he's dead."

"Dead?"

"Dead-drunk, that is. O the gifted man! Come up!" He thrust the mop in
the fellow's heavy face. "There now! Did he move, did he wink? 'No,'
says you. O an accomplished drunkard!"

He paus'd a moment; then stirr'd up No. 2, who open'd one eye lazily,
and shut it again in slumber.

"You saw? Open'd one eye, hey? That's Benjamin Halliday. The next is a
black man, as you see: a man of dismal color, and hath other drawbacks
natural to such. Can the Aethiop shift his skin? No, but he'll open both
eyes. See there--a perfect Christian, in so far as drink can make him."

With like comments he ran down the line till he came to the last man, in
front of whom he stepp'd back.

"About this last--he's a puzzler. Times I put him top o' the list, an'
times at the tail. That's Ned Masters, an' was once the Reverend Edward
Masters, Bachelor o' Divinity in Cambridge College; but in a tavern
there fell a-talking with a certain Pelagian about Adam an' Eve, an'
because the fellow turn'd stubborn, put a knife into his waistband, an'
had to run away to sea: a middling drinker only, but after a quart or
so to hear him tackle Predestination! So there be times after all when
I sets'n apart, and says, 'Drunk, you'm no good, but half-drunk, you'm
priceless.' Now there's a man--" He dropp'd his mop, and, leading us
aft, pointed with admiring finger to the helmsman--a thin, wizen'd
fellow, with a face like a crab apple, and a pair of piercing grey eyes
half hidden by the droop of his wrinkled lids. "Gabriel Hutchins, how
old be you?"

"Sixty-four, come next Martinmas," pip'd the helmsman.

"In what state o' life?"

"Drunk."

"How drunk?"

"As a lord!"

"Canst stand upright?"

"Hee-hee! Now could I iver do other?--a miserable ould worms to whom the
sweet effects o' quantums be denied. When was I iver wholesomely maz'd?
Or when did I lay my grey hairs on the floor, saying, 'Tis enough, an'
'tis good'? Answer me that, Cap'n Bill."

"But you hopes for the best, Gabriel."

"Aye, I hopes--I hopes."

The old man sigh'd as he brought the _Godsend_ a point nearer the wind;
and, as we turn'd away with the Captain, was still muttering, his sharp
grey eyes fix'd on the vessel's prow.

"He's my best," said Captain Billy Pottery.

With this crew we pass'd four days; and I write this much of them
because they afterward, when sober, did me a notable good turn, as you
shall read toward the end of this history. But lest you should
judge them hardly, let me say here that when they recovered of their
stupor--as happen'd to the worst after thirty-six hours--there was no
brisker, handier set of fellows on the seas. And this Captain Billy well
understood: "but" (said he) "I be a collector an' a man o' conscience
both, which is uncommon. Doubtless there be good sots that are not good
seamen, but from such I turn my face, drink they never so prettily."

'Twas necessary I should impart some notion of my errand to Captain
Billy, tho' I confin'd myself to hints, telling him only 'twas urgent I
should be put ashore somewhere on the Cornish coast, for that I carried
intelligence which would not keep till we reached Plymouth, a town that,
besides, was held by the rebels. And he agreed readily to land me in
Bude Bay: "and also thy comrade, if (as I guess) she be so minded,"
he added, glancing up at Delia from the paper whereon I had written my
request.

She had been silent of late, beyond her wont, avoiding (I thought) to
meet my eye: but answer'd simply,

"I go with Jack."

Captain Billy, whose eyes rested on her as she spoke, beckon'd me, very
mysterious, outside the cabin, and winking slily, whisper'd loud enough
to stun one----

"Ply her, Jack"--he had call'd me "Jack" from the first--"ply her
briskly! Womankind is but yielding flesh: 'am an amorous man mysel', an'
speak but that I have prov'd."

On this--for the whole ship could hear it--there certainly came the
sound of a stifled laugh from the other side of the cabin door: but it
did not mend my comrade's shy humor, that lasted throughout the voyage.

To be brief, 'twas not till the fourth afternoon (by reason of baffling
head winds) that we stepped out of the _Godsend's_ boat upon a small
beach of shingle, whence, between a rift in the black cliffs, wound up
the road that was to lead us inland. The _Godsend_, as we turn'd to wave
our hands, lay at half a mile's distance, and made a pretty sight: for
the day, that had begun with a white frost, was now turn'd sunny and
still, so that looking north we saw the sea all spread with pink and
lilac and hyacinth, and upon it the ship lit up, her masts and sails
glowing like a gold piece. And there was Billy, leaning over the
bulwarks and waving his trumpet for "Good-bye!" Thought I, for I little
dream'd to see these good fellows again, "what a witless game is this
life! to seek ever in fresh conjunctions what we leave behind in a hand
shake." 'Twas a cheap reflection, yet it vex'd me that as we turn'd to
mount the road Delia should break out singing---

"Hey! nonni--nonni--no! Is't not fine to laugh and sing When the hells
of death do ring!--"

"Why, no," said I, "I don't think it": and capp'd her verse with
another--

"Silly man, the cost to find Is to leave as good behind--"

"Jack, for pity's sake, stop!" She put her fingers to her ears. "What a
nasty, creaking voice thou hast, to be sure!"

"That's as a man may hold," said I, nettled.

"No, indeed: yours is a very poor voice, but mine is beautiful. So
listen."

She went on to sing as she went, "Green as grass is my kirtle," "Tire me
in tiffany," "Come ye bearded men-at-arms," and "The Bending Rush." All
these she sang, as I must confess, most delicately well, and then fac'd
me, with a happy smile---

"Now, have not I a sweet voice? Why, Jack--art still glum?"

"Delia," answer'd I, "you have first to give me a reply to what, four
days agone, I ask'd you. Dear girl--nay then, dear comrade--"

I broke off, for she had come to a stop, wringing her hands and looking
in my face most dolefully.

"Oh, dear--oh, dear! Jack, we have had such merry times: and you are
spoiling all the fun!"

We follow'd the road after this very moodily; for Delia, whom I had
made sharer of the rebels' secret, agreed that no time was to be lost
in reaching Bodmin, that lay a good thirty miles to the southwest. Night
fell and the young moon rose, with a brisk breeze at our backs that kept
us still walking without any feeling of weariness. Captain Billy had
given me at parting a small compass, of new invention, that a man could
carry easily in his pocket; and this from time to time I examin'd in the
moonlight, guiding our way almost due south, in hopes of striking into
the main road westward. I doubt not we lost a deal of time among
the byways; but at length happen'd on a good road bearing south, and
follow'd it till daybreak, when to our satisfaction we spied a hill in
front, topp'd with a stout castle, and under it a town of importance,
that we guess'd to be Launceston.

By this, my comrade and I were on the best of terms again; and now drew
up to consider if we should enter the town or avoid it to the west,
trusting to find a breakfast in some tavern on the way. Because we knew
not with certainty the temper of the country, it seem'd best to choose
this second course: so we fetch'd around by certain barren meadows, and
thought ourselves lucky to hit on a road that, by the size, must be the
one we sought, and a tavern with a wide yard before it and a carter's
van standing at the entrance, not three gunshots from the town walls.

"Now Providence hath surely led us to breakfast," said Delia, and
stepped before me into the yard, toward the door.

I was following her when, inside of a gate to the right of the house, I
caught the gleam of steel, and turn'd aside to look.

To my dismay there stood near a score of chargers in this second court,
saddled and dripping with sweat. My first thought was to run after
Delia; but a quick surprise made me rub my eyes with wonder---

'Twas the sight of a sorrel mare among them--a mare with one high white
stocking. In a thousand I could have told her for Molly.

Three seconds after I was at the tavern door, and in my ears a voice
sounding that stopp'd me short and told me in one instant that without
God's help all was lost.

'Twas the voice of Captain Settle speaking in the taproom; and already
Delia stood, past concealment, by the open door.

"... And therefore, master carter, it grieves me to disappoint thee;
but no man goeth this day toward Bodmin. Such be my Lord of Stamford's
orders, whose servant I am, and as captain of this troop I am sent to
exact them. As they displease you, his lordship is but twenty-four hours
behind: you can abide him and complain. Doubtless he will hear--_ten
million devils!_"

I heard his shout as he caught sight of Delia. I saw his crimson face as
he darted out and gripp'd her. I saw, or half saw, the troopers crowding
out after him. For a moment I hesitated. Then came my pretty comrade's
voice, shrill above the hubbub---

"Jack--they have horses outside! Leave me--I am ta'en--and ride, dear
lad--ride!"

In a flash my decision was taken, for better or worse. I dash'd out
around the house, vaulted the gate, and catching at Molly's mane, leap'd
into the saddle.

A dozen troopers were at the gate, and two had their pistols levell'd.

"Surrender!"

"Be hang'd if I do!"

I set my teeth and put Molly at the low wall. As she rose like a bird in
air the two pistols rang out together, and a burning pain seem'd to tear
open my left shoulder. In a moment the mare alighted safe on the other
side, flinging me forward on her neck. But I scrambled back, and with a
shout that frighten'd my own ears, dug my heels into her flanks.

Half a minute more and I was on the hard road, galloping westward for
dear life. So also were a score of rebel troopers. Twenty miles and more
lay before me; and a bare hundred yards was all my start.

[Illustration: The two pistols rang out together.]




CHAPTER XI

I RIDE DOWN INTO TEMPLE: AND AM WELL TREATED THERE.


And now I did indeed abandon myself to despair. Few would have given a
groat for my life, with that crew at my heels; and I least of all, now
that my dear comrade was lost. The wound in my shoulder was bleeding
sore--I could feel the warm stream welling--yet not so sore as my heart.
And I pressed my knees into the saddle flap, and wondered what the end
would be.

The sorrel mare was galloping, free and strong, her delicate ears laid
back, and the network of veins under her soft skin working with the
heave and fall of her withers: yet--by the mud and sweat about her--I
knew she must have travelled far before I mounted. I heard a shot or two
fired, far up the road: tho' their bullets must have fallen short:
at least, I heard none whiz past. But the rebels' shouting was clear
enough, and the thud of their gallop behind.

I think that, for a mile or two, I must have ridden in a sort of swoon.
'Tis certain, not an inch of the road comes back to me: nor did I once
turn my head to look back, but sat with my eyes fastened stupidly on the
mare's neck. And by-and-bye, as we galloped, the smart of my wound, the
heartache, hurry, pounding of hoofs--all dropp'd to an enchanting lull.
I rode, and that was all.

For, swoon or no, I was lifted off earth, as it seemed, and on easy
wings to an incredible height, where were no longer hedges, nor road,
nor country round; but a great stillness, and only the mare and I
running languidly through it.

"Ride!"

Now, at first, I thought 'twas someone speaking this in my ear, and
turn'd my head. But 'twas really the last word I had heard from Delia,
now after half an hour repeated in my brain. And as I grew aware of
this, the dullness fell off me, and all became very distinct. And the
muscles about my wound had stiffen'd--which was vilely painful: and the
country, I saw, was a brown, barren moor, dotted with peat-ricks: and I
cursed it.

This did me good: for it woke the fighting-man in me, and I set my
teeth. Now for the first time looking back, I saw, with a great gulp of
joy, I had gained on the troopers. A long dip of the road lay between
me and the foremost, now topping the crest. The sun had broke through at
last, and sparkled on his cap and gorget. I whistled to Molly (I could
not pat her), and spoke to her softly: the sweet thing prick'd up
her ears, laid them back again, and mended her pace. Her stride was
beautiful to feel.

I had yet no clear idea how to escape. In front the moors rose
gradually, swelling to the horizon line, and there broken into steep,
jagged heights. The road under me was sound white granite and stretch'd
away till lost among these fastnesses--in all of it no sign of man's
habitation. Be sure I look'd along it, and to right and left, dreading
to spy more troopers. But for mile on mile, all was desolate.

Now and then I caught the cry of a pewit, or saw a snipe glance up from
his bed; but mainly I was busied about the mare. "Let us but gain the
ridge ahead," thought I, "and there is a chance." So I rode as light as
I could, husbanding her powers.

She was going her best, but the best was near spent. The sweat was
oozing, her satin coat losing the gloss, the spume flying back from her
nostrils--"Soh!" I called to her: "Soh! my beauty; we ride to save an
army!" The loose stones flew right and left, as she reach'd out her
neck, and her breath came shorter and shorter.

A mile, and another mile, we passed in this trim, and by the end of it
must have spent three-quarters of an hour at the work. Glancing back, I
saw the troopers scattered; far behind, but following. The heights were
still a weary way ahead: but I could mark their steep sides ribb'd
with boulders. Till these were passed, there was no chance to hide. The
parties in this race could see each other all the way, and must ride it
out.

And all the way the ground kept rising. I had no means to ease the
mare, even by pulling off my heavy jack-boots, with one arm (and that my
right) dangling useless. Once she flung up her head and I caught sight
of her nostril, red as fire, and her poor eyes starting. I felt her
strength ebbing between my knees. Here and there she blundered in her
stride. And somewhere, over the ridge yonder, lay the Army of the West,
and we alone could save it.

The road, for half a mile, now fetched a sudden loop, though the country
on either side was level enough. Had my head been cool, I must have
guessed a reason for this: but, you must remember, I had long been giddy
with pain and loss of blood--so, thinking to save time, I turned Molly
off the granite, and began to cut across.

The short grass and heath being still frozen, we went fairly for the
first minute or so. But away behind us, I heard a shout--and it must
have been loud to reach me. I learn'd the meaning when, about two
hundred yards before we came on the road again, the mare's forelegs went
deep, and next minute we were plunging in a black peat-quag.

Heaven can tell how we won through. It must have been still partly
frozen, and perhaps we were only on the edge of it. I only know that as
we scrambled up on solid ground, plastered and breathless, I looked at
the wintry sun, the waste, and the tall hill tow'ring to the right of
us, and thought it a strange place to die in.

For the struggle had burst open my wound again, and the blood was
running down my arm and off my fingers in a stream. And now I could
count every gorsebush, every stone--and now I saw nothing at all. And
I heard the tinkling of bells: and then found a tune running in my
head--'twas "Tire me in tiffany," and I tried to think where last I
heard it.

But sweet gallant Molly must have held on: for the next thing I woke up
to was a four-hol'd cross beside the road: and soon after we were over
the ridge and clattering down hill.

A rough tor had risen full in front, but the road swerved to the left
and took us down among the spurs of it. Now was my last lookout. I tried
to sway less heavily in the saddle, and with my eyes searched the plain
at our feet.

Alas! Beneath us the waste land was spread, mile upon mile: and I
groaned aloud. For just below I noted a clump of roofless cabins, and
beyond, upon the moors, the dotted walls of sheep-cotes, ruined also:
but in all the sad-color'd leagues no living man, nor the sign of one.
It was done with us. I reined up the mare--and then, in the same motion,
wheeled her sharp to the right.

High above, on the hillside, a voice was calling.

I look'd up. Below the steeper ridge of the tor a patch of land had been
cleared for tillage: and here a yoke of oxen was moving leisurely before
a plough ('twas their tinkling bells I had heard, just now); while
behind followed the wildest shape--by the voice, a woman.

She was not calling to me, but to her team: and as I put Molly at the
slope, her chant rose and fell in the mournfullest singsong.

"So-hoa! Oop Comely Vean! oop, then--o-oop!"

I rose in my stirrups and shouted.

At this and the sound of hoofs, she stay'd the plough and, hand on hip,
looked down the slope. The oxen, softly rattling the chains on their
yoke, turn'd their necks and gazed. With sunk head Molly heaved herself
up the last few yards and came to a halt with a stagger. I slipp'd out
of the saddle and stood, with a hand on it, swaying.

"What's thy need, young man--that comest down to Temple wi' sword
a-danglin'?"

The girl was a half-naked savage, dress'd only in a strip of sacking
that barely reach'd her knees, and a scant bodice of the same, lac'd in
front with pack thread, that left her bosom and brown arms free. Yet she
appear'd no whit abash'd, but lean'd on the plough-tail and regarded me,
easy and frank, as a man would.

"Sell me a horse," I blurted out: "Twenty guineas will I give for
one within five minutes, and more if he be good! I ride on the King's
errand."

"Then get thee back to thy master, an' say, no horse shall he have o'
me--nor any man that uses horseflesh so." She pointed to Molly's knees,
that were bow'd and shaking, and the bloody froth dripping from her
mouth.
