her and us lay another huge berg."

A WONDERFUL DAWN

Speaking of the moment when the Carpathia was sighted. Mrs. J. J. Brown,
who had cowed the driveling quartermaster, said:

"Then, knowing that we were safe at last, I looked about me. The most
wonderful dawn I have ever seen came upon us. I have just returned from
Egypt. I have been all over the world, but I have never seen anything
like this. First the gray and then the flood of light. Then the sun came
up in a ball of red fire. For the first time we saw where we were. Near
us was open water, but on every side was ice. Ice ten feet high was
everywhere, and to the right and left and back and front were icebergs.
Some of them were mountain high. This sea of ice was forty miles wide,
they told me. We did not wait for the Carpathia to come to us, we rowed
to it. We were lifted up in a sort of nice little sling that was lowered
to us. After that it was all over. The passengers of the Carpathia
were so afraid that we would not have room enough that they gave us
practically the whole ship to ourselves."

It had been learned that some of the passengers, in fact all of the
women passengers of the Titanic who were rescued, refer to "Lady
Margaret," as they called Mrs. Brown as the strength of them all.


TRANSFERRING THE RESCUED

Officers of the Carpathia report that when they reached the scene of
the Titanic's wreck there were fifty bodies or more floating in the
sea. Only one mishap attended the transfer of the rescued from the
life-boats. One large collapsible life-boat, in which thirteen persons
were seated, turned turtle just as they were about to save it, and all
in it were lost.



THE DOG HERO

Not the least among the heroes of the Titanic disaster was Rigel, a big
black Newfoundland dog, belonging to the first officer, who went down
with the ship. But for Rigel the fourth boat picked up might have been
run down by the Carpathia. For three hours he swam in the icy water
where the Titanic went down, evidently looking for his master, and was
instrumental in guiding the boatload of survivors to the gangway of the
Carpathia.

Jonas Briggs, a seaman abroad the Carpathia, now has Rigel and told
the story of the dog's heroism. The Carpathia was moving slowly about,
looking for boats, rafts or anything which might be afloat. Exhausted
with their efforts, weak from lack of food and exposure to the cutting
wind and terror-stricken, the men and women in the fourth boat had
drifted under the Carpathia's starboard bow. They were dangerously close
to the steamship, but too weak to shout a warning loud enough to reach
the bridge.

The boat might not have been seen were it not for the sharp barking of
Rigel, who was swimming ahead of the craft, and valiantly announcing his
position. The barks attracted the attention of Captain Rostron; and he
went to the starboard end of the bridge to see where they came from and
saw the boat. He immediately ordered the engines stopped, and the boat
came alongside the starboard gangway.

Care was taken to get Rigel aboard, but he appeared little affected
by his long trip through the ice-cold water. He stood by the rail and
barked until Captain Rostron called Briggs and had him take the dog
below.


A THRILLING ACCOUNT OF RESCUE

Mr. Wallace Bradford, of San Francisco, a passenger aboard the
Carpathia, gave the following thrilling account of the rescue of the
Titanic's passengers.

"Since half-past four this morning I have experienced one of those
never-to-be-forgotten circumstances that weighs heavy on my soul and
which shows most awfully what poor things we mortals are. Long before
this reaches you the news will be flashed that the Titanic has gone down
and that our steamer, the Carpathia, caught the wireless message when
seventy-five miles away, and so far we have picked up twenty boats
estimated to contain about 750 people.

"None of us can tell just how many, as they have been hustled to various
staterooms and to the dining saloons to be warmed up. I was awakened by
unusual noises and imagined that I smelled smoke. I jumped up and looked
out of my port-hole, and saw a huge iceberg looming up like a rock off
shore. It was not white, and I was positive that it was a rock, and the
thought flashed through my mind, how in the world can we be near a rock
when we are four days out from New York in a southerly direction and in
mid-ocean.

"When I got out on deck the first man I encountered told me that the
Titanic had gone down and we were rescuing the passengers. The first two
boats from the doomed vessel were in sight making toward us. Neither of
them was crowded. This was accounted for later by the fact that it was
impossible to get many to leave the steamer, as they would not believe
that she was going down. It was a glorious, clear morning and a quiet
sea. Off to the starboard was a white area of ice plain, from whose even
surface rose mammoth forts, castles and pyramids of solid ice almost as
real as though they had been placed there by the hand of man.

"Our steamer was hove to about two and a half miles from the edge of
this huge iceberg. The Titanic struck about 11.20 P. M. and did not go
down until two o'clock. Many of the passengers were in evening dress
when they came aboard our ship, and most of these were in a most
bedraggled condition. Near me as I write is a girl about eighteen years
old in a fancy dress costume of bright colors, while in another seat
near by is a women in a white dress trimmed with lace and covered with
jaunty blue flowers.

"As the boats came alongside after the first two all of them contained
a very large proportion of women. In fact, one of the boats had women
at the oars, one in particular containing, as near as I could estimate,
about forty-five women and only about six men. In this boat two women
were handling one of the oars. All of the engineers went down with the
steamer. Four bodies have been brought aboard. One is that of a fireman,
who is said to have been shot by one of the officers because he refused
to obey orders. Soon after I got on deck I could, with the aid of my
glasses, count seven boats headed our way, and they continued to come up
to half past eight o'clock. Some were in sight for a long time and
moved very slowly, showing plainly that the oars were being handled by
amateurs or by women.

"No baggage of any kind was brought by the survivors. In fact, the only
piece of baggage that reached the Carpathia from the Titanic is a small
closed trunk about twenty-four inches square, evidently the property of
an Irish female immigrant. While some seemed fully dressed, many of
the men having their overcoats and the women sealskin and other coats,
others came just as they had jumped from their berths, clothed in their
pajamas and bath robes."


THE SORROW OF THE LIVING

Of the survivors in general it may be said that they escaped death and
they gained life. Life is probably sweet to them as it is to everyone,
but what physical and mental torture has been the price of life to those
who were brought back to land on the Carpathia--the hours in life-boats,
amid the crashing of ice, the days of anguish that have succeeded, the
horrors of body and mind still experienced and never to be entirely
absent until death affords them its relief.

The thought of the nation to-day is for the living. They need our
sympathy, our consolation more than do the dead, and, perhaps, in the
majority of the cases they need our protecting care as well.



CHAPTER X. ON BOARD THE CARPATHIA

AID FOR THE SUFFERING AND HYSTERICAL--BURYING THE DEAD--VOTE OF
THANKS TO CAPTAIN ROSTRON OF THE CARPATHIA--IDENTIFYING THOSE
SAVED--COMMUNICATING WITH LAND--THE PASSAGE TO NEW YORK.

IF the scenes in the life-boats were tear-bringing, hardly less so
was the arrival of the boats at the Carpathia with their bands of
terror-stricken, grief-ridden survivors, many of them too exhausted to
know that safety was at hand. Watchers on the Carpathia were moved to
tears.

"The first life-boat reached the Carpathia about half-past five o'clock
in the morning," recorded one of the passengers on the Carpathia. "And
the last of the sixteen boats was unloaded before nine o'clock. Some of
the life-boats were only half filled, the first one having but two men
and eleven women, when it had accommodations for at least forty. There
were few men in the boats. The women were the gamest lot I have ever
seen. Some of the men and women were in evening clothes, and others
among those saved had nothing on but night clothes and raincoats."

After the Carpathia had made certain that there were no more passengers
of the Titanic to be picked up, she threaded her way out of the ice
fields for fifty miles. It was dangerous work, but it was managed
without trouble.


AID FOR THE SUFFERING AND HYSTERICAL

The shrieks and cries of the women and men picked up in life-boats by
the Carpathia were horrible. The women were clothed only in night robes
and wrappers. The men were in their night garments. One was lifted on
board entirely nude. All the passengers who could bear nourishment were
taken into the dining rooms and cabins by Captain Rostron and given food
and stimulants. Passengers of the Carpathia gave up their berths and
staterooms to the survivors.

As soon as they were landed on the Carpathia many of the women became
hysterical, but on the whole they behaved splendidly. Men and women
appeared to be stunned all day Monday, the full force of the disaster
not reaching them until Tuesday night. After being wrapped up in
blankets and filled with brandy and hot coffee, the first thoughts were
for their husbands and those at home. Most of them imagined that their
husbands had been picked up by other vessels, and they began flooding
the wireless rooms with messages. It was almost certain that those who
were not on board the Carpathia had gone down to death.

One of the most seriously injured was a woman who had lost both her
children. Her limbs had been severely torn; but she was very patient.

WOMEN SEEKING NEWS

In the first cabin library women of wealth and refinement mingled their
grief and asked eagerly for news of the possible arrival of a belated
boat, or a message from other steamers telling of the safety of their
husbands. Mrs. Henry B. Harris, wife of a New York theatrical manager,
checked her tears long enough to beg that some message of hope be sent
to her father-in-law. Mrs. G. Thorne, Miss Marie Young, Mrs Emil Taussig
and her daughter, Ruth, Mrs. Martin Rothschild, Mrs. William Augustus
Spencer, Mrs. J. Stewart White and Mrs. Walter M. Clark were a few
of those who lay back, exhausted, on the leather cushions and told in
shuddering sentences of their experiences.

Mrs. John Jacob Astor and the Countess of Rothes had been taken to
staterooms soon after their arrival on shipboard.

Before noon, at the captain's request, the first cabin passengers of the
Titanic gathered in the saloon and the passengers of other classes in
corresponding places on the rescue ship. Then the collecting of names
was begun by the purser and the stewards. A second table was served in
both cabins for the new guests, and the Carpathia's second cabin, being
better filled than its first, the second class arrivals had to be sent
to the steerage.


TEARS THEIR ONLY RELIEF

Mrs. Jacques Futrelle, wife of the novelist, herself a writer of note,
sat dry eyed in the saloon, telling her friends that she had given up
hope for her husband. She joined with the rest in inquiries as to the
chances of rescue by another ship, and no one told her what soon came
to be the fixed opinion of the men--that all those saved were on the
Carpathia.

"I feel better," Mrs. Futrelle said hours afterward, "for I can cry
now."

Among the men conversation centered on the accident and the
responsibility for it. Many expressed the belief that the Titanic, in
common with other vessels, had had warning of the ice packs, but that in
the effort to establish a record on the maiden run sufficient heed had
not been paid to the warnings.

"God knows I'm not proud to be here," said a rich New York man. "I got
on a boat when they were about to lower it and when, from delays below,
there was no woman to take the vacant place. I don't think any man who
was saved is deserving of censure, but I realize that, in contrast with
those who went down, we may be viewed unfavorably." He showed a picture
of his baby boy as he spoke.


PITIFUL SCENES OF GRIEF

As the day passed the fore part of the ship assumed some degree of order
and comfort, but the crowded second sabin and rear decks gave forth the
incessant sound of lamentation. A bride of two months sat on the floor
and moaned her widowhood. An Italian mother shrieked the name of her
lost son.

A girl of seven wept over the loss of her Teddy bear and two dolls,
while her mother, with streaming eyes, dared not tell the child that her
father was lost too, and that the money for which their home in England
had been sold had gone down with him. Other children clung to the necks
of the fathers who, because carrying them, had been permitted to take
the boats.

In the hospital and the public rooms lay, in blankets, several others
who had been benumbed by the water. Mrs. Rosa Abbott, who was in the
water for hours, was restored during the day. K. Whiteman, the Titanic's
barber, who declared he was blown off the ship by the second of the two
explosions after the crash, was treated for bruises. A passenger, who
was thoroughly ducked before being picked up, caused much amusement on
this ship, soon after the doctors were through with him, by demanding a
bath.


SURVIVORS AID THE DESTITUTE

Storekeeper Prentice, the last man off the Titanic to reach this ship,
was also soon over the effects of his long swim in the icy waters into
which he leaped from the poop deck.

The physicians of the Carpathia were praised, as was Chief Steward
Hughes, for work done in making the arrivals comfortable and averting
serious illness.

Monday night on the Carpathia was one of rest. The wailing and sobbing
of the day were hushed as widows and orphans slept. Tuesday, save for
the crowded condition of the ship, matters took somewhat their normal
appearance.

The second cabin dining room had been turned into a hospital to care
for the injured, and the first, second and third class dining rooms were
used for sleeping rooms at night for women, while the smoking rooms were
set aside for men. All available space was used, some sleeping in chairs
and some on the floor, while a few found rest in the bathrooms.

Every cabin had been filled, and women and children were sleeping on the
floors in the dining saloon, library and smoking rooms. The passengers
of the Carpathia had divided their clothes with the shipwrecked ones
until they had at least kept warm. It is true that many women had to
appear on deck in kimonos and some in underclothes with a coat thrown
over them, but their lives had been spared and they had not thought of
dress. Some children in the second cabin were entirely without clothes,
but the women had joined together, and with needles and thread they
could pick up from passenger to passenger, had made warm clothes out of
the blankets belonging to the Carpathia.


WOMEN BEFRIENDED ONE ANOTHER

The women aboard the Carpathia did what they could by word and act to
relieve the sufferings of the rescued. Most of the survivors were in
great need of clothing, and this the women of the Carpathia supplied to
them as long as their surplus stock held out.

J. A. Shuttleworth, of Louisville, Ky., befriended Mrs. Lucien Smith,
whose husband went down with the Titanic. Mrs. Smith was formerly Miss
Eloise Hughes, daughter of Representative and Mrs. James A. Hughes, of
Huntington, W. Va., and was on her wedding trip. Mr. Shuttleworth asked
her if there wasn't something he could do for her. She said that all the
money she had was lost on the Titanic, so Mr. Shuttleworth gave her $500


DEATHS ON THE CARPATHIA

Two of the rescued from the Titanic died from shock and exposure before
they reached the Carpathia, and another died a few minutes after being
taken on board. The dead were W. H. Hoyte, first cabin; Abraham Hormer,
third class, and S. C. Sirbert, steward, and they were buried at sea the
morning of April 15th, latitude 41.14 north, longitude 51.24 west. P.
Lyon, able seaman, died and was buried at sea the following morning.

