comprised a town within itself--and a well-peopled town too. The members
of the household, and the various retainers connected with it, were
multitudinous as the rooms themselves.

One charm and peculiarity of the palace, visible from without, consisted
in the arched walks before referred to, placed high up on the building,
on every side. Screened from the weather, these walks looked upon the
different courts and gardens, and commanded extensive views of the
lovely sylvan scenery around. Hence Cheshunt and Waltham Abbey, Enfield,
and other surrounding villages, could be distinguished through the green
vistas of the park.

On the south, facing the grand avenue, was "a large open cloister, built
upon several large fair pillars of stone, arched over with seven arches,
with a fair rail, and balusters, well painted with the Kings and Queens
of England, and the pedigree of the old Lord Burleigh, and divers other
ancient families."

The body of the palace consisted of two large quadrangles: one of which,
eighty-six feet square, was denominated the Fountain Court, from the
circumstance of a fountain of black and white marble standing within
it. The other quadrangle, somewhat larger, being one hundred and ten
feet square, was called the Middle Court. In addition to these, there
were three other smaller courts, respectively entitled the Dial Court,
the Buttery Court, and the Dove-house Court, wherein the offices were
situated.

On the east side of the Fountain Court stood an arched cloister; and on
the ground-floor there was a spacious hall, paved with marble, and
embellished with a curiously-carved ceiling. Adjoining it were the
apartments assigned to the Earl of Salisbury as Keeper of Theobalds, the
council-chamber, and the chambers of Sir Lewis Lewkener, Master of the
Ceremonies, and Sir John Finett. Above was the presence-chamber,
wainscotted with oak, painted in liver-colour and gilded, having rich
pendents from the ceiling, and vast windows resplendent with armorial
bearings. Near this were the privy-chamber and the King's bed-chamber,
together with a wide gallery, one hundred and twenty-three feet in
length, wainscotted and roofed like the presence-chamber, but yet more
gorgeously fretted and painted. Its walls were ornamented with stags'
heads with branching antlers. On the upper floor were the rooms assigned
to the Duke of Lennox, as Lord Chamberlain, and close to them was one of
the external leaded walks before alluded to, sixty-two feet long-and
eleven wide, which, from its eminent position, carried the gaze to Ware.

In the Middle-court were the Queen's apartments, comprising her chapel,
presence-chamber, and other rooms, and over them a gallery nearly equal
in length to that reserved for the King. In this quadrangle, also, were
Prince Charles's lodgings. Over the latter was the Green Gallery, one
hundred and nine feet in length, and proportionately wide. And above the
gallery was another external covered walk, wherein were two "lofty
arches of brick, of no small ornament to the house, and rendering it
comely and pleasant to all that passed by."

The gardens were enchanting, and in perfect keeping with the palace.
Occupying several acres. They seemed infinitely larger than they were,
since they abounded in intricate alleys, labyrinths, and mazes; so that
you were easily lost within them, and sometimes wanted a clue to come
forth. They contained some fine canals, fountains, and statues. In
addition to the great gardens were the priory-gardens, with other
inclosures for pheasants, aviaries, and menageries; for James was very
fond of wild beasts, and had a collection of them worthy of a zoological
garden. In one of his letters to Buckingham when the latter was at
Madrid, we find him inquiring about the elephant, camels, and wild
asses. He had always a camel-house at Theobalds. To close our
description, we may add that the tennis-court, _manege_ stable kennels,
and falconry were on a scale of magnitude proportionate to the palace.

Beneath the wide-spreading branches of a noble elm, forming part of the
great avenue, and standing at a short distance from the principal,
entrance to the palace, were collected together, one pleasant afternoon
in May, a small group of persons, consisting almost entirely of the
reader's acquaintances. Chief amongst them was Jocelyn Mounchensey, who,
having dismounted and fastened his horse to the branch, was leaning
against the large trunk of the tree, contemplating the magnificent
structure we have attempted to describe. Unacquainted as yet with its
internal splendours, he had no difficulty in comprehending them from
what he beheld from without. The entrance gates were open, and a wide
archway beyond leading to the great quadrangle, gave him a view of its
beautiful marble fountain in the midst, ornamented with exquisite
statues of Venus and Cupid. Numerous officers of the household, pages,
ushers, and serving-men in the royal liveries, with now and then some
personage of distinction, were continually passing across the Fountain
Court. Gaily attired courtiers, in doublets of satin and mantles of
velvet, were lounging in the balconies of the presence-chamber, staring
at Jocelyn and his companions for, want of better occupation. Other
young nobles, accompanied by richly-habited dames--some of them the
highest-born and loveliest in the land--were promenading to and fro upon
the garden terrace on the right, chattering and laughing loudly. There
was plenty of life and movement everywhere. Even in the Lord
Chamberlain's walk, which, as we have said, was contrived in the upper
part of the structure, and formed a sort of external gallery, three
persons might be discerned; and to save the reader any speculation, we
will tell him that these persons were the Duke of Lennox (Lord
Chamberlain), the Conde de Gondomar (the Spanish lieger-ambassador), and
the Lord Roos. In front of the great gates were stationed four warders
with the royal badge woven in gold on the front and back of their
crimson doublets, with roses in their velvet hats, roses in their
buskins, and halberts over their shoulders. Just within the gates stood
a gigantic porter, a full head and shoulders taller than the burly
warders themselves. From the summit of the lofty central tower of the
palace floated the royal banner, discernible by all the country round.

On the other side of the tree against which Jocelyn was leaning, and
looking down the long avenue, rather than towards the palace, stood Dick
Taverner, who however bestowed little attention upon his master, being
fully occupied by a more attractive object close at hand. Dickon, it
appeared, had succeeded in inducing Gillian Greenford to accompany him
in the expedition to Theobalds, and as the fair damsel could not of
course go alone, she had cajoled her good-natured old grandsire into
conveying her thither; and she was now seated behind him upon a pillion
placed on the back of a strong, rough-coated, horse. Dick was in
raptures at his success. The ride from Tottenham had been delightful.
They had tarried for a short time to drink a cup of ale at the Bell at
Edmonton, where Dick meant to have breakfasted, though chance had so
agreeably prevented him, and where the liquor was highly approved by the
old farmer, who became thenceforth exceedingly chatty, and talked of
nothing else but good Queen Bess and her frequent visits to Theobalds in
the old Lord Burleigh's time, during the rest of the journey. Little
heed was paid to his garrulity by the young couple. They let him talk
on, feigning to listen, but in reality noting scarce a word he said. As
they entered the park of Theobalds, however, they found their tongues,
and Gillian became loud in her admiration of the beautiful glades that
opened before them, and of the dappled denizens of the wood that tripped
lightsomely across the sward, or hurried towards the thickets. The park,
indeed, looked beautiful with its fine oaks in their freshly-opened
foliage of the tenderest green, its numerous spreading beeches, its
scattered thorns white with blossom, and the young fern just springing
from the seed in the brakes. No wonder Gillian was delighted. Dick was
equally enchanted, and regretted he was not like King James, master of a
great park, that he might hunt within it at his pleasure. Of course, if
he had been king, Gillian would naturally have been his queen, and have
hunted with him. Old Greenford, too, admired the scene, and could not
but admit that the park was improved, though he uttered something like a
groan as he thought that Queen Elizabeth and the Lord Treasurer could be
seen in it no longer.

After riding for a couple of miles along a road which led them over
beautifully undulating ground, affording glimpses of every variety of
forest scenery--sometimes plunging them into the depths of groves, where
the path was covered by over-arching trees--sometimes crossing the open
chace, studded by single aged oaks of the largest size--sometimes,
skirting the margin of a pool, fringed with flags, reeds, and bulrushes
for the protection of the water-fowl--now passing the large heronry, to
the strict preservation of which James attached the utmost importance;
they at length approached the long avenue leading to the palace. At its
entrance they found Jocelyn waiting for them.

The young man, who cared not for their company, had ridden on in
advance. The strange events of the morning gave him plenty of material
for reflection, and he longed to commune with himself. Accordingly,
when the others stopped at Edmonton, he quitted them, promising to halt
till they came up, before entering the precincts of the palace. If his
ride was not so agreeable as their's, it at least enabled him to regain,
in some degree, his composure of mind, which had been greatly disturbed
by his abrupt parting with Aveline. Her image was constantly before him,
and refusing to be dismissed, connected itself with every object he
beheld. At first he despaired of meeting her again; but as he gradually
grew calmer, his hopes revived, and difficulties which seemed
insuperable began to disperse. By the time Dick Taverner and his
companions came up, he felt some disposition to talk, and Gillian's
hearty merriment and high spirits helped to enliven him. Having
ascertained, from one of the royal keepers whom he had encountered, that
the King, with a large company, was out hawking on the banks of the New
River, which was cut through the park, and that he would in all
probability return through the great avenue to the palace, he proposed
that they should station themselves somewhere within it, in order to see
him pass. This arrangement pleased all parties, so proceeding slowly up
the avenue, they took up a position as described.

More than an hour, however, elapsed, and still James, who no doubt was
pleased with his sport, came not.

Without being aware of their high quality, or having the slightest
notion that the Conde Gondomar was one of them, Jocelyn had remarked the
three personages in the Lord Chamberlain's Walk. He had seen them pause,
and apparently look towards the little group of which he himself formed
part. Shortly after this, two of the party retired, leaving the third
alone in the gallery. By-and-by these two individuals were seen to cross
the Fountain Court, and passing through the great gates, to direct their
steps towards the avenue.

As they approached, Jocelyn recognised one of them as Lord Roos, whom he
had seen play so singular a part at Madame Bonaventure's ordinary. The
other was wholly unknown to him. But that he was a person of the utmost
distinction he felt convinced, as well from his haughty bearing and
sumptuous attire, as from the evident respect paid him by his companion.
In stature he was rather short, being somewhat under the ordinary
standard; but his figure was admirably proportioned, and was displayed
to the greatest advantage by his rich habiliments. His doublet was of
sea-green satin, embroidered with silver and black, with rich open
sleeves, and his Spanish cloak was of velvet of the same colour and
similarly embroidered. His hose were of tawny silk, and the plumes in
his bonnet black, striped with white. He was decorated with the order of
the Golden Fleece, and bore at his side a genuine blade of Toledo, with
a handle of rarest workmanship. Bound his throat he wore a large, triple
ruff, edged with pointed lace. His face was oval in shape, his
complexion of a rich olive hue, his eyes large, dark, and keen, his
features singularly handsome, and his looks penetrating. His hair was
raven-black, cut short, and removed from the forehead.

Lord Roos and his companion passed close to Jocelyn without appearing to
notice him; but they halted before Gillian, regarding her with insolent
admiration. Evidently she was the object that had brought them forth.
The poor damsel was terribly confused by their ardent glances and
libertine scrutiny, and blushed to her very temples. As to Dick
Taverner, he trembled with rage and jealousy, and began to repent having
brought his treasure into such a dangerous neighbourhood.

The person who seemed to be most struck with Gillian's charms was the
wearer of the Spanish mantle.

"En verdad!" he exclaimed, "that is the loveliest piece of rusticity I
have seen since I came to England. I thought mine eyes did not deceive
me, as to her beauty, when I caught sight of her from the Lord
Chamberlain's gallery."

"The Conde de Gondomar hath ever an eagle's eye for a pretty woman,"
Lord Roos replied, laughing.

"The Conde de Gondomar!" mentally ejaculated Jocelyn, who had overheard
what he said. "Why, this is he to whom the ring must be shown. The
opportunity must not be lost."

Accordingly, regardless of the impropriety of the proceeding, he
uncovered his head, and advancing towards the Spaniard said--

"I believe I have the honour of addressing the Conde de Gondomar?"

"What means this intrusion, Sir?" Lord Roos demanded insolently. "What
have you to say to his Excellency?"

"I bring him a token, my lord," the young man replied, exhibiting the
ring, given him by the masked horseman, to the ambassador.

"Ha!" exclaimed De Gondomar, glancing at the ring, and then regarding
Jocelyn steadfastly, "I must speak with this young man, my lord."

"And abandon the damsel?" demanded Lord Roos.

"No--no--you must take care of her," De Gondomar replied in a low tone.
"Can you not induce Lady Exeter to take her into her service?"

"I will try," Lord Roos replied. "And see!" he added, pointing down the
avenue, "the royal party is returning, so I can at once ascertain
whether her ladyship will second your Excellency's designs."

"Do so," said De Gondomar, "and I shall be for ever indebted to you.
This girl has quite taken my fancy, and I must not lose her. And now,
Sir," he added, stepping aside with Jocelyn, "you have brought me the
token from my assured agent, and I understand from it that you are a
person upon whom I may rely."

"In all that beseems a gentleman and a man of honour and loyalty your
Excellency may rely on me," Jocelyn replied.

"I shall require nothing inconsistent with those principles," the
Spanish Ambassador said. "This point disposed of, let me know how I can
serve you, for I presume you have some request to prefer?"

"Your Excellency can very materially serve me," Jocelyn returned. "I am
in danger."

"I thought as much," De Gondomar observed with a smile. "Since you have
placed yourself under my protection, I will do my best to hold you
harmless. But who is your enemy?"

"I have two deadly enemies, Sir Giles Mompesson and Sir Francis
Mitchell," Jocelyn rejoined.

"I know them well--instruments of Buckingham," said De Gondomar. "They
are indeed dangerous enemies."

"I have another yet more dangerous," returned Jocelyn. "I have reason to
fear that, by boldness of speech I have incurred the enmity of the
Marquis of Buckingham himself."

"Ah! this, indeed, is serious," said De Gondomar.

"I am threatened with arrest by the Star-Chamber," pursued Jocelyn; "so
your Excellency will perceive that my position is fraught with extreme
peril. Still I persuade myself, if I could obtain a hearing of the
King, I should be able to set my enemies at defiance and obtain my
right."

De Gondomar smiled somewhat scornfully.

"You will obtain little in that way," he said, "and your enemies will
crush you effectually. But you must explain to me precisely how you are
circumstanced, and I will then consider what can be done for you. And
begin by acquainting me with your name and condition, for as yet I am
entirely ignorant whom I am addressing."

Upon this Jocelyn succinctly related to the Ambassador all such
particulars of his history as have been laid before the reader. De
Gondomar listened to him with attention, and put some questions to him
as he proceeded. At its close his countenance brightened.

"You are in an awkward dilemma, it must be owned, Master Jocelyn
Mounchensey," he said. "But I think I can protect you in spite of them
all--in spite of Buckingham himself. Luckily, he is not at Theobalds at
present--so the coast is clear for action. The first blow is half the
battle. I must present you to the King without delay. And see, his
Majesty approaches. Stand close behind me, and act as I advise you by a
sign."




CHAPTER XX.

King James the First.


Meantime the royal cavalcade came slowly up the avenue. It was very
numerous, and all the more brilliant in appearance, since it comprised
nearly as many high-born dames as nobles. Amongst the distinguished
foreigners who with their attendants swelled the party were the Venetian
lieger-ambassador Giustiniano, and the Marquis de Tremouille, of the
family des Ursins, ambassador from France.

These exalted personages rode close behind the King, and one or the
other of them was constantly engaged in conversation with him.
Giustiniano had one of those dark, grave, handsome countenances
familiarized to us by the portraits of Titian and Tintoretto, and even
the King's jests failed in making him smile. He was apparelled entirely
in black velvet, with a cloak bordered with the costly fur of the black
fox. All his followers were similarly attired. The sombre Venetian
presented a striking contrast to his vivacious companion, the gay and
graceful De Tremouille, who glittered in white satin, embroidered with
leaves of silver, while the same colour and the same ornaments were
adopted by his retinue.

No order of precedence was observed by the court nobles. Each rode as
he listed. Prince Charles was absent, and so was the supreme favourite
Buckingham; but their places were supplied by some of the chief
personages of the realm, including the Earls of Arundel, Pembroke, and
Montgomery, the Marquis of Hamilton, and the Lords Haddington, Fenton,
and Doncaster. Intermingled with the nobles, the courtiers of lesser
rank, and the ambassadors' followers, were the ladies, most of whom
claimed attention from personal charms, rich attire, and the grace and
skill with which they managed their horses.

Perhaps the most beautiful amongst them was the young Countess of
Exeter, whose magnificent black eyes did great execution. The lovely
Countess was mounted on a fiery Spanish barb, given to her by De
Gondomar. Forced into a union with a gouty and decrepit old husband, the
Countess of Exeter might have pleaded this circumstance in extenuation
of some of her follies. It was undoubtedly an argument employed by her
admirers, who, in endeavouring to shake her fidelity to her lord, told
her it was an infamy that she should be sacrificed to such an old dotard
as he. Whether these arguments prevailed in more cases than one we shall
not inquire too nicely; but, if court-scandal may be relied on, they
did--Buckingham and De Gondomar being both reputed to have been her
lovers.

The last, however, in the list, and the one who appeared to be most
passionately enamoured of the beautiful Countess, and to receive the
largest share of her regard, was Lord Roos; and as this culpable
attachment and its consequences connect themselves intimately with our
history we have been obliged to advert to them thus particularly. Lord
Roos was a near relative of the Earl of Exeter; and although the infirm
and gouty old peer had been excessively jealous of his lovely young wife
on former occasions, when she had appeared to trifle with his honour, he
seemed perfectly easy and unsuspicious now, though there was infinitely
more cause for distrust. Possibly he had too much reliance on Lord
Roos's good feelings and principles to suspect him.

Very different was Lady Roos's conduct. This unhappy lady, whom we have
already mentioned as the daughter of Sir Thomas Lake, Secretary of
State, had the misfortune to be sincerely attached to her handsome but
profligate husband, whose neglect and frequent irregularities she had
pardoned, until the utter estrangement, occasioned by his passion for
the Countess of Exeter, filled her with such trouble, that, overpowered
at length by anguish, she complained to her mother Lady Lake,--an
ambitious and imperious woman, whose vanity had prompted her to bring
about this unfortunate match. Expressing the greatest indignation at the
treatment her daughter had experienced, Lady Lake counselled her to
resent it, undertaking herself to open the eyes of the injured Earl of
Exeter to his wife's infidelity; but she was dissuaded from her purpose
by Sir Thomas Lake. Though generally governed by his wife, Sir Thomas
succeeded, in this instance, in over-ruling her design of proceeding at
once to extremities with the guilty pair, recommending that, in the
first instance, Lord Roos should be strongly remonstrated with by Lady
Lake and her daughter, when perhaps his fears might be aroused, if his
sense of duty could not be awakened.

This final appeal had not yet been made; but an interview had taken
place between Lady Roos and her husband, at which, with many passionate
entreaties, she had implored him to shake off the thraldom in which he
had bound himself, and to return to her, when all should be forgiven and
forgotten,--but without effect.

Thus matters stood at present.

As we have seen, though the Countess of Exeter formed one of the chief
ornaments of the hawking party, Lord Roos had not joined it; his absence
being occasioned by a summons from the Conde de Gondomar, with some of
whose political intrigues he was secretly mixed up. Whether the Countess
missed him or not, we pretend not to say. All we are able to declare is,
she was in high spirits, and seemed in no mood to check the advances of
other aspirants to her favour. Her beautiful and expressive features
beamed with constant smiles, and her lustrous black eyes seemed to
create a flame wherever their beams alighted.

But we must quit this enchantress and her spells, and proceed with the
description of the royal party. In the rear of those on horseback walked
the falconers, in liveries of green cloth, with bugles hanging from the
shoulder; each man having a hawk upon his fist, completely 'tired in its
