
"It never can depart," answered Conrade.

"Visions of ducal crowns and kingly diadems are, indeed, somewhat
tenacious of their place in the imagination," replied the Grand Master.

"Well," answered Conrade, "let me but first try to break peace between
Austria and England."

They parted. Conrade remained standing still upon the spot, and watching
the flowing white cloak of the Templar as he stalked slowly away, and
gradually disappeared amid the fast-sinking darkness of the Oriental
night. Proud, ambitious, unscrupulous, and politic, the Marquis of
Montserrat was yet not cruel by nature. He was a voluptuary and an
epicurean, and, like many who profess this character, was averse,
even upon selfish motives, from inflicting pain or witnessing acts of
cruelty; and he retained also a general sense of respect for his own
reputation, which sometimes supplies the want of the better principle by
which reputation is to be maintained.

"I have," he said, as his eyes still watched the point at which he had
seen the last slight wave of the Templar's mantle--"I have, in truth,
raised the devil with a vengeance! Who would have thought this stern,
ascetic Grand Master, whose whole fortune and misfortune is merged in
that of his order, would be willing to do more for its advancement than
I who labour for my own interest? To check this wild Crusade was my
motive, indeed, but I durst not think on the ready mode which this
determined priest has dared to suggest. Yet it is the surest--perhaps
even the safest."

Such were the Marquis's meditations, when his muttered soliloquy was
broken by a voice from a little distance, which proclaimed with the
emphatic tone of a herald, "Remember the Holy Sepulchre!"

The exhortation was echoed from post to post, for it was the duty of
the sentinels to raise this cry from time to time upon their periodical
watch, that the host of the Crusaders might always have in their
remembrance the purpose of their being in arms. But though Conrade was
familiar with the custom, and had heard the warning voice on all former
occasions as a matter of habit, yet it came at the present moment so
strongly in contact with his own train of thought, that it seemed a
voice from Heaven warning him against the iniquity which his heart
meditated. He looked around anxiously, as if, like the patriarch of
old, though from very different circumstances, he was expecting some
ram caught in a thicket some substitution for the sacrifice which his
comrade proposed to offer, not to the Supreme Being, but to the Moloch
of their own ambition. As he looked, the broad folds of the ensign of
England, heavily distending itself to the failing night-breeze, caught
his eye. It was displayed upon an artificial mound, nearly in the midst
of the camp, which perhaps of old some Hebrew chief or champion had
chosen as a memorial of his place of rest. If so, the name was now
forgotten, and the Crusaders had christened it Saint George's
Mount, because from that commanding height the banner of England was
supereminently displayed, as if an emblem of sovereignty over the many
distinguished, noble, and even royal ensigns, which floated in lower
situations.

A quick intellect like that of Conrade catches ideas from the glance of
a moment. A single look on the standard seemed to dispel the uncertainty
of mind which had affected him. He walked to his pavilion with the hasty
and determined step of one who has adopted a plan which he is resolved
to achieve, dismissed the almost princely train who waited to attend
him, and, as he committed himself to his couch, muttered his amended
resolution, that the milder means are to be tried before the more
desperate are resorted to.

"To-morrow," he said, "I sit at the board of the Archduke of Austria. We
will see what can be done to advance our purpose before prosecuting the
dark suggestions of this Templar."



CHAPTER XI.

     One thing is certain in our Northern land--
     Allow that birth or valour, wealth or wit,
     Give each precedence to their possessor,
     Envy, that follows on such eminence,
     As comes the lyme-hound on the roebuck's trace,
     Shall pull them down each one.
              SIR DAVID LINDSAY.

Leopold, Grand Duke of Austria, was the first possessor of that noble
country to whom the princely rank belonged. He had been raised to the
ducal sway in the German Empire on account of his near relationship to
the Emperor, Henry the Stern, and held under his government the finest
provinces which are watered by the Danube. His character has been
stained in history on account of one action of violence and perfidy,
which arose out of these very transactions in the Holy Land; and yet
the shame of having made Richard a prisoner when he returned through
his dominions; unattended and in disguise, was not one which flowed from
Leopold's natural disposition. He was rather a weak and a vain than
an ambitious or tyrannical prince. His mental powers resembled the
qualities of his person. He was tall, strong, and handsome, with a
complexion in which red and white were strongly contrasted, and had long
flowing locks of fair hair. But there was an awkwardness in his gait
which seemed as if his size was not animated by energy sufficient to
put in motion such a mass; and in the same manner, wearing the richest
dresses, it always seemed as if they became him not. As a prince, he
appeared too little familiar with his own dignity; and being often at
a loss how to assert his authority when the occasion demanded it, he
frequently thought himself obliged to recover, by acts and expressions
of ill-timed violence, the ground which might have been easily and
gracefully maintained by a little more presence of mind in the beginning
of the controversy.

Not only were these deficiencies visible to others, but the Archduke
himself could not but sometimes entertain a painful consciousness that
he was not altogether fit to maintain and assert the high rank which he
had acquired; and to this was joined the strong, and sometimes the just,
suspicion that others esteemed him lightly accordingly.

When he first joined the Crusade, with a most princely attendance,
Leopold had desired much to enjoy the friendship and intimacy of
Richard, and had made such advances towards cultivating his regard as
the King of England ought, in policy, to have received and answered.
But the Archduke, though not deficient in bravery, was so infinitely
inferior to Coeur de Lion in that ardour of mind which wooed danger as a
bride, that the King very soon held him in a certain degree of contempt.
Richard, also, as a Norman prince, a people with whom temperance was
habitual, despised the inclination of the German for the pleasures of
the table, and particularly his liberal indulgence in the use of wine.
For these, and other personal reasons, the King of England very soon
looked upon the Austrian Prince with feelings of contempt, which he was
at no pains to conceal or modify, and which, therefore, were speedily
remarked, and returned with deep hatred, by the suspicious Leopold. The
discord between them was fanned by the secret and politic arts of Philip
of France, one of the most sagacious monarchs of the time, who, dreading
the fiery and overbearing character of Richard, considering him as his
natural rival, and feeling offended, moreover, at the dictatorial manner
in which he, a vassal of France for his Continental domains, conducted
himself towards his liege lord, endeavoured to strengthen his own party,
and weaken that of Richard, by uniting the Crusading princes of inferior
degree in resistance to what he termed the usurping authority of the
King of England. Such was the state of politics and opinions entertained
by the Archduke of Austria, when Conrade of Montserrat resolved upon
employing his jealousy of England as the means of dissolving, or
loosening at least, the league of the Crusaders.

The time which he chose for his visit was noon; and the pretence, to
present the Archduke with some choice Cyprus wine which had lately
fallen into his hands, and discuss its comparative merits with those of
Hungary and of the Rhine. An intimation of his purpose was, of course,
answered by a courteous invitation to partake of the Archducal meal, and
every effort was used to render it fitting the splendour of a sovereign
prince. Yet the refined taste of the Italian saw more cumbrous profusion
than elegance or splendour in the display of provisions under which the
board groaned.

The Germans, though still possessing the martial and frank character of
their ancestors--who subdued the Roman Empire--had retained withal
no slight tinge of their barbarism. The practices and principles of
chivalry were not carried to such a nice pitch amongst them as amongst
the French and English knights, nor were they strict observers of the
prescribed rules of society, which among those nations were supposed
to express the height of civilization. Sitting at the table of the
Archduke, Conrade was at once stunned and amused with the clang of
Teutonic sounds assaulting his ears on all sides, notwithstanding the
solemnity of a princely banquet. Their dress seemed equally fantastic to
him, many of the Austrian nobles retaining their long beards, and
almost all of them wearing short jerkins of various colours, cut, and
flourished, and fringed in a manner not common in Western Europe.

Numbers of dependants, old and young, attended in the pavilion, mingled
at times in the conversation, received from their masters the relics of
the entertainment, and devoured them as they stood behind the backs
of the company. Jesters, dwarfs, and minstrels were there in unusual
numbers, and more noisy and intrusive than they were permitted to be in
better regulated society. As they were allowed to share freely in the
wine, which flowed round in large quantities, their licensed tumult was
the more excessive.

All this while, and in the midst of a clamour and confusion which would
better have become a German tavern during a fair than the tent of a
sovereign prince, the Archduke was waited upon with a minuteness of form
and observance which showed how anxious he was to maintain rigidly the
state and character to which his elevation had entitled him. He was
served on the knee, and only by pages of noble blood, fed upon plate of
silver, and drank his Tokay and Rhenish wines from a cup of gold. His
ducal mantle was splendidly adorned with ermine, his coronet might have
equalled in value a royal crown, and his feet, cased in velvet shoes
(the length of which, peaks included, might be two feet), rested upon
a footstool of solid silver. But it served partly to intimate the
character of the man, that, although desirous to show attention to the
Marquis of Montserrat, whom he had courteously placed at his right hand,
he gave much more of his attention to his SPRUCH-SPRECHER--that is, his
man of conversation, or SAYER-OF-SAYINGS--who stood behind the Duke's
right shoulder.

This personage was well attired in a cloak and doublet of black velvet,
the last of which was decorated with various silver and gold coins
stitched upon it, in memory of the munificent princes who had conferred
them, and bearing a short staff to which also bunches of silver coins
were attached by rings, which he jingled by way of attracting attention
when he was about to say anything which he judged worthy of it. This
person's capacity in the household of the Archduke was somewhat betwixt
that of a minstrel and a counsellor. He was by turns a flatterer, a
poet, and an orator; and those who desired to be well with the Duke
generally studied to gain the good-will of the SPRUCH-SPRECHER.

Lest too much of this officer's wisdom should become tiresome, the
Duke's other shoulder was occupied by his HOFF-NARR, or court-jester,
called Jonas Schwanker, who made almost as much noise with his fool's
cap, bells, and bauble, as did the orator, or man of talk, with his
jingling baton.

These two personages threw out grave and comic nonsense alternately;
while their master, laughing or applauding them himself, yet carefully
watched the countenance of his noble guest, to discern what impressions
so accomplished a cavalier received from this display of Austrian
eloquence and wit. It is hard to say whether the man of wisdom or the
man of folly contributed most to the amusement of the party, or stood
highest in the estimation of their princely master; but the sallies of
both seemed excellently well received. Sometimes they became rivals for
the conversation, and clanged their flappers in emulation of each other
with a most alarming contention; but, in general, they seemed on such
good terms, and so accustomed to support each other's play, that the
SPRUCH-SPRECHER often condescended to follow up the jester's witticisms
with an explanation, to render them more obvious to the capacity of
the audience, so that his wisdom became a sort of commentary on the
buffoon's folly. And sometimes, in requital, the HOFF-NARR, with a pithy
jest, wound up the conclusion of the orator's tedious harangue.

Whatever his real sentiments might be, Conrade took especial care that
his countenance should express nothing but satisfaction with what he
heard, and smiled or applauded as zealously, to all appearance, as the
Archduke himself at the solemn folly of the SPRUCH-SPRECHER and the
gibbering wit of the fool. In fact, he watched carefully until the one
or other should introduce some topic favourable to the purpose which was
uppermost in his mind.

It was not long ere the King of England was brought on the carpet by the
jester, who had been accustomed to consider Dickon of the Broom (which
irreverent epithet he substituted for Richard Plantagenet) as a subject
of mirth, acceptable and inexhaustible. The orator, indeed, was silent,
and it was only when applied to by Conrade that he observed, "The
GENISTA, or broom-plant, was an emblem of humility; and it would be well
when those who wore it would remember the warning."

The allusion to the illustrious badge of Plantagenet was thus rendered
sufficiently manifest, and Jonas Schwanker observed that they who
humbled themselves had been exalted with a vengeance. "Honour unto whom
honour is due," answered the Marquis of Montserrat. "We have all had
some part in these marches and battles, and methinks other princes might
share a little in the renown which Richard of England engrosses amongst
minstrels and MINNE-SINGERS. Has no one of the joyeuse science here
present a song in praise of the royal Archduke of Austria, our princely
entertainer?"

Three minstrels emulously stepped forward with voice and harp. Two were
silenced with difficulty by the SPRUCH-SPRECHER, who seemed to act as
master of the revels, and a hearing was at length procured for the
poet preferred, who sung, in high German, stanzas which may be thus
translated:--

"What brave chief shall head the forces, Where the red-cross legions
gather? Best of horsemen, best of horses, Highest head and fairest
feather."

Here the orator, jingling his staff, interrupted the bard to intimate to
the party--what they might not have inferred from the description--that
their royal host was the party indicated, and a full-crowned goblet went
round to the acclamation, HOCH LEBE DER HERZOG LEOPOLD! Another stanza
followed:--

"Ask not Austria why, 'midst princes, Still her banner rises highest;
Ask as well the strong-wing'd eagle, Why to heaven he soars the
highest."

"The eagle," said the expounder of dark sayings, "is the cognizance of
our noble lord the Archduke--of his royal Grace, I would say--and the
eagle flies the highest and nearest to the sun of all the feathered
creation."

"The lion hath taken a spring above the eagle," said Conrade carelessly.

The Archduke reddened, and fixed his eyes on the speaker, while the
SPRUCH-SPRECHER answered, after a minute's consideration, "The Lord
Marquis will pardon me--a lion cannot fly above an eagle, because no
lion hath got wings."

"Except the lion of Saint Mark," responded the jester.

"That is the Venetian's banner," said the Duke; "but assuredly that
amphibious race, half nobles, half merchants, will not dare to place
their rank in comparison with ours."

"Nay, it was not of the Venetian lion that I spoke," said the Marquis of
Montserrat, "but of the three lions passant of England. Formerly, it is
said, they were leopards; but now they are become lions at all points,
and must take precedence of beast, fish, or fowl, or woe worth the
gainstander."

"Mean you seriously, my lord?" said the Austrian, now considerably
flushed with wine. "Think you that Richard of England asserts any
pre-eminence over the free sovereigns who have been his voluntary allies
in this Crusade?"

"I know not but from circumstances," answered Conrade. "Yonder hangs
his banner alone in the midst of our camp, as if he were king and
generalissimo of our whole Christian army."

"And do you endure this so patiently, and speak of it so coldly?" said
the Archduke.

"Nay, my lord," answered Conrade, "it cannot concern the poor Marquis of
Montserrat to contend against an injury patiently submitted to by
such potent princes as Philip of France and Leopold of Austria. What
dishonour you are pleased to submit to cannot be a disgrace to me."

Leopold closed his fist, and struck on the table with violence.

"I have told Philip of this," he said. "I have often told him that it
was our duty to protect the inferior princes against the usurpation
of this islander; but he answers me ever with cold respects of their
relations together as suzerain and vassal, and that it were impolitic in
him to make an open breach at this time and period."

"The world knows that Philip is wise," said Conrade, "and will judge his
submission to be policy. Yours, my lord, you can yourself alone account
for; but I doubt not you have deep reasons for submitting to English
domination."

"I submit!" said Leopold indignantly--"I, the Archduke of Austria, so
important and vital a limb of the Holy Roman Empire--I submit myself to
this king of half an island, this grandson of a Norman bastard! No, by
Heaven! The camp and all Christendom shall see that I know how to right
myself, and whether I yield ground one inch to the English bandog.--Up,
my lieges and merry men; up and follow me! We will--and that without
losing one instant--place the eagle of Austria where she shall float as
high as ever floated the cognizance of king or kaiser."

With that he started from his seat, and amidst the tumultuous cheering
of his guests and followers, made for the door of the pavilion, and
seized his own banner, which stood pitched before it.

"Nay, my lord," said Conrade, affecting to interfere, "it will blemish
your wisdom to make an affray in the camp at this hour; and perhaps it
is better to submit to the usurpation of England a little longer than
to--"

"Not an hour, not a moment longer," vociferated the Duke; and with the
banner in his hand, and followed by his shouting guests and attendants,
marched hastily to the central mount, from which the banner of England
floated, and laid his hand on the standard-spear, as if to pluck it from
the ground.

"My master, my dear master!" said Jonas Schwanker, throwing his arms
about the Duke, "take heed--lions have teeth--"

"And eagles have claws," said the Duke, not relinquishing his hold on
the banner-staff, yet hesitating to pull it from the ground.

The speaker of sentences, notwithstanding such was his occupation, had
nevertheless some intervals of sound sense. He clashed his staff loudly,
and Leopold, as if by habit, turned his head towards his man of counsel.

"The eagle is king among the fowls of the air," said the
SPRUCH-SPRECHER, "as is the lion among the beasts of the field--each has
his dominion, separated as wide as England and Germany. Do thou, noble
eagle, no dishonour to the princely lion, but let your banners remain
floating in peace side by side."

Leopold withdrew his hand from the banner-spear, and looked round for
Conrade of Montserrat, but he saw him not; for the Marquis, so soon as
he saw the mischief afoot, had withdrawn himself from the crowd, taking
care, in the first place, to express before several neutral persons his
regret that the Archduke should have chosen the hours after dinner to
avenge any wrong of which he might think he had a right to complain. Not
seeing his guest, to whom he wished more particularly to have addressed
himself, the Archduke said aloud that, having no wish to breed
dissension in the army of the Cross, he did but vindicate his own
privileges and right to stand upon an equality with the King of England,
without desiring, as he might have done, to advance his banner--which he
derived from emperors, his progenitors--above that of a mere descendant
of the Counts of Anjou; and in the meantime he commanded a cask of wine
to be brought hither and pierced, for regaling the bystanders, who,
with tuck of drum and sound of music, quaffed many a carouse round the
Austrian standard.

This disorderly scene was not acted without a degree of noise, which
alarmed the whole camp.

The critical hour had arrived at which the physician, according to the
rules of his art, had predicted that his royal patient might be awakened
with safety, and the sponge had been applied for that purpose; and
the leech had not made many observations ere he assured the Baron of
Gilsland that the fever had entirely left his sovereign, and that,
such was the happy strength of his constitution, it would not be even
necessary, as in most cases, to give a second dose of the powerful
medicine. Richard himself seemed to be of the same opinion, for, sitting
up and rubbing his eyes, he demanded of De Vaux what present sum of
money was in the royal coffers.

The baron could not exactly inform him of the amount.

"It matters not," said Richard; "be it greater or smaller, bestow it
all on this learned leech, who hath, I trust, given me back again to the
service of the Crusade. If it be less than a thousand byzants, let him
have jewels to make it up."

"I sell not the wisdom with which Allah has endowed me," answered the
Arabian physician; "and be it known to you, great Prince, that the
divine medicine of which you have partaken would lose its effects in my
unworthy hands did I exchange its virtues either for gold or diamonds."

"The Physician refuseth a gratuity!" said De Vaux to himself. "This is
more extraordinary than his being a hundred years old."

"Thomas de Vaux," said Richard, "thou knowest no courage but what
belongs to the sword, no bounty and virtue but what are used in
chivalry. I tell thee that this Moor, in his independence, might set an
example to them who account themselves the flower of knighthood."

"It is reward enough for me," said the Moor, folding his arms on his
bosom, and maintaining an attitude at once respectful and dignified,
"that so great a king as the Melech Ric [Richard was thus called by the
Eastern nations.] should thus speak of his servant.--But now let me pray
you again to compose yourself on your couch; for though I think there
needs no further repetition of the divine draught, yet injury might
ensue from any too early exertion ere your strength be entirely
restored."

"I must obey thee, Hakim," said the King; "yet believe me, my bosom
feels so free from the wasting fire which for so many days hath scorched
it, that I care not how soon I expose it to a brave man's lance.--But
hark! what mean these shouts, and that distant music, in the camp? Go,
Thomas de Vaux, and make inquiry."

"It is the Archduke Leopold," said De Vaux, returning after a minute's
absence, "who makes with his pot-companions some procession through the
camp."

"The drunken fool!" exclaimed King Richard; "can he not keep his brutal
inebriety within the veil of his pavilion, that he must needs show
his shame to all Christendom?--What say you, Sir Marquis?" he added,
addressing himself to Conrade of Montserrat, who at that moment entered
the tent.

"Thus much, honoured Prince," answered the Marquis, "that I delight
to see your Majesty so well, and so far recovered; and that is a long
speech for any one to make who has partaken of the Duke of Austria's
hospitality."

"What! you have been dining with the Teutonic wine-skin!" said
the monarch. "And what frolic has he found out to cause all this
disturbance? Truly, Sir Conrade, I have still held you so good a
reveller that I wonder at your quitting the game."

De Vaux, who had got a little behind the King, now exerted himself by
look and sign to make the Marquis understand that he should say nothing
to Richard of what was passing without. But Conrade understood not, or
heeded not, the prohibition.

"What the Archduke does," he said, "is of little consequence to any one,
least of all to himself, since he probably knows not what he is acting;
yet, to say truth, it is a gambol I should not like to share in, since
he is pulling down the banner of England from Saint George's Mount, in
the centre of the camp yonder, and displaying his own in its stead."

"WHAT sayest thou?" exclaimed the King, in a tone which might have waked
the dead.
