When we arrived last night at thy house he left me abruptly. Will he
ever vouchsafe to be my friend?'

'He is consumed with some secret care,' answered Ione, tearfully.
'Would that we could lure him from himself!  Let us join in that tender
office.'

'He shall be my brother,' returned the Greek.

'How calmly,' said Ione, rousing herself from the gloom into which her
thoughts of Apaecides had plunged her--'how calmly the clouds seem to
repose in heaven; and yet you tell me, for I knew it not myself, that
the earth shook beneath us last night.'

'It did, and more violently, they say, than it has done since the great
convulsion sixteen years ago: the land we live in yet nurses mysterious
terror; and the reign of Pluto, which spreads beneath our burning
fields, seems rent with unseen commotion.  Didst thou not feel the earth
quake, Nydia, where thou wert seated last night?  and was it not the
fear that it occasioned thee that made thee weep?'

'I felt the soil creep and heave beneath me, like some monstrous
serpent,' answered Nydia; 'but as I saw nothing, I did not fear: I
imagined the convulsion to be a spell of the Egyptian's.  They say he
has power over the elements.'

'Thou art a Thessalian, my Nydia,' replied Glaucus, 'and hast a national
right to believe in magic.

'Magic!--who doubts it?' answered Nydia, simply: 'dost thou?'

'Until last night (when a necromantic prodigy did indeed appal me),
methinks I was not credulous in any other magic save that of love!' said
Glaucus, in a tremulous voice, and fixing his eyes on Ione.

'Ah!' said Nydia, with a sort of shiver, and she awoke mechanically a
few pleasing notes from her lyre; the sound suited well the tranquility
of the waters, and the sunny stillness of the noon.

'Play to us, dear Nydia, said Glaucus--'play and give us one of thine
old Thessalian songs: whether it be of magic or not, as thou wilt--let
it, at least, be of love!'

'Of love!' repeated Nydia, raising her large, wandering eyes, that ever
thrilled those who saw them with a mingled fear and pity; you could
never familiarize yourself to their aspect: so strange did it seem that
those dark wild orbs were ignorant of the day, and either so fixed was
their deep mysterious gaze, or so restless and perturbed their glance,
that you felt, when you encountered them, that same vague, and chilling,
and half-preternatural impression, which comes over you in the presence
of the insane--of those who, having a life outwardly like your own, have
a life within life--dissimilar--unsearchable--unguessed!

'Will you that I should sing of love?' said she, fixing those eyes upon
Glaucus.

'Yes,' replied he, looking down.

She moved a little way from the arm of Ione, still cast round her, as if
that soft embrace embarrassed; and placing her light and graceful
instrument on her knee, after a short prelude, she sang the following
strain:


               NYDIA'S LOVE-SONG

                     I

         The Wind and the Beam loved the Rose,
           And the Rose loved one;
          For who recks the wind where it blows?
          Or loves not the sun?

                     II

         None knew whence the humble Wind stole,
           Poor sport of the skies--
         None dreamt that the Wind had a soul,
           In its mournful sighs!

                    III

         Oh, happy Beam! how canst thou prove
           That bright love of thine?
          In thy light is the proof of thy love.
           Thou hast but--to shine!

                     IV

         How its love can the Wind reveal?
           Unwelcome its sigh;
          Mute--mute to its Rose let it steal--
          Its proof is--to die!

'Thou singest but sadly, sweet girl,' said Glaucus; 'thy youth only
feels as yet the dark shadow of Love; far other inspiration doth he
wake, when he himself bursts and brightens upon us.

'I sing as I was taught,' replied Nydia, sighing.

'Thy master was love-crossed, then--try thy hand at a gayer air. Nay,
girl, give the instrument to me.' As Nydia obeyed, her hand touched his,
and, with that slight touch, her breast heaved--her cheek flushed.  Ione
and Glaucus, occupied with each other, perceived not those signs of
strange and premature emotions, which preyed upon a heart that,
nourished by imagination, dispensed with hope.

And now, broad, blue, bright, before them, spread that halcyon sea, fair
as at this moment, seventeen centuries from that date, I behold it
rippling on the same divinest shores.  Clime that yet enervates with a
soft and Circean spell--that moulds us insensibly, mysteriously, into
harmony with thyself, banishing the thought of austerer labor, the
voices of wild ambition, the contests and the roar of life; filling us
with gentle and subduing dreams, making necessary to our nature that
which is its least earthly portion, so that the very air inspires us
with the yearning and thirst of love. Whoever visits thee seems to leave
earth and its harsh cares behind--to enter by the Ivory gate into the
Land of Dreams.  The young and laughing Hours of the PRESENT--the Hours,
those children of Saturn, which he hungers ever to devour, seem snatched
from his grasp.  The past--the future--are forgotten; we enjoy but the
breathing time. Flower of the world's garden--Fountain of Delight--Italy
of Italy--beautiful, benign Campania!--vain were, indeed, the Titans, if
on this spot they yet struggled for another heaven!  Here, if God meant
this working-day life for a perpetual holiday, who would not sigh to
dwell for ever--asking nothing, hoping nothing, fearing nothing, while
thy skies shine over him--while thy seas sparkle at his feet--while
thine air brought him sweet messages from the violet and the orange--and
while the heart, resigned to--beating with--but one emotion, could find
the lips and the eyes, which flatter it (vanity of vanities!) that love
can defy custom, and be eternal?

It was then in this clime--on those seas, that the Athenian gazed upon a
face that might have suited the nymph, the spirit of the place: feeding
his eyes on the changeful roses of that softest cheek, happy beyond the
happiness of common life, loving, and knowing himself beloved.

In the tale of human passion, in past ages, there is something of
interest even in the remoteness of the time.  We love to feel within us
the bond which unites the most distant era--men, nations, customs
perish; THE AFFECTIONS ARE IMMORTAL!--they are the sympathies which
unite the ceaseless generations.  The past lives again, when we look
upon its emotions--it lives in our own!  That which was, ever is!  The
magician's gift, that revives the dead--that animates the dust of
forgotten graves, is not in the author's skill--it is in the heart of
the reader!

Still vainly seeking the eyes of Ione, as, half downcast, half averted,
they shunned his own, the Athenian, in a low and soft voice, thus
expressed the feelings inspired by happier thoughts than those which had
colored the song of Nydia.


 THE SONG OF GLAUCUS

                    I
   As the bark floateth on o'er the summer-lit sea,
    Floats my heart o'er the deeps of its passion for thee;
    All lost in the space, without terror it glides,
    For bright with thy soul is the face of the tides.
    Now heaving, now hush'd, is that passionate ocean,
    As it catches thy smile or thy sighs;
    And the twin-stars that shine on the wanderer's devotion
    Its guide and its god--are thine eyes!

                    II

   The bark may go down, should the cloud sweep above,
    For its being is bound to the light of thy love.
    As thy faith and thy smile are its life and its joy,
    So thy frown or thy change are the storms that destroy.
    Ah! sweeter to sink while the sky is serene,
     If time hath a change for thy heart!
    If to live be to weep over what thou hast been,
     Let me die while I know what thou art!

As the last words of the song trembled over the sea, Ione raised her
looks--they met those of her lover.  Happy Nydia!--happy in thy
affliction, that thou couldst not see that fascinated and charmed gaze,
that said so much--that made the eye the voice of the soul--that
promised the impossibility of change!

But, though the Thessalian could not detect that gaze, she divined its
meaning by their silence--by their sighs.  She pressed her hands lightly
across her breast, as if to keep down its bitter and jealous thoughts;
and then she hastened to speak--for that silence was intolerable to her.

'After all, O Glaucus!' said she, 'there is nothing very mirthful in
your strain!'

'Yet I meant it to be so, when I took up thy lyre, pretty one. Perhaps
happiness will not permit us to be mirthful.'

'How strange is it,' said Ione, changing a conversation which oppressed
her while it charmed--'that for the last several days yonder cloud has
hung motionless over Vesuvius!  Yet not indeed motionless, for sometimes
it changes its form; and now methinks it looks like some vast giant,
with an arm outstretched over the city.  Dost thou see the likeness--or
is it only to my fancy?'

'Fair Ione!  I see it also.  It is astonishingly distinct.  The giant
seems seated on the brow of the mountain, the different shades of the
cloud appear to form a white robe that sweeps over its vast breast and
limbs; it seems to gaze with a steady face upon the city below, to point
with one hand, as thou sayest, over its glittering streets, and to raise
the other (dost thou note it?) towards the higher heaven. It is like the
ghost of some huge Titan brooding over the beautiful world he lost;
sorrowful for the past--yet with something of menace for the future.'

'Could that mountain have any connection with the last night's
earthquake? They say that, ages ago, almost in the earliest era of
tradition, it gave forth fires as AEtna still.  Perhaps the flames yet
lurk and dart beneath.'

'It is possible,' said Glaucus, musingly.

'Thou sayest thou art slow to believe in magic,' said Nydia, suddenly.
'I have heard that a potent witch dwells amongst the scorched caverns of
the mountain, and yon cloud may be the dim shadow of the demon she
confers with.'

'Thou art full of the romance of thy native Thessaly,' said Glaucus;
'and a strange mixture of sense and all conflicting superstitions.'

'We are ever superstitious in the dark,' replied Nydia.  'Tell me,' she
added, after a slight pause, 'tell me, O Glaucus! do all that are
beautiful resemble each other?  They say you are beautiful, and Ione
also.  Are your faces then the same?  I fancy not, yet it ought to be
so.'

'Fancy no such grievous wrong to Ione,' answered Glaucus, laughing.
'But we do not, alas! resemble each other, as the homely and the
beautiful sometimes do.  Ione's hair is dark, mine light; Ione's eyes
are--what color, Ione?  I cannot see, turn them to me.  Oh, are they
black? no, they are too soft. Are they blue? no, they are too deep: they
change with every ray of the sun--I know not their color: but mine,
sweet Nydia, are grey, and bright only when Ione shines on them!  Ione's
cheek is...'

'I do not understand one word of thy description,' interrupted Nydia,
peevishly.  'I comprehend only that you do not resemble each other, and
I am glad of it.'

'Why, Nydia?' said Ione.

Nydia colored slightly.  'Because,' she replied, coldly, 'I have always
imagined you under different forms, and one likes to know one is right.'

'And what hast thou imagined Glaucus to resemble?' asked Ione, softly.

'Music!' replied Nydia, looking down.

'Thou art right,' thought Ione.

'And what likeness hast thou ascribed to Ione?'

'I cannot tell yet,' answered the blind girl; 'I have not yet known her
long enough to find a shape and sign for my guesses.'

'I will tell thee, then,' said Glaucus, passionately; 'she is like the
sun that warms--like the wave that refreshes.'

'The sun sometimes scorches, and the wave sometimes drowns,' answered
Nydia.

'Take then these roses,' said Glaucus; 'let their fragrance suggest to
thee Ione.'

'Alas, the roses will fade!' said the Neapolitan, archly.

Thus conversing, they wore away the hours; the lovers, conscious only of
the brightness and smiles of love; the blind girl feeling only its
darkness--its tortures--the fierceness of jealousy and its woe!

And now, as they drifted on, Glaucus once more resumed the lyre, and
woke its strings with a careless hand to a strain, so wildly and gladly
beautiful, that even Nydia was aroused from her reverie, and uttered a
cry of admiration.

'Thou seest, my child,' cried Glaucus, 'that I can yet redeem the
character of love's music, and that I was wrong in saying happiness
could not be gay. Listen, Nydia! listen, dear Ione! and hear:

             THE BIRTH OF LOVE

                    I

         Like a Star in the seas above,
             Like a Dream to the waves of sleep--
        Up--up--THE INCARNATE LOVE--
            She rose from the charmed deep!
          And over the Cyprian Isle
          The skies shed their silent smile;
          And the Forest's green heart was rife
          With the stir of the gushing life--
         The life that had leap'd to birth,
          In the veins of the happy earth!
                Hail! oh, hail!
          The dimmest sea-cave below thee,
             The farthest sky-arch above,
          In their innermost stillness know thee:
             And heave with the Birth of Love!
                Gale! soft Gale!
          Thou comest on thy silver winglets,
             From thy home in the tender west,
          Now fanning her golden ringlets,
             Now hush'd on her heaving breast.
          And afar on the murmuring sand,
          The Seasons wait hand in hand
          To welcome thee, Birth Divine,
          To the earth which is henceforth thine.

                    II

         Behold! how she kneels in the shell,
          Bright pearl in its floating cell!
          Behold! how the shell's rose-hues,
             The cheek and the breast of snow,
          And the delicate limbs suffuse,
             Like a blush, with a bashful glow.
          Sailing on, slowly sailing
             O'er the wild water;
          All hail! as the fond light is hailing
             Her daughter,
                   All hail!
          We are thine, all thine evermore:
          Not a leaf on the laughing shore,
          Not a wave on the heaving sea,
             Nor a single sigh
             In the boundless sky,
          But is vow'd evermore to thee!

                   III

         And thou, my beloved one--thou,
           As I gaze on thy soft eyes now,
          Methinks from their depths I view
          The Holy Birth born anew;
          Thy lids are the gentle cell
             Where the young Love blushing lies;
          See! she breaks from the mystic shell,
             She comes from thy tender eyes!
                Hail! all hail!
          She comes, as she came from the sea,
          To my soul as it looks on thee;
             She comes, she comes!
          She comes, as she came from the sea,
          To my soul as it looks on thee!
                Hail! all hail!




Chapter III

THE CONGREGATION.

FOLLOWED by Apaecides, the Nazarene gained the side of the Sarnus--that
river, which now has shrunk into a petty stream, then rushed gaily into
the sea, covered with countless vessels, and reflecting on its waves the
gardens, the vines, the palaces, and the temples of Pompeii.  From its
more noisy and frequented banks, Olinthus directed his steps to a path
which ran amidst a shady vista of trees, at the distance of a few paces
from the river.  This walk was in the evening a favorite resort of the
Pompeians, but during the heat and business of the day was seldom
visited, save by some groups of playful children, some meditative poet,
or some disputative philosophers.  At the side farthest from the river,
frequent copses of box interspersed the more delicate and evanescent
foliage, and these were cut into a thousand quaint shapes, sometimes
into the forms of fauns and satyrs, sometimes into the mimicry of
Egyptian pyramids, sometimes into the letters that composed the name of
a popular or eminent citizen.  Thus the false taste is equally ancient
as the pure; and the retired traders of Hackney and Paddington, a
century ago, were little aware, perhaps, that in their tortured yews and
sculptured box, they found their models in the most polished period of
Roman antiquity, in the gardens of Pompeii, and the villas of the
fastidious Pliny.

This walk now, as the noonday sun shone perpendicularly through the
chequered leaves, was entirely deserted; at least no other forms than
those of Olinthus and the priest infringed upon the solitude. They sat
themselves on one of the benches, placed at intervals between the trees,
and facing the faint breeze that came languidly from the river, whose
waves danced and sparkled before them--a singular and contrasted pair;
the believer in the latest--the priest of the most ancient--worship of
the world!

'Since thou leftst me so abruptly,' said Olinthus, 'hast thou been
happy? has thy heart found contentment under these priestly robes? hast
thou, still yearning for the voice of God, heard it whisper comfort to
thee from the oracles of Isis?  That sigh, that averted countenance,
give me the answer my soul predicted.'

'Alas!' answered Apaecides, sadly, 'thou seest before thee a wretched
and distracted man!  From my childhood upward I have idolized the dreams
of virtue!  I have envied the holiness of men who, in caves and lonely
temples, have been admitted to the companionship of beings above the
world; my days have been consumed with feverish and vague desires; my
nights with mocking but solemn visions.  Seduced by the mystic
prophecies of an impostor, I have indued these robes;--my nature (I
confess it to thee frankly)--my nature has revolted at what I have seen
and been doomed to share in! Searching after truth, I have become but
the minister of falsehoods. On the evening in which we last met, I was
buoyed by hopes created by that same impostor, whom I ought already to
have better known.  I have--no matter--no matter! suffice it, I have
added perjury and sin to rashness and to sorrow.  The veil is now rent
for ever from my eyes; I behold a villain where I obeyed a demigod; the
earth darkens in my sight; I am in the deepest abyss of gloom; I know
not if there be gods above; if we are the things of chance; if beyond
the bounded and melancholy present there is annihilation or an
hereafter--tell me, then, thy faith; solve me these doubts, if thou hast
indeed the power!'

'I do not marvel,' answered the Nazarene, 'that thou hast thus erred, or
that thou art thus sceptic.  Eighty years ago there was no assurance to
man of God, or of a certain and definite future beyond the grave.  New
laws are declared to him who has ears--a heaven, a true Olympus, is
revealed to him who has eyes--heed then, and listen.'

And with all the earnestness of a man believing ardently himself, and
zealous to convert, the Nazarene poured forth to Apaecides the
assurances of Scriptural promise.  He spoke first of the sufferings and
miracles of Christ--he wept as he spoke: he turned next to the glories
of the Saviour's Ascension--to the clear predictions of Revelation.  He
described that pure and unsensual heaven destined to the virtuous--those
fires and torments that were the doom of guilt.

The doubts which spring up to the mind of later reasoners, in the
immensity of the sacrifice of God to man, were not such as would occur
to an early heathen.  He had been accustomed to believe that the gods
had lived upon earth, and taken upon themselves the forms of men; had
shared in human passions, in human labours, and in human misfortunes.
What was the travail of his own Alcmena's son, whose altars now smoked
with the incense of countless cities, but a toil for the human race?
Had not the great Dorian Apollo expiated a mystic sin by descending to
the grave?  Those who were the deities of heaven had been the lawgivers
or benefactors on earth, and gratitude had led to worship.  It seemed
therefore, to the heathen, a doctrine neither new nor strange, that
Christ had been sent from heaven, that an immortal had indued mortality,
and tasted the bitterness of death. And the end for which He thus toiled
and thus suffered--how far more glorious did it seem to Apaecides than
that for which the deities of old had visited the nether world, and
passed through the gates of death!  Was it not worthy of a God to,
descend to these dim valleys, in order to clear up the clouds gathered
over the dark mount beyond--to satisfy the doubts of sages--to convert
speculation into certainty--by example to point out the rules of
life--by revelation to solve the enigma of the grave--and to prove that
the soul did not yearn in vain when it dreamed of an immortality?  In
this last was the great argument of those lowly men destined to convert
the earth.  As nothing is more flattering to the pride and the hopes of
man than the belief in a future state, so nothing could be more vague
and confused than the notions of the heathen sages upon that mystic
subject. Apaecides had already learned that the faith of the
philosophers was not that of the herd; that if they secretly professed a
creed in some diviner power, it was not the creed which they thought it
wise to impart to the community.  He had already learned, that even the
priest ridiculed what he preached to the people--that the notions of the
few and the many were never united.  But, in this new faith, it seemed
to him that philosopher, priest, and people, the expounders of the
religion and its followers, were alike accordant: they did not speculate
and debate upon immortality, they spoke of as a thing certain and
assured; the magnificence of the promise dazzled him--its consolations
soothed. For the Christian faith made its early converts among sinners!
many of its fathers and its martyrs were those who had felt the
bitterness of vice, and who were therefore no longer tempted by its
false aspect from the paths of an austere and uncompromising virtue.
All the assurances of this healing faith invited to repentance--they
were peculiarly adapted to the bruised and sore of spirit! the very
remorse which Apaecides felt for his late excesses, made him incline to
one who found holiness in that remorse, and who whispered of the joy in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth.

'Come,' said the Nazarene, as he perceived the effect he had produced,
'come to the humble hall in which we meet--a select and a chosen few;
listen there to our prayers; note the sincerity of our repentant tears;
mingle in our simple sacrifice--not of victims, nor of garlands, but
offered by white-robed thoughts upon the altar of the heart.  The
flowers that we lay there are imperishable--they bloom over us when we
are no more; nay, they accompany us beyond the grave, they spring up
beneath our feet in heaven, they delight us with an eternal odor, for
they are of the soul, they partake of its nature; these offerings are
temptations overcome, and sins repented. Come, oh come! lose not another
moment; prepare already for the great, the awful journey, from darkness
to light, from sorrow to bliss, from corruption to immortality!  This is
the day of the Lord the Son, a day that we have set apart for our
devotions.  Though we meet usually at night, yet some amongst us are
gathered together even now.  What joy, what triumph, will be with us
all, if we can bring one stray lamb into the sacred fold!'

There seemed to Apaecides, so naturally pure of heart, something
ineffably generous and benign in that spirit of conversation which
animated Olinthus--a spirit that found its own bliss in the happiness of
others--that sought in its wide sociality to make companions for
eternity.  He was touched, softened, and subdued.  He was not in that
mood which can bear to be left alone; curiosity, too, mingled with his
purer stimulants--he was anxious to see those rites of which so many
dark and contradictory rumours were afloat.  He paused a moment, looked
over his garb, thought of Arbaces, shuddered with horror, lifted his
eyes to the broad brow of the Nazarene, intent, anxious, watchful--but
for his benefits, for his salvation!  He drew his cloak round him, so as
wholly to conceal his robes, and said, 'Lead on, I follow thee.'

Olinthus pressed his hand joyfully, and then descending to the river
side, hailed one of the boats that plyed there constantly; they entered
it; an awning overhead, while it sheltered them from the sun, screened
also their persons from observation: they rapidly skimmed the wave.
From one of the boats that passed them floated a soft music, and its
prow was decorated with flowers--it was gliding towards the sea.

'So,' said Olinthus, sadly, 'unconscious and mirthful in their
delusions, sail the votaries of luxury into the great ocean of storm and
shipwreck! we pass them, silent and unnoticed, to gain the land.'

Apaecides, lifting his eyes, caught through the aperture in the awning a
glimpse of the face of one of the inmates of that gay bark--it was the
face of Ione.  The lovers were embarked on the excursion at which we
have been made present.  The priest sighed, and once more sunk back upon
his seat. They reached the shore where, in the suburbs, an alley of
small and mean houses stretched towards the bank; they dismissed the
boat, landed, and Olinthus, preceding the priest, threaded the labyrinth
of lanes, and arrived at last at the closed door of a habitation
somewhat larger than its neighbors.  He knocked thrice--the door was
opened and closed again, as Apaecides followed his guide across the
threshold.

They passed a deserted atrium, and gained an inner chamber of moderate
size, which, when the door was closed, received its only light from a
small window cut over the door itself.  But, halting at the threshold of
this chamber, and knocking at the door, Olinthus said, 'Peace be with
you!' A voice from within returned, 'Peace with whom?' 'The Faithful!'
answered Olinthus, and the door opened; twelve or fourteen persons were
sitting in a semicircle, silent, and seemingly absorbed in thought, and
opposite to a crucifix rudely carved in wood.

They lifted up their eyes when Olinthus entered, without speaking; the
Nazarene himself, before he accosted them, knelt suddenly down, and by
his moving lips, and his eyes fixed steadfastly on the crucifix,
Apaecides saw that he prayed inly.  This rite performed, Olinthus turned
to the congregation--'Men and brethren,' said he, 'start not to behold
amongst you a priest of Isis; he hath sojourned with the blind, but the
Spirit hath fallen on him--he desires to see, to hear, and to
understand.'

'Let him,' said one of the assembly; and Apaecides beheld in the speaker
a man still younger than himself, of a countenance equally worn and
pallid, of an eye which equally spoke of the restless and fiery
operations of a working mind.

'Let him,' repeated a second voice, and he who thus spoke was in the
prime of manhood; his bronzed skin and Asiatic features bespoke him a
son of Syria--he had been a robber in his youth.

'Let him,' said a third voice; and the priest, again turning to regard
the speaker, saw an old man with a long grey beard, whom he recognized
as a slave to the wealthy Diomed.

'Let him,' repeated simultaneously the rest--men who, with two
exceptions, were evidently of the inferior ranks.  In these exceptions,
Apaecides noted an officer of the guard, and an Alexandrian merchant.

'We do not,' recommenced Olinthus--'we do not bind you to secrecy; we
impose on you no oaths (as some of our weaker brethren would do) not to
betray us. It is true, indeed, that there is no absolute law against us;
but the multitude, more savage than their rulers, thirst for our lives.
So, my friends, when Pilate would have hesitated, it was the people who
shouted "Christ to the cross!" But we bind you not to our safety--no!
Betray us to the crowd--impeach, calumniate, malign us if you will--we
are above death, we should walk cheerfully to the den of the lion, or
the rack of the torturer--we can trample down the darkness of the grave,
and what is death to a criminal is eternity to the Christian.'

A low and applauding murmur ran through the assembly.

'Thou comest amongst us as an examiner, mayest thou remain a convert!
Our religion? you behold it!  Yon cross our sole image, yon scroll the
mysteries of our Caere and Eleusis!  Our morality? it is in our
lives!--sinners we all have been; who now can accuse us of a crime? we
have baptized ourselves from the past.  Think not that this is of us, it
is of God.  Approach, Medon,' beckoning to the old slave who had spoken
third for the admission of Apaecides, 'thou art the sole man amongst us
who is not free.  But in heaven, the last shall be first: so with us.
Unfold your scroll, read and explain.'

Useless would it be for us to accompany the lecture of Medon, or the
comments of the congregation.  Familiar now are those doctrines, then
strange and new.  Eighteen centuries have left us little to expound upon
