  And as he went, hiss'd, warning Diomede.
  But he, projecting still some hardier deed,
  Stood doubtful, whether by the pole to draw                    595
  The chariot thence, laden with gorgeous arms,
  Or whether heaving it on high, to bear
  The burthen off, or whether yet to take
  More Thracian lives; when him with various thoughts
  Perplex'd, Minerva, drawing near, bespake.                     600
    Son of bold Tydeus! think on thy return
  To yonder fleet, lest thou depart constrain'd.
  Some other God may rouse the powers of Troy.
    She ended, and he knew the voice divine.
  At once he mounted. With his bow the steeds                    605
  Ulysses plyed, and to the ships they flew.
    Nor look'd the bender of the silver bow,
  Apollo, forth in vain, but at the sight
  Of Pallas following Diomede incensed,
  Descended to the field where numerous most                     610
  He saw the Trojans, and the Thracian Chief
  And counsellor, Hippocooen aroused,[19]
  Kinsman of Rhesus, and renown'd in arms.
  He, starting from his sleep, soon as he saw
  The spot deserted where so lately lay                          615
  Those fiery coursers, and his warrior friends
  Gasping around him, sounded loud the name
  Of his loved Rhesus. Instant, at the voice,
  Wild stir arose and clamorous uproar
  Of fast-assembling Trojans. Deeds they saw--                   620
  Terrible deeds, and marvellous perform'd,
  But not their authors--they had sought the ships.
    Meantime arrived where they had slain the spy
  Of Hector, there Ulysses, dear to Jove,
  The coursers stay'd, and, leaping to the ground,               625
  The son of Tydeus in Ulysses' hands
  The arms of Dolon placed foul with his blood,
  Then vaulted light into his seat again.
  He lash'd the steeds, they, not unwilling, flew
  To the deep-bellied barks, as to their home.                   630
  First Nestor heard the sound, and thus he said.
    Friends! Counsellors! and leaders of the Greeks!
  False shall I speak, or true?--but speak I must.
  The echoing sound of hoofs alarms my ear.
  Oh, that Ulysses, and brave Diomede                            635
  This moment might arrive drawn into camp
  By Trojan steeds! But, ah, the dread I feel!
  Lest some disaster have for ever quell'd
  In yon rude host those noblest of the Greeks.
    He hath not ended, when themselves arrived,                  640
  Both quick dismounted; joy at their return
  Fill'd every bosom; each with kind salute
  Cordial, and right-hand welcome greeted them,
  And first Gerenian Nestor thus inquired.
    Oh Chief by all extoll'd, glory of Greece,                   645
  Ulysses! how have ye these steeds acquired?
  In yonder host? or met ye as ye went
  Some God who gave them to you? for they show
  A lustre dazzling as the beams of day.
  Old as I am, I mingle yet in fight                             650
  With Ilium's sons--lurk never in the fleet--
  Yet saw I at no time, or have remark'd
  Steeds such as these; which therefore I believe
  Perforce, that ye have gained by gift divine;
  For cloud-assembler Jove, and azure-eyed                       655
  Minerva, Jove's own daughter, love you both.
    To whom Ulysses, thus, discreet, replied.
  Neleian Nestor, glory of the Greeks!
  A God, so willing, could have given us steeds
  Superior, for their bounty knows no bounds.                    660
  But, venerable Chief! these which thou seest
  Are Thracians new-arrived. Their master lies
  Slain by the valiant Diomede, with twelve
  The noblest of his warriors at his side,
  A thirteenth[20] also, at small distance hence                 665
  We slew, by Hector and the Chiefs of Troy
  Sent to inspect the posture of our host.
    He said; then, high in exultation, drove
  The coursers o'er the trench, and with him pass'd
  The glad Achaians; at the spacious tent                        670
  Of Diomede arrived, with even thongs
  They tied them at the cribs where stood the steeds
  Of Tydeus' son, with winnow'd wheat supplied.
  Ulysses in his bark the gory spoils
  Of Dolon placed, designing them a gift                         675
  To Pallas. Then, descending to the sea,
  Neck, thighs, and legs from sweat profuse they cleansed,
  And, so refresh'd and purified, their last
  Ablution in bright tepid baths perform'd.
  Each thus completely laved, and with smooth oil                680
  Anointed, at the well-spread board they sat,
  And quaff'd, in honor of Minerva, wine
  Delicious, from the brimming beaker drawn.

                *        *        *        *        *

The vividness of the scenes presented to us in this Book constitute
its chief beauty. The reader sees the most natural night-scene in the
world. He is led step by step with the adventurers, and made the
companion of all their expectations and uncertainties. We see the very
color of the sky; know the time to a minute; are impatient while the
heroes are arming; our imagination follows them, knows all their
doubts, and even the secret wishes of their hearts sent up to Minerva.
We are alarmed at the approach of Dolon, hear his very footsteps,
assist the two chiefs in pursuing him, and stop just with the spear
that arrests him. We are perfectly acquainted with the situation of
all the forces, with the figure in which they lie, with the
disposition of Rhesus and the Thracians, with the posture of his
chariot and horses. The marshy spot of ground where Dolon is killed,
the tamarisk, or aquatic plant upon which they hung his spoils, and
the reeds that are heaped together to mark the place, are
circumstances the most picturesque imaginable.




                              THE ILIAD.

                               BOOK XI.




                    ARGUMENT OF THE ELEVENTH BOOK.


Agamemnon distinguishes himself. He is wounded, and retires. Diomede
is wounded by Paris; Ulysses by Socus. Ajax with Menelaus flies to the
relief of Ulysses, and Eurypylus, soon after, to the relief of Ajax.
While he is employed in assisting Ajax, he is shot in the thigh by
Paris, who also wounds Machaon. Nestor conveys Machaon from the field.
Achilles dispatches Patroclus to the tent of Nestor, and Nestor takes
that occasion to exhort Patroclus to engage in battle, clothed in the
armor of Achilles.




                               BOOK XI.


  Aurora from Tithonus' side arose
  With light for heaven and earth, when Jove dispatch'd
  Discord, the fiery signal in her hand
  Of battle bearing, to the Grecian fleet.
  High on Ulysses' huge black ship she stood                       5
  The centre of the fleet, whence all might hear,
  The tent of Telamon's huge son between,
  And of Achilles; for confiding they
  In their heroic fortitude, their barks
  Well-poised had station'd utmost of the line.                   10
  There standing, shrill she sent a cry abroad
  Among the Achaians, such as thirst infused
  Of battle ceaseless into every breast.
  All deem'd, at once, war sweeter, than to seek
  Their native country through the waves again.                   15
  Then with loud voice Atrides bade the Greeks
  Gird on their armor, and himself his arms
  Took radiant. First around his legs he clasp'd
  His shining greaves with silver studs secured,
  Then bound his corselet to his bosom, gift                      20
  Of Cynyras long since;[1] for rumor loud
  Had Cyprus reached of an Achaian host
  Assembling, destined to the shores of Troy:
  Wherefore, to gratify the King of men,
  He made the splendid ornament his own.                          25
  Ten rods of steel coerulean all around
  Embraced it, twelve of gold, twenty of tin;
  Six[2] spiry serpents their uplifted heads
  Coerulean darted at the wearer's throat,
  Splendor diffusing as the various bow                           30
  Fix'd by Saturnian Jove in showery clouds,
  A sign to mortal men.[3] He slung his sword
  Athwart his shoulders; dazzling bright it shone
  With gold emboss'd, and silver was the sheath
  Suspended graceful in a belt of gold.                           35
  His massy shield o'ershadowing him whole,
  High-wrought and beautiful, he next assumed.
  Ten circles bright of brass around its field
  Extensive, circle within circle, ran;
  The central boss was black, but hemm'd about                    40
  With twice ten bosses of resplendent tin.
  There, dreadful ornament! the visage dark
  Of Gorgon scowl'd, border'd by Flight and Fear.
  The loop was silver, and a serpent form
  Coerulean over all its surface twined,                          45
  Three heads erecting on one neck, the heads
  Together wreath'd into a stately crown.
  His helmet quatre-crested,[4] and with studs
  Fast riveted around he to his brows
  Adjusted, whence tremendous waved his crest                     50
  Of mounted hair on high. Two spears he seized
  Ponderous, brass-pointed, and that flash'd to heaven.
  Sounds[5] like clear thunder, by the spouse of Jove
  And by Minerva raised to extol the King
  Of opulent Mycenae, roll'd around.                               55
  At once each bade his charioteer his steeds
  Hold fast beside the margin of the trench
  In orderly array; the foot all arm'd
  Rush'd forward, and the clamor of the host
  Rose infinite into the dawning skies.                           60
  First, at the trench, the embattled infantry[6]
  Stood ranged; the chariots follow'd close behind;
  Dire was the tumult by Saturnian Jove
  Excited, and from ether down he shed
  Blood-tinctured dews among them, for he meant                   65
  That day to send full many a warrior bold
  To Pluto's dreary realm, slain premature.
    Opposite, on the rising-ground, appear'd
  The Trojans; them majestic Hector led,
  Noble Polydamas, AEneas raised                                   70
  To godlike honors in all Trojan hearts,
  And Polybus, with whom Antenor's sons
  Agenor, and young Acamas advanced.
  Hector the splendid orb of his broad shield
  Bore in the van, and as a comet now                             75
  Glares through the clouds portentous, and again,
  Obscured by gloomy vapors, disappears,
  So Hector, marshalling his host, in front
  Now shone, now vanish'd in the distant rear.
  All-cased he flamed in brass, and on the sight                  80
  Flash'd as the lightnings of Jove AEgis-arm'd.
  As reapers, toiling opposite,[7] lay bare
  Some rich man's furrows, while the sever'd grain,
  Barley or wheat, sinks as the sickle moves,
  So Greeks and Trojans springing into fight                      85
  Slew mutual; foul retreat alike they scorn'd,
  Alike in fierce hostility their heads
  Both bore aloft, and rush'd like wolves to war.
  Discord, spectatress terrible, that sight
  Beheld exulting; she, of all the Gods,                          90
  Alone was present; not a Power beside
  There interfered, but each his bright abode
  Quiescent occupied wherever built
  Among the windings of the Olympian heights;
  Yet blamed they all the storm-assembler King                    95
  Saturnian, for his purposed aid to Troy.
  The eternal father reck'd not; he, apart,
  Seated in solitary pomp, enjoy'd
  His glory, and from on high the towers survey'd
  Of Ilium and the fleet of Greece, the flash                    100
  Of gleaming arms, the slayer and the slain.
    While morning lasted, and the light of day
  Increased, so long the weapons on both sides
  Flew in thick vollies, and the people fell.
  But, what time his repast the woodman spreads                  105
  In some umbrageous vale, his sinewy arms
  Wearied with hewing many a lofty tree,
  And his wants satisfied, he feels at length
  The pinch of appetite to pleasant food,[8]
  Then was it, that encouraging aloud                            110
  Each other, in their native virtue strong,
  The Grecians through the phalanx burst of Troy.
  Forth sprang the monarch first; he slew the Chief
  Bianor, nor himself alone, but slew
  Oileus also driver of his steeds.                              115
  Oileus, with a leap alighting, rush'd
  On Agamemnon; he his fierce assault
  Encountering, with a spear met full his front.
  Nor could his helmet's ponderous brass sustain
  That force, but both his helmet and his skull                  120
  It shatter'd, and his martial rage repress'd.
  The King of men, stripping their corselets, bared
  Their shining breasts, and left them. Isus, next,
  And Antiphus he flew to slay, the sons
  Of Priam both, and in one chariot borne,                       125
  This spurious, genuine that. The bastard drove,
  And Antiphus, a warrior high-renown'd,
  Fought from the chariot; them Achilles erst
  Feeding their flocks on Ida had surprised
  And bound with osiers, but for ransom loosed.                  130
  Of these, imperial Agamemnon, first,
  Above the pap pierced Isus; next, he smote
  Antiphus with his sword beside the ear,
  And from his chariot cast him to the ground.
  Conscious of both, their glittering arms he stripp'd,          135
  For he had seen them when from Ida's heights
  Achilles led them to the Grecian fleet.
  As with resistless fangs the lion breaks
  The young in pieces of the nimble hind,
  Entering her lair, and takes their feeble lives;               140
  She, though at hand, can yield them no defence,
  But through the thick wood, wing'd with terror, starts
  Herself away, trembling at such a foe;
  So them the Trojans had no power to save,
  Themselves all driven before the host of Greece.               145
  Next, on Pisandrus, and of dauntless heart
  Hippolochus he rush'd; they were the sons
  Of brave Antimachus, who with rich gifts
  By Paris bought, inflexible withheld
  From Menelaus still his lovely bride.                          150
  His sons, the monarch, in one chariot borne
  Encounter'd; they (for they had lost the reins)
  With trepidation and united force
  Essay'd to check the steeds; astonishment
  Seized both; Atrides with a lion's rage                        155
  Came on, and from the chariot thus they sued.
    Oh spare us! son of Atreus, and accept
  Ransom immense. Antimachus our sire
  Is rich in various treasure, gold and brass,
  And temper'd steel, and, hearing the report                    160
  That in Achaia's fleet his sons survive,
  He will requite thee with a glorious price.
    So they, with tears and gentle terms the King
  Accosted, but no gentle answer heard.
    Are ye indeed the offspring of the Chief                     165
  Antimachus, who when my brother once
  With godlike Laertiades your town
  Enter'd ambassador, his death advised
  In council, and to let him forth no more?
  Now rue ye both the baseness of your sire.                     170
    He said, and from his chariot to the plain
  Thrust down Pisandrus, piercing with keen lance
  His bosom, and supine he smote the field.
  Down leap'd Hippolochus, whom on the ground
  He slew, cut sheer his hands, and lopp'd his head,             175
  And roll'd it like a mortar[9] through the ranks.
  He left the slain, and where he saw the field
  With thickest battle cover'd, thither flew
  By all the Grecians follow'd bright in arms.
  The scatter'd infantry constrained to fly,                     180
  Fell by the infantry; the charioteers,
  While with loud hoofs their steeds the dusty soil
  Excited, o'er the charioteers their wheels
  Drove brazen-fellied, and the King of men
  Incessant slaughtering, called his Argives[10] on.             185
  As when fierce flames some ancient forest seize,
  From side to side in flakes the various wind
  Rolls them, and to the roots devour'd, the trunks
  Fall prostrate under fury of the fire,
  So under Agamemnon fell the heads                              190
  Of flying Trojans. Many a courser proud
  The empty chariots through the paths of war
  Whirl'd rattling, of their charioteers deprived;
  They breathless press'd the plain, now fitter far
  To feed the vultures than to cheer their wives.                195
    Conceal'd, meantime, by Jove, Hector escaped
  The dust, darts, deaths, and tumult of the field;
  And Agamemnon to the swift pursuit
  Call'd loud the Grecians. Through the middle plain
  Beside the sepulchre of Ilus, son                              200
  Of Dardanus, and where the fig-tree stood,
  The Trojans flew, panting to gain the town,
  While Agamemnon pressing close the rear,
  Shout after shout terrific sent abroad,
  And his victorious hands reek'd, red with gore.                205
  But at the beech-tree and the Scaean gate
  Arrived, the Trojans halted, waiting there
  The rearmost fugitives; they o'er the field
  Came like a herd, which in the dead of night
  A lion drives; all fly, but one is doom'd                      210
  To death inevitable; her with jaws
  True to their hold he seizes, and her neck
  Breaking, embowels her, and laps the blood;
  So, Atreus' royal son, the hindmost still
  Slaying, and still pursuing, urged them on.                    215
  Many supine, and many prone, the field
  Press'd, by the son of Atreus in their flight
  Dismounted; for no weapon raged as his.
  But now, at last, when he should soon have reach'd
  The lofty walls of Ilium, came the Sire                        220
  Of Gods and men descending from the skies,
  And on the heights of Ida fountain-fed,
  Sat arm'd with thunders. Calling to his foot
  Swift Iris golden-pinion'd, thus he spake.
    Iris! away. Thus speak in Hector's ears.                     225
  While yet he shall the son of Atreus see
  Fierce warring in the van, and mowing down
  The Trojan ranks, so long let him abstain
  From battle, leaving to his host the task
  Of bloody contest furious with the Greeks.                     230
  But soon as Atreus' son by spear or shaft
  Wounded shall climb his chariot, with such force
  I will endue Hector, that he shall slay
  Till he have reach'd the ships, and till, the sun
  Descending, sacred darkness cover all.                         235
    He spake, nor rapid Iris disobey'd
  Storm-wing'd ambassadress, but from the heights
  Of Ida stoop'd to Ilium. There she found
  The son of royal Priam by the throng
  Of chariots and of steeds compass'd about                      240
  She, standing at his side, him thus bespake.
    Oh, son of Priam! as the Gods discreet!
  I bring thee counsel from the Sire of all.
  While yet thou shalt the son of Atreus see
  Fierce warring in the van, and mowing down                     245
  The warrior ranks, so long he bids thee pause
  From battle, leaving to thy host the task
  Of bloody contest furious with the Greeks.
  But soon as Atreus' son, by spear or shaft
  Wounded, shall climb his chariot, Jove will then               250
  Endue thee with such force, that thou shalt slay
  Till thou have reach'd the ships, and till, the sun
  Descending, sacred darkness cover all.
    So saying, swift-pinion'd Iris disappear'd.
  Then Hector from his chariot at a leap                         255
  Came down all arm'd, and, shaking his bright spears,
  Ranged every quarter, animating loud
  The legions, and rekindling horrid war.
  Back roll'd the Trojan ranks, and faced the Greeks;
  The Greeks their host to closer phalanx drew;                  260
  The battle was restored, van fronting van
  They stood, and Agamemnon into fight
  Sprang foremost, panting for superior fame.
    Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell!
  What Trojan first, or what ally of Troy                        265
  Opposed the force of Agamemnon's arm?
  Iphidamas, Antenor's valiant son,
  Of loftiest stature, who in fertile Thrace
  Mother of flocks was nourish'd, Cisseus him
  His grandsire, father of Theano praised                        270
  For loveliest features, in his own abode
  Rear'd yet a child, and when at length he reach'd
  The measure of his glorious manhood firm
  Dismiss'd him not, but, to engage him more,
  Gave him his daughter. Wedded, he his bride                    275
  As soon deserted, and with galleys twelve
  Following the rumor'd voyage of the Greeks,
  The same course steer'd; but at Percope moor'd,
  And marching thence, arrived on foot at Troy.
  He first opposed Atrides. They approach'd.                     280
  The spear of Agamemnon wander'd wide;
  But him Iphidamas on his broad belt
  Beneath the corselet struck, and, bearing still
  On his spear-beam, enforced it; but ere yet
  He pierced the broider'd zone, his point, impress'd            285
  Against the silver, turn'd, obtuse as lead.
  Then royal Agamemnon in his hand
  The weapon grasping, with a lion's rage
  Home drew it to himself, and from his gripe
  Wresting it, with his falchion keen his neck                   290
  Smote full, and stretch'd him lifeless at his foot.
  So slept Iphidamas among the slain;
  Unhappy! from his virgin bride remote,
  Associate with the men of Troy in arms
  He fell, and left her beauties unenjoy'd.                      295
  He gave her much, gave her a hundred beeves,
  And sheep and goats a thousand from his flocks
  Promised, for numberless his meadows ranged;
  But Agamemnon, son of Atreus, him
  Slew and despoil'd, and through the Grecian host               300
  Proceeded, laden with his gorgeous arms.
  Cooen that sight beheld, illustrious Chief,
  Antenor's eldest born, but with dim eyes
  Through anguish for his brother's fall. Unseen
  Of noble Agamemnon, at his side                                305
  He cautious stood, and with a spear his arm,
  Where thickest flesh'd, below his elbow, pierced,
  Till opposite the glittering point appear'd.
  A thrilling horror seized the King of men
  So wounded; yet though wounded so, from fight                  310
  He ceased not, but on Cooen rush'd, his spear
  Grasping, well-thriven growth[11] of many a wind.
  He by the foot drew off Iphidamas,
  His brother, son of his own sire, aloud
  Calling the Trojan leaders to his aid;                         315
  When him so occupied with his keen point
  Atrides pierced his bossy shield beneath.
  Expiring on Iphidamas he fell
  Prostrate, and Agamemnon lopp'd his head.
  Thus, under royal Agamemnon's hand,                            320
  Antenor's sons their destiny fulfill'd,
  And to the house of Ades journey'd both.
  Through other ranks of warriors then he pass'd,
  Now with his spear, now with his falchion arm'd,
  And now with missile force of massy stones,                    325
  While yet his warm blood sallied from the wound.
  But when the wound grew dry, and the blood ceased,
  Anguish intolerable undermined
  Then all the might of Atreus' royal son.
  As when a laboring woman's arrowy throes                       330
  Seize her intense, by Juno's daughters dread
  The birth-presiding Ilithyae deep
  Infixt, dispensers of those pangs severe;
  So, anguish insupportable subdued
  Then all the might of Atreus' royal son.                       335
  Up-springing to his seat, instant he bade
  His charioteer drive to the hollow barks,
  Heart-sick himself with pain; yet, ere he went,
  With voice loud-echoing hail'd the Danai.
    Friends! counsellors and leaders of the Greeks!              340
  Now drive, yourselves, the battle from your ships.
  For me the Gods permit not to employ
  In fight with Ilium's host the day entire.
    He ended, and the charioteer his steeds
  Lash'd to the ships; they not unwilling flew,                  345
  Bearing from battle the afflicted King
  With foaming chests and bellies grey with dust.
  Soon Hector, noting his retreat, aloud
  Call'd on the Trojans and allies of Troy.
    Trojans and Lycians, and close-fighting sons                 350
  Of Dardanus! oh summon all your might;
  Now, now be men! Their bravest is withdrawn!
  Glory and honor from Saturnian Jove
  On me attend; now full against the Greeks
  Drive all your steeds, and win a deathless name.               355
    He spake--and all drew courage from his word.
  As when his hounds bright-tooth'd some hunter cheers
  Against the lion or the forest-boar,
  So Priameian Hector cheer'd his host
  Magnanimous against the sons of Greece,                        360
  Terrible as gore-tainted Mars. Among
  The foremost warriors, with success elate
  He strode, and flung himself into the fight
  Black as a storm which sudden from on high
  Descending, furrows deep the gloomy flood.                     365
    Then whom slew Priameian Hector first,
  Whom last, by Jove, that day, with glory crown'd?
  Assaeus, Dolops, Orus, Agelaues,
  Autonoues, Hipponoues, AEsymnus,
  Opheltius and Opites first he slew,                            370
  All leaders of the Greeks, and, after these,
  The people. As when whirlwinds of the West
  A storm encounter from the gloomy South,
  The waves roll multitudinous, and the foam
  Upswept by wandering gusts fills all the air,                  375
  So Hector swept the Grecians. Then defeat
  Past remedy and havoc had ensued,
  Then had the routed Grecians, flying, sought
  Their ships again, but that Ulysses[12] thus
  Summon'd the brave Tydides to his aid.                         380
    Whence comes it, Diomede, that we forget
  Our wonted courage? Hither, O my friend!
  And, fighting at my side, ward off the shame
  That must be ours, should Hector seize the fleet.
    To whom the valiant Diomede replied.                         385
  I will be firm; trust me thou shalt not find
  Me shrinking; yet small fruit of our attempts
  Shall follow, for the Thunderer, not to us,
  But to the Trojan, gives the glorious day.
    The Hero spake, and from his chariot cast                    390
  Thymbraeus to the ground pierced through the pap,
  While by Ulysses' hand his charioteer
  Godlike Molion, fell. The warfare thus
  Of both for ever closed, them there they left,
  And plunging deep into the warrior-throng                      395
  Troubled the multitude. As when two boars
  Turn desperate on the close-pursuing hounds,
  So they, returning on the host of Troy,
  Slew on all sides, and overtoil'd with flight
  From Hector's arm, the Greeks meantime respired.               400
  Two warriors, next, their chariot and themselves
  They took, plebeians brave, sons of the seer
  Percosian Merops in prophetic skill
  Surpassing all; he both his sons forbad
  The mortal field, but disobedient they                         405
  Still sought it, for their destiny prevail'd.
  Spear-practised Diomede of life deprived
  Both these, and stripp'd them of their glorious arms,
  While by Ulysses' hand Hippodamus
  Died and Hypeirochus. And now the son                          410
  Of Saturn, looking down from Ida, poised
  The doubtful war, and mutual deaths they dealt.
  Tydides plunged his spear into the groin
  Of the illustrious son of Paeon, bold
  Agastrophus. No steeds at his command                          415
  Had he, infatuate! but his charioteer
  His steeds detain'd remote, while through the van
  Himself on foot rush'd madly till he fell.
  But Hector through the ranks darting his eye
  Perceived, and with ear-piercing cries advanced                420
  Against them, follow'd by the host of Troy.
  The son of Tydeus, shuddering, his approach
  Discern'd, and instant to Ulysses spake.[13]
    Now comes the storm! This way the mischief rolls!
  Stand and repulse the Trojan. Now be firm.                     425
    He said, and hurling his long-shadow'd beam
  Smote Hector. At his helmet's crown he aim'd,
  Nor err'd, but brass encountering brass, the point
  Glanced wide, for he had cased his youthful brows
  In triple brass, Apollo's glorious gift.                       430
  Yet with rapidity at such a shock
  Hector recoil'd into the multitude
  Afar, where sinking to his knees, he lean'd
  On his broad palm, and darkness veil'd his eyes.
  But while Tydides follow'd through the van                     435
  His stormy spear, which in the distant soil
  Implanted stood, Hector his scatter'd sense
  Recovering, to his chariot sprang again,
  And, diving deep into his host, escaped.
  The noble son of Tydeus, spear in hand,                        440
  Rush'd after him, and as he went, exclaim'd.
    Dog! thou hast now escaped; but, sure the stroke
  Approach'd thee nigh, well-aim'd. Once more thy prayers
  Which ever to Apollo thou prefer'st
  Entering the clash of battle, have prevail'd,                  445
  And he hath rescued thee. But well beware
  Our next encounter, for if also me
  Some God befriend, thou diest. Now will I seek
  Another mark, and smite whom next I may.
    He spake, and of his armor stripp'd the son                  450
  Spear-famed of Paeon. Meantime Paris, mate
  Of beauteous Helen, drew his bow against
  Tydides; by a pillar of the tomb
  Of Ilus, ancient senator revered,
  Conceal'd he stood, and while the Hero loosed                  455
  His corselet from the breast of Paeon's son
  Renown'd, and of his helmet and his targe
  Despoil'd him; Paris, arching quick his bow,
  No devious shaft dismiss'd, but his right foot
  Pierced through the sole, and fix'd it to the ground.          460
  Transported from his ambush forth he leap'd
  With a loud laugh, and, vaunting, thus exclaim'd:
    Oh shaft well shot! it galls thee. Would to heaven
  That it had pierced thy heart, and thou hadst died!
  So had the Trojans respite from their toils                    465
  Enjoy'd, who, now, shudder at sight of thee
  Like she-goats when the lion is at hand.
    To whom, undaunted, Diomede replied.
  Archer shrew-tongued! spie-maiden! man of curls![14]
  Shouldst thou in arms attempt me face to face,                 470
  Thy bow and arrows should avail thee nought.
  Vain boaster! thou hast scratch'd my foot--no more--
  And I regard it as I might the stroke
  Of a weak woman or a simple child.
  The weapons of a dastard and a slave                           475
  Are ever such. More terrible are mine,
  And whom they pierce, though slightly pierced, he dies.
  His wife her cheeks rends inconsolable,
  His babes are fatherless, his blood the glebe
  Incarnadines, and where he bleeds and rots                     480
  More birds of prey than women haunt the place.
    He ended, and Ulysses, drawing nigh,
  Shelter'd Tydides; he behind the Chief
  Of Ithaca sat drawing forth the shaft,
  But pierced with agonizing pangs the while.                    485
  Then, climbing to his chariot-seat, he bade
  Sthenelus hasten to the hollow ships,
  Heart-sick with pain. And now alone was seen
  Spear-famed Ulysses; not an Argive more
  Remain'd, so universal was the rout,                           490
  And groaning, to his own great heart he said.
    Alas! what now awaits me? If, appall'd
  By multitudes, I fly, much detriment;
  And if alone they intercept me here,
  Still more; for Jove hath scatter'd all the host,              495
  Yet why these doubts! for know I not of old
  That only dastards fly, and that the voice
  Of honor bids the famed in battle stand,
  Bleed they themselves, or cause their foes to bleed?
    While busied in such thought he stood, the ranks             500
  Of Trojans fronted with broad shields, enclosed
  The hero with a ring, hemming around
  Their own destruction. As when dogs, and swains
  In prime of manhood, from all quarters rush
  Around a boar, he from his thicket bolts,                      505
  The bright tusk whetting in his crooked jaws:
  They press him on all sides, and from beneath
  Loud gnashings hear, yet firm, his threats defy;
  Like them the Trojans on all sides assail'd
  Ulysses dear to Jove. First with his spear                     510
  He sprang impetuous on a valiant chief,
  Whose shoulder with a downright point he pierced,
  Deiopites; Thooen next he slew,
  And Ennomus, and from his coursers' backs
  Alighting quick, Chersidamas; beneath                          515
  His bossy shield the gliding weapon pass'd
  Right through his navel; on the plain he fell
  Expiring, and with both hands clench'd the dust.
  Them slain he left, and Charops wounded next,
  Brother of Socus, generous Chief, and son                      520
  Of Hippasus; brave Socus to the aid
  Of Charops flew, and, godlike, thus began.
    Illustrious chief, Ulysses! strong to toil
  And rich in artifice! Or boast to-day
  Two sons of Hippasus, brave warriors both,                     525
  Of armor and of life bereft by thee,
  Or to my vengeful spear resign thy own!
    So saying, Ulysses' oval disk he smote.
  Through his bright disk the stormy weapon flew,
  Transpierced his twisted mail, and from his side               530
  Drove all the skin, but to his nobler parts
  Found entrance none, by Pallas turn'd aslant.[15]
  Ulysses, conscious of his life untouch'd,
  Retired a step from Socus, and replied.
    Ah hapless youth; thy fate is on the wing;                   535
  Me thou hast forced indeed to cease a while
  From battle with the Trojans, but I speak
  Thy death at hand; for vanquish'd by my spear,
  This self-same day thou shalt to me resign
  Thy fame, thy soul to Pluto steed-renown'd.                    540
    He ceased; then Socus turn'd his back to fly,
  But, as he turn'd, his shoulder-blades between
  He pierced him, and the spear urged through his breast.
  On his resounding arms he fell, and thus
  Godlike Ulysses gloried in his fall.                           545
    Ah, Socus, son of Hippasus, a chief
  Of fame equestrian! swifter far than thou
  Death follow'd thee, and thou hast not escaped.
  Ill-fated youth! thy parents' hands thine eyes
  Shall never close, but birds of ravenous maw                   550
  Shall tear thee, flapping thee with frequent wing,
  While me the noble Grecians shall entomb!
    So saying, the valiant Socus' spear he drew
  From his own flesh, and through his bossy shield.
  The weapon drawn, forth sprang the blood, and left             555
  His spirit faint. Then Ilium's dauntless sons,
  Seeing Ulysses' blood, exhorted glad
  Each other, and, with force united, all
  Press'd on him. He, retiring, summon'd loud
  His followers. Thrice, loud as mortal may,                     560
  He call'd, and valiant Menelaus thrice
  Hearing the voice, to Ajax thus remark'd.
    Illustrious son of Telamon! The voice
  Of Laertiades comes o'er my ear
  With such a sound, as if the hardy chief,                      565
  Abandon'd of his friends, were overpower'd
  By numbers intercepting his retreat.
  Haste! force we quick a passage through the ranks.
  His worth demands our succor, for I fear
  Lest sole conflicting with the host of Troy,                   570
  Brave as he is, he perish, to the loss
  Unspeakable and long regret of Greece.
    So saying, he went, and Ajax, godlike Chief,
  Follow'd him. At the voice arrived, they found
  Ulysses Jove-beloved compass'd about                           575
  By Trojans, as the lynxes in the hills,
  Adust for blood, compass an antler'd stag
  Pierced by an archer; while his blood is warm
  And his limbs pliable, from him he 'scapes;
  But when the feather'd barb hath quell'd his force,            580
  In some dark hollow of the mountain's side,
  The hungry troop devour him; chance, the while,
  Conducts a lion thither, before whom
  All vanish, and the lion feeds alone;
  So swarm'd the Trojan powers, numerous and bold,               585
  Around Ulysses, who with wary skill
  Heroic combated his evil day.
  But Ajax came, cover'd with his broad shield
  That seem'd a tower, and at Ulysses' side
  Stood fast; then fled the Trojans wide-dispersed,              590
  And Menelaus led him by the hand
  Till his own chariot to his aid approach'd.
  But Ajax, springing on the Trojans, slew
  Doryclus, from the loins of Priam sprung,
  But spurious. Pandocus he wounded next,                        595
  Then wounded Pyrasus, and after him
  Pylartes and Lysander. As a flood
  Runs headlong from the mountains to the plain
  After long showers from Jove; many a dry oak
  And many a pine the torrent sweeps along,                      600
  And, turbid, shoots much soil into the sea,
  So, glorious Ajax troubled wide the field,
  Horse and man slaughtering, whereof Hector yet
  Heard not; for on the left of all the war
  He fought beside Scamander, where around                       605
  Huge Nestor, and Idomeneus the brave,
  Most deaths were dealt, and loudest roar'd the fight.
  There Hector toil'd, feats wonderful of spear
  And horsemanship achieving, and the lines
  Of many a phalanx desolating wide.                             610
  Nor even then had the bold Greeks retired,
  But that an arrow triple-barb'd, dispatch'd
  By Paris, Helen's mate, against the Chief
  Machaon warring with distinguish'd force,
  Pierced his right shoulder. For his sake alarm'd,              615
  The valor-breathing Grecians fear'd, lest he
  In that disast'rous field should also fall.[16]
  At once, Idomeneus of Crete approach'd
  The noble Nestor, and him thus bespake.
    Arise, Neleian Nestor! Pride of Greece!                      620
  Ascend thy chariot, and Machaon placed
  Beside thee, bear him, instant to the fleet.
  For one, so skill'd in medicine, and to free
  The inherent barb, is worth a multitude.
    He said, nor the Gerenian hero old                           625
  Aught hesitated, but into his seat
  Ascended, and Machaon, son renown'd
  Of AEsculapius, mounted at his side.
  He lash'd the steeds, they not unwilling sought
  The hollow ships, long their familiar home.                    630
    Cebriones, meantime, the charioteer
  Of Hector, from his seat the Trojan ranks
  Observing sore discomfited, began.
    Here are we busied, Hector! on the skirts
  Of roaring battle, and meantime I see                          635
  Our host confused, their horses and themselves
  All mingled. Telamonian Ajax there
  Routs them; I know the hero by his shield.
  Haste, drive we thither, for the carnage most
  Of horse and foot conflicting furious, there                   640
  Rages, and infinite the shouts arise.
    He said, and with shrill-sounding scourge the steeds
  Smote ample-maned; they, at the sudden stroke
  Through both hosts whirl'd the chariot, shields and men
  Trampling; with blood the axle underneath                      645
  All redden'd, and the chariot-rings with drops
