
328. Condition of the Country; Power of the Crown.

Henry, it is said, had his claim to the throne printed by Caxton, and
distributed broadcast over the country (S306).  It was the first
political appeal to the people made through the press, and was a sign
of the new period upon which English history had entered.  Since
Caxton began his great work, the kingdom had undergone a most
momentous change.

The leading nobles, like the Earl of Warwick (SS296, 303), were, with
few exceptions, dead.  Their estates were confiscated, their thousands
of followers either buried on the battlefield or dispersed throughout
the land (S316).  The small number of titled families remaining was no
longer to be feared.  The nation itself, though it had taken
comparatively little part in the war, was weary of bloodshed, and
ready for peace on any terms.

The accession of the Welsh house of Tudor (S39) marks the beginning of
a long period of almost absolute royal power.  The nobility were too
weak to place any check on the King.  The clergy, who had not
recovered from their dread of Lollardism (SS255, 283) and its attacks
on their wealth and influence, were anxious for a strong conservative
government such as Henry promised.  The House of Commons had no clear
united policy, and though the first Parliament put certain restrainst
on the Crown, yet they were never really enforced.[1]  The truth is,
that the new King was both too prudent and too crafty to give them an
opportunity.  By avoiding foreign wars he dispensed with the necessity
of summoning frequent Parliaments, and with demanding large sums of
money from them.

[1] At the accession of Henry VII, Parliament imposed the following
checks on the power of the King: (1) No new tax to be levied without
consent of Parliament; (2) No new law to be made without the same
consent; (3) No committal to prison without a warrant specifying the
offense, and the trial to be speedy; (4) Criminal charges and
questions of fact in civil cases to be decided by jury; (5) The King's
officers to be held responsible to the nation.

By thus ruling alone for a large part of the time, Henry got the
management of affairs into his own hands, and transmitted the power to
those who came after him.  In this way the Tudors with their
successors, the Stuarts, built up a system of "personal sovereignty"--
or "one-man power"--unchecked by constitutional restraints.  It
continued for a hundred and fifty years, when the outbreak of the
great Civil War brought it to an end forever.

329. Growth of a Stronger Feeling of Nationality.

It would be an error, however, to consider this absolutism of the
Crown as an unmitigated evil.  On the contrary, it was in one
important direction an advantage.  There are times when the great need
of a people is not more individual liberty, but greater national
unity.  Spain and France were two countries consisting of a collection
of petty feudla states.  Their nobility were always trying to steal
each other's possessions and cut each other's throats.

But the rise in each country of a royal despotism forced the turbulent
barons to make peace, and to obey a common central law.  By this means
both realms ultimately developed into great and powerful kingdoms.

When the Tudors came to the throne, England was still full of rankling
hate engendered by the Wars of the Roses (S299).  Held down by the
heavy hand of Henry VII, and later, by the still heavier one of Henry
VIII, the country learned the same salutary lesson of growth under
repression which had benefited Spain and France.

Henceforth Englishmen of all classes no longer boasted that they
belonged to the Yorkist or the Lancastrian faction (S300), but began
to pride themselves on their loyalty to Crown and country, and their
readiness to draw their swords to defend both.[1]

[1] But the passage of Poyning's Act (1494) in Ireland prohibited the
Irish Parliament from passing any law which did not receive the
sanction of the English Council.  This act was not repealed until
1782.

330. Henry's Methods of raising Money; the Court of Star Chamber.

Henry's reign was in the interest of the middle classes,--the farmers,
tradesmen, and mechanics.  His policy was to avoid heavy taxation, to
exempt the poor from the burdens of state, and so ingratiate himself
with a large body of the people.

In order to accomplish this, he revived "benevolences" (SS307, 313),
and by a device suggested by his chief minister, Cardinal Morton, and
hence known and dreaded as "Morton's Fork," he extorted large sums
from the rich and well-to-do.[2]

[2] Those whose income from land was less than $2, or whose movable
property did not exceed 15 pounds (Say 150 pounds and $1125 now), were
exempt.  The lowest rate of assessment for the "benevolences" was
fixed at twenty pence on the pound on land, and half that rate on
other property.

The Cardinal's agents made it their business to learn every man's
income, and visit him accordingly.  If a person lived handomely, the
Cardinal would insist on a correspondingly liberal gift; if, however,
a citizen lived very plainly, the King's minister insisted none the
less, telling the unfortunate man that by his economy he must surely
have accumulated enough to bestow the required "benevolence."[3]  Thus
on one prong or the other of his terrible "fork" the shrewd Cardinal
impaled his writhing victims, and speedily filled the royal treasury
as it had never been filled before.[4]

[3] Richard Reed, a London alderman, refused to contribute a
"benevolence."  He was sent to serve as a soldier in the Scotch wars
at his own expense, and the general was ordered to "use him in all
things according to sharp military discipline."  The effect was such
that few after that ventured to deny the King what he asked.
[4] Henry is said to have accumulated a fortune of nearly two millions
sterling, an amount which would perhaps represent upwards of
$90,000,000 now.

But Henry VII had other methods for raising money.  He sold offices in
Church and State, and took bribes for pardoning rebels.  When he
summoned a Parliament he obtained grants for putting down some real or
pretended insurrection, or to defray the expenses of a threatened
attack from abroad, and then quietly pocketed the appropriation,--a
device not altogether unknown to modern government officials.

A third and last method for getting funds was invented in Henry's
behalf by two lawyers, Empson and Dudley, who were so rapacious and
cut so close that they were commonly known as "the King's skin
shearers."  They went about the country enforcing old and forgotten
laws, by which they reaped a rich harvest.

Their chief instrument for gain, however, was a revival of the Statute
of Liveries.  This law imposed enormous fines on those noblemen who
dared to equip their followers in military garb, or designate them by
a badge equivalent to it, as had been the custom during the late civil
wars (S296).

In order to thoroughly enforce the Statute of Liveries, Henry
organized the Court of Star Chamber, so called from the starred
ceiling where the tribunal met.  This court had for its object the
punishment of such crimes committed by the great families, or their
adherents, as the ordinary law courts could not, or through
intimidation dared not, deal with.  It had no power to inflict death,
but might impose long terms of imprisonment and ruinous fines.  It,
too, first made use of torture in England to extort confessions of
guilt.

Henry seemed to have enforced the Law of Livery against friend and foe
alike.  Said the King to the Earl of Oxford, as he left his castle,
where a large number of retainers in uniform were drawn up to do him
honor, "My lord, I thank you for your entertainment, but my attorney
must speak to you."  The attorney, who was the notorious Empson,
brought suit in the Star Chamber against the Earl, who was fined
fifteen thousand marks, or something like $750,000, for the incautious
display he had made.

331. The Introduction of Artillery strengthens the Power of the King.

It was easier for Henry to pursue this arbitrary course because the
introduction of artillery had changed the art of war.  Throughout the
Middle Ages the call of a great baron had, as Macaulay says, been
sufficient to raise a formidable revolt.  Countrymen and followers
took down their tough yew long bows from the chimney corner, knights
buckled on their steel armor, mounted their horses, and in a few days
an army threatened the holder of the throne, who had no troops save
those furnished by loyal subjects.

But since then, men had "digged villainous saltpeter out of the bowels
of the harmless earth" to manufacture powder, and others had invented
cannon (S239), "those devilish iron engines," as the poet Spenser
called them, "ordained to kill."  Without artillery, the old feudal
army, with its bows, swords, and battle-axes, could do little against
a king like Henry, who had it.  For this reason the whole kingdom lay
at his mercy; and though the nobles and the rich might groan, they saw
that it was useless to fight.

332. The Pretenders Symnel and Warbeck.

During Henry's reign, two pretenders laid claim to the crown: Lambert
Symnel, who represented himself to be Edward Plantagenet, nephew of
the late King; and Perkin Warbeck, who asserted that he was Richard,
Duke of York (S310), who had been murdered in the Tower by his uncle,
Richard III.  Symnel's attempt was easily suppressed, and he commuted
his claim to the crown for the position of scullion in the King's
kitchen.

Warbeck kept the kingdom in a turmoil for more than five years, during
which time one hundred and fifty of his adherents were executed, and
their bodies exposed on gibbets along the south coast of England to
deter their master's French supporters from landing.  At length
Warbeck was captured, imprisoned, and finall hanged at Tyburn.

333. Henry's Politic Marriages.

Henry accomplished more by the marriages of his children and by
diplomacy than other monarchs had by their wars.  He gave his daughter
Margaret to King James IV of Scotland, and thus prepared the way for
the union of the two kingdoms in 1603.  He married his eldest son,
Prince Arthur, to Catharine of Aragon, daughter of the King of Spain,
by which he secured a very large marriage portion for the Prince, and,
what was of equal importance, the alliance of Spain against France.

Arthur died soon afterward, and the King got a dispensation from the
Pope, granting him permission to marry his younger son Henry to
Arthur's widow.  It was this Prince who eventually became King of
England, with the title of Henry VIII, and we shall hereafter see that
this marriage was destined by its results to change the whole course
of the country's history.

334. The World as known at Henry's Accession (1485).

The King also took some small part in certain other events, which
seemed to him, at the time, of less consequence than these matrimonial
alliances.  But history has regarded them in a different light from
that in which the cunning and cautious monarch considered them.

A glance at the map (opposite) will sho how different our world is
from that with which the English were acquainted when Henry was
crowned.  Then the earth was generally supposed to be a flat body
surrounded by the ocean.  The only countries of which anything was
certainly known, with the exception of Europe, were parts of western
Asia, together with a narrow strip of the northern, eastern, and
western coasts of Africa.  The knowledge which had once existed of
India, China, and Japan appears to have died out in great measure with
the travelers and merchants of earlier times who had brought it.  The
land farthest west of which anything was then known was Iceland.

335. First Voyages of Exploration; the Cabots, 1497.

About the time of Henry's accession a new spirit of exploration sprang
up.  The Portuguese had coasted along the western shores of Africa as
far as the Gulf of Guinea, and had established trading posts there.
Later, they reached and doubled the Cape of Good Hope (1487).
Stimulated by what they had done, Columbus, who believed the earth to
be round, determined to sail westward in the hope of reaching the
Indies.  In 1492 he made his first voyage, and discovered a number of
the West India Islands.

Five years afterward John Cabot, a Venetian residing in Bristol,
England, with his son Sebastian, persuaded the King to aid them in a
similar undertaking.  They sailed from that port.  On a map drawn by
the father after his return we read the following lines: "In the year
of our Lord 1497, John Cabot and his son Sebastian discovered that
country which no one before his time had ventured to approach, on the
24th June, about 5 o'clock in the morning."  That entry is supposed to
record the discovery of Cape Breton Island; a few days later they set
foot on the mainland.  This made the Cabots the first discoverers of
the American CONTINENT.

As an offset to that record we have the following, taken from the
King's private account book: "10. Aug. 1497, To him that found the new
isle 10 pounds."

Such was the humble beginning of a series of explorations which gave
England possession of the largest part of North America.

336. Henry VII's Reign the Beginning of a New Epoch.

A few years after Cabot's return Henry laid the corner stone of that
"solemn and sumptuous chapel" which bears his own name, and which
joins Westminster abbey on the east.  There he gave orders that his
tomb should be erected, and that prayers should be said over it "as
long as the world lasted."

Emerson remarks in his "English Traits" that when the visitor to the
Abbey mounts the flight of twelve black marble steps which lead from
it to the edifice where Henry lies buried, he passes from the medieval
to the beginning of the modern age,--a change which the different
style of the architecture distinctly marks (S324).

The true significance of Henry's reign is, that it, in like manner,
stands for a new epoch,--new in modes of government, in law, in
geographical discovery, in letters, art, and religion.

The century just closing was indeed one of the most remarkable in
history, not only in what it had actually accomplished, but still more
in the seed it was sowing for the future.  The celebrated German
artist Kaulbach, in his fresco of "The Age of the Reformation," has
summed up all that it was, and all that it was destined to become in
its full development.

Therein we see it as the period which witnessed the introduction of
firearms, and the consequent overthrow of feudal warfare and feudal
institutions; the growth of the power of royalty and of nationality
through royalty; the sailing of Columbus and of Cabot; the revival of
classical learning; the publication of the first printed book; and
finally, the birth of Martin Luther, the monk who broke away from the
Catholic Church, and persuaded many people to become Protestants.

337. Summary.

Looking back, we find that with Henry VII the absolutism of the Crown,
or "personal monarchy," began in England.  Yet the repressive power of
that "personal monarchy" procured peace for the English people and,
despite "benevolences" and other exactions, they grew into a stronger
national unity.

Simultaneously with this increase of royal authority came the
discovery of a "New World," in which England and her colonies were to
have the chief part.  A century will elapse before those discoveries
begin to bear fruit.  After that, our attention will no longer be
confined to the British Islands, but will be fixed as well on that
western continent where British enterprise and English love of liberty
were destined to find a new and broader field of activity.

Henry VIII--1509-1547

338. Henry's Advantages.

Henry VIII was not quite eighteen when he came to the throne.  The
country was at peace, was fairly prosperous, and the young King had
everything in his favor.  He was handsome, well educated, and fond of
athletic sports.  His frank disposition won friends everywhere, and he
had inherited from his father the largest private fortune that had
ever descended to an English sovereign.  Intellectually, he was in
hearty sympathy with the revival of learning, then in progress both on
the Continent and in England.

339. The New Learning; Colet, Erasmus, More.

During the greater part of the Middle Ages the chief object of
education was to make men monks, and originally the schools
established at Oxford and Cambridge were exclusively for that
purpose.  In their day they did excellent work; but a time came when
men ceased to found monasteries, and began to erect colleges and
hospitals instead.[1]

[1] In the twelfth century four hundred and eighteen monasteries were
founded in England; in the next century, only about a third as many;
in the fourteenth, only twenty-three; after that date their
establishment may be said to cease.

In the course of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries William of
Wykeham and King Henry VI built and endowed colleges which were
specially designed to fit their pupils to live in the world and serve
the state, instead of withdrawing from it to seek their own salvation.

These new institutions encouraged a broader range of studies, and in
Henry VI's time particular attention was given to the Latin classics,
hitherto but little known.  The geographical discoveries of Henry
VII's reign, made by Columbus, Cabot, and others (S335), began to
stimulate scientific thought.  It was evident that the day was not far
distant when questions about the earth and the stars would no longer
be settled by a text from Scripture which forbade further inquiry.

With the accession of Henry VIII education received a still further
impulse.  A few zealous English scholars had just returned from Italy
to Oxford, full of ardor for a new study,--that of Greek.  Among them
was a young clergyman named John Colet.  He saw that by means of that
language, of which the alphabet was as yet hardly known in England,
men might put themselves in direct communication with the greatest
thinkers and writers of the past.

Better still, they might acquire the power of reading the Gospels and
the writings of St. Paul in the original, and thus reach their true
meaning and feel their full influence.  Colet's intimate friend and
fellow worker, the Dutch scholar Erasmus, had the same enthusiasm.
When in sore need of everything, he wrote in one of his letters, "As
soon as I get some money I shall buy Greek books, and then I may buy
some clothes."  The third young man, who, with Erasmus and Colet,
devoted himself to the study of Greek and to the advancement of
learning, was Thomas More, who later became Lord Chancellor (SS145,
351).

The three looked to King Henry for encouragement in the work they had
undertaken; nor did they look in vain.  Colet, who had become a doctor
of divinity and a dean of St. Paul's Cathedral, London, encountered a
furious storm of opposition on account of his devotion to the "New
Learning," as it was sneeringly called.  His attempts at educational
reform met the same resistance.

But Henry liked the man's resolute spirit, and said, "Let others have
what doctors they will; this is the doctor for me."  The King also
took a lively interest in Erasmus, who was appointed professor of
Greek at Cambridge, where he began his great work of preparing an
edition of the Greek Testament with a Latin translation in parallel
columns.

Up to this time the Greek Testament had existed in scattered
manuscripts only.  The publication of the work in printed form gave an
additional impetus to the study of the Scriptures, helped forward the
Reformation, and in a measure laid the foundation for a revised
English translation of the Bible far superior to Wycliffe's (S254).
In the same spirit of genuine love of learning Henry founded Trinity
College, Cambridge, and at a later date confirmed and extended
Cardinal Wolsey's endowment of Christ Church College, Oxford.

340. Henry against Luther.

The King continued, however, to be a staunch Catholic, and certainly
had no thought at this period of doing anything which should tend to
undermine the authority of that ancient form of worship.  In Germany,
Martin Luther was making ready to begin his tremendous battle against
the power and teachings of the Papacy.  In 1517 he nailed to the door
of the church of Wittenberg that famous series of denunciations which
started the movement that ultimately protested against the authority
of Rome, and gave the name of Protestant to all who joined it.

A few years later Henry published a reply to one of Luther's books,
and sent a copy bound in cloth of gold to the Pope.  The Pope was so
delighted with what he termed Henry's "angelic spirit" that he
forthwith conferred on him the title of "Defender of the Faith."  The
English sovereigns have persisted in retaining this title to the
present time, though for what reason, and with what right, even a
royal intellect might be somewhat puzzled to explain.

With this new and flattering title the Pope also sent the King a
costly two-handed sword, intended to represent Henry's zeal in smiting
the enemies of Rome.  But it was destined by fate to become to tsymbol
of the King's final separation from the power that bestowed it (S349).

341. Victory of Flodden (1513); "Field of the Cloth of Gold" (1520).

Politically, Henry was equally fortunate.  The Scotch had ventured to
attack the kingdom during the King's absence on the Continent.  At
Flodden, on the borders of Scotland and England, they were defeated by
the Earl of Surrey, with great slaughter.  (See map facing p. 120.)
This victory placed Scotland at Henry's feet.[1]

[1] See Scott's "Marmion."

The King of France and the Emperor Charles V of Germany now vied with
each other in seeking Henry's alliance.  The Emperor visited England
in order to meet the English sovereign, while the King of France
arranged an interview in his own dominions, known, from the
magnificence of its appointments, as the "Field of the Cloth of Gold."
Henry held the balance of power by which he could make France or
Germany predominate as he saw fit.  It was owing to his able
diplomatic policy, or to that of Cardinal Wolsey, his chief
counsellor, that England reaped advantages from both sides, and
advanced from a comparatively low position to one that was fully
abreast of the foremost nations of Europe.

342. Henry's Marriage with his Brother's Widow.

Such was the King at the outset.  In less than twenty years he had
become another man.  At the age of twelve he had married at his
father's command, and solely for political and mercenary reasons,
Catharine of Aragon, his brother Arthur's widow (S333), who was six
years his senior.  Such a marriage was forbidden, except in certain
cases, by the Old Testament and by the ordinances of the Roman
Catholic Church.

The Pope, however, had granted his permission, and when Henry ascended
the throne, the ceremony was performed a second time.  Several
children were the fruit of this union, all of whom died in infancy,
except one daughter, Mary, unhappily fated to figure as the "Bloody
Mary" of later history (S374).

343. The King's Anxiety for a Successor; Anne Boleyn.

No woman had yet ruled in her own right, either in England or in any
prominent kingdom of Europe, and Henry was anxious to have a son to
succeed him.  He could not bear the thought of being disappointed; in
fact he sent the Duke of Buckingham to the block for casually saying,
that if the King died without issue, he should consider himself
entitled to receive the crown.

It was while meditating this question of the succession, that Henry
became attached to Anne Boleyn, one of the Queen's maids of honor; she
was a sprightly brunette of nineteen, with long black hair and
strikingly beautiful eyes.

The light that shone in those eyes, though hardly that "Gospel light"
which the poet calls it,[1] was yet bright enough to effectually clear
up all difficulties in the royal mind.  The King now declared that he
felt conscientiously moved to obtain a divorce from his old wife, and
to marry a new one.  In that determination lay most momentous
consequences, since it finally separated England from the jurisdiction
of the Church of Rome.

[1] "When love could teach a monarch to be wise,
     And Gospel light first dawned from Bullen's [Boleyn's] eyes."
                                        --Gray.

344. Wolsey favors the Divorce from Catharine.

Cardinal Wolsey, Henry's chief counselor,--the man who thought that he
ruled both King and Kingdom,[2]--lent his powerful aid to bring about
the divorce, but with the expectation that the King would marry a
princess from France, and thus form an alliance with that country.  If
so, his own ambitious schemes would be forwarded, since the united
influence of the two kingdoms might elevate him to the Papacy.

[2] The Venetian ambassador in a dispatch to his government, wrote of
Cardinal Wolsey: "It is he who rules both the King and the entire
Kingdom.  At first the Cardinal used to say, `His Majesty will do so
and so'; subsequently he went on, forgetting himself, and commenced
saying, `We shall do so and so'; at present (1519) he has reached such
a pitch that he says, `I shall do so and so.'"

When Wolsey learned that the King's choice was Anne Boleyn (S343), he
fell on his knees, and begged him not to persist in his purpose; but
his entreaties had no effect, and the Cardinal was obliged to continue
what he had begun.

345. The Court at Blackfriars (1529).

The King had applied to the Pope to annul the marriage with Catharine
(S342) on the ground of illegality; but the Emperor Charles V, who was
the Queen's nephew, used his influence in her behalf.  Vexatious
delays now became the order of the day.  At last, a court composed of
Cardinal Wolsey and Cardinal Campeggio, an Italian, as papal legates,
or representatives, was convened at Blackfriars, London, to test the
validity of the marriage.

Henry and Catharine were summoned.  The first appeared and answered to
his name.  When the Queen was called she declined to answer, but
throwing herself at Henry's feet, begged him with tears and sobs not
to put her away without cause.  Finding him inflexible, she left the
court, and refused to attend again, appealing to Rome for justice.

This was in the spring (1529).  Nothing was done that summer, and in
the autumn, the court, instead of reaching a decision, dissolved.
Campeggio, the Italian legate, returned to Italy, and Henry, to his
disappointment and rage, received an order from Rome to carry the
question to the Pope for settlement.

346. Fall of Wolsey (1529).

Both the King and Anne Boleyn believed that Wolsey had played false
with them.  They now resolved upon his destruction.  The Cardinal had
a presentiment of his impending doom.  The French ambassador, who saw
him at this juncture, said that his face had shrunk to half its size.
But his fortunes were destined to shrink even more than his face.

By a law of Richard II no representative of the Pope had any rightful
authority in England[1] (S265).  Though the King had given his consent
to Wolsey's holding the office of legate, yet now that a contrary
result to what he expected had been reached, he proceeded to prosecute
him to the full extent of the law.

[1] Act of Praemunire.  See S243 and Summary of Constitutional History
in the Appendix, p. xiii, S14, and p. xxxii.

It was an easy matter for him to crush the Cardinal.  Erasmus said of
him, "He was feared by all, he was loved by few--I may say by nobody."
His arrogance and extravagant ostentation had excited the jealous hate
of the nobility; his constant demands for money in behalf of the King
set Parliament against him; and his exactions from the common people
had, as the chronicle of the time tells us, made them weep, beg, and
"speak cursedly."

Wolsey bowed to the storm, and to save himself gave up everything; his
riches, pomp, power, all vanished as suddenly as they had come.  It
was Henry's hand that stripped him, but it was Anne Boleyn who moved
that hand.  Well might the humbled favorite say of her:

        "There was the weight that pulled me down.
                ... all my glories
         In that one woman I have lost forever."[1]

[1] Shakespeare's "Henry VIII," Act III, scene ii.

Thus deprived of well-nigh everything but life, the Cardinal was
permitted to go into retirement in the north; less than a twelve-month
later he was arrested on a charge of high treason.  Through the irony
of fate, the warrant was served by a former lover of Anne Boleyn's,
whom Wolsey, it is said, had separated from her in order that she
might consummate her unhappy marriage with royalty.  On the way to
London Wolsey fell mortally ill, and turned aside at Leicester to die
in the abbey there, with the words:

                        "...O, Father Abbot,
        An old man, broken with the storms of state,
        Is come to lay his weary bones among ye:
        Give him a little earth for charity!"[2]

[2] Shakespeare's "Henry VIII," Act IV, scene ii.

347. Appeal to the Universities.

Before Wolsey's death, Dr. Thomas Cranmer, of Cambridge, suggested
that the King lay the divorce question before the universities of
Europe.  Henry caught eagerly at this proposition, and exclaimed,
"Cranmer has the right pig by the ear."  The scheme was at once
adopted.  Several universities returned favorable answers.  In a few
instances, as at Oxford and Cambridge, where the authorities
hesitated, a judicious use of bribes or threats soon brought them to
see the matter in a proper light.

348. The Clergy declare Henry Head of the Church, 1531.

Armed with these decisions in his favor, Henry now charged the whole
body of the English Church with being guilty of the same crime of
which Wolsey had been accused (S346).  The clergy, in their terror,
made haste to buy a pardon at a cost reckoned at nearly $5,000,000 at
the present value of money.

They furthermore declared Henry to be the supreme head on earth of the
Church of England, adroitly adding, "in so far as is permitted by the
law of Christ."  Thus the Reformation came into England "by a side
door, as it were."  Nevertheless, it came.

349. Henry marries Anne Boleyn; Act of Supremacy, 1534.

Events now moved rapidly toward a crisis.  In 1533, after having
waited over five years, Henry privately married Anne Boleyn (S343),
and she was soon after crowned in Westminster Abbey.  When the Pope
was informed of this, he ordered the King, under pain of
excommunication (S194), to put her away, and to take back Queen
Catharine (S345).

Parliament met that demand by passing the Act of Supremacy, 1534,
which declared Henry to be without reservation the sole head of the
Church, making denial thereof high treason.[1]  As he signed the act,
the King with one stroke of his pen overturned the traditions of a
thousand years, and England stood boldly forth with a National Church
independent of the Pope.[2]

[1] Henry's full title was now "Henry VIII, by the Grace of God, King
of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith and of the
Church of England, and also of Ireland, on earth the Supreme Head."
[2] Attention is called to the fact that a controversy, more or less
serious in its character, had been going on, at intervals for nearly
five hundred years, between the English sovereigns (or the barons) and
the popes.  It began with William the Conqueror in 1076 (S118).  It
was continued by Henry I (S136), by Henry II (SS163-170), by John
(S194), by the barons under Henry III (S211), by the Parliament of
Merton (S211), by Edward I (S226), and it may be said to have
practically culminated under Henry VIII in the Act of Supremacy of
1534 (S349).  But after the formal establishment of Protestantism by
Edward VI in 1549 (S362) we find the Act of Supremacy reaffirmed, in
slightly different form, by Queen Elizabeth in 1559 (S382).  Finally,
the Revolution of 1688 settled the question (S497).

350. Subserviency of Parliament.

But as Luther said, Henry had a pope within him.  The King now
proceeded to prove the truth of Luther's declaration.  We have already
seen (S328) that since the Wars of the Roses had destroyed the power
of the barons, there was no effectual check on the despotic will of
the sovereign.  The new nobility were the creatures of the Crown,
hence bound to support it; the clergy were timid, the Commons anything
but bold, so that Parliament gradually became the servile echo and
ready instrument of the throne.

That body twice released the King from the discharge of his just
debts.  It even exempted him from paying certain forced loans which he
had extorted from his people.  Parliament also repeatedly changed the
laws of succession to the Crown to please him.  Moreover it promptly
attainted and destroyed such victims as he desired to put out of the
way (S351).  Later (1539) it declared that proclamations, concerning
religious doctrines, when made by the King and Council, should have
the force of acts of Parliament.  This new power enabled Henry to
pronounce heretical many opinions which he disliked and to punish them
with death.

351. Execution of More and Fisher (1535).

Thomas Cromwell had been Cardinal Wolsey's private secretary; but he
had now become chief counselor to the King, and in his crooked and
cruel policy reduced bloodshed to a science.  He first introduced the
practice of condemning an accused prisoner without any form of trial
(by Act of Attainder), and sending him to the block[1] without
allowing him to speak in his own defense (S356).  No one was now safe
who did not openly side with the King.

[1] Act of Attainder.  See Constitutional Documents in Appendix,
p. xxxii.

Sir Thomas More, who had been Lord Chancellor (S339), and the aged
Bishop Fisher were executed because they could not affirm that they
conscientiously believed that Henry was morally and spiritually
entitled to be the head of the English Church (S349).

Both died with Christian fortitude.  More said to the governor of the
Tower with a flash of his old humor, as the steps leading to the
scaffold shook while he was mounting them, "Do you see me safe up, and
I will make shift to get down by myself."

352. Destruction of the Monasteries; Seizure of their Property,
     1536-1539.

When the intelligence of the judicial murder of the venerable
ex-chancellor reached Rome, the Pope issued a bull of excommunication
and deposition against Henry (S194).  It delivered his soul to Satan,
and his kingdom to the first invader.

The King retaliated by the suppression of the monasteries.  In doing
so, he simply hastened a process which had already begun.  Years
before, Cardinal Wolsey had not scrupled to shut up several, and take
their revenues to found Christ Church College at Oxford.  The truth
was, that, in most cases, monasticism "was dead long before the
Reformation came to bury it" (S339, note 1).  It was dead because it
had done its work,--in many respects a great and good work, which the
world could ill have spared (SS43, 45, 46, 60).  The monasteries
simply shared the fate of all human institutions, however excellent
they may be.

                "Our little systems have their day;
                 They have their day and cease to be:
                 They are but broken lights of Thee,
                 And Thou, O Lord, art more than they."[1]

[1] Tennyson's "In Memoriam."

Henry, however, had no such worthy object as Wolsey had.  His pretext
was that these institutions had sunk into a state of ingnorance,
drunkenness, and profligacy.  This may have been true of some of the
smaller monasteries, though not of the large ones.  But the vices of
the monasteries the King had already made his own.  It was their
wealth which he now coveted.  The smaller religious houses were
speedily swept out of existence (1536).  This caused a furious
insurrection in the North, called the "Pilgrimage of Grace" (1537);
but the revolt was soon put down.

Though Parliament had readily given its sanction to the extinction of
the smaller monasteries, it hesitated about abolishing the greater
ones.  Henry, it is reported, sent for a leading member of the House o
Commons, and, laying his hand on the head of the kneeling
representative, said, "Get my bill passed by to-morrow, little man, or
else to-morrow this head of yours will come off."  The next day the
bill passed, and the work of destruction began anew (1539).  Property
worth millions of pounds was confiscated, and abbots like those of
Glastonbury and Charter House, who dared to resist, were speedily
hanged.[1]

[1] The total number of religious houses destroyed was 645
monasteries, 2374 chapels, 90 collegiate churches, and 110 charitable
institutions.  Among the most famous of these ruins are Glastonbury,
Kirkstal, Furness, Netley, Tintern, and Fountains abbeys.

The magnificent monastic buildings throughout England were now
stripped of everything of value, and left as ruins.  (See map
opposite.)  The beautiful windowes of stained glass were wantonly
broken; the images of the saints were cast down from their niches; the
chimes of bells were melted and cast into cannon; while the valuable
