too dangerous for them to go to the proper people to lay in quantities
of things; and that he waited on two ships, which he showed me, that had
laid in little or nothing but biscuit bread[172] and ship beer, and that
he had bought everything else almost for them. I asked him if there were
any more ships that had separated themselves as those had done. He told
me yes; all the way up from the point, right against Greenwich, to
within the shores of Limehouse and Redriff, all the ships that could
have room rid[173] two and two in the middle of the stream, and that
some of them had several families on board. I asked him if the distemper
had not reached them. He said he believed it had not, except two or
three ships, whose people had not been so watchful as to keep the seamen
from going on shore as others had been; and he said it was a very fine
sight to see how the ships lay up the Pool.[174]

When he said he was going over to Greenwich as soon as the tide began
to come in, I asked if he would let me go with him, and bring me back,
for that I had a great mind to see how the ships were ranged, as he had
told me. He told me if I would assure him, on the word of a Christian
and of an honest man, that I had not the distemper, he would. I assured
him that I had not; that it had pleased God to preserve me; that I lived
in Whitechapel, but was too impatient of being so long within doors, and
that I had ventured out so far for the refreshment of a little air, but
that none in my house had so much as been touched with it.

"Well, sir," says he, "as your charity has been moved to pity me and my
poor family, sure you cannot have so little pity left as to put yourself
into my boat if you were not sound in health, which would be nothing
less than killing me, and ruining my whole family." The poor man
troubled me so much when he spoke of his family with such a sensible
concern and in such an affectionate manner, that I could not satisfy
myself at first to go at all. I told him I would lay aside my curiosity
rather than make him uneasy, though I was sure, and very thankful for
it, that I had no more distemper upon me than the freshest man in the
world. Well, he would not have me put it off neither, but, to let me see
how confident he was that I was just to him, he now importuned me to go:
so, when the tide came up to his boat, I went in, and he carried me to
Greenwich. While he bought the things which he had in charge to buy, I
walked up to the top of the hill, under which the town stands, and on
the east side of the town, to get a prospect of the river; but it was a
surprising sight to see the number of ships which lay in rows, two and
two, and in some places two or three such lines in the breadth of the
river, and this not only up to the town, between the houses which we
call Ratcliff and Redriff, which they name the Pool, but even down the
whole river, as far as the head of Long Reach, which is as far as the
hills give us leave to see it.

I cannot guess at the number of ships, but I think there must have been
several hundreds of sail; and I could not but applaud the contrivance,
for ten thousand people and more who attended ship affairs were
certainly sheltered here from the violence of the contagion, and lived
very safe and very easy.

I returned to my own dwelling very well satisfied with my day's journey,
and particularly with the poor man; also I rejoiced to see that such
little sanctuaries were provided for so many families on board in a time
of such desolation. I observed, also, that, as the violence of the
plague had increased, so the ships which had families on board removed
and went farther off, till, as I was told, some went quite away to sea,
and put into such harbors and safe roads[175] on the north coast as they
could best come at.

But it was also true, that all the people who thus left the land, and
lived on board the ships, were not entirely safe from the infection; for
many died, and were thrown overboard into the river, some in coffins,
and some, as I heard, without coffins, whose bodies were seen sometimes
to drive up and down with the tide in the river.

But I believe I may venture to say, that, in those ships which were thus
infected, it either happened where the people had recourse to them too
late, and did not fly to the ship till they had staid too long on shore,
and had the distemper upon them, though perhaps they might not perceive
it (and so the distemper did not come to them on board the ships, but
they really carried it with them), or it was in these ships where the
poor waterman said they had not had time to furnish themselves with
provisions, but were obliged to send often on shore to buy what they had
occasion for, or suffered boats to come to them from the shore; and so
the distemper was brought insensibly among them.

And here I cannot but take notice that the strange temper of the people
of London at that time contributed extremely to their own destruction.
The plague began, as I have observed, at the other end of the town
(namely, in Longacre, Drury Lane, etc.), and came on towards the city
very gradually and slowly. It was felt at first in December, then again
in February, then again in April (and always but a very little at a
time), then it stopped till May; and even the last week in May there
were but seventeen in all that end of the town. And all this while, even
so long as till there died about three thousand a week, yet had the
people in Redriff and in Wapping and Ratcliff, on both sides the river,
and almost all Southwark side, a mighty fancy that they should not be
visited, or at least that it would not be so violent among them. Some
people fancied the smell of the pitch and tar, and such other things, as
oil and resin and brimstone (which is much used by all trades relating
to shipping), would preserve them. Others argued it,[176] because
it[177] was in its extremest violence in Westminster and the parish of
St. Giles's and St. Andrew's, etc., and began to abate again before it
came among them, which was true, indeed, in part. For example:--

    Aug. 8 to Aug. 15,  St. Giles-in-the-Fields      242
       "         "      Cripplegate                  886
       "         "      Stepney                      197
       "         "      St. Mag.[178] Bermondsey      24
       "         "      Rotherhithe                    3
    Total this week                                4,030

    Aug. 15 to Aug. 22, St. Giles-in-the-Fields      175
       "         "      Cripplegate                  847
       "         "      Stepney                      273
       "         "      St. Mag. Bermondsey           36
       "         "      Rotherhithe                    2
    Total this week                                5,319

N.B.[179]--That it was observed that the numbers mentioned in Stepney
Parish at that time were generally all on that side where Stepney
Parish joined to Shoreditch, which we now call Spittlefields, where
the parish of Stepney comes up to the very wall of Shoreditch
churchyard. And the plague at this time was abated at St.
Giles-in-the-Fields, and raged most violently in Cripplegate,
Bishopsgate, and Shoreditch Parishes, but there were not ten people a
week that died of it in all that part of Stepney Parish which takes in
Limehouse, Ratcliff Highway, and which are now the parishes of
Shadwell and Wapping, even to St. Katherine's-by-the-Tower, till after
the whole month of August was expired; but they paid for it
afterwards, as I shall observe by and by.

This, I say, made the people of Redriff and Wapping, Ratcliff and
Limehouse, so secure, and flatter themselves so much with the plague's
going off without reaching them, that they took no care either to fly
into the country or shut themselves up: nay, so far were they from
stirring, that they rather received their friends and relations from the
city into their houses; and several from other places really took
sanctuary in that part of the town as a place of safety, and as a place
which they thought God would pass over, and not visit as the rest was
visited.

And this was the reason, that, when it came upon them, they were more
surprised, more unprovided, and more at a loss what to do, than they
were in other places; for when it came among them really and with
violence, as it did indeed in September and October, there was then no
stirring out into the country. Nobody would suffer a stranger to come
near them, no, nor near the towns where they dwelt; and, as I have been
told, several that wandered into the country on the Surrey side were
found starved to death in the woods and commons; that country being more
open and more woody than any other part so near London, especially about
Norwood and the parishes of Camberwell, Dulwich,[180] and Lusum, where
it seems nobody durst[181] relieve the poor distressed people for fear
of the infection.

This notion having, as I said, prevailed with the people in that part of
the town, was in part the occasion, as I said before, that they had
recourse to ships for their retreat; and where they did this early and
with prudence, furnishing themselves so with provisions so that they had
no need to go on shore for supplies, or suffer boats to come on board to
bring them,--I say, where they did so, they had certainly the safest
retreat of any people whatsoever. But the distress was such, that people
ran on board in their fright without bread to eat, and some into ships
that had no men on board to remove them farther off, or to take the boat
and go down the river to buy provisions, where it may be done safely;
and these often suffered, and were infected on board as much as on
shore.

As the richer sort got into ships, so the lower rank got into hoys,[182]
smacks, lighters, and fishing boats; and many, especially watermen, lay
in their boats: but those made sad work of it, especially the latter;
for going about for provision, and perhaps to get their subsistence, the
infection got in among them, and made a fearful havoc. Many of the
watermen died alone in their wherries as they rid at their roads, as
well above bridge[183] as below, and were not found sometimes till they
were not in condition for anybody to touch or come near them.

Indeed, the distress of the people at this seafaring end of the town was
very deplorable, and deserved the greatest commiseration. But, alas!
this was a time when every one's private safety lay so near them that
they had no room to pity the distresses of others; for every one had
death, as it were, at his door, and many even in their families, and
knew not what to do, or whither to fly.

This, I say, took away all compassion. Self-preservation, indeed,
appeared here to be the first law: for the children ran away from their
parents as they languished in the utmost distress; and in some places,
though not so frequent as the other, parents did the like to their
children. Nay, some dreadful examples there were, and particularly two
in one week, of distressed mothers, raving and distracted, killing
their own children; one whereof was not far off from where I dwelt, the
poor lunatic creature not living herself long enough to be sensible of
the sin of what she had done, much less to be punished for it.

It is not, indeed, to be wondered at; for the danger of immediate death
to ourselves took away all bowels of love, all concern for one another.
I speak in general: for there were many instances of immovable
affection, pity, and duty in many, and some that came to my knowledge,
that is to say, by hearsay; for I shall not take upon me to vouch the
truth of the particulars.

I could tell here dismal stories of living infants being found sucking
the breasts of their mothers or nurses after they have been dead of the
plague; of a mother in the parish where I lived, who, having a child
that was not well, sent for an apothecary to view the child, and when he
came, as the relation goes, was giving the child suck at her breast, and
to all appearance was herself very well; but, when the apothecary came
close to her, he saw the tokens upon that breast with which she was
suckling the child. He was surprised enough, to be sure; but, not
willing to fright the poor woman too much, he desired she would give the
child into his hand: so he takes the child, and, going to a cradle in
the room, lays it in, and, opening its clothes, found the tokens upon
the child too; and both died before he could get home to send a
preventive medicine to the father of the child, to whom he had told
their condition. Whether the child infected the nurse mother, or the
mother the child, was not certain, but the last most likely.

Likewise of a child brought home to the parents from a nurse that had
died of the plague; yet the tender mother would not refuse to take in
her child, and laid it in her bosom, by which she was infected and died,
with the child in her arms dead also.

It would make the hardest heart move at the instances that were
frequently found of tender mothers tending and watching with their dear
children, and even dying before them, and sometimes taking the distemper
from them, and dying, when the child for whom the affectionate heart
had been sacrificed has got over it and escaped.

I have heard also of some who, on the death of their relations, have
grown stupid with the insupportable sorrow; and of one in particular,
who was so absolutely overcome with the pressure upon his spirits, that
by degrees his head sunk into his body so between his shoulders, that
the crown of his head was very little seen above the bone of his
shoulders; and by degrees, losing both voice and sense, his face,
looking forward, lay against his collar bone, and could not be kept up
any otherwise, unless held up by the hands of other people. And the poor
man never came to himself again, but languished near a year in that
condition, and died. Nor was he ever once seen to lift up his eyes, or
to look upon any particular object.[184]

I cannot undertake to give any other than a summary of such passages as
these, because it was not possible to come at the particulars where
sometimes the whole families where such things happened were carried off
by the distemper; but there were innumerable cases of this kind which
presented[185] to the eye and the ear, even in passing along the
streets, as I have hinted above. Nor is it easy to give any story of
this or that family, which there was not divers parallel stories to be
met with of the same kind.

But as I am now talking of the time when the plague raged at the
easternmost parts of the town; how for a long time the people of those
parts had flattered themselves that they should escape, and how they
were surprised when it came upon them as it did (for indeed it came upon
them like an armed man when it did come),--I say this brings me back to
the three poor men who wandered from Wapping, not knowing whither to go
or what to do, and whom I mentioned before,--one a biscuit baker, one a
sailmaker, and the other a joiner, all of Wapping or thereabouts.

The sleepiness and security of that part, as I have observed, was such,
that they not only did not shift for themselves as others did, but they
boasted of being safe, and of safety being with them. And many people
fled out of the city, and out of the infected suburbs, to Wapping,
Ratcliff, Limehouse, Poplar, and such places, as to places of security.
And it is not at all unlikely that their doing this helped to bring the
plague that way faster than it might otherwise have come: for though I
am much for people's flying away, and emptying such a town as this upon
the first appearance of a like visitation, and that all people who have
any possible retreat should make use of it in time, and begone, yet I
must say, when all that will fly are gone, those that are left, and must
stand it, should stand stock-still where they are, and not shift from
one end of the town or one part of the town to the other; for that is
the bane and mischief of the whole, and they carry the plague from house
to house in their very clothes.

Wherefore were we ordered to kill all the dogs and cats, but because, as
they were domestic animals, and are apt to run from house to house and
from street to street, so they are capable of carrying the effluvia or
infectious steams of bodies infected, even in their furs and hair? And
therefore it was, that, in the beginning of the infection, an order was
published by the lord mayor and by the magistrates, according to the
advice of the physicians, that all the dogs and cats should be
immediately killed; and an officer was appointed for the execution.

It is incredible, if their account is to be depended upon, what a
prodigious number of those creatures were destroyed. I think they talked
of forty thousand dogs and five times as many cats; few houses being
without a cat, some having several, sometimes five or six in a house.
All possible endeavors were used also to destroy the mice and rats,
especially the latter, by laying rats-bane and other poisons for them;
and a prodigious multitude of them were also destroyed.

I often reflected upon the unprovided condition that the whole body of
the people were in at the first coming of this calamity upon them; and
how it was for want of timely entering into measures and managements, as
well public as private, that all the confusions that followed were
brought upon us, and that such a prodigious number of people sunk in
that disaster which, if proper steps had been taken, might, Providence
concurring, have been avoided, and which, if posterity think fit, they
may take a caution and warning from. But I shall come to this part
again.

I come back to my three men. Their story has a moral in every part of
it; and their whole conduct, and that of some whom they joined with, is
a pattern for all poor men to follow, or women either, if ever such a
time comes again: and if there was no other end in recording it, I think
this a very just one, whether my account be exactly according to fact or
no.

Two of them were said to be brothers, the one an old soldier, but now a
biscuit baker; the other a lame sailor, but now a sailmaker; the third a
joiner. Says John the biscuit baker, one day, to Thomas, his brother,
the sailmaker, "Brother Tom, what will become of us? The plague grows
hot in the city, and increases this way. What shall we do?"

"Truly," says Thomas, "I am at a great loss what to do; for I find if it
comes down into Wapping I shall be turned out of my lodging." And thus
they began to talk of it beforehand.

     _John._ Turned out of your lodging, Tom? If you are, I don't know
     who will take you in; for people are so afraid of one another now,
     there is no getting a lodging anywhere.

     _Tho._ Why, the people where I lodge are good civil people, and
     have kindness for me too; but they say I go abroad every day to my
     work, and it will be dangerous; and they talk of locking themselves
     up, and letting nobody come near them.

     _John._ Why, they are in the right, to be sure, if they resolve to
     venture staying in town.

     _Tho._ Nay, I might even resolve to stay within doors too; for,
     except a suit of sails that my master has in hand, and which I am
     just finishing, I am like to get no more work a great while.
     There's no trade stirs now, workmen and servants are turned off
