her from the injury to which her captors voluntarily exposed her. There
was at first no attempt at flight, although the Bruce's men carried all
before them; the men fell where they stood, till only five remained,
and these, after a moment's hesitation, turned and fled. A shrill cry
from Malcolm had turned the king's and Alan's attention in another
direction, and it was well they did so. Determined on foiling the
efforts of his foes, Donald MacAlpine, who was supposed to be among the
fallen, had stealthily approached the spot where the countess, overcome
with excessive faintness, still reclined, then noiselessly rising, his
sword was descending on her unguarded head, when Alan, aroused by
Malcolm's voice, turned upon him and dashed his weapon from his grasp,
at the same minute that the Bruce's sword pierced the traitor's heart:
he sprung in the air with a loud yell of agony, and fell, nearly
crushing the countess with his weight.

It was the voice of Alan which aroused that fainting heart. It was in
the bosom of her son those tearful eyes were hid, after one startled and
bewildered gaze on the countenance of her sovereign, who had been
leaning over her in unfeigned anxiety. A thicket of thorn, mingled with
crags, divided her from the unseemly signs of the late affray; but
though there was naught to renew alarm, it was with a cold shudder she
had clung to her son, as if even her firm, bold spirit had given way.
Gently, cheeringly the king addressed her, and she evidently struggled
to regain composure; but her powers of body were evidently so
prostrated, that her friends felt rest of some kind she must have, ere
she could regain sufficient strength to accompany them on their
wanderings. She had received three or four wounds in the melee, which
though slight, the loss of blood that had followed materially increased
her weakness, and the king anxiously summoned his friends around him to
deliberate on the best measures to pursue.

Amongst them were two of Sir Alan's retainers, old and faithful Scottish
men, coeval with his grandfather, the late Earl of Buchan. Devoted alike
to the countess, the king, and their country, they eagerly listened to
all that was passing, declaring that rather than leave the Lady Isabella
in a situation of such danger as the present, they would take it by
turns to carry her in their arms to the encampment. The king listened
with a benevolent smile.

"Is there no hut or house, or hunting-lodge to which we could convey
your lady," he asked, "where she might find quieter shelter and greater
rest than hitherto? An ye knew of such, it would be the wiser plan to
seek it at break of day."

A hunting-lodge, belonging to the Earls of Buchan, there was, or ought
to be, the old men said, near the head of the Tay, just at the entrance
of Athol Forest. It had not been used since their old master's days; he
had been very partial to it when a boy, and was continually there; it
had most likely fallen into decay from disuse, as they believed the
present earl did not even know of its existence, but that was all the
better, as it would be a still more safe and secure retreat for the
countess, and they were sure, when once out of the hollows and
intricacies of their present halting-place, they could easily discover
the path to it.

And how long did they think it would be, the king inquired, before their
lady could be taken to it? the sooner, they must perceive as well as
himself, the better for her comfort. He was relieved when they declared
that two days, or at the very utmost three, would bring them there, if,
as the old men earnestly entreated he would, they retraced their steps
to the encampment as soon as daylight was sufficiently strong for them
clearly to distinguish their path. This was unanimously resolved on, and
the few intervening hours were spent by the countess in calm repose.

Conscious that filial affection watched over her, the sleep of the
countess tranquillized her sufficiently to commence the return to the
encampment with less painful evidences of exhaustion. A rude litter
waited for her, in which she could recline when the pass allowed its
safe passage, and which could be easily borne by the bearers when the
intricacies of the path prevented all egress save by pedestrianism. It
had been hurriedly made by her devoted adherents, and soothed and
gratified, her usual energy seemed for the moment to return. By nine
o'clock forenoon all traces of the Bruce and his party had departed from
the glen, the last gleam of their armor was lost in the winding path,
and then it was that a man, who had lain concealed in a thicket from the
moment of the affray, hearing all that had passed, unseen himself, now
slowly, cautiously raised himself on his knees, gazed carefully round
him, then with a quicker but as silent motion sprung to his feet, and
raised his hands in an action of triumph.

"_He is_ amongst them, then," he muttered, "the traitor Bruce himself.
This is well. The countess, her son, find the would-be king--ha! ha! My
fortune's made!" and he bounded away in quite a contrary direction to
that taken by the Bruce.

The old retainers of Buchan were correct in their surmises. The evening
of the second day succeeding the event we have narrated brought them to
the hunting-lodge. It was indeed very old, and parts had fallen almost
to ruins, but there were still three or four rooms remaining, whose
compact walls and well-closed roofs rendered them a warm and welcome
refuge for the Countess of Buchan, whose strenuous exertions the two
preceding days had ended, as was expected, by exhaustion more painful
and overpowering than before.

The exertions of her friends--for the Bruce and his followers with one
consent had permitted their wanderings to be guided by the old
men--speedily rendered the apartments habitable. Large fires were soon
blazing on the spacious hearths, and ere night fell, all appearance of
damp and discomfort had vanished. The frugal supper was that night a
jovial meal; the very look of a cheerful blaze beneath a walled roof was
reviving to the wanderers; the jest passed round, the wine-cup sparkled
to the health of the countess, and many a fervent aspiration echoed
round for the speedy restoration of her strength; for truly she was the
beloved, the venerated of all, alike from her sovereign to his lowest
follower.

"Trust my experience, my young knight," had been the Bruce's address to
Alan ere they parted for the night. "A few days' complete repose will
quite restore your valued parent and my most honored friend. This
hunting-lodge shall be our place of rendezvous for a time, till she is
sufficiently restored to accompany us southward. You are satisfied, are
you not, with the diligence of our scouts?"

"Perfectly, your highness," was Alan's reply; for well-tried and
intelligent men had been sent in every direction to discover, if
possible, to what party of the enemy the captors of the Lady Isabella
belonged, and to note well the movements and appearance, not only of any
martial force, but of the country people themselves. They had executed
their mission as well as the intricate passes and concealed hollows of
the mountains permitted, and brought back the welcome intelligence, that
for miles round the country was perfectly clear, and to all appearance
peaceful. The hunting-lodge, too, was so completely hidden by dark woods
of pine and overhanging crags, that even had there been foes prowling
about the mountains, they might pass within twenty yards of its vicinity
and yet fail to discover it. The very path leading to the bottom of the
hollow in which it stood was concealed at the entrance by thick shrubs
and an arch of rock, which had either fallen naturally into that shape,
or been formed by the architects of the lodge. It seemed barely possible
that the retreat could be discovered, except by the basest treachery,
and therefore the king and Sir Alan felt perfectly at rest regarding the
safety of the countess, even though they could only leave with her a
guard of some twenty or thirty men.

So much was she refreshed the following morning, that the hopes of her
son brightened, and with that filial devotion so peculiarly his
characteristic, he easily obtained leave of absence from his sovereign,
to remain by the couch of his mother for at least that day, instead of
accompanying him, as was his wont, in the expeditions of the day. The
countess combated this decision, but in vain. Alan was resolved. He was
convinced, he said, her former capture, and all its ill consequences,
would not have taken place had he been by her side; and even were she
not now exposed to such indignity, she would be lonely and sad without
him, and stay, in consequence, he would. The king and his officers
approved of the youth's resolution, and reluctantly Isabella yielded.

About two hours before noon the Bruce and his companions departed,
desiring Sir Alan not to expect their return till near midnight, as they
intended penetrating a part of the country which had not yet been
explored; they might be a few hours sooner, but they scarcely expected
it. It was afterwards remembered that a peculiar expression of sadness
overclouded the countenance of the countess, as for a moment she fixed
her speaking eyes on the king's face when he cheerfully bade her
farewell, and said, in a low emphatic voice--

"Farewell, sire! It may be the hour of meeting is longer deferred than
we either of us now believe. Fain would I beseech your grace to grant me
one boon, make me but one promise ere you depart."

"Any boon, any promise that our faithful friend and subject can demand,
is granted ere 'tis asked," answered the king, without a moment's pause,
though startled alike at the expression of her features and the sadness
of her voice. "Gladly would we give any pledge that could in any way
bespeak our warm sense of thy true merit, lady, therefore speak, and
fear not."

"'Tis simply this, sire," she said, and her voice was still mournful,
despite her every effort to prevent its being so. "Should unforeseen
evil befall me, captivity, danger of death, or aught undreamed of now,
give me your royal word as a knight and king, that you will not peril
your sacred person, and with it the weal and liberty of our unhappy
country, for my sake, but leave me to my fate; 'tis a strange and
fanciful boon, yet, gracious sovereign, refuse it not. I mean not
treachery such as we have encountered, where your grace's noble
gallantry rescued me with little peril to yourself. No; I mean other and
greater danger; where I well know that rather than leave me exposed to
the wrath of my husband and Edward of England, you would risk your own
precious life, and with it the liberty of Scotland. Grant me this boon,
my liege, and perchance this heavy weight upon my spirit will pass and
leave me free."

"Nay, 'tis such a strange and unknightly promise, lady, how may I pledge
my word to its fulfilment?" answered Robert, gravely and sadly. "You bid
me pledge mine honor to a deed that will stain my name with an
everlasting infamy, that even the liberty of Scotland will not wash
away. How may I do this thing? You press me sorely, lady. Even for thee,
good and faithful as thou art, how may I hurt my knightly fame?"

"Sire, thou wilt not," she returned, still more entreatingly; "thy
brilliant fame, thy noble name, will never--can never, receive a stain.
I do but ask a promise whose fulfilment may never be demanded. I do but
bid thee remember thou art not only a knight, a noble, a king, but one
by whom the preservation, the independence of our country can alone be
achieved--one on whose safety and freedom depends the welfare of a
nation, the unchained glory of her sons. Were death thy portion,
Scotland lies a slave forever at the feet of England, and therefore is
it I do beseech thee, King of Scotland, make me this pledge. I know thy
noble spirit well, and I know thy too chivalric honor would blind thee
to a sense of danger, to a sense of country, duty, glory, of all save
the rescue of one who, though she be faithful to thee and to her
country, is but as a drop of water in the ocean, compared to other
claims. My liege, thy word is already in part pledged," she continued,
more proudly. "Any pledge or promise I might demand is granted ere it is
asked, your highness deigned to say; thou canst not retract it now."

"And wherefore shouldst thou, royal brother?" cheeringly interrupted
Alexander Bruce. "The Lady Isahella asks not unreasonably; she does but
suggest _what may be_, although that may be is, as we all know, next to
impossible, particularly now when nature has fortified this pleasant
lodge even as would a garrison of some hundred men. Come, be not so
churlish in thy favors, good my liege; give her the pledge she demands,
and be sure its fulfilment will never be required."

"Could I but think so," he replied, still gravely. "Lady, I do entreat
thee, tell me wherefore thou demandest this strange boon; fearest thou
evil--dreamest thou aught of danger hovering near? If so, as there is a
God in heaven, I will not go forth to-day!"

"Pardon me, gracious sovereign," answered Isabella, evasively; "I ask
it, because since the late adventure there has been a weight upon my
spirit as if I, impotent, of little consequence as I am, yet even I
might be the means of hurling down evil on thy head, and through thee on
Scotland; and, therefore, until thy promise to the effect I have
specified is given, I cannot, I will not rest--even though, as Lord
Alexander justly believes, its fulfilment will never be required. Evil
here, my liege, trust me, cannot be; therefore go forth in confidence. I
fear not to await your return, e'en should I linger here alone. Grant
but my boon."

"Nay, an it must be, lady, I promise all thou demandest," answered
Bruce, more cheerfully, for her words reassured him; "but, by mine
honor, thou hast asked neither well nor kindly. Remember, my pledge is
passed but for real danger, and that only for Scotland's sake, not for
mine own; and now farewell, lady. I trust, ere we meet again, these
depressing fancies will have left thee."

"They have well-nigh departed now, my liege; 'twas simply for thee and
Scotland these heavy bodings oppressed me. My son," she added, after a
brief pause, "I would your highness could prevail on him to accompany
you to-day. Wherefore should he stay with me?"

"Wherefore not rather, lady?" replied the king, smiling. "I may not
leave thee to thine own thoughts to weave fresh boons like to the last.
No, no! our young knight must guard thee till we meet again," and with
these words he departed. They did not, however, deter the countess from
resuming her persuasions to Alan to accompany his sovereign, but without
success. Isabella of Buchan had, however, in this instance departed from
her usual strict adherence to the truth, she did not feel so secure that
no evil would befall her in the absence of the Bruce, as she had
endeavored to make him believe.

Some words she had caught during her brief captivity caused her, she
scarcely knew why, to believe that the Earl of Buchan himself was in the
neighborhood; nay, that the very party which had captured her were
members of the army under his command. She had gathered, too, that it
was a very much larger force than the king's, and therefore it was that
she had made no objection to Robert's wish that she should rest some few
days in the hunting-lodge. She knew that, however her failing strength
might detain and harass their movements, Bruce and his followers would
never consent to leave her, unless, as in the present case, under a
comparatively comfortable roof and well-concealed shelter; and she knew,
too, that however she might struggle to accompany them in their
wanderings, the struggle in her present exhausted state would be utterly
in vain, and lingering for her might expose her sovereign to a renewal
of the ills with which he had already striven so nobly, and perchance to
yet more irreparable misfortune. The information of the scouts had
partially reassured her, at least to the fact that no immediate danger
was to be apprehended, and for a while she indulged the hope that safety
might be found in this hidden spot until the peril passed. She had full
confidence in the fidelity of the old retainers who had guided them to
the spot, and sought to feel satisfied that its vicinity was unknown to
the earl, her husband; but, whether from the restlessness of a slight
degree of fever, or from that nervous state of mind attendant on
worn-out strength, ere the Bruce departed the same foreboding came on
her again, and all her desire was the absence of her sovereign and his
followers, to have some hold upon his almost too exalted sense of
chivalry, which would prevent any rash act of daring on his part; and
this, as we have seen, she obtained.

Could she but have prevailed on her son to accompany them, she would
calmly and resignedly have awaited her fate, whatever it might be; but
the horror of beholding him a prisoner in the hands of his father--that
father perhaps so enraged at the boy's daring opposition to his will and
political opinions, that he would give him up at once to the wrath of
Edward--was a picture of anguish from which her mind revolted in such
intense suffering, she could not rest. She strove with the fancy; she
sought to rouse every energy, to feel secure in her present
resting-place. But who can resist the influence of feelings such as
these? What mother's heart cannot enter into the emotions of Isabella of
Buchan, as she gazed on her noble boy, improved as he was in manliness
and beauty, and with the dread anticipation of evil, believing only
absence could protect him; that perchance the very love which kept him
by her side would expose him to danger, imprisonment, and death? She did
not speak her fears, but Alan vainly sought to soothe that unwonted
restlessness. She had endeavored to secure the Bruce's safety by the aid
of Malcolm, the young page, by whose instrumentality she had been both
captured and released. Taking advantage of Sir Alan's absence, she had
called the boy to her side, and made him promise that, at the first
manifest sign of danger, he would make his escape, which, by his extreme
agility and address, would easily be achieved, seek the king, and give
him exact information of the numbers, strength, and situation of the
foes, reminding him, at the same time, of his solemn pledge. She made
him promise the profoundest secrecy, and adjured him at all hazards to
save the king.

The boy, affected by the solemnity of her manner, promised faithfully to
observe her minutest sign, and on the re-entrance of Sir Alan departed,
to marvel wherefore his lady should so have spoken, and examine the
localities around, as to the best means of concealment and escape.

The hours waned, and night fell, as is usual in October, some five hours
after noon, the gloom perhaps greatly increased by the deep shades in
which their place of concealment lay. Sir Alan roused the fire to a
cheerful blaze, and lighting a torch of pine-wood, placed it in an iron
bracket projecting from the wall, and amused himself by polishing his
arms, and talking in that joyous tone his mother so loved, on every
subject that his affection fancied might interest and amuse her. He was
wholly unarmed, except his sword, which, secured to his waist by a
crimson sash, he never laid aside; and fair and graceful to his mother's
eye did he look in his simple doublet of Lincoln-green, cut and slashed
with ruby velvet, his dark curls clustering round his bare throat, and
his bright face beaming in all the animation of youth and health,
spiritualized by the deeper feelings of his soul; and she, too, was
still beautiful, though her frame was slighter, her features more
attenuated than when we first beheld her. He had insisted on her
reclining on the couch, and drawn from her otherwise painful thoughts by
his animated sallies, smiles circled her pale lip, and her sorrows were
a while forgotten.

An hour, perhaps rather more, elapsed, and found the mother and son
still as we have described, There had been no sound without, but about
that period many heavy footsteps might have been distinguished,
cautiously, it seemed, advancing. Alan started up and listened; the
impatient neigh of a charger was heard, and then voices suppressed, yet,
as he fancied, familiar.

"King Robert returned already!" he exclaimed; "they must have had an
unusually successful chase. I must e'en seek them and inquire."

"Alan! my child!" He started at the voice, it was so unlike his
mother's. She had risen and flung her arm around him with a pressure so
convulsive, he looked at her with terror. There was no time to answer; a
sudden noise usurped the place of the previous stillness--a struggle--a
heavy fall; the door was flung rudely open, and an armed man stood upon
the threshold, his vizor up, but even had it not been, the heart of the
countess too truly told her she gazed upon her husband!




CHAPTER XIV.


A brief pause followed the entrance of this unexpected visitor. Standing
upon the threshold, his dark brow knit, his eyes fixed on his prisoners,
the Earl of Buchan stood a few minutes immovable. Alan saw but a
mail-clad warrior, more fierce and brutal in appearance than the
generality of their foes, and felt, with all that heart-sinking
despondency natural to youth, that they were betrayed, that resistance
was in vain, for heavier and louder grew the tramp of horse and man, and
the narrow passage, discernible through the open door, was filled with
steel-clad forms, their drawn swords glancing in the torchlight, their
dark brows gleaming in ill-concealed triumph. Alan was still a boy in
years, despite his experience as a warrior, and in the first agony of
this discovery, the first dream of chains and captivity, when his young
spirit revelled in the thought of freedom, and joyed as a bird in the
fresh air of mount and stream, weaving bright hopes, not exile or
wandering could remove, his impulse had been to dash his useless sword
in anguish to the earth, and weep; but the sight of his mother checked
that internal weakness. He felt her convulsive clasp; he beheld the
expression on her features,--how unlike their wont--terror, suffering,
whose _entire_ cause he vainly endeavored to define, and he roused
himself for her. And she, did she see more than her son? She _knew_ that
face, and as she gazed, she felt hope had departed; she beheld naught
but a long, endless vista of anguish; yet she felt not for herself, she
thought but of her child. And the earl, can we define his exulting
mood?--it was the malice, the triumph of a fiend.

"Who and what art thou?" demanded Alan, fiercely, laying his right hand
on his sword, and with the left firmly clasping his mother's waist.
"What bold knight and honorable chevalier art thou, thus seeking by
stealth the retreat of a wanderer, and overpowering by numbers and
treachery men, who on the field thou and such as thou had never dared to
meet?"

The earl laughed; that bitter, biting laugh of contempt and triumph so
difficult to bear.

"Thou hast a worthy tongue, my pretty springald," said he; "canst thou
use thy sword as bravely? Who and what am I? ask of the lady thou hast
so caressingly encircled with thine arm, perchance she can give thee
information."

Alan started, a cold thrill passed through his frame, as the real cause
of his mother's terror flashed on his mind; her lips, parched and
quivering, parted as to speak, but there was no sound.

"Mother," he said, "mother, speak to thy son. Why, why art thou thus?
it is not the dread of imprisonment, of death. No, no; they have no
terrors for such as thee. Who is this man?"

Engrossed in his own agitation, Alan had not heard the muttered
exclamation which burst from Buchan's lips with his first words, for
great was the earl's surprise as he looked on his son; the impression he
was still a child had remained on his mind despite all reports to the
contrary, but no softer feeling obtained dominion.

"Who and what am I?" he continued, after a brief pause. "Wouldst thou
know, Alan of Buchan? Even a faithful knight, soldier, and subject of
his Royal Highness Edward, king of England and Scotland, and
consequently thy foe; the insulted and dishonored husband of the woman
thou callest mother, and consequently thy father, young man. Ha! have I
spoken home? Thy sword, thy sword; acknowledge thy disloyalty to thy
father and king, and for thee all may yet be well."

"Never!" answered Alan, proudly, the earl's concluding words rousing the
spirit which the knowledge of beholding his father and the emotion of
his mother seemed to have crushed. "Never, Lord of Buchan! for father I
cannot call thee. Thou mayest force me to resign my sword, thou mayest
bring me to the block, but acknowledge allegiance to a foreign tyrant,
who hath no claims on Scotland or her sons, save those of hate and
detestation, that thou canst never do, even if thy sword be pointed at
my heart."

"Boy!" burst from the earl's lips, in accents of irrepressible rage, but
he checked himself; "thou hast learned a goodly lesson of disobedience
and daring, of a truth, and I should tender grateful thanks to thy most
worthy, most efficient and virtuous teacher," he added, in his own
bitterly sarcastic tone. "The Lady Isabella deems, perchance, she has
done her duty to her husband in placing a crown on the head of his
hereditary and hated foe, and leading his son in the same path of
rebellion and disloyalty, and giving his service to the murderer of his
kinsman."

"Earl of Buchan, I have done my duty alike to my country and my son,"
replied the countess, her high spirit roused by the taunts of her
husband. "According to the dictates of my conscience, mine honor as a
Scottish woman, the mother of a Scottish warrior, I have done my duty,
and neither imprisonment, nor torture, nor death will bid me retract
those principles, or waver in my acknowledgment of Scotland and her
king. Pardon me, my lord; but there is no rebellion in resisting the
infringement of a tyrant, no disloyalty in raising the standard against
Edward, for there is no treason when there is no lawful authority; and
by what right is Edward of England king of Scotland? Lord of Buchan, I
have done my duty. As my father taught _me_ I have taught my child!"

"Regarding, of course, madam, all which that child's father would have
taught him, particularly that most Christian virtue returning good for
evil, as in the fact of revenging the death of a kinsman with the gift
of a crown. Oh! thou hast done well, most intrinsically well."

"I own no relationship with a traitor," burst impetuously from Alan.
"Sir John Comyn was honored in his death, for the sword of the Bruce was
too worthy a weapon for the black heart of a traitor. Lord of Buchan, we
are in thy power, it is enough. Hadst thou wished thy son to imbibe thy
peculiar principles, to forget his country and her lights, it had been
better perchance hadst thou remembered thou hadst a child--a son. Had
the duty of a father been performed, perchance I had not now forgotten
mine as a son! As it is, we stand as strangers and as foes. Against thee
in truth I will not raise my sword; but further, we are severed and
forever!" He crossed his arms proudly on his bosom, and returned the
dark, scowling glance of his father with a flashing eye, and a mien as
firm and nobler than his own.

"It is well, young man; I thank you for my freedom," returned the earl,
between his teeth. "As my son, I might stand between thee and Edward's
wrath; as a stranger and my foe, why, whatever his sentence be--the axe
and block without doubt--let it work, it will move me little."

"Heed not his rash words, in mercy, heed them not!" exclaimed the
countess, her voice of agony contrasting strangely with its former proud
reserve. "Neglected, forgotten him as thou hast, yet, Lord of Buchan, he
is still thy son. Oh, in mercy, expose him not to the deadly wrath of
Edward! thou canst save him, thou canst give him freedom. It is I--I who
am the attainted traitor, not my child. Give me up to Edward, and he
will heed not, ask not for thy son. It is I who have offended him and
thee, not my child. Art thou not a Scottish noble, descendant of a
house as purely loyal and devoted to their country as mine own--art thou
not indeed this man, and yet hath Edward, the deadly foe of thy race,
thy land, thy countrymen, more exalted claims than thine own blood? No,
no, it cannot be! thou wilt relent, thou wilt have mercy; let him be but
free, and do with me even what thou wilt!"

"Free! go free!" repeated the earl, with a hoarse laugh, ere Alan could
interfere. "Let him go free, forsooth, when he tells me he is my foe,
and will go hence and join my bitterest enemies the moment he is free.
Go free! and who art thou who askest this boon? Hast thou such claims
