call you so in private."

Colbert raised his head as if to read, or to try to read, upon Vanel's
face how much actual sincerity entered into this protestation of
devotion. But the counselor knew perfectly well how to sustain the
weight of his look, even were it armed with the full authority of the
title he had conferred. Colbert sighed; he could not read anything in
Vanel's face, and Vanel might possibly be honest in his profession, but
Colbert recollected that this man, inferior to himself in every other
respect, was actually his superior through the fact of his having a wife
unfaithful to him. At the moment he was pitying this man's lot, Vanel
coldly drew from his pocket a perfumed letter, sealed with Spanish wax,
and held it toward Colbert saying, "A letter from my wife, monseigneur."

Colbert coughed, took, opened, and read the letter, and then put it
carefully away in his pocket, while Vanel turned over the leaves of the
papers he had brought with him with an unmoved and unconcerned air.
"Vanel," he said suddenly to his protege, "you are a hard-working man,
I know; would twelve hours' daily labor frighten you?"

"I work fifteen hours every day."

"Impossible. A counselor need not work more than three hours a day in
the parliament."

"Oh! I am working up some returns for a friend of mine in the department
of accounts, and, as I still have time left on my hands, I am studying
Hebrew."

"Your reputation stands high in the parliament, Vanel."

"I believe so, monseigneur."

"You must not grow rusty in your post of counselor."

"What must I do to avoid it?"

"Purchase a high place. Mean and low ambitions are very difficult to
satisfy."

"Small purses are the most difficult to fill, monseigneur."

"What post have you in view?" said Colbert.

"I see none--not one."

"There is one, certainly, but one need be almost the king himself to be
able to buy it without inconvenience! and the king will not be inclined,
I suppose, to purchase the post of procureur-general."

At these words, Vanel fixed his at once humble and dull look upon
Colbert, who could hardly tell whether Vanel had comprehended him or
not. "Why do you speak to me, monseigneur," said Vanel, "of the post of
procureur-general to the parliament; I know no other post than the one
M. Fouquet fills."

"Exactly so, my dear counselor."

"You are not over fastidious, monseigneur; but before the post can be
bought, it must be offered for sale."

"I believe, Monsieur Vanel, that it will be for sale before long."

"For sale! What, M. Fouquet's post of procureur-general?"

"So it is said."

"The post which renders him so perfectly inviolable, for sale! Oh! oh!"
said Vanel, beginning to laugh.

"Would you be afraid, then, of the post?" said Colbert, gravely.

"Afraid! no, but--"

"Nor desirous of obtaining it?"

"You are laughing at me, monseigneur," replied Vanel; "is it likely that
a counselor of the parliament would not be desirous of becoming
procureur-general?"

"Well, Monsieur Vanel, since I tell you that the post, as report goes,
will be shortly for sale--"

"I cannot help repeating, monseigneur, that it is impossible; a man
never throws away the buckler, behind which he maintains his honor, his
fortune, his very life."

"There are certain men mad enough, Vanel, to fancy themselves out of the
reach of all mischances."

"Yes, monseigneur; but such men never commit their mad acts for the
advantage of the poor Vanels of the world."

"Why not?"

"For the very reason that those Vanels are poor."

"It is true that M. Fouquet's post might cost a good round sum. What
would you bid for it, Monsieur Vanel?"

"Everything I am worth."

"Which means?"

"Three or four hundred thousand francs."

"And the post is worth--"

"A million and a half at the very lowest. I know persons who have
offered one million seven hundred thousand francs, without being able to
persuade M. Fouquet to sell. Besides, supposing it were to happen that
M. Fouquet wished to sell, which I do not believe, in spite of what I
have been told--"

"Ah! you have heard something about it, then; who told you?"

"M. de Gourville, M. Pellisson, and others."

"Very good; if, therefore, M. Fouquet did wish to sell--"

"I could not buy it just yet, since the surintendant will only sell for
ready money, and no one has a million and a half to throw down at once."

Colbert suddenly interrupted the counselor by an imperious gesture; he
had begun to meditate. Observing his superior's serious attitude, and
his perseverance in continuing the conversation on this subject, Vanel
awaited the solution without venturing to precipitate it. "Explain fully
to me the privileges which this post confers."

"The right of impeaching every French subject who is not a prince of the
blood; the right of quashing all proceedings taken against any Frenchman
who is neither king nor prince. The procureur-general is the king's
right hand to punish the guilty; he is the means whereby also he can
evade the administration of justice. M. Fouquet, therefore, will be
able, by stirring up the parliaments, to maintain himself even against
the king; and the king could as easily, by humoring M. Fouquet, get his
edicts registered in spite of every opposition and objection. The
procureur-generalship can be made a very useful or very dangerous
instrument."

"Vanel, would you like to be procureur-general?" said Colbert, suddenly,
softening both his look and his voice.

"I!" exclaimed the latter; "I have already had the honor to represent to
you that I want about eleven hundred thousand francs to make up the
amount."

"Borrow that sum from your friends."

"I have no friends richer than myself."

"You are an honest and honorable man, Vanel."

"Ah! monseigneur, if the world were to think as you do!"

"I think so, and that is quite enough; and if it should be needed, I
will be your security."

"Do you forget the proverb, monseigneur?"

"What is that?"

"That he who becomes responsible for another has to pay for his
responsibility."

"Let that make no difference."

Vanel rose, quite bewildered by this offer, which had been so suddenly
and unexpectedly made to him. "You are not trifling with me,
monseigneur?" he said.

"Stay; you say that M. Gourville has spoken to you about M. Fouquet's
post?"

"Yes, and M. Pellisson also."

"Officially so, or only by their own suggestion?"

"These were their very words: 'These parliamentary people are as proud
as they are wealthy; they ought to club together two or three millions
among themselves, to present to their protector and great luminary, M.
Fouquet.'"

"And what did you reply?"

"I said that, for my own part, I would give ten thousand francs if
necessary."

"Ah! you like M. Fouquet, then!" exclaimed Colbert, with a look full of
hatred.

"No; but M. Fouquet is our chief. He is in debt--is on the high road to
ruin; and we ought to save the honor of the body of which we are
members."

"Exactly; and that explains why M. Fouquet will be always safe and
sound, so long as he occupies his present post," replied Colbert.

"Thereupon," said Vanel, "M. Gourville added, 'If we were to do anything
out of charity to M. Fouquet, it could not be otherwise than most
humiliating to him: and he would be sure to refuse it. Let the
parliament subscribe among themselves to purchase, in a proper manner,
the post of procureur-general; in that case all would go on well; the
honor of our body would be saved, and M. Fouquet's pride spared.'"

"That is an opening."

"I considered it so, monseigneur."

"Well, Monsieur Vanel, you will go at once, and find out either M.
Gourville or M. Pellisson. Do you know any other friend of M. Fouquet?"

"I know M. de la Fontaine very well."

"La Fontaine, the rhymester?"

"Yes, he used to write verses to my wife, when M. Fouquet was one of our
friends."

"Go to him, then, and try and procure an interview with the
surintendant."

"Willingly--but the sum itself?"

"On the day and hour you arrange to settle the matter, Monsieur Vanel,
you shall be supplied with the money; so do not make yourself uneasy on
that account."

"Monseigneur, such munificence! You eclipse kings even--you surpass M.
Fouquet himself."

"Stay a moment--do not let us mistake each other. I do not make you a
present of fourteen hundred thousand francs, Monsieur Vanel; for I have
children to provide for--but I will lend you that sum."

"Ask whatever interest, whatever security you please, monseigneur; I am
quite ready. And when all your requisitions are satisfied, I will still
repeat, that you surpass kings and M. Fouquet in munificence. What
conditions do you impose?"

"The repayment in eight years, and a mortgage upon the appointment
itself."

"Certainly. Is that all?"

"Wait a moment. I reserve to myself the right of purchasing the post
from you at one hundred and fifty thousand francs profit for yourself,
if, in your mode of filling the office, you do not follow out a line of
conduct in conformity with the interests of the king and with my
projects."

"Ah! ah!" said Vanel, in a slightly altered tone.

"Is there anything in that which can possibly be objectionable to you,
Monsieur Vanel?" said Colbert, coldly.

"Oh! no, no!" replied Vanel, quickly.

"Very good. We will sign an agreement to that effect whenever you like.
And now, go as quickly as you can to M. Fouquet's friends, obtain an
interview with the surintendant; do not be too difficult in making
whatever concessions may be required of you; and when once the
arrangements are all made--"

"I will press him to sign."

"Be most careful to do nothing of the kind; do not speak of signatures
with M. Fouquet, nor of deeds, nor even ask him to pass his word.
Understand this, otherwise you will lose everything. All you have to do
is to get M. Fouquet to give you his hand on the matter. Go, go."




CHAPTER L.

AN INTERVIEW WITH THE QUEEN-MOTHER.


The queen-mother was in her bedroom at the Palais Royal, with Madame de
Motteville and the Senora Molina. The king, who had been impatiently
expected the whole day, had not made his appearance; and the queen, who
had grown quite impatient, had often sent to inquire about him. The
whole atmosphere of the court seemed to indicate an approaching storm;
the courtiers and the ladies of the court avoided meeting in the
antechambers and the corridors, in order not to converse on compromising
subjects. Monsieur had joined the king early in the morning for a
hunting-party; Madame remained in her own apartments, cool and distant
to every one: and the queen-mother, after she had said her prayers in
Latin, talked of domestic matters with her two friends, in pure
Castilian. Madame de Motteville, who understood the language perfectly,
answered her in French. When the three ladies had exhausted every form
of dissimulation and politeness, as a circuitous mode of expressing
that the king's conduct was making the queen and the queen-mother pine
away from sheer grief and vexation, and when, in the most guarded and
polished phrases, they had fulminated every variety of imprecation
against Mademoiselle de la Valliere, the queen-mother terminated her
attack by an exclamation indicative of her own reflections and
character.

"Estos hijos!" said she to Molina--which means, "These children!" words
full of meaning in a mother's lips--words full of terrible significance
in the mouth of a queen who, like Anne of Austria, hid many curious and
dark secrets in her soul.

"Yes," said Molina, "these children! for whom every mother becomes a
sacrifice."

"Yes," replied the queen; "a mother has sacrificed everything,
certainly." She did not finish her phrase; for she fancied, when she
raised her eyes toward the full-length portrait of the pale Louis XIII.,
that light had once more flashed from her husband's dull eyes, and that
his nostrils were inflated by wrath. The portrait seemed animated by a
living expression--speak it did not, but it seemed to menace. A profound
silence succeeded the queen's last remark. La Molina began to turn over
the ribbons and lace of a large work-table. Madame de Motteville,
surprised at the look of mutual intelligence which had been exchanged
between the confidante and her mistress, cast down her eyes, like a
discreet woman, and, pretending to be observant of nothing that was
passing, listened with the utmost attention instead. She heard nothing,
however, but a very significant "hum" on the part of the Spanish duenna,
who was the perfect representation of extreme caution--and a profound
sigh on that of the queen. She looked up immediately.

"You are suffering?" she said.

"No, Motteville, no; why do you say that?"

"Your majesty almost groaned just now."

"You are right; I did sigh, in truth."

"Monsieur Vallot is not far off; I believe he is in Madame's apartment."

"Why is he with Madame?"

"Madame is troubled with nervous attacks."

"A very fine disorder, indeed! There is little good in M. Vallot being
there, when another physician instead would cure Madame."

Madame de Motteville looked up with an air of great surprise, as she
replied, "Another doctor instead of M. Vallot?--whom do you mean?"

"Occupation, Motteville, occupation. If any one is really ill it is my
poor daughter."

"And your majesty, too."

"Less so this evening, though."

"Do not believe that too confidently, madame," said De Motteville. And,
as if to justify her caution, a sharp acute pain seized the queen, who
turned deadly pale, and threw herself back in the chair, with every
symptom of a sudden fainting fit. Molina ran to a richly-gilded
tortoise-shell cabinet, from which she took a large rock-crystal
smelling-bottle, and immediately held it to the queen's nostrils, who
inhaled it wildly for a few minutes, and murmured:

"It will hasten my death--but Heaven's will be done."

"Your majesty's death is not so near at hand," added Molina, replacing
the smelling-bottle in the cabinet.

"Does your majesty feel better now?" inquired Madame de Motteville.

"Much better," returned the queen, placing her finger on her lips, to
impose silence on her favorite.

"It is very strange," remarked Madame de Motteville, after a pause.

"What is strange?" said the queen.

"Does your majesty remember the day when this pain attacked you for the
first time?"

"I remember only that it was a grievously sad day for me, Motteville."

"But your majesty had not always regarded that day a sad one."

"Why?"

"Because three and twenty years before, on that very day, his present
majesty, your own glorious son, was born at the very same hour."

The queen uttered a loud cry, buried her face in her hands, and seemed
utterly lost for some minutes; but whether from recollections which
arose in her mind, or from reflection, or even from sheer pain, it was
of course uncertain. La Molina darted almost a furious look at Madame de
Motteville, which was so full of bitter reproach, that the poor woman,
perfectly ignorant of its meaning, was, in her own exculpation, on the
point of asking an explanation of its meaning; when, suddenly Anne of
Austria arose and said, "Yes, the 5th of September; my sorrow began on
the 5th of September. The greatest joy, one day; the deepest sorrow the
next:--the sorrow," she added, "the bitter expiation of a too excessive
joy."

And, from that moment, Anne of Austria, whose memory and reason seemed
to have become entirely suspended for a time, remained impenetrable,
with vacant look, mind almost wandering, and hands hanging heavily down,
as if life had almost departed.

"We must put her to bed," said La Molina.

"Presently, Molina."

"Let us leave the queen alone," added the Spanish attendant.

Madame de Motteville rose; large and glistening tears were fast rolling
down the queen's pallid face; and Molina, having observed this sign of
weakness, fixed her black vigilant eyes upon her.

"Yes, yes," replied the queen. "Leave us, Motteville; go."

The word "us," produced a disagreeable effect upon the ears of the
French favorite; for it signified that an interchange of secrets, or of
revelations of the past, was about to be made, and that one person was
_de trop_ in the conversation which seemed likely to take place.

"Will Molina, alone, be sufficient for your majesty to-night?" inquired
the Frenchwoman.

"Yes," replied the queen. Madame de Motteville bowed in submission, and
was about to withdraw, when, suddenly, an old female attendant, dressed
as if she had belonged to the Spanish court of the year 1620, opened
the door and surprised the queen in her tears. "The remedy!" she cried,
delightedly, to the queen, as she unceremoniously approached the group.

"What remedy?" said Anne of Austria.

"For your majesty's sufferings," the former replied.

"Who brings it?" asked Madame de Motteville, eagerly; "Monsieur Vallot?"

"No; a lady from Flanders."

"From Flanders. Is she Spanish?" inquired the queen.

"I don't know."

"Who sent her?"

"M. Colbert."

"Her name?"

"She did not mention it."

"Her position in life?"

"She will answer that herself."

"Her face?"

"She is masked."

"Go, Molina; go and see!" cried the queen.

"It is needless," suddenly replied a voice, at once firm and gentle in
its tone, which proceeded from the other side of the tapestry hangings;
a voice which made the attendants start and the queen tremble
excessively. At the same moment a masked female appeared through the
hangings, and, before the queen could speak a syllable, she added, "I am
connected with the order of the Beguines of Bruges, and do, indeed,
bring with me the remedy which is certain to effect a cure of your
majesty's complaint." No one uttered a sound, and the Beguine did not
move a step.

"Speak," said the queen.

"I will, when we are alone," was the answer.

Anne of Austria looked at her attendants, who immediately withdrew. The
Beguine, thereupon, advanced a few steps toward the queen, and bowed
reverently before her. The queen gazed with increasing mistrust at this
woman, who, in her turn, fixed a pair of brilliant eyes upon her,
through her mask.

"The queen of France must, indeed, be very ill," said Anne of Austria,
"if it is known at the Beguinage of Bruges that she stands in need of
being cured."

"Your majesty is not irremediably ill."

"But, tell me, how do you happen to know I am suffering?"

"Your majesty has friends in Flanders."

"Since these friends, then, have sent you, mention their names."

"Impossible, madame, since your majesty's memory has not been awakened
by your heart."

Anne of Austria looked up, endeavoring to discover through the
concealment of the mask, and through her mysterious language, the name
of her companion, who expressed herself with such familiarity and
freedom; then, suddenly, wearied by a curiosity which wounded every
feeling of pride in her nature, she said, "You are ignorant, perhaps,
that royal personages are never spoken to with the face masked."

"Deign to excuse me, madame," replied the Beguine, humbly.

"I cannot excuse you. I may possibly forgive you, if you throw your mask
aside."

"I have made a vow, madame, to attend and aid all afflicted or suffering
persons, without ever permitting them to behold my face. I might have
been able to administer some relief to your body and to your mind, too;
but, since your majesty forbids me, I will take my leave. Adieu, madame,
adieu."

These words were uttered with a harmony of tone and respect of manner
that deprived the queen of all her anger and suspicion, but did not
remove her feeling of curiosity. "You are right," she said; "it ill
becomes those who are suffering to reject the means of relief which
Heaven sends them. Speak, then; and may you, indeed, be able, as you
assert you can, to administer relief to my body--"

"Let us first speak a little of the mind, if you please," said the
Beguine; "of the mind, which, I am sure, must also suffer."

"My mind?"

"There are cancers so insidious in their nature that their very
pulsation is invisible. Such cancers, madame, leave the ivory whiteness
of the skin untouched, and marble not the firm, fair flesh, with their
blue tints; the physician who bends over the patient's chest hears not,
though he listens, the insatiable teeth of the disease grinding its
onward progress through the muscles, as the blood flows freely on; the
knife has never been able to destroy, and rarely even, temporarily, to
disarm the rage of these mortal scourges; their home is in the mind,
which they corrupt; they fill the whole heart until it breaks. Such,
madame, are the cancers fatal to queens; are you, too, free from their
scourge?"

Anne slowly raised her arm, dazzling in its perfect whiteness, and pure
in its rounded outlines, as it was in the time of her earlier days.

"The evils to which you allude," she said, "are the condition of the
lives of the high in rank upon earth, to whom Heaven has imparted mind.
When those evils become too heavy to be borne, Heaven lightens their
burden by penitence and confession. There we lay down our burden, and
the secrets which oppress us. But, forget not, that the same gracious
Heaven, in its mercy, apportions to their trials the strength of the
feeble creatures of its hand; and my strength has enabled me to bear my
burden. For the secrets of others, the silence of Heaven is more than
sufficient; for my own secrets, that of my confessor is just enough."

"You are as courageous, madame, I see, as ever, against your enemies.
You do not acknowledge your confidence in your friends."

"Queens have no friends; if you have nothing further to say to me--if
you feel yourself inspired by Heaven as a prophetess--leave me, I pray,
for I dread the future."

"I should have supposed," said the Beguine, resolutely, "that you would
rather have dreaded the past."

Hardly had these words escaped her lips, than the queen rose up proudly.
"Speak," she cried, in a short, imperious tone of voice, "explain
yourself briefly, quickly, entirely; or, if not--"

"Nay, do not threaten me, your majesty," said the Beguine, gently; "I
came to you full of compassion and respect. I came here on the part of a
friend."

"Prove that to me! Comfort instead of irritating me."

"Easily enough: and your majesty will see who is friendly to you. What
misfortune has happened to your majesty during these three and twenty
years past--"

"Serious misfortunes, indeed; have I not lost the king?"

"I speak not of misfortunes of that kind. I wish to ask you, if since
the birth of the king, any indiscretion on a friend's part has caused
your majesty the slightest serious anxiety or distress?"

"I do not understand you," replied the queen, setting her teeth hard
together in order to conceal her emotion.

"I will make myself understood, then. Your majesty remembers that the
king was born on the 5th of September, 1633, at a quarter-past eleven
o'clock."

"Yes," stammered out the queen.

"At half-past twelve," continued the Beguine, "the dauphin, who had been
baptized by Monseigneur de Meaux in the king's and in your own presence,
was acknowledged as the heir of the crown of France. The king then went
to the chapel of the old Chateau de Saint-Germain to hear the _Te Deum_
chanted."

"Quite true, quite true," murmured the queen.

"Your majesty's confinement took place in the presence of Monsieur, his
majesty's late uncle, of the princes, and of the ladies attached to the
court. The king's physician, Bovard, and Honore, the surgeon, were
stationed in the antechamber; your majesty slept from three o'clock
until seven, I believe!"

"Yes, yes: but you tell me no more than every one else knows as well as
you and myself."

"I am now, madame, approaching that which very few persons are
acquainted with. Very few persons, did I say, alas! I might almost say
two only, for formerly there were but five in all, and for many years
past the secret has been well preserved by the deaths of the principal
participators in it. The late king sleeps now with his ancestors;
Peronne, the midwife, soon followed him; Laporte is already forgotten."

The queen opened her lips as though about to reply; she felt, beneath
her icy hand, with which she kept her face half concealed, the beads of
perspiration upon her brow.

"It was eight o'clock," pursued the Beguine; "the king was seated at
supper, full of joy and happiness; around him on all sides arose wild
cries of delight and drinking of healths; the people cheered beneath the
balconies; the Swiss guards, the musketeers, and the royal guards
wandered through the city, borne about in triumph by the drunken
students. Those boisterous sounds of the general joy disturbed the
dauphin, the future king of France, who was quietly lying in the arms of
Madame de Hausac, his nurse, and whose eyes, as he opened them and
stared about, might have observed two crowns at the foot of his cradle.
Suddenly your majesty uttered a piercing cry, and Dame Peronne
immediately flew to your bedside. The doctors were dining in a room at
some distance from your chamber; the palace, deserted from the frequency
of the irruptions made into it, was without either sentinels or guards.
The midwife, having questioned and examined your majesty, gave a sudden
exclamation, as if in wild astonishment, and taking you in her arms,
bewildered almost out of her senses from sheer distress of mind,
dispatched Laporte to inform the king that her majesty the queen-mother
wished to see him in her room. Laporte, you are aware, madame, was a man
of the most admirable calmness and presence of mind. He did not approach
the king as if he were the bearer of alarming intelligence and wished to
inspire the terror which he himself experienced; besides, it was not a
very terrifying intelligence which awaited the king. Therefore, Laporte
appeared with a smile upon his lips, and approached the king's chair,
saying to him, 'Sire, the queen is very happy, and would be still more
so to see your majesty.' On that day, Louis XIII. would have given his
crown away to the veriest beggar for a 'God bless you.' Animated,
light-hearted, and full of gayety, the king rose from the table, and
said to those around him, in a tone that Henry IV. might have adopted,
'Gentlemen, I am going to see my wife.' He came to your bedside, madame,
at the very moment Dame Peronne presented to him a second prince, as
beautiful and healthy as the former, and said, 'Sire, Heaven will not
allow the kingdom of France to fall into the female line.' The king,
yielding to a first impulse, clasped the child in his arms, and cried,
'Oh! Heaven, I thank Thee!'"

At this part of her recital, the Beguine paused, observing how intensely
the queen was suffering; she had thrown herself back in her chair, and
with her head bent forward, and her eyes fixed, listened without seeming
to hear, and her lips moving convulsively, either breathing a prayer to
Heaven or in imprecations against the woman standing before her.

"Ah! do not believe that, because there could be but one dauphin in
France," exclaimed the Beguine, "or that if the queen allowed that child
to vegetate, banished from his royal parents' presence, she was on that
account an unfeeling mother. Oh! no, no; there are those alive who know
the floods of bitter tears she shed; there are those who have known and
witnessed the passionate kisses she imprinted on that innocent creature
in exchange for a life of misery and gloom to which state policy
condemned the twin brother of Louis XIV."

"Oh! Heaven!" murmured the queen, feebly.

"It is admitted," continued the Beguine, quickly, "that when the king
perceived the effect which would result from the existence of two sons,
both equal in age and pretensions, he trembled for the welfare of
France, for the tranquillity of the state; and it is equally well known
that the Cardinal de Richelieu, by the direction of Louis XIII., thought
over the subject with deep attention, and after an hour's meditation in
his majesty's cabinet, he pronounced the following sentence: 'One prince
is peace and safety for the state; two competitors are civil war and
anarchy.'"

The queen rose suddenly from her seat, pale as death, and her hands
clenched together. "You know too much," she said in a hoarse, thick
voice, "since you refer to secrets of state. As for the friends from
whom you have acquired this secret, they are false and treacherous. You
are their accomplice in the crime which is being now committed. Now,
throw aside your mask, or I will have you arrested by my captain of the
guards. Do not think that this secret terrifies me! You have obtained
it, you shall restore it to me. Never shall it leave your bosom, for
neither your secret nor your own life belong to you from this moment."

Anne of Austria, joining gesture to the threat, advanced a couple of
steps toward the Beguine. "Learn," said the latter, "to know and value
the fidelity, the honor, and secrecy of the friends you have abandoned."
And then suddenly threw aside her mask.

"Madame de Chevreuse!" exclaimed the queen.

"With your majesty the sole living confidante of this secret."

"Ah!" murmured Anne of Austria; "come and embrace me, duchesse. Alas!
you kill your friend in thus trifling with her terrible distress."

And the queen, leaning her head upon the shoulder of the old duchesse,
burst into a flood of bitter tears. "How young you are still!" said the
latter, in a hollow voice; "you can weep!"




CHAPTER LI.

TWO FRIENDS.


The queen looked steadily at Madame de Chevreuse, and said, "I believe
you just now made use of the word 'happy' in speaking of me. Hitherto,
duchesse, I had thought it impossible that a human creature could
anywhere be found less happy than the queen of France."

"Your afflictions, madame, have indeed been terrible enough. But by the
side of those great and grand misfortunes to which we, two old friends
separated by men's malice, were just now alluding, you possess sources
of pleasure, slight enough in themselves it may be, but which are
greatly envied by the world."

"What are they?" said Anne of Austria, bitterly. "What can induce you to
pronounce the word 'pleasure,' duchesse--you who, just now, admitted
that my body and my mind both stood in need of remedies?"

Madame de Chevreuse collected herself for a moment and then murmured,
"How far removed kings are from other people!"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that they are so far removed from the vulgar herd that they
forget that others ever stand in need of the bare necessaries of life.
They are like the inhabitant of the African mountain, who gazing from
the verdant table land, refreshed by the rills of melted snow, cannot
comprehend that the dwellers in the plains below him are perishing from
hunger and thirst in the midst of their lands, burned up by the heat of
the sun."

The queen slightly colored, for she now began to perceive the drift of
her friend's remark. "It was very wrong," she said, "to have neglected
you."

"Oh! madame, the king I know has inherited the hatred his father bore
me. The king would dismiss me if he knew I were in the Palais Royal."

"I cannot say that the king is very well disposed toward you, duchesse,"
replied the queen; "but I could--secretly, you know--"

The duchesse's disdainful smile produced a feeling of uneasiness in the
queen's mind. "Duchesse," she hastened to add, "you did perfectly right
to come here, even were it only to give us the happiness of
contradicting the report of your death."

"Has it been said, then, that I was dead?"

"Everywhere."

"And yet my children did not go into mourning."

"Ah! you know, duchesse, the court is very frequently moving about from
place to place; we see M. Albert de Luynes but seldom, and many things
escape our minds in the midst of the preoccupations which constantly
beset us."

"Your majesty ought not to have believed the report of my death."

"Why not? Alas! we are all mortal; and you may perceive how rapidly I,
your younger sister, as we used formerly to say, am approaching the
tomb."

"If your majesty had believed me dead, you ought, in that case, to have
been astonished not to have received any news of me."

"Death not unfrequently takes us by surprise, duchesse."

"Oh! your majesty, those who are burdened with secrets such as we have
just now discussed, must, as a necessity of their nature, satisfy their
craving desire to divulge them, and they feel they must gratify that
desire before they die. Among the various preparations for their final
journey, the task of placing their papers in order is not omitted."

The queen started.

"Your majesty will be sure to learn, in a particular manner, the day of
my death."

"In what way?"

"Because your majesty will receive the next day, under several
coverings, everything connected with our mysterious correspondence of
former times."

"Did you not burn them?" cried Anne, in alarm.

"Traitors only," replied the duchesse, "destroy a royal correspondence."

"Traitors, do you say?"

"Yes, certainly, or rather they pretend to destroy, instead of which
they keep or sell it. Faithful friends, on the contrary, most carefully
secrete such treasures, for it may happen that some day or other they
would wish to seek out their queen in order to say to her: Madame, I am
getting old; my health is fast failing me; in the presence of the danger
of death, for there is the danger for your majesty that this secret may
be revealed, take, therefore, this paper, so fraught with danger for
yourself, and trust not to another to burn it for you."

"What paper do you refer to?"

"As far as I am concerned, I have but one, it is true, but that is
indeed most dangerous in its nature."

"Oh! duchesse, tell me what it is."

"A letter, dated Tuesday, the 2d of August, 1644, in which you beg me to
go to Noisy-le-Sec, to see that unhappy child. In your own handwriting,
madame, there are those words, 'that unhappy child!'"

A profound silence ensued; the queen's mind was wandering in the past;
Madame de Chevreuse was watching the progress of her scheme. "Yes,
unhappy, most unhappy!" murmured Anne of Austria; "how sad the existence
he led, poor child, to finish it in so cruel a manner."

"Is he dead!" cried the duchesse, suddenly, with a curiosity whose
sincere accents the queen instinctively detected.

"He died of consumption, died forgotten, died withered and blighted like
the flowers a lover has given to his mistress, which she leaves to die
secreted in a drawer where she had hid them from the gaze of others."

"Died!" repeated the duchesse with an air of discouragement, which would
have afforded the queen the most unfeigned delight, had it not been
tempered in some measure by a mixture of doubt.

"Died--at Noisy-le-Sec?"

"Yes, in the arms of his tutor, a poor, honest man, who did not long
survive him."

"That can easily be understood; it is so difficult to bear up under the
weight of such a loss and such a secret," said Madame de Chevreuse, the
irony of which reflection the queen pretended not to perceive. Madame de
Chevreuse continued: "Well, madame, I inquired some years ago at
Noisy-le-Sec about this unhappy child. I was told that it was not
believed he was dead, and that was my reason for not having at first
been grieved with your majesty; for, most certainly, if I could have
thought it were true, never should I have made the slightest allusion to
so deplorable an event, and thus have reawakened your majesty's
legitimate distress."

"You say that it is not believed that the child died at Noisy?"

"No, madame."

"What did they say about him, then?"

"They said--but, no doubt, they were mistaken--"

"Nay, speak, speak!"

"They said, that, one evening, about the year 1645, a lady, beautiful
and majestic in her bearing, which was observed notwithstanding the mask
and the mantle which concealed her figure--a lady of rank, of very high
rank no doubt--came in a carriage to the place where the road branches
off; the very same spot, you know, where I awaited news of the young
prince when your majesty was graciously pleased to send me there."

"Well, well?"

"That the boy's tutor, or guardian, took the child to this lady."

"Well, what next?"

"That both the child and his tutor left that part of the country the
very next day."

"There, you see there is some truth in what you relate, since, in point
of fact, the poor child died from a sudden attack of illness, which
makes the lives of all children, as doctors say, suspended as it were by
a thread."

"What your majesty says is quite true; no one knows it better than
you--no one believes it more than myself. But yet how strange it is--"

"What can it now be?" thought the queen.

"The person who gave me these details, who had been sent to inquire
after the child's health--"

"Did you confide such a charge to any one else? Oh, duchesse!"

"Some one as dumb as your majesty, as dumb as myself; we will suppose it
was myself, madame; this 'some one,' some months after, passing through
Touraine--"

"Touraine!"

"Recognized both the tutor and the child, too! I am wrong: he thought he
recognized them, both living, cheerful, happy, and flourishing, the one
in a green old age, the other in the flower of his youth. Judge after
that what truth can be attributed to the rumors which are circulated, or
what faith, after that, placed in anything that may happen in the world?
But I am fatiguing your majesty; it was not my intention, however, to do
so, and I will take my leave of you, after renewing to you the assurance
of my most respectful devotion."

"Stay, duchesse; let us first talk a little about yourself."

"Of myself, madame; I am not worthy that you should bend your looks upon
me."

"Why not, indeed? Are you not the oldest friend I have? Are you angry
with me, duchesse?"

"I, indeed! what motive could I have? If I had reason to be angry with
your majesty, should I have come here?"

"Duchesse, age is fast creeping on us both; we should be united against
that death whose approach cannot be far off."

"You overpower me, madame, with the kindness of your language."

"No one has ever loved or served me as you have done, duchesse."

"Your majesty is too kind in remembering it."

"Not so. Give me a proof of your friendship, duchesse."

"My whole being is devoted to you, madame."

"The proof I require is, that you should ask something of me."

"Ask--"

"Oh, I know you well--no one is more disinterested, more noble, and
truly royal."

"Do not praise me too highly, madame," said the duchesse, somewhat
anxiously.

"I could never praise you as much as you deserve to be praised."

"And yet, age and misfortune effect a terrible change in people,
madame."

"So much the better; for the beautiful, the haughty, the adored duchesse
of former days might have answered me ungratefully, 'I do not wish for
anything from you.' Heaven be praised! The misfortunes you speak of have
indeed worked a change in you, for you will now, perhaps, answer me, 'I
accept.'"

The duchesse's look and smile soon changed at this conclusion, and she
no longer attempted to act a false part.

"Speak, dearest, what do you want?"

"I must first explain to you--"

"Do so unhesitatingly."

"Well, then, your majesty can confer the greatest, the most ineffable
pleasure upon me."

"What is it?" said the queen, a little distant in her manner, from an
uneasiness of feeling produced by this remark. "But do not forget, my
good Chevreuse, that I am quite as much under my son's influence as I
was formerly under my husband's."

"I will not be too hard, madame."

"Call me as you used to do; it will be a sweet echo of our happy youth."

"Well, then, my dear mistress, my darling Anne--"

"Do you know Spanish still?"

"Yes."

"Ask me in Spanish, then."

"Will your majesty do me the honor to pass a few days with me at
Dampierre?"

"Is that all?" said the queen, stupefied. "Nothing more than that?"

"Good heavens! Can you possibly imagine that in asking you that, I am
not asking you the greatest conceivable favor. If that really be the
case, you do not know me. Will you accept?"

"Yes, gladly. And I shall be happy," continued the queen, with some
suspicion, "if my presence can in any way be useful to you."

"Useful!" exclaimed the duchesse, laughing; "oh, no, no,
agreeable--delightful, if you like; and you promise me, then?"

"I swear it," said the queen, whereupon the duchesse seized her
beautiful hand, and covered it with kisses. The queen could not help
murmuring to herself, "She is a good-hearted woman, and very generous
too."

"Will your majesty consent to wait a fortnight before you come?"

"Certainly; but why?"

"Because," said the duchesse, "knowing me to be in disgrace, no one
would lend me the hundred thousand francs which I require to put
Dampierre into a state of repair. But when it is known that I require
that sum for the purpose of receiving your majesty at Dampierre
properly, all the money in Paris will be at my disposal."

"Ah!" said the queen, gently nodding her head, in sign of intelligence,
"a hundred thousand francs! you want a hundred thousand francs to put
Dampierre into repair?"

"Quite as much as that."

"And no one will lend you them?"

"No one."

"I will lend them to you, if you like, duchesse."

"Oh, I hardly dare accept such a sum."

"You would be wrong if you did not. Besides, a hundred thousand francs
is really not much. I know but too well that you never set a right value
upon your silence and your secrecy. Push that table a little toward me,
duchesse, and I will write you an order on M. Colbert; no, on M.
Fouquet, who is a far more courteous and obliging man."

"Will he pay it, though?"

"If he will not pay it, I will; but it will be the first time he will
have refused me."

The queen wrote and handed the duchesse the order, and afterward
dismissed her with a warm and cheerful embrace.




CHAPTER LII.

HOW JEAN DE LA FONTAINE WROTE HIS FIRST TALE.


All these intrigues are exhausted; the human mind, so variously
complicated, has been enabled to develop itself at its ease in the three
outlines with which our recital has supplied it. It is not unlikely
that, in the future we are now preparing, a question of politics and
intrigues may still arise, but the springs by which they work will be so
carefully concealed that no one will be able to see aught but flowers
and paintings, just as at a theater, where a Colossus appears upon the
scene walking along moved by the small legs and slender arms of a child
concealed within the framework.

We now return to Saint-Mande, where the surintendant was in the habit of
receiving his select society of epicureans. For some time past the host
had met with some terrible trials. Every one in the house was aware of
and felt the minister's distress. No more magnificent or recklessly
improvident reunions. Money had been the pretext assigned by Fouquet,
and never _was_ any pretext, as Gourville said, more fallacious, for
there was not the slightest appearance of money.

M. Vatel was most resolutely painstaking in keeping up the reputation of
the house, and yet the gardeners who supplied the kitchens complained of
a ruinous delay. The agents for the supply of Spanish wines frequently
sent drafts which no one honored; fishermen, whom the surintendant
engaged on the coast of Normandy, calculated that if they were paid all
that was due to them, the amount would enable them to retire comfortably
for the rest of their lives; fish, which, at a later period, was the
cause of Vatel's death, did not arrive at all. However, on the ordinary
day of reception, Fouquet's friends flocked in more numerously than
ever. Gourville and the Abbe Fouquet talked over money matters--that is
to say, the abbe borrowed a few pistoles from Gourville; Pellisson,
seated with his legs crossed, was engaged in finishing the peroration of
a speech with which Fouquet was to open the parliament; and this speech
was a master-piece, because Pellisson wrote it for his friend--that is
to say, he inserted everything in it which the latter would most
certainly never have taken the trouble to say of his own accord.
Presently Loret and La Fontaine would enter from the garden, engaged in
a dispute upon the facility of making verses. The painters and musicians
in their turn, also, were hovering near the dining-room. As soon as
eight o'clock struck, the supper would be announced, for the
surintendant never kept any one waiting. It was already half-past seven,
and the appetites of the guests were beginning to be declared in a very
emphatic manner. As soon as all the guests were assembled Gourville
went straight up to Pellisson, awoke him out of his reverie, and led him
into the middle of a room, and closed the doors. "Well," he said,
"anything new?"

Pellisson raised his intelligent and gentle face, and said: "I have
borrowed five-and-twenty thousand francs of my aunt, and I have them
here in good sterling money."

"Good," replied Gourville, "we only want one hundred and ninety-five
thousand livres for the first payment."

"The payment of what?" asked La Fontaine.

"What! absent as usual! Why it was you who told us that the small estate
at Corbeil was going to be sold by one of M. Fouquet's creditors; and
you, also, who proposed that all his friends should subscribe; more than
that, too, it was you who said that you would sell a corner of your
house at Chateau-Thierry, in order to furnish your own proportion, and
you now come and ask--'_The payment of what?_'"

This remark was received with a general laugh, which made La Fontaine
blush. "I beg your pardon," he said, "I had not forgotten it; oh, no!
only--"

"Only you remembered nothing about it," replied Loret.

"That is the truth; and the fact is, he is quite right; there is a great
difference between forgetting and not remembering."

"Well, then," added Pellisson, "you bring your mite in the shape of the
price of the piece of land you have sold?"

"Sold? no!"

"Have you not sold the field, then?" inquired Gourville in astonishment,
for he knew the poet's disinterestedness.

"My wife would not let me," replied the latter, at which there were
fresh bursts of laughter.

"And yet you went to Chateau-Thierry for that purpose," said some one.

"Certainly I did, and on horseback."

"Poor fellow!"

"I had eight different horses, and I was almost jolted to death."

"You are an excellent fellow! And you rested yourself when you arrived
there!"

"Rested! Oh! of course I did, for I had an immense deal of work to do."

"How so?"

"My wife had been flirting with the man to whom I wished to sell the
land. The fellow drew back from his bargain, and so I challenged him."

"Very good; and you fought?"

"It seems not."

"You know nothing about it, I suppose?"

"No, my wife and her relations interfered in the matter. I was kept a
quarter of an hour with my sword in my hand; but I was not wounded."

"And your adversary?"

"Oh! he just as much, for he never came on to the field."

"Capital!" cried his friends from all sides: "you must have been
terribly angry."

"Exceedingly so; I had caught cold; I returned home, and then my wife
began to quarrel with me."

"In real earnest?"

"Yes, in real earnest; she threw a loaf of bread at my head, a large
loaf."

"And what did you do?"

"Oh! I upset the table over her and her guests; and then I got upon my
horse again, and here I am."

Every one had great difficulty in keeping his countenance at the
exposure of his heroi-comedy, and when the laughter had somewhat ceased,
one of the guests present said to him:

"Is that all you have brought us back?"

"Oh, no! I have an excellent idea in my head."

"What is it?"

"Have you noticed that there is a good deal of sportive, jesting poetry
written in France?"

"Yes, of course," replied every one.

"And," pursued La Fontaine, "only a very small portion of it is
printed."

"The laws are strict, you know."

"That may be, but a rare article is a dear article, and that is the
reason why I have written a small poem, excessively free in its style,
very broad, and extremely cynical in its tone."

"The deuce you have!"

"Yes," continued the poet, with cold indifference; "and I have
introduced in it the greatest freedom of language I could possibly
employ."

Peals of laughter again broke forth, while the poet was thus announcing
the quality of his wares.

"And," he continued, "I have tried to exceed everything that Boccaccio,
Aretin, and other masters of their craft, have written in the same
style."

"Its fate is clear," said Pellisson; "it will be scouted and forbidden."

"Do you think so?" said La Fontaine simply; "I assure you, I did not do
it on my own account so much as on M. Fouquet's."

This wonderful conclusion again raised the mirth of all present.

"And I have sold the first edition of this little book for eight hundred
livres," exclaimed La Fontaine, rubbing his hands together. "Serious and
religious books sell at about half that rate."

"It would have been better," said Gourville, "to have written two
religious books instead."

"It would have been too long and not amusing enough," replied La
Fontaine, tranquilly; "my eight hundred livres are in this little bag,
and I beg to offer them as my contribution."

As he said this, he placed his offering in the hands of their treasurer;
it was then Loret's turn, who gave a hundred and fifty livres; the
others stripped themselves in the same way; and the total sum in the
purse amounted to forty thousand livres. The money was still being
counted over when the surintendant noiselessly entered the room; he had
heard everything; and then this man, who had possessed so many millions,
who had exhausted all the pleasures and honors that this world had to
bestow, this generous heart, this inexhaustible brain, which had, like
two burning crucibles, devoured the material and moral substance of the
first kingdom in the world, was seen to cross the threshold with his
eyes filled with tears, and pass his fingers through the gold and
silver which the bag contained.

"Poor offering," he said, in a softened and affected tone of voice; "you
will disappear in the smallest corner of my empty purse, but you have
filled to overflowing that which no one can ever exhaust, my heart.
Thank you, my friends--thank you." And as he could not embrace every one
present, who were all weeping a little, philosophers as they were, he
embraced La Fontaine, saying to him, "Poor fellow! so you have, on my
account, been beaten by your wife and censured by your confessor."

"Oh! it is a mere nothing," replied the poet; "if your creditors will
only wait a couple of years, I shall have written a hundred other tales,
which, at two editions each, will pay off the debt."




CHAPTER LIII.

LA FONTAINE IN THE CHARACTER OF A NEGOTIATOR.


Fouquet pressed La Fontaine's hand most warmly, saying to him, "My dear
poet, write a hundred other tales, not only for the eighty pistoles
which each of them will produce you, but, still more, to enrich our
language with a hundred other master-pieces of composition."

"Oh! oh!" said La Fontaine, with a little air of pride, "you must not
suppose that I have only brought this idea and the eighty pistoles to
the surintendant."

"Oh! indeed," was the general acclamation from all parts of the room,
"M. de la Fontaine is in funds to-day."

"Heaven bless the idea, if it only brings us one or two millions," said
Fouquet, gayly.

"Exactly," replied La Fontaine.

"Quick, quick!" cried the assembly.

"Take care," said Pellisson in La Fontaine's ear; "you have had a most
brilliant success up to the present moment, so do not go too far."

"Not at all, Monsieur Pellisson; and you, who are a man of decided
taste, will be the first to approve of what I have done."

"We are talking of millions, remember," said Gourville.

"I have fifteen hundred thousand francs here, Monsieur Gourville," he
replied, striking himself on the chest.

"The deuce take this Gascon from Chateau-Thierry!" cried Loret.

"It is not the pocket you should touch, but the brain," said Fouquet.

"Stay a moment, Monsieur le Surintendant," added La Fontaine; "you are
not procureur-general--you are a poet."

"True, true!" cried Loret, Conrart, and every person present connected
with literature.

"You are, I repeat, a poet and a painter, a sculptor, a friend of the
arts and sciences; but acknowledge that you are no lawyer."

"Oh! I do acknowledge it," replied M. Fouquet, smiling.

"If you were to be nominated at the Academy, you would refuse, I think."

"I think I should, with all due deference to the academicians."

"Very good; if therefore you do not wish to belong to the Academy, why
do you allow yourself to form one of the parliament?"

"Oh! oh!" said Pellisson, "we are talking politics."

"I wish to know whether the barrister's gown does or does not become M.
Fouquet."

"There is no question of the gown at all," retorted Pellisson, annoyed
at the laughter of those who were present.

"On the contrary, it is the gown," said Loret.

"Take the gown away from the procureur-general," said Conrart, "and we
have M. Fouquet left us still, of whom we have no reason to complain;
but, as he is no procureur-general without his gown, we agree with M. de
la Fontaine, and pronounce the gown to be nothing but a bugbear."

"_Fugiunt risus leporesque_," said Loret.

"The smiles and the graces," said some one present.

"That is not the way," said Pellisson, gravely, "that I translate
_lepores_."

"How do you translate it?" said La Fontaine.

"Thus: the hares run away as soon as they see M. Fouquet." A burst of
laughter, in which the surintendant joined, followed this sally.

"But why hares?" objected Conrart, vexed.

"Because the hare will be the very one who will not be over-pleased to
see M. Fouquet surrounded by all the attributes which his parliamentary
strength and power confer on him."

"Oh! oh!" murmured the poets.

"_Quo non ascendant_," said Conrart, "seems impossible to me, when one
is fortunate enough to wear the gown of the procureur-general."

"On the contrary, it seems so to me without that gown," said the
obstinate Pellisson; "what is your opinion, Gourville?"

"I think the gown in question is a very good thing," replied the latter;
"but I equally think a million and a half is far better than the gown."

"And I am of Gourville's opinion," exclaimed Fouquet, stopping the
discussion by the expression of his own opinion, which would necessarily
bear down all the others.

"A million and a half," Pellisson grumbled out; "now I happen to know an
Indian fable--"

"Tell it me," said La Fontaine; "I ought to know it, too."

"Tell it, tell it," said the others.

"There was a tortoise, which was as usual well protected by its shell,"
said Pellisson; "whenever its enemies threatened it, it took refuge
within its covering. One day some one said to it, 'You must feel very
hot in such a house as that in the summer, and you are altogether
prevented showing off your graces; here is a snake here who will give
you a million and a half for your shell.'"

"Good!" said the surintendant, laughing.

"Well, what next?" said La Fontaine, much more interested in the
apologue than its moral.

"The tortoise sold his shell and remained naked and defenseless. A
vulture happened to see him, and being hungry, broke the tortoise's back
with a blow of his beak and devoured it. The moral is, that M. Fouquet
should take very good care to keep his gown."

La Fontaine understood the moral seriously. "You forget Eschylus," he
said to his adversary.

"What do you mean?"

"Eschylus was bald-headed, and a vulture--your vulture, probably--who
was a great amateur in tortoises, mistook at a distance his head for a
block of stone, and let a tortoise, which was shrunk up in his shell,
fall upon it."

"Yes, yes, La Fontaine is right," resumed Fouquet, who had become very
thoughtful; "whenever a vulture wishes to devour a tortoise, he well
knows how to break his shell; and but too happy is that tortoise which a
snake pays a million and a half for his envelope. If any one were to
bring me a generous-hearted snake like the one in your fable, Pellisson,
I would give him my shell."

"_Rara avis in terris!_" cried Conrart.

"And like a black swan, is he not!" added La Fontaine; "well, then, the
bird in question, black and very rare, is already found."

"Do you mean to say that you have found a purchaser for my post of
procureur-general?" exclaimed Fouquet.

"I have, monsieur."

"But the surintendant never said that he wished to sell," resumed
Pellisson.

"I beg your pardon," said Conrart, "you yourself spoke about it, even--"

"Yes, I am a witness to that," said Gourville.

"He seems very tenacious about his brilliant idea," said Fouquet,
laughing. "Well, La Fontaine, who is the purchaser?"

"A perfect black bird, for he is a counselor belonging to the
parliament, an excellent fellow."

"What is his name?"

"Vanel."

"Vanel!" exclaimed Fouquet, "Vanel, the husband of--"

"Precisely, her husband; yes monsieur."

"Poor fellow!" said Fouquet, with an expression of great interest.

"He wishes to be everything that you have been, monsieur," said
Gourville, "and to do everything that you have done."

"It is very agreeable; tell us all about it, La Fontaine."

"It is very simple. I see him occasionally, and a short time ago I met
him walking about on the Place de la Bastille, at the very moment when I
was about to take the small carriage to come down here to Saint-Mande."

"He must have been watching his wife," interrupted Loret.

"Oh, no!" said La Fontaine, "he is far from being jealous. He accosted
me, embraced me, and took me to the inn called 'L'Image Saint-Fiacre,'
and told me all about his troubles."

"He has his troubles, then?"

"Yes; his wife wants to make him ambitious."

"Well, and he told you--"

"That some one had spoken to him about a post in parliament: that M.
Fouquet's name had been mentioned; that ever since Madame Vanel dreams
of nothing else but being called Madame la Procureuse-Generale, and that
it makes her ill and keeps her awake every night she does not dream of
it."

"The deuce!"

"Poor woman!" said Fouquet.

"Wait a moment. Conrart is always telling me that I do not know how to
conduct matters of business; you will see how I manage this one."

"Well, go on."

"'I suppose you know,' said I to Vanel, 'that the value of a post such
as that which M. Fouquet holds is by no means trifling.'

"'How much do you imagine it to be?' he said.

"'M. Fouquet, I know, has refused seventeen hundred thousand francs.'

"'My wife,' replied Vanel, 'had estimated it at about fourteen hundred
thousand.'

"'Ready money?' I asked.

"'Yes; she has sold some property of hers in Guienne, and has received
the purchase money.'"

"That's a pretty sum to touch all at once," said the Abbe Fouquet, who
had not hitherto said a word.

"Poor Madame Vanel!" murmured Fouquet.

Pellisson shrugged his shoulders, as he whispered in Fouquet's ear,
"That woman is a perfect fiend."

"That may be; and it will be delightful to make use of this fiend's
money to repair the injury which an angel has done herself for me."

Pellisson looked with a surprised air at Fouquet, whose thoughts were
from that moment fixed upon a fresh object in view.

"Well!" inquired La Fontaine, "what about my negotiation?"

"Admirable, my dear poet."

"Yes," said Gourville; "but there are some people who are anxious to
have the steed who have not money enough to pay for the bridle."

"And Vanel would draw back from his offer if he were to be taken at his
word," continued the Abbe Fouquet.

"I do not believe it," said La Fontaine.

"What do you know about it?"

"Why, you have not yet heard the _denouement_ of my story."

"If there is a _denouement_, why do you beat about the bush so much?"

"_Semper ad eventum._ Is that correct?" said Fouquet, with the air of a
nobleman who condescends to barbarisms. To which the Latinists present
answered with loud applause.

"My _denouement_," cried La Fontaine, "is, that Vanel, that determined
blackbird, knowing that I was coming to Saint-Mande, implored me to
bring him with me, and, if possible, to present him to M. Fouquet."

"So that--"

"So that he is here; I left him in that part of the grounds called
Bel-Air. Well, M. Fouquet, what is your reply?"

"Well, it is not respectful toward Madame Vanel that her husband should
run the risk of catching cold outside my house; send for him, La
Fontaine, since you know where he is."

"I will go there myself."

"And I will accompany you," said the Abbe Fouquet; "I can carry the
money bags."

"No jesting," said Fouquet, seriously; "let the business be a serious
one if it is to be one at all. But, first of all, let us show we are
hospitable. Make my apologies, La Fontaine, to M. Vanel, and tell him
how distressed I am to have kept him waiting, but that I was not aware
he was there."

La Fontaine set off at once, fortunately accompanied by Gourville, for,
absorbed in his own calculations, the poet would have mistaken the
route, and was hurrying as fast as he could toward the village of
Saint-Mande. Within a quarter of an hour afterward, M. Vanel was
introduced into the surintendant's cabinet, the description and details
of which have already been given at the beginning of this story. When
Fouquet saw him enter, he called to Pellisson and whispered a few words
in his ear. "Do not lose a word of what I am going to say: let all the
silver and gold plate, together with the jewels of every description, be
packed up in the carriage. You will take the black horses: the jeweler
will accompany you; and you will postpone the supper until Madame de
Belliere's arrival."

"Will it be necessary to inform Madame de Belliere of it?" said
Pellisson.

"No, that will be useless; I will do that. So away with you, my dear
friend."

Pellisson set off, not quite clear as to his friend's meaning or
intention, but confident, like every true friend, in the judgment of the
man he was blindly obeying. It is that which constitutes the strength of
such men; distrust only arises in the minds of inferior natures.

Vanel bowed lowly to the surintendant, and was about to begin a speech.

"Do not trouble yourself, monsieur," said Fouquet, politely; "I am told
that you wish to purchase a post I hold. How much can you give me for
it?"

"It is for you, monseigneur, to fix the amount you require. I know that
offers of purchase have already been made to you for it."

"Madame Vanel, I have been told, values it at fourteen hundred thousand
livres."

"That is all we have."

"Can you give me the money immediately?"

"I have not the money with me," said Vanel, frightened almost by the
unpretending simplicity, amounting to greatness, of the man, for he had
expected disputes, and difficulties, and opposition of every kind.

"When will you be able to have it?"

"Whenever you please, monseigneur;" for he began to be afraid that
Fouquet was trifling with him.

"If it were not for the trouble you would have in returning to Paris, I
would say at once; but we will arrange that the payment and the
signature shall take place at six o'clock to-morrow morning."

"Very good," said Vanel, as cold as ice, and feeling quite bewildered.

"Adieu, Monsieur Vanel, present my humblest respects to Madame Vanel,"
said Fouquet, as he rose; upon which Vanel, who felt the blood rushing
up to his head, for he was quite confounded by his success, said
seriously to the surintendant, "Will you give me your word, monseigneur,
upon this affair?"

Fouquet turned round his head, saying:

"Pardieu! and you, monsieur?"

Vanel hesitated, trembled all over, and at last finished by hesitatingly
holding out his hand. Fouquet opened and nobly extended his own; this
loyal hand lay for a moment in Vanel's moist hypocritical palm, and he
