The man who stood on the threshold demands a somewhat particular
description.

He was tall and of an eminently graceful figure.  The uniform which
he carried--that of a captain in the 1st or Royal Regiment of Foot--
well set off his small waist, deep chest and square shoulders.
His complexion was clear and sanguine, albeit no longer retaining the
candour of youth; his wig was carefully curled, and in colour a light
golden-brown.  Though in fact his age was not far short of fifty, he
looked hardly a day older than thirty-five.

In many respects his resemblance to Tristram was exceedingly close.
The stature and proportions were Tristram's; the nose like Tristram's
in shape, but slightly longer; the eyes of the same greyish blue,
though in this case deep lines radiated from the outer corners.
Above all, there was a fugitive, baffling likeness, that belonged to
no particular feature, but to all.  On the other hand, the difference
in expression between the two faces was hardly less striking: for
whereas Tristram's beamed a modest kindliness on his fellows, this
face looked out on the world with an unshrinking audacity.  Beside it
the Earl of Marlborough's handsome countenance seemed to lack
intelligence; but the Earl's countenance was then, and remains
to-day, an impenetrable mask.

"You sent for me, my lord?" Captain Salt's voice was silvery in tone
and pleasant to hear as running water.

"I did," said the Earl, pressing his seal upon the letter and sitting
down to direct it.  "You have the lists?"

The other drew a bundle of papers from his breastpocket, and
advancing, laid them upon the table.  The Earl put the letter aside,
opened the bundle and ran his eye over its contents.

"You are sure of all these men?"

"Quite."

"You seem to have enough.  We mustn't overdo this, you understand?
It wouldn't do for the affair to--succeed."

Captain Salt smiled.

"If they carry off a vessel or two," the Earl went on, "it's no great
loss, and it will give Saint Germains the agreeable notion that
something is about to happen.  They've been plaguing me again.
This time it's an urgent letter in my royal master's own hand.
He calls on me to bring over the whole army in the very first
action--the born fool!  Can he really believe I love him so dearly?
Has he really persuaded himself that I've forgotten--?"

He checked himself; but for the first time that evening his face was
suffused with a hot flush.  For, in fact, he was thinking of his
sister, Arabella Churchill; and John Churchill, though he had made no
scruple to profit by his sister's shame, had never forgiven it.

Captain Salt filled up the pause in his dulcet voice: "We want, my
lord, such a mutiny as, without succeeding, shall convince England of
the strong dissatisfaction felt by our forces at the favouritism
shown by his Majesty towards the Dutch."

"Salt," said his lordship, eyeing him narrowly, "you are remarkably
intelligent."

"Why, my lord, should I conceal my thoughts when they tally with my
honest hopes?  I look around, and what do I see?  Dutchmen filling
every lucrative post; Dutchmen crowding the House of Lords; Dutchmen
commanding our armies; Dutchmen pocketing our fattest revenues.
England is weary of it.  I, as an Englishman, am weary of it.
My lord, if I dared to say it--"

"Would you mind looking out and observing if the sentry is at his
post?"

Captain Salt stepped to the door and opened it.  The sentry was at
the far end of the passage, engaged in his steady tramp to and fro.

"My lord," he said, closing the door softly and returning, "let this
mutiny fail!  It will serve its purpose if it brings home to the
understanding of Englishmen the iniquity of this plague of Dutchmen.
Let that feeling ripen.  You will return before the winter, and by
that time you may strike boldly.  Then, from your place in the House
of Lords, you can move an address--"

"Go on," murmured the Earl, as he paused for a moment.

"--An address praying that all foreigners may be dismissed from his
Majesty's service."

The Earl looked up swiftly and checked his fingers, which had been
drumming on the table.

"Decidedly you are intelligent," he said very slowly.

"What can William do if that address is carried, as it may be?
To yield will be to discard his dearest friends: to resist will mean
a national rising.  He will lose his crown."

"And then?"

"My lord, _may it not be possible to eject William without restoring
James?_"

"Ah!"

"There is the Princess Anne."

The Earl looked into his companion's eyes and read his own thoughts
there.  James was a Papist, William a Dutchman; but the Princess Anne
was an Englishwoman and a Protestant.  And the Earl and his Countess
held the Princess Anne under their thumbs.  Let her succeed to the
throne, and he would be, to all intents, King of England.  Nay, he
would hold the balance of Europe in his palm.

"My friend," he said, under his breath, "you are too dangerous."
Aloud he gave the talk a new turn.

"This mutiny will not succeed," he observed reflectively.  "The men
who intend to rise must be informed against."

"It appears so."

"But not too soon.  They must not succeed, as I said; but they must
have time enough to show their countrymen that the discontent is
serious, and to convince James that only an accident has prevented
their coming over to him in a body."

"That is clear enough."

"The only question," the Earl pursued, "is--who is to give the
information at the proper moment?"

"Undoubtedly that is a difficulty."

"I thought--excuse me if I come to the point--I thought that _you_
might do so."

"My lord!"

"You object?"

"Decidedly I do.  Already I have risked too much in this business."

"I can think of nobody," said the Earl coldly, "so well suited for
the task.  William thinks you are his spy, and would receive your
information without suspicion.  He does not guess that, owing to my
knowledge of your past--of the affair of the dice at Antwerp, for
instance, or that trivial letter from Saint Germains which I happen
to possess--"

Captain Salt's sanguine cheeks were by this time white as death.

"If you insist--" he stammered in a hoarse voice that bore no
resemblance to his natural tone.

"I'm afraid I must.  At the same time I mean to reward you," the Earl
continued pleasantly; "and a portion of the reward shall be paid in
advance.  My dear captain, I have the most delightful surprise for
you.  You were once a married man, and the lady you married was a
native of this port."

"Thank you, my lord; I was aware of the fact."

"You left her."

"I did."

"And in your absence she bore you a son."

"I have since heard a rumour to that effect," said Captain Salt
coldly.

"Cherish that son, for his worth to you is inestimable.  He lies, at
this moment, on board the  _Good Intent_--I regret to say in irons.
His Majesty enlisted him this afternoon, somewhat against his will,
and he began very unluckily by kicking his superior officer from one
end of the frigate to the other.  It was the natural ebullition of
youth, and the sergeant was a Dutchman.  Therefore in this letter I
have pardoned him.  Take it--a boat is waiting for you--and convey it
to his captain.  Thereafter seek the poor lad out and imprint the
parental kiss upon both cheeks.  Reveal yourself to him!"

"Your lordship is excessively kind, but I stand in no immediate need of
filial love."

"My dear sir, I promise you that this son means thousands in your
pocket.  He means to you a calm old age, surrounded by luxuries which
are hardly to be gained by espionage, however zealously practised."

"In what way, may I inquire?"

"I will inform you when you have done the small service I asked just
now."

Captain Salt took the letter and moved towards the door.

"By the way," the Earl said, "it may be painful to you to be reminded
of your former connection with Harwich; but did you happen to know,
in those days, two gentlemen, captains in King Charles's Navy, and
natives, I believe, of this town--Barker and Runacles?"

"I did.  They were both, at one time, suitors for the hand of my late
wife."

"Indeed?  I have been trying to enlist them for this business of the
mutiny."

"They were a simple pair, I remember, and would serve our purpose
admirably."

"I found them a trifle too simple.  Well, I won't keep you just now.
Remember the help I expect from you; but we will talk that over in a
day or two.  Meanwhile, keep a parent's eye upon your son (he's
called Tristram), for through him your reward will be attained.
Good night."



CHAPTER VII.


THE CAPTAINS MAKE A FALSE START.

It was past midnight when Captain Runacles left his friend's pavilion
and let himself through the little blue door to his own garden.
The heavens were clear and starry, and he paused for a moment on the
grass-plot, his hands clasped behind him, his head tilted back and
his eyes fixed on the Great Bear that hung directly overhead.

"Poor Jack!" he muttered, shaking his head at the constellation, as
if gently accusing Fate.  His nature had been considerably softened
by the little man's distress, and he had come away with a generous
trouble in his heart.

"I shan't sleep a wink to-night," he decided; and went on
inconsequently, "After all, a girl is less anxiety than a boy.
People don't find it worth their while to kidnap a girl and flog her
with a cat-o'-nine-tails.  A turn of a die, and I'd have been in
Jack's shoes to-night; while, as it is--"

As it was, however, he seemed hardly to enjoy his good fortune, for
he added, still looking up:

"Plague seize it!  I shan't sleep a wink--I know I shan't.  What a
magnificent show of stars!  Let me see, how long is it before
daybreak?  One-two-three-five hours only.  I won't go to bed at all--
I'll have a turn at the telescope."

He stole into the house softly and climbed up the spiral staircase.
A faint light shone out on the first landing from the half-open door
of his workroom.  He entered and turned up the lamp.

Its light revealed a scene of amazing disorder.  The walls were
covered with books and charts; the floor was littered with
manuscripts, mathematical instruments, huge folios, piled
higgledy-piggledy, carpenter's tools, retorts, bottles of chemicals.
In one corner, beside a door leading to his bedroom, stood a
turning-lathe three inches deep in sawdust and shavings; in another,
a human skeleton hung against the wall, its feet concealed by the
model of a pumping-engine.  Hard by was nailed a rack containing a
couple of antique swords, a walking-cane and a large telescope.

Captain Runacles took down this telescope and tucked it under his
arm.  Then, unhitching a dressing-gown of faded purple from a peg
behind the door, he turned the lamp low again and stepped out upon
the landing.  Here he paused for a minute and listened.  The house
was still.  From the floor below ascended the sound of breathing,
regular and stertorous, which proved that Simeon was asleep.

He put his hand on the stair-rail and ascended to the next floor,
passing his daughter's room on tiptoe.  Above this, a flight of steps
that was little more than a ladder led up into the obscurity of the
attics.  He climbed these steps, and, entering a lumber-room, where
he had to duck his head to avoid striking the sloping roof, felt his
way to a shuttered window, with the bolt of which he fumbled for a
moment.  When at length he drew the shutter open, a whiff of cold air
streamed into the room and a parallelogram of purple sky was visible,
studded with stars and crossed by the bars of a little balcony.

Captain Runacles stepped out upon this balcony.  He had constructed
it two years before, and it ran completely round the roof.  Under his
feet he heard the pigeons murmuring in their cote.  Below were spread
the dim grass-plots and flower-beds of the two gardens; and, far upon
his right, the misty leagues of the North Sea.  Full in front of him,
over Harwich town, hung the dainty constellation of Cassiopeia's
chair, and all around the vast army of heaven moved, silent and
radiant.  One seemed to hear its breathing up there, across the deep
calm of the firmament.

He turned to the western horizon, to the spot where the Pleiades had
just set for the summer months, and lifting his glass moved it slowly
up towards Capella and the Kids, thence on to Perseus, and that most
gorgeous tract of the Milky Way which lies thereby.  Now, in the
sword-handle of Perseus, as it is called, are set two clusters of
gems, by trying to count which the Captain had, before now, amused
himself for hours together.  He was about to make another attempt,
and in fact had reached fifty-six, when he felt a light touch on his
elbow.

He faced quickly round.  Behind him, on the balcony, stood his
daughter.

"Don't be angry," she entreated in a whisper.  "I heard you come up.
