out the Brahmin's dress he had before worn. In the morning, Abdool
went out to Scindia's camp with a letter which, when Scindia came
out of his marquee, he handed to him. There was nothing unusual in
this, for petitions were frequently presented in this way to rulers
in India.

As he did so, he said in a low voice, "It is private and important,
Your Highness;" and instead of handing it to one of his officers,
Scindia went back to his tent to read it.

It stated that the writer, Kawerseen, an unworthy member of the
Kshittree Brahmins, prayed for a private interview with His
Highness, on matters of the most urgent import. Scindia thought for
a moment and then, tearing up the piece of paper, went out and, as
he passed Abdool, who was waiting at the entrance, said:

"Tell your master to be here at half-past ten, tonight. The sentry
will have orders to admit him."

Abdool returned at once to Harry, and delivered his message.

"That is good," the latter said.

"You will take me with you, sahib?"

"Certainly, Abdool, if you are willing to go. There is some danger
in it and, should Scindia give the alarm, you may be of great
assistance, by cutting down the sentry before he can run in. Take
your pistols and tulwar, and bring another sword for me. If I can
once get out of the tent we shall be fairly safe for, in the
darkness and confusion which will arise, we shall be able to make
off quietly. We will ride there, and fasten our horses in that
grove that lies about a quarter of a mile from the camp."

At half-past nine they started, and reached Scindia's tent at the
time appointed. Harry's belief that he would succeed was largely
founded on the knowledge that Scindia was a weak young man, who had
never been engaged in warfare, and was wanting in physical courage.
An attendant was at the door, and led him to the prince's private
tent, which stood in the middle of an encampment composed of large
tents; for the purpose of receptions and entertainments, for the
abodes of the ladies of the zenana, and for the officers in whom
Scindia reposed most confidence. The retinue of servants,
attendants, and minor officials were lodged in tents fifty yards
behind the royal encampment.

Scindia was sitting on a divan. Two lamps hung from the ceiling. He
himself was smoking.

"You have something of importance to say to me?" he said, as Harry
entered, and bowed deeply.

"I have, Your Highness. You are doubtless well aware that the
Kshittree Brahmins, who formerly held the principal offices under
your father, are greatly offended by the elevation of Ghatgay; and
still more so by his atrocious deeds in the town of Poona. There
has been a private meeting, and twelve of them, myself among the
number, have sworn by the feet of Brahma to take your life, either
by poison, dagger, or musket ball."

"And you have the insolence to avow that you took such an oath!"

He sprang to his feet, and would have touched the bell on the table
but, in an instant, Harry sprung forward with a loaded pistol,
pointed at Scindia's head.

"Stop, sir, I beg of you; for assuredly, if you raise a voice or
touch a bell, that moment will be your last."

Scindia sank down into his seat again. He had not the least doubt
that the man before him would execute his threat.

"Your Highness," he said, "I have not come here for the purpose of
assassinating you. I was first on the list, but obtained from the
others permission to endeavour to put an end to the present state
of things, before carrying out our vow. We know that, in spite of
the enormous sums that Ghatgay has raised in Poona, you yourself
have not been enriched; and that you have been unable to persuade
your troops to march, owing to your want of money to pay up their
arrears. We have thought the matter over, and can see but one way
by which you can obtain the necessary funds."

"And that is?" Scindia asked.

"That is, Your Highness, to liberate Nana Furnuwees--setting his
liberty, of course, at a high price. In this way you will not only
be able to move your army, but you will cripple the power of the
Peishwa--who would, if possible, overthrow you, now you have done
his work and freed him from Nana.

"You are well aware, Prince, that Nana Furnuwees always exercised
his authority on the side of peace, and there is no fear that he
will permit Bajee Rao to engage in war against you. He is an old
man, and useless to you as a prisoner. If you exacted a heavy sum
from him it would, in all ways, aid your views."

"But how do you know that Nana could raise such a sum as would
satisfy the troops?"

"We have assured ourselves on that score, and I know that it
matters not how much Nana Furnuwees will have to give. What I would
suggest is that you shall seize Ghatgay, and rid yourself of his
domination. He cannot but be as odious to you as he is to Bajee
Rao, and to the people."

Scindia sat for some time, in silence.

"Do I understand," he said, "that if I carry out these suggestions,
your comrades will be satisfied?"

"That I swear solemnly. I do not threaten Your Highness, for my
visit today is one of conciliation. You might, as soon as I leave
this tent, order me to be arrested. In that case I should use this
pistol against myself, and you would seek in vain for the names of
my eleven brethren; but your life would be forfeited--whether in
the midst of your guards or in your tent, whether you ride or walk.
You would be watched, and your servants would be bribed, and your
food poisoned. If the first man fails, he will blow out his brains,
and so will they all; but be assured that the vow will be kept and
that, whether by night or by day, you will never be safe."

"You are a bold man to speak so," Scindia said.

"I speak so, Your Highness, because I am perfectly ready to die for
the good of the country, and to secure for it peace and
contentment."

Scindia rose, and took two or three turns up and down the tent;
Harry keeping his pistol in his hand, in readiness to fire should
he attempt to slip away. At last, Scindia stopped before him.

"I agree to your conditions," he said, "and the more readily
because I shall, as you say, at once free myself from difficulties,
and avenge myself on Bajee Rao; who is, I know, in spite of his
professions of friendship, constantly plotting against me. Tomorrow
at daybreak an officer shall ride, with a troop of cavalry, and
shall bring Nana here."

"You have chosen wisely, Prince. It is, believe me, your only way
of escaping from your present difficulties. I know that, already,
your soldiery are becoming mutinous at being thus kept, for months,
away from their country, and receiving no pay. That feeling will
grow rapidly, unless their demands are conceded. As to Ghatgay, the
soldiers hold him in abhorrence, and his arrest and downfall would
cause the most lively satisfaction among them. Your men are
soldiers and not assassins, and the tortures and executions that
daily take place fill them with horror; so that your order for his
arrest will be executed with joy.

"Now, Your Highness, I will leave you. I believe that you will keep
your promise, as indeed it is to your interest to do so; in which
case you will never hear of myself, or my eleven companions."

"Do not fear," Scindia said, "tomorrow my messenger shall certainly
start for Ahmednuggur."

Harry, bowing deeply, turned, passed through the curtain, and made
his way out of the tent. Abdool, who was squatting near the
entrance, at once rose and followed him.

"Is all well, sahib?"

"I think so. I have so frightened Scindia that I have little doubt
he will carry out the promise he has given me. I will tell you
about it, when we get back."

They passed through the sleeping camp, and mounted their horses in
the grove, and rode to the Residency. Colonel Palmer was still up,
engaged in writing a report for the Government. It was a dark
night, and the sentry on duty, knowing Harry's voice, let him pass
without question, not even observing the change in his attire.

"What! Back again, Mr. Lindsay?" the colonel exclaimed, in
surprise, when Harry entered. "I thought that it would be a month
before you returned--that is, if you ever returned at all, and of
this I had but little hope. As I expected, you have, of course,
found it impossible to carry out your design."

"On the contrary, sir, I have been, I hope, perfectly successful. I
have seen Nana Furnuwees, and ascertained that he is ready to pay a
large sum to obtain his freedom, and his former position as the
Peishwa's minister. I have seen Scindia. Tomorrow a troop of horse
will start, to fetch Nana to his camp; and Ghatgay will be arrested
as soon as possible, after he arrives."

"How in the name of fortune have you managed all these things?" the
colonel asked.

"I will tell you, sir, now that I am back here. I shall tomorrow
reassume my uniform, and there is no danger of my being recognized,
or of trouble arising from what I have done."

He then related the various steps he had taken, and his
conversations with Nana and Scindia.

"Upon my word, Mr. Lindsay, I do not know whether to admire most
your daring, in bearding Scindia in the heart of his camp; or the
intelligence with which you have carried out what seemed, to me, an
absolutely impossible undertaking.

"Light your cheroot. I need not trouble about this report that I
was engaged on, when you entered, but will put it by until the day
after tomorrow, when we shall see whether Nana is brought to
Scindia's camp.

"You speak Hindustani as well as Mahratti, do you not?"

"Not so well, sir; but as you know I have, during the six months
that I was at Bombay, and since I have been here, used most of my
spare time working up Hindustani, with a moonshee."

"I am glad to hear it, for I received a letter from the Governor,
this morning, saying that Lord Mornington has requested him to send
an officer, thoroughly acquainted with Mahratti and with some
knowledge of the people; and that he has selected you for the
service, as being by far better fitted than anyone he knows for the
appointment. A knowledge of Hindustani will, of course, be very
useful to you; but Mahratti is the principal thing, as he is
intending to open negotiations with the Mahrattas, as well as with
the Nizam, to induce them to join in concerted action against
Tippoo.

"He says that no vessel will be sailing for Calcutta for less than
a month, so you can stay here for a few days, and see how your
scheme works out. It will be a great step for you, and ensure you
rapid promotion."

"I am indeed obliged to the Governor for selecting me," Harry said,
"and will do my best to justify his confidence."

Two days later, Nana Furnuwees was brought to Scindia's camp--news
which caused Bajee Rao intense consternation. He at once sent off,
to open negotiations with the Nizam for common action, offering a
considerable amount of territory for his assistance.

Colonel Palmer rode over the next morning to Scindia's camp, and
found that Scindia had demanded three millions of rupees as the
price of Nana's release, and appointment as minister to the
Peishwa. Nana had protested his absolute inability to raise
anything like that sum, but had offered five hundred thousand
rupees.

"I can quite believe that he could not pay the sum Scindia
demands," the colonel said, on his return; "and when Scindia sees
that he would rather return to prison than attempt impossibilities,
he will come down in his demands, and Nana will go up in his offer.
It is a mere question of bargaining."

When Scindia heard of the step that Bajee Rao had taken, he was
greatly alarmed; for he could hardly hope to withstand the Nizam's
army, and that which Bajee himself could raise; and he therefore
materially lowered his demands, and finally accepted Nana's offer
of nine hundred thousand rupees. This arrangement being made, he
permitted Nana to leave the camp in order to raise the money;
receiving his solemn oath that, if he failed to do so, he would
return and render himself a prisoner again.

However, in a few days Nana sent in the money. Scindia fulfilled
the other part of his promise, and insisted upon the Peishwa's
receiving Nana as his minister. A few days later he had Ghatgay
arrested, by the sons of two of his European officers.

Scindia was, indeed, most anxious to be off. He did not know that
the Nizam had refused Bajee Rao's offer. He had received news of
widespread disaffection among his troops at home, and felt that he
could not rely upon those with him. As soon, therefore, as he
received the money from Nana, he partially paid the arrears due to
the soldiers. The sum, however, was altogether insufficient to
satisfy the troops and, as Nana Furnuwees found that Bajee was
still intriguing with Scindia for his overthrow, and that no rest
could be hoped for until the latter's army marched away, he
advanced Scindia fifteen lakhs of rupees from his own private
funds. The latter was then able to satisfy his troops.

Scindia accepted the money, but still remained in the neighbourhood
of Poona.

These matters were not concluded until months after Harry left for
Bombay. On arriving there he called upon the Governor, to report
the release of Nana Furnuwees.

"I received Colonel Palmer's last report, four days ago. He has
given me full details of the manner in which you, on your own
initiative, brought about Nana's release, and the approaching
departure of Scindia; and I of course brought them before the
Council, and they quite agreed with me as to the remarkable daring
and ability with which you had carried out what Colonel Palmer
believed to be an impossible scheme.

"I have pleasure in handing you your commission of captain, and
only regret that we cannot break the rules of the service, by
nominating you major. Tomorrow your name will be removed from the
list of officers of the 3rd Regiment, and you will be appointed to
the staff. You will have a week before you, to obtain the proper
uniform. I shall not require you to perform any duties, and you
will therefore have your time to yourself, till you sail. I shall,
of course, forward my reasons for sending you to Lord Mornington,
and shall give an account of the services that you have rendered;
which will doubtless excite as much admiration in Calcutta as in
Bombay.

"I shall be glad if you will dine with me, the day after tomorrow,
when I shall ask the members of the Council to meet you."

On leaving the Governor, Harry at once went to the shop of the
Parsee merchant from whom he had obtained his regimentals, and
ordered the various uniforms required for the staff. He then went
to Soyera and, to his great satisfaction, found Sufder there. The
latter's troop was one of those which had been disbanded when, on
the arrival of Scindia, Bajee Rao deemed it necessary to reduce his
force; and Sufder, after staying for some time at Jooneer, had now
come down to see his cousin.

"I am glad, indeed, to find you here, Sufder; in the first place,
because it is always a pleasure to meet a good friend; and in the
second, because you can take Soyera back with you, and place her
with Ramdass."

"But why should I leave here, Harry?"

"Because, mother, I am to start for Madras in three weeks; and may
be, for aught I know, away for a year or more. Of course you can
remain here if you prefer it, but it seems to me that the other
would be the better plan."

"I should certainly prefer to go with Sufder to my home," Soyera
said. "I have numbers of acquaintances here, but no real friends;
and Ramdass and Anundee will, I know, joyfully receive me."

"At any rate, you shall be no burden to them, Soyera. I will give
you a thousand rupees, with which you can pay your share of the
expenses of the house or land; and I will give you a similar sum to
hand to Ramdass, as a token of my gratitude for his protection and
kindness. This will enable him to add to his holding, and to the
comforts of his house. I would willingly give much more, but it
might cause suspicion and enquiry, were he to extend his holding
largely; and the authorities of Jooneer might demand from him how
he became possessed of such means. As I told you, I have received
much money in presents, and could afford to give you very much
more, if it were of any advantage to you.

"I shall give a thousand rupees also to you, Sufder. They will be
useful to you, when you settle down on the revenues of your
district; and enable you to cut a good figure among the people when
you arrive there."

The day before he was to sail, a Hindu entered Harry's apartment
and, bowing deeply, handed him a letter. It was from Nana.

"My good English friend,

"I send the enclosed bill, upon my agent, as a small token of
acknowledgment for the inestimable service you have rendered me.
During my long life I have had many friends; but these, in
supporting me, acted in their own interest. You alone have shown me
absolutely disinterested friendship. I have always been opposed to
your people interfering in the affairs of the Deccan; but I see now
that nothing save their intervention can save the country from
absolute ruin, owing to the constant struggles for supremacy among
the great rajahs; and I see that it were far better we should enjoy
peace and protection, under a foreign power, than be exposed to
ruin and misery at the hands of warring factions.

"I grieve that I have not seen you again. Colonel Palmer tells me
that you are about to start for either Calcutta or Madras, to join
the army that is about to act against Tippoo. It is unlikely that I
shall ever see you again; but I shall never forget that, had it not
been for you, I should have ended my life a prisoner at
Ahmednuggur.

"Nana."

The bill enclosed was an order for a hundred thousand rupees, upon
Nana's agent in Bombay.

When Harry went to say goodbye to the Governor, the latter said:

"It is likely that you will see your old regiment before long,
Captain Lindsay. This morning a ship arrived, with orders from Lord
Mornington for us to send as many troops as could possibly be
spared, to ascend the southern Ghauts and join him near
Seringapatam. Lord Mornington is now at Madras, making arrangements
for an advance; when his brother, Colonel Wellesley, will move
forward with the Nizam's troops. There is still a doubt what part
the Mahrattas will take--probably they will hold aloof, altogether,
until they see how matters go. We know that Tippoo has sent
thirteen lakhs of rupees to Bajee Rao, and that the latter and
Scindia are in constant communication with him. However, at present
we shall take no notice of these proceedings; but allow the Peishwa
to believe that we are deceived by the constant assurances that he
gives us of his friendship, although he has declined to enter into
a treaty with us, similar to that which the Nizam has made.

"It is enough to have one formidable foe on our hands at a time,
and our experience of Bajee assures us that he will not commit
himself, by openly declaring for Tippoo, until he sees how matters
are going."

The winds were unfavourable, and it was not until six weeks after
leaving Bombay that Harry arrived at Madras. It was now November,
1798 and, on landing, he learned that General Harris was in command
of the army that was assembling at Vellore, and that the Governor
General had returned to Calcutta. He therefore at once went back to
the ship, which next day sailed for that town.

On arriving there he presented himself at the Government House and,
on sending in his name, was in a short time shown in to Lord
Mornington's private room.

"I am glad that you have come, Captain Lindsay," the latter said.
"I wish that you had been here sooner."

"I came by the first ship, sir, after the Governor of Bombay
received your letter but, owing to contrary winds, we have been
nearly two months on the voyage. I landed for an hour at Madras
and, hearing that you had returned here, I hesitated whether to
come to you for orders, or to join General Harris at Vellore; but I
thought it better to come on, and so again embarked on the ship,
which has only just anchored."

"You were quite right, sir, for it was an agent rather than a
soldier that I required. I own that I thought the Governor would
have sent an older man."

"I am the bearer of this letter from him. I believe that in it he
gives his reasons for the honour he did me, in selecting me for the
post."

"I will look through it, presently," Lord Mornington said; "and if
you will dine with me here, I shall then have read it, and shall be
able to decide where you can be employed to the best advantage."

The dinner was a quiet one, only the officers of the Governor
General's suite being present. The Governor received Harry with
much more cordiality than he had evinced at their first interview,
and introduced him to his officers, with the expression that
Captain Lindsay had done very valuable service in the Deccan.
Little allusion was made to business, until the other officers had
left, when Lord Mornington said:

"I have read the Governor of Bombay's letter, and am convinced that
he could have made no better choice than he has done. He speaks of
you in the highest terms, and has given me a slight sketch of your
story, and a fuller one of the manner in which you obtained the
release of Nana Furnuwees. I learn that Nana has always been
considered our friend; although we have not been able to give him
the support that we could wish, as this would have entailed war
with the Mahrattas, which Bombay is in no position to undertake.
Nevertheless, his release will doubtless, to some extent,
counterbalance the duplicity of the Peishwa who, while lavish in
his promises to us, is receiving money from Tippoo; and will
undoubtedly, unless restrained by Nana, openly espouse his cause,
should he gain any successes over us. You showed such intelligence
in the matter that he says I can place every confidence in you.

"Although the Nizam has been obliged to dismiss the French troops
in his service, and to send a portion of his army to act in
connection with our own against Mysore, he is in no way to be
trusted; being as slippery as the rest of these Indian princes and,
like the Mahrattas, would assuredly join Tippoo if he saw his way
to doing so. This is so certain that nothing would be gained by
sending another agent to Hyderabad. I therefore propose to open
communications with the Rajah of Berar.

"None of my officers is able to talk Mahratti; though many of them
are, of course, familiar with the southern dialects. The rajah is
already practically at war with the Mahrattas as, for a long time,
his troops have been ravaging the territory of Purseram Bhow; which
he was invited to do by the Peishwa, when Purseram took sides
against him. He is doubtless in some apprehension of an attack by
the Mahrattas and, upon our promising to guarantee his dominions,
and to give him support if attacked, he may be willing to venture
into an alliance with us; and his doing so would, alike, help us in
keeping the Nizam to his engagements, and deter the Mahrattas from
moving.

"This is the mission that I intend to confide to you. I believe
that it could not be in better hands. If you will call, tomorrow
afternoon, your written instructions and powers to act for me, and
to enter into engagements in my name, will be ready for you; and I
should wish you to start the next morning. You will have an escort
of twenty troopers. These Indian princes have little respect for
persons who travel unattended.

"You will understand that the instructions recite the maximum that
you are authorized to offer to the rajah. If he will be satisfied
with less you will, of course, grant as little as you can; if he
demands more, you must refer the matter to me. At any rate, so long
as you are negotiating, he will take no active steps against us;
though I have learned that Bajee Rao has already been at work,
trying to persuade him to join himself and Tippoo against us. Were
such a treaty concluded, we could no longer hope to retain the
Nizam; and indeed, should find it difficult to contend against so
powerful a confederacy. At any rate, if the rajah will not join us,
you must endeavour at least to secure his neutrality.

"The day after tomorrow you will start. I will have a route map
prepared for you. The distance to Nagpore is about eight hundred
miles, and you will get there in four weeks, travelling thirty
miles a day. I have given orders, today, for one of the Company's
ships of war to take you and your escort to the mouth of the
Ganjam; and express messengers have already started, with orders to
the commandant to provide waggons to carry your tent, equipage and
stores. You should, if the winds are favourable, reach there in
four or five days' time."

"The carts will delay us, sir, and without them we might make forty
miles a day, after we have landed; for the horses of this country
have great endurance."

"A few days will make no great difference. There are no towns of
any importance on the road to Nagpore, and you would have to put up
at wretched khans, and would be considered as worthy of little
consideration; whereas I wish you to travel in a style suitable for
my agent, and to impress the native mind with your importance.

"Have you horses?"

