"The Abbess of the Ursulines seems to have been at the bottom of it," I
explained, fretting with impatience.  This wonder was misplaced, I
thought; and time was passing.  "Madame d'O found out where she was," I
continued, "and took her home, and then sent me to fetch you, hearing
you had crossed the river.  That is the story in brief."

"That woman sent you to fetch me?"  he repeated again.

"Yes," I answered angrily.  "She did, M. de Pavannes."

"Then," he said slowly, and with an air of solemn conviction which
could not but impress me, "there is a trap laid for me! She is the
worst, the most wicked, the vilest of women!  If she sent you, this is
a trap!  And my wife has fallen into it already!  Heaven help her--and
me--if it be so!"



CHAPTER VIII.

THE PARISIAN MATINS.

There are some statements for which it is impossible to be prepared;
statements so strong and so startling that it is impossible to answer
them except by action--by a blow.  And this of M. de Pavannes was one
of these.  If there had been any one present, I think I should have
given him the lie and drawn upon him.  But alone with him at midnight
in the shadow near the bottom of the Rue des Fosses, with no witnesses,
with every reason to feel friendly towards him, what was I to do?

As a fact, I did nothing.  I stood, silent and stupefied, waiting to
hear more.  He did not keep me long.

"She is my wife's sister," he continued grimly.  "But I have no reason
to shield her on that account!  Shield her?  Had you lived at court
only a month I might shield her all I could, M. de Caylus, it would
avail nothing.  Not Madame de Sauves is better known.  And I would not
if I could!  I know well, though my wife will not believe it, that
there is nothing so near Madame d'O's heart as to get rid of her sister
and me--of both of us--that she may succeed to Madeleine's inheritance!
Oh, yes, I had good grounds for being nervous yesterday, when my wife
did not return," he added excitedly.

"But there at least you wrong Madame d'O!"  I cried, shocked and
horrified by an accusation, which seemed so much more dreadful in the
silence and gloom--and withal so much less preposterous than it might
have seemed in the daylight.  "There you certainly wrong her!  For
shame!  M. de Pavannes."

He came a step nearer, and laying a hand on my sleeve peered into my
face.  "Did you see a priest with her?"  he asked slowly.  "A man
called the Coadjutor--a down-looking dog?"

I said--with a shiver of dread, a sudden revulsion of feeling, born of
his manner--that I had.  And I explained the part the priest had taken.

"Then," Pavannes rejoined, "I am right There IS a trap laid for me.
The Abbess of the Ursulines!  She abduct my wife?  Why, she is her
dearest friend, believe me.  It is impossible.  She would be more
likely to save her from danger than to--umph!  wait a minute."  I did:
I waited, dreading what he might discover, until he muttered, checking
himself--"Can that be it?  Can it be that the Abbess did know of some
danger threatening us, and would have put Madeleine in a safe retreat?
I wonder!"

And I wondered; and then--well, thoughts are like gunpowder.  The least
spark will fire a train.  His words were few, but they formed spark
enough to raise such a flare in my brain as for a moment blinded me,
and shook me so that I trembled.  The shock over, I was left face to
face with a possibility of wickedness such as I could never have
suspected of myself.  I remembered Mirepoix's distress and the priest's
eagerness.  I re-called the gruff warning Bezers--even Bezers, and
there was something very odd in Bezers giving a warning!--had given
Madame de Pavannes when he told her that she would be better where she
was.  I thought of the wakefulness which I had marked in the streets,
the silent hurrying to and fro, the signs of coming strife, and
contrasted these with the quietude and seeming safety of Mirepoix's
house; and I hastily asked Pavannes at what time he had been arrested.

"About an hour before midnight," he answered.

"Then you know nothing of what is happening?"  I replied quickly. "Why,
even while we are loitering here--but listen!"

And with all speed, stammering indeed in my haste and anxiety, I told
him what I had noticed in the streets, and the hints I had heard, and I
showed him the badges with which Madame had furnished me.

His manner when he had heard me out frightened me still more.  He drew
me on in a kind of fury to a house in the windows of which some lighted
candles had appeared not a minute before.

"The ring!"  he cried, "let me see the ring!  Whose is it?"

He held up my hand to this chance light and we looked at the ring.  It
was a heavy gold signet, with one curious characteristic:  it had two
facets.  On one of these was engraved the letter "H," and above it a
crown.  On the other was an eagle with outstretched wings.

Pavannes let my hand drop and leaned against the wall in sudden
despair.  "It is the Duke of Guise's," he muttered.  "It is the eagle
of Lorraine."

"Ha!"  said I softly, seeing light.  The Duke was the idol then, as
later, of the Parisian populace, and I understood now why the citizen
soldiers had shown me such respect.  They had taken me for the Duke's
envoy and confidant.

But I saw no farther.  Pavannes did, and murmured bitterly, "We may say
our prayers, we Huguenots.  That is our death-warrant. To-morrow night
there will not be one left in Paris, lad.  Guise has his father's death
to avenge, and these cursed Parisians will do his bidding like the
wolves they are!  The Baron de Rosny warned us of this, word for word.
I would to Heaven we had taken his advice!"

"Stay!"  I cried--he was going too fast for me--"stay!"  His monstrous
conception, though it marched some way with my own suspicions, outran
them far!  I saw no sufficient grounds for it. "The King--the king
would not permit such a thing, M. de Pavannes," I argued.

"Boy, you are blind!"  he rejoined impatiently, for now he saw all and
I nothing.  "Yonder was the Duke of Anjou's captain--Monsieur's
officer, the follower of France's brother, mark you! And HE--he obeyed
the Duke's ring!  The Duke has a free hand to-night, and he hates us.
And the river.  Why are we not to cross the river?  The King indeed!
The King has undone us.  He has sold us to his brother and the Guises.
VA CHASSER L'IDOLE" for the second time I heard the quaint phrase,
which I learned afterwards was an anagram of the King's name, Charles
de Valois, used by the Protestants as a password--"VA CHASSER L'IDOLE
has betrayed us!  I remember the very words he used to the Admiral,
'Now we have got you here we shall not let you go so easily!' Oh, the
traitor!  The wretched traitor!"

He leaned against the wall overcome by the horror of the conviction
which had burst upon him, and unnerved by the imminence of the peril.
At all times he was an unready man, I fancy, more fit, courage apart,
for the college than the field; and now he gave way to despair.
Perhaps the thought of his wife unmanned him.  Perhaps the excitement
through which he had already gone tended to stupefy him, or the
suddenness of the discovery.

At any rate, I was the first to gather my wits together, and my
earliest impulse was to tear into two parts a white handkerchief I had
in my pouch, and fasten one to his sleeve, the other in his hat, in
rough imitation of the badges I wore myself.

It will appear from this that I no longer trusted Madame d'O.  I was
not convinced, it is true, of her conscious guilt, still I did not
trust her entirely.  "Do not wear them on your return," she had said
and that was odd; although I could not yet believe that she was such a
siren as Father Pierre had warned us of, telling tales from old poets.
Yet I doubted, shuddering as I did so.  Her companionship with that
vile priest, her strange eagerness to secure Pavannes' return, her
mysterious directions to me, her anxiety to take her sister home--home,
where she would be exposed to danger, as being in a known Huguenot's
house--these things pointed to but one conclusion; still that one was
so horrible that I would not, even while I doubted and distrusted her,
I would not, I could not accept it.  I put it from me, and refused to
believe it, although during the rest of that night it kept coming back
to me and knocking for admission at my brain.

All this flashed through my mind while I was fixing on Pavannes'
badges.  Not that I lost time about it, for from the moment I grasped
the position as he conceived it, every minute we had wasted on
explanations seemed to me an hour.  I reproached myself for having
forgotten even for an instant that which had brought us to town--the
rescue of Kit's lover.  We had small chance now of reaching him in
time, misled as we had been by this miserable mistake in identity.  If
my companion's fears were well founded, Louis would fall in the general
massacre of the Huguenots, probably before we could reach him.  If
ill-founded, still we had small reason to hope.  Bezers' vengeance
would not wait.  I knew him too well to think it.  A Guise might spare
his foe, but the Vidame--the Vidame never!  We had warned Madame de
Pavannes it was true; but that abnormal exercise of benevolence could
only, I cynically thought, have the more exasperated the devil within
him, which now would be ravening like a dog disappointed of its
victuals.

I glanced up at the line of sky visible between the tall houses, and
lo!  the dawn was coming.  It wanted scarcely half-an-hour of daylight,
though down in the dark streets about us the night still reigned.  Yes,
the morning was coming, bright and hopeful, and the city was quiet.
There were no signs, no sounds of riot or disorder.  Surely, I thought,
surely Pavannes must be mistaken.  Either the plot had never existed,
that was most likely, or it had been abandoned, or perhaps--Crack!

A pistol shot!  Short, sharp, ominous it rang out on the instant, a
solitary sound in the night!  It was somewhere near us, and I stopped.
I had been speaking to my companion at the moment. "Where was it?"  I
cried, looking behind me.

"Close to us.  Near the Louvre," he answered, listening intently. "See!
See!  Ah, heavens!"  he continued in a voice of despair, "it was a
signal!"

It was.  One, two, three!  Before I could count so far, lights sprang
into brightness in the windows of nine out of ten houses in the short
street where we stood, as if lighted by a single hand.  Before too I
could count as many more, or ask him what this meant, before indeed, we
could speak or stir from the spot, or think what we should do, with a
hurried clang and clash, as if brought into motion by furious frenzied
hands, a great bell just above our heads began to boom and whirr!  It
hurled its notes into space, it suddenly filled all the silence.  It
dashed its harsh sounds down upon the trembling city, till the air
heaved, and the houses about us rocked.  It made in an instant a
pandemonium of the quiet night.

We turned and hurried instinctively from the place, crouching and
amazed, looking upwards with bent shoulders and scared faces. "What is
it?  What is it?"  I cried, half in resentment; half in terror.  It
deafened me.

"The bell of St. Germain l'Auxerrois!"  he shouted in answer. "The
Church of the Louvre.  It is as I said.  We are doomed!"

"Doomed?  No!"  I replied fiercely, for my courage seemed to rise again
on the wave of sound and excitement as if rebounding from the momentary
shock.  "Never!  We wear the devil's livery, and he will look after his
own.  Draw, man, and let him that stops us look to himself.  You know
the way.  Lead on!"  I cried savagely.

He caught the infection and drew his sword.  So we started boldly, and
the result justified my confidence.  We looked, no doubt, as like
murderers as any who were abroad that night. Moving in this desperate
guise we hastened up that street and into another--still pursued by the
din and clangour of the bell--and then a short distance along a third.
We were not stopped or addressed by anyone, though numbers, increasing
each moment as door after door opened, and we drew nearer to the heart
of the commotion, were hurrying in the same direction, side by side
with us; and though in front, where now and again lights gleamed on a
mass of weapons, or on white eager faces, filling some alley from wall
to wall, we heard the roar of voices rising and falling like the murmur
of an angry sea.

All was blur, hurry, confusion, tumult.  Yet I remember, as we pressed
onwards with the stream and part of it, certain sharp outlines.  I
caught here and there a glimpse of a pale scared face at a window, a
half-clad form at a door, of the big, wondering eyes of a child held up
to see us pass, of a Christ at a corner ruddy in the smoky glare of a
link, of a woman armed, and in man's clothes, who walked some distance
side by side with us, and led off a ribald song.  I retain a memory of
these things:  of brief bursts of light and long intervals of darkness,
and always, as we tramped forwards, my hand on Pavannes' sleeve, of an
ever-growing tumult in front--an ever-rising flood of noise.

At last we came to a standstill where a side street ran out of ours.
Into this the hurrying throng tried to wheel, and, unable to do so,
halted, and pressed about the head of the street, which was already
full to overflowing; and so sought with hungry eyes for places whence
they might look down it.  Pavannes and I struggled only to get through
the crowd--to get on; but the efforts of those behind partly aiding and
partly thwarting our own, presently forced us to a position whence we
could not avoid seeing what was afoot.

The street--this side street was ablaze with light.  From end to end
every gable, every hatchment was glowing, every window was flickering
in the glare of torches.  It was paved too with faces--human faces, yet
scarcely human--all looking one way, all looking upward; and the noise,
as from time to time this immense crowd groaned or howled in unison,
like a wild beast in its fury, was so appalling, that I clutched
Pavannes' arm and clung to him in momentary terror.  I do not wonder
now that I quailed, though sometimes I have heard that sound since.
For there is nothing in the world so dreadful as that brute beast we
call the CANAILLE, when the chain is off and its cowardly soul is
roused.

Near our end of the street a group of horsemen rising island-like from
the sea of heads, sat motionless in their saddles about a gateway.
They were silent, taking no notice of the rioting fiends shouting at
their girths, but watching in grim quiet what was passing within the
gates.  They were handsomely dressed, although some wore corslets over
their satin coats or lace above buff jerkins.  I could even at that
distance see the jewels gleam in the bonnet of one who seemed to be
their leader.  He was in the centre of the band, a very young man,
perhaps twenty or twenty-one, of most splendid presence, sitting his
horse superbly.  He wore a grey riding-coat, and was a head taller than
any of his companions.  There was pride in the very air with which his
horse bore him.

I did not need to ask Pavannes who he was.  I KNEW that he was the Duke
of Guise, and that the house before which he stood was Coligny's.  I
knew what was being done there.  And in the same moment I sickened with
horror and rage.  I had a vision of grey hairs and blood and fury
scarcely human, And I rebelled.  I battled with the rabble about me.  I
forced my way through them tooth and nail after Pavannes, intent only
on escaping, only on getting away from there.  And so we neither halted
nor looked back until we were clear of the crowd and had left the blaze
of light and the work doing by it some way behind us.

We found ourselves then in the mouth of an obscure alley which my
companion whispered would bring us to his house; and here we paused to
take breath and look back.  The sky was red behind us, the air full of
the clash and din of the tocsin, and the flood of sounds which poured
from every tower and steeple.  From the eastward came the rattle of
drums and random shots, and shrieks of "A BAS COLIGNY!"  "A BAS LES
HUGUENOTS!"  Meanwhile the city was rising as one man, pale at this
dread awakening.  From every window men and women, frightened by the
uproar, were craning their necks, asking or answering questions or
hurriedly calling for and kindling tapers.  But as yet the general
populace seemed to be taking no active part in the disorder.

Pavannes raised his hat an instant as we stood in the shadow of the
houses.  "The noblest man in France is dead," he said, softly and
reverently.  "God rest his soul!  They have had their way with him and
killed him like a dog.  He was an old man and they did not spare him!
A noble, and they have called in the CANAILLE to tear him.  But be
sure, my friend"--and as the speaker's tone changed and grew full and
proud, his form seemed to swell with it--"be sure the cruel shall not
live out half their days!  No. He that takes the knife shall perish by
the knife!  And go to his own place!  I shall not see it, but you will!"

