"Oh come, I'm not going to stand that," cried Mark, dragging at the
pony's head.  "You're so full of oats now that you can hardly move, and
he'll be looking back directly, and thinking I'm afraid to come on."

The cob's head was up: so was its obstinate nature.  It evidently
considered it would be a sin to leave such a delicious salad, so
tempting and juicy, and suitable after a peck or two of dry, husky oats;
and, thoroughly determined not to pass the herbage by, it set its fore
feet straight out a good distance apart, and strained at the reins till,
as Mark pulled and pressed his feet against the stirrups, it seemed
probable that there would be a break.

"Oh, you brute!" cried the lad angrily; "you ugly, coarse, obstinate
brute!  Pony!  You're not a pony, I feel sure; you're only a miserable
mule, and your father was some long-eared, thick-skinned, thin-tailed,
muddle-headed, old jackass.  Look here!  I'll take out my sword, and
prick you with the point."

The cob evidently did not believe it, and kept on the strain of the bit,
till the lad took a rein in each hand, and began to saw the steel from
side to side, making it rattle against the animal's teeth.

This seemed to have a pleasant effect on the hard mouth, and produced
the result of the cob nodding its head a little; and just then, to
Mark's great disgust, Ralph turned his head and looked back.

"There!  I expected as much.  Now go on, you beast, or I'll kill you."

The pony snorted with satisfaction, for in his excitement, the rider had
slackened the reins a little.  Down went the animal's muzzle; there was
another puff to blow away the insects, and it began to crop again, with
that pleasant sound heard when grazing animals are amongst rich herbage.

Then followed a fresh struggle, and the pony won, taking not the
slightest notice of the insulting remarks made by its rider about its
descent, appearance, and habits.

But at last, perhaps because it had had its own way, more probably
because it was not hungry, and just when the rider was thinking of
getting down to walk, and sending Dummy Rugg to find the animal next
day, it raised its head, ground up a little grass between its teeth and
then began to follow Ralph once more, as he trudged on without turning
his head again.

Still, try as he would, Mark could not get the animal to break into a
canter; in fact, the way was impossible; and when the sun had sunk down
below the western hill, which cast a great purple shadow, to begin
rising slowly higher and higher against the mountain on his left, he and
Ralph were still at about the same distance apart.

"I can't halloa to him to stop," muttered Mark angrily; "I don't want to
seem to know him, but to overtake him, and appear surprised, and then
break into a quarrel hotly and at once.  Oh! it's enough to drive anyone
mad.  You brute!  I'll never try to ride you again."

Rather hard, this, upon the patient beast which had carried him for many
miles that day, and was carefully abstaining now from cantering
recklessly amongst dangerous stones, and giving its master a heavy fall.
But boys will be unreasonable sometimes, almost as unreasonable as some
men.

Finding at last that drumming the cob's sides was of no use, jerking the
bit of not the slightest avail, and that whacks with the sheathed sword
only produced whisks of the tail, Mark subsided into a sulky silence,
and rode at a walk, watching the enemy's back as he trudged steadily on.

The vale grew more gloomy on the right side, the steep limestone hill
being all in shadow, and the rough blocks looked like grotesque
creatures peering out from among the blackening bushes; and as he rode
on, the lad could not help thinking that by night the place might easily
scare ignorant, untutored, superstitious people, who saw, or fancied
they saw, strange lights here and there.

"And in the sunshine it is as bright as the other hill," thought Mark,
as he glanced at the left side of the dale; "not very bright, though.
It's a desolate place at the best of times;" and once more he glanced up
the steep slope on his right.

"Wonder why they call it Ergles," he mused.  "Let's see; it's up there
where the cave with the hot spring is.  Not a bit farther on."

He was still a long distance from home, and knowing that before long
Ralph Darley would turn off to the left, he again made an effort to urge
on the cob, but in vain.

"And he'll go home thinking I'm afraid," muttered the lad; "but first
time I meet him, and he isn't a miserable, wretched, contemptible
cripple, I'll show him I'm not."

"Then you shall show him now," the cob seemed to say, for it broke into
a smart canter, but only because the bottom of the dale was here free
from stones, and in a very short time Ralph was overtaken.

"Here, hi! fellow! clear the road," shouted Mark; and he essayed to
stop.  But now, the way being good, the cob was anxious to get on and
reach its stable, passing Ralph quickly enough, and enraging its rider
more and more.

"Oh, you brute, you brute!" he muttered.  "Now he can't help thinking
I'm afraid of him.  If I only had a whip."

For the moment Mark felt disposed to turn in the saddle, and make some
insulting gesture at the lad behind--one that would make him, if he had
any courage within, come running rapidly in pursuit.  But the act would
have seemed too weak and boyish, when he wanted to be manly; and he
refrained, contenting himself with dragging hard at the rein, till a
hundred yards farther the ground grew stony again, and the pony dropped
into a walk, and picked its way in and out more slowly than ever.

This had the result that Mark desired, for a glance back showed him that
Ralph was coming on fast, and in a few minutes he had overtaken him,
just as he sprang off his pony and faced round.

"Oh, it is you," said Mark haughtily.

"Yes," said Ralph, meeting his eyes boldly.

"I thought it was.  Well, you are not lame now?"

"No."

"And I see you have a sword."

"Yes, I have my sword."

"Then as we are equal now, and if you are not afraid, we may as well
have a little conversation with them."

"Fight?" said Ralph quietly.  "Why?"

"Ha-ha!" laughed Mark, with his face flushing.  "Why?  Because we are
gentlemen, I suppose; because we have been taught to use our swords; at
least I have; and it's the worse for you if you have not."

"But I have," said Ralph firmly, his own cheeks beginning to look hot;
"but I don't see that this is a reason why we two should fight."

"Then I'll give you another," cried Mark; "because you are a Darley, and
I am an Eden, and we cannot meet without drawing swords.  Your people
were always a set of cut-throats, murderers, robbers, and thieves."

"It's a lie," cried Ralph hotly.  "My people were always gentlemen.  It
was your people who always insulted ours, as you are insulting me now,
and did a few minutes ago, when you passed me going quietly on my way."

"That's enough," said Mark sharply.  "Out of the way, beast," and he
drew his sword and struck the cob sharply on the flank, sending it
trotting onward at the risk of breaking its knees.

"This is your doing," said Ralph quietly, as he threw down his rod, and
passed the strap of his creel over his head, to swing it after.

"Bah! don't talk," cried Mark hotly.  "This place will do.  It is as
fair for you as for me."

He made a gesture with his sword toward a tolerably level spot, and
Ralph bowed his head.

"Then draw," cried Mark, throwing down his cap.

Ralph followed his example, and the next moment his own bright blade
leaped from its sheath, and without further preliminary, they crossed
their trusty blades, which emitted a harsh grating noise as they played
up and down, flashing in the paling evening light, each awaiting the
other's attack.

Mark, in the fear that his enemy would doubt his prowess, began the
attack; and in defending himself from his adversary's thrusts Ralph soon
showed him that he had learned the use of his thin rapier from a master
the equal of his own teacher, thus making the hot-headed youth more
cautious, and ready to turn aside the thrusts which followed when he
ceased his own.

They fenced equally well, and for a few minutes no harm was done.  Then
all at once, in response to a quick thrust, a spot appeared high up
above the russet leather boot which came half-way up Mark's thigh, and
Ralph leaped back with a strange feeling of compunction attacking him
that he could not understand.

"Nothing," cried Mark angrily; "a scratch," as he pressed his teeth upon
his nether lip; and they crossed swords once more, with the wounded lad
commencing the attack with as much vigour as before.  And now, forgetful
of everything but the desire to lay one another _hors de combat_, they
thrust and parried for the next minute, till Ralph uttered a faint cry,
as his adversary's sword passed through his doublet, between his right
arm and ribs, a sharp pang warning him that the blade had pierced
something more than the velvet he wore.

Mark dropped the point of his blade, for at that moment a whistle rang
out, and he looked inquiringly in the direction from which it had come,
leaving himself quite open to any treacherous attack had it been
intended.

But none was meant, Ralph standing with his left hand pressing his side,
just below the armpit, as another whistle was heard from a fresh
direction.  Others followed, and the adversaries looked sharply at each
other.

"Not birds," said Ralph quickly.

"Don't look like it," said Mark bitterly, as he drew his breath with a
hissing noise, as if in pain.

"We're surrounded," cried Ralph excitedly, as they saw six or seven men
appearing from different directions, and evidently all making the spot
where the lads now stood the centre for which they aimed.

"You coward!" cried Mark bitterly--"a trap--your father's men.  _En
garde_!" he shouted.  "You shall pay for this!"

"My father's men?" cried Ralph angrily, as he ignored the other's
preparations for a fresh attack.  "You're mad; can't you see they're
those scoundrels who came to us--Captain Purlrose and his men.  Look,
there he is--up yonder by that hole."

"What do they mean, then?" cried Mark, dropping the point of his weapon.

"Mischief to us," cried Ralph.

"Or me," said Mark suspiciously.

"To us, I tell you," cried Ralph.--"You won't give in?"

"No; will you?"

"Not if you'll stand by me."

"And I will," cried Mark excitedly.

"But you are wounded."

"So are you."

"I don't feel it now."

"No more do I.  Hurrah, then; let them come on!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

FIGHTING LONG ODDS.

But the men did not come on, and the two lads, now breathing hard from
their exertions, had time to think as well as recover their breath, for
the men, after carefully approaching singly from different directions,
so as to surround the combatants, now halted as if by one consent a good
fifty yards away, each looking upward from time to time at the burly
cloaked figure high above them, and now standing upon a big block of
stone, making signals by waving his arms and pointing.

In answer to one of these signals, the men all took off the long cloaks
they wore; and in a moment the thought flashed through Mark Eden's brain
that these men must have been seen seated round their fire, somewhere
above, and hence had arisen the rumours of witches on the mountain
slope, the cloaks being their long gowns.

And now, as the men stood fast, in spite of several signs from above,
Ralph suddenly said:

"Perhaps they've only come to see us fight, and are waiting for us to
begin again."

"Not they," cried Mark excitedly.  "I know: they mean to take us
prisoners, and keep us till we're ransomed."

"Perhaps.  That is why we have heard of so many robberies," said Ralph,
whose hot anger against his enemy was fast cooling down.

"Yes, that's it.  The dogs!" cried Mark.  "I know there's a big cave up
there that you go in through a narrow crack.  I saw it once.  They
couldn't get my father to have them up at the Tor, and so they've taken
possession of the cavern and turned robbers.  Well, my father will soon
rout them out of there."

"If yours don't, mine will," replied Ralph.  "But they don't seem
disposed to interfere.  Are they stopping to see us fight?"

"If they are," cried Mark hotly, "they'll have to wait a long time.  I'm
not going to make a raree-show of myself to please them."

"Nor I neither," cried Ralph.  "But," he added hastily, "you know I'm
not afraid?"

"Say you know that I'm not afraid either, and I'll say the same."

"Oh, I'll say that," replied Ralph, "because I know it."

"That's right, then," said Mark; "and we can finish having it out
another time."

"Of course.  I say, though, your leg's bleeding a good deal."

"Oh, never mind that.  So's your arm."

"Can't be deep," said Ralph, "because it only smarts a bit.  I say, look
there!  That's Captain Purlrose upon the stone, and he's making signals
again."

The wide ring of men saw the signs made by the burly figure above, and
they all wrapped their cloaks round their left arms, and then drew their
swords.

"Then they do mean to fight," cried Mark excitedly.

"Yes, but they don't come on.  I say: you're not going to let them take
you prisoner, are you?"

"I'm not going to run away," said Mark sturdily.

"But they are six to one," said Ralph.

"Yes, if you stand still and look on.  If you won't let them take you,
they'll only be three to one."

"I'm going to make a dash for it," said Ralph, setting his teeth hard,
for his wound smarted a good deal, and there was a peculiar warm feeling
as of something trickling down his sleeve.

"What, run away?"

"Who said I was going to run away?" cried Ralph.  "Look here: in war two
kings who hate one another often join together against an enemy."

"Of course," said Mark.

"I hate you and all your family, but we don't want any one else to set
up here, near our homes, do we?"

"No," said Mark sharply.

"Then I'll stand by you like a trump," cried Ralph; "if you'll stand by
me now.  It's long odds, but we've got right on our side."

"Shake hands on it then," cried Mark--"No, we can't do that, because
it's like making friends, when we're enemies and hate one another."

"No, we can't shake hands," said Ralph warmly, "but we can make our
swords kiss hilts, and that's joining together for the fight."

"Agreed," cried Mark; and the lace steel shells of their rapiers clinked
together, making the men, who were watching them intently, exchange
glances.  "I say," said Mark hastily, "wasn't that a mistake?"

"What?"

"Joining like that.  It's making our swords friends."

"Only till this skirmish is over," said Ralph.

"Oh yes; of course.  We can make the blades kiss then.  Here, what's
that Captain what-you-may-call-him doing, waving his arms like that?"

"Means for them to come on and attack.  He's savage because they don't,"
said Ralph.

"Yes, that's it.  I believe they're afraid of getting more holes in
their jerkins."

"Ha-ha!" laughed Ralph; "and they have no room, I suppose.  Look here,
let's have a dash for it."

"What! run away?  That I won't, from them, so long as I've got a sword."

"Run away!  No!" cried Ralph, who was bubbling over with excitement, the
slight wound he had received acting as a spur to his natural desire to
punish some one for his pain.  "Can't you see that if we make a dash at
them on one side, we shall only have two to fight for a bit till the
others can come up; and we might wound the first two if we're quick,
before their companions could attack."

"Well said, general," cried Mark excitedly.  "That's right.  Let's look
sharp then, for my leg hurts as if it was getting stiff."

"Never mind your leg.  Hallo! hark!"

"Why don't you come on yourself, then?" shouted one of the men, in
answer to a good deal of gesticulation from the captain.  "Take care you
don't get a hole in your skin."

"Hurrah!" cried Mark; "they are afraid.  Ready?"

"Yes; come on!" cried Ralph; and the two lads made a rush at the men who
stood in their homeward way, astonishing them so that they turned and
ran before the attacking party had gone half-a-dozen paces.

But a yell of execration rose from the others, as they now made a rush
after the lads, who became pursuers and pursued as well.

A savage yell, too, came from high up the mountain slope, the captain
being joined by the rest of his gang, and standing shouting and waving
his hands furiously.

The position now was this: Two men were running, with the lads some
