Twenty drops, and no more."

"My hand is as steady as your own, and I can count the drops as
accurately," she rejoined, taking the phial from him. "Twenty, you say?"

"Twenty, my lady," rejoined Hatton, evidently displeased; "but perhaps
you had better confine yourself to fifteen, or even ten. 'T will be
safer."

"You think the larger dose might give me too much strength--ha! What say
you to fifty, or a hundred?"

"It must not be, my lady--it must not be. You will destroy yourself. It
is my duty to prevent you. I must insist upon your giving me back the
phial, unless you will consent to obey my orders."

"But I tell you, man, I will have a hundred drops of the cordial," she
cried pertinaciously.

"And I say you shall not, my lady," he rejoined, unable in his anger to
maintain the semblance of respect he had hitherto preserved, and
endeavouring to obtain forcible possession of the phial.

But she was too quick for him. And as he stretched out his hand for the
purpose, the dagger gleamed before his eyes.

"Back, miscreant!" she cried; "your over-eagerness has betrayed you. I
now fully believe what I have hitherto doubted, that this is a
counter-poison, and that I may safely use it. It is time to unmask you,
and to let you know that your villanies are discovered. I am aware of
the malignant practices you have resorted to, and that my daughter and
myself would have been destroyed by your poisonous preparations. But I
now feel some security in the antidote I have obtained; and if I do
perish I have the satisfaction of knowing that I shall not die
unavenged, but that certain punishment awaits you and your employers."

On this she poured out half the contents of the phial into the glass,
saying as she drank it, "I reserve the other half for Lady Roos."

Luke Hatton, who appeared thunder-stricken, made no further effort to
prevent her, but turned to fly. Lady Lake, however, upon whom the
restorative effect of the cordial was almost magical, ordered him to
stay, telling him if he went forth he would be arrested, on hearing
which he sullenly obeyed her.

"You have not deceived me as to the efficacy of the potion," said the
lady; "it has given me new life, and with returning vigour I can view
all things as I viewed them heretofore. Now mark what I have to say,
villain. You have placed me and my daughter in fearful jeopardy; but it
is in your power to make reparation for the injury; and as I hold you to
be a mere instrument in the matter, I am willing to spare the life you
have forfeited, on condition of your making a full confession in writing
of your attempt, to be 'used by me against your employers. Are you
willing to do this, or shall I strike upon the bell, and have you bound
hand and foot, and conveyed to the Gatehouse?"

"I will write that I was employed by the Countess of Exeter to poison
you and my Lady Roos," replied Luke Hatton, stubbornly; "but I will do
nothing more."

"That will suffice," replied Lady Lake, after a moment's reflection.

"And when I have done it, I shall be free to go?" he asked.

"You shall be free to go," she replied.

There were writing materials on an adjoining table, and, without
another word, Luke Hatton sat down, and with great expedition drew up a
statement which he signed, and handed to Lady Lake; asking if that was
what she required?

A smile lighted up her ghastly features as she perused it.

"It will do," she said. "And now answer me one question, and you are
free. Will this cordial have the same effect on my daughter as on me?"

"Precisely the same. It will cure her. But you must proceed more
cautiously. Were she to take the quantity you have taken, it would kill
her. Am I now at liberty to depart?"

"You are," replied Lady Lake.

So saying, she struck the bell, and immediately afterwards the door was
opened; not, however, by the attendants, but by Sir Thomas Lake.

As the Secretary of State perceived that the apothecary avoided him, and
would have passed forth quickly, he sternly and authoritatively
commanded him to stay, exclaiming, "You stir not hence, till you have
accounted to me for my daughter, who, I understand, is dying from your
pernicious treatment. What ho, there! Keep strict watch without; and
suffer not this man to pass forth!"




CHAPTER III.

Showing that "our pleasant vices are made the whips to scourge us."


We must now request the reader to visit the noble mansion in the Strand,
erected by Thomas Cecil, then Earl of Exeter, and bearing-his name; in a
chamber of which Lord Roos and the Countess of Exeter will be found
alone together--alone for the last time.

Very different was the deportment of the guilty pair towards each other
from what it used to be. The glances they exchanged were no longer those
of passionate love, but of undissembled hatred. Bitter reproaches had
been uttered on one side, angry menaces on the other. Ever since the
fatal order had been wrested from the Countess, her peace of mind had
been entirely destroyed, and she had become a prey to all the horrors of
remorse. Perceiving the change in her sentiments towards him, Lord Roos
strove, by the arts which had hitherto proved so successful, to win back
the place he had lost in her affections; but failing in doing so, and
irritated by her reproaches, and still more by her coldness, he gave
vent to his displeasure in terms that speedily produced a decided
quarrel between them; and though reconciled in appearance, they never
again were to each other what they had been.

As this was to be their final meeting, they had agreed not to embitter
it with unavailing reproaches and recriminations. Lord Roos acquainted
the Countess that he had decided upon travelling into Italy and Spain,
and remaining abroad for a lengthened period; and the announcement of
his intention was received by her without an objection. Perhaps he hoped
that when put to this trial she might relent. If so, he was
disappointed. She even urged him not to delay his departure, and
concluded her speech with these words--

"Something tells me we shall meet no more in this world. But we are
certain to meet hereafter at the Judgment Seat. How shall we regard each
other then?"

"Trouble me not with the question," rejoined Lord Roos gloomily; "I have
not come here to listen to sermons, and will brook no more reproaches."

"I do not mean to reproach you, William," she returned meekly; "but the
thought of our dire offence rises perpetually before me. Would we could
undo what we have done!"

"I tell you it is too late," rejoined Lord Roos harshly.

At this moment Diego suddenly presented himself, and apologizing for the
abruptness of his entrance, accounted for it by saying that Sarah
Swarton besought a word with his Lordship. She brought a message, he
added, from Lady Roos, who was much worse, and not finding his Lordship
at his own residence had ventured to follow him to Exeter House to
deliver it.

"I will come to her anon," said Lord Roos carelessly.

"No, no; admit her at once, Diego," cried the Countess; "I would hear
what she has to say." And the next moment Sarah Swarton being ushered
into the room, she rushed up to her and eagerly demanded, "How fares it
with your lady? Is there any hope for her?"

"None whatever," replied Sarah, shaking her head sadly. "She is past all
chance of recovery."

"Then Heaven pardon me!" ejaculated the Countess, clasping her hands
together, and falling upon her knees.

Sarah Swarton gazed at her in astonishment; while Lord Roos, rushing
towards her, commanded her to rise.

"Take heed what you say and do, Countess," he whispered. "You will
excite this woman's suspicions."

"Why should your ladyship implore Heaven's pardon because my poor dear
lady is near her end?" inquired Sarah.

"I sue for it because I have caused her much affliction," replied the
Countess.

"Your message, Sarah--your message?" interposed Lord Roos. "What have
you to say to me?"

"My lady desires to see you once more before she expires, my lord,"
replied Sarah. "She would take leave of you; and--and--she has something
to impart to you. You will not refuse her last request?"

"He will not--he will not, I am sure," cried the Countess, seeing him
look irresolute.

"I did not expect to be seconded by you, my lady," observed Sarah, in
increasing surprise.

"Would that I, too, might see her and obtain her forgiveness!" exclaimed
the Countess, without heeding the remark.

"An idle wish, and not to be indulged," said Lord Roos.

A sudden idea appeared to strike Sarah, and she cried, "Your ladyship's
desire may possibly be gratified. My poor lady desires to part in peace
with all the world, even with those who have injured her. I will
communicate your wishes to her, and it may be she will consent to see
you."

"You shall have a reward well worthy of the service if you accomplish
it," said the Countess. "Hasten to her with all speed, my Lord, and I
will follow in my litter, ready to attend Sarah's summons."

"I like not the plan," rejoined Lord Roos. "You are wrong to go. Why
need you see her?"

"Why?" she answered, regarding him fixedly. "Because it may be some
little consolation to me afterwards."

"Then go alone," said Lord Roos savagely. "I will not accompany you."

"I do not ask you to accompany me, but to precede me," she replied.
"Now, mark me, my Lord," she added in a low, firm tone, "and be assured
I do not advance more than I will perform. If you refuse your wife's
dying request, I will go back with Sarah and confess all to her."

Lord Roos looked as if he could have annihilated her, and muttered a
terrible imprecation on her head.

"Threaten me--ay, and execute your threats hereafter if you will,"
continued the Countess in the same low decided tone, "but go you _shall_
now."

Her manner was so irresistible that Lord Roos was compelled to obey, and
he quitted the room without a word more, followed by Diego and Sarah
Swarton, the latter of whom signed to the Countess that she might depend
upon the fulfilment of her wishes.

They had not been gone many minutes before Lady Exeter entered her
litter, and wholly unattended by page or serving-man, except those in
charge of the conveyance, caused herself to be conveyed to Sir Thomas
Lake's lodgings in Whitehall.




CHAPTER IV.

How the forged Confession was produced.


Summoning up all his firmness for the interview with his lady, Lord Roos
entered her chamber, attended by Sarah Swarton, and beheld her propped
up by pillows, bearing evident marks in her countenance of the severe
sufferings she had endured. She was emaciated in frame, and almost livid
in complexion; hollow-cheeked and hollow-eyed; but still with a look of
unaltered affection for him.

Having fulfilled her mission, Sarah left them alone together.

He took the thin fingers extended towards him, and pressed them to his
lips, but scarcely dared to raise his eyes towards his wife, so much was
he shocked by her appearance. It was with difficulty she gave utterance
to the words she addressed to him.

"I thank you for coming to me, my Lord," she said; "but you will not
regret your kindness. We are quite alone, are we not? My eyes are so dim
that I cannot distinguish any object at the other end of the room--but I
can see you plainly enough, my dear Lord."

"We are alone, Elizabeth," replied Lord Roos, in a voice of some
emotion, after glancing around.

"Then I may speak freely," she continued. "What I predicted has
occurred. You did not do well, my dear Lord, to take that phial from me
and place it in other hands. Nay, start not! I know I am poisoned: I
have known it from the first. But I have made no effort to save myself,
for I was aware it was your will I should die."

"O, Elizabeth!" murmured her husband.

"I was aware of it," she repeated; "and as I have never voluntarily
disobeyed you, I would not now thwart your purpose, even though I myself
must be the sacrifice. It was to tell you this that I have sent for you.
It was to forgive--to bless you."

And as she spoke she threw her arms round his neck, and he felt his
cheek wet with her tears.

"This is more than I can bear," cried Lord Roos, in a voice suffocated
by emotion. "I thought I had firmness for anything; but it deserts me
entirely now. You are an angel of goodness, Elizabeth; as I am a demon
of darkness. I do not deserve your forgiveness."

"You will deserve it, if you will comply with the request I am about to
make to you," she rejoined, looking at him beseechingly.

"Whatever it be it shall be granted, if in my power," he rejoined
earnestly. "I would redeem your life, if I could, at the price of my
own. You have exorcised the evil spirit from me, Elizabeth."

"Then I shall die happy," she replied, with a smile of ineffable
delight.

"But the request! What is it you would have me perform?" he asked.

"I would have you spare my mother," she replied. "I know she has been
dealt with in the same way as myself; but I also know there is yet time
to save her."

"It shall be done," said Lord Roos, emphatically. "Where is she?"

"In the adjoining chamber."

"Is Luke Hatton in attendance upon her?"

"In constant attendance," she rejoined. "That man has obeyed you well,
my Lord. But take heed of him: he is a dangerous weapon, and may injure
the hand that employs him. Strike gently upon that bell. He will attend
the summons."

Lord Roos complied; when, to his astonishment and dismay, the curtains
shrouding the entrance to the adjoining room were drawn aside, and Lady
Lake stalked from behind them. Never before had she surveyed her
son-in-law with such a glance of triumph as she threw upon him now.

"You were mistaken you see, Elizabeth," said Lord Roos to his lady.
"Your mother needs no aid. She is perfectly well."

"Ay, well enough to confound you and all your wicked purposes, my Lord,"
cried Lady Lake. "You have not accomplished my destruction, as you
perceive; nor shall you accomplish your wife's destruction, though you
have well-nigh succeeded. Let it chafe you to madness to learn that I
possess an antidote, which I have myself approved, and which will kill
the poison circling in her veins, and give her new life."

"An antidote!" exclaimed Lord Roos. "So far from galling me to madness,
the intelligence fills me with delight beyond expression. Give it me,
Madam, that I may administer it at once; and heaven grant its results
may be such as you predict!"

"Administered by you, my Lord, it would be poison," said Lady Lake,
bitterly. "But you may stand by and witness its beneficial effects. They
will be instantaneous."

"As you will, Madam, so you do not delay the application," cried Lord
Roos.

"Drink of this, my child," said Lady Lake, after she had poured some
drops of the cordial into a glass.

"I will take it from no hand but my husband's," murmured Lady Roos.

"How?" exclaimed her mother, frowning.

"Give it me, I say, Madam," cried Lord Roos. "Is this a time for
hesitation, when you see her life hangs upon a thread, which you
yourself may sever?"

And taking the glass from her, he held it to his wife's lips; tenderly
supporting her while she swallowed its contents.

It was not long before the effects of the cordial were manifest. The
deathly hue of the skin changed to a more healthful colour, and the
pulsations of the heart became stronger and more equal; and though the
debility could not be so speedily repaired, it was apparent that the
work of restoration had commenced, and might be completed if the same
treatment were pursued.

"Now I owe my life to you, my dear Lord," said Lady Roos, regarding her
husband with grateful fondness.

"To him!" exclaimed her mother. "You owe him nothing but a heavy debt of
vengeance, which we will endeavour to pay, and with interest. But keep
calm, my child, and do not trouble yourself; whatever may occur. Your
speedy restoration will depend much on that."

"You do not adopt the means to make me calm, mother," replied Lady Roos.

But Lady Lake was too much bent upon the immediate and full
gratification of her long-deferred vengeance to heed her. Clapping her
hands together, the signal was answered by Sir Thomas Lake, who came
forth from the adjoining room with Luke Hatton. At the same time, and as
if it had been so contrived that all the guilty parties should be
confronted together, the outer door of the chamber was opened, and the
Countess of Exeter was ushered in by Sarah Swarton.

On seeing in whose presence she stood, the Countess would have
precipitately retreated; but it was too late. The door was closed by
Sarah.

"Soh! my turn is come at last," cried Lady Lake, gazing from one to the
other with a smile of gratified vengeance. "I hold you all in my toils.
You, my Lord," addressing her son-in-law, "have treated a wife, who has
ever shown you the most devoted affection, with neglect and cruelty,
and, not content with such barbarous treatment, have conspired against
her life, and against my life."

"Take heed how you bring any charge against him, mother," cried Lady
Roos, raising herself in her couch. "Take heed, I say. Let your
vengeance fall upon her head," pointing to the Countess--"but not upon
him."
