
On the other side of this, James turned round and said, 'Thanks, Sir
Knight; I suppose I may not hope that you will become a follower of the
knight adventurer.'

'I cannot fight under the English banner, my liege.  Elsewhere I would
fellow you to the death.'

'This is no time to show your error,' said James; 'and I therefore
counsel you to come no farther.  The English will be pricking forth in
search of us: so I will but thank you for your loyal aid.'

'I entreat you, Sir,' cried Patrick, 'not to believe that we meant this
matter to go as it has done!  It had long been our desire--of all of us,
that is, save my Lord Buchan's retainers--to find you and release you;
but never did we deem that Lord Douglas would have dared to conduct
matters thus.'

'You would be little the better for me did Lord Douglas bring me back on
his own terms,' said James, smiling.  'No, no; when I go home, it shall
be as a free king, able to do justice to all alike; and for that I am
content to bide my time, and trust to such as you to back me when it
comes.'

'And with all my heart, Sir,' said Patrick.  'Would that you were where I
could do so now.  Ah! laddie,' to Malcolm; 'ye're in good hands.  My
certie, I kenned ye but by your voice!  Ye're verily grown into a goodly
ship after all, and ye stood as brave as the rest.  My poor father would
have been fain to see this day!'

Malcolm flushed to the ears; somehow Patrick's praise was not as pleasant
to him as he would have expected, and he only faltered, 'You know--'

'I ken but what Johnnie Swinton brought me in a letter frae the Abbot of
Coldingham, that my father--the saints be with him!--had been set on and
slain by yon accursed Master of Albany--would that his thrapple were in
my grip!--that he had sent you southwards to the King, and that your
sister was in St. Abbs.  Is it so?'

Malcolm had barely time to make a sign of affirmation, when the King
hurried him on.  'I grieve to balk you of your family tidings, but delay
will be ill for one or other of us; so fare thee well, Sir Patrick, till
better times.'

He shook the knight's hand as he spoke, cut short his protestations, and
leapt down the bank, saying in a low voice, as he stretched out his hand
and helped Malcolm down after him, 'He would have known me again for your
guest if we had stood many moments longer; he looked hard at me as it
was; and neither in England nor Scotland may that journey of mine be
blazed abroad.'

Malcolm was on the whole rather relieved; he could not help feeling
guilty towards Patrick, and unless he could have full time for
explanation, he preferred not falling in with him.

And at the same moment Kitson stepped towards the King.  'Sir, you are an
honest man, and we crave your pardon if we said aught that seemed in
doubt thereof.'

James laughed, shaking each honest hand, and saying, 'At least, good
sirs, do not always think Scot and traitor the same word; and thank you
for backing me so gallantly.'

'I'd wish no better than to back such as you, Sir,' said Kitson heartily;
and James then turned to Ralf Percy, and asked him what he thought of the
Douglas face to face.

'A dour old block!' said Ralf.  'If those runaways had but stayed within
us, the hoary ruffian should have had his lesson from a Percy.'

James smiled, for the grim giant was still a good deal more than a match
for the slim, rosy-faced stripling of the house of Percy, who
nevertheless simply deemed his nation and family made him invincible by
either Scot or Frenchman.

The difficulties of their progress, however, entirely occupied them.
Having diverged from the regular track, they had to make their way
through the inundated meadows; sometimes among deep pools, sometimes in
quagmires, or ever hedges; while the water that drenched them was fast
freezing, and darkness came down on them.  All stumbled or were bogged at
different times; and Malcolm, shorter and weaker than the rest, and his
lameness becoming more felt than usual, could not help impeding their
progress, and at last was so spent that but for the King's strong arm he
would have spent the night in a bog-hole.

At last the lights were near, the outskirts were gained, the pass-word
given to the watch, and the rough but welcome greeting was heard--'That's
well!  More of you come in!  How got you off?'

'The rogues got back, then?' said Kitson.

'Some score of them,' was the answer; 'but 'tis thought most are drowned
or stuck by the French.  The King is in a proper rage, as well he may be;
but what else could come of a false Scot in the camp?'

'Have a care, you foul tongue!' Percy was the first to cry; and as
torches were now brought out and cast their light on the well-known
faces, the soldiers stood abashed; but James tarried not for their
excuses; his heart was hot at the words which implied that Henry
suspected him, and he strode hastily on to the convent, where the
quadrangle was full of horses and men, and the windows shone with lights.
At the door of the refectory stood a figure whose armour flashed with
light, and his voice sounded through the closed visor--'I tell you,
March, I cannot rest till I knew what his hap has been.  If he have done
this thing--'

'What then?' answered James out of the darkness, in a voice deep with
wrath; but Henry started.

'You there! you safe!  Speak again!  Come here that I may see.  Where is
he?'

'Here, Sir King,' said James, gravely.

'Now the saints be thanked!' cried Henry, joyously.  'Where be the
caitiffs that brought me their false tale?  They shall hang for it at
once.'

'It was the less wonder,' said James, still coldly, 'that they should
have thought themselves betrayed, since their king believed it of me.'

'Nay, 'twas but for a hot moment--ay, and the bitterest I ever spent.
What could I do when the villains swore that there were signals and I
know not what devices passing?  I hoped yet 'twas but a plea for their
own cowardice, and was mounting to come and see for you.  Come, I should
have known you better; I'd rather the whole world deceived me than have
distrusted you, Jamie.'

There was that in his tone which ended all resentment, and James's hand
was at once clasped in his, while Henry added, 'Ho, Provost-marshal! to
the gallows with these knaves!'

'Nay, Harry,' said James, 'let me plead for them.  There was more than
ordinary to dismay them.'

'Dismay! ay, the more cause they should have stood like honest men.  If a
rogue be not to hang for deserting his captain and then maligning him,
soon would knavery be master of all.'

'Hear me first, Hal.'

'I'll hear when I return and you are dried.  Why, man, thou art an icicle
errant; change thy garments while I go round the posts, or I shall hear
nought for the chattering of thy teeth.'

'Nor I for your cough, if you go, Harry.  Surely, 'tis Salisbury's
night!'

'The more cause that I be on the alert!  Could I be everywhere, mayhap a
few winter blasts would not have chilled and frozen all the manhood out
of the host.'

He spoke very sharply as he threw him on his horse, and wrapped his cloak
about him--a poor defence, spite of the ermine lining, against the frost
of the December night for a man whose mother, the fair and wise Mary de
Bohun, had died in early youth from disease of the lungs.

James and the two young partners of his adventure had long been clad in
their gowns of peace, and seated by the fire in the refectory, James with
his harp in his hand, from time to time dreamily calling forth a few
plaintive notes, such as he said always rang in his ears after hearing a
Scottish voice, when they again heard Henry's voice in hot displeasure
with the provost-marshal for having deferred the execution of the
runaways till after the hearing of the story of the King of Scots.

'His commands were not to be transgressed for the king of anything,' and
he only reprieved the wretches till morning that their fate might be more
signal.  He spoke with the peremptory fierceness that had of late almost
obscured his natural good-humour and kindliness; and when he entered the
refectory and threw himself into a chair by the fire, he looked wearied
out in body and mind, shivered and coughed, and said with unwonted
depression that the sullen fellows would make a quagmire of their camp
after all, since a French reinforcement had come up, and the vigilance
that would be needed would occupy the whole army.  At supper he ate
little and spoke less; and when James would have related his encounter
within the Scots, he cut him short, saying, 'Let that rest till morning;
I am sick of hearing of it!  An air upon thy harp would be more to the
purpose.'

Nor would James have been unwilling to be silent on old Douglas's conduct
if he had not been anxious to plead for the panic-stricken archers, as
well as to extol the conduct of the two youths, and of the Yorkshire
squires; but, as he divined that the young Hotspur would regard praise
from him as an insult, he deferred the subject for his absence, and
launched into a plaintive narrative ballad, to which Henry listened,
leaning back in his chair, often dozing, but without relaxation of the
anxiety that sat on his pale face, and ever and anon wakening within a
heavy sigh, as though his buoyant spirits were giving way under the
weight of care he had brought on himself.

James was just singing of one of the many knightly orphans of romance,
exposed in woods to the nurture of bears, his father slain, his mother
dead of grief--a ditty he had perhaps chosen for its soporific
powers--when a gay bugle blast rang through the court of the convent.

'The French would scarce send to parley thus late,' exclaimed James; but
the next moment a joyful clamour arose without, and Henry, springing to
his feet, spoke not, but stood awaiting the tidings with the colour
burning on cheek and brow in suppressed excitement.

An esquire, splashed to the ears, hurried into the room, and falling on
his knees, cried aloud, 'God save King Harry!  News, news, my lord!  The
Queen has safely borne you a fair son at Windsor Castle, five days
since.'

Henry did not speak, but took the messenger's hand, wrung it, and left a
costly ring there.  Then, taking off his cap, he put his hands over his
face, uttering a few words of fervent thanksgiving almost within himself,
and then turning to the esquire, made further inquiries after his wife's
welfare, took from him the letter that Archbishop Chicheley had sent,
poured out a cup of wine for him, bade the lords around make him good
cheer, but craved license for himself to retire.

It was so unlike his usual hilarious manner that all looked at one
another in anxiety, and spoke of his unusual susceptibility to fatigue
and care; while the squire, looking at the rich jewel in his hand,
declared within disappointment in his tone, that he would rather have had
a mere flint stone so he had heard King Harry's own cheery voice.

James was not the least anxious of them, but long ere light the next
morning Henry stood at his bedside, saying, 'I must go round the posts
before mass, Jamie.  Will you face the matin frost?'

'I am fitter to face it than thou,' said James, rising.  'Is there need
for this?'

'Great need,' said Henry.  'Here are these fresh forces all aglow within
their first zeal, and unless they are worse captains than I suppose them,
they will attempt some mischief ere long--nor is any time so slack as
cock-crow.'

James was speedily ready, and, within some suppressed sighs, so was
Malcolm, who knew himself in duty bound to attend his master, and was
kept on the alert by seeing Ralf Percy also on foot.  But it was a great
relief to him that the young gentleman murmured in no measured terms
against the intolerable activity of their kings.  No other attendants
went within them, since Henry was wont to patrol his camp with as little
demonstration as possible.

'I would scarcely ask a dog to come out with me this wintry morn,' said
he, as he waved back his sleepy chamberlain, Fitzhugh, and took his
brother king's arm; 'but I could not but crave a turn with thee, Jamie,
ere the hue and cry of rejoicing begins.'

'That is poor welcome for your heir,' said James.

'Poor child!' said Henry; then, after they had walked some space in
silence, he added, 'You'll mock me, but I would that this had not
befallen at Windsor.  I had laid my plans that it should be otherwise;
but ladies are ill to guide.'

'And wherefore should it not have been at fair Windsor?  If I can love it
as a prison, sure your son may well love it as a cradle.'

'No dishonour to Windsor,' said Henry; 'but, sleeping or waking, this
whole night hath this adage rung in my ears--

   "Harry, born at Monmouth, shall short time live and all get;
   Harry, born at Windsor, shall long time live and lose all."'

'A most choice piece of royal poesy and prophecy,' laughed James.

'Nay, do not charge me with it, thou dainty minstrel.  It was sung to me
by mime old Herefordshire nurse, when Windsor seemed as little within my
reach as Meaux, and I never thought of it again till I looked to have a
son.'

'Then balk the prophecy,' said James; 'Edward born at Windsor got enough,
and lived long enough to boot!'

'Too late!' was the answer.  'The Archbishop christened the poor child
Harry in the very hour of his birth.'

'Poor child!' echoed James, rather sarcastically.

'Nay, 'tis not solely the rhyme,' said Henry; 'but this has been a
wakeful night, and not without misgivings whether I am one who ought to
look for joy in his children.'

'What is past was not such that you alone should cry _mea culpa_,' said
James.

'I never thought so till now,' said Henry.  'Yet who knows?  My father
was a winsome young man ere his exile, full of tenderness to us all, at
the rare times he was with us.  Who knows what cares may make of me ere
my boy learns to knew me?'

'You will not hold him aloof, and give him no chance of loving you?'

'I trow not!  I'll have him with me in the camp, and he and my brave men
shall be one another's pride.  Which Roman emperor is it that hears the
nickname his father's soldiers gave him as a child?  Nay--Caligula was
it?  Omens are against me this morning.'

'Then laughs them to scorn, and be yourself,' said James.  'Bless God for
the goodly child, who is born to two kingdoms, won by his father's and
his grandsire's swords.'

'Ah!' said Henry, depressed by failing health, a sleepless night, and
hungry morning, 'maybe it were better for him, soul and body both, did I
stand here Duke of Lancaster, and good Edmund of March yonder were head
of realm and army.'

'Never would he be head of this army,' said James.  'He would be snoring
at Shene; that is, if he could sleep for the trouble the Duke of
Lancaster would be giving him.'

Henry laughed at last.  'Good King Edmund, he would assuredly never try
to set the world right on its hinges.  Honest fellow, soon he will be as
hearty in his congratulations as though he did not lie under a great
wrong.  Heigh-ho! such as he may be in the right on't.  I've marvelled of
late, whether any priest or hermit could bring back my old assurance,
that all this is my work on earth, or tell me if it be all one grand
error.  Men there have been like Caesar, Alexander, or Charlemagne, who
thought my thoughts and worked them out; and surely Church and nations
cry aloud for purifying.  Jerusalem, and a general council--I saw them
once clear and bright before me; but now a mist seems to rise up from
Richard's blood, and hide them from me; and there comes from it my
father's voice when he asked on his deathbed what right I had to the
crown.  What would it be if I had to leave this work half done?'

He was interrupted by the sight of a young knight stealing into the camp,
after a furtive expedition to Paris.  It was enough to rouse him from his
despondent state; and the severity of his wrath was in full proportion to
the offence.  Nor did he again utter his misgivings, but was full of his
usual alacrity and life, as though daylight had restored his buoyancy.

James, on the way back to the thanksgiving mass, interceded for last
night's offenders, as an act of grace suitable to the occasion; but Henry
was inexorable.

'Had they stood to die like Englishmen, they had not lied like dogs! 'he
said; 'and as dogs they shall hang!'

In fact, in the critical state of his army, he knew that the only safety
lay in the promptest and sternest justice; and therefore the three
foremost in accusing King James of treachery were hung long before noon.

However, he called for the two Yorkshiremen, and thus addressed them:
'Well done, my masters!  Thanks for showing Scots and Frenchmen what
stuff Englishmen are made of!  I keep my word, good fellows.  Kneel down,
and I'll dub each a knight.  How now! what are you blundering and
whispering for?'

'So please you, Sir,' said Kitson, 'this is no matter to win one's spurs
for--mere standing still without a blow.'

'I would all had that same gift of standing still,' returned Henry.  'What
is it sticks in your gizzard, friend?  If 'tis the fees, I take them on
myself.'

'No, Sir,' hoarsely cried both.

And Kitson explained: 'Sir, you said you'd knight the one of us that was
foremost.  Now, the two being dubbed, we shall be but where we were
before as to Mistress Agnes of Mineshull, unless of your good-will you
would be pleased to let us fight out the wager of the heriard in all
peace and amity.'

Henry burst out laughing, with all his old merriment, as he said, 'For no
Mistress Agnes living can I have honest men's lives wasted, specially of
such as have that gift of standing still.  If she does not knew her own
mind, one of you must get himself killed by the Frenchmen, not by one
another.  So kneel down, and we'll make your knighthood's feast fall in
with that of my son.'

Thus Sir Christopher Kitson and Sir William Trenton rose up knights; and
bore their honours with a certain bluntness that made them butts, even
while they were the heroes of the day; and Henry, who had resumed his gay
temper, made much diversion out of their mingled shrewdness and
gruffness.

'So,' muttered Malcolm to Ralf Percy, 'we are passed over in the self-
same matter for which these fellows are knighted.'

'Tush!' answered Percy; 'I'd scorn to be confounded with a couple of
clowns like them!  Moreover,' he added, with better reason, 'their valour
was more exercised than ours, inasmuch as they thought there was
treachery, and we did not.  No, no; when my spurs are won, it shall be
for some prowess, better than standing stock-still.'

Malcolm held his tongue, unwilling that Percy should see that he did feel
this an achievement; but he was vexed at the lack of reward, fancying
that knighthood would be no small step in the favour of that imaginary
Esclairmonde whom he had made for himself.

'Light of the world' he loved to call her still, but it was in the
