went north. And presently flapped over me the ravens in the wake of the
kites, and the great sea eagles came in screaming and went the same way,
and so for all the time that I was at the ship, and until I came home."

"There is a sacrifice to the Asir somewhere," I said, "for the birds of
Odin and Thor have always their share."

My father shook his head.

"The birds cry to one another, as I think, and say when the feast is but
enough for those that have gathered. They have cried now that there is
room for all at some great feasting. Once have I seen the like before,
and that was when I was with the ship guard when the jarl fought his
great battle in the Orkneys; we knew that he had fought by the same token."

But my mother said that I was surely right. There was no fear of battle
here, and indeed with Gunnar and Sigurd to guard the land we had had
peace for many a long year on our own coasts, if other lands had had to
fear them. My father laughed a little, saying that perhaps it was so,
and then my mother took the two little ones and went with them into the
sleeping room to put them to rest, while I and my two brothers went out
to the cattle garth to see that all was well for the night.

Then, when our eyes were used to the moonlight, which was not very
bright, away to the northward we saw a red glow that was not that of the
sunset or of the northern lights, dying down now and then, and then
again flaring up as will a far-off fire; and even as we looked we heard
the croak of an unseen raven flying thitherward overhead.

"Call father," I said to Withelm, who was the youngest of us three. The
boy ran in, and presently my father came out and looked long at the glow
in the sky.

"Even as I thought," he said. "The king's town is burning, and I must go
to tell the jarl. Strange that we have had no message. Surely the king's
men must be hard pressed if this is a foe's work."

So he went at once, leaving us full of wonder and excited, as boys will
be at anything that is new and has a touch of fear in it. But he had
hardly gone beyond the outbuildings when one came running and calling
him. The jarl had sent for him, for there was strange news from the
king. Then he and this messenger hastened off together.

In half an hour the war horns were blowing fiercely, and all the quiet
town was awake, for my father's forebodings were true, and the foe was
on us. In our house my mother was preparing the food that her husband
should carry with him, and I was putting a last polish on the arms that
should keep him, while the tramp of men who went to the gathering rang
down the street, one by one at first, and then in twos and threes. My
mother neither wept nor trembled, but worked with a set face that would
not show fear.

Then came in my father, and I armed him, begging at the same time that I
might go also, for I could use /my/ weapons well enough; but he told me
that some must needs bide at home as a guard, and that I was as much
wanted there as at the king's place, wherewith I had to be content. It
was by no means unlikely that we also might be attacked, if it was true
that the king's men were outnumbered, as was said.

Now when my father went to say farewell to us, nowhere could be found my
brother Withelm.

"The boy has gone to watch the muster," my father said. "I shall see him
there presently."

Then, because he saw that my mother was troubled more than her wont, he
added, "Have no fear for me. This will be no more than a raid of
Norsemen, and they will plunder and be away with the tide before we get
to the place."

So he laughed and went out, having done his best to cheer us all, and I
went with him to where the men were gathered in their arms in the wide
space in the midst of the houses. There I sought for little Withelm, but
could not find him among the women and children who looked on; and
before we had been there more than a few minutes the jarl gave the word,
and the march was begun. There were about fifteen miles to be covered
between our town and the king's.

I watched them out of sight, and then went home, having learned that I
was to be called out only in case of need. And as I drew near the
homestead I saw a light in the little ash grove that was behind the
garth.[3] In the midst of the trees, where this light
seemed to be, was our wooden image of Thor the Hammer Bearer, older than
any of us could tell; and in front of this was what we used as his altar
---four roughly-squared stones set together. These stones were
blue-black in colour, and whence they came I do not know, unless it was
true that my forefathers brought them here when first Odin led his folk
to the northern lands. Always they had been the altar for my people, and
my father held that we should have no luck away from them.

So it was strange to see a light in that place, where none would
willingly go after dark, and half was I feared to go and see what it
might mean. But then it came into my mind that the enemy might be
creeping on the house through the grove, and that therefore I must needs
find out all about it. So I went softly to the nearest trees, and crept
from one to another, ever getting closer to the light; and I will say
that I feared more that I might see some strange thing that was more
than mortal than that I should see the leading foeman stealing towards
me. But presently it was plain that the light did not move as if men
carried it, but it flickered as a little fire; and at last I saw that it
burned on the altar stones, and that frightened me so that I almost fled.

Maybe I should have done so, but that I heard a voice that I knew; and
so, looking once more, I saw a figure standing before the fire, and knew
it. It was little Withelm, and why a ten-year-old boy should be here I
could not think. But I called him softly, and he started somewhat,
turning and trying to look through the darkness towards me, though he
did not seem afraid. There was a little fire of dry sticks burning on
the stones, and the gaunt old statue seemed to look more terrible than
ever in its red blaze. One might have thought that the worn face writhed
itself as the light played over it.

"It is I, Withelm," I said softly, for the fear of the place was on me.
"We have sought you everywhere, and father would have wished you
farewell. What are you doing here?"

I came forward then, for it was plain that the child feared nothing, so
that I was put to shame. And as I came I asked once more what he was
doing in this place.

"The jarl has surely forgotten the sacrifice to the Asir before the
warriors went to fight, and they will be angry," he answered very
calmly. "It is right that one should remember, and I feared for father,
and therefore---"

He pointed to the altar, and I saw that he had laid his own untasted
supper on the fire that he had lighted, and I had naught to say. The
thing was over-strange to me, who thought nothing of these things. It
was true that the host always sacrificed before sailing on the Viking
path, but tonight had been urgent haste.

"Thor will not listen to any but a warrior," I said. "Come home,
brother, for mother waits us."

"If not Thor, who is maybe busy at the battle they talk of, then do I
think that All Father will listen," he said stoutly. "But this was all
that I had to make sacrifice withal, and it may not be enough."

"The jarl will make amends when he comes back," I said, wishing to get
home and away from this place, and yet unwilling to chide the child.
"Now let us go, for mother will grow anxious."

With that he put his hand in mine, and we both saluted Thor, as was
fitting, and then went homeward. It seemed to me that the glare in the
north was fiercer now than when I had first seen it.

Now, after my mother had put Withelm to bed, I told her how I had found
him; and thereat she wept a little, as I could see in the firelight.

After a long silence she said, "Strange things and good come into the
mind of a child, and one may learn what his fate shall be in the days to
come. I am sure from this that Withelm will be a priest."

Now as one may buy the place of a godar, with the right to have a temple
of the Asir for a district and the authority that goes therewith, if so
be that one falls vacant or is to be given up by the holder, this did
not seem unlikely, seeing how rich we were fast growing. And indeed my
mother's saying came to pass hereafter, though not at all in the way of
which we both thought.

There was no alarm that night. The old warriors watched round the town
and along the northern tracks, but saw nothing, and in the morning the
black smoke hung over the place of the burning, drifting slowly seaward.
The wind had changed, and they said that it would doubtless have taken
the foe away with it, as my father had hoped. So I went down to the ship
with Raven, and worked at the few things that were still left to be done
to her as she lay in her long shed on the slips, ready to take the water
at any tide. She was only waiting for cargo and stores to be put on
board her with the shift of wind that had come at last, and I thought
that my father would see to these things as soon as he came back.

Now in the evening we had news from the Jarl, and strange enough it was.
My father came back two days afterwards and told us all, and so I may as
well make a short story of it. The ways of Gunnar Kirkeban had been his
end, for a certain Viking chief, a Norseman, had wintered in Wales
during the past winter, and there he had heard from the Welsh of the
wrongs that they had suffered at his hands. Also he had heard of the
great booty of Welsh gold that Gunnar had taken thence in the last
summer; and so, when these Welsh asked that he would bide with them and
help fight the next Danes who came, he had offered to do more than that
---he would lead them to Gunnar's place if they would find men to man
three ships that he had taken, and would be content to share the booty
with them.

The Welsh king was of the line of Arthur, and one who yet hoped to win
back the land of his fathers from the Saxons and English; and so he
listened to this Hodulf, thinking to gain a powerful ally in him for
attack on the eastern coast of England after this. So, favoured by the
wind that had kept us from the sea, Hodulf, with twenty ships in all,
had fallen on Gunnar unawares, and had had an easy victory, besetting
the town in such wise that only in the confusion while the wild Welsh
were burning and plundering on every side had the messenger to the jarl
been able to slip away.

But when the jarl and our men reached the town there was naught to be
done but to make terms with Hodulf as best he might, that the whole
country might not be overrun. For Gunnar had been slain in his own hall,
with his two young daughters and with the queen also, as was supposed.
Havelok the prince was in his hands, and for his sake therefore Sigurd
had been the more ready to come to terms.

Then Hodulf sent messengers to the overlord of all Denmark, saying that
he would hold this kingdom as for him, and backed up that promise with a
great present from Gunnar's treasure, so that he was listened to.
Therefore our jarl was helpless; and there being no other king strong
enough to aid him if he rose, in the end he had to take Hodulf for lord
altogether, though it went sorely against the grain.

I have heard it said by the Welsh folk that Hodulf held the kingdom for
their lord; and it is likely that he humoured them by saying that he
would do so, which was a safe promise to make, as even King Arthur
himself could never have reached him to make him pay scatt.


    CHAPTER II. KING HODULF'S SECRET.

My father came home heavy and anxious enough, for he did not know how
things would go under this new king, though he had promised peace to all
men who would own him. We in our place saw nothing of him or his men for
the next few weeks, but he was well spoken of by those who had aught to
do with him elsewhere. So my father went on trying to gather a cargo for
England; but it was a slow business, as the burnt and plundered folk of
the great town had naught for us, and others sold to them. But he would
never be idle, and every day when weather served we went fishing, for he
loved his old calling well, as a man will love that which he can do
best. Our two boats and their gear were always in the best of order, and
our kinsman, Arngeir, used and tended them when we were away in the ship
in summertime.

Now, one evening, as we came up from the shore after beaching the boat
on the hard below the town, and half a mile from the nearest houses, and
being, as one may suppose, not altogether in holiday trim, so that Grim
and his boys with their loads of fish and nets looked as though a
fisher's hovel were all the home that they might own, we saw a horseman,
followed at a little distance by two more, riding towards us. The dusk
was gathering, and at first we thought that this was Jarl Sigurd, who
would ask us maybe to send fish to his hall, and so we set our loads
down and waited for him.

But it was not our lord, and I had never seen this man before. From his
arms, which were of a new pattern to me, he might be one of the host of
Hodulf, as I thought.

"Ho, fisher!" he cried, when he was yet some way from us; "leave your
lads, and come hither. I have a word for you."

He reined up and waited, and now I was sure that he was a Norseman, for
his speech was rougher than ours. He was a tall, handsome man enough;
but I liked neither his voice nor face, nor did I care to hear Grim, my
father, summoned in such wise, not remembering that just now a stranger
could not tell that he was aught but a fisher thrall of the jarl's.

But my father did as he was asked, setting down the nets that he was
carrying, and only taking with him the long boathook on which he had
slung them as he went forward. I suppose he remembered the old saying,
that a man should not stir a step on land without his weapons, as one
never knows when there may be need of them; and so, having no other, he
took this.

I heard the first questions that the man asked, for he spoke loudly.

"Whose man are you?"

"Sigurd's," answered my father shortly.

"Whose are the boats?"

"Mine, seeing that I built them."

"Why, then, there is somewhat that you can do for me," the horseman
said. "Is your time your own, however?"

"If the jarl needs me not."

"Tonight, then?"

"I have naught to do after I have carried the nets home."

"That is well," said the stranger; and after that he dropped his voice
so that I heard no more, but he and my father talked long together.

We waited, and at last the talk ended, and my father came hack to us,
while the stranger rode away northward along the sands. Then I asked who
the man was, and what he wanted.

"He is some chief of these Norsemen, and one who asks more questions of
a thrall, as he thinks me, than he would dare ask Sigurd the jarl, or
Grim the merchant either, for that matter."

Seeing that my father did not wish to say more at this time, we asked
nothing else, but went homeward in silence. It seemed as if he was ill
at ease, and he went more quickly than was his wont, so that presently
Raven and little Withelm lagged behind us with their burdens, for our
catch had been a good one.

Then he stopped outside the garth when we reached home, and told me not
to go in yet. And when the others came up he said to them, "Do you two
take in the things and the fish, and tell mother that Radbard and I have
to go down to the ship. There is cargo to be seen to, and it is likely
that we shall he late, so bid her not wait up for us."

Then he told me to come, and we left the two boys at once and turned
away towards the haven. There was nothing strange in this, for cargo
often came at odd times, and we were wont to work late in stowing it. I
did wonder that we had not stayed to snatch a bit of supper, but it
crossed my mind that the Norseman had told my father of some goods that
had maybe been waiting for the whole day while we were at sea. And then
that did not seem likely, for he had taken us for thralls. So I was
puzzled, but held my peace until it should seem good to my father to
tell me what we were about.

When we reached a place where there was no house very near and no man
about, he said to me at last, "What is on hand I do not rightly know,
but yon man was Hodulf, the new king, as I suppose we must call him. He
would not tell me his name, but I saw him when he and the jarl made
terms the other day. Now he has bidden me meet him on the road a mile
from the town as soon as it is dark, and alone. He has somewhat secret
for me to do."

"It is a risk to go alone and unarmed," I answered; "let me go home and
get your weapons, for the errand does not seem honest."

"That is what I think also," said my father, "and that is why I am going
to meet him. It is a bad sign when a king has a secret to share with a
thrall, and I have a mind to find out what it is. There may be some plot
against our jarl."

He was silent for a few minutes, as if thinking, and then he went on.

"I cannot take arms, or he would suspect me, and would tell me nothing;
but if there is any plotting to be done whereof I must tell the jarl, it
will be as well that you should hear it."

Then he said that he thought it possible for me to creep very close to
the place where he was to meet Hodulf, so that I could hear all or most
of what went on, and that I might as well be armed in case of foul play,
for he did not suppose that the Norseman would think twice about cutting
down a thrall who did not please him.

It was almost dark by this time, and therefore he must be going. I was
not to go home for arms, but to borrow from Arngeir as we passed his
house. And this I did, saying that I had an errand beyond the town and
feared prowling men of the Norse host. Which danger being a very
reasonable one, Arngeir offered to go with me; and I had some difficulty
in preventing him from doing so, for he was like an elder brother to all
