sprang up amazed with the lyre in his hand, and left the seat where he
was sitting, and in like manner Patroklos when he beheld the men arose.
Then Achilles fleet of foot greeted them and said: "Welcome; verily ye
are friends that are come--sore indeed is the need--even ye that are
dearest of the Achaians to me even in my wrath."

So spake noble Achilles and led them forward, and made them sit on
settles and carpets of purple; and anon he spake to Patroklos being
near: "Bring forth a greater bowl, thou son of Menoitios; mingle
stronger drink, and prepare each man a cup, for dearest of men are these
that are under my roof."

Then put they forth their hands to the good cheer lying before them. And
when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, Aias nodded to
Phoinix. But noble Odysseus marked it, and filled a cup with wine and
pledged Achilles: "Hail, O Achilles! The fair feast lack we not either
in the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus neither now in thine; for feasting
is there abundance to our heart's desire, but our thought is not for
matters of the delicious feast; nay, we behold very sore destruction,
thou fosterling of Zeus, and are afraid. Now is it in doubt whether we
save the benched ships or behold them perish, if thou put not on thy
might. Nigh unto ships and wall have the high-hearted Trojans and famed
allies pitched their camp, and kindled many fires throughout their host,
and ween that they shall no more be withheld but will fall on our black
ships. And Zeus son of Kronos sheweth them signs upon the right by
lightning, and Hector greatly exulteth in his might and rageth
furiously, trusting in Zeus, and recketh not of god nor man, for mighty
madness hath possessed him. He prayeth bright Dawn to shine forth with
all speed, for he bath passed his word to smite off from the ships the
ensigns' tops, and to fire the hulls with devouring flame, and hard
thereby to make havoc of the Achaians confounded by the smoke. Therefore
am I sore afraid in my heart lest the gods fulfil his boastings, and it
be fated for us to perish here in Troy-land, far from Argos pasture-land
of horses. Up then! if thou art minded even at the last to save the
failing sons of the Achaians from the war-din of the Trojans. Eschew thy
grievous wrath; Agamemnon offereth thee worthy gifts, so thou wilt cease
from anger. Lo now, hearken thou to me, and I will tell thee all the
gifts that in his hut Agamemnon promised thee. But if Agamemnon be too
hateful to thy heart, both he and his gifts, yet have thou pity on all
the Achaians that faint throughout the host; these shall honour thee as
a god, for verily thou wilt earn exceeding great glory at their hands.
Yea now mightest thou slay Hector, for he would come very near thee in
his deadly madness, because he deemeth that there is no man like unto
him among the Danaans that the ships brought hither."

And Achilles fleet of foot answered and said unto him: "Heaven-sprung
son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, in openness must I now declare
unto you my saying, even as I am minded and as the fulfilment thereof
shall be, that ye may not sit before me and coax this way and that. For
hateful to me even as the gates of hell is he that hideth one thing in
his heart and uttereth another: but I will speak what meseemeth best.
Not me, I ween, shall Agamemnon son of Atreus persuade, nor the other
Danaans, seeing we were to have no thank for battling with the foemen
ever without respite. He that abideth at home hath equal share with him
that fighteth his best, and in like honour are held both the coward and
the brave; death cometh alike to the untoiling and to him that hath
toiled long. Neither have I any profit for that I endured tribulation of
soul, ever staking my life in fight. Even as a hen bringeth her
unfledged chickens each morsel as she winneth it, and with herself it
goeth hard, even so I was wont to watch out many a sleepless night and
pass through many bloody days of battle, warring with folk for their
women's sake. Twelve cities of men have I laid waste from ship-board,
and from land eleven, throughout deep-soiled Troy-land; out of all these
took I many goodly treasures and would bring and give them all to
Agamemnon son of Atreus, and he staying behind amid the fleet ships
would take them and portion out some few but keep the most. Now some he
gave to be meeds of honour to the princes and the kings, and theirs are
left untouched; only from me of all the Achaians took he my darling lady
and keepeth her. But why must the Argives make war on the Trojans? why
hath Atreides gathered his host and led them hither? is it not for
lovely-haired Helen's sake? Do then the sons of Atreus alone of mortal
men love their wives? surely whatsoever man is good and sound of mind
loveth his own and cherisheth her, even as I too loved mine with all my
heart, though but the captive of my spear. But now that he hath taken my
meed of honour from mine arms and hath deceived me, let him not tempt me
that know him full well; he shall not prevail. Nay, Odysseus, let him
take counsel with thee and all the princes to ward from the ships the
consuming fire. Verily without mine aid he hath wrought many things, and
built a wall and dug a foss about it wide and deep, and set a palisade
therein; yet even so can he not stay murderous Hector's might. But so
long as I was fighting amid the Achaians, Hector had no mind to array
his battle far from the wall, but scarce came unto the Skaian gates and
to the oak-tree; there once he awaited me alone and scarce escaped my
onset. But now, seeing I have no mind to fight with noble Hector, I will
to-morrow do sacrifice to Zeus and all the gods, and store well my ships
when I have launched them on the salt sea--then shalt thou see, if thou
wilt and hast any care therefor, my ships sailing at break of day over
Hellespont, the fishes' home, and my men right eager at the oar; and if
the great Shaker of the Earth grant me good journey, on the third day
should I reach deep-soiled Phthia. There are my great possessions that I
left when I came hither to my hurt; and yet more gold and ruddy bronze
shall I bring from hence, and fair-girdled women and grey iron, all at
least that were mine by lot; only my meed of honour hath he that gave it
me taken back in his despitefulness, even lord Agamemnon son of Atreus.
To him declare ye everything even as I charge you, openly, that all the
Achaians likewise may have indignation, if haply he hopeth to beguile
yet some other Danaan, for that he is ever clothed in shamelessness.
Verily not in my face would he dare to look, though he have the front of
a dog. Neither will I devise counsel with him nor any enterprise, for
utterly he hath deceived me and done wickedly; but never again shall he
beguile me with fair speech--let this suffice him. Let him begone in
peace; Zeus the lord of counsel hath taken away his wits. Hateful to me
are his gifts, and I hold him at a straw's worth. Not even if he gave me
ten times, yea twenty, all that now is his, and all that may come to him
otherwhence, even all the revenue of Orchomenos or Egyptian Thebes where
the treasure-houses are stored fullest--Thebes of the hundred gates,
whence sally forth two hundred warriors through each with horses and
chariots--nay, nor gifts in number as sand or dust; not even so shall
Agamemnon persuade my soul till he have paid me back all the bitter
despite. And the daughter of Agamemnon son of Atreus will I not wed, not
were she rival of golden Aphrodite for fairness and for handiwork
matched bright-eyed Athene--not even then will I wed her; let him choose
him of the Achaians another that is his peer and is more royal than I.
For if the gods indeed preserve me and I come unto my home, then will
Peleus himself seek me a wife. Many Achaian maidens are there throughout
Hellas and Phthia, daughters of princes that ward their cities;
whomsoever of these I wish will I make my dear lady. Very often was my
high soul moved to take me there a wedded wife, a help meet for me, and
have joy of the possessions that the old man Peleus possesseth. For not
of like worth with life hold I even all the wealth that men say was
possessed of the well-peopled city of Ilios in days of peace gone by,
before the sons of the Achaians came; neither all the treasure that the
stone threshold of the archer Phoebus Apollo encompasseth in rocky
Pytho. For kine and goodly flocks are to be had for the harrying, and
tripods and chestnut horses for the purchasing; but to bring back man's
life neither harrying nor earning availeth when once it hath passed the
barrier of his lips. For thus my goddess mother telleth me, Thetis the
silver-footed, that twain fates are bearing me to the issue of death. If
I abide here and besiege the Trojans' city, then my returning home is
taken from me, but my fame shall be imperishable; but if I go home to my
dear native land, my high fame is taken from me, but my life shall
endure long while, neither shall the issue of death soon reach me.
Moreover I would counsel you all to set sail homeward, seeing ye shall
never reach your goal of steep Ilios; of a surety far-seeing Zeus
holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of good courage. So go your
way and tell my answer to the princes of the Achaians, even as is the
office of elders, that they may devise in their hearts some other better
counsel, such as shall save them their ships and the host of the
Achaians amid the hollow ships: since this counsel availeth them naught
that they have now devised, by reason of my fierce wrath. But let
Phoinix now abide with us and lay him to rest, that he may follow with
me on my ships to our dear native land to-morrow, if he will; for I will
not take him perforce."

So spake he, and they all held their peace and were still, and marvelled
at his saying; for he denied them very vehemently. But at the last spake
to them the old knight Phoinix, bursting into tears, because he was sore
afraid for the ships of the Achaians: "If indeed thou ponderest
departure in thy heart, glorious Achilles, and hast no mind at all to
save the fleet ships from consuming fire, because that wrath bath
entered into thy heart; how can I be left of thee, dear son, alone
thereafter? To thee did the old knight Peleus send me the day he sent
thee to Agamemnon forth from Phthia, a stripling yet unskilled in equal
war and in debate wherein men wax pre-eminent. Therefore sent he me to
teach thee all these things, to be both a speaker of words and a doer of
deeds. Yea, I reared thee to this greatness, thou godlike Achilles, with
my heart's love; for with none other wouldest thou go unto the feast,
neither take meat in the hall, till that I had set thee upon my knees
and stayed thee with the savoury morsel cut first for thee, and put the
wine-cup to thy lips. Oft hast thou stained the doublet on my breast
with sputtering of wine in thy sorry helplessness. Thus I suffered much
with thee, and much I toiled, being mindful that the gods in nowise
created any issue of my body; but I made thee my son, thou godlike
Achilles, that thou mayest yet save me from grievous destruction.
Therefore, Achilles, rule thy high spirit; neither beseemeth it thee to
have a ruthless heart. Nay, even the very gods can bend, and theirs
withal is loftier majesty and honour and might. Nay, come for the gifts;
the Achaians shall honour thee even as a god. But if without gifts thou
enter into battle the bane of men, thou wilt not be held in like honour,
even though thou avert the fray."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: "Phoinix my
father, thou old man fosterling of Zeus, such honour need I in no wise;
for I deem that I have been honoured by the judgment of Zeus, which
shall abide upon me amid my beaked ships as long as breath tarrieth in
my body and my limbs are strong. Moreover I will say this thing to thee
and lay thou it to thine heart; trouble not my soul by weeping and
lamentation, to do the pleasure of warrior Atreides; neither beseemeth
it thee to cherish him, lest thou be hated of me that cherish thee. It
were good that thou with me shouldest vex him that vexeth me. Be thou
king even as I, and share my sway by halves, but these shall bear my
message. So tarry thou here and lay thee to rest in a soft bed, and with
break of day will we consider whether to depart unto our own, or to
abide."

He spake, and nodded his brow in silence unto Patroklos to spread for
Phoinix a thick couch, that the others might bethink them to depart from
the hut with speed. Then spake to them Aias, Telamon's godlike son, and
said: "Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, let us go
hence; for methinks the purpose of our charge will not by this journey
be accomplished; and we must tell the news, though it be no wise good,
with all speed unto the Danaans, that now sit awaiting. But Achilles
hath wrought his proud soul to fury within him--stubborn man, that
recketh naught of his comrades' love, wherein we worshipped him beyond
all men amid the ships--unmerciful! Yet doth a man accept recompense of
his brother's murderer or for his dead son; and so the man-slayer for a
great price abideth in his own land, and the kinsman's heart is
appeased, and his proud soul, when he hath taken the recompense. But for
thee, the gods have put within thy breast a spirit implacable and evil,
by reason of one single damsel. And now we offer thee seven damsels, far
best of all, and many other gifts besides; entertain thou then a kindly
spirit, and have respect unto thine home; because we are guests of thy
roof, sent of the multitude of Danaans, and we would fain be nearest to
thee and dearest beyond all other Achaians, as many as there be."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: "Aias sprung of
Zeus, thou son of Telamon, prince of the folk, thou seemest to speak all
this almost after mine own mind; but my heart swelleth with wrath as oft
as I bethink me of those things, how Atreides entreated me arrogantly
among the Argives, as though I were some worthless sojourner. But go ye
and declare my message; I will not take thought of bloody war until that
wise Priam's son, noble Hector, come to the Myrmidons' huts and ships,
slaying the Argives, and smirch the ships with fire. But about mine hut
and black ship I ween that Hector, though he be very eager for battle,
shall be refrained."

So said he, and they took each man a two-handled cup, and made libation
and went back along the line of ships; and Odysseus led the way. And
Patroklos bade his fellows and handmaidens spread with all speed a thick
couch for Phoinix; and they obeyed and spread a couch as he ordained,
fleeces and rugs and fine flock of linen. Then the old man laid him down
and tarried for bright Dawn.

Now when those were come unto Atreides' huts, the sons of the Achaians
stood up on this side and on that, and pledged them in cups of gold, and
questioned them; and Agamemnon king of men asked them first: "Come now,
tell me, Odysseus full of praise, thou great glory of the Achaians; will
he save the ships from consuming fire, or said he nay, and hath wrath
yet hold of his proud spirit?"

And steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him: "Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, he yonder hath no mind to quench his wrath, but
is yet more filled of fury, and spurneth thee and thy gifts. He biddeth
thee take counsel for thyself amid the Argives, how to save the ships
and folk of the Achaians. And for himself he threateneth that at break
of day he will launch upon the sea his trim well-benched ships. Moreover
he said that he would counsel all to sail for home, because ye now shall
never reach your goal of steep Ilios; surely far-seeing Zeus holdeth his
hand over her and her folk are of good courage. Even so said he, and
here are also these to tell the tale that were my companions, Aias and
the two heralds, both men discreet. But the old man Phoinix laid him
there to rest, even as Achilles bade him, that he may follow with him on
his ships to his dear native land to-morrow, if he will; for he will not
take him perforce."

So said he, and they all held their peace and were still, marvelling at
his saying, for he harangued very vehemently. Long were the sons of the
Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last Diomedes of the loud
war-cry spake amid them: "Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of
men, would thou hadst never besought Peleus' glorious son with offer of
gifts innumerable; proud is he at any time, but now hast thou yet far
more encouraged him in his haughtiness. Howbeit we will let him bide,
whether he go or tarry; hereafter he shall fight, whenever his heart
within him biddeth and god arouseth him. Come now, even as I shall say
let us all obey. Go ye now to rest, full to your hearts' desire of meat
and wine, wherein courage is and strength; but when fair rosy-fingered
Dawn appeareth, array thou with all speed before the ships thy folk and
horsemen, and urge them on; and fight thyself amid the foremost."

So said he, and all the princes gave assent, applauding the saying of
Diomedes tamer of horses. And then they made libation and went every man
to his hut, and there laid them to rest and took the boon of sleep.



BOOK X.

    How Diomedes and Odysseus slew Dolon, a spy of the Trojans,
    and themselves spied on the Trojan camp, and took the horses
    of Rhesos, the Thracian king.

Now beside the ships the other leaders of the whole Achaian host were
sleeping all night long, by soft Sleep overcome, but Agamemnon son of
Atreus, shepherd of the host, sweet Sleep held not, so many things he
debated in his mind. And even as when the lord of fair-tressed Hera
lighteneth, fashioning either a mighty rain unspeakable, or hail, or
snow, when the flakes sprinkle all the ploughed lands, or fashioning
perchance the wide mouth of bitter war, even so oft in his breast
groaned Agamemnon, from the very deep of his heart, and his spirits
trembled within him. And whensoever he looked toward that Trojan plain,
he marvelled at the many fires that blazed in front of Ilios, and at the
sound of flutes and pipes, and the noise of men; but whensoever to the
ships he glanced and the host of the Achaians, then rent he many a lock
clean forth from his head, to Zeus that is above, and greatly groaned
his noble heart.

And this in his soul seemed to him the best counsel, to go first of all
to Nestor son of Neleus, if perchance he might contrive with him some
right device that should be for the warding off of evil from all the
Danaans.

Then he rose, and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
shining feet he bound on fair sandals, and thereafter clad him in the
tawny skin of a lion fiery and great, a skin that reached to the feet,
and he grasped his spear.

And even in like wise did trembling fear take hold on Menelaos, (for
neither on his eyelids did Sleep settle down,) lest somewhat should
befall the Argives, who verily for his sake over wide waters were come
to Troy-land, with fierce war in their thoughts.

With a dappled pard's akin first he covered his broad shoulders, and he
raised and set on his head a casque of bronze, and took a spear in his
strong hand. Then went he on his way to rouse his brother, that mightily
ruled over all the Argives, and as a god was honoured by the people. Him
found he harnessing his goodly gear about his shoulders, by the stern of
the ship, and glad to his brother was his coming. Then Menelaos of the
loud war-cry first accosted him: "Wherefore thus, dear brother, art thou
arming? Wilt thou speed forth any of thy comrades to spy on the Trojans?
Nay, terribly I fear lest none should undertake for thee this deed, even
to go and spy out the foeman alone through the ambrosial night; needs
must he be a man right hardy of heart."

Then the lord Agamemnon answered him and spake: "Need of good counsel
have I and thou, Menelaos fosterling of Zeus, of counsel that will help
and save the Argives and the ships, since the heart of Zeus hath turned
again. Surely on the sacrifices of Hector hath he set his heart rather
than on ours. For never did I see, nor heard any tell, that one man
devised so many terrible deeds in one day, as Hector, dear to Zeus, hath
wrought on the sons of the Achaians, unaided; though no dear son of a
goddess is he, nor of a god. He hath done deeds that methinks will be a
sorrow to the Argives, lasting and long, such evils hath he devised
against the Achaians. But go now, run swiftly by the ships, and summon
Aias and Idomeneus, but I will betake me to noble Nestor, and bid him
arise, if perchance he will be fain to go to the sacred company of the
sentinels and lay on them his command. For to him above others would
they listen, for his own son is chief among the sentinels, he and the
brother in arms of Idomeneus, even Meriones, for to them above all we
entrusted this charge."

Then Menelaos of the loud war-cry answered him: "How meanest thou this
word wherewith thou dost command and exhort me? Am I to abide there with
them, waiting till thou comest, or run back again to thee when I have
well delivered to them thy commandment?"

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: "There do thou
abide lest we miss each other as we go, for many are the paths through
the camp. But call aloud, wheresoever thou goest, and bid men awake,
naming each man by his lineage, and his father's name, and giving all
their dues of honour, nor be thou proud of heart. Nay rather let us
ourselves be labouring, for even thus did Zeus from our very birth
dispense to us the heaviness of toil."

So he spake, and sent his brother away, having clearly laid on him his
commandment. Then went he himself after Nestor, the shepherd of the
host, whom he found by his hut and black ship, in his soft bed: beside
him lay his arms, a shield, and two spears, and a shining helmet. Beside
him lay his glittering girdle wherewith the old man was wont to gird
himself when he harnessed him for war, the bane of men, and led on the
host, for he yielded not to grievous old age. Then he raised him on his
elbow, lifting his head, and spake to the son of Atreus, inquiring of
him with this word: "Who art thou that farest alone by the ships,
through the camp in the dark night, when other mortals are sleeping?
Seekest thou one of thy mules, or of thy comrades? speak, and come not
silently upon me. What need hast thou?"

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him: "O Nestor, son of Neleus,
great glory of the Achaians, thou shalt know Agamemnon, son of Atreus,
whom above all men Zeus hath planted for ever among labours, while my
breath abides within my breast, and my knees move. I wander thus, for
that sweet sleep rests not on mine eyes, but war is my care, and the
troubles of the Achaians. Yea, greatly I fear for the sake of the
Danaans, nor is my heart firm, but I am tossed to and fro, and my heart
is leaping from my breast, and my good knees tremble beneath me. But if
thou wilt do aught, since neither on thee cometh sleep, let us go
thither to the sentinels, that we may see them, lest they be fordone
with toil, and so are slumbering, and have quite forgotten to keep
watch. And hostile men camp hard by, nor know we at all but that they
are keen to do battle in the night."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "Verily will I follow
after thee, but let us also rouse others again, both the son of Tydeus,
spearman renowned, and Odysseus, and swift Aias, and the strong son of
Phyleus. But well it would be if one were to go and call those also, the
godlike Aias, and Idomeneus the prince; for their ships are furthest of
all, and nowise close at hand. But Menelaos will I blame, dear as he is
and worshipful, yea, even if thou be angry with me, nor will I hide my
thought, for that he slumbereth, and to thee alone hath left the toil;
now should he be toiling among all the chiefs and beseeching them, for
need no longer tolerable is coming upon us."

And the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: "Old man, another
day I even bid thee blame him, for often is he slack, and willeth not
to labour, yielding neither to unreadiness nor heedlessness of heart,
but looking toward me, and expecting mine instance. But now he awoke
far before me, and came to me, and him I sent forward to call those
concerning whom thou inquirest. But let us be gone, and them shall
we find before the gates, among the sentinels, for there I bade them
gather."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "So will none of the
Argives be wroth with him or disobey him, when soever he doth urge any
one, and give him his commands."

So spake he, and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
bright feet he bound goodly shoon, and all around him buckled a purple
cloak, with double folds and wide, and thick down all over it.

And he took a strong spear, pointed with sharp bronze, and he went among
the ships of the mail-clad Achaians. Then Odysseus first, the peer of
Zeus in counsel, did knightly Gerenian Nestor arouse out of sleep, with
his voice, and quickly the cry came all about his heart, and he came
forth from the hut and spake to them saying: "Wherefore thus among the
ships and through the camp do ye wander alone, in the ambrosial night;
what so great need cometh upon you?"

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "Laertes' son, be not
wroth, for great trouble besetteth the Achaians. Nay follow, that we may
arouse others too, even all that it behoveth to take counsel, whether we
should fly, or fight."

So spake he, and Odysseus of the many counsels came to the hut, and cast
a shield about his shoulders, and went after them.

And they went to seek Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and him they found
outside his hut, with his arms, and around him his comrades were
