in use. It is greatest with a pinhole, and least with a full
aperture. Hence a small stop is required if the picture is to include
near and far objects, while a large aperture may be used if all the
subject is far enough away to be in clear focus--say more than 25
feet--or if it is a flat surface. The small stop is also required when
the rising front or the swing back is in use. The power of regulating
the time of exposure is convenient for shortening long exposures in
dark interiors, or for lengthening inconveniently short exposures in
a bright light.

In practice it will be best to become familiar with the use of about
three stops, say the full aperture (perhaps F/5.6 or F/8), F/16, and
F/32.

For judging long exposures, the use of an actinometer (issued in many
inexpensive forms) is helpful.

A telephoto attachment increases the photographer's power of
rendering distant details on a large scale. The results are greatly
superior to enlargements of a small plate. It is, however, useless in
a wind, unless the camera is specially supported, and is otherwise
rather tricky to use. The traveller is strongly advised to master its
management at home. It should be adjusted by the maker to the camera
for which it is intended.

Unless a photographer's dark room can be had the developing of the
bulk is best left until the return home, but tests should be made to
see that the exposures are correct. A piece of ruby fabric or ruby
paper tied over an electric light will give a safe light after dark,
and 'Scalol' or some such one-solution developer which requires
merely the addition of water, will give all that is needed for
developing. For fixing use 4 oz. hypo to a pint of water.

In warm climates, use cold water. If it is not cool enough, the
gelatine of the negatives may give trouble. In that case, get colder
water, and use an alum bath. If water is precious, plates can be
sufficiently washed by moving them forward in succession, through
half-dozen soup plates filled with water.

If habitual use is not made of tabloid developers, &c., it is
advisable to have some in reserve, for use in the case of broken
bottles and spilt solutions.

 Useful notes and maxims.

An over-exposed plate gives no dark shadows in the print.

An under-exposed plate gives no high lights. When in doubt, choose
the risk of over-exposure.

To test the safety of your camera--Half draw the shutter, and expose
part of the plate in the camera, in the sunshine, without uncapping
the lens, and develop.

To test the safety of your red light--Expose a plate, divide it into
two, develop half in the dark, and half for the same time, with the
same solution by the light you are testing, and compare the results.
This test is worth making, as photographers are apt to give
themselves much discomfort from exaggerated caution.

 2. Itinerary.

Where there are efficient maps the only need is to mark in the
position of any antiquities, by cross-bearings to clear points, with
the compass, drawn in with a sharp pencil. Where the maps are too
small, or deficient, a continuous register of time should be made,
noting the minute of starting and of stopping; this over known
distances will serve to give the value over the unknown. Note whether
mounted or walking, and the compass bearing of the track; also the
bearings of known points around, whenever stopping. Without any known
bearings pacing and compass used carefully may go over the roughest
ground without five per cent. error in the day.

It is better when on unknown ground to plot a map as you go, so that
no misunderstanding of notes can arise after. If a squared block
cannot be used, at least draw the bearings and distances roughly,
writing in the amounts. This should be plotted up accurately in the
evening. A photograph may be unintelligible later in its detail. It
is best where known features, a temple, tombs, &c., are in a view, to
sketch the outline when photographing, and write in the details, so
as to give a key to the photograph. Inquire about antiquities
whenever stopping. When camping, villagers usually come up to see who
it is; then tell them the directions of the places around. They will
ask how you know; show them the map, and they are puzzled; talk over
all the names a few miles round, and then anything notable in the
district may be remarked, and inquiries made. Several men together
help each other to remember, and bring out more remarks. Sometimes an
intelligent man will describe all the antiquities he knows in the
district: this should be followed closely on the map, and
difficulties resolved at once, so as to get a clear record noted.

Of course, enormous exaggerations are met with, and not one report in
ten will prove to be anything. Tracking up the source of bought
antiquities is one of the best methods, and the one by which
Naukratis was found.

If travelling by camel, it is practicable to diverge widely on foot,
if objects are looked for well ahead. A foot track diverging 4.5
degrees, and then converging likewise, will easily keep in touch with
a baggage camel. Fix on the camping-place in the morning, and let
every one know of it, so that if accidentally parted all can rejoin
by night.

 3. Recording.

Buildings or ruins.
Fix position by bearings to mapped points; also note bearings of any
prominent feature near by, which may serve for finding the position
again. Sketch a plan, always north up in the book, note bearing of
main wall, and then measure with bamboo rod all original dimensions,
with some diagonals to fix angles; do not forget the thickness of the
walls. It is best for a long length to stretch a tape, pegged down by
the ring, and pulled tight by hand: read off all positions of doors,
windows, cross-walls, &c., on one long length, and not as separate
short lengths. If possible plot the measures on squared paper as you
go, and then any errors or omissions will be checked at once. 'E. and
O.E.' has no place in a plan.

Town mounds.
Estimate height over bare land outside; eye height is a trifle over
five feet. At the foot of the mound see where the horizon cuts the
shoulder of it to find eye height; walk up to that point, and sight
another five feet; so on, till you see over the top. If there is any
section, by a stream side, or digging, or land-slip, look for strata,
stone or brick walls and floor levels, and for any distinctive
potsherds; observing levels as before. Look all over the top for
potsherds, to find the latest period of the town. Look around the
mound for any early potsherds. Sherds on the slopes are worth less;
as they have probably slipped down. Red burnt brick in Egypt is all
Roman or Arab; in Greece and Asia Minor, red brick and mortar is
Roman, Byzantine, or later.

Walk to the middle of the site or mound, and see its extent. Then
walk round the wall line, or circuit of it, pacing and compass
noting, to sketch the shape and size of the site: especially look for
any straight lines of wall showing. Sometimes a mud-brick wall may be
entirely denuded away, yet the position is shown by the sharp edge of
the strew of potsherds on the surface.

Look for any slag-heaps; these are the remains of lime burning, and
show where stone buildings existed; sometimes foundations still
remain. Look for any recent pits or trenches; these show where stone
or burnt brick has been dug out in modern times, and may give the
position and plan of a temple or church.

See if any rubbish mounds can be traced outside of the town site;
usually marked by a gentle walk-up slope, and a steep thrown-down
slope, and mainly consisting of pottery, e.g. Monte Testaccio at
Rome, and mounds east of Cairo.

Town sites rise in Egypt about forty inches a century, by the dust,
rubbish, and decay of mud-brick buildings. In Palestine the rise is
five feet a century, owing to the rains.

Cemeteries.
These have generally been more or less plundered; if recently, the
pits show; if anciently, there are scraps of pottery lying about. If
there are pebbles or marl thrown up from deep levels, there is
evidence of tombs, and they may be unplundered. Blown sand or grass
may hide all trace of tombs. Sometimes the whole masonry of a tomb
may have been removed, and the gravel filling-in have spread so
uniformly that there is no sign of building, although a course or two
of stone may yet remain under the surface. The surface of ground
should be closely looked over at sunrise or sunset to show up the
slight hollows or ridges by the shadows. After rain differences will
often appear in the drying of the ground. Ask any one near a site if
he knows of any one getting stones, or bronze, or plunder from tombs.
Anything found will probably be greatly exaggerated, and no clear
idea of the time of finding can be reached; yet any such detail may
be useful.

Any large town site must have a cemetery, which is near it in most
cases. In Egypt the towns being in the inundated land, the cemeteries
are at some miles distant on the desert. The prehistoric cemeteries
may be anywhere; the historic cemeteries are usually round the ends
of the dyke roads, which were thrown up in the early dynasties as
irrigation dams, and still serve as the roads of the country. In
Greek lands cemeteries are always outside a town, usually by the side
of the roads.

Caves should always be carefully explored; the roof and sides
searched for inscriptions or carvings; rock pockets in the sides
examined; and the floor dug over for potsherds and any small objects.
If there are different strata these should be each removed
separately, and the depth and positions of objects noted.

 4. Methods of Planning.

Though we cannot here give full technical details of all the methods
for plans and surveys, it will be useful to state the scope of each
method, so that they may be kept in mind, and whichever is best
suited to the individual and his work may be provided for.

 1. Plain pacing.
After pacing lengths of a few hundred feet, up and down hill and
flat, tape the distances, and learn true value of pace. Careful
pacing can be done to one or two per cent. of the whole; and properly
used, in triangles, may give a useful plan.

 2. Pacing and compass.
This covers large spaces quickly, but the compass is less accurate
than the pace.

 3. Tape.
Lines of taping must be well planned, with triangle ties to secure
the angles. Pulling up straight is difficult in a wind, especially on
broken ground, and one per cent. error is quite possible then. When
working alone peg the tape down by the ring, or round a stone.

 4. Tapes and cross lines.
Stretch two strings crossing squarely on the ground: fix the square
by laying a squared drawing block below and looking at strings over
it. Two helpers each hold a tape, zero on a string, and the two tapes
are held together by the observer and read off, giving the distance
to each string; this is to be plotted at once on squared paper, and
the plan is completed in detail as it progresses, without any note-
book or later plotting. The helpers must be capable of holding the
tape square to the string. Good for sites up to two hundred or three
hundred feet.

 5. Plane table.
Excellent for some ground, where objects are visible from a distance:
otherwise it requires a marker put up at every point to be fixed.
Cumbrous to carry, much slower than 4.

 6. Box sextant, used as giving angular accuracy to any of the
foregoing; most useful with taping, and in following.

 7. Sextant and three points.
The most rapid accurate method is to adopt three points visible all
over the ground (as trees or chimneys) or set up three markers. Find
shape and size of this triangle. Then at any point take two angles
visible between the points, and this fixes position of observer. A
large site may have forty points fixed in two hours thus to about 1
in 1000. For detail and plotting see Petrie, _Methods and Aims in
Archaeology_.

 8. Theodolite.
For the most accurate work a theodolite is used, giving points to
about 1 in 5000. It is almost essential for any astronomical meridian
or latitude.

None of these methods necessitate any helper, except 4 which needs
two helpers. The observation is from the point to be fixed in 1, 2,
3, 4, and 7; but it is _to_ the point, needing signals or visible
features on the points, in 5, 6, and 8, and for those methods a large
stock of rods must be taken, and the whole ground gone over, before
the work of observation; such methods take far more time than the
others. The able surveyor will know by instinct how to use all the
inferior methods as supplements to the higher, whenever time demands
and accuracy allows.

When first searching a site, note the direction of any wall to the
horizon point, and so see if other walls are parallel.

In all cases a plumb line is wanted for alining foundations and
scattered blocks. Always carry six feet of thin string, and pick up
the nearest suitable stone for a weight, up to three or four pounds
in a wind.

 5. Drawing and Copying.




Inscriptions.
If there is any chance of being interrupted by any claimant, or by
crowds, always make a hand copy at once, as quickly as possible.
After a squeeze or photograph is taken, yet the hand copy is often of
value to explain positions of squeeze slips or detail of photographs.

If there is no chance of interruption, then a carefully drawn copy
full size should be made. For this a dry squeeze is the ground work.
Lay a sheet of thin paper, such as thin wrapping or plain paper, on
the stone, and press all the letters over with the fingers, so as to
make a sharp bend; a break in the deep hollows does not matter. Then,
putting the paper on a drawing-board or sheet of millboard, cock it
up so that the shadow of the squeeze is seen, and draw over the lines
(starting at right base), referring to the stone whenever uncertain.
This is the only right way to copy hieroglyphics by hand. Note that
the edges are usually rather worn, and the drawn lines should be
inside the squeeze lines. If the stone is large, several lesser
sheets are best.

Where there is writing, or the relief is too faint to squeeze, put
the paper immediately below the first line, and draw it sign for
sign, so that the spacing is preserved and no omission is possible.
Fold back the paper as each line is copied, and so always keep the
copying close below the line of inscription.

If the signs are in an alphabet that is not familiar, refer to the
table of alphabets.

Sculpture
Sculpture in low relief can be copied best by dry squeeze. As the
connexion of the sheets used should be exact, put up the first sheet
truly vertical, and mark little pencil crosses at the corners on the
stone. Then the corners of successive sheets should be fitted into
the angles of the crosses. When inking in the pencil drawings, do not
carry the lines within two inches of the edges of the sheets. Then
place sheets edge to edge, adjust them to fit as best they may,
weight them heavily with books, turn back one edge and weight it, and
then slip a strip of wetted adhesive paper half-way under the edge
that is down; at once liberate the edge that is up, and dab (not rub)
both heavily down on the adhesive. This makes a joint free of
cockling, and when dry the inking can be completed across the joint.
Where there is any colour remaining on sculpture or inscription, only
dry squeezing is permissible.

Where signs are worn or decayed it is needful to try various
lighting. This can be done in the open air, by shading the part by
the hands placed around it as a sort of tube, the head blocking out
the light over the tube. Then quickly raise a hand alternately, so as
to reverse the oblique lighting, and watch the effect on the sign.

If the stone has not too tender a face, careful washing often brings
out an inscription; and in such cases it is usually far easier to
copy from a wet than from a dry stone.

If reliefs have been much weathered they can be made plain for
photographing by laying horizontal and covering with sand; on wiping
away the sand from the relief the ground will be left flat sand, so
hiding the confused hollows of weathering.

The safest way for drawings to travel is to post them at the nearest
post direct to where they will be worked up. The Postal Union takes
rolls of 21 cm. thick, 60 cm. long, up to 5 kilos as parcels, or
rolls of 10 cm. thick, 75 cm. long, up to 2 kilos by book post open
at ends. This is far better than carrying rolls by hand.

Wet squeezing. Where there is no colour, and the stone is strong and
not crumbling, a wet squeeze is the best copy. There are three
purposes for it, and the method differs for each; (1) thin single
sheet kept fresh on the outer face for photographing later; or (2)
single sheet well beaten in and patched, depending on pricking the
outlines and hand-copy from it, or blacking over the relief on the
inner side and photographing; or (3) double sheet hard beaten, and
patched in the hollows, for plaster casting afterwards.

For (1) there is no need to get an impression of the hollows to the
bottom, and the face of the paper should be smooth. A soft paper,
with little or no size, and a soft clothes-brush will do well for
this. The sheet should cover the whole inscription, or have as few
joints as may be. The stone should be dabbed with a wet brush so as
to saturate the face, the sheet of paper well soaked in water laid
upon it, taking care not to leave bubbles, and then dabbing firmly
with the brush will drive the paper into the hollows. If the stone is
polished or very smooth, it is needful to peel off the paper while
wet by holding two corners, and lay it reversed on a flat surface to
dry; if left on the stone the contraction will destroy the impress.
Out of doors the paper can be held down by pebbles around it, or by
sand on the edges, to prevent the wind catching it.

(2) The stronger squeeze should be of a tough paper with moderate
sizing. Cut the paper to the form of the stone. Thrust it into a pail
of water, knead it about vigorously, roll it into a ball and pummel
it, so as to break the grain and let the water well into it. Then wet
the stone, shake out the paper like a wet handkerchief, full of
creases, lay it on the stone and begin to beat it in with a hard,
long spoke-brush. A few strokes round the edge will catch it down so
that the wind does not disturb it. Then begin to beat it heavily
along the top edge; beat it to a pulp, and patch with strips left
soaking in the water wherever breaks occur. If the stone is porous
the paper may part from it, especially if expanded by beating; the
only course then is to slush more water on the face so that it will
go through the breaks and hold the paper down again. It may be
needful to slit the paper to let the water go below it. Beat down
again, enough to fix it.

(3) For casting purposes a final backing sheet, moderately beaten on,
is needed to hold the squeeze together and stiffen it. Either (2) or
(3) can be left on the face of the stone till quite dry, and then
carefully detached by lifting up from one corner, and slipping a
dinner-knife or a slip of wood under the paper to lift any part that
sticks.

Stiff squeezes as (3) must be packed flat; thin, as (1) and sometimes
(2), may be rolled in a large curve, but this always deteriorates a
squeeze.

For plaster casting, a squeeze should be heated on a stove and
brushed over with melted paraffin, or better wax, sufficient to cover
the face without choking the finer detail. Before each cast the face
should be lightly oiled with a tuft of wool.

Small objects.
These can be copied by a thin paper squeeze, and the squeeze may be
mounted by pasting a card and lightly pressing the squeeze back down
on it. This will take out all cockling and make it lie flat for
photographing.

Tin-foil is very handy for squeezes, and may be saved from chocolate
for this. Press it firmly on a coin or seal with a tuft of wool, or
beat it with a soft tooth-brush, being careful to avoid creases. The
foil should then be floated on water, hollow back up, and blazing
sealing-wax dropped into it to back it. The resulting positive can be
then stuck on card.

For plaster casts of coins the face should be dusted with French
chalk, as also a smooth bed of plasticine; the coin can then be
pressed in safely without any possible risk, and afterward plaster
cast in the mould. Sealing-wax is said to be sharper, but there is a
risk of its sticking to the coin. If it is used, breathe hard on the
coin, or wet it, before impressing; and when first set lift it
slightly to detach it, and then replace till cold. Or tin-foil may be
used, as in making positives; but, instead of floating on water,
press plasticine on the foil while it is still on the object.

For curved surfaces, as cylinders, any of these methods can be used;
the plasticine is the more successful.

In all casting of plaster on a small scale, use a soft camel-hair
brush. Mix the plaster in the palm of the hand with a knife, take up
some of the wettest to brush over the face of the moulds (a dozen
scarabs or small coins done at once); then put he brush in water, and
take up thicker plaster with a pocket-knife to drop on as a backing.
This avoids air bubbles without using too weak a plaster.



Copying hieroglyphic inscriptions.
Where possible a wet or a dry squeeze should be taken of any
inscription. When hand copying is necessary, the main matter is to
get the cartouches of king's names accurately, and the date at the
beginning, examining specially whether single strokes, I I I I, have
been connected above, n n, forming the ten sign. The main difficulty
for any one not knowing the 800 signs is to distinguish between those
that are alike, especially when damaged. For this purpose the
commonest signs that may be confused are here placed together, so
that the essential points of difference may be noticed. A small cross
is placed here by small points of distinction which might escape
notice.

