
"It has been terrible, master. I climbed up into that tree beneath which
we halted yesterday and watched the battle. I shouted with joy when I
saw Enghien clear out the ambuscade, and again when he drove the Walloon
horse away; then everything seemed to go wrong. I saw the marshal's
cavalry on the left driven off the field like chaff before the wind.
Then the centre broke up directly they were charged; and as the enemy
fell upon the reserve it seemed to me that all was lost. Then I saw
Enghien and his horsemen coming along like a whirlwind, bursting their
way through the enemy's horse, and in turn driving them off the field.
I hoped then that the battle was all over, and that the Spanish infantry
would be allowed to march away; but no, my heart fell again when, time
after time, our cavalry dashed up against them, and each time fell back
again, leaving the slope behind them covered with dead men and horses;
and I shouted aloud when I saw the artillery move up and the reserves
advancing. As soon as I saw that the square was broken and a terrible
melee was going on, I knew that all was over, and could restrain my
impatience no longer, so I mounted my horse with, I may say, small hope
of finding you alive, seeing that you rode behind Enghien, whose white
plumes I could see ever in front of the line."

"It has been a marvellous victory, Paolo, and there can be no doubt that
Enghien has covered himself with glory. It was his quick eye that saw
what there was to be done, his brain that instantly directed the blow
where alone it could be effectual, and his extraordinary bravery that
roused the enthusiasm of those around him to a point at which no man
thought of his life. But for him it was a lost battle."

"Well, master, I am glad that we have won the battle, but that is as
nothing to me in comparison that you have come out of it safely, and I
think, master, that we have a right to say that we helped in some degree
to bring about the victory by discovering that ambuscade down in the
hollow."

"That had not occurred to me, Paolo," Hector laughed. "No doubt it was
a fortunate discovery, for had the musketeers lain hidden there until we
were beaten back after our first charge, and then poured their fire into
us, it would doubtless have thrown us into some confusion, and might
even have caused a panic for a while."

"Now, master, if you will mount this horse I will be off and catch
another; there are scores of them running about riderless, some of them
belonging to the marshal's men, but many more to the Germans, and a few
that galloped off riderless each time Enghien fell back."

"Don't take one of those, Paolo; it might be claimed by its master's
lackeys; get one of the best German horses that you can find. You might
as well get two if you can, for I want a second horse while I am here
with the prince."



CHAPTER IX: HONOURS


In half an hour Paolo returned leading two horses. By their trappings
and appearance both had evidently belonged to officers.

"Take off the trappings," Hector said, "then put a saddle on one for
me; shift your own saddle on to the other, and picket your own with the
spare horses of the staff, then we will ride over and get my saddle,
bridle, holsters, and trappings. The horse has carried me well ever
since I left Paris, and I am grieved indeed to lose it."

"So am I, master; it was a good beast, but I think that either of these
is as good, though it will be long before I get to like them as I did
Scotty. We shall want housings for this second horse, master."

"Yes; there will be no difficulty about that. There are scores of dead
horses on the field; choose one without any embroidery or insignia. You
may as well take another pair of holsters with pistols."

Riding across to the spot where Enghien and his officers were forming up
the prisoners, talking courteously to the Spanish officers and seeing
to the wounded, Hector, leaving Paolo to find his fallen horse and shift
his trappings to the one that he rode, cantered up to the spot where
Enghien's white plume could be seen in the midst of a group of officers,
among whom was General Gassion. He saluted as he came up.

"I am glad indeed to see you, Captain Campbell," Enghien said warmly,
holding out his hand; "I feared that you were killed. Some of my friends
told me that you were struck down in the third charge, and that they had
not seen you since and feared that you were slain."

"My horse was killed, prince, and in falling pinned me to the ground,
and being within thirty yards of the Spanish square, I lay without
movement until you came back again and broke them. Then some soldiers so
far lifted my horse that I could get my foot from under it, my servant
found and caught a riderless German horse, and here I am unharmed."

"Well, sir, at the time that you came up General Gassion was just
telling these gentlemen that had it not been for you things might have
gone very differently. Had you not discovered that ambush their fire
would have been fatal to us, for we fell back, as you know, farther than
the copse, and a volley from a thousand muskets would have played havoc
among us, and after so terrible a repulse might well have decided the
day against us. For this great service, rendered by you voluntarily and
without orders, I as commander-in-chief of this army, with the full and
warm approval of General Gassion, appoint you to the rank of colonel,
a rank which I am sure will be confirmed by the queen's minister when I
report to him my reasons for the promotion. General Gassion reports
that the man who accompanied you on this reconnaissance was the same who
followed you in the expedition to Turin. As he is not a soldier I cannot
promote him, but I will order my chamberlain to hand him a purse of a
hundred pistoles. When you return to Turenne, tell him that I owe him
my best thanks for having sent you to me, and that, thanks to the aid of
his teaching, you have been the means of preventing a great disaster to
our forces."

"I thank you, indeed, monsieur, for your kindness, and for promoting
me so far beyond my merits, but I hope in the future I shall be able to
still further prove my gratitude."

"That is proved already," Gassion said, "for although every man today
has fought like a hero, you were the only one in camp that suspected
that the Spanish might be lying in an ambush, and who not only thought
it, but took means to find out whether it was so."

The next morning Enghien informed Hector that he was elected as one
of the three officers who were to have the honour of carrying his
despatches to Paris, and that he was to start in half an hour. Paolo,
who was in the highest state of delight at the purse that had been
presented to him the evening before, was greatly pleased with the
prospect.

"Heaven be praised, master, that you are not going into another battle!
It was well nigh a miracle that you escaped last time, and such good
luck does not befall a man twice. I have never seen Paris, and greatly
do I long to do so. How they will shout when they hear the news we
bring!"

"It will not be altogether news to them, Paolo. La Moussaie, Enghien's
intimate friend, who acted as his aide-de-camp during the battle, was
sent off ten minutes after the fight ended with a paper, on which the
prince had pencilled that he had utterly defeated the enemy. He will
change horses at every post, and will be in Paris by this evening. We
bear the official despatches, giving a full account of the battle, and
of the total destruction of the Spanish infantry, with no doubt a list
of the nobles and gentlemen who have fallen. Well, I should think now,
Paolo, that when we have seen enough of Paris and we have journeyed down
to Perpignan again, you will leave my service and buy a farm; you can
afford a substantial one now."

"What, master! I leave your service, where gold comes in in showers, and
where one serves a master whom one loves? No, sir, I am not such a fool
as that. I do not say that when the war is over I may not settle down in
a snug home among the mountains of Savoy, but not until then; besides, I
am but eighteen, and a nice hand I should make at managing a farm."

"Well, get the horses ready at once and the valises packed. You can put
them on my spare horse. The mule will scarce keep up with us, for we
shall certainly travel fast, so you had best hand it over to someone who
you think will treat it kindly."

Twenty minutes later Hector, and two officers who had distinguished
themselves especially in the battle, sat mounted before the tent that
had now been raised for d'Enghien. The young prince himself came out.
"Gentlemen," he said, handing the three sealed packets, "you will
present these to the queen, who is now Regent of France, for Louis XIII
died a week ago. They contain the despatches and reports of myself and
General Gassion. Your packet, colonel," he added to Hector, "is General
Gassion's report; it goes more fully into military details than mine.
You, Monsieur de Penthiere, carry my despatches in reference to the
battle of yesterday. You, Monsieur de Caussac, are the bearer of my
plans for our future operations. I think that you will all agree with me
that, after the battle we have won, we shall be able to make ourselves
masters of Flanders with but slight resistance."

The three officers bowed their agreement with the words.

"I know not who is in power or on whom the queen chiefly relies for
counsel, but should any questions be put to you, you will, I hope, be
able to express the urgency of prompt action in this matter before the
Spaniards have time to rally from the terrible blow that this defeat has
inflicted upon them. And now, gentlemen, a rapid and pleasant journey.
Orders were sent on last night that four sets of fresh horses should
be in readiness along the road. They are my own horses, and good ones.
Twelve troopers will accompany you; three of these will remain behind at
each stage where you change, and the horses that you have used will be
brought on at a more leisurely pace after you. They will readily find
out in Paris where you are lodged, and I beg that you will retain the
horses as a slight proof of my goodwill."

Then he waved his hand and went into his tent again. The three lackeys,
each holding a spare horse, were sitting in readiness for a start some
fifty yards away. After a moment's conversation the officers rode up to
them.

"You must follow us quietly," one of them said. "For today you can keep
up with us to the end of the first stage. Three fresh horses have been
provided for us, for we ride without a stop to Paris. Three soldiers
will there take charge of the horses we ride. When we go on you will
follow quietly with the horses that you are now leading. It will be
impossible for you to keep up with us."

Then they placed themselves at the head of their escort of dragoons, the
lackeys fell in behind them, and they started at a fast pace.

"Do you know where the first relays are?" one of the officers asked the
sergeant in charge of the escort, after they had ridden three or four
miles.

"The first is at Rethel, monsieur, the second at Rheims, the third at
Chateau-Thierry, the fourth at Meaux."

"Then we will ride on at once. You have your orders?"

"Yes, sir."

Whereupon the three officers quickened their pace. The distance to be
traversed was about a hundred and thirty miles, and as they had five
horses, including those they rode, each stage would average about
twenty-six miles.

"Now, gentlemen," de Penthiere said, "it seems to me that it would be
a pity to founder fifteen good horses in order to gain an hour on this
journey. The queen has already received news of the victory, or at least
she will receive it some time today, therefore the details we bring are
not of particular importance. It is now eight o'clock. If we were to
gallop all the way we might do it in twelve hours. The roads in many
places will be bad, and we must stop for meals at least three times;
with the utmost speed we could hardly be in Paris in less than fifteen
hours. Her majesty will scarce want to read long despatches at that
time, and may take it that we ourselves will need a bath and a change of
garments, and the services of a barber, before we could show ourselves
in court. Had we been bearers of the original despatch, we might have
gone in splashed from head to foot. As it is, it seems to me that if we
present ourselves with our papers at seven in the morning we shall have
done that which is necessary. What do you both say?"

"I agree with you, de Penthiere. It would be a sore pity to injure good
horses by galloping them at the top of their speed, to say nothing of
knocking ourselves up. Had we been sent off from the field of battle I
should have said, spare neither the horses nor ourselves. But indeed it
seems to me that tomorrow morning will be quite early enough for us
to present ourselves and our despatches. To tell you the truth, I have
never ridden a hundred and thirty miles or so at the pace of a courier.
I should say let us go at a reasonable pace, and get into Paris soon
after midnight, which will give us time for some little sleep, and
afterwards to make ourselves presentable. What say you, Colonel
Campbell?"

"I have no opinion, messieurs. I know nothing of the manners of the
court, and if you think that tomorrow morning will be quite soon enough
for us to deliver the despatches I am quite willing to fall in with your
view. It is certainly a long ride, and as we marched hither we found
that the roads were very bad, and certainly where the army has passed
they are so cut up by the artillery and wagons that they are sure to
be quite unfit for going at racing speed. Therefore I think that if we
present ourselves at the palace early in the morning, we shall have done
all that can be expected of us."

It was indeed two o'clock in the morning when they arrived at the gates
of Paris. Accustomed though they all were to horse exercise, the journey
had been a very fatiguing one. Until night fell they had ridden briskly,
talking as they went on the probable state of affairs in France and of
the military operations that were likely to be undertaken as the result
of the victory, but progress became slow after darkness set in. The
roads were in many places detestably bad. In passing through forests it
was not possible to travel much beyond a walk, as it was necessary not
only to avoid overhanging arms of trees, but to keep the track, for the
road in many places was nothing more.

Once or twice they lost it altogether, and it was only when they hit
upon the house of a peasant or a little village, and obtained a guide,
that they were able to recover their road. Consequently all were
thoroughly exhausted when they reached Paris. The gates were opened to
them when it was understood that they bore despatches from the army.
They made their way to the Hotel Conde. It was illuminated, for the
prince had given a great banquet in honour of the victory won by his
son; and although most of the guests had left long before, a party
of the closest friends and connections of the prince were holding an
informal council, when the word came to them that three officers had
arrived with despatches from the Duc d'Enghien. The prince came down.
Hector had dismounted without assistance, but the other two officers had
to be lifted from their saddles.

"Are you bearers of any special news, de Penthiere?" the prince asked;
for the two young nobles were well known to him.

"No, monseigneur, save that our despatches give full details of the
battle."

"What is our loss?"

"It is very heavy," de Penthiere said. "Fully a hundred men of good
blood have fallen. The loss principally fell upon the cavalry commanded
by the duke, who three times charged the Spanish infantry, and only
succeeded at the fourth attempt in breaking their square."

"And the Spanish infantry?"

"Every man was either killed or taken."

"Glorious!" the prince said. "Well, I will not detain you now, for I see
that you can scarce stand, and it would be cruel to keep you up, much as
we desire to hear the particulars."

"I think, monseigneur, that this gentleman, Colonel Campbell, is more in
a condition to talk to you than de Caussac or myself."

"I shall be happy to answer any questions," Hector said, bowing to the
prince. "I have been campaigning for the last four years under Monsieur
de Turenne, and am accustomed to long journeys and sleepless nights."

"Thank you, colonel. We will not keep you up long."

Some lackeys were ordered to assist the two young nobles to couches,
and then Conde and his companions left the courtyard and entered a small
saloon where they had supped two hours before. Some fresh bottles of
wine and cold viands were at once placed upon the table. Hector drank
off a goblet of wine.

"Now, Monsieur le Prince, I will tell you all I know about the fight."
And he gave Conde and his companions a brief sketch of the various
movements and changes of the battle.

"It was a hard fought field indeed," Conde said, "and the result is
a glorious one for France. Now we will keep you no longer from your
couch."

"May I ask, sir, at what time we ought to present ourselves with the
despatches at the palace?"

"It will not be necessary for you to present yourselves before ten
o'clock, for it was late last night before her majesty retired. Paris
was wild at the news of the victory, and the reception at the palace was
crowded. Still, I should say that at ten it would be well that you and
your companions should attend there, though you may have to wait for an
hour or more for an audience."

At ten o'clock Hector and his companions presented themselves at the
palace. Seven hours' sleep, a warm bath, and the services of the barber,
who curled the hair of the two young nobles and sprinkled them all with
perfume, did much to restore them, though they were all somewhat stiff,
and every bone seemed to ache. They were kept waiting for half an hour,
at the end of which time the door of the antechamber was opened and
their names were called. The queen, who was still a beautiful woman,
was standing talking to a gentleman, in whose attire there were but few
symbols that would betray to a stranger that he was an ecclesiastic of
high rank.

"You are the bearers of despatches from the army, messieurs?"

"We have that honour, your majesty," de Penthiere, who was the senior of
the party, said. "We arrived from Paris at two o'clock this morning, but
did not venture to disturb your majesty at that hour."

"You did rightly," the queen said graciously. "We already knew that
a great victory had been gained, and could afford to wait for the
particulars. Do you each bear a despatch?"

"We do, your majesty," de Penthiere said, producing that which he bore.
"This, your majesty, is the general report of the Duc d'Enghien of
the events of the battle. Colonel Campbell is intrusted with the more
detailed description of General Gassion. Monsieur de Caussac's despatch
contains the duke's views as to the carrying on of the campaign; these
he submits to the judgment of your majesty and the council."

Cardinal Mazarin stepped forward and took the three documents.

"These we will peruse and consider at our leisure," the queen said, "and
I shall, I hope, see you at my levee this evening. In the meantime I
thank you for your service in having brought the despatches so speedily
here, and am well aware that the fact that you have been chosen as the
messengers of the commander-in-chief is in itself a proof that your
share in the battle was in the highest degree honourable."

She graciously held out her hand, which de Penthiere and his companions,
dropping upon one knee, raised to their lips, one after the other.

"You are aware of the contents of the despatches, cardinal," the queen
said when they were alone.

"Of their general scope, madam. The Prince of Conde did me the honour to
call upon me at eight this morning. He had gathered a general account
of the battle from the lips of that young Scottish colonel, who was the
only one of the party who was capable of relating it, the others being
almost speechless with fatigue, for the road from Rocroi hither is long
and rough."

"You may well say the young Scottish colonel, cardinal. He is but a
youth, and it is strange indeed that he should already have attained
that rank."

"He has served for four years under the Viscount Turenne," Mazarin
said, "and must therefore have had good opportunities of distinguishing
himself. Still, it is seldom indeed that any save one of royal blood or
of the very highest families obtains such a rank so quickly. Turenne,
however, was himself a colonel after less than four years service."

"Yes, cardinal, but he had the advantage of belonging to the family of
an almost independent sovereign."

"Conde said that he had himself asked the young man how it was that he
had won it, and he replied that it was solely due to the kindness of the
Duc d'Enghien, who had been pleased to consider a small service he had
rendered as worthy of recognition. It is like enough, your majesty, that
we shall see his name mentioned in one of these documents. It is certain
that he would not have been chosen to carry the despatches--a duty which
is regarded as a reward of the most distinguished service--unless he had
done something of marked importance."

The two French officers on leaving the palace at once went off to pay
their respects in the first place to the heads of their families, and
afterwards to visit the various circles and coteries with which they
were connected, and where they would be sure of a flattering welcome and
attentive listeners. Hector, for his part, rode direct to the quarters
of the colonel of the Scottish regiment. A soldier came out and took the
bridle of his horse as he saluted, while a sergeant asked what name he
should announce.

"Then you do not remember me, Sergeant Macfarlane?"

The soldier looked at him earnestly. "Why," he exclaimed suddenly, "it's
Hector Campbell!"

"Right enough, sergeant."

"You have changed mightily, sir; you were but a laddie when you went
away nigh four years ago. The news came to the regiment that you had
been made a captain, and proud we all were. The colonel will be right
glad to see you," and he led the way into the house.

"Then the regiment has not been on service just lately?"

"We had two years on the Rhine; but we came back here last autumn.
The Red Cardinal was not fond of us, but he knew that he could trust
us--which is more than he could have done some of the regiments--so
he had us back again; and we were not sorry, for it was but dull work
there--sieges and nought else."

He was just going to open the door of the inner room when Hector said,
"You can announce me, Macfarlane, as Colonel Campbell."

"Gude Lord," the sergeant ejaculated, "ye dinna say that ye are a
colonel?" Then reassuming with a great effort his military stiffness, he
