from the top slipped their greyhounds, which, excelling the fox in
swiftness, and equalling him in ferocity and spirit, soon brought the
plunderer to his life's end.

In this way, without any attention to the ordinary rules and decorums
of sport, but apparently as much to the gratification both of bipeds
and quadrupeds as if all due ritual had been followed, four foxes were
killed on this active morning; and even Brown himself, though he had
seen the princely sports of India, and ridden a-tiger-hunting upon an
elephant with the Nabob of Arcot, professed to have received an
excellent morning's amusement. When the sport was given up for the day,
most of the sportsmen, according to the established hospitality of the
country, went to dine at Charlie's Hope.

During their return homeward Brown rode for a short time beside the
huntsman, and asked him some questions concerning the mode in which he
exercised his profession. The man showed an unwillingness to meet his
eye, and a disposition to be rid of his company and conversation, for
which Brown could not easily account. He was a thin, dark, active
fellow, well framed for the hardy profession which he exercised. But
his face had not the frankness of the jolly hunter; he was down-looked,
embarrassed, and avoided the eyes of those who looked hard at him.
After some unimportant observations on the success of the day, Brown
gave him a trifling gratuity, and rode on with his landlord. They found
the goodwife prepared for their reception; the fold and the
poultry-yard furnished the entertainment, and the kind and hearty
welcome made amends for all deficiencies in elegance and fashion.




CHAPTER XXVI

     The Elliots and Armstrongs did convene,
     They were a gallant company!

          Ballad of Johnnie Armstrong


Without noticing the occupations of an intervening day or two, which,
as they consisted of the ordinary silvan amusements of shooting and
coursing, have nothing sufficiently interesting to detain the reader,
we pass to one in some degree peculiar to Scotland, which may be called
a sort of salmon-hunting. This chase, in which the fish is pursued and
struck with barbed spears, or a sort of long-shafted trident, called a
waster, is much practised at the mouth of the Esk and in the other
salmon rivers of Scotland. The sport is followed by day and night, but
most commonly in the latter, when the fish are discovered by means of
torches, or fire-grates, filled with blazing fragments of tar-barrels,
which shed a strong though partial light upon the water. On the present
occasion the principal party were embarked in a crazy boat upon a part
of the river which was enlarged and deepened by the restraint of a
mill-wear, while others, like the ancient Bacchanals in their gambols,
ran along the banks, brandishing their torches and spears, and pursuing
the salmon, some of which endeavoured to escape up the stream, while
others, shrouding themselves under roots of trees, fragments of stones,
and large rocks, attempted to conceal themselves from the researches of
the fishermen. These the party in the boat detected by the slightest
indications; the twinkling of a fin, the rising of an airbell, was
sufficient to point out to these adroit sportsmen in what direction to
use their weapon.

The scene was inexpressibly animating to those accustomed to it; but,
as Brown was not practised to use the spear, he soon tired of making
efforts which were attended with no other consequences than jarring his
arms against the rocks at the bottom of the river, upon which, instead
of the devoted salmon, he often bestowed his blow. Nor did he relish,
though he concealed feelings which would not have been understood,
being quite so near the agonies of the expiring salmon, as they lay
flapping about in the boat, which they moistened with their blood. He
therefore requested to be put ashore, and, from the top of a heugh or
broken bank, enjoyed the scene much more to his satisfaction. Often he
thought of his friend Dudley the artist, when he observed the effect
produced by the strong red glare on the romantic banks under which the
boat glided. Now the light diminished to a distant star that seemed to
twinkle on the waters, like those which, according to the legends of
the country, the water-kelpy sends for the purpose of indicating the
watery grave of his victims. Then it advanced nearer, brightening and
enlarging as it again approached, till the broad flickering flame
rendered bank and rock and tree visible as it passed, tingeing them
with its own red glare of dusky light, and resigning them gradually to
darkness, or to pale moonlight, as it receded. By this light also were
seen the figures in the boat, now holding high their weapons, now
stooping to strike, now standing upright, bronzed by the same red glare
into a colour which might have befitted the regions of Pandemonium.

Having amused himself for some time with these effects of light and
shadow, Brown strolled homewards towards the farm-house, gazing in his
way at the persons engaged in the sport, two or three of whom are
generally kept together, one holding the torch, the others with their
spears, ready to avail themselves of the light it affords to strike
their prey. As he observed one man struggling with a very weighty
salmon which he had speared, but was unable completely to raise from
the water, Brown advanced close to the bank to see the issue of his
exertions. The man who held the torch in this instance was the
huntsman, whose sulky demeanour Brown had already noticed with
surprise. 'Come here, sir! come here, sir! look at this ane! He turns
up a side like a sow.' Such was the cry from the assistants when some
of them observed Brown advancing.

'Ground the waster weel, man! ground the waster weel! Haud him down! Ye
haena the pith o' a cat!' were the cries of advice, encouragement, and
expostulation from those who were on the bank to the sportsman engaged
with the salmon, who stood up to his middle in water, jingling among
broken ice, struggling against the force of the fish and the strength
of the current, and dubious in what manner he should attempt to secure
his booty. As Brown came to the edge of the bank, he called out--'Hold
up your torch, friend huntsman!' for he had already distinguished his
dusky features by the strong light cast upon them by the blaze. But the
fellow no sooner heard his voice, and saw, or rather concluded, it was
Brown who approached him, than, instead of advancing his light, he let
it drop, as if accidentally, into the water.

'The deil's in Gabriel!' said the spearman, as the fragments of glowing
wood floated half-blazing, half-sparkling, but soon extinguished, down
the stream. 'The deil's in the man! I'll never master him without the
light; and a braver kipper, could I but land him, never reisted abune a
pair o' cleeks.'[Footnote: See Note 4] Some dashed into the water to
lend their assistance, and the fish, which was afterwards found to
weigh nearly thirty pounds, was landed in safety.

The behaviour of the huntsman struck Brown, although he had no
recollection of his face, nor could conceive why he should, as it
appeared he evidently did, shun his observation. Could he be one of the
footpads he had encountered a few days before? The supposition was not
altogether improbable, although unwarranted by any observation he was
able to make upon the man's figure and face. To be sure the villains
wore their hats much slouched, and had loose coats, and their size was
not in any way so peculiarly discriminated as to enable him to resort
to that criterion. He resolved to speak to his host Dinmont on the
subject, but for obvious reasons concluded it were best to defer the
explanation until a cool hour in the morning.

The sportsmen returned loaded with fish, upwards of one hundred salmon
having been killed within the range of their sport. The best were
selected for the use of the principal farmers, the others divided among
their shepherds, cottars, dependents, and others of inferior rank who
attended. These fish, dried in the turf smoke of their cabins or
shealings, formed a savoury addition to the mess of potatoes, mixed
with onions, which was the principal part of their winter food. In the
meanwhile a liberal distribution of ale and whisky was made among them,
besides what was called a kettle of fish,--two or three salmon, namely,
plunged into a cauldron and boiled for their supper. Brown accompanied
his jolly landlord and the rest of his friends into the large and smoky
kitchen, where this savoury mess reeked on an oaken table, massive
enough to have dined Johnnie Armstrong and his merry-men. All was
hearty cheer and huzza, and jest and clamorous laughter, and bragging
alternately, and raillery between whiles. Our traveller looked
earnestly around for the dark countenance of the fox-hunter; but it was
nowhere to be seen.

At length he hazarded a question concerning him. 'That was an awkward
accident, my lads, of one of you, who dropped his torch in the water
when his companion was struggling with the large fish.'

'Awkward!' returned a shepherd, looking up (the same stout young fellow
who had speared the salmon); 'he deserved his paiks for't, to put out
the light when the fish was on ane's witters! I'm weel convinced
Gabriel drapped the roughies in the water on purpose; he doesna like to
see ony body do a thing better than himsell.'

'Ay,' said another, 'he's sair shamed o' himsell, else he would have
been up here the night; Gabriel likes a little o' the gude thing as
weel as ony o' us.'

'Is he of this country?' said Brown.

'Na, na, he's been but shortly in office, but he's a fell hunter; he's
frae down the country, some gate on the Dumfries side.'

'And what's his name, pray?'

'Gabriel.'

'But Gabriel what?'

'Oh, Lord kens that; we dinna mind folk's afternames muckle here, they
run sae muckle into clans.'

'Ye see, sir,' said an old shepherd, rising, and speaking very slow,
'the folks hereabout are a' Armstrongs and Elliots,[Footnote: See Note
5] and sic like--two or three given names--and so, for distinction's
sake, the lairds and farmers have the names of their places that they
live at; as, for example, Tam o' Todshaw, Will o' the Flat, Hobbie o'
Sorbietrees, and our good master here o' the Charlie's Hope. Aweel,
sir, and then the inferior sort o' people, ye'll observe, are kend by
sorts o' by-names some o' them, as Glaiket Christie, and the Deuke's
Davie, or maybe, like this lad Gabriel, by his employment; as, for
example, Tod Gabbie, or Hunter Gabbie. He's no been lang here, sir, and
I dinna think ony body kens him by ony other name. But it's no right to
rin him doun ahint his back, for he's a fell fox-hunter, though he's
maybe no just sae clever as some o' the folk hereawa wi' the waster.'

After some further desultory conversation, the superior sportsmen
retired to conclude the evening after their own manner, leaving the
others to enjoy themselves, unawed by their presence. That evening,
like all those which Brown had passed at Charlie's Hope, was spent in
much innocent mirth and conviviality. The latter might have approached
to the verge of riot but for the good women; for several of the
neighbouring mistresses (a phrase of a signification how different from
what it bears in more fashionable life!) had assembled at Charlie's
Hope to witness the event of this memorable evening. Finding the
punch-bowl was so often replenished that there was some danger of their
gracious presence being forgotten, they rushed in valorously upon the
recreant revellers, headed by our good mistress Ailie, so that Venus
speedily routed Bacchus. The fiddler and piper next made their
appearance, and the best part of the night was gallantly consumed in
dancing to their music.

An otter-hunt the next day, and a badger-baiting the day after,
consumed the time merrily. I hope our traveller will not sink in the
reader's estimation, sportsman though he may be, when I inform him that
on this last occasion, after young Pepper had lost a fore-foot and
Mustard the second had been nearly throttled, he begged, as a
particular and personal favour of Mr. Dinmont, that the poor badger,
who had made so gallant a defence, should be permitted to retire to his
earth without farther molestation.

The farmer, who would probably have treated this request with supreme
contempt had it come from any other person, was contented in Brown's
case to express the utter extremity of his wonder. 'Weel,' he said,
'that's queer aneugh! But since ye take his part, deil a tyke shall
meddle wi' him mair in my day. We 'll e'en mark him, and ca' him the
Captain's brock; and I'm sure I'm glad I can do ony thing to oblige
you,--but, Lord save us, to care about a brock!'

After a week spent in rural sport, and distinguished by the most frank
attentions on the part of his honest landlord, Brown bade adieu to the
banks of the Liddel and the hospitality of Charlie's Hope. The
children, with all of whom he had now become an intimate and a
favourite, roared manfully in full chorus at his departure, and he was
obliged to promise twenty times that he would soon return and play over
all their favourite tunes upon the flageolet till they had got them by
heart. 'Come back again, Captain,' said one little sturdy fellow, 'and
Jenny will be your wife.' Jenny was about eleven years old; she ran and
hid herself behind her mammy.

'Captain, come back,' said a little fat roll-about girl of six, holding
her mouth up to be kissed, 'and I'll be your wife my ainsell.'

'They must be of harder mould than I,' thought Brown, 'who could part
from so many kind hearts with indifference.' The good dame too, with
matron modesty, and an affectionate simplicity that marked the olden
time, offered her cheek to the departing guest. 'It's little the like
of us can do,' she said, 'little indeed; but yet, if there were but ony
thing--'

'Now, my dear Mrs. Dinmont, you embolden me to make a request: would
you but have the kindness to weave me, or work me, just such a grey
plaid as the goodman wears?' He had learned the language and feelings
of the country even during the short time of his residence, and was
aware of the pleasure the request would confer.

'A tait o' woo' would be scarce amang us,' said the goodwife,
brightening, 'if ye shouldna hae that, and as gude a tweel as ever cam
aff a pirn. I'll speak to Johnnie Goodsire, the weaver at the
Castletown, the morn. Fare ye weel, sir! and may ye be just as happy
yoursell as ye like to see a' body else; and that would be a sair wish
to some folk.'

I must not omit to mention that our traveller left his trusty attendant
Wasp to be a guest at Charlie's Hope for a season. He foresaw that he
might prove a troublesome attendant in the event of his being in any
situation where secrecy and concealment might be necessary. He was
therefore consigned to the care of the eldest boy, who promised, in the
words of the old song, that he should have

     A bit of his supper, a bit of his bed,

and that he should be engaged in none of those perilous pastimes in
which the race of Mustard and Pepper had suffered frequent mutilation.
Brown now prepared for his journey, having taken a temporary farewell
of his trusty little companion.

There is an odd prejudice in these hills in favour of riding. Every
farmer rides well, and rides the whole day. Probably the extent of
their large pasture farms, and the necessity of surveying them rapidly,
first introduced this custom; or a very zealous antiquary might derive
it from the times of the 'Lay of the Last Minstrel,' when twenty
thousand horsemen assembled at the light of the beacon-fires.
[Footnote: It would be affectation to alter this reference. But the
reader will understand that it was inserted to keep up the author's
incognito, as he was not likely to be suspected of quoting his own
works. This explanation is also applicable to one or two similar
passages, in this and the other novels, introduced for the same
reason.] But the truth is undeniable; they like to be on horseback, and
can be with difficulty convinced that any one chooses walking from
other motives than those of convenience or necessity. Accordingly,
Dinmont insisted upon mounting his guest and accompanying him on
horseback as far as the nearest town in Dumfries-shire, where he had
directed his baggage to be sent, and from which he proposed to pursue
his intended journey towards Woodbourne, the residence of Julia
Mannering.

Upon the way he questioned his companion concerning the character of
the fox-hunter; but gained little information, as he had been called to
that office while Dinmont was making the round of the Highland fairs.
'He was a shake-rag like fellow,' he said, 'and, he dared to say, had
gipsy blood in his veins; but at ony rate he was nane o' the smaiks
that had been on their quarters in the moss; he would ken them weel if
he saw them again. There are some no bad folk amang the gipsies too, to
be sic a gang,' added Dandie; 'if ever I see that auld randle-tree of a
wife again, I 'll gie her something to buy tobacco. I have a great
notion she meant me very fair after a'.'

When they were about finally to part, the good farmer held Brown long
by the hand, and at length said, 'Captain, the woo's sae weel up the
year that it's paid a' the rent, and we have naething to do wi' the
rest o' the siller when Ailie has had her new gown, and the bairns
their bits o' duds. Now I was thinking of some safe hand to put it
into, for it's ower muckle to ware on brandy and sugar; now I have
heard that you army gentlemen can sometimes buy yoursells up a step,
and if a hundred or twa would help ye on such an occasion, the bit
scrape o' your pen would be as good to me as the siller, and ye might
just take yer ain time o' settling it; it wad be a great convenience to
me.' Brown, who felt the full delicacy that wished to disguise the
conferring an obligation under the show of asking a favour, thanked his
grateful friend most heartily, and assured him he would have recourse
to his purse without scruple should circumstances ever render it
convenient for him. And thus they parted with many expressions of
mutual regard.




CHAPTER XXVII

     If thou hast any love of mercy in thee,
     Turn me upon my face that I may die.

           JOANNA BALLIE.


Our traveller hired a post-chaise at the place where he separated from
Dinmont, with the purpose of proceeding to Kippletringan, there to
inquire into the state of the family at Woodbourne, before he should
venture to make his presence in the country known to Miss Mannering.
The stage was a long one of eighteen or twenty miles, and the road lay
across the country. To add to the inconveniences of the journey, the
snow began to fall pretty quickly. The postilion, however, proceeded on
his journey for a good many miles without expressing doubt or
hesitation. It was not until the night was completely set in that he
intimated his apprehensions whether he was in the right road. The
increasing snow rendered this intimation rather alarming, for, as it
drove full in the lad's face and lay whitening all around him, it
served in two different ways to confuse his knowledge of the country,
and to diminish the chance of his recovering the right track. Brown
then himself got out and looked round, not, it may be well imagined,
from any better hope than that of seeing some house at which he might
make inquiry. But none appeared; he could therefore only tell the lad
to drive steadily on. The road on which they were ran through
plantations of considerable extent and depth, and the traveller
therefore conjectured that there must be a gentleman's house at no
great distance. At length, after struggling wearily on for about a
mile, the post-boy stopped, and protested his horses would not budge a
foot farther; 'but he saw,' he said, 'a light among the trees, which
must proceed from a house; the only way was to inquire the road there.'
Accordingly, he dismounted, heavily encumbered with a long great-coat
and a pair of boots which might have rivalled in thickness the
seven-fold shield of Ajax. As in this guise he was plodding forth upon
his voyage of discovery, Brown's impatience prevailed, and, jumping out
of the carriage, he desired the lad to stop where he was by the horses,
and he would himself go to the house; a command which the driver most
joyfully obeyed.

Our traveller groped along the side of the inclosure from which the
light glimmered, in order to find some mode of approaching in that
direction, and, after proceeding for some space, at length found a
stile in the hedge, and a pathway leading into the plantation, which in
that place was of great extent. This promised to lead to the light
which was the object of his search, and accordingly Brown proceeded in
that direction, but soon totally lost sight of it among the trees. The
path, which at first seemed broad and well marked by the opening of the
wood through which it winded, was now less easily distinguishable,
although the whiteness of the snow afforded some reflected light to
assist his search. Directing himself as much as possible through the
more open parts of the wood, he proceeded almost a mile without either
recovering a view of the light or seeing anything resembling a
habitation. Still, however, he thought it best to persevere in that
direction. It must surely have been a light in the hut of a forester,
for it shone too steadily to be the glimmer of an ignis fatuus. The
ground at length became broken and declined rapidly, and, although
Brown conceived he still moved along what had once at least been a
pathway, it was now very unequal, and the snow concealing those
breaches and inequalities, the traveller had one or two falls in
consequence. He began now to think of turning back, especially as the
falling snow, which his impatience had hitherto prevented his attending
to, was coming on thicker and faster.

Willing, however, to make a last effort, he still advanced a little
way, when to his great delight he beheld the light opposite at no great
distance, and apparently upon a level with him. He quickly found that
this last appearance was deception, for the ground continued so rapidly
to sink as made it obvious there was a deep dell, or ravine of some
kind, between him and the object of his search. Taking every precaution
to preserve his footing, he continued to descend until he reached the
bottom of a very steep and narrow glen, through which winded a small
rivulet, whose course was then almost choked with snow. He now found
himself embarrassed among the ruins of cottages, whose black gables,
rendered more distinguishable by the contrast with the whitened surface
from which they rose, were still standing; the side-walls had long
since given way to time, and, piled in shapeless heaps and covered with
snow, offered frequent and embarrassing obstacles to our traveller's
progress. Still, however, he persevered, crossed the rivulet, not
without some trouble, and at length, by exertions which became both
painful and perilous, ascended its opposite and very rugged bank, until
he came on a level with the building from which the gleam proceeded.

It was difficult, especially by so imperfect a light, to discover the
nature of this edifice; but it seemed a square building of small size,
the upper part of which was totally ruinous. It had, perhaps, been the
abode in former times of some lesser proprietor, or a place of strength
and concealment, in case of need, for one of greater importance. But
only the lower vault remained, the arch of which formed the roof in the
present state of the building. Brown first approached the place from
whence the light proceeded, which was a long narrow slit or loop-hole,
such as usually are to be found in old castles. Impelled by curiosity
to reconnoitre the interior of this strange place before he entered,
Brown gazed in at this aperture. A scene of greater desolation could
not well be imagined. There was a fire upon the floor, the smoke of
which, after circling through the apartment, escaped by a hole broken
in the arch above. The walls, seen by this smoky light, had the rude
and waste appearance of a ruin of three centuries old at least. A cask
or two, with some broken boxes and packages, lay about the place in
confusion. But the inmates chiefly occupied Brown's attention. Upon a
lair composed of straw, with a blanket stretched over it, lay a figure,
so still that, except that it was not dressed in the ordinary
habiliments of the grave, Brown would have concluded it to be a corpse.
On a steadier view he perceived it was only on the point of becoming
so, for he heard one or two of those low, deep, and hard-drawn sighs
that precede dissolution when the frame is tenacious of life. A female
figure, dressed in a long cloak, sate on a stone by this miserable
couch; her elbows rested upon her knees, and her face, averted from the
light of an iron lamp beside her, was bent upon that of the dying
person. She moistened his mouth from time to time with some liquid, and
between whiles sung, in a low monotonous cadence, one of those prayers,
or rather spells, which, in some parts of Scotland and the north of
England, are used by the vulgar and ignorant to speed the passage of a
parting spirit, like the tolling of the bell in Catholic days. She
accompanied this dismal sound with a slow rocking motion of her body to
and fro, as if to keep time with her song. The words ran nearly thus:--

     Wasted, weary, wherefore stay,
      Wrestling thus with earth and clay?
      From the body pass away.
           Hark! the mass is singing.

     From thee doff thy mortal weed,
      Mary Mother be thy speed,
      Saints to help thee at thy need.
           Hark! the knell is ringing.

     Fear not snow-drift driving fast,
      Sleet, or hail, or levin blast.
      Soon the shroud shall lap thee fast,
      And the sleep be on thee cast
           That shall ne'er know waking.

     Haste thee, haste thee, to be gone,
      Earth flits fast, and time draws on.
      Gasp thy gasp, and groan thy groan,
           Day is near the breaking.

The songstress paused, and was answered by one or two deep and hollow
groans, that seemed to proceed from the very agony of the mortal
strife. 'It will not be,' she muttered to herself; 'he cannot pass away
with that on his mind, it tethers him here--

     Heaven cannot abide it,
      Earth refuses to hide it.  [Footnote: See Note 6.]

I must open the door'; and, rising, she faced towards the door of the
apartment, observing heedfully not to turn back her head, and,
withdrawing a bolt or two (for, notwithstanding the miserable
appearance of the place, the door was cautiously secured), she lifted
the latch, saying,

     Open lock, end strife,
      Come death, and pass life.

Brown, who had by this time moved from his post, stood before her as
she opened the door. She stepped back a pace, and he entered, instantly
recognising, but with no comfortable sensation, the same gipsy woman
whom he had met in Bewcastle. She also knew him at once, and her
attitude, figure, and the anxiety of her countenance, assumed the
appearance of the well-disposed ogress of a fairy tale, warning a
stranger not to enter the dangerous castle of her husband. The first
words she spoke (holding up her hands in a reproving manner) were,
'Said I not to ye, Make not, meddle not? Beware of the redding straik!
[Footnote: The redding straik, namely, a blow received by a peacemaker
who interferes betwixt two combatants, to red or separate them, is
proverbially said to be the most dangerous blow a man can receive.] You
are come to no house o' fair-strae death.' So saying, she raised the
lamp and turned its light on the dying man, whose rude and harsh
features were now convulsed with the last agony. A roll of linen about
his head was stained with blood, which had soaked also through the
blankets and the straw. It was, indeed, under no natural disease that
the wretch was suffering. Brown started back from this horrible object,
and, turning to the gipsy, exclaimed, 'Wretched woman, who has done
this?'

'They that were permitted,' answered Meg Merrilies, while she scanned
with a close and keen glance the features of the expiring man. 'He has
had a sair struggle; but it's passing. I kenn'd he would pass when you
came in. That was the death-ruckle; he's dead.'

Sounds were now heard at a distance, as of voices. 'They are coming,'
said she to Brown; 'you are a dead man if ye had as mony lives as
hairs.' Brown eagerly looked round for some weapon of defence. There
was none near. He then rushed to the door with the intention of
plunging among the trees, and making his escape by flight from what he
now esteemed a den of murderers, but Merrilies held him with a
masculine grasp. 'Here,' she said, 'here, be still and you are safe;
stir not, whatever you see or hear, and nothing shall befall you.'

Brown, in these desperate circumstances, remembered this woman's
intimation formerly, and thought he had no chance of safety but in
obeying her. She caused him to couch down among a parcel of straw on
the opposite side of the apartment from the corpse, covered him
carefully, and flung over him two or three old sacks which lay about
the place. Anxious to observe what was to happen, Brown arranged as
softly as he could the means of peeping from under the coverings by
which he was hidden, and awaited with a throbbing heart the issue of
this strange and most unpleasant adventure. The old gipsy in the
meantime set about arranging the dead body, composing its limbs, and
straighting the arms by its side. 'Best to do this,' she muttered, 'ere
he stiffen.' She placed on the dead man's breast a trencher, with salt
sprinkled upon it, set one candle at the head and another at the feet
of the body, and lighted both. Then she resumed her song, and awaited
the approach of those whose voices had been heard without.

Brown was a soldier, and a brave one; but he was also a man, and at
this moment his fears mastered his courage so completely that the cold
drops burst out from every pore. The idea of being dragged out of his
miserable concealment by wretches whose trade was that of midnight
murder, without weapons or the slightest means of defence, except
entreaties, which would be only their sport, and cries for help, which
could never reach other ear than their own; his safety entrusted to the
precarious compassion of a being associated with these felons, and
whose trade of rapine and imposture must have hardened her against
every human feeling--the bitterness of his emotions almost choked him.
He endeavoured to read in her withered and dark countenance, as the
lamp threw its light upon her features, something that promised those
feelings of compassion which females, even in their most degraded
state, can seldom altogether smother. There was no such touch of
humanity about this woman. The interest, whatever it was, that
determined her in his favour arose not from the impulse of compassion,
but from some internal, and probably capricious, association of
feelings, to which he had no clue. It rested, perhaps, on a fancied
likeness, such as Lady Macbeth found to her father in the sleeping
monarch. Such were the reflections that passed in rapid succession
through Brown's mind as he gazed from his hiding-place upon this
extraordinary personage. Meantime the gang did not yet approach, and he
was almost prompted to resume his original intention of attempting an
escape from the hut, and cursed internally his own irresolution, which
had consented to his being cooped up where he had neither room for
resistance nor flight.

Meg Merrilies seemed equally on the watch. She bent her ear to every
sound that whistled round the old walls. Then she turned again to the
dead body, and found something new to arrange or alter in its position.
'He's a bonny corpse,' she muttered to herself, 'and weel worth the
streaking.' And in this dismal occupation she appeared to feel a sort
of professional pleasure, entering slowly into all the minutise, as if
with the skill and feelings of a connoisseur. A long, dark-coloured
sea-cloak, which she dragged out of a corner, was disposed for a pall.
The face she left bare, after closing the mouth and eyes, and arranged
the capes of the cloak so as to hide the bloody bandages, and give the
body, as she muttered, 'a mair decent appearance.'

At once three or four men, equally ruffians in appearance and dress,
rushed into the hut. 'Meg, ye limb of Satan, how dare you leave the
door open?' was the first salutation of the party.

'And wha ever heard of a door being barred when a man was in the
dead-thraw? how d'ye think the spirit was to get awa through bolts and
bars like thae?'

'Is he dead, then?' said one who went to the side of the couch to look
at the body.

'Ay, ay, dead enough,' said another; 'but here's what shall give him a
rousing lykewake.' So saying, he fetched a keg of spirits from a
corner, while Meg hastened to display pipes and tobacco. From the
activity with which she undertook the task, Brown conceived good hope
of her fidelity towards her guest. It was obvious that she wished to
engage the ruffians in their debauch, to prevent the discovery which
might take place if by accident any of them should approach too nearly
the place of Brown's concealment.




CHAPTER XXVIII

     Nor board nor garner own we now,
      Nor roof nor latched door,
     Nor kind mate, bound, by holy vow,
      To bless a good man's store
     Noon lulls us in a gloomy den,
      And night is grown our day;
     Uprouse ye, then, my merry men!
      And use it as ye may

          JOANNA BAILLIE.


Brown could now reckon his foes: they were five in number; two of them
were very powerful men, who appeared to be either real seamen or
strollers who assumed that character; the other three, an old man and
two lads, were slighter made, and, from their black hair and dark
complexion, seemed to belong to Meg's tribe. They passed from one to
another the cup out of which they drank their spirits. 'Here's to his
good voyage!' said one of the seamen, drinking; 'a squally night he's
got, however, to drift through the sky in.'

We omit here various execrations with which these honest gentlemen
garnished their discourse, retaining only such of their expletives as
are least offensive.

' 'A does not mind wind and weather; 'a has had many a north-easter in
his day.'

'He had his last yesterday,' said another gruffly; 'and now old Meg may
pray for his last fair wind, as she's often done before.'

'I'll pray for nane o' him,' said Meg, 'nor for you neither, you randy
dog. The times are sair altered since I was a kinchen-mort. Men were
men then, and fought other in the open field, and there was nae milling
in the darkmans. And the gentry had kind hearts, and would have given
baith lap and pannel to ony puir gipsy; and there was not one, from
Johnnie Faa the upright man to little Christie that was in the
panniers, would cloyed a dud from them. But ye are a' altered from the
gude auld rules, and no wonder that you scour the cramp-ring and trine
to the cheat sae often. Yes, ye are a' altered: you 'll eat the
goodman's meat, drink his drink, sleep on the strammel in his barn, and
break his house and cut his throat for his pains! There's blood on your
hands, too, ye dogs, mair than ever came there by fair righting. See
how ye'll die then. Lang it was ere he died; he strove, and strove
sair, and could neither die nor live; but you--half the country will
see how ye'll grace the woodie.'

The party set up a hoarse laugh at Meg's prophecy.

'What made you come back here, ye auld beldam?' said one of the
gipsies; 'could ye not have staid where you were, and spaed fortunes to
the Cumberland flats? Bing out and tour, ye auld devil, and see that
