    Glenaladale's peaks are illumined with the rays,
    And the streams of Glenfinnan leap bright in the blaze.

[Footnote: The young and daring adventurer, Charles Edward, landedat
Glenaladale, in Moidart, and displayed his standard in the valley of
Glenfinnan, mustering around it the Mac-Donalds, the Camerons, and other
less numerous clans, whom he had prevailed on to join him. There is a
monument erected on the spot, with a Latin inscription by the late Doctor
Gregory.]

    O high-minded Moray! the exiled! the dear!
    In the blush of the dawning the STANDARD uprear!
    Wide, wide on the winds of the north let it fly,
    Like the sun's latest flash when the tempest is nigh!

[Footnote: The Marquis of Tullibardine's elder brother, who, long exiled,
returned to Scotland with Charles Edward in 1745.]

    Ye sons of the strong, when that dawning shall break,
    Need the harp of the aged remind you to wake?
    That dawn never beam'd on your forefathers' eye,
    But it roused each high chieftain to vanquish or die.

    O, sprung from the Kings who in Islay kept state,
    Proud chiefs of Clan Ranald, Glengarry, and Sleat!
    Combine like three streams from one mountain of snow,
    And resistless in union rush down on the foe!

    True son of Sir Evan, undaunted Lochiel,
    Place thy targe on thy shoulder and burnish thy steel!
    Rough Keppoch, give breath to thy bugle's bold swell,
    Till far Coryarrick resound to the knell!

    Stern son of Lord Kenneth, high chief of Kintail,
    Let the stag in thy standard bound wild in the gale!
    May the race of Clan Gillean, the fearless and free,
    Remember Glenlivat, Harlaw, and Dundee!

    Let the clan of grey Fingon, whose offspring has given
    Such heroes to earth and such martyrs to heaven,
    Unite with the race of renown'd Rorri More,
    To launch the long galley and stretch to the oar.

    How Mac-Shimei will joy when their chief shall display
    The yew-crested bonnet o'er tresses of grey!
    How the race of wrong'd Alpine and murder'd Glencoe
    Shall shout for revenge when they pour on the foe!

    Ye sons of brown Dermid, who slew the wild boar,
    Resume the pure faith of the great Callum-More!
    Mac-Neil of the islands, and Moy of the Lake,
    For honour, for freedom, for vengeance awake!

Here a large greyhound, bounding up the glen, jumped upon Flora and
interrupted her music by his importunate caresses. At a distant whistle
he turned and shot down the path again with the rapidity of an arrow.
'That is Fergus's faithful attendant, Captain Waverley, and that was his
signal. He likes no poetry but what is humorous, and comes in good time
to interrupt my long catalogue of the tribes, whom one of your saucy
English poets calls

    Our bootless host of high-born beggars,
    Mac-Leans, Mac-Kenzies, and Mac-Gregors.'

Waverley expressed his regret at the interruption.

'O you cannot guess how much you have lost! The bard, as in duty bound,
has addressed three long stanzas to Vich Ian Vohr of the Banners,
enumerating all his great properties, and not forgetting his being a
cheerer of the harper and bard--"a giver of bounteous gifts." Besides,
you should have heard a practical admonition to the fair-haired son of
the stranger, who lives in the land where the grass is always green--the
rider on the shining pampered steed, whose hue is like the raven, and
whose neigh is like the scream of the eagle for battle. This valiant
horseman is affectionately conjured to remember that his ancestors were
distinguished by their loyalty as well as by their courage. All this you
have lost; but, since your curiosity is not satisfied, I judge, from the
distant sound of my brother's whistle, I may have time to sing the
concluding stanzas before he comes to laugh at my translation.'
    Awake on your hills, on your islands awake,
    Brave sons of the mountain, the frith, and the lake!
    'T is the bugle--but not for the chase is the call;
    'T is the pibroch's shrill summons--but not to the hall.

    'T is the summons of heroes for conquest or death,
    When the banners are blazing on mountain and heath:
    They call to the dirk, the claymore, and the targe,
    To the march and the muster, the line and the charge.

    Be the brand of each chieftain like Fin's in his ire!
    May the blood through his veins flow like currents of fire!
    Burst the base foreign yoke as your sires did of yore,
    Or die like your sires, and endure it no more!






CHAPTER XXIII

WAVERLEY CONTINUES AT GLENNAQUOICH


As Flora concluded her song, Fergus stood before them. 'I knew I should
find you here, even without the assistance of my friend Bran. A simple
and unsublimed taste now, like my own, would prefer a jet d'eau at
Versailles to this cascade, with all its accompaniments of rock and roar;
but this is Flora's Parnassus, Captain Waverley, and that fountain her
Helicon. It would be greatly for the benefit of my cellar if she could
teach her coadjutor, Mac-Murrough, the value of its influence: he has
just drunk a pint of usquebaugh to correct, he said, the coldness of the
claret. Let me try its virtues.' He sipped a little water in the hollow
of his hand, and immediately commenced, with a theatrical air,--

    'O Lady of the desert, hail!
     That lovest the harping of the Gael,
     Through fair and fertile regions borne,
     Where never yet grew grass or corn.

But English poetry will never succeed under the influence of a Highland
Helicon. Allons, courage!

O vous, qui buvez, a tasse pleine, A cette heureuse fontaine, Ou on ne
voit, sur le rivage, Que quelques vilains troupeaux, Suivis de nymphes de
village, Qui les escortent sans sabots--'

'A truce, dear Fergus! spare us those most tedious and insipid persons of
all Arcadia. Do not, for Heaven's sake, bring down Coridon and Lindor
upon us.'

'Nay, if you cannot relish la houlette et le chalumeau, have with you in
heroic strains.'

'Dear Fergus, you have certainly partaken of the inspiration of
Mac-Murrough's cup rather than of mine.'

'I disclaim it, ma belle demoiselle, although I protest it would be the
more congenial of the two. Which of your crack-brained Italian romancers
is it that says,
                               Io d'Elicona niente
    Mi curo, in fe de Dio; che'l bere d'acque
    (Bea chi ber ne vuol) sempre mi spiacque!
[Footnote:
    Good sooth, I reck nought of your Helicon;
    Drink water whoso will, in faith I will drink none.]
But if you prefer the Gaelic, Captain Waverley, here is little Cathleen
shall sing you Drimmindhu. Come, Cathleen, astore (i.e. my dear), begin;
no apologies to the cean-kinne.'

Cathleen sung with much liveliness a little Gaelic song, the burlesque
elegy of a countryman on the loss of his cow, the comic tones of which,
though he did not understand the language, made Waverley laugh more than
once. [Footnote: This ancient Gaelic ditty is still well known, both in
the Highlands and in Ireland It was translated into English, and
published, if I mistake not, under the auspices of the facetious Tom
D'Urfey, by the title of 'Colley, my Cow.']

'Admirable, Cathleen!' cried the Chieftain; 'I must find you a handsome
husband among the clansmen one of these days.'

Cathleen laughed, blushed, and sheltered herself behind her companion.

In the progress of their return to the castle, the Chieftain warmly
pressed Waverley to remain for a week or two, in order to see a grand
hunting party, in which he and some other Highland gentlemen proposed to
join. The charms of melody and beauty were too strongly impressed in
Edward's breast to permit his declining an invitation so pleasing. It was
agreed, therefore, that he should write a note to the Baron of
Bradwardine, expressing his intention to stay a fortnight at
Glennaquoich, and requesting him to forward by the bearer (a gilly of the
Chieftain's) any letters which might have arrived for him.

This turned the discourse upon the Baron, whom Fergus highly extolled as
a gentleman and soldier. His character was touched with yet more
discrimination by Flora, who observed he was the very model of the old
Scottish cavalier, with all his excellencies and peculiarities. 'It is a
character, Captain Waverley, which is fast disappearing; for its best
point was a self-respect which was never lost sight of till now. But in
the present time the gentlemen whose principles do not permit them to pay
court to the existing government are neglected and degraded, and many
conduct themselves accordingly; and, like some of the persons you have
seen at Tully-Veolan, adopt habits and companions inconsistent with their
birth and breeding. The ruthless proscription of party seems to degrade
the victims whom it brands, however unjustly. But let us hope a brighter
day is approaching, when a Scottish country gentleman may be a scholar
without the pedantry of our friend the Baron, a sportsman without the low
habits of Mr. Falconer, and a judicious improver of his property without
becoming a boorish two-legged steer like Killancureit.'

Thus did Flora prophesy a revolution, which time indeed has produced, but
in a manner very different from what she had in her mind.

The amiable Rose was next mentioned, with the warmest encomium on her
person, manners, and mind. 'That man,' said Flora, 'will find an
inestimable treasure in the affections of Rose Bradwardine who shall be
so fortunate as to become their object. Her very soul is in home, and in
the discharge of all those quiet virtues of which home is the centre. Her
husband will be to her what her father now is, the object of all her
care, solicitude, and affection. She will see nothing, and connect
herself with nothing, but by him and through him. If he is a man of sense
and virtue, she will sympathise in his sorrows, divert his fatigue, and
share his pleasures. If she becomes the property of a churlish or
negligent husband, she will suit his taste also, for she will not long
survive his unkindness. And, alas! how great is the chance that some such
unworthy lot may be that of my poor friend! O that I were a queen this
moment, and could command the most amiable and worthy youth of my kingdom
to accept happiness with the hand of Rose Bradwardine!'

'I wish you would command her to accept mine en attendant,' said Fergus,
laughing.

I don't know by what caprice it was that this wish, however jocularly
expressed, rather jarred on Edward's feelings, notwithstanding his
growing inclination to Flora and his indifference to Miss Bradwardine.
This is one of the inexplicabilities of human nature, which we leave
without comment.

'Yours, brother?' answered Flora, regarding him steadily. 'No; you have
another bride--Honour; and the dangers you must run in pursuit of her
rival would break poor Rose's heart.'

With this discourse they reached the castle, and Waverley soon prepared
his despatches for Tully-Veolan. As he knew the Baron was punctilious in
such matters, he was about to impress his billet with a seal on which his
armorial bearings were engraved, but he did not find it at his watch, and
thought he must have left it at Tully-Veolan. He mentioned his loss,
borrowing at the same time the family seal of the Chieftain.

'Surely,' said Miss Mac-Ivor, 'Donald Bean Lean would not--'

'My life for him in such circumstances,' answered her brother; 'besides,
he would never have left the watch behind.'

'After all, Fergus,' said Flora, 'and with every allowance, I am
surprised you can countenance that man.'

'I countenance him? This kind sister of mine would persuade you, Captain
Waverley, that I take what the people of old used to call "a steakraid,"
that is, a "collop of the foray," or, in plainer words, a portion of the
robber's booty, paid by him to the Laird, or Chief, through whose grounds
he drove his prey. O, it is certain that, unless I can find some way to
charm Flora's tongue, General Blakeney will send a sergeant's party from
Stirling (this he said with haughty and emphatic irony) to seize Vich lan
Vohr, as they nickname me, in his own castle.'

'Now, Fergus, must not our guest be sensible that all this is folly and
affectation? You have men enough to serve you without enlisting banditti,
and your own honour is above taint. Why don't you send this Donald Bean
Lean, whom I hate for his smoothness and duplicity even more than for his
rapine, out of your country at once? No cause should induce me to
tolerate such a character.'

'No cause, Flora?' said the Chieftain significantly.

'No cause, Fergus! not even that which is nearest to my heart. Spare it
the omen of such evil supporters!'

'O but, sister,' rejoined the Chief gaily, 'you don't consider my respect
for la belle passion. Evan Dhu Maccombich is in love with Donald's
daughter, Alice, and you cannot expect me to disturb him in his amours.
Why, the whole clan would cry shame on me. You know it is one of their
wise sayings, that a kinsman is part of a man's body, but a
foster-brother is a piece of his heart.'

'Well, Fergus, there is no disputing with you; but I would all this may
end well.'

'Devoutly prayed, my dear and prophetic sister, and the best way in the
world to close a dubious argument. But hear ye not the pipes, Captain
Waverley? Perhaps you will like better to dance to them in the hall than
to be deafened with their harmony without taking part in the exercise
they invite us to.'

Waverley took Flora's hand. The dance, song, and merry-making proceeded,
and closed the day's entertainment at the castle of Vich Ian Vohr. Edward
at length retired, his mind agitated by a variety of new and conflicting
feelings, which detained him from rest for some time, in that not
unpleasing state of mind in which fancy takes the helm, and the soul
rather drifts passively along with the rapid and confused tide of
reflections than exerts itself to encounter, systematise, or examine
them. At a late hour he fell asleep, and dreamed of Flora Mac-Ivor.




CHAPTER XXIV

A STAG-HUNT AND ITS CONSEQUENCES


Shall this be a long or a short chapter? This is a question in which you,
gentle reader, have no vote, however much you may be interested in the
consequences; just as you may (like myself) probably have nothing to do
with the imposing a new tax, excepting the trifling circumstance of being
obliged to pay it. More happy surely in the present case, since, though
it lies within my arbitrary power to extend my materials as I think
proper, I cannot call you into Exchequer if you do not think proper to
read my narrative. Let me therefore consider. It is true that the annals
and documents in my hands say but little of this Highland chase; but then
I can find copious materials for description elsewhere. There is old
Lindsay of Pitscottie ready at my elbow, with his Athole hunting, and his
'lofted and joisted palace of green timber; with all kind of drink to be
had in burgh and land, as ale, beer, wine, muscadel, malvaise, hippocras,
and aquavitae; with wheat-bread, main-bread, ginge-bread, beef, mutton,
lamb, veal, venison, goose, grice, capon, coney, crane, swan, partridge,
plover, duck, drake, brisselcock, pawnies, black-cock, muir-fowl, and
capercailzies'; not forgetting the 'costly bedding, vaiselle, and napry,'
and least of all the 'excelling stewards, cunning baxters, excellent
cooks, and pottingars, with confections and drugs for the desserts.'
Besides the particulars which may be thence gleaned for this Highland
feast (the splendour of which induced the Pope's legate to dissent from
an opinion which he had hitherto held, that Scotland, namely, was
the--the--the latter end of the world)--besides these, might I not
illuminate my pages with Taylor the Water Poet's hunting in the Braes of
Mar, where,--

    Through heather, mosse,'mong frogs, and bogs, and fogs,
      'Mongst craggy cliffs and thunder-batter'd hills,
    Hares, hinds, bucks, roes, are chased by men and dogs,
      Where two hours' hunting fourscore fat deer kills.
    Lowland, your sports are low as is your seat;
    The Highland games and minds are high and great?

But without further tyranny over my readers, or display of the extent of
my own reading, I shall content myself with borrowing a single incident
from the memorable hunting at Lude, commemorated in the ingenious Mr.
Gunn's essay on the Caledonian Harp, and so proceed in my story with all
the brevity that my natural style of composition, partaking of what
scholars call the periphrastic and ambagitory, and the vulgar the
circumbendibus, will permit me.

The solemn hunting was delayed, from various causes, for about three
weeks. The interval was spent by Waverley with great satisfaction at
Glennaquoich; for the impression which Flora had made on his mind at
their first meeting grew daily stronger. She was precisely the character
to fascinate a youth of romantic imagination. Her manners, her language,
her talents for poetry and music, gave additional and varied influence to
her eminent personal charms. Even in her hours of gaiety she was in his
fancy exalted above the ordinary daughters of Eve, and seemed only to
stoop for an instant to those topics of amusement and gallantry which
others appear to live for. In the neighbourhood of this enchantress,
while sport consumed the morning and music and the dance led on the hours
of evening, Waverley became daily more delighted with his hospitable
landlord, and more enamoured of his bewitching sister.

At length the period fixed for the grand hunting arrived, and Waverley
and the Chieftain departed for the place of rendezvous, which was a day's
journey to the northward of Glennaquoich. Fergus was attended on this
occasion by about three hundred of his clan, well armed and accoutred in
their best fashion. Waverley complied so far with the custom of the
country as to adopt the trews (he could not be reconciled to the kilt),
brogues, and bonnet, as the fittest dress for the exercise in which he
was to be engaged, and which least exposed him to be stared at as a
stranger when they should reach the place of rendezvous. They found on
the spot appointed several powerful Chiefs, to all of whom Waverley was
formally presented, and by all cordially received. Their vassals and
clansmen, a part of whose feudal duty it was to attend on these parties,
appeared in such numbers as amounted to a small army. These active
assistants spread through the country far and near, forming a circle,
technically called the tinchel, which, gradually closing, drove the deer
in herds together towards the glen where the Chiefs and principal
sportsmen lay in wait for them. In the meanwhile these distinguished
personages bivouacked among the flowery heath, wrapped up in their
plaids, a mode of passing a summer's night which Waverley found by no
means unpleasant.

For many hours after sunrise the mountain ridges and passes retained
their ordinary appearance of silence and solitude, and the Chiefs, with
their followers, amused themselves with various pastimes, in which the
joys of the shell, as Ossian has it, were not forgotten. 'Others apart
sate on a hill retired,' probably as deeply engaged in the discussion of
politics and news as Milton's spirits in metaphysical disquisition. At
length signals of the approach of the game were descried and heard.
Distant shouts resounded from valley to valley, as the various parties of
Highlanders, climbing rocks, struggling through copses, wading brooks,
and traversing thickets, approached more and more near to each other, and
compelled the astonished deer, with the other wild animals that fled
before them, into a narrower circuit. Every now and then the report of
muskets was heard, repeated by a thousand echoes. The baying of the dogs
was soon added to the chorus, which grew ever louder and more loud. At
length the advanced parties of the deer began to show themselves; and as
the stragglers came bounding down the pass by two or three at a time, the
Chiefs showed their skill by distinguishing the fattest deer, and their
dexterity in bringing them down with their guns. Fergus exhibited
remarkable address, and Edward was also so fortunate as to attract the
notice and applause of the sportsmen.

But now the main body of the deer appeared at the head of the glen,
compelled into a very narrow compass, and presenting such a formidable
phalanx that their antlers appeared at a distance, over the ridge of the
steep pass, like a leafless grove. Their number was very great, and from
a desperate stand which they made, with the tallest of the red-deer stags
arranged in front, in a sort of battle-array, gazing on the group which
barred their passage down the glen, the more experienced sportsmen began
to augur danger. The work of destruction, however, now commenced on all
sides. Dogs and hunters were at work, and muskets and fusees resounded
from every quarter. The deer, driven to desperation, made at length a
fearful charge right upon the spot where the more distinguished sportsmen
had taken their stand. The word was given in Gaelic to fling themselves
upon their faces; but Waverley, on whose English ears the signal was
lost, had almost fallen a sacrifice to his ignorance of the ancient
language in which it was communicated. Fergus, observing his danger,
sprung up and pulled him with violence to the ground, just as the whole
herd broke down upon them. The tide being absolutely irresistible, and
wounds from a stag's horn highly dangerous, the activity of the Chieftain
may be considered, on this occasion, as having saved his guest's life. He
detained him with a firm grasp until the whole herd of deer had fairly
run over them. Waverley then attempted to rise, but found that he had
suffered several very severe contusions, and, upon a further examination,
discovered that he had sprained his ankle violently.

[Footnote: The thrust from the tynes, or branches, of the stag's horns
was accounted far more dangerous than those of the boar's tusk:--

    If thou be hurt with horn of stag,
    it brings thee to thy bier,
    But barber's hand shall boar's hurt heal,
    thereof have thou no fear.]

This checked the mirth of the meeting, although the Highlanders,
accustomed to such incidents, and prepared for them, had suffered no harm
themselves. A wigwam was erected almost in an instant, where Edward was
deposited on a couch of heather. The surgeon, or he who assumed the
office, appeared to unite the characters of a leech and a conjuror. He
was an old smoke-dried Highlander, wearing a venerable grey beard, and
having for his sole garment a tartan frock, the skirts of which descended
to the knee, and, being undivided in front, made the vestment serve at
once for doublet and breeches. [Footnote: This garb, which resembled the
dress often put on children in Scotland, called a polonie (i. e.
polonaise), is a very ancient modification of the Highland garb. It was,
in fact, the hauberk or shirt of mail, only composed of cloth instead of
rings of armour.] He observed great ceremony in approaching Edward; and
though our hero was writhing with pain, would not proceed to any
operation which might assuage it until he had perambulated his couch
three times, moving from east to west, according to the course of the
sun. This, which was called making the deasil, [Footnote: Old Highlanders
will still make the deasil around those whom they wish well to. To go
round a person in the opposite direction, or withershins (German
wider-shins), is unlucky, and a sort of incantation.] both the leech and
the assistants seemed to consider as a matter of the last importance to
the accomplishment of a cure; and Waverley, whom pain rendered incapable
of expostulation, and who indeed saw no chance of its being attended to,
submitted in silence.

After this ceremony was duly performed, the old Esculapius let his
patient's blood with a cupping-glass with great dexterity, and proceeded,
muttering all the while to himself in Gaelic, to boil on the fire certain
herbs, with which he compounded an embrocation. He then fomented the
parts which had sustained injury, never failing to murmur prayers or
spells, which of the two Waverley could not distinguish, as his ear only
caught the words Gaspar-Melchior-Balthazar-max-prax-fax, and similar
gibberish. The fomentation had a speedy effect in alleviating the pain
and swelling, which our hero imputed to the virtue of the herbs or the
effect of the chafing, but which was by the bystanders unanimously
ascribed to the spells with which the operation had been accompanied.
Edward was given to understand that not one of the ingredients had been
gathered except during the full moon, and that the herbalist had, while
collecting them, uniformly recited a charm, which in English ran thus:--

    Hail to thee, thou holy herb,
    That sprung on holy ground!
    All in the Mount Olivet
    First wert thou found.
    Thou art boot for many a bruise,
    And healest many a wound;
    In our Lady's blessed name,
    I take thee from the ground.

[Footnote: This metrical spell, or something very like it, is preserved
by Reginald Scott in his work on Witchcraft.]

Edward observed with some surprise that even Fergus, notwithstanding his
knowledge and education, seemed to fall in with the superstitious ideas
of his countrymen, either because he deemed it impolitic to affect
scepticism on a matter of general belief, or more probably because, like
most men who do not think deeply or accurately on such subjects, he had
in his mind a reserve of superstition which balanced the freedom of his
expressions and practice upon other occasions. Waverley made no
commentary, therefore, on the manner of the treatment, but rewarded the
professor of medicine with a liberality beyond the utmost conception of
his wildest hopes. He uttered on the occasion so many incoherent
blessings in Gaelic and English that Mac-Ivor, rather scandalised at the
excess of his acknowledgments, cut them short by exclaiming, Ceud mile
mhalloich ort! i.e. 'A hundred thousand curses on you!' and so pushed the
helper of men out of the cabin.

After Waverley was left alone, the exhaustion of pain and fatigue--for
the whole day's exercise had been severe--threw him into a profound, but
yet a feverish sleep, which he chiefly owed to an opiate draught
administered by the old Highlander from some decoction of herbs in his
pharmacopoeia.

Early the next morning, the purpose of their meeting being over, and
their sports damped by the untoward accident, in which Fergus and all his
friends expressed the greatest sympathy, it became a question how to
dispose of the disabled sportsman. This was settled by Mac-Ivor, who had
a litter prepared, of 'birch and hazel-grey,'

[FOOTNOTE:
    On the morrow they made their biers
    Of birch and hazel grey. Chevy Chase.]
which was borne by his people with such caution and dexterity as renders
it not improbable that they may have been the ancestors of some of those
sturdy Gael who have now the happiness to transport the belles of
Edinburgh in their sedan-chairs to ten routs in one evening. When Edward
was elevated upon their shoulders he could not help being gratified with
the romantic effect produced by the breaking up of this sylvan camp.
[Footnote: See Note 25.]

The various tribes assembled, each at the pibroch of their native clan,
and each headed by their patriarchal ruler. Some, who had already begun
to retire, were seen winding up the hills, or descending the passes which
led to the scene of action, the sound of their bagpipes dying upon the
ear. Others made still a moving picture upon the narrow plain, forming
various changeful groups, their feathers and loose plaids waving in the
morning breeze, and their arms glittering in the rising sun. Most of the
Chiefs came to take farewell of Waverley, and to express their anxious
hope they might again, and speedily, meet; but the care of Fergus
abridged the ceremony of taking leave. At length, his own men being
completely assembled and mustered, Mac-Ivor commenced his march, but not
towards the quarter from which they had come. He gave Edward to
understand that the greater part of his followers now on the field were
bound on a distant expedition, and that when he had deposited him in the
house of a gentleman, who he was sure would pay him every attention, he
himself should be under the necessity of accompanying them the greater
part of the way, but would lose no time in rejoining his friend.

Waverley was rather surprised that Fergus had not mentioned this ulterior
destination when they set out upon the hunting-party; but his situation
did not admit of many interrogatories. The greater part of the clansmen
went forward under the guidance of old Ballenkeiroch and Evan Dhu
Maccombich, apparently in high spirits. A few remained for the purpose of
escorting the Chieftain, who walked by the side of Edward's litter, and
attended him with the most affectionate assiduity. About noon, after a
journey which the nature of the conveyance, the pain of his bruises, and
the roughness of the way rendered inexpressibly painful, Waverley was
hospitably received into the house of a gentleman related to Fergus, who
had prepared for him every accommodation which the simple habits of
living then universal in the Highlands put in his power. In this person,
an old man about seventy, Edward admired a relic of primitive simplicity.
He wore no dress but what his estate afforded; the cloth was the fleece
of his own sheep, woven by his own servants, and stained into tartan by
the dyes produced from the herbs and lichens of the hills around him. His
linen was spun by his daughters and maidservants, from his own flax; nor
did his table, though plentiful, and varied with game and fish, offer an
article but what was of native produce.

Claiming himself no rights of clanship or vassalage, he was fortunate in
the alliance and protection of Vich Ian Vohr and other bold and
enterprising Chieftains, who protected him in the quiet unambitious life
he loved. It is true, the youth born on his grounds were often enticed to
leave him for the service of his more active friends; but a few old
servants and tenants used to shake their grey locks when they heard their
master censured for want of spirit, and observed, 'When the wind is
still, the shower falls soft.' This good old man, whose charity and
hospitality were unbounded, would have received Waverley with kindness
had he been the meanest Saxon peasant, since his situation required
assistance. But his attention to a friend and guest of Vich Ian Vohr was
anxious and unremitted. Other embrocations were applied to the injured
limb, and new spells were put in practice. At length, after more
solicitude than was perhaps for the advantage of his health, Fergus took
farewell of Edward for a few days, when, he said, he would return to
Tomanrait, and hoped by that time Waverley would be able to ride one of
the Highland ponies of his landlord, and in that manner return to
Glennaquoich.

The next day, when his good old host appeared, Edward learned that his
friend had departed with the dawn, leaving none of his followers except
Callum Beg, the sort of foot-page who used to attend his person, and who
had now in charge to wait upon Waverley. On asking his host if he knew
where the Chieftain was gone, the old man looked fixedly at him, with
something mysterious and sad in the smile which was his only reply.
Waverley repeated his question, to which his host answered in a
proverb,--

    What sent the messengers to hell,
    Was asking what they knew full well.

[Footnote: Corresponding to the Lowland saying, 'Mony ane speirs the gate
they ken fu' weel.']

He was about to proceed, but Callum Beg said, rather pertly, as Edward
thought, that 'Ta Tighearnach (i.e. the Chief) did not like ta Sassenagh
duinhe-wassel to be pingled wi' mickle speaking, as she was na tat weel.'
From this Waverley concluded he should disoblige his friend by inquiring
of a stranger the object of a journey which he himself had not
communicated.

It is unnecessary to trace the progress of our hero's recovery. The sixth
morning had arrived, and he was able to walk about with a staff, when
Fergus returned with about a score of his men. He seemed in the highest
spirits, congratulated Waverley on his progress towards recovery, and
finding he was able to sit on horseback, proposed their immediate return
to Glennaquoich. Waverley joyfully acceded, for the form of its fair
mistress had lived in his dreams during all the time of his confinement.

Now he has ridden o'er moor and moss, O'er hill and many a glen,

Fergus, all the while, with his myrmidons, striding stoutly by his side,
or diverging to get a shot at a roe or a heath-cock. Waverley's bosom
beat thick when they approached the old tower of Ian nan Chaistel, and
could distinguish the fair form of its mistress advancing to meet them.

Fergus began immediately, with his usual high spirits, to exclaim, 'Open
your gates, incomparable princess, to the wounded Moor Abindarez, whom
Rodrigo de Narvez, constable of Antiquera, conveys to your castle; or
open them, if you like it better, to the renowned Marquis of Mantua, the
sad attendant of his half-slain friend Baldovinos of the Mountain. Ah,
long rest to thy soul, Cervantes! without quoting thy remnants, how
should I frame my language to befit romantic ears!'

Flora now advanced, and welcoming Waverley with much kindness, expressed
her regret for his accident, of which she had already heard particulars,
and her surprise that her brother should not have taken better care to
put a stranger on his guard against the perils of the sport in which he
engaged him. Edward easily exculpated the Chieftain, who, indeed, at his
own personal risk, had probably saved his life.

This greeting over, Fergus said three or four words to his sister in
Gaelic. The tears instantly sprung to her eyes, but they seemed to be
tears of devotion and joy, for she looked up to heaven and folded her
hands as in a solemn expression of prayer or gratitude. After the pause
of a minute, she presented to Edward some letters which had been
forwarded from Tully-Veolan during his absence, and at the same time
delivered some to her brother. To the latter she likewise gave three or
four numbers of the Caledonian Mercury, the only newspaper which was then
published to the north of the Tweed.

Both gentlemen retired to examine their despatches, and Edward speedily
found that those which he had received contained matters of very deep
interest.




CHAPTER XXV

NEWS FROM ENGLAND


The letters which Waverley had hitherto received from his relations in
England were not such as required any particular notice in this
narrative. His father usually wrote to him with the pompous affectation
of one who was too much oppressed by public affairs to find leisure to
attend to those of his own family. Now and then he mentioned persons of
rank in Scotland to whom he wished his son should pay some attention; but
Waverley, hitherto occupied by the amusements which he had found at
Tully-Veolan and Glennaquoich, dispensed with paying any attention to
hints so coldly thrown out, especially as distance, shortness of leave of
absence, and so forth furnished a ready apology. But latterly the burden
of Mr. Richard Waverley's paternal epistles consisted in certain
mysterious hints of greatness and influence which he was speedily to
attain, and which would ensure his son's obtaining the most rapid
promotion, should he remain in the military service. Sir Everard's
letters were of a different tenor. They were short; for the good Baronet
was none of your illimitable correspondents, whose manuscript overflows
the folds of their large post paper, and leaves no room for the seal; but
they were kind and affectionate, and seldom concluded without some
allusion to our hero's stud, some question about the state of his purse,
and a special inquiry after such of his recruits as had preceded him from
Waverley-Honour. Aunt Rachel charged him to remember his principles of
religion, to take care of his health, to beware of Scotch mists, which,
she had heard, would wet an Englishman through and through, never to go
out at night without his great-coat, and, above all, to wear flannel next
to his skin.

Mr. Pembroke only wrote to our hero one letter, but it was of the bulk of
six epistles of these degenerate days, containing, in the moderate
compass of ten folio pages, closely written, a precis of a supplementary
quarto manuscript of addenda, delenda, et corrigenda in reference to the
two tracts with which he had presented Waverley. This he considered as a
mere sop in the pan to stay the appetite of Edward's curiosity until he
should find an opportunity of sending down the volume itself, which was
much too heavy for the post, and which he proposed to accompany with
certain interesting pamphlets, lately published by his friend in Little
Britain, with whom he had kept up a sort of literary correspondence, in
virtue of which the library shelves of Waverley-Honour were loaded with
much trash, and a good round bill, seldom summed in fewer than three
figures, was yearly transmitted, in which Sir Everard Waverley of
Waverley-Honour, Bart., was marked Dr. to Jonathan Grubbet, bookseller
and stationer, Little Britain. Such had hitherto been the style of the
letters which Edward had received from England; but the packet delivered
to him at Glennaquoich was of a different and more interesting
complexion. It would be impossible for the reader, even were I to insert
the letters at full length, to comprehend the real cause of their being
written, without a glance into the interior of the British cabinet at the
period in question.

The ministers of the day happened (no very singular event) to be divided
into two parties; the weakest of which, making up by assiduity of
intrigue their inferiority in real consequence, had of late acquired some
new proselytes, and with them the hope of superseding their rivals in the
favour of their sovereign, and overpowering them in the House of Commons.
Amongst others, they had thought it worth while to practise upon Richard
Waverley. This honest gentleman, by a grave mysterious demeanour, an
attention to the etiquette of business rather more than to its essence, a
facility in making long dull speeches, consisting of truisms and
commonplaces, hashed up with a technical jargon of office, which
prevented the inanity of his orations from being discovered, had acquired
a certain name and credit in public life, and even established, with
many, the character of a profound politician; none of your shining
orators, indeed, whose talents evaporate in tropes of rhetoric and
flashes of wit, but one possessed of steady parts for business, which
would wear well, as the ladies say in choosing their silks, and ought in
all reason to be good for common and every-day use, since they were
confessedly formed of no holiday texture.

This faith had become so general that the insurgent party in the cabinet,
of which we have made mention, after sounding Mr. Richard Waverley, were
so satisfied with his sentiments and abilities as to propose that, in
case of a certain revolution in the ministry, he should take an
ostensible place in the new order of things, not indeed of the very first
rank, but greatly higher, in point both of emolument and influence, than
that which he now enjoyed. There was no resisting so tempting a proposal,
notwithstanding that the Great Man under whose patronage he had enlisted,
and by whose banner he had hitherto stood firm, was the principal object
of the proposed attack by the new allies. Unfortunately this fair scheme
of ambition was blighted in the very bud by a premature movement. All the
official gentlemen concerned in it who hesitated to take the part of a
voluntary resignation were informed that the king had no further occasion
for their services; and in Richard Waverley's case, which the minister
considered as aggravated by ingratitude, dismissal was accompanied by
something like personal contempt and contumely. The public, and even the
party of whom he shared the fall, sympathised little in the
disappointment of this selfish and interested statesman; and he retired
to the country under the comfortable reflection that he had lost, at the
same time, character, credit, and,--what he at least equally
deplored,--emolument.

Richard Waverley's letter to his son upon this occasion was a masterpiece
of its kind. Aristides himself could not have made out a harder case. An
unjust monarch and an ungrateful country were the burden of each rounded
paragraph. He spoke of long services and unrequited sacrifices; though
the former had been overpaid by his salary, and nobody could guess in
what the latter consisted, unless it were in his deserting, not from
conviction, but for the lucre of gain, the Tory principles of his family.
In the conclusion, his resentment was wrought to such an excess by the
force of his own oratory, that he could not repress some threats of
vengeance, however vague and impotent, and finally acquainted his son
with his pleasure that he should testify his sense of the ill-treatment
he had sustained by throwing up his commission as soon as the letter
reached him. This, he said, was also his uncle's desire, as he would
himself intimate in due course.

Accordingly, the next letter which Edward opened was from Sir Everard.
His brother's disgrace seemed to have removed from his well-natured bosom
all recollection of their differences, and, remote as he was from every
means of learning that Richard's disgrace was in reality only the just as
well as natural consequence of his own unsuccessful intrigues, the good
but credulous Baronet at once set it down as a new and enormous instance
of the injustice of the existing government. It was true, he said, and he
must not disguise it even from Edward, that his father could not have
sustained such an insult as was now, for the first time, offered to one
of his house, unless he had subjected himself to it by accepting of an
employment under the present system. Sir Everard had no doubt that he now
both saw and felt the magnitude of this error, and it should be his (Sir
Everard's) business to take care that the cause of his regret should not
extend itself to pecuniary consequences. It was enough for a Waverley to
have sustained the public disgrace; the patrimonial injury could easily
be obviated by the head of their family. But it was both the opinion of
Mr. Richard Waverley and his own that Edward, the representative of the
family of Waverley-Honour, should not remain in a situation which
