Hartley admitted that a certain degree of light-headedness was often the
consequence of nervous fits.

The General proceeded. "As to this young man--this friend of yours--this
Richard Middlemas--did you not call him so?"

"Not that I recollect," answered Hartley; "but your Excellency has hit
upon his name."

"That is odd enough--Certainly you said something about Middlemas?"
replied General Witherington.

"I mentioned the name of the town," said Hartley.

"Ay, and I caught it up as the name of the recruit--I was indeed
occupied at the moment by my anxiety about my wife. But this Middlemas,
since such is his name, is a wild young fellow, I suppose?"

"I should do him wrong to say so, your Excellency. He may have had his
follies like other young men; but his conduct has, so far as I know,
been respectable; but, considering we lived in the same house, we were
not very intimate."

"That is bad--I should have liked him--that is--it would have been happy
for him to have had a friend like you. But I suppose you studied too
hard for him. He would be a soldier, ha?--Is he good-looking?"

"Remarkably so," replied Hartley; "and has a very prepossessing manner."

"Is his complexion dark or fair?" asked the General.

"Rather uncommonly dark," said Hartley,--"darker, if I may use the
freedom, than your Excellency's."

"Nay, then, he must be a black ouzel, indeed!--Does he understand
languages?"

"Latin and French tolerably well."

"Of course he cannot fence or dance?"

"Pardon me, sir, I am no great judge; but Richard is reckoned to do both
with uncommon skill."

"Indeed!--Sum this up, and it sounds well. Handsome, accomplished in
exercises, moderately learned, perfectly well-bred, not unreasonably
wild. All this comes too high for the situation of a private sentinel.
He must have a commission, Doctor--entirely for your sake."

"Your Excellency is generous."

"It shall be so; and I will find means to make Tom Hillary disgorge his
plunder, unless he prefers being hanged, a fate he has long deserved.
You cannot go back to the Hospital to-day. You dine with us, and you
know Mrs. Witherington's fears of infection; but to-morrow find out
your friend. Winter shall see him equipped with every thing needful.
Tom Hillary shall repay advances, you know; and he must be off with the
first detachment of the recruits, in the Middlesex Indiaman, which sails
from the Downs on Monday fortnight; that is, if you think him fit for
the voyage. I dare say the poor fellow is sick of the Isle of Wight."

"Your Excellency will permit the young man to pay his respects to you
before his departure?"

"To what purpose, sir?" said the General hastily and peremptorily; but
instantly added, "You are right--I should like to see him. Winter shall
let him know the time, and take horses to fetch him hither. But he must
have been out of the Hospital for a day or two; so the sooner you can
set him at liberty the better. In the meantime, take him to your own
lodgings, Doctor; and do not let him form any intimacies with the
officers, or any others, in this place, where he may light on another
Hillary."

Had Hartley been as well acquainted as the reader with the circumstances
of young Middlemas's birth, he might have drawn decisive conclusions
from the behaviour of General Witherington, while his comrade was the
topic of conversation. But as Mr. Gray and Middlemas himself were both
silent on the subject, he knew little of it but from general report,
which his curiosity had never induced him to scrutinize minutely.
Nevertheless, what he did apprehend interested him so much, that he
resolved upon trying a little experiment, in which he thought there
could be no great harm. He placed on his finger the remarkable ring
intrusted to his care by Richard Middlemas, and endeavoured to make it
conspicuous in approaching Mrs. Witherington; taking care, however,
that this occurred during her husband's absence. Her eyes had no sooner
caught a sight of the gem, than they became riveted to it, and she
begged a nearer sight of it, as strongly resembling one which she had
given to a friend. Taking the ring from his finger, and placing it in
her emaciated hand, Hartley informed her it was the property of the
friend in whom he had just been endeavouring to interest the General.
Mrs. Witherington retired in great emotion, but next day summoned
Hartley to a private interview, the particulars of which, so far as are
necessary to be known, shall be afterwards related.

On the succeeding day after these important discoveries, Middlemas, to
his great delight, was rescued from his seclusion in the Hospital, and
transferred to his comrade's lodgings in the town of Ryde, of which
Hartley himself was a rare inmate; the anxiety of Mrs. Witherington
detaining him at the General's house, long after his medical attendance
might have been dispensed with.

Within two or three days a commission arrived for Richard Middlemas, as
a lieutenant in the service of the East India Company. Winter, by his
master's orders, put the wardrobe of the young officer on a suitable
footing; while Middlemas, enchanted at finding himself at once
emancipated from his late dreadful difficulties, and placed under the
protection of a man of such importance as the General, obeyed implicitly
the hints transmitted to him by Hartley, and enforced by Winter, and
abstained from going into public, or forming acquaintances with any one.
Even Hartley himself he saw seldom; and, deep as were his obligations,
he did not perhaps greatly regret the absence of one whose presence
always affected him with a sense of humiliation and abasement.




CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.


The evening before he was to sail for the Downs, where the Middlesex
lay ready to weigh anchor, the new lieutenant was summoned by Winter
to attend him to the General's residence, for the purpose of being
introduced to his patron, to thank him at once, and to bid him farewell.
On the road, the old man took the liberty of schooling his companion
concerning the respect which he ought to pay to his master, "who
was, though a kind and generous man as ever came from Northumberland,
extremely rigid in punctiliously exacting the degree of honour which was
his due."

While they were advancing towards the house, the General and his wife
expected their arrival with breathless anxiety. They were seated in
a superb drawing-room, the General behind a large chandelier, which,
shaded opposite to his face, threw all the light to the other side of
the table, so that he could observe any person placed there, without
becoming the subject of observation in turn. On a heap of cushions,
wrapped in a glittering drapery of gold and silver muslins, mingled with
shawls, a luxury which was then a novelty in Europe, sate, or rather
reclined, his lady, who, past the full meridian of beauty, retained
charms enough to distinguish her as one who had been formerly a very
fine woman, though her mind seemed occupied by the deepest emotion.

"Zilia," said her husband, "you are unable for what you have
undertaken--take my advice--retire--you shall know all and everything
that passes--but retire. To what purpose should you cling to the idle
wish of beholding for a moment a being whom you can never again look
upon?"

"Alas," answered the lady, "and is not your declaration that I shall
never see him more, a sufficient reason that I should wish to see him
now--should wish to imprint on my memory the features and the form which
I am never again to behold while we are in the body? Do not, my Richard,
be more cruel than was my poor father, even when his wrath was in its
bitterness. He let me look upon my infant, and its cherub face dwelt
with me, and was my comfort among the years of unutterable sorrow in
which my youth wore away."

"It is enough, Zilia--you have desired this boon--I have granted
it--and, at whatever risk, my promise shall be kept. But think how much
depends on this fatal secret--your rank and estimation in society--my
honour interested that that estimation should remain uninjured. Zilia,
the moment that the promulgation of such a secret gives prudes and
scandalmongers a right to treat you with scorn, will be fraught with
unutterable misery, perhaps with bloodshed and death, should a man dare
to take up the rumour."

"You shall be obeyed, my husband," answered Zilia, "in all that the
frailness of nature will permit. But oh, God of my fathers, of what clay
hast thou fashioned us poor mortals, who dread so much the shame which
follows sin, yet repent so little for the sin itself!" In a minute
afterwards steps were heard--the door opened--Winter announced
Lieutenant Middlemas, and the unconscious son stood before his parents.

Witherington started involuntarily up, but immediately constrained
himself to assume the easy deportment with which a superior receives
a dependent, and which, in his own case, was usually mingled with a
certain degree of hauteur. The mother had less command of herself. She,
too, sprung up, as if with the intention of throwing herself on the neck
of her son, for whom she had travailed and sorrowed. But the warning
glance of her husband arrested her as if by magic, and she remained
standing, with her beautiful head and neck somewhat advanced, her hands
clasped together, and extended forward in the attitude of motion, but
motionless, nevertheless, as a marble statue, to which the sculptor
has given all the appearance of life, but cannot impart its powers. So
strange a gesture and posture might have excited the young officer's
surprise; but the lady stood in the shade, and he was so intent in
looking upon his patron, that he was scarce even conscious of Mrs.
Witherington's presence.

"I am happy in this opportunity," said Middlemas, observing that the
General did not speak, "to return my thanks to General Witherington, to
whom they never can be sufficiently paid."

The sound of his voice, though uttering words so indifferent, seemed to
dissolve the charm which kept his mother motionless. She sighed deeply,
relaxed the rigidity of her posture, and sunk back on the cushions from
which she had started up. Middlemas turned a look towards her at the
sound of the sigh, and the rustling of her drapery. The General hastened
to speak.

"My wife, Mr. Middlemas, has been unwell of late--your friend, Mr.
Hartley, might mention it to you--an affection of the nerves."

Mr. Middlemas was, of course, sorry and concerned.

"We have had distress in our family, Mr. Middlemas, from the ultimate
and heart-breaking consequences of which we have escaped by the skill
of your friend, Mr. Hartley. We will be happy if it is in our power to
repay a part of our obligations in service to his friend and protege,
Mr. Middlemas."

"I am only acknowledged as _his_ protege, then," _thought_ Richard;
but he _said_, "Every one must envy his friend in having had the
distinguished good fortune to be of use to General Witherington and his
family."

"You have received your commission, I presume. Have you any particular
wish or desire respecting your destination?"

"No, may it please your Excellency," answered Middlemas. "I suppose
Hartley would tell your Excellency my unhappy state--that I am an
orphan, deserted by the parents who cast me on the wide world, an
outcast about whom nobody knows or cares, except to desire that I should
wander far enough, and live obscurely enough, not to disgrace them by
their connexion with me."

Zilia wrung her hands as he spoke, and drew her muslin veil closely
around her head as if to exclude the sounds which excited her mental
agony.

"Mr. Hartley was not particularly communicative about your affairs,"
said the General; "nor do I wish to give you the pain of entering into
them. What I desire to know is, if you are pleased with your destination
to Madras?"

"Perfectly, please your Excellency--anywhere, so that there is no chance
of meeting the villain Hillary."

"Oh! Hillary's services are too necessary in the purlieus of St.
Giles's, the Lowlights of Newcastle, and such like places, where human
carrion can be picked up, to be permitted to go to India. However, to
show you the knave has some grace, there are the notes of which you were
robbed. You will find them the very same paper which you lost, except a
small sum which the rogue had spent, but which a friend has made up, in
compassion for your sufferings." Richard Middlemas sunk on one knee, and
kissed the hand which restored him to independence.

"Pshaw!" said the General, "you are a silly young man;" but he withdrew
not his hand from his caresses. This was one of the occasions on which
Dick Middlemas could be oratorical.

"O, my more than father," he said, "how much greater a debt do I owe
to you than to the unnatural parents, who brought me into this world by
their sin, and deserted me through their cruelty!"

Zilia, as she heard these cutting words, flung back her veil, raising it
on both hands till it floated behind her like a mist, and then giving
a faint groan, sunk down in a swoon. Pushing Middlemas from him with a
hasty movement, General Witherington flew to his lady's assistance, and
carried her in his arms, as if she had been a child, into the anteroom,
where an old servant waited with the means of restoring suspended
animation, which the unhappy husband too truly anticipated might be
useful. These were hastily employed, and succeeded in calling the
sufferer to life, but in a state of mental emotion that was dreadful.

Her mind was obviously impressed by the last words which her son
had uttered.--"Did you hear him, Richard," she exclaimed, in accents
terribly loud, considering the exhausted state of her strength--"Did you
hear the words? It was Heaven speaking our condemnation by the voice of
our own child. But do not fear, my Richard, do not weep! I will answer
the thunder of Heaven with its own music."

She flew to a harpsichord which stood in the room, and, while the
servant and master gazed on each other, as if doubting whether her
senses were about to leave her entirely, she wandered over the keys,
producing a wilderness of harmony, composed of passages recalled by
memory, or combined by her own musical talent, until at length her voice
and instrument united in one of those magnificent hymns in which her
youth had praised her Maker, with voice and harp, like the Royal Hebrew
who composed it. The tear ebbed insensibly from the eyes which she
turned upwards--her vocal tones, combining with those of the instrument,
rose to a pitch of brilliancy seldom attained by the most distinguished
performers, and then sunk into a dying cadence, which fell, never again
to rise,--for the songstress had died with her strain.

The horror of the distracted husband may be conceived, when all efforts
to restore life proved totally ineffectual. Servants were despatched for
medical men--Hartley, and every other who could be found. The General
precipitated himself into the apartment they had so lately left, and in
his haste ran, against Middlemas, who, at the sound of the music from
the adjoining apartment, had naturally approached nearer to the door,
and surprised and startled by the sort of clamour, hasty steps, and
confused voices which ensued, had remained standing there, endeavouring
to ascertain the cause of so much disorder.

The sight of the unfortunate young man wakened the General's stormy
passions to frenzy. He seemed to recognise his son only as the cause of
his wife's death. He seized him by the collar, and shook him violently
as he dragged him into the chamber of mortality.

"Come hither," he said, "thou for whom a life of lowest obscurity was
too mean a fate--come hither, and look on the parents whom thou hast so
much envied--whom thou hast so often cursed. Look at that pale emaciated
form, a figure of wax, rather than flesh and blood--that is thy
mother--that is the unhappy Zilia Moncada, to whom thy birth was the
source of shame and misery, and to whom thy ill-omened presence has now
brought death itself. And behold me"--he pushed the lad from him, and
stood up erect, looking wellnigh in gesture and figure the apostate
spirit he described--"Behold me," he said; "see you not my hair
streaming with sulphur, my brow scathed with lightning? I am the
Arch-Fiend--I am the father whom you seek--I am the accursed Richard
Tresham, the seducer of Zilia, and the father of her murderer!"

Hartley entered while this horrid scene was passing. All attention to
the deceased, he instantly saw, would be thrown away; and understanding,
partly from Winter, partly from the tenor of the General's frantic
discourse, the nature of the disclosure which had occurred, he hastened
to put an end, if possible, to the frightful and scandalous scene which
had taken place. Aware how delicately the General felt on the subject
of reputation, he assailed him with remonstrances on such conduct, in
presence of so many witnesses. But the mind had ceased to answer to that
once powerful keynote.

"I care not if the whole world hear my sin and my punishment," said
Witherington. "It shall not be again said of me, that I fear shame more
than I repent sin. I feared shame only for Zilia, and Zilia is dead!"

"But her memory, General--spare the memory of your wife, in which the
character of your children is involved."

"I have no children!" said the desperate and violent man. "My Reuben is
gone to Heaven, to prepare a lodging for the angel who has now escaped
from the earth in a flood of harmony, which can only be equalled where
she is gone. The other two cherubs will not survive their mother. I
shall be, nay, I already feel myself, a childless man."

"Yet I am your son," replied Middlemas, in a tone sorrowful, but at the
same time tinged with sullen resentment--"Your son by your wedded wife.
Pale as she lies there, I call upon you both to acknowledge my rights,
and all who are present to bear witness to them."

"Wretch!" exclaimed the maniac father, "canst thou think of thine own
sordid rights in the midst of death and frenzy? My son?--thou art the
fiend who has occasioned my wretchedness in this world, and who will
share my eternal misery in the next. Hence from my sight, and my curse
go with thee!"

His eyes fixed on the ground, his arms folded on his breast, the
haughty and dogged spirit of Middlemas yet seemed to meditate reply. But
Hartley, Winter, and other bystanders interfered, and forced him from
the apartment. As they endeavoured to remonstrate with him, he twisted
himself out of their grasp, ran to the stables, and seizing the first
saddled horse that he found, out of many that had been in haste got
ready to seek for assistance, he threw himself on its back, and rode
furiously off. Hartley was about to mount and follow him; but Winter and
the other domestics threw themselves around him, and implored him not to
desert their unfortunate master, at a time when the influence which he
had acquired over him might be the only restraint on the violence of his
passions.

"He had a _coup de soleil_ in India," whispered Winter, "and is capable
of any thing in his fits. These cowards cannot control him, and I am old
and feeble."

Satisfied that General Witherington was a greater object of compassion
than Middlemas, whom besides he had no hope of overtaking, and who
he believed was safe in his own keeping, however violent might be his
present emotions, Hartley returned where the greater emergency demanded
his immediate care.

He found the unfortunate General contending with the domestics, who
