the earlier date. Dr. Finnur Jonsson,[6-1] who accepts Dr. Storm's
opinion in other respects, says on this point: "The classic form of the
saga and its vivid and excellent tradition surely carry it back to about
1200.... To assume that the saga was first written down about 1270 or
after, I consider to be almost an impossibility." Nor does this
conservative opinion by Dr. Jonsson preclude the possibility, or even
probability, that written accounts of the Vinland voyages existed before
this date. John Fiske's[6-2] well-considered opinion of this same saga
(544 and 557) has weight: "Its general accuracy in the statement and
grouping of so many remote details is proof that its statements were
controlled by an exceedingly strong and steady tradition,--altogether too
strong and steady, in my opinion, to have been maintained simply by word
of mouth." And Vigfusson,[6-3] in speaking of the sagas in general, says:
"We believe that when once the first saga was written down, the others
were in quick succession committed to parchment, some still keeping their
original form through a succession of copies, others changed. The saga
time was short and transitory, as has been the case with the highest
literary periods of every nation, whether we look at the age of Pericles
in Athens, or of our own Elizabeth in England, and that which was not
written down quickly, in due time, was lost and forgotten forever."

The absence of contemporary record has caused some American historians
to view the narratives of the Vinland voyages as ordinary hearsay. But it
is important to remember that before the age of writing in Iceland there
was a saga-telling age, a most remarkable period of intellectual
activity, by means of which the deeds and events of the seething life of
the heroic age were carried over into the age of writing.[7-1] The
general trustworthiness of this saga-telling period has been attested in
numerous ways from foreign records. Thus Snorri Sturlason's "The Sagas of
the Kings of Norway," one of the great history books of the world,
written in Iceland in the thirteenth century, was based primarily on
early tradition, brought over the sea to Iceland. Yet the exactness of
its descriptions and the reliability of its statements have been verified
in countless cases by modern Norwegian historians.[7-2]

With reference to the Vinland voyages, there is proof of an unusually
strong tradition in the fact that it has come down from two sources, the
only case of such a phenomenon among the Icelandic sagas proper. It does
not invalidate the general truth of the tradition that these two sources
clash in various matters. These disagreements are not so serious but that
fair-minded American scholars have found it "easy to believe that the
narratives contained in the sagas are true in their general outlines and
important features." It lies within the province of Old Norse scholarship
to determine which of the two Vinland sagas has the better literary and
historical antecedents. After this point has been established, the
truthfulness and credibility of the selected narrative in its details
must be maintained on the internal evidence in conjunction with the
geographical and other data of early America. And here American
scholarship may legitimately speak.

These sagas have in recent years been subjected, especially by Dr. Gustav
Storm of Christiania,[8-1] to most searching textual and historical
criticism, and the result has been that the simpler narrative of Hauk's
Book and AM. 557 is pronounced the more reliable account.[8-2] In respect
to literary quality, it has the characteristics of the Icelandic sagas
proper, as distinguished from the later sagas by well-known literary men
like Snorri. Where it grazes facts of Northern history it is equally
strong. Thus, there is serious question as to the first sighting of land
by Biarni Herjulfson, who is mentioned only in the Flat Island narrative,
and nowhere else in the rich genealogical literature of Iceland, although
his alleged father was an important man, of whom there are reliable
accounts. On the other hand, the record of the "Saga of Eric the Red,"
giving the priority of discovery to Leif Ericson, can be collaterally
confirmed.[8-3] The whole account of Biarni seems suspicious, and the
main facts, viewed with reference to Leif's discovery, run counter to
Northern chronology and history. There are, however, two incidental
touches in the Flat Island Book narrative, which are absent from the
other saga, namely, the observation concerning the length of the day in
Vinland, and the reference to finding "three skin-canoes, with three men
under each." The improbabilities of the Flat Island Book saga are easily
detected, if one uses as a guide the simpler narrative of the "Saga of
Eric the Red," the only doubtful part of which is the "uniped" episode, a
touch of mediaeval superstition so palpable as not to be deceptive.

Aside from such things as picking grapes in the spring, sipping sweet dew
from the grass, and the presence of an apparition, the Flat Island Book
account, when read by itself, with no attempt to make it harmonize with
the statements of the "Saga of Eric the Red" or other facts of
Scandinavian history, is a sufficiently straightforward narrative. The
difficulty begins when it is placed in juxtaposition to these facts and
statements. It should not be and need not be discarded, but in giving an
account of the Vinland voyages it must be used with circumspection. From
an historical standpoint it must occupy a subordinate place. If Rafn in
his _Antiquitates Americanae_ had given emphatic precedence to the saga as
found in Hauk's Book and AM. 557, had left to American scholars the
Dighton Rock and the Newport Tower, and had not been so confident in the
matter of identifying the exact localities that the explorers visited, he
might have carried conviction, instead of bringing confusion, to American
scholars.

The general results of the work of the Norwegian scholar Dr. Storm,
together with a unique presentation of the original narratives, are
accessible in _The Finding of Wineland_ (London, 1890 and 1895), by an
American scholar, the late Arthur Middleton Reeves. This work contains a
lucid account of the important investigations on the subject, photographs
of all the vellum pages that give the various narratives, a printed text
accompanying these, page by page and line by line, and also translations
into English. There is one phase of the subject that this work does not
discuss: the identifications of the regions visited by the Northmen. Dr.
Storm, however, has gone into this subject, and is convinced that
Helluland, Markland, and Vinland of the sagas, are Labrador,
Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia.[10-1] The sailing directions in the "Saga
of Eric the Red" are given with surprising detail. These, with other
observations, seem to fit Nova Scotia remarkably well. Only one thing
appears to speak against Storm's view, and that is the _abundance_ of
grapes to which the Flat Island Book account testifies. But coupled with
this testimony are statements (to say nothing of the unreliability of
this saga in other respects) that indicate that the Icelandic narrators
had come to believe that grapes were gathered in the spring, thus
invalidating the testimony as to abundance.

Whether the savages that the sagas describe were Indians or Eskimos is a
question of some interest. John Fiske[10-2] believes that the explorers
came in contact with American Indians; Vigfusson, on the other hand,
believes that the sagas describe Eskimos. Here, however, the American has
the better right to an opinion.

On this point, it is of importance to call attention to the fact that the
Norse colonists in Greenland found no natives there, only vestiges of
them. They were at that time farther north in Greenland; the colonists
came in contact with them much later,--too late to admit of descriptions
of them in any of the classical Icelandic sagas, in which the Greenland
colonists play no inconspicuous part. Ari, the great authority on early
Norse history, speaking of the Greenland colonists, says in his
_Libellus Islandorum_:[11-1] "They found there men's habitations both
east and west in the land [_i.e._, in both the Eastern and Western
settlements] both broken cayaks and stone-smithery, whereby it may be
seen that the same kind of folk had been there as they which inhabited
Vinland, and whom the men of Greenland [_i.e._, the explorers] called
Skrellings."

A sort of negative corroboration of this is offered by a work of high
rank, the famous _Speculum Regale_, written in Old Norse in Norway in the
middle of the thirteenth century. It contains much trustworthy
information on Greenland; it tells, "with bald common sense," of such
characteristic things as glaciers and northern lights, discusses the
question as to whether Greenland is an island or a peninsula, tells of
exports and imports, the climate, the means of subsistence, and
especially the fauna, _but not one word concerning any natives_. Moreover
Ivar Bardsen's account[11-2] of Greenland, which is entirely trustworthy,
gives a distinct impression that the colonists did not come into conflict
with the Eskimos until the fourteenth century.

There is consequently no valid reason for doubting that the savages
described in the sagas were natives of Vinland and Markland. But whether
it can ever be satisfactorily demonstrated that the Norse explorers came
in contact with Algonquin, Micmac, or Beothuk Indians, and just where
they landed, are not matters of essential importance. The
incontrovertible facts of the various Norse expeditions are that Leif
Ericson and Thorfinn Karlsefni are as surely historical characters as
Christopher Columbus, that they visited, in the early part of the
eleventh century, some part of North America where the grape grew, and
that in that region the colonists found savages, whose hostility upset
their plans of permanent settlement.

According to the usually accepted chronology, Leif's voyage from Norway
to Greenland (during which voyage he found Vinland) was made in the year
1000, and Karlsefni's attempt at colonization within the decade
following. On the basis of genealogical records (so often treacherous)
some doubt has recently been cast on this chronology by Vigfusson, in
_Origines Islandicae_[12-1] (1905). Vigfusson died in 1889, sixteen years
before the publication of this work. He had no opportunity to consider
the investigations of Dr. Storm, who accepts without question the first
decade of the eleventh century for the Vinland voyages. Nor do Storm's
evidences and arguments on this point appear in the work as published.
Therefore we are obliged to say of Vigfusson's observations on the
chronology of the Vinland voyages, that they stand as question-marks
which call for confirmation.

We are surprised, moreover, to find that _Origines Islandicae_ prints the
Flat Island Book story first, apparently on account of the belief that
this story contains the "truer account of the first sighting of the
American continent" by Biarni Herjulfson.[12-2] It is impossible to
believe that this would have been done, if the editors (Vigfusson and
Powell) had known the results of Dr. Storm's work, which is not
mentioned. There is, furthermore, no attempt in the _Origines Islandicae_
to refute or explain away an opinion on AM. 557 expressed by the same
authorities, in 1879,[12-3] to the effect that "it is free from grave
errors of fact which disfigure the latter [the Flat Island Book saga]."
We are almost forced to the conclusion that a hand less cunning than
Vigfusson's has had to do with the unfinished section of the work.

In regard to the extract from Adam of Bremen, which we print, it should
be observed that its only importance lies in the fact that it
corroborates the Icelandic tradition of a land called Vinland, where
there were grapes and "unsown grain," and thus serves to strengthen faith
in the trustworthiness of the saga narrative. The annals and papal
letters that follow need no further discussion, we think, than that
contained in the annotations.

Besides the texts in Icelandic, already described, by Rafn, Reeves,
Vigfusson and Powell, and Storm, it may be mentioned that the Flat Island
text is given in Vol. I. of _Flateyjar-bok_, ed. Vigfusson and Unger,
Christiania, 1860. There are translations of both texts in Beamish,
_Discovery of North America by the Northmen_ (London, 1841), in Slafter,
_Voyages of the Northmen_ (Boston, 1877), and in De Costa, _Pre-Columbian
Discovery of America by the Northmen_ (Albany, 1901). But most of these
are confused in arrangement, and the best is that by the late Mr. Reeves,
which by the kind consent of his representatives we are permitted to use
in this volume.

JULIUS E. OLSON.

FOOTNOTES:

[4-1] _Eiriks Saga Raudha_ (Copenhagen, 1891), p. xv.

[5-1] A translation, with the title "The Story of Thorfinn Carlsemne,"
based on AM. 557, may be found in _Origines Islandicae_, II. 610.

[5-2] _Origines Islandicae_, II. 590.

[6-1] _Den oldnorske og oldislandske Litteraturs Historie_ (Copenhagen,
1901), II. 648.

[6-2] _The Discovery of America_, p. 212.

[6-3] Prolegomena, _Sturlunga Saga_, p. lxix.

[7-1] Snorri, the Icelandic historian, says that "it was more than 240
years from the settlement of Iceland (about 870) before sagas began to be
written" and that "Ari (1067-1148) was the first man who wrote in the
vernacular stories of things old and new."

[7-2] "Among the mediaeval literatures of Europe, that of Iceland is
unrivalled in the profusion of detail with which the facts of ordinary
life are recorded, and the clearness with which the individual character
of numberless real persons stands out from the historic background....
The Icelanders of the Saga-age were not a secluded self-centred race;
they were untiring in their desire to learn all that could be known of
the lands round about them, and it is to their zeal for this knowledge,
their sound historical sense, and their trained memories, that we owe
much information regarding the British Isles themselves from the ninth to
the thirteenth century. The contact of the Scandinavian peoples with the
English race on the one hand, and the Gaelic on the other, has been an
important factor in the subsequent history of Britain; and this is
naturally a subject on which the Icelandic evidence is of the highest
value." Prefatory Note to _Origines Islandicae_.

[8-1] _Studies on the Vinland Voyages_ (Copenhagen, 1889) and _Eiriks
Saga Raudha_ (Copenhagen, 1891).

[8-2] Of the same opinion are Professor Hugo Gering of Kiel, _Zeitschrift
fuer deutsche Philologie_, XXIV. (1892), and Professor Finnur Jonsson of
Copenhagen, _Den oldnorske og oldislandske Litteraturs Historie_, II.
646.

[8-3] The Kristni-Saga, which tells of the conversion of Iceland, says:
"That summer [1000] King Olaf [of Norway] went out of the country to
Wendland in the south, and he sent Leif Eric's son to Greenland to preach
the faith there. It was then that Leif discovered Vinland the Good. He
also discovered a crew on the wreck of a ship out in the deep sea, and so
he got the name of Leif the Lucky." For passages from other sagas that
corroborate Leif's discovery on his voyage from Norway to Greenland
(_i.e._, in the year that Olaf Tryggvason fell, namely, 1000), see
Reeves, _The Finding of Wineland the Good_ (London, 1895), pp. 7-18.

[10-1] See, in support of Storm, Juul Dieserud's paper, "Norse
Discoveries in America," _Bulletin of the American Geographical Society_,
Feb., 1901.

[10-2] _Discovery of America_, p. 182.

[11-1] See _Origines Islandicae_, I. 294.

[11-2] See notes 6 and 8 to Papal Letters, p. 71 of this volume.

[12-1] See note 1, p. 43.

[12-2] In other respects the editors speak highly of the saga as found in
Hauk's Book and AM. 557: "This saga has never been so well known as the
other, though it is probably of even higher value. Unlike the other, it
has the form and style of one of the 'Islendinga Sogor' [the Icelandic
sagas proper]; its phrasing is broken, its dialogue is excellent, it
contains situations of great pathos, such as the beautiful incident at
the end of Bearne's self-sacrifice, and scenes of high interest, such as
that of the Sibyl's prophesying in Greenland...." II. 591.

[12-3] _Icelandic Prose Reader_ (where AM. 557 is printed), notes, p.
377.




THE SAGA OF ERIC THE RED

ALSO CALLED THE SAGA OF THORFINN KARLSEFNI[14-1]


_The Saga of Eric the Red, also called the Saga of Thorfinn Karlsefni and
Snorri Thorbrandsson._[14-2]--Olaf was the name of a warrior-king, who
was called Olaf the White. He was the son of King Ingiald, Helgi's son,
the son of Olaf, Gudraud's son, son of Halfdan Whiteleg, king of the
Uplands-men.[14-3] Olaf engaged in a Western freebooting expedition and
captured Dublin in Ireland and the Shire of Dublin, over which he became
king.[14-4] He married Aud the Wealthy, daughter of Ketil Flatnose, son
of Biorn Buna, a famous man of Norway. Their son was called Thorstein the
Red. Olaf was killed in battle in Ireland, and Aud and Thorstein went
then to the Hebrides; there Thorstein married Thurid, daughter of Eyvind
Easterling, sister of Helgi the Lean; they had many children. Thorstein
became a warrior-king, and entered into fellowship with Earl Sigurd the
Mighty, son of Eystein the Rattler. They conquered Caithness and
Sutherland, Ross and Moray, and more than the half of Scotland. Over
these Thorstein became king, ere he was betrayed by the Scots, and was
slain there in battle. Aud was at Caithness when she heard of Thorstein's
death; she thereupon caused a ship to be secretly built in the forest,
and when she was ready, she sailed out to the Orkneys. There she bestowed
Groa, Thorstein the Red's daughter, in marriage; she was the mother of
Grelad, whom Earl Thorfinn, Skull-cleaver, married. After this Aud set
out to seek Iceland, and had on board her ship twenty freemen. Aud
arrived in Iceland, and passed the first winter at Biarnarhoefn with her
brother, Biorn. And afterwards took possession of all the Dale country
between Doegurdar river and Skraumuhlaups river. She lived at Hvamm, and
held her orisons at Krossholar, where she caused crosses to be erected,
for she had been baptized and was a devout believer. With her there came
out [to Iceland] many distinguished men, who had been captured in the
Western freebooting expedition, and were called slaves. Vifil was the
name of one of these: he was a highborn man, who had been taken captive
in the Western sea, and was called a slave, before Aud freed him; now
when Aud gave homesteads to the members of her crew, Vifil asked
wherefore she gave him no homestead as to the other men. Aud replied,
that this should make no difference to him, saying, that he would be
regarded as a distinguished man wherever he was. She gave him Vifilsdal,
and there he dwelt. He married a woman whose name was...;[15-1] their
sons were Thorbiorn and Thorgeir. They were men of promise, and grew up
with their father.[15-2]

_Eric the Red finds Greenland._--There was a man named Thorvald; he was a
son of Asvald, Ulf's son, Eyxna-Thori's son. His son's name was Eric. He
and his father went from Jaederen[15-3] to Iceland, on account of
manslaughter, and settled on Hornstrandir, and dwelt at Drangar. There
Thorvald died, and Eric then married Thorhild, a daughter of Jorund,
Atli's son, and Thorbiorg the Ship-chested, who had been married before
to Thorbiorn of the Haukadal family. Eric then removed from the North,
and cleared land in Haukadal, and dwelt at Ericsstadir by Vatnshorn. Then
Eric's thralls caused a land-slide on Valthiof's farm, Valthiofsstadir.
Eyiolf the Foul, Valthiof's kinsman, slew the thralls near Skeidsbrekkur
above Vatnshorn. For this Eric killed Eyiolf the Foul, and he also killed
Duelling-Hrafn, at Leikskalar. Geirstein and Odd of Jorva, Eyiolf's
kinsmen, conducted the prosecution for the slaying of their kinsmen, and
Eric was, in consequence, banished from Haukadal. He then took possession
of Brokey and Eyxney, and dwelt at Tradir on Sudrey, the first winter. It
was at this time that he loaned Thorgest his outer dais-boards;[16-1]
Eric afterwards went to Eyxney, and dwelt at Ericsstad. He then demanded
his outer dais-boards, but did not obtain them. Eric then carried the
outer dais-boards away from Breidabolstad, and Thorgest gave chase. They
came to blows a short distance from the farm of Drangar. There two of
Thorgest's sons were killed and certain other men besides. After this
each of them retained a considerable body of men with him at his home.
Styr gave Eric his support, as did also Eyiolf of Sviney, Thorbiorn,
Vifil's son, and the sons of Thorbrand of Alptafirth; while Thorgest was
backed by the sons of Thord the Yeller, and Thorgeir of Hitardal, Aslak
of Langadal and his son, Illugi. Eric and his people were condemned to
outlawry at Thorsness-thing. He equipped his ship for a voyage, in
Ericsvag; while Eyiolf concealed him in Dimunarvag, when Thorgest and his
people were searching for him among the islands. He said to them, that it
was his intention to go in search of that land which Gunnbiorn, son of
Ulf the Crow, saw when he was driven out of his course, westward across
the main, and discovered Gunnbiorns-skerries.[16-2] He told them that he
would return again to his friends, if he should succeed in finding that
country. Thorbiorn, and Eyiolf, and Styr accompanied Eric out beyond the
islands, and they parted with the greatest friendliness; Eric said to
them that he would render them similar aid, so far as it might lie within
his power, if they should ever stand in need of his help. Eric sailed
out to sea from Snaefells-iokul, and arrived at that ice-mountain which
is called Blacksark. Thence he sailed to the southward, that he might
ascertain whether there was habitable country in that direction. He
passed the first winter at Ericsey, near the middle of the Western
Settlement.[17-1] In the following spring he proceeded to Ericsfirth, and
selected a site there for his homestead. That summer he explored the
western uninhabited region, remaining there for a long time, and
assigning many local names there. The second winter he spent at
Ericsholms beyond Hvarfsgnipa. But the third summer he sailed northward
to Snaefell,[17-2] and into Hrafnsfirth. He believed then that he had
reached the head of Ericsfirth; he turned back then, and remained the
third winter at Ericsey at the mouth of Ericsfirth. The following summer
he sailed to Iceland, and landed in Breidafirth. He remained that winter
with Ingolf at Holmlatr. In the spring he and Thorgest fought together,
and Eric was defeated; after this a reconciliation was effected between
them. That summer Eric set out to colonize the land which he had
discovered, and which he called Greenland, because, he said, men would be
the more readily persuaded thither if the land had a good name.[17-3]

_Concerning Thorbiorn._--Thorgeir, Vifil's son, married, and took to wife
Arnora, daughter of Einar of Laugarbrekka, Sigmund's son, son of Ketil
Thistil, who settled Thistilsfirth. Einar had another daughter named
Hallveig; she was married to Thorbiorn, Vifil's son, who got with her
Laugarbrekkaland on Hellisvellir. Thorbiorn moved thither, and became a
very distinguished man. He was an excellent husbandman, and had a great
estate. Gudrid was the name of Thorbiorn's daughter. She was the most
beautiful of her sex, and in every respect a very superior woman. There
dwelt at Arnarstapi a man named Orm, whose wife's name was Halldis. Orm
was a good husbandman, and a great friend of Thorbiorn, and Gudrid lived
with him for a long time as a foster-daughter. There was a man named
Thorgeir, who lived at Thorgeirsfell; he was very wealthy and had been
manumitted; he had a son named Einar, who was a handsome, well-bred man,
and very showy in his dress. Einar was engaged in trading-voyages from
one country to the other, and had prospered in this. He always spent his
winters alternately either in Iceland or in Norway.

Now it is to be told, that one autumn, when Einar was in Iceland, he went
with his wares out along Snaefellsness, with the intention of selling
them. He came to Arnarstapi, and Orm invited him to remain with him, and
Einar accepted this invitation, for there was a strong friendship
[between Orm and himself]. Einar's wares were carried into a store-house,
where he unpacked them, and displayed them to Orm and the men of his
household, and asked Orm to take such of them as he liked. Orm accepted
this offer, and said that Einar was a good merchant, and was greatly
favored by fortune. Now, while they were busied about the wares, a woman
passed before the door of the store-house. Einar inquired of Orm: "Who
was that handsome woman who passed before the door? I have never seen her
here before." Orm replies: "That, is Gudrid, my foster-child, the
daughter of Thorbiorn of Laugarbrekka." "She must be a good match," said
Einar; "has she had any suitors?" Orm replies: "In good sooth she has
been courted, friend, nor is she easily to be won, for it is believed
that both she and her father will be very particular in their choice of a
husband." "Be that as it may," quoth Einar, "she is a woman to whom I
mean to pay my addresses, and I would have thee present this matter to
her father in my behalf, and use every exertion to bring it to a
favorable issue, and I shall reward thee to the full of my friendship, if
I am successful. It may be that Thorbiorn will regard the connection as
being to our mutual advantage, for [while] he is a most honorable man and
has a goodly home, his personal effects, I am told, are somewhat on the
wane; but neither I nor my father are lacking in lands or chattels, and
Thorbiorn would be greatly aided thereby, if this match should be brought
about." "Surely I believe myself to be thy friend," replies Orm, "and yet
I am by no means disposed to act in this matter, for Thorbiorn hath a
very haughty spirit, and is moreover a most ambitious man." Einar replied
that he wished for nought else than that his suit should be broached; Orm
replied, that he should have his will. Einar fared again to the South
until he reached his home. Sometime after this, Thorbiorn had an autumn
feast, as was his custom, for he was a man of high position. Hither came
Orm of Arnarstapi, and many other of Thorbiorn's friends. Orm came to
speech with Thorbiorn, and said, that Einar of Thorgeirsfell had visited
him not long before, and that he was become a very promising man. Orm now
makes known the proposal of marriage in Einar's behalf, and added that
for some persons and for some reasons it might be regarded as a very
appropriate match: "thou mayest greatly strengthen thyself thereby,
master, by reason of the property." Thorbiorn answers: "Little did I
expect to hear such words from thee, that I should marry my daughter to
the son of a thrall; and that, because it seems to thee that my means are
diminishing, wherefore she shall not remain longer with thee since thou
deemest so mean a match as this suitable for her." Orm afterward returned
to his home, and all of the invited guests to their respective
households, while Gudrid remained behind with her father, and tarried at
home that winter. But in the spring Thorbiorn gave an entertainment to
his friends, to which many came, and it was a noble feast, and at the
banquet Thorbiorn called for silence, and spoke: "Here have I passed a
goodly lifetime, and have experienced the good-will of men toward me, and
their affection; and, methinks, our relations together have been
pleasant; but now I begin to find myself in straitened circumstances,
although my estate has hitherto been accounted a respectable one. Now
will I rather abandon my farming, than lose my honor, and rather leave
the country, than bring disgrace upon my family; wherefore I have now
concluded to put that promise to the test, which my friend Eric the Red
made, when we parted company in Breidafirth. It is my present design to
go to Greenland this summer, if matters fare as I wish." The folk were
greatly astonished at this plan of Thorbiorn's, for he was blessed with
many friends, but they were convinced that he was so firmly fixed in his
purpose, that it would not avail to endeavor to dissuade him from it.
Thorbiorn bestowed gifts upon his guests, after which the feast came to
an end, and the folk returned to their homes. Thorbiorn sells his lands
and buys a ship, which was laid up at the mouth of Hraunhoefn. Thirty
persons joined him in the voyage; among these were Orm of Arnarstapi, and
his wife, and other of Thorbiorn's friends, who would not part from him.
Then they put to sea. When they sailed the weather was favorable, but
after they came out upon the high-seas the fair wind failed, and there
came great gales, and they lost their way, and had a very tedious voyage
that summer. Then illness appeared among their people, and Orm and his
wife Halldis died, and the half of their company. The sea began to run
high, and they had a very wearisome and wretched voyage in many ways, but
arrived, nevertheless, at Heriolfsness in Greenland, on the very eve of
winter.[20-1] At Heriolfsness lived a man named Thorkel. He was a man of
ability and an excellent husbandman. He received Thorbiorn and all of his
ship's company, and entertained them well during the winter. At that time
there was a season of great dearth in Greenland; those who had been at
the fisheries had had poor hauls, and some had not returned. There was a
certain woman there in the settlement, whose name was Thorbiorg. She was
a prophetess, and was called Little Sibyl. She had had nine sisters, all
of whom were prophetesses, but she was the only one left alive. It was
Thorbiorg's custom in the winters, to go to entertainments, and she was
especially sought after at the homes of those who were curious to know
their fate, or what manner of season might be in store for them; and
inasmuch as Thorkel was the chief yeoman in the neighborhood, it was
thought to devolve upon him to find out when the evil time, which was
upon them, would cease. Thorkel invited the prophetess to his home, and
careful preparations were made for her reception, according to the custom
which prevailed, when women of her kind were to be entertained. A high
seat was prepared for her, in which a cushion filled with poultry
feathers was placed. When she came in the evening, with the man who had
been sent to meet her, she was clad in a dark-blue cloak, fastened with a
strap, and set with stones quite down to the hem. She wore glass beads
around her neck, and upon her head a black lamb-skin hood, lined with
white cat-skin. In her hands she carried a staff, upon which there was a
knob, which was ornamented with brass, and set with stones up about the
knob. Circling her waist she wore a girdle of touch-wood, and attached to
it a great skin pouch, in which she kept the charms which she used when
she was practising her sorcery. She wore upon her feet shaggy calf-skin
shoes, with long, tough latchets, upon the ends of which there were large
brass buttons. She had cat-skin gloves upon her hands, which were white
inside and lined with fur. When she entered, all of the folk felt it to
be their duty to offer her becoming greetings. She received the
salutations of each individual according as he pleased her. Yeoman
Thorkel took the sibyl by the hand, and led her to the seat which had
been made ready for her. Thorkel bade her run her eyes over man and beast
and home. She had little to say concerning all these. The tables were
brought forth in the evening, and it remains to be told what manner of
food was prepared for the prophetess. A porridge of goat's beestings was
made for her, and for meat there were dressed the hearts of every kind of
beast, which could be obtained there. She had a brass spoon, and a knife
with a handle of walrus tusk, with a double hasp of brass around the
haft, and from this the point was broken. And when the tables were
removed, Yeoman Thorkel approaches Thorbiorg, and asks how she is pleased
with the home, and the character of the folk, and how speedily she would
be likely to become aware of that concerning which he had questioned her,
and which the people were anxious to know. She replied that she could not
give an opinion in this matter before the morrow, after that she had
slept there through the night. And on the morrow, when the day was far
spent, such preparations were made as were necessary to enable her to
accomplish her soothsaying. She bade them bring her those women, who knew
the incantation, which she required to work her spells, and which she
called Warlocks; but such women were not to be found. Thereupon a search
was made throughout the house, to see whether any one knew this
[incantation]. Then says Gudrid: "Although I am neither skilled in the
black art nor a sibyl, yet my foster-mother, Halldis, taught me in
Iceland that spell-song, which she called Warlocks." Thorbiorg answered:
"Then art thou wise in season!" Gudrid replies: "This is an incantation
and ceremony of such a kind, that I do not mean to lend it any aid, for
that I am a Christian woman." Thorbiorg answers: "It might so be that
thou couldst give thy help to the company here, and still be no worse
woman than before; however I leave it with Thorkel to provide for my
needs." Thorkel now so urged Gudrid, that she said she must needs comply
with his wishes. The women then made a ring round about, while Thorbiorg
sat up on the spell-dais. Gudrid then sang the song, so sweet and well,
that no one remembered ever before to have heard the melody sung with so
fair a voice as this. The sorceress thanked her for the song, and said:
"She has indeed lured many spirits hither, who think it pleasant to hear
this song, those who were wont to forsake us hitherto and refuse to
submit themselves to us. Many things are now revealed to me, which
hitherto have been hidden, both from me and from others. And I am able to
announce that this period of famine will not endure longer, but the
season will mend as spring approaches. The visitation of disease, which
has been so long upon you, will disappear sooner than expected. And thee,
Gudrid, I shall reward out of hand, for the assistance, which thou hast
vouchsafed us, since the fate in store for thee is now all made manifest
to me. Thou shalt make a most worthy match here in Greenland, but it
shall not be of long duration for thee, for thy future path leads out to
Iceland, and a lineage both great and goodly shall spring from thee, and
above thy line brighter rays of light shall shine, than I have power
clearly to unfold. And now fare well and health to thee, my daughter!"
After this the folk advanced to the sibyl, and each besought information
concerning that about which he was most curious. She was very ready in
her responses, and little of that which she foretold failed of
fulfilment. After this they came for her from a neighboring farmstead,
and she thereupon set out thither. Thorbiorn was then sent for, since he
had not been willing to remain at home while such heathen rites were
practising. The weather improved speedily, when the spring opened, even
as Thorbiorg had prophesied. Thorbiorn equipped his ship and sailed away,
until he arrived at Brattahlid.[23-1] Eric received him with open arms,
and said that it was well that he had come thither. Thorbiorn and his
household remained with him during the winter, while quarters were
provided for the crew among the farmers. And the following spring Eric
gave Thorbiorn land on Stokkaness, where a goodly farmstead was founded,
and there he lived thenceforward.

_Concerning Leif the Lucky and the Introduction of Christianity into
Greenland._--Eric was married to a woman named Thorhild, and had two sons;
one of these was named Thorstein, and the other Leif. They were both
promising men. Thorstein lived at home with his father, and there was not
at that time a man in Greenland who was accounted of so great promise as
he. Leif had sailed to Norway,[24-1] where he was at the court of King
Olaf Tryggvason. When Leif sailed from Greenland, in the summer, they were
driven out of their course to the Hebrides. It was late before they got
fair winds thence, and they remained there far into the summer. Leif
became enamored of a certain woman, whose name was Thorgunna. She was a
woman of fine family, and Leif observed that she was possessed of rare
intelligence. When Leif was preparing for his departure Thorgunna asked to
be permitted to accompany him. Leif inquired whether she had in this the
approval of her kinsmen. She replied that she did not care for it. Leif
responded that he did not deem it the part of wisdom to abduct so
high-born a woman in a strange country, "and we so few in number." "It is
by no means certain that thou shalt find this to be the better decision,"
said Thorgunna. "I shall put it to the proof, notwithstanding," said Leif.
"Then I tell thee," said Thorgunna, "that I am no longer a lone woman, for
I am pregnant, and upon thee I charge it. I foresee that I shall give
birth to a male child. And though thou give this no heed, yet will I rear
the boy, and send him to thee in Greenland, when he shall be fit to take
his place with other men. And I foresee that thou wilt get as much profit
of this son as is thy due from this our parting; moreover, I mean to come
to Greenland myself before the end comes." Leif gave her a gold
finger-ring, a Greenland wadmal mantle, and a belt of walrus-tusk. This
boy came to Greenland, and was called Thorgils. Leif acknowledged his
paternity, and some men will have it that this Thorgils came to Iceland in
the summer before the Froda-wonder.[24-2] However, this Thorgils was
afterwards in Greenland, and there seemed to be something not altogether
natural about him before the end came. Leif and his companions sailed
