opportunities for accomplishing much that was of great importance were
sacrificed and lost to the city; and that he received presents in
payment for all these services, in company with Philocrates; then
condemn him, and exact the penalty which his crimes deserve. If I fail
to prove these points, or fail to prove them all, then regard me with
contempt, and let the defendant go.

{9} I have still to charge him, men of Athens, with many atrocious acts
in addition to these--acts which would naturally call forth the
execration of every one among you. But I desire, before all else that I
am about to say, to remind you (though most of you, I know, remember it
well) of the position which Aeschines originally took up in public
life, and the speeches which he thought it right to address to the
people against Philip; for I would have you realize that his own
actions, his own speeches at the beginning of his career, are the
strongest evidence of his corruption. {10} According to his own public
declaration at that time, he was the first Athenian to perceive that
Philip had designs against the Hellenes and was corrupting certain
leading men in Arcadia. With Ischander, the son of Neoptolemus, to
second him in his performance, he came before the Council and he came
before the people, to speak on the subject: he persuaded you to send
envoys in all directions to bring together a congress at Athens to
discuss the question of war with Philip: {11} then, on his return from
Arcadia, he reported to you those noble and lengthy speeches which, he
said, he had delivered on your behalf before the Ten Thousand[n] at
Megalopolis, in reply to Philip's spokesman, Hieronymus; and he
described at length the criminal wrong that was done, not only to their
own several countries, but to all Hellas, by men who took bribes and
received money from Philip. {12} Such was his policy at that time, and
such the sample which he displayed of his sentiments. Then you were
induced by Aristodemus, Neoptolemus, Ctesiphon, and the rest of those
who brought reports from Macedonia in which there was not an honest
word, to send ambassadors to Philip and to negotiate for peace.
Aeschines himself is appointed one of them, in the belief, not that he
was one of those who would sell your interests, or had placed
confidence in Philip, but rather one who would keep an eye on the rest.
The speeches which he had already delivered, and his antipathy to
Philip, naturally led you to take this view of him. {13} Well, after
this he came to me[n] and tried to make an agreement by which we should
act in concert on the Embassy, and urged strongly that we should both
keep an eye upon that abominable and shameless man Philocrates; and
until we returned to Athens from the First Embassy, I at least, men of
Athens, had no idea that he had been corrupted and had sold himself.
For (not to mention the other speeches which, as I have told you, he
had made on former occasions) at the first of the assemblies in which
you debated about the Peace, he rose and delivered an exordium which I
think I can repeat to you word for word as he uttered it at the
meeting. {14} 'If Philocrates,' he said, 'had spent a very long time in
studying how he could best oppose the Peace, I do not think he could
have found a better device than a motion of this kind. The Peace which
he proposes is one which I can never recommend the city to make, so
long as a single Athenian remains alive. Peace, however, we ought, I
think, to make.' {15} And he made a brief and reasonable speech in the
same tone. But though he had spoken thus at the first meeting, in the
hearing of you all, yet at the second meeting, when the Peace was to be
ratified; when I was upholding the resolution of the allies and working
for a Peace on just and equitable terms; when you in your desire for
such a Peace would not even listen to the voice of the despicable
Philocrates; then, I say, Aeschines rose and spoke in support of him,
using language for which he deserves, God knows, to die many deaths,
{16} saying that you must not remember your forefathers, nor tolerate
speakers who recalled your trophies and your victories by sea; and that
he would frame and propose a law, that you should assist no Hellene who
had not previously assisted you. These words he had the callous
shamelessness to utter in the very presence and hearing of the
ambassadors[n] whom you had summoned from the Hellenic states, in
pursuance of the advice which he himself had given you, before he had
sold himself.

{17} You elected him again, men of Athens, to receive the oaths. How he
frittered away the time, how cruelly he injured all his country's
interests, and what violent mutual enmity arose between myself and him
in consequence of his conduct and of my desire to prevent it, you shall
hear presently. But when we returned from this Embassy which was sent
to receive the oaths, and the report of which is now under examination;
when we had secured nothing, either small or great, of all that had
been promised and expected when you were making the Peace, but had been
totally deceived; when they had again acted without regard to their
instructions,[n] and had conducted their mission in direct defiance of
your decree; we came before the Council: and there are many who have
personal knowledge of what I am about to tell you, for the
Council-Chamber was crowded with spectators. {18} Well, I came forward
and reported to the Council the whole truth: I denounced these men: I
recounted the whole story, beginning with those first hopes, aroused in
you by the report of Ctesiphon and Aristodemus, and going on to the
speeches which Aeschines delivered during the time of the
Peace-negotiations, and the position into which they had brought the
city: as regards all that remained to you--I meant the Phocians and
Thermopylae--I counselled you not to abandon these, not to be victims
once more of the same mistake, not to let yourselves be reduced to
extremities through depending upon a succession of hopes and promises:
and I carried the Council with me. {19} But when the day of the
Assembly came, and it was our duty to address you, the defendant
Aeschines came forward before any of his colleagues--and I entreat you,
in God's name, to follow me, and try to recollect whether what I tell
you is true; for now we have come to the very thing which so cruelly
injured and ruined your whole cause. He made not the remotest attempt
to give any report of the results of the Embassy--if indeed he
questioned the truth of my allegations at all--but instead of this, he
made statements of such a character, promising you benefits so numerous
and so magnificent, that he completely carried you away with him. {20}
For he said that,[n] before his return, he had persuaded Philip upon
all the points in which the interests of the city were involved, in
regard both to the Amphictyonic dispute and to all other matters: and
he described to you a long speech which he professed to have addressed
to Philip against the Thebans, and of which he reported to you the
substance, calculating that, as the result of his own diplomacy, you
would within two or three days, without stirring from home or taking
the field or suffering any inconvenience, hear that Thebes was being
blockaded, alone and isolated from the rest of Boeotia, {21} that
Thespiae and Plataeae were being repeopled, and that the debt due to
the god[n] was being exacted not from the Phocians, but from the
Thebans who had planned the seizure of the temple. For he said that he
gave Philip to understand that those who planned the act were no less
guilty of impiety than those whose hands executed the plan; and that on
this account the Thebans had set a price upon his head. {22} Moreover,
he said that he heard some of the Euboeans, who had been thrown into a
state of panic and confusion by the friendly relations established
between Athens and Philip, saying to the ambassadors, 'You have not
succeeded, gentlemen, in concealing from us the conditions on which you
have made your Peace with Philip; nor are we unaware that while you
have given him Amphipolis, he has undertaken to hand over Euboea to
you.' There was, indeed, another matter which he had arranged as well,
but he did not wish to mention this at present, since even as it was
some of his colleagues were jealous of him. {23} This was an
enigmatical and indirect allusion to Oropus. These utterances naturally
raised him high in your estimation; he seemed to be an admirable
speaker and a marvellous man; and he stepped down with a very lofty
air. Then I rose and denied all knowledge of these things, and at the
same time attempted to repeat some part of my report to the Council.
But they now took their stand by me, one on this side, one on that--the
defendant and Philocrates; they shouted, they interrupted me, and
finally they jeered, while you laughed. {24} You would not hear, and
you did not wish to believe anything but what Aeschines had reported.
Heaven knows, your feelings were natural enough; for who, that expected
all these marvellous benefits, would have tolerated a speaker who said
that the expectation would not be realized, or denounced the
proceedings of those who made the promise? All else, of course, was of
secondary importance at the time, in comparison with the expectations
and the hopes placed before you; any contradiction appeared to be
nothing but sheer obstruction and malignity, while the proceedings
described seemed to be of incredible importance and advantage to the
city.

{25} Now with what object have I recalled these occurrences to you
before everything else, and described these speeches of his? My first
and chief object, men of Athens, is that none of you, when he hears me
speak of any of the things that were done and is struck by their
unparalleled atrocity, may ask in surprise why I did not tell you at
once and inform you of the facts; {26} but may remember the promises
which these men made at each critical moment, and by which they
entirely prevented every one else from obtaining a hearing; and that
splendid pronouncement by Aeschines; and that you may realize that in
addition to all his other crimes, you have suffered this further wrong
at his hands--that you were prevented from learning the truth
instantly, when you ought to have learned it, because you were deluded
by hopes, deceits and promises. {27} That is my first and, as I have
said, my chief object in recalling all these occurrences. But there is
a second which is of no less importance than the first, and what is
this? It is that you may remember the policy which he adopted in his
public life, when he was still uncorrupted--his guarded and mistrustful
attitude towards Philip; and may consider the sudden growth of
confidence and friendship which followed; {28} and then, if all that he
announced to you has been realized, if the results achieved are
satisfactory, you may believe that all has been done out of an honest
interest in the welfare of Athens; but if, on the other hand, the issue
has been exactly the opposite of that which he predicted: if his policy
has involved the city in great disgrace and in grave perils, you may
then be sure that his conversion was due to his own base covetousness
and to his having sold the truth for money.

{29} And now, since I have been led on to this subject, I desire to
describe to you, before everything else, the way in which they took the
Phocian question entirely out of your hands. And let none of you,
gentlemen of the jury, when he looks at the magnitude of the
transactions, imagine that the crimes with which the defendant is
charged are on a grander scale than one of his reputation could
compass. You have rather to observe that any one whom you would have
placed in such a position as this--a position in which, as each
critical moment arrived, the decision would be in his hands--could have
brought about disasters equal to those for which Aeschines is
responsible, if, like Aeschines, he had wished to sell his services,
and to cheat and deceive you. {30} For however contemptible[n] may be
the men whom you frequently employ in the public service, it does not
follow that the part which the world expects this city to play is a
contemptible one. Far from it! And further, though it was Philip, of
course, who destroyed the Phocian people, it was Aeschines and his
party who seconded Philip's efforts. And so what you have to observe
and consider is whether, so far as the preservation of the Phocians
came within the scope of their mission, these men deliberately
destroyed and ruined that whole cause. You have not to suppose that
Aeschines ruined the Phocians by himself. How could he have done so?

{31} (_To the clerk._) Now give me the draft-resolution which the
Council passed in view of my report, and the deposition of the clerk
who wrote it. (_To the jury._) For I would have you know that I am not
repudiating to-day transactions about which I held my peace at the
time, but that I denounced them at once, with full prevision of what
must follow; and that the Council, which was not prevented from hearing
the truth from me, neither voted thanks to the ambassadors, nor thought
fit to invite them to the Town Hall.[n] From the foundation of the city
to this day, no body of ambassadors is recorded to have been treated
so; nor even Timagoras,[n] whom the people condemned to death. {32} But
these men have been so treated. (_To the clerk._) First read them the
deposition, and then the resolution.

[_The deposition and resolution are read._]

Here is no expression of thanks, no invitation of the ambassadors to
the Town Hall by the Council. If Aeschines asserts that there is any,
let him point it out and produce it, and I give way to him. But there
is none. Now on the assumption that we all fulfilled our mission in the
same way, the Council had good reason not to thank any of us, for the
transactions of all alike were in that case atrocious. But if some of
us acted uprightly, while others did the reverse, it must, it seems,
have been owing to the knavery of their colleagues that the virtuous
were forced to take their share of this dishonour. {33} How then can
you all ascertain without any difficulty who is the rogue? Recall to
your minds who it is that has denounced the transaction from the
outset. For it is plain that it must have been the guilty person who
was well content to be silent, to stave off the day of reckoning for
the moment, and to take care for the future not to present himself to
give an account of his actions; while it must have been he whose
conscience was clear to whom there occurred the thought of the danger,
lest through keeping silence he might be regarded as a partner in such
atrocious villany. Now it is I that have denounced these men from the
outset, while none of them has accused me. {34} Such then was the
resolution of the Council. The meeting of the Assembly took place when
Philip was already at Thermopylae: for this was the first of all their
crimes, that they placed Philip in command of the situation, so that,
when you ought first to have heard the facts, then to have deliberated,
and afterwards to have taken such measures as you had resolved upon,
you in fact heard nothing until he was on the spot, and it was no
longer easy to say what steps you ought to take. {35} In addition to
this, no one read the resolution of the Council to the people, and the
people never heard it; but Aeschines rose and delivered the harangue
which I just now described to you, recounting the numerous and
important benefits which he said he had, before his return, persuaded
Philip to grant, and on account of which the Thebans had set a price
upon his head. In consequence of this, appalled though you were at
first at the proximity of Philip, and angry with these men for not
having warned you of it, you became as mild as possible, having now
formed the expectation that all your wishes would be realized; and you
would not hear a word from me or from any one else. {36} After this was
read the letter from Philip, which Aeschines had written[n] when we had
left him behind, a letter which was nothing less than a direct and
express defence in writing of the misconduct of the ambassadors. For in
it is stated that Philip himself prevented them, when they were anxious
to go to the several cities and receive the oaths, and that he retained
them in order that they might help him to effect a reconciliation
between the peoples of Halus and Pharsalus. He takes upon his own
shoulders the whole of their misconduct, and makes it his own. {37} But
as to the Phocians and Thespiae, and the promises contained in
Aeschines' report to you--why, there is not the slightest mention of
them! And it was no mere accident that the proceedings took this form.
For the failure of the ambassadors to carry out or give effect to any
of the instructions imposed upon them by your resolution--the failure
for which you were bound to punish them--Philip makes himself
responsible in their stead, and says that the fault was his; for you
were not likely, of course, to be able to punish _him_. {38} But the
points in regard to which Philip wished to deceive you and to steal a
march upon the city were made the subject of the defendant's report, in
order that you might be able to find no ground of accusation or
reproach against Philip, since these points were not mentioned either
in his letter or in any other part of the communications received from
him. But (_to the clerk_) read the jury the actual letter--written by
Aeschines, sent by Philip; and (_to the jury_) do you observe that it
is such as I have described. (_To the clerk._) Read on.

[_The letter is read._]

{39} You hear the letter, men of Athens; you hear how noble and
generous it is. But about the Phocians or the Thebans or the other
subjects of the defendant's report--not a syllable. Indeed, in this
letter there is not an honest word, as you will very shortly see for
yourselves. He says that he retained the ambassadors to help him
reconcile the people of Halus: and such is the reconciliation that they
have obtained, that they are exiles from their country, and their city
is laid waste. And as to the prisoners, though he professed to be
wondering what he could do to gratify you, he says that the idea of
procuring their release had not occurred to any one. {40} But evidence
has, as you know, been laid before you many times in the Assembly, to
the effect that I myself went to ransom them, taking a talent[n] for
the purpose; and it shall now be laid before you once more. It follows,
therefore, that it was to deprive me of my laudable ambition[n] that
Aeschines persuaded Philip to insert this statement. But the strongest
point of all is this. In his former letter--the letter which we brought
back--he wrote, 'I should have mentioned expressly the great benefits
that I propose to confer upon you, if I felt sure that you would grant
me the alliance as well.' And yet when the alliance has been granted,
he says that he does not know what he can do to gratify you. He does
not even know what he had himself promised! Why, he must obviously have
known that, unless he was trying to cheat you! To prove that he did
write thus and in these terms, (_to the clerk_) take his former letter,
and read the very passage, beginning at this point. Read on.

[_An extract from the letter is read._]

{41} Thus, before he obtained the Peace, he undertook to set down in
writing the great benefits he would confer on the city, in the event of
an alliance also being granted him. But as soon as he had obtained both
his wishes, he says that he does not know what he can do to gratify
you, but that if you will inform him, he will do anything that will not
involve any disgrace or stigma upon himself. Such are the excuses in
which he takes refuge, to secure his retreat, in case you should
actually make any suggestion or should be induced to ask any favour.

{42} It would have been possible to expose this whole proceeding at the
time--and a great deal more--without delay; to inform you of the facts,
and to prevent you from sacrificing your cause, had not the thought of
Thespiae and Plataeae, and the idea that the Thebans were on the very
point of paying the penalty, robbed you of the truth. While, however,
there was good reason for mentioning these prospects, if the city was
to hear of them and then be cheated, it would have been better, if
their realization was actually intended, that nothing should have been
said about them. For if matters had already reached a stage at which
the Thebans would be no better off, even if they perceived the design
against them, why was the design not fulfilled? But if its fulfilment
was prevented because they perceived it in time, who was it that
betrayed the secret? {43} Must it not have been Aeschines? Its
fulfilment, however, was not in fact intended, nor did the defendant
either desire or expect it; so that he may be relieved of the charge of
betraying the secret. What was intended was that you should be
hoodwinked by these statements, and should refuse to hear the truth
from me; that you should not stir from home, and that such a decree
should carry the day as would involve the destruction of the Phocians.
Hence this prodigality in promises, and their proclamation in his
speech to the people.

{44} When I heard Aeschines making all these magnificent promises, I
knew perfectly well that he was lying; and I will tell you how I knew.
I knew it first, because when Philip was about to take the oath in
ratification of the Peace, the Phocians were openly excluded from it.
This was a point which it would have been natural to pass over in
silence, if the Phocians were really to be saved. And secondly, I knew
it because the promises were not made by Philip's ambassadors or in
Philip's letter, but by the defendant. {45} Accordingly, drawing my
conclusions from these facts, I rose and came forward and attempted to
contradict him; but as you were not willing to hear me, I held my
peace, with no more than these words of solemn protest, which I entreat
you, in Heaven's name, to remember. 'I have no knowledge of these
promises,' I said, 'and no share in making them; and,' I added, 'I do
not believe they will be fulfilled.' This last expression roused your
temper, and I proceeded, 'Take care, men of Athens, that if any of
these things comes to pass, you thank these gentlemen for it, and give
your honours and crowns to them, and not to me. If, however, anything
of an opposite character occurs, you must equally vent your anger on
them: I decline all responsibility.' {46} 'No, no!' interrupted
Aeschines, 'do not decline responsibility now! Take care rather that
you do not claim credit, when the time comes.' 'Indeed, it would be an
injustice if I did so,' I replied. Then Philocrates arose with a most
insolent air, and said, 'It is no wonder, men of Athens, that I and
Demosthenes should disagree; for he drinks water, I drink wine.' And
you laughed.

{47} Now consider the decree which Philocrates proposed and handed
in.[n] An excellent resolution it sounds, as you hear it now. But when
you take into account the occasion on which it was proposed, and the
promises which Aeschines was then making, you will see that their
action amounts to nothing less than a surrender of the Phocians to
Philip and the Thebans, and that, practically, with their hands tied
behind their backs. (_To the clerk._) Read the decree.

[_The decree is read._]

{48} There, men of Athens, is the decree, overflowing with expressions
of gratitude and auspicious language. 'The Peace,' it says, 'which is
granted to Philip shall be granted on the same terms to his
descendants, and also the alliance.' Again, we are 'to thank Philip for
his promised acts of justice'. Yet Philip made no promises: so far was
he from making promises that he said he did not know what he could do
to gratify you. {49} It was Aeschines who spoke in his name, and made
the promises. Then Philocrates took advantage of the enthusiasm which
Aeschines' words aroused in you, to insert in the decree the clause,
'and unless the Phocians act as they are bound, and surrender the
temple to the Amphictyons, the Athenian people will render their
assistance against those who still stand in the way of such surrender.'
{50} Thus, men of Athens, at a time when you were still at home and had
not taken the field, when the Spartans had foreseen the deception and
retired, and when none of the Amphictyons were on the spot but the
Thessalians and Thebans, he proposes in the most innocent-sounding
language in the world that they shall deliver up the temple to these.
For he proposes that they shall deliver it up to the Amphictyons. But
what Amphictyons? for there were none there but the Thessalians and
Thebans. He does not propose that the Amphictyons should be convoked,
or that they should wait until the Amphictyons met or that Proxenus
should render assistance in Phocis, or that the Athenians should take
the field, or anything of the sort. {51} Philip did indeed actually
