
"Your brother is one."

"True, true," interrupted Frances, blushing to the eyes; "but he leaves
his room, and thinks his wound lightly purchased by the pleasure of
being with his friends. If," she added, with a tremulous lip, "this
dreadful suspicion that is affixed to his visit were removed, I could
consider his wound of little moment."

"You now have the fruits of rebellion brought home to you; a brother
wounded and a prisoner, and perhaps a victim; your father distressed,
his privacy interrupted, and not improbably his estates torn from him,
on account of his loyalty to his king."

Frances continued her walk in silence. While facing the northern
entrance to the vale, her eyes were uniformly fastened on the point
where the road was suddenly lost by the intervention of a hill; and at
each turn, as she lost sight of the spot, she lingered until an
impatient movement of her sister quickened her pace to an even motion
with that of her own. At length, a single horse chaise was seen making
its way carefully among the stones which lay scattered over the country
road that wound through the valley, and approached the cottage. The
color of Frances changed as the vehicle gradually drew nearer; and when
she was enabled to see a female form in it by the side of a black in
livery, her limbs shook with an agitation that compelled her to lean on
Sarah for support. In a few minutes the travelers approached the gate.
It was thrown open by a dragoon who followed the carriage, and who had
been the messenger dispatched by Dunwoodie to the father of Captain
Singleton. Miss Peyton advanced to receive their guest, and the sisters
united in giving her the kindest welcome; still Frances could with
difficulty withdraw her truant eyes from the countenance of their
visitor. She was young, and of a light and fragile form, but of
exquisite proportions. Her eyes were large, full, black, piercing, and
at times a little wild. Her hair was luxuriant, and as it was without
the powder it was then the fashion to wear, it fell in raven blackness.
A few of its locks had fallen on her cheek, giving its chilling
whiteness by the contrast a more deadly character. Dr. Sitgreaves
supported her from the chaise; and when she gained the floor of the
piazza, she turned an expressive look on the face of the practitioner.

"Your brother is out of danger and wishes to see you, Miss Singleton,"
said the surgeon.

The lady burst into a flood of tears. Frances had stood contemplating
the action and face of Isabella with a kind of uneasy admiration, but
she now sprang to her side with the ardor of a sister, and kindly
drawing her arm within her own, led the way to a retired room. The
movement was so ingenuous, so considerate, and so delicate, that even
Miss Peyton withheld her interference, following the youthful pair with
only her eyes and a smile of complacency. The feeling was communicated
to all the spectators, and they dispersed in pursuit of their usual
avocations. Isabella yielded to the gentle influence of Frances without
resistance; and, having gained the room where the latter conducted her,
wept in silence on the shoulder of the observant and soothing girl,
until Frances thought her tears exceeded the emotion natural to the
occasion. The sobs of Miss Singleton for a time were violent and
uncontrollable, until, with an evident exertion, she yielded to a kind
observation of her companion, and succeeded in suppressing her tears.
Raising her face to the eyes of Frances, she rose, while a smile of
beautiful radiance passed over her features; and making a hasty apology
for the excess of her emotion, she desired to be conducted to the room
of the invalid.

The meeting between the brother and sister was warm, but, by an effort
on the part of the lady, more composed than her previous agitation had
given reason to expect. Isabella found her brother looking better, and
in less danger than her sensitive imagination had led her to suppose.
Her spirits rose in proportion; from despondency, she passed to
something like gayety; her beautiful eyes sparkled with renovated
brilliancy; and her face was lighted with smiles so fascinating, that
Frances, who, in compliance with her earnest entreaties, had accompanied
her to the sick chamber, sat gazing on a countenance that possessed so
wonderful variability, impelled by a charm that was beyond her control.
The youth had thrown an earnest look at Frances, as soon as his sister
raised herself from his arms, and perhaps it was the first glance at the
lovely lineaments of our heroine, when the gazer turned his eyes from
the view in disappointment. He seemed bewildered, rubbed his forehead
like a man awaking from a dream, and mused.

"Where is Dunwoodie, Isabella?" he said. "The excellent fellow is never
weary of kind actions. After a day of such service as that of yesterday,
he has spent the night in bringing me a nurse, whose presence alone is
able to raise me from my couch."

The expression of the lady's countenance changed; her eye roved around
the apartment with a character of wildness in it that repelled the
anxious Frances, who studied her movements with unabated interest.

"Dunwoodie! Is he then not here? I thought to have met him by the side
of my brother's bed."

"He has duties that require his presence elsewhere; the English are said
to be out by the way of the Hudson, and they give us light troops but
little rest. Surely nothing else could have kept him so long from a
wounded friend. But, Isabella, the meeting has been too much for you;
you tremble."

Isabella made no reply; she stretched her hand towards the table which
held the nourishment of the captain, and the attentive Frances
comprehended her wishes in a moment. A glass of water in some measure
revived the sister, who was enabled to say,--

"Doubtless it is his duty. 'Twas said above, a royal party was moving on
the river; though I passed the troops but two miles from this spot." The
latter part of the sentence was hardly audible, and it was spoken more
in the manner of a soliloquy, than as if for the ears of her companions.

"On the march, Isabella?" eagerly inquired her brother.

"No, dismounted, and seemingly at rest," was the reply.

The wondering dragoon turned his gaze on the countenance of his sister,
who sat with her eye bent on the carpet in unconscious absence, but
found no explanation. His look was changed to the face of Frances, who,
startled by the earnestness of his expression, arose, and hastily
inquired if he would have any assistance.

"If you can pardon the rudeness," said the wounded officer, making a
feeble effort to raise his body, "I would request to have Captain
Lawton's company for a moment."

Frances hastened instantly to communicate his wish to that gentleman,
and impelled by an interest she could not control, she returned again to
her seat by the side of Miss Singleton.

"Lawton," said the youth, impatiently, as the trooper entered, "hear you
from the major?"

The eye of the sister was now bent on the face of the trooper, who made
his salutations to the lady with ease, blended with the frankness of
a soldier.

"His man has been here twice," he said, "to inquire how we fared in the
lazaretto."

"And why not himself?"

"That is a question the major can answer best; but you know the redcoats
are abroad, and Dunwoodie commands in the county; these English must be
looked to."

"True," said Singleton, slowly, as if struck with the other's reasons.
"But how is it that you are idle, when there is work to do?"

"My sword arm is not in the best condition, and Roanoke has but a
shambling gait this morning; besides, there is another reason I could
mention, if it were not that Miss Wharton would never forgive me."

"Speak, I beg, without dread of my displeasure," said Frances, returning
the good-humored smile of the trooper, with the archness natural to her
own sweet face.

"The odors of your kitchen, then," cried Lawton bluntly, "forbid my
quitting the domains, until I qualify myself to speak with more
certainty concerning the fatness of the land."

"Oh! Aunt Jeanette is exerting herself to do credit to my father's
hospitality," said the laughing girl, "and I am a truant from her
labors, as I shall be a stranger to her favor, unless I proffer my
assistance."

Frances withdrew to seek her aunt, musing deeply on the character and
extreme sensibility of the new acquaintance chance had brought to
the cottage.

The wounded officer followed her with his eyes, as she moved, with
infantile grace, through the door of his apartment, and as she vanished
from his view, he observed,--

"Such an aunt and niece are seldom to be met with, Jack; this seems a
fairy, but the aunt is angelic."

"You are doing well, I see; your enthusiasm for the sex holds its own."

"I should be ungrateful as well as insensible, did I not bear testimony
to the loveliness of Miss Peyton."

"A good motherly lady, but as to love, that is a matter of taste. A few
years younger, with deference to her prudence and experience, would
accord better with my fancy."

"She must be under twenty," said the other, quickly.

"It depends on the way you count. If you begin at the heel of life,
well; but if you reckon downward, as is most common, I think she is
nearer forty."

"You have mistaken an elder sister for the aunt," said Isabella, laying
her fair hand on the mouth of the invalid. "You must be silent! Your
feelings are beginning to affect your frame."

The entrance of Dr. Sitgreaves, who, in some alarm, noticed the increase
of feverish symptoms in his patient, enforced this mandate; and the
trooper withdrew to pay a visit of condolence to Roanoke, who had been
an equal sufferer with himself in their last night's somersault. To his
great joy, his man pronounced the steed to be equally convalescent with
the master; and Lawton found that by dint of rubbing the animal's limbs
several hours without ceasing, he was enabled to place his feet in what
he called systematic motion. Orders were accordingly given to be in
readiness to rejoin the troop at the Four Corners, as soon as his master
had shared in the bounty of the approaching banquet.

In the meantime, Henry Wharton entered the apartment of Wellmere, and by
his sympathy succeeded in restoring the colonel to his own good graces.
The latter was consequently enabled to rise, and prepared to meet a
rival of whom he had spoken so lightly, and, as the result had proved,
with so little reason. Wharton knew that their misfortune, as they both
termed their defeat, was owing to the other's rashness; but he forbore
to speak of anything except the unfortunate accident which had deprived
the English of their leader, and to which he good-naturedly ascribed
their subsequent discomfiture.

"In short, Wharton," said the colonel, putting one leg out of bed, "it
may be called a combination of untoward events; your own ungovernable
horse prevented my orders from being carried to the major, in season to
flank the rebels."

"Very true," replied the captain, kicking a slipper towards the bed.
"Had we succeeded in getting a few good fires upon them in flank, we
should have sent these brave Virginians to the right about."

"Aye, and that in double-quick time," cried the colonel, making the
other leg follow its companion. "Then it was necessary to rout the
guides, you know, and the movement gave them the best possible
opportunity to charge."

"Yes," said the other, sending the second slipper after the first, "and
this Major Dunwoodie never overlooks an advantage."

"I think if we had the thing to do over again," continued the colonel,
raising himself on his feet, "we might alter the case very materially,
though the chief thing the rebels have now to boast of is my capture;
they were repulsed, you saw, in their attempt to drive us from
the wood."

"At least they would have been, had they made an attack," said the
captain, throwing the rest of his clothes within reach of the colonel.

"Why, that is the same thing," returned Wellmere, beginning to dress
himself. "To assume such an attitude as to intimidate your enemy, is the
chief art of war."

"Doubtless, then, you may remember in one of their charges they were
completely routed."

"True--true," cried the colonel, with animation. "Had I been there to
have improved that advantage, we might have turned the table on the
Yankees"; saying which he displayed still greater animation in
completing his toilet; and he was soon prepared to make his appearance,
fully restored to his own good opinion, and fairly persuaded that his
capture was owing to casualties absolutely beyond the control of man.

The knowledge that Colonel Wellmere was to be a guest at the table in no
degree diminished the preparations which were already making for the
banquet; and Sarah, after receiving the compliments of the gentleman,
and making many kind inquiries after the state of his wounds, proceeded
in person to lend her counsel and taste to one of those labored
entertainments, which, at that day, were so frequent in country life,
and which are not entirely banished from our domestic economy at the
present moment.




CHAPTER XIII


     I will stand to and feed,
     Although my last.

                          --Tempest.

The savor of preparation which had been noticed by Captain Lawton began
to increase within the walls of the cottage; certain sweet-smelling
odors, that arose from the subterranean territories of Caesar, gave to
the trooper the most pleasing assurances that his olfactory nerves,
which on such occasions were as acute as his eyes on others, had
faithfully performed their duty; and for the benefit of enjoying the
passing sweets as they arose, the dragoon so placed himself at a window
of the building, that not a vapor charged with the spices of the East
could exhale on its passage to the clouds, without first giving its
incense to his nose. Lawton, however, by no means indulged himself in
this comfortable arrangement, without first making such preparations to
do meet honor to the feast, as his scanty wardrobe would allow. The
uniform of his corps was always a passport to the best tables, and this,
though somewhat tarnished by faithful service and unceremonious usage,
was properly brushed and decked out for the occasion. His head, which
nature had ornamented with the blackness of a crow, now shone with the
whiteness of snow; and his bony hand, that so well became the saber,
peered from beneath a ruffle with something like maiden coyness. The
improvements of the dragoon went no further, excepting that his boots
shone with more than holiday splendor, and his spurs glittered in the
rays of the sun, as became the pure ore of which they were composed.

Caesar moved through the apartments with a face charged with an
importance exceeding even that which had accompanied him in his
melancholy task of the morning. The black had early returned from the
errand on which he had been dispatched by the peddler, and, obedient to
the commands of his mistress, promptly appeared to give his services
where his allegiance was due; so serious, indeed, was his duty now
becoming, that it was only at odd moments he was enabled to impart to
his sable brother, who had been sent in attendance on Miss Singleton to
the Locusts, any portion of the wonderful incidents of the momentous
night he had so lately passed. By ingeniously using, however, such
occasions as accidentally offered, Caesar communicated so many of the
heads of his tale, as served to open the eyes of his visitor to their
fullest width. The gusto for the marvelous was innate in these sable
worthies; and Miss Peyton found it necessary to interpose her authority,
in order to postpone the residue of the history to a more befitting
opportunity.

"Ah! Miss Jinnett," said Caesar, shaking his head, and looking all that
he expressed, "'twas awful to see Johnny Birch walk on a feet when he
lie dead!"

This concluded the conversation; though the black promised himself the
satisfaction, and did not fail to enjoy it, of having many a gossip on
the subject at a future period.

The ghost thus happily laid, the department of Miss Peyton flourished;
and by the time the afternoon's sun had traveled a two hours' journey
from the meridian, the formal procession from the kitchen to the parlor
commenced, under the auspices of Caesar, who led the van, supporting a
turkey on the palms of his withered hands, with the dexterity of a
balance master.

Next followed the servant of Captain Lawton, bearing, as he marched
stiffly, and walking wide, as if allowing room for his steed, a ham of
true Virginian flavor; a present from the spinster's brother in Accomac.
The supporter of this savory dish kept his eye on his trust with
military precision; and by the time he reached his destination, it might
be difficult to say which contained the most juice, his own mouth or the
Accomac bacon.

Third in the line was to be seen the valet of Colonel Wellmere, who
carried in either hand chickens fricasseed and oyster patties.

After him marched the attendant of Dr. Sitgreaves, who had instinctively
seized an enormous tureen, as most resembling matters he understood, and
followed on in place, until the steams of the soup so completely
bedimmed the spectacles he wore, as a badge of office, that, on arriving
at the scene of action, he was compelled to deposit his freight on the
floor, until, by removing the glasses, he could see his way through the
piles of reserved china and plate warmers.

Next followed another trooper, whose duty it was to attend on Captain
Singleton; and, as if apportioning his appetite to the feeble state of
his master, he had contented himself with conveying a pair of ducks,
roasted, until their tempting fragrance began to make him repent his
having so lately demolished a breakfast that had been provided for his
master's sister, with another prepared for himself.

The white boy, who belonged to the house, brought up the rear, groaning
under a load of sundry dishes of vegetables, that the cook, by way of
climax, had unwittingly heaped on him.

But this was far from all of the preparations for that day's feast;
Caesar had no sooner deposited his bird, which, but the week before, had
been flying amongst the highlands of Dutchess, little dreaming of so
soon heading such a goodly assemblage, than he turned mechanically on
his heel, and took up his line of march again for the kitchen. In this
evolution the black was imitated by his companions in succession, and
another procession to the parlor followed in the same order. By this
admirable arrangement, whole flocks of pigeons, certain bevies of
quails, shoals of flatfish, bass, and sundry woodcock, found their way
into the presence of the company.

A third attack brought suitable quantities of potatoes, onions, beets,
coldslaw, rice, and all the other minutiae of a goodly dinner.

The board now fairly groaned with American profusion, and Caesar,
glancing his eye over the show with a most approving conscience, after
readjusting every dish that had not been placed on the table with his
own hands, proceeded to acquaint the mistress of the revels that his
task was happily accomplished.

Some half hour before the culinary array just recorded took place, all
the ladies disappeared, much in the same unaccountable manner that
swallows flee the approach of winter. But the springtime of their return
had arrived, and the whole party were collected in an apartment that, in
consequence of its containing no side table, and being furnished with a
chintz coverlet settee, was termed a withdrawing-room.

The kind-hearted spinster had deemed the occasion worthy, not only of
extraordinary preparations in the culinary department, but had seen
proper to deck her own person in garments suited to the guests whom it
was now her happiness to entertain.

On her head Miss Peyton wore a cap of exquisite lawn, which was
ornamented in front with a broad border of lace, that spread from the
face in such a manner as to admit of a display of artificial flowers,
clustered in a group on the summit of her fine forehead.

The color of her hair was lost in the profusion of powder with which it
was covered; but a slight curling of the extremities in some degree
relieved the formality of its arrangement, and gave a look of feminine
softness to the features.

Her dress was a rich, heavy silk, of violet color, cut low around the
bust, with a stomacher of the same material, that fitted close to the
figure, and exhibited the form, from the shoulders to the waist in its
true proportions. Below, the dress was full, and sufficiently showed
that parsimony in attire was not a foible of the day. A small loop
displayed the beauty of the fabric to advantage, and aided in giving
majesty to the figure.

The tall stature of the lady was heightened by shoes of the same
material with the dress, whose heels added more than an inch to the
liberality of nature.

The sleeves were short, and close to the limb, until they fell off at
the elbows in large ruffles, that hung in rich profusion from the arm
when extended; and duplicates and triplicates of lawn, trimmed with
Dresden lace, lent their aid in giving delicacy to a hand and arm that
yet retained their whiteness and symmetry. A treble row of large pearls
closely encircled her throat; and a handkerchief of lace partially
concealed that part of the person that the silk had left exposed, but
which the experience of forty years had warned Miss Peyton should now
be veiled.

Thus attired, and standing erect with the lofty grace that distinguished
the manners of that day, the maiden would have looked into nothingness a
bevy of modern belles.

The taste of Sarah had kept even pace with the decorations of her aunt;
and a dress, differing in no respect from the one just described, but
in material and tints, exhibited her imposing form to equal advantage.
The satin of her robe was of a pale bluish color. Twenty years did not,
however, require the screen that was prudent in forty, and nothing but
an envious border of exquisite lace hid, in some measure, what the satin
left exposed to view. The upper part of the bust, and the fine fall of
the shoulders, were blazing in all their native beauty, and, like the
aunt, the throat was ornamented by a treble row of pearls, to correspond
with which were rings of the same quality in the ears. The head was
without a cap, and the hair drawn up from the countenance so as to give
to the eye all the loveliness of a forehead as polished as marble and as
white as snow. A few straggling curls fell gracefully on the neck, and a
bouquet of artificial flowers was also placed, like a coronet, over
her brow.

Miss Singleton had resigned her brother to the advice of Dr. Sitgreaves,
who had succeeded in getting his patient into a deep sleep after
quieting certain feverish symptoms that followed the agitation of the
interview. The sister was persuaded, by the observant mistress of the
mansion, to make one of the party, and she sat by the side of Sarah,
differing but little in appearance from that lady, except in refusing
the use of powder on her raven locks, and that her unusually high
forehead and large, brilliant eyes gave an expression of thoughtfulness
to her features, that was possibly heightened by the paleness of
her cheek.

Last and least, but not the most unlovely, in this display of female
charms, was the youngest daughter of Mr. Wharton. Frances, we have
already mentioned, left the city before she had attained to the age of
fashionable womanhood. A few adventurous spirits were already beginning
to make inroads in those customs which had so long invaded the comforts
of the fair sex; and the youthful girl had ventured to trust her beauty
to the height which nature had bestowed. This was but little, but that
little was a masterpiece. Frances several times had determined, in the
course of the morning, to bestow more than usual pains in the decoration
of her person. Each time in succession, as she formed this resolution,
she spent a few minutes in looking earnestly towards the north, and then
she as invariably changed it.

At the appointed hour, our heroine appeared in the drawing-room, clothed
in a robe of pale blue silk, of a cut and fashion much like that worn by
her sister. Her hair was left to the wild curls of nature, its
exuberance being confined to the crown of her head by a long, low comb,
made of light tortoise shell; a color barely distinguishable in the
golden hue of her tresses. Her dress was without a plait or a wrinkle,
and fitted the form with an exactitude that might lead one to imagine
the arch girl more than suspected the beauties it displayed. A tucker of
rich Dresden lace softened the contour of the figure. Her head was
without ornament; but around her throat was a necklace of gold clasped
in front with a rich cornelian.

Once, and once only, as they moved towards the repast, did Lawton see a
foot thrust itself from beneath the folds of her robe, and exhibit its
little beauties encased in a slipper of blue silk, clasped close to the
shape by a buckle of brilliants. The trooper caught himself sighing as
he thought, though it was good for nothing in the stirrup, how
enchantingly it would grace a minuet.

As the black appeared on the threshold of the room, making a low
reverence, which has been interpreted for some centuries into "dinner
waits," Mr. Wharton, clad in a dress of drab, bedecked with enormous
buttons, advanced formally to Miss Singleton, and bending his powdered
head nearly to the level of the hand he extended, received hers
in return.

Dr. Sitgreaves offered the same homage to Miss Peyton, and met with
equal favor; the lady first pausing to draw on her gloves.

Colonel Wellmere was honored with a smile from Sarah, while performing a
similar duty; and Frances gave the ends of her taper fingers to Captain
Lawton with maiden bashfulness.

Much time, and some trouble were expended before the whole party were,
to the great joy of Caesar, comfortably arranged around the table, with
proper attention to all points of etiquette and precedence. The black
well knew the viands were not improving; and though abundantly able to
comprehend the disadvantage of eating a cold dinner, it greatly exceeded
his powers of philosophy to weigh all the latent consequences to society
which depend on social order.

For the first ten minutes all but the captain of dragoons found
themselves in a situation much to their liking. Even Lawton would have
been perfectly happy, had not excess of civility on the part of his host
and Miss Jeanette Peyton kept him from the more agreeable occupation of
tasting dishes he did want, in order to decline those he did not. At
length, however, the repast was fairly commenced, and a devoted
application to the viands was more eloquent than a thousand words in
favor of Dinah's skill.

Next came drinking with the ladies; but as the wine was excellent, and
the glasses ample, the trooper bore this interruption with consummate
good nature. Nay, so fearful was he of giving offense, and of omitting
any of the nicer points of punctilio, that having commenced this
courtesy with the lady who sat next him, he persevered until not one of
his fair companions could, with justice, reproach him with partiality in
this particular.

Long abstemiousness from anything like generous wine might plead the
excuse of Captain Lawton, especially when exposed to so strong a
temptation as that now before him. Mr. Wharton had been one of a set of
politicians in New York, whose principal exploits before the war had
been to assemble, and pass sage opinions on the signs of the times,
under the inspiration of certain liquor made from a grape that grew on
the south side of the island of Madeira, and which found its way into
the colonies of North America through the medium of the West Indies,
sojourning awhile in the Western Archipelago, by way of proving the
virtues of the climate. A large supply of this cordial had been drawn
from his storehouse in the city, and some of it now sparkled in a bottle
before the captain, blushing in the rays of the sun, which were passing
obliquely through it, like amber.

Though the meat and vegetables had made their entrance with perfect
order and propriety, their exeunt was effected much in the manner of a
retreat of militia. The point was to clear the board something after the
fabled practice of the harpies, and by dint of scrambling, tossing,
breaking, and spilling, the remnants of the overflowing repast
disappeared. And now another series of processions commenced, by virtue
of which a goodly display of pastry, with its usual accompaniments,
garnished the table.

Mr. Wharton poured out a glass of wine for the lady who sat on his right
hand, and, pushing the bottle to a guest, said with a low bow,--

"We are to be honored with a toast from Miss Singleton."

Although there was nothing more in this movement than occurred every day
on such occasions, yet the lady trembled, colored, and grew pale again,
seemingly endeavoring to rally her thoughts, until, by her agitation,
she had excited the interest of the whole party; when by an effort, and
in a manner as if she had striven in vain to think of another, Isabella
said, faintly,--

"Major Dunwoodie."

The health was drunk cheerfully by all but Colonel Wellmere, who wet his
lips, and drew figures on the table with some of the liquor he
had spilled.

At length Colonel Wellmere broke silence by saying aloud to Captain
Lawton,--

"I suppose, sir, this Mr. Dunwoodie will receive promotion in the rebel
army, for the advantage my misfortune gave him over my command."

