The tide ran strong, and the steady oars carried them swiftly down.
London passed; then solitary hamlets here and there; then dun fields
running to the river's edge like thirsty deer.

In Deptford Reach some lords who were coming down by water passed them,
racing with a little Dutch boat from Deptford to the turn. Their boats
had holly-bushes at their prows and holiday garlands along their sides.
They were all shouting gaily, and the stream was bright with their
scarlet cloaks, Lincoln-green jerkins, and gold embroidery. But they
were very badly beaten, at which they laughed, and threw the Dutchmen a
handful of silver pennies. Thereupon the Dutchmen stood up in their boat
and bowed like jointed ninepins; and the lords, not to be outdone, stood
up likewise in their boats and bowed very low in return, with their
hands upon their breasts. Then everybody on the river laughed, and the
boys gave three cheers for the merry lords and three more for the sturdy
Dutchmen. The Dutchmen shouted back, "Goot Yule!" and bowed and bowed
until their boat turned round and went stern foremost down the stream,
so that they were bowing to the opposite bank, where no one was at all.
At this the rest all laughed again till their sides ached, and cheered
them twice as much as they had before.

And while they were cheering and waving their caps, the boatmen rested
upon their oars and let the boats swing with the tide, which thereabout
set strong against the shore, and a trumpeter in the Earl of Arundel's
barge stood up and blew upon a long horn bound with a banner of blue
and gold.

Instantly he had blown, another trumpet answered from the south, and
when Nick turned, the shore was gay with men in brilliant livery. Beyond
was a wood of chestnut-trees as blue and leafless as a grove of spears;
and in the plain between the river and the wood stood a great palace of
gray stone, with turrets, pinnacles, and battlemented walls, over the
topmost tower of which a broad flag, blazoned with golden lions and
silver lilies square for square, whipped the winter wind. Amid a group
of towers large and small a lofty stack poured out a plume of sea-coal
smoke against the milky sky, and on the countless windows in the wall
the sunlight flashed with dazzling radiance.

There were people on the battlements, and at the port between two towers
where the Queen went in and out the press was so thick that men's heads
looked like the cobbles in the street.

The shore was stayed with piling and with timbers like a wharf, so that
a hundred boats might lie there cheek by jowl and scarcely rub their
paint. The lords made way, and the children players came ashore through
an aisle of uplifted oars. They were met by the yeomen of the guard,
tall, brawny fellows clad in red, with golden roses on their breasts and
backs, and with them marched up to the postern two and two, Master Gyles
the last of all, as haughty as a Spanish don come courting fair
Queen Bess.

A smoking dinner was waiting them, of whitebait with red pepper, and a
yellow juice so sour that Nick's mouth drew up in a knot; but it was
very good. There were besides, silver dishes full of sugared red
currants, and heaps of comfits and sweetmeats, which Master Gyles would
not allow them even to touch, and saffron cakes with raisins in them,
and spiced hot cordial out of tiny silver cups. Bareheaded pages clad in
silk and silver lace waited upon them as if they were fledgling kings;
but the boys were too hungry to care for that or to try to put on airs,
and waded into the meat and drink as if they had been starved for a
fortnight.

But when they were done Nick saw that the table off which they had eaten
was inlaid with pearl and silver filigree, and that the table-cloth was
of silk with woven metal-work and gems set in it worth more than a
thousand crowns. He was very glad he had eaten first, for such wonderful
service would have taken away his appetite.

And truly a wonderful palace was the Queen's Plaisance, as Greenwich
House was called. Elizabeth was born in it, and so loved it most of all.
There she pleased oftenest to receive and grant audiences to envoys from
foreign courts. And there, on that account, as was always her proud,
jealous way, she made a blinding show of glory and of wealth, of
science, art, and power, that England, to the eyes which saw her there,
might stand in second place to no dominion in the world, however rich
or great.

It was a very house of gold.

Over the door where the lads marched in was the Queen's device, a golden
rose, with a motto set below in letters of gold, "Dieu et mon droit";
and upon the walls were blazoned coats of noble arms on branching golden
trees, of purest metal and finest silk, costly beyond compare. The royal
presence-chamber shone with tapestries of gold, of silver, and of
oriental silks, of as many shifting colors as the birds of paradise, and
wrought in exquisite design, The throne was set with diamonds, with
rubies, garnets, and sapphires, glittering like a pastry-crust of stars,
and garnished with gold-lace work, pearls, and ornament; and under the
velvet canopy which hung above the throne was embroidered in
seed-pearls, "Vivat Regina Elizabetha!" There was no door without a
gorgeous usher, no room without a page, no corridor without a guard, no
post without a man of noble birth to fill it.

On the walls of the great gallery were masterly paintings of great folk,
globes showing all the stars fast in the sky, and drawings of the world
and all its parts, so real that one could see the savages in the New
World hanging to the under side by their feet, like flies upon the
ceiling. How they stuck was more than Nick could make out; and where
they landed if they chanced to slip and fall troubled him a deal, until
in the sheer multiplication of wonders he could not wonder any more.

When they came to rehearse in the afternoon the stage was hung with
stiff, rich silks that had come in costly cedar chests from the looms of
old Cathay; and the curtain behind which the players came and went was
broidered with gold thread in flowers and birds like meteors for
splendor. The gallery, too, where the musicians sat, was draped with
silk and damask.

Some of the lads would have made out by their great airs as if this were
all a common thing to them; but Nick stared honestly with round eyes,
and went about with cautious feet, chary of touching things, and feeling
very much out of place and shy.

It was all too grand, too wonderful,--amazing to look upon, no doubt,
and good to outface foreign envy with, but not to be endured every day
nor lived with comfortably. And as the day went by, each passing moment
with new marvels, Nick grew more and more uneasy for some simple little
nook where he might just sit down and be quiet for a while, as one could
do at home, without fine pages peering at him from the screens, or
splendid guards patrolling at his heels wherever he went, or obsequious
ushers bowing to the floor at every turn, and asking him what he might
be pleased to wish. And by the time night fell and the attendant came to
light them to their beds, he felt like a fly on the rim of a wheel that
went so fast he could scarcely get his breath or see what passed him by,
yet of which he durst not let go.

The palace was much too much for him.




CHAPTER XXVIII


CHRISTMAS WITH QUEEN BESS

Christmas morning came and went as if on swallow-wings, in a gale of
royal merriment. Four hundred sat to dinner that day in Greenwich halls,
and all the palace streamed with banners and green garlands.

Within the courtyard two hundred horses neighed and stamped around a
water-fountain playing in a bowl of ice and evergreen. Grooms and pages,
hostlers and dames, went hurry-scurrying to and fro; cooks, bakers, and
scullions steamed about, leaving hot, mouth-watering streaks of
fragrance in the air; bluff men-at-arms went whistling here and there;
and serving-maids with rosy cheeks ran breathlessly up and down the
winding stairways.

The palace stirred like a mighty pot that boils to its utmost verge, for
the hour of the revelries was come.

Over the beech-wood and far across the black heath where Jack Cade
marshaled the men of Kent, the wind trembled with the boom of the castle
bell. Within the walls of the palace its clang was muffled by a sound of
voices that rose and fell like the wind upon the sea.

The ambassadors of Venice and France were there, with their courtly
trains. The Lord High Constable of England was come to sit below the
Queen. The earls, too, of Southampton, Montgomery, Pembroke, and
Huntington were there; and William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, the Queen's
High Treasurer, to smooth his care-lined forehead with a Yuletide jest.

Up from the entry ports came shouts of "Room! room! room for my Lord
Strange! Room for the Duke of Devonshire!" and about the outer gates
there was a tumult like the cheering of a great crowd.

The palace corridors were lined with guards. Gentlemen pensioners under
arms went flashing to and fro. Now and then through the inner throng
some handsome page with wind-blown hair and rainbow-colored cloak pushed
to the great door, calling: "Way, sirs, way for my Lord--way for my Lady
of Alderstone!" and one by one, or in blithe groups, the courtiers, clad
in silks and satins, velvets, jewels, and lace of gold, came up through
the lofty folding-doors to their places in the hall.

There, where the Usher of the Black Rod stood, and the gentlemen of the
chamber came and went with golden chains about their necks, was bowing
and scraping without stint, and reverent civility; for men that were
wise and noble were passing by, men that were handsome and brave; and
ladies sweet as a summer day, and as fair to see as spring, laughed by
their sides and chatted behind their fans, or daintily nibbled comfits,
lacking anything to say.

The windows were all curtained in, making a night-time in midday; and
from the walls and galleries flaring links and great bouquets of candles
threw an eddying flood of yellow light across the stirring scene. From
clump to clump of banner-staves and burnished arms, spiked above the
wainscot, garlands of red-berried holly, spruce, and mistletoe were
twined across the tapestry, till all the room was bound about with a
chain of living green.

There were sweet odors floating through the air, and hazy threads of
fragrant smoke from perfumes burning in rich braziers; and under foot
was the crisp, clean rustle of new rushes.

From time to time, above the hum of voices, came the sound of music from
a room beyond--cornets and flutes, fifes, lutes, and harps, with an
organ exquisitely played, and voices singing to it; and from behind the
players' curtain, swaying slowly on its rings at the back of the stage,
came a murmur of whispering childish voices, now high in eager
questioning, now low, rehearsing some doubtful fragment of a song.

Behind the curtain it was dark--not total darkness, but twilight; for a
dull glow came down overhead from the lights in the hall without, and
faint yellow bars went up and down the dusk from crevices in the screen.
The boys stood here and there in nervous groups. Now and then a sharp
complaint was heard from the tire-woman when an impatient lad would not
stand still to be dressed.

Master Gyles went to and fro, twisting the manuscript of the Revel in
his hands, or pausing kindly to pat some faltering lad upon the back.
Nick and Colley were peeping by turns through a hole in the screen at
the throng in the audience-chamber.

They could see a confusion of fans, jewels, and faces, and now and again
could hear a burst of subdued laughter over the steadily increasing buzz
of voices. Then from the gallery above, all at once there came a murmur
of instruments tuning together; a voice in the corridor was heard
calling, "Way here, way here!" in masterful tones; the tall
folding-doors at the side of the hall swung wide, and eight dapper pages
in white and gold came in with the Master of Revels. After them came
fifty ladies and noblemen clad in white and gold, and a guard of
gentlemen pensioners with glittering halberds.

There was a sharp rustle. Every head in the audience-chamber louted low.
Nick's heart gave a jump--for the Queen was there!

She came with an air that was at once serious and royal, bearing herself
haughtily, yet with a certain grace and sprightliness that became her
very well. She was quite tall and well made, and her quickly changing
face was long and fair, though wrinkled and no longer young. Her
complexion was clear and of an olive hue; her nose was a little hooked;
her firm lips were thin; and her small black eyes, though keen and
bright, were pleasant and merry withal. Her hair was a coppery, tawny
red, and false, moreover. In her ears hung two great pearls; and there
was a fine small crown studded with diamonds upon her head, beside a
necklace of exceeding fine gold and jewels about her neck. She was
attired in a white silk gown bordered with pearls the size of beans, and
over it wore a mantle of black silk, cunningly shot with silver threads.
Her ruff was vast, her farthingale vaster; and her train, which was very
long, was borne by a marchioness who made more ado about it than
Elizabeth did of ruling her realm.

"The Queen!" gasped Colley.

"Dost think I did na know it?" answered Nick, his heart beginning to
beat tattoo as he stared through the peep-hole in the screen.

He saw the great folk bowing like a gardenful of flowers in a storm, and
in its midst Elizabeth erect, speaking to those about her in a lively
and good-humored way, and addressing all the foreigners according to
their tongue--in French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch; but hers was funny
Dutch, and while she spoke she smiled and made a joke upon it in Latin,
at which they all laughed heartily, whether they understood what it
meant or not. Then, with her ladies in waiting, she passed to a dais
near the stage, and stood a moment, stately, fair, and proud, while all
her nobles made obeisance, then sat and gave a signal for the players
to begin.

"Rafe Fullerton!" the prompter whispered shrilly; and out from behind
the screen slipped Rafe, the smallest of them all, and down the stage to
speak the foreword of the piece. He was frightened, and his voice shook
as he spoke, but every one was smiling, so he took new heart.

"It is a masque of Summer-time and Spring," said he, "wherein both
claim to be best-loved, and have their say of wit and humor, and each
her part of songs and dances suited to her time, the sprightly galliard
and the nimble jig for Spring, the slow pavone, the stately peacock
dance, for Summer-time. And win who may, fair Summer-time or merry
Spring, the winner is but that beside our Queen!"--with which he snapped
his fingers in the faces of them all--"God save Queen Bess!"

At that the Queen's eyes twinkled, and she nodded, highly pleased, so
that every one clapped mightily.

The play soon ran its course amid great laughter and applause. Spring
won. The English ever loved her best, and the quick-paced galliard took
their fancy, too. "Up and be doing!" was its tune, and it gave one a
chance to cut fine capers with his heels.

Then the stage stood empty and the music stopped.

At this strange end a whisper of surprise ran through the hall. The
Queen tapped with the inner side of her rings upon the broad arm of her
chair. From the look on her face she was whetting her tongue. But before
she could speak, Nick and Colley, dressed as a farmer boy and girl, with
a garland of house-grown flowers about them, came down the stage from
the arras, hand in hand, bowing.

The audience-chamber grew very still--_this_ was something new. Nick
felt a swallowing in his throat, and Colley's hand winced in his grip.
There was no sound but a silky rustling in the room.

Then suddenly the boys behind the players' curtain laughed together,
not loud, but such a jolly little laugh that all the people smiled to
hear it. After the laughter came a hush.

Then the pipes overhead made a merry sound as of shepherds piping on
oaten straws in new grass where there are daisies; and there was a
little elfish laughter of clarionets, and a fluttering among the cool
flutes like spring wind blowing through crisp young leaves in April. The
harps began to pulse and throb with a soft cadence like raindrops
falling into a clear pool where brown leaves lie upon the bottom and
bubbles float above green stones and smooth white pebbles. Nick lifted
up his head and sang.

It was a happy little song of the coming and the triumph of the spring.
The words were all forgotten long ago. They were not much: enough to
serve the turn, no more; but the notes to which they went were like barn
swallows twittering under the eaves, goldfinches clinking in purple
weeds beside old roads, and robins singing in common gardens at dawn.
And wherever Nick's voice ran Colley's followed, the pipes laughing
after them a note or two below; while the flutes kept gurgling softly to
themselves as a hill brook gurgles through the woods, and the harps ran
gently up and down like rain among the daffodils. One voice called, the
other answered; there were echo-like refrains; and as they sang Nick's
heart grew full. He cared not a stiver for the crowd, the golden palace,
or the great folk there--the Queen no more--he only listened for
Colley's voice coming up lovingly after his own and running away when he
followed it down, like a lad and a lass through the bloom of the May.
And Colley was singing as if his heart would leap out of his round mouth
for joy to follow after the song they sung, till they came to the end
and the skylark's song.

There Colley ceased, and Nick went singing on alone, forgetting, caring
for, heeding nought but the song that was in his throat.

The Queen's fan dropped from her hand upon the floor. No one saw it or
picked it up. The Venetian ambassador scarcely breathed.

Nick came down the stage, his hands before him, lifted as if he saw the
very lark he followed with his song, up, up, up into the sun. His cheeks
were flushed and his eyes were wet, though his voice was a song and a
laugh in one.

Then they were gone behind the curtain, into the shadow and the twilight
there, Colley with his arms about Nick's neck, not quite laughing, not
quite sobbing. The manuscript of the Revel lay torn in two upon the
floor, and Master Gyles had a foot upon each piece.

In the hall beyond the curtain was a silence that was deeper than a
hush, a stillness rising from the hearts of men.

Then Elizabeth turned in the chair where she sat. Her eyes were as
bright as a blaze. And out of the sides of her eyes she looked at the
Venetian ambassador. He was sitting far out on the edge of his chair,
and his lips had fallen apart. She laughed to herself. "It is a good
song, signor," said she, and those about her started at the sound of her
voice. "_Chi tace confessa--_it is so! There are no songs like English
songs--there is no spring like an English spring--there is no land like
England, _my_ England!" She clapped her hands. "I will speak with those
lads," said she.

Straightway certain pages ran through the press and came behind the
curtain where Nick and Colley stood together, still trembling with the
music not yet gone out of them, and brought them through the hall to
where the Queen sat, every one whispering, "Look!" as they passed.

On the dais they knelt together, bowing, side by side. Elizabeth, with a
kindly smile, leaning a little forward, raised them with her slender
hand. "Stand, dear lads," said she, heartily. "Be lifted up by thine own
singing, as our hearts have been uplifted by thy song. And name me the
price of that same song--'twas sweeter than the sweetest song we ever
heard before."

"Or ever shall hear again," said the Venetian ambassador, under his
breath, rubbing his forehead as if just wakening out of a dream.

"Come," said Elizabeth, tapping Colley's cheek with her fan, "what wilt
thou have of me, fair maid?"

Colley turned red, then very pale. "That I may stay in the palace
forever and sing for your Majesty," said he. His fingers shivered
in Nick's.

"Now that is right prettily asked," she cried, and was well pleased.
"Thou shalt indeed stay for a singing page in our household--a voice and
a face like thine are merry things upon a rainy Monday. And thou, Master
Lark," said she, fanning the hair back from Nick's forehead with her
perfumed fan--"thou that comest up out of the field with a song like the
angels sing--what wilt thou have: that thou mayst sing in our choir and
play on the lute for us?"

Nick looked up at the torches on the wall, drawing a deep, long breath.
When he looked down again his eyes were dazzled and he could not see
the Queen.

"What wilt thou have?" he heard her ask.

"Let me go home," said he.

There were red and green spots in the air. He tried to count them, since
he could see nothing else, and everything was very still; but they all
ran into one purple spot which came and went like a firefly's glow, and
in the middle of the purple spot he saw the Queen's face coming
and going.

"Surely, boy, that is an ill-considered speech," said she, "or thou dost
deem us very poor, or most exceeding stingy!" Nick hung his head, for
the walls seemed tapestried with staring eyes. "Or else this home of
thine must be a very famous place."

The maids of honour tittered. Further off somebody laughed. Nick looked
up, and squared his shoulders.

They had rubbed the cat the wrong way.

It is hard to be a stranger in a palace, young, country-bred, and
laughed at all at once; but down in Nick Attwood's heart was a stubborn
streak that all the flattery on earth could not cajole nor ridicule
efface. He might be simple, shy, and slow, but what he loved he loved:
that much he knew; and when they laughed at him for loving home they
seemed to mock not him, but home--and _that_ touched the fighting-spot.

"I would rather be there than here," said he.

The Queen's face flushed. "Thou art more curt than courteous," said she.
"Is it not good enough for thee here?"

"I could na live in such a place."

The Queen's eyes snapped. "In such a place? Marry, art thou so choice?
These others find no fault with the life."

"Then they be born to it," said Nick, "or they could abide no more than
I--they would na fit."

"Haw, haw!" said the Lord High Constable.

The Queen shot one quick glance at him. "Old pegs have been made to fit
new holes before to-day," said she; "and the trick can be done again."
The Constable smothered the rest of that laugh in his hand, "But come,
boy, speak up; what hath put thee so out of conceit with our
best-beloved palace?"

"There is na one thing likes me here. I can na bide in a place so fine,
for there's not so much as a corner in it feels like home. I could na
sleep in the bed last night."

"What, how? We commanded good beds!" exclaimed Elizabeth, angrily, for
the Venetian ambassador was smiling in his beard. "This shall be
seen to."

"Oh, it _was_ a good bed--a very good bed indeed, your Majesty!" cried
Nick. "But the mattress puffed up like a cloud in a bag, and almost
smothered me; and it was so soft and so hot that it gave me a fever."

Elizabeth leaned back in her chair and laughed. The Lord High Constable
