tracks of the ship Argo are clearly sung of? What great constraint and
need brought the heroes so far? What breezes wafted them?

When Apsyrtus had fallen in mighty overthrow Zeus himself, king of gods,
was seized with wrath at what they had done. And he ordained that by the
counsels of Aeaean Circe they should cleanse themselves from the
terrible stain of blood and suffer countless woes before their return.
Yet none of the chieftains knew this; but far onward they sped starting
from the Hyllean land, and they left behind all the islands that were
beforetime thronged by the Colchians--the Liburnian isles, isle after
isle, Issa, Dysceladus, and lovely Pityeia. Next after them they came to
Corcyra, where Poseidon settled the daughter of Asopus, fair-haired
Corcyra, far from the land of Phlius, whence he had carried her off
through love; and sailors beholding it from the sea, all black with its
sombre woods, call it Corcyra the Black. And next they passed Melite,
rejoicing in the soft-blowing breeze, and steep Cerossus, and Nymphaea
at a distance, where lady Calypso, daughter of Atlas, dwelt; and they
deemed they saw the misty mountains of Thunder. And then Hera bethought
her of the counsels and wrath of Zeus concerning them. And she devised
an ending of their voyage and stirred up storm-winds before them, by
which they were caught and borne back to the rocky isle of Electra. And
straightway on a sudden there called to them in the midst of their
course, speaking with a human voice, the beam of the hollow ship, which
Athena had set in the centre of the stem, made of Dodonian oak. And
deadly fear seized them as they heard the voice that told of the
grievous wrath of Zeus. For it proclaimed that they should not escape
the paths of an endless sea nor grievous tempests, unless Circe should
purge away the guilt of the ruthless murder of Apsyrtus; and it bade
Polydeuces and Castor pray to the immortal gods first to grant a path
through the Ausonian sea where they should find Circe, daughter of Perse
and Helios.

Thus Argo cried through the darkness; and the sons of Tyndareus uprose,
and lifted their hands to the immortals praying for each boon: but
dejection held the rest of the Minyan heroes. And far on sped Argo under
sail, and entered deep into the stream of Eridanus; where once, smitten
on the breast by the blazing bolt, Phaethon half-consumed fell from the
chariot of Helios into the opening of that deep lake; and even now it
belcheth up heavy steam clouds from the smouldering wound. And no bird
spreading its light wings can cross that water; but in mid-course it
plunges into the flame, fluttering. And all around the maidens, the
daughters of Helios, enclosed in tall poplars, wretchedly wail a piteous
plaint; and from their eyes they shed on the ground bright drops of
amber. These are dried by the sun upon the sand; but whenever the waters
of the dark lake flow over the strand before the blast of the wailing
wind, then they roll on in a mass into Eridanus with swelling tide. But
the Celts have attached this story to them, that these are the tears of
Leto's son, Apollo, that are borne along by the eddies, the countless
tears that he shed aforetime when he came to the sacred race of the
Hyperboreans and left shining heaven at the chiding of his father, being
in wrath concerning his son whom divine Coronis bare in bright Lacereia
at the mouth of Amyrus. And such is the story told among these men. But
no desire for food or drink seized the heroes nor were their thoughts
turned to joy. But they were sorely afflicted all day, heavy and faint
at heart, with the noisome stench, hard to endure, which the streams of
Eridanus sent forth from Phaethon still burning; and at night they heard
the piercing lament of the daughters of Helios, wailing with shrill
voice; and, as they lamented, their tears were borne on the water like
drops of oil.

Thence they entered the deep stream of Rhodanus which flows into
Eridanus; and where they meet there is a roar of mingling waters. Now
that river, rising from the ends of the earth, where are the portals and
mansions of Night, on one side bursts forth upon the beach of Ocean, at
another pours into the Ionian sea, and on the third through seven mouths
sends its stream to the Sardinian sea and its limitless bay.[1] And from
Rhodanus they entered stormy lakes, which spread throughout the Celtic
mainland of wondrous size; and there they would have met with an
inglorious calamity; for a certain branch of the river was bearing them
towards a gulf of Ocean which in ignorance they were about to enter, and
never would they have returned from there in safety. But Hera leaping
forth from heaven pealed her cry from the Hercynian rock; and all
together were shaken with fear of her cry; for terribly crashed the
mighty firmament. And backward they turned by reason of the goddess, and
noted the path by which their return was ordained. And after a long
while they came to the beach of the surging sea by the devising of Hera,
passing unharmed through countless tribes of the Celts and Ligyans. For
round them the goddess poured a dread mist day by day as they fared on.
And sailing through the midmost mouth, they reached the Stoechades
islands in safety by the aid of the sons of Zeus; wherefore altars and
sacred rites are established in their honour for ever; and not that
sea-faring alone did they attend to succour; but Zeus granted to them
the ships of future sailors too. Then leaving the Stoechades they passed
on to the island Aethalia, where after their toil they wiped away with
pebbles sweat in abundance; and pebbles like skin in colour are strewn
on the beach[2]; and there are their quoits and their wondrous armour;
and there is the Argoan harbour called after them.

[Footnote 1: Apollonius seems to have thought that the Po, the Rhone,
and the Rhine are all connected together.]

[Footnote 2: i.e. like the scrapings from skin, [Greek: apostlengismata];
see Strabo p. 224 for this adventure.]

And quickly from there they passed through the sea, beholding the
Tyrrhenian shores of Ausonia; and they came to the famous harbour of
Aeaea, and from the ship they cast hawsers to the shore near at hand.
And here they found Circe bathing her head in the salt sea-spray, for
sorely had she been scared by visions of the night. With blood her
chambers and all the walls of her palace seemed to be running, and flame
was devouring all the magic herbs with which she used to bewitch
strangers whoever came; and she herself with murderous blood quenched
the glowing flame, drawing it up in her hands; and she ceased from
deadly fear. Wherefore when morning came she rose, and with sea-spray
was bathing her hair and her garments. And beasts, not resembling the
beasts of the wild, nor yet like men in body, but with a medley of
limbs, went in a throng, as sheep from the fold in multitudes follow the
shepherd. Such creatures, compacted of various limbs, did earth herself
produce from the primeval slime when she had not yet grown solid beneath
a rainless sky nor yet had received a drop of moisture from the rays of
the scorching sun; but time combined these forms and marshalled them in
their ranks; in such wise these monsters shapeless of form followed her.
And exceeding wonder seized the heroes, and at once, as each gazed on
the form and face of Circe, they readily guessed that she was the sister
of Aeetes.

Now when she had dismissed the fears of her nightly visions, straightway
she fared backwards, and in her subtlety she bade the heroes follow,
charming them on with her hand. Thereupon the host remained stedfast at
the bidding of Aeson's son, but Jason drew with him the Colchian maid.
And both followed the selfsame path till they reached the hall of Circe,
and she in amaze at their coming bade them sit on brightly burnished
seats. And they, quiet and silent, sped to the hearth and sat there, as
is the wont of wretched suppliants. Medea hid her face in both her
hands, but Jason fixed in the ground the mighty hilted sword with which
he had slain Aeetes' son; nor did they raise their eyes to meet her
look. And straightway Circe became aware of the doom of a suppliant and
the guilt of murder. Wherefore in reverence for the ordinance of Zeus,
the god of suppliants, who is a god of wrath yet mightily aids slayers
of men, she began to offer the sacrifice with which ruthless suppliants
are cleansed from guilt when they approach the altar. First to atone for
the murder still unexpiated, she held above their heads the young of a
sow whose dugs yet swelled from the fruit of the womb, and, severing its
neck, sprinkled their hands with the blood; and again she made
propitiation with other drink offerings, calling on Zeus the Cleanser,
the protector of murder-stained suppliants. And all the defilements in a
mass her attendants bore forth from the palace--the Naiad nymphs who
ministered all things to her. And within, Circe, standing by the hearth,
kept burning atonement-cakes without wine, praying the while that she
might stay from their wrath the terrible Furies, and that Zeus himself
might be propitious and gentle to them both, whether with hands stained
by the blood of a stranger or, as kinsfolk, by the blood of a kinsman,
they should implore his grace.

But when she had wrought all her task, then she raised them up and
seated them on well polished seats, and herself sat near, face to face
with them. And at once she asked them clearly of their business and
their voyaging, and whence they had come to her land and palace, and had
thus seated themselves as suppliants at her hearth. For in truth the
hideous remembrance of her dreams entered her mind as she pondered; and
she longed to hear the voice of the maiden, her kinswoman, as soon as
she saw that she had raised her eyes from the ground. For all those of
the race of Helios were plain to discern, since by the far flashing of
their eyes they shot in front of them a gleam as of gold. So Medea told
her all she asked--the daughter of Aeetes of the gloomy heart, speaking
gently in the Colchian tongue, both of the quest and the journeyings of
the heroes, and of their toils in the swift contests, and how she had
sinned through the counsels of her much-sorrowing sister, and how with
the sons of Phrixus she had fled afar from the tyrannous horrors of her
father; but she shrank from telling of the murder of Apsyrtus. Yet she
escaped not Circe's ken; nevertheless, in spite of all she pitied the
weeping maiden, and spake thus:

"Poor wretch, an evil and shameful return hast thou planned. Not for
long, I ween, wilt thou escape the heavy wrath of Aeetes; but soon will
he go even to the dwellings of Hellas to avenge the blood of his son,
for intolerable are the deeds thou hast done. But since thou art my
suppliant and my kinswoman, no further ill shall I devise against thee
at thy coming; but begone from my halls, companioning the stranger,
whosoever he be, this unknown one that thou hast taken in thy father's
despite; and kneel not to me at my hearth, for never will I approve thy
counsels and thy shameful flight."

Thus she spake, and measureless anguish seized the maid; and over her
eyes she cast her robe and poured forth a lamentation, until the hero
took her by the hand and led her forth from the hall quivering with
fear. So they left the home of Circe.

But they were not unmarked by the spouse of Zeus, son of Cronos; but
Iris told her when she saw them faring from the hall. For Hera had
bidden her watch what time they should come to the ship; so again she
urged her and spake:

"Dear Iris, now come, if ever thou hast fulfilled bidding, his thee away
on light pinions, and bid Thetis arise from the sea and come hither. For
need of her is come upon me. Then go to the sea-beaches where the bronze
anvils of Hephaestus are smitten by sturdy hammers, and tell him to
still the blasts of fire until Argo pass by them. Then go to Aeolus too,
Aeolus who rules the winds, children of the clear sky; and to him also
tell my purpose so that he may make all winds cease under heaven and no
breeze may ruffle the sea; yet let the breath of the west wind blow
until the heroes have reached the Phaeacian isle of Alcinous."

So she spake, and straightway Iris leapt down from Olympus and cleft her
way, with light wings outspread. And she plunged into the Aegean Sea,
where is the dwelling of Nereus. And she came to Thetis first and, by
the promptings of Hera, told her tale and roused her to go to the
goddess. Next she came to Hephaestus, and quickly made him cease from
the clang of his iron hammers; and the smoke-grimed bellows were stayed
from their blast. And thirdly she came to Aeolus, the famous son of
Hippotas. And when she had given her message to him also and rested her
swift knees from her course, then Thetis leaving Nereus and her sisters
had come from the sea to Olympus to the goddess Hera; and the goddess
made her sit by her side and uttered her word:

"Hearken now, lady Thetis, to what I am eager to tell thee. Thou knowest
how honoured in my heart is the hero, Aeson's son, and the others that
have helped him in the contest, and how I saved them when they passed
between the Wandering rocks[1] where roar terrible storms of fire and
the waves foam round the rugged reefs. And now past the mighty rock of
Scylla and Charybdis horribly belching, a course awaits them. But thee
indeed from thy infancy did I tend with my own hands and love beyond all
others that dwell in the salt sea because thou didst refuse to share the
couch of Zeus for all his desire. For to him such deeds are ever dear,
to embrace either goddesses or mortal women. But in reverence for me and
with fear in thy heart thou didst shrink from his love; and he then
swore a mighty oath that thou shouldst never be called the bride of an
immortal god. Yet he ceased not from spying thee against thy will, until
reverend Themis declared to him the whole truth, how that it was thy
fate to bear a son mightier than his sire; wherefore he gave thee up,
for all his desire, fearing lest another should be his match and rule
the immortals, and in order that he might ever hold his own dominion.
But I gave thee the best of the sons of earth to be thy husband, that
thou mightest find a marriage dear to thy heart and bear children; and I
summoned to the feast the gods, one and all. And with my own hand I
raised the bridal torch, in return for the kindly honour thou didst pay
me. But come, let me tell a tale that erreth not. When thy son shall
come to the Elysian plain, he whom now in the home of Cheiron the
Centaur water-nymphs are tending, though he still craves thy mother
milk, it is fated that he be the husband of Medea, Aeetes' daughter; do
thou aid thy daughter-in-law as a mother-in-law should, and aid Peleus
himself. Why is thy wrath so steadfast? He was blinded by folly. For
blindness comes even upon the gods. Surely at my behest I deem that
Hephaestus will cease from kindling the fury of his flame, and that
Aeolus, son of Hippotas, will check his swift rushing winds, all but the
steady west wind, until they reach the havens of the Phaeacians; do thou
devise a return without bane. The rocks and the tyrannous waves are my
fear, they alone, and them thou canst foil with thy sisters' aid. And
let them not fall in their helplessness into Charybdis lest she swallow
them at one gulp, or approach the hideous lair of Scylla, Ausonian
Scylla the deadly, whom night-wandering Hecate, who is called
Crataeis,[2] bare to Phorcys, lest swooping upon them with her horrible
jaws she destroy the chiefest of the heroes. But guide their ship in the
course where there shall be still a hair's breadth escape from
destruction."

[Footnote 1: The _Symplegades_ are referred to, where help was given by
Athena, not by Hera. It is strange that no mention is made of the
_Planctae_, properly so called, past which they are soon to be helped.
Perhaps some lines have fallen out.]

[Footnote 2: i.e. the Mighty One.]

Thus she spake, and Thetis answered with these words: "If the fury of
the ravening flame and the stormy winds cease in very deed, surely will
I promise boldly to save the ship, even though the waves bar the way, if
only the west wind blows fresh and clear. But it is time to fare on a
long and measureless path, in quest of my sisters who will aid me, and
to the spot where the ship's hawsers are fastened, that at early dawn
the heroes may take thought to win their home-return."

She spake, and darting down from the sky fell amid the eddies of the
dark blue sea; and she called aid her the rest of the Nereids, her own
sisters; and they heard her and gathered together; and Thetis declared
to them Hera's behests, and quickly sped them all on their way to the
Ausonian sea. And herself, swifter than the flash of an eye or the hafts
of the sun, when it rises upwards from a far-distant land, hastened
swiftly through the sea, until she reached the Aeaean beach of the
Tyrrhenian mainland. And the heroes she found by the ship taking their
pastime, with quoits and shooting of arrows; and she drew near and just
touched the hand of Aeacus' son Peleus, for he was her husband; nor
could anyone see her clearly, but she appeared to his eyes alone, and
thus addressed him:

"No longer now must ye stay sitting on the Tyrrhenian beach, but at dawn
loosen the hawsers of your swift ship, in obedience to Hera, your
helper. For at her behest the maiden daughters of Nereus have met
together to draw your ship through the midst of the rocks which are
called Planctae,[1] for that is your destined path. But do thou show my
person to no one, when thou seest us come to meet thee, but keep it
secret in thy mind, lest thou anger me still more than thou didst anger
me before so recklessly."

[Footnote 1: i.e. the Wanderers.]

She spake, and vanished into the depths of the sea; but sharp pain smote
Peleus, for never before had he seen her come, since first she left her
bridal chamber and bed in anger, on account of noble Achilles, then a
babe. For she ever encompassed the child's mortal flesh in the night
with the flame of fire; and day by day she anointed with ambrosia his
tender frame, so that he might become immortal and that she might keep
off from his body loathsome old age. But Peleus leapt up from his bed
and saw his dear son gasping in the flame; and at the sight he uttered a
terrible cry, fool that he was; and she heard it, and catching up the
child threw him screaming to the ground, and herself like a breath of
wind passed swiftly from the hall as a dream and leapt into the sea,
exceeding wroth, and thereafter returned not again. Wherefore blank
amazement fettered his soul; nevertheless he declared to his comrades
all the bidding of Thetis. And they broke off in the midst and hurriedly
ceased their contests, and prepared their meal and earth-strewn beds,
whereon after supper they slept through the night as aforetime.

Now when dawn the light-bringer was touching the edge of heaven, then at
the coming of the swift west wind they went to their thwarts from the
land; and gladly did they draw up the anchors from the deep and made the
tackling ready in due order; and above spread the sail, stretching it
taut with the sheets from the yard-arm. And a fresh breeze wafted the
ship on. And soon they saw a fair island, Anthemoessa, where the
clear-voiced Sirens, daughters of Achelous, used to beguile with their
sweet songs whoever cast anchor there, and then destroy him. Them lovely
Terpsichore, one of the Muses, bare, united with Achelous; and once they
tended Demeter's noble daughter still unwed, and sang to her in chorus;
and at that time they were fashioned in part like birds and in part like
maidens to behold. And ever on the watch from their place of prospect
with its fair haven, often from many had they taken away their sweet
return, consuming them with wasting desire; and suddenly to the heroes,
too, they sent forth from their lips a lily-like voice. And they were
already about to cast from the ship the hawsers to the shore, had not
Thracian Orpheus, son of Oeagrus, stringing in his hands his Bistonian
lyre, rung forth the hasty snatch of a rippling melody so that their
ears might be filled with the sound of his twanging; and the lyre
overcame the maidens' voice. And the west wind and the sounding wave
rushing astern bore the ship on; and the Sirens kept uttering their
ceaseless song. But even so the goodly son of Teleon alone of the
comrades leapt before them all from the polished bench into the sea,
even Butes, his soul melted by the clear ringing voice of the Sirens;
and he swam through the dark surge to mount the beach, poor wretch.
Quickly would they have robbed him of his return then and there, but the
goddess that rules Eryx, Cypris, in pity snatched him away, while yet in
the eddies, and graciously meeting him saved him to dwell on the
Lilybean height. And the heroes, seized by anguish, left the Sirens, but
other perils still worse, destructive to ships, awaited them in the
meeting-place of the seas.

For on one side appeared the smooth rock of Scylla; on the other
Charybdis ceaselessly spouted and roared; in another part the Wandering
rocks were booming beneath the mighty surge, where before the burning
flame spurted forth from the top of the crags, above the rock glowing
with fire, and the air was misty with smoke, nor could you have seen the
sun's light. Then, though Hephaestus had ceased from his toils, the sea
was still sending up a warm vapour. Hereupon on this side and on that
the daughters of Nereus met them; and behind, lady Thetis set her hand
to the rudder-blade, to guide them amid the Wandering rocks. And as when
in fair weather herds of dolphins come up from the depths and sport in
circles round a ship as it speeds along, now seen in front, now behind,
now again at the side--and delight comes to the sailors; so the Nereids
darted upward and circled in their ranks round the ship Argo, while
Thetis guided its course. And when they were about to touch the
Wandering rocks, straightway they raised the edge of their garments over
their snow-white knees, and aloft on the very rocks and where the waves
broke, they hurried along on this side and on that apart from one
another. And the ship was raised aloft as the current smote her, and all
around the furious wave mounting up broke over the rocks, which at one
time touched the sky like towering crags, at another, down in the
depths, were fixed fast at the bottom of the sea and the fierce waves
poured over them in floods. And the Nereids, even as maidens near some
sandy beach roll their garments up to their waists out of their way and
sport with a shapely-rounded ball; then they catch it one from another
and send it high into the air; and it never touches the ground; so they
in turn one from another sent the ship through the air over the waves,
as it sped on ever away from the rocks; and round them the water spouted
and foamed. And lord Hephaestus himself standing on the summit of a
smooth rock and resting his massy shoulder on the handle of his hammer,
beheld them, and the spouse of Zeus beheld them as she stood above the
gleaming heaven; and she threw her arms round Athena, such fear seized
her as she gazed. And as long as the space of a day is lengthened out in
springtime, so long a time did they toil, heaving the ship between the
loud-echoing rocks; then again the heroes caught the wind and sped
onward; and swiftly they passed the mead of Thrinacia, where the kine of
Helios fed. There the nymphs, like sea-mews, plunged beneath the depths,
when they had fulfilled the behests of the spouse of Zeus. And at the
same time the bleating of sheep came to the heroes through the mist and
the lowing of kine, near at hand, smote their ears. And over the dewy
leas Phaethusa, the youngest of the daughters of Helios, tended the
sheep, bearing in her hand a silver crook; while Lampetia, herding the
kine, wielded a staff of glowing orichalcum[1] as she followed. These
kine the heroes saw feeding by the river's stream, over the plain and
the water-meadow; not one of them was dark in hue but all were white as
milk and glorying in their horns of gold. So they passed them by in the
day-time, and when night came on they were cleaving a great sea-gulf,
rejoicing, until again early rising dawn threw light upon their course.

[Footnote 1: A fabulous metal, resembling gold in appearance.]

