she knew he would not trifle with any commission she should entrust to
him.

The letter was duly written and left with Margaret Van Eyck; and the
following week, sure enough, Hans Memling returned from Flanders,
Margaret Van Eyck gave him the letter, and a piece of gold towards his
travelling expenses. He seemed in a hurry to be off.

"All the better," said the old artist; "he will be the sooner in Italy."

But as there are horses who burn and rage to start, and after the first
yard or two want the whip, so all this hurry cooled into inaction when
Hans got as far as the principal hostelry of Tergou, and saw two of
his boon companions sitting in the bay window. He went in for a parting
glass with them; but when he offered to pay, they would not hear of it,
No; he was going a long journey; they would treat him; everybody must
treat him, the landlord and all.

It resulted from this treatment that his tongue got as loose as if the
wine had been oil; and he confided to the convivial crew that he was
going to show the Italians how to paint: next he sang his exploits
in battle, for he had handled a pike; and his amorous successes with
females, not present to oppose their version of the incidents. In short,
"plenus rimarum erat: huc illuc diffluebat;" and among the miscellaneous
matters that oozed out, he must blab that he was entrusted with a letter
to a townsman of theirs, one Gerard, a good fellow: he added "you are
all good fellows:" and to impress his eulogy, slapped Sybrandt on the
back so heartily, as to drive the breath out of his body.

Sybrandt got round the table to avoid this muscular approval; but
listened to every word, and learned for the first time that Gerard was
gone to Italy. However, to make sure, he affected to doubt it.

"My brother Gerard is never in Italy."

"Ye lie, ye cur," roared Hans, taking instantly the irascible turn, and
not being clear enough to see that he, who now sat opposite him, was the
same he had praised, and hit, when beside him. "If he is ten times
your brother, he is in Italy. What call ye this? There, read me that
superscription!" and he flung down a letter on the table.

Sybrandt took it up, and examined it gravely; but eventually laid it
down, with the remark, that he could not read. However, one of the
company, by some immense fortuity, could read; and proud of so rare an
accomplishment, took it, and read it out:

"To Gerard Eliassoen, of Tergou. These by the hand of the trusty Hans
Memling, with all speed."

"'Tis excellently well writ," said the reader, examining every letter.

"Ay!" said Hans bombastically, "and small wonder: 'tis writ by a famous
hand; by Margaret, sister of Jan Van Eyck. Blessed and honoured be his
memory! She is an old friend of mine, is Margaret Van Eyck."

Miscellaneous Hans then diverged into forty topics.

Sybrandt stole out of the company, and went in search of Cornelis.

They put their heads together over the news: Italy was an immense
distance off. If they could only keep him there?

"Keep him there? Nothing would keep him long from his Margaret."

"Curse her!" said Sybrandt. "Why didn't she die when she was about it?"

"She die? She would outlive the pest to vex us." And Cornelis was wroth
at her selfishness in not dying, to oblige.

These two black sheep kept putting their heads together, and tainting
each other worse and worse, till at last their corrupt hearts conceived
a plan for keeping Gerard in Italy all his life, and so securing his
share of their father's substance.

But when they had planned it they were no nearer the execution: for that
required talent: so iniquity came to a standstill. But presently, as if
Satan had come between the two heads, and whispered into the right ear
of one and the left of the other simultaneously, they both burst out--

"THE BURGOMASTER!"


They went to Ghysbrecht Van Swieten, and he received them at once:
for the man who is under the torture of suspense catches eagerly at
knowledge. Certainty is often painful, but seldom, like suspense,
intolerable.

"You have news of Gerard?" said he eagerly.

Then they told about the letter and Hans Memling. He listened with
restless eye. "Who writ the letter?"

"Margaret Van Eyck," was the reply; for they naturally thought the
contents were by the same hand as the superscription.

"Are ye sure?" And he went to a drawer and drew out a paper written by
Margaret Van Eyck while treating with the burgh for her house. "Was it
writ like this?"

"Yes. 'Tis the same writing," said Sybrandt boldly.

"Good. And now what would ye of me?" said Ghysbrecht, with beating
heart, but a carelessness so well feigned that it staggered them. They
fumbled with their bonnets, and stammered and spoke a word or two, then
hesitated and beat about the bush, and let out by degrees that they
wanted a letter written, to say something that might keep Gerard in
Italy; and this letter they proposed to substitute in Hans Memling's
wallet for the one he carried. While these fumbled with their bonnets
and their iniquity, and vacillated between respect for a burgomaster,
and suspicion that this one was as great a rogue as themselves, and
somehow or other, on their side against Gerard, pros and cons were
coursing one another to and fro in the keen old man's spirit. Vengeance
said let Gerard come back and feel the weight of the law. Prudence said
keep him a thousand miles off. But then Prudence said also, why do dirty
work on a doubtful chance? Why put it in the power of these two rogues
to tarnish your name? Finally, his strong persuasion that Gerard was
in possession of a secret by means of which he could wound him to the
quick, coupled with his caution, found words thus: "It is my duty to
aid the citizens that cannot write. But for their matter I will not be
responsible. Tell me, then, what I shall write."

"Something about this Margaret."

"Ay, ay! that she is false, that she is married to another, I'll go
bail."

"Nay, burgomaster, nay! not for all the world!" cried Sybrandt; "Gerard
would not believe it, or but half, and then he would come back to see.
No; say that she is dead."

"Dead! what, at her age, will he credit that?"

"Sooner than the other. Why she was nearly dead: so it is not to say a
downright lie, after all."

"Humph! And you think that will keep him in Italy?"

"We are sure of it, are we not, Cornelis?"

"Ay," said Cornelis, "our Gerard will never leave Italy now he is
there. It was always his dream to get there. He would come back for
his Margaret, but not for us. What cares he for us? He despises his own
family; always did."

"This would be a bitter pill to him," said the old hypocrite.

"It will be for his good in the end," replied the young one.

"What avails Famine wedding Thirst?" said Cornelis.

"And the grief you are preparing for him so coolly?" Ghysbrecht spoke
sarcastically, but tasted his own vengeance all the time.

"Oh, a lie is not like a blow with a curtal axe. It hacks no flesh, and
breaks no bones."

"A curtal axe?" said Sybrandt; "no, nor even like a stroke with a
cudgel." And he shot a sly envenomed glance at the burgomaster's broken
nose.

Ghysbrecht's face darkened with ire when this adder's tongue struck his
wound. But it told, as intended: the old man bristled with hate.

"Well," said he, "tell me what to write for you, and I must write it;
but take notice, you bear the blame if aught turns amiss. Not the hand
which writes, but the tongue which dictates, doth the deed."

The brothers assented warmly, sneering within. Ghysbrecht then drew
his inkhorn towards him, and laid the specimen of Margaret Van Eyck's
writing before him, and made some inquiries as to the size and shape
of the letter, when an unlooked-for interruption occurred; Jorian Ketel
burst hastily into the room, and looked vexed at not finding him alone.

"Thou seest I have matter on hand, good fellow."

"Ay; but this is grave. I bring good news; but 'tis not for every ear."

The burgomaster rose, and drew Jorian aside into the embrasure of his
deep window, and then the brothers heard them converse in low but eager
tones. It ended by Ghysbrecht sending Jorian out to saddle his mule. He
then addressed the black sheep with a sudden coldness that amazed them--

"I prize the peace of households; but this is not a thing to be done in
a hurry: we will see about it, we will see."

"But, burgomaster, the man will be gone. It will be too late."

"Where is he?"

"At the hostelry, drinking."

"Well, keep him drinking! We will see, we will see." And he sent them
off discomfited.

To explain all this we must retrograde a step. This very morning then,
Margaret Brandt had met Jorian Ketel near her own door. He passed her
with a scowl. This struck her, and she remembered him.

"Stay," said she. "Yes! it is the good man who saved him. Oh! why
have you not been near me since? And why have you not come for the
parchments? Was it not true about the hundred crowns?"

Jorian gave a snort; but, seeing her face that looked so candid, began
to think there might be some mistake. He told her he had come, and how
he had been received.

"Alas!" said she, "I knew nought of this. I lay at Death's door. She
then invited him to follow her, and took him into the garden and showed
him the spot where the parchments were buried. Martin was for taking
them up, but I would not let him. He put them there; and I said none
should move them but you, who had earned them so well of him and me."

"Give me a spade!" cried Jorian eagerly. "But stay! No; he is a
suspicious man. You are sure they are there still?"

"I will openly take the blame if human hand hath touched them."

"Then keep them but two hours more, I prithee, good Margaret," said
Jorian, and ran off to the Stadthouse of Tergou a joyful man.

The burgomaster jogged along towards Sevenbergen, with Jorian striding
beside him, giving him assurance that in an hour's time the missing
parchments would be in his hand.

"Ah, master!" said he, "lucky for us it wasn't a thief that took them."

"Not a thief? not a thief? what call you him, then?"

"Well, saving your presence, I call him a jackdaw. This is jackdaw's
work, if ever there was; 'take the thing you are least in need of, and
hide it'--that's a jackdaw. I should know," added Jorian oracularly,
"for I was brought up along with a chough. He and I were born the same
year, but he cut his teeth long before me, and wow! but my life was a
burden for years all along of him. If you had but a hole in your hose no
bigger than a groat, in went his beak like a gimlet; and, for stealing,
Gerard all over. What he wanted least, and any poor Christian in the
house wanted most, that went first. Mother was a notable woman, so
if she did but look round, away flew her thimble. Father lived by
cordwaining, so about sunrise Jack went diligently off with his awl, his
wax, and his twine. After that, make your bread how you could! One day
I heard my mother tell him to his face he was enough to corrupt
half-a-dozen other children; and he only cocked his eye at her, and next
minute away with the nurseling's shoe off his very foot. Now this Gerard
is tarred with the same stick. The parchments are no more use to him
than a thimble or an awl to Jack. He took 'em out of pure mischief and
hid them, and you would never have found them but for me."

"I believe you are right," said Ghysbrecht, "and I have vexed myself
more than need."

When they came to Peter's gate he felt uneasy.

"I wish it had been anywhere but here."

Jorian reassured him.

"The girl is honest and friendly," said he. "She had nothing to do with
taking them, I'll be sworn;" and he led him into the garden. "There,
master, if a face is to be believed, here they lie; and see, the mould
is loose."

He ran for a spade which was stuck up in the ground at some distance,
and soon went to work and uncovered a parchment. Ghysbrecht saw it, and
thrust him aside and went down on his knees and tore it out of the hole.
His hands trembled and his face shone. He threw out parchment after
parchment, and Jorian dusted them and cleared them and shook them. Now,
when Ghysbrecht had thrown out a great many, his face began to darken
and lengthen, and when he came to the last, he put his hands to his
temples and seemed to be all amazed.

"What mystery lies here?" he gasped. "Are fiends mocking me? Dig deeper!
There must be another."

Jorian drove the spade in and threw out quantities of hard mould. In
vain. And even while he dug, his master's mood had changed.

"Treason! treachery!" he cried. "You knew of this."

"Knew what, master, in Heaven's name?"

"Caitiff, you knew there was another one worth all these twice told.'

"'Tis false," cried Jorian, made suspicious by the other's suspicion.
"'Tis a trick to rob me of my hundred crowns. Oh! I know you,
burgomaster." And Jorian was ready to whimper.

A mellow voice fell on them both like oil upon the waves.

"No, good man, it is not false, nor yet is it quite true: there was
another parchment."

"There, there, there! Where is it?"

"But," continued Margaret calmly, "it was not a town record (so you have
gained your hundred crowns, good man): it was but a private deed between
the burgomaster here and my grandfather Flor--"

"Hush, hush!"

"--is Brandt."

"Where is it, girl? that is all we want to know."

"Have patience, and I shall tell you. Gerard read the title of it, and
he said, 'This is as much yours as the burgomaster's,' and he put it
apart, to read it with me at his leisure."

"It is in the house, then?" said the burgomaster, recovering his
calmness.

"No, sir," said Margaret gravely, "it is not." Then, in a voice
that faltered suddenly, "You hunted--my poor Gerard--so hard--and so
close-that you gave him--no time-to think of aught--but his life--and
his grief. The parchment was in his bosom, and he hath ta'en it with
him."

"Whither, whither?"

"Ask me no more, sir. What right is yours to question me thus? It was
for your sake, good man, I put force upon my heart, and came out here,
and bore to speak at all to this hard old man. For, when I think of the
misery he has brought on him and me, the sight of him is more than I can
bear;" and she gave an involuntary shudder, and went slowly in, with her
hand to her head, crying bitterly.

Remorse for the past, and dread of the future--the slow, but, as he now
felt, the inevitable future--avarice, and fear, all tugged in one short
moment at Ghysbrecht's tough heart. He hung his head, and his arms fell
listless by his sides. A coarse chuckle made him start round, and there
stood Martin Wittenhaagen leaning on his bow, and sneering from ear
to ear. At sight of the man and his grinning face, Ghysbrecht's worst
passions awoke.

"Ho! attach him, seize him, traitor and thief!" cried he. "Dog, thou
shalt pay for all."

Martin, without a word, calmly thrust the duke's pardon under
Ghysbrecht's nose. He looked, and had not a word to say. Martin followed
up his advantage.

"The duke and I are soldiers. He won't let you greasy burghers trample
on an old comrade. He bade me carry you a message too."

"The duke send a message to me?"

"Ay! I told him of your masterful doings, of your imprisoning Gerard
for loving a girl; and says he, 'Tell him this is to be a king, not
a burgomaster. I'll have no kings in Holland but one. Bid him be more
humble, or I'll hang him at his own door,'"

(Ghysbrecht trembled: he thought the duke capable of the deed)

"'as I hanged the burgomaster of Thingembob.' The duke could not mind
which of you he had hung, or in what part; such trifles stick not in a
soldier's memory; but he was sure he had hanged one of you for grinding
poor folk, 'and I'm the man to hang another,' quoth the good duke."

These repeated insults from so mean a man, coupled with his
invulnerability, shielded as he was by the duke, drove the choleric old
man into a fit of impotent fury: he shook his fist at the soldier,
and tried to threaten him, but could not speak for the rage and
mortification that choked him: then he gave a sort of screech, and
coiled himself up in eye and form like a rattlesnake about to strike;
and spat furiously upon Martin's doublet.

The thick-skinned soldier treated this ebullition with genuine contempt.
"Here's a venomous old toad! he knows a kick from his foot would send
him to his last home; and he wants me to cheat the gallows. But I have
slain too many men in fair fight to lift limb against anything less than
a man; and this I count no man. What is it, in Heaven's name? an old
goat's-skin bag full o' rotten bones."

"My mule! my mule!" screamed Ghysbrecht.

Jorian helped the old man up trembling in every joint. Once in the
saddle, he seemed to gather in a moment unnatural vigour; and the figure
that went flying to Tergou was truly weird-like and terrible: so old and
wizened the face; so white and reverend the streaming hair; so baleful
the eye; so fierce the fury which shook the bent frame that went
spurring like mad; while the quavering voice yelled, "I'll make their
hearts ache. I'll make their hearts ache. I'll make their hearts ache.
I'll make their hearts ache. All of them. All!--all!--all!"


The black sheep sat disconsolate amidst the convivial crew, and eyed
Hans Memling's wallet. For more ease he had taken it off, and flung it
on the table. How readily they could have slipped out that letter and
put in another. For the first time in their lives they were sorry they
had not learned to write, like their brother.

And now Hans began to talk of going, and the brothers agreed in a
whisper to abandon their project for the time. They had scarcely
resolved this, when Dierich Brower stood suddenly in the doorway, and
gave them a wink.

They went out to him. "Come to the burgomaster with all speed," said he,

They found Ghysbrecht seated at a table, pale and agitated. Before him
lay Margaret Van Eyck's handwriting. "I have written what you desired,"
said he. "Now for the superscription. What were the words? did ye see?"

"We cannot read," said Cornelis.

"Then is all this labour lost," cried Ghysbrecht angrily. "Dolts!"

"Nay, but," said Sybrandt, "I heard the words read, and I have not lost
them. They were, 'To Gerard Eliassoen, these by the hand of the trusty
Hans Memling, with all speed.'"

"'Tis well. Now, how was the letter folded? how big was it?"

"Longer than that one, and not so long as this."

"'Tis well. Where is he?"

"At the hostelry."

"Come, then, take you this groat, and treat him. Then ask to see the
letter, and put this in place of it. Come to me with the other letter."

The brothers assented, took the letter, and went to the hostelry.

They had not been gone a minute, when Dierich Brower issued from the
Stadthouse, and followed them. He had his orders not to let them out
of his sight till the true letter was in his master's hands. He watched
outside the hostelry.

He had not long to wait. They came out almost immediately, with downcast
looks. Dierich made up to them.

"Too late!" they cried; "too late! He is gone."

"Gone? How long?"

"Scarce five minutes. Cursed chance!"

"You must go back to the burgomaster at once," said Dierich Brower.

"To what end?"

"No matter; come!" and he hurried them to the Stadthouse.

Ghysbrecht Van Swieten was not the man to accept a defeat.

"Well," said he, on hearing the ill news, "suppose he is gone. Is he
mounted?"

"No."

"Then what hinders you to come up with him?"

"But what avails coming up with him! There are no hostelries on the road
he is gone."

"Fools!" said Ghysbrecht, "is there no way of emptying a man's pockets
but liquor and sleight of hand?"

A meaning look, that passed between Ghysbrecht and Dierich, aided the
brothers' comprehension. They changed colour, and lost all zeal for the
business.

"No! no! we don't hate our brother. We won't get ourselves hanged to
spite him," said Sybrandt; "that would be a fool's trick."

"Hanged!" cried Ghysbrecht. "Am I not the burgomaster? How can ye be
hanged? I see how 'tis ye fear to tackle one man, being two: hearts
of hare, that ye are! Oh! why cannot I be young again? I'd do it
single-handed."

The old man now threw off all disguise, and showed them his heart was in
this deed. He then flattered and besought, and jeered them alternately,
but he found no eloquence could move them to an action, however
dishonourable, which was attended with danger. At last he opened a
drawer, and showed them a pile of silver coins.

"Change but those letters for me," he said, "and each of you shall
thrust one hand into this drawer, and take away as many of them as you
can hold."

The effect was magical. Their eyes glittered with desire. Their whole
bodies seemed to swell, and rise into male energy.

"Swear it, then," said Sybrandt.

"I swear it."

"No; on the crucifix."

Ghysbrecht swore upon the crucifix.

The next minute the brothers were on the road, in pursuit of Hans
Memling. They came in sight of him about two leagues from Tergou, but
though they knew he had no weapon but his staff, they were too prudent
to venture on him in daylight; so they fell back.

But being now three leagues and more from the town, and on a grassy
road--sun down, moon not yet up--honest Hans suddenly found himself
attacked before and behind at once by men with uplifted knives, who
cried in loud though somewhat shaky voices, "Stand and deliver!"

The attack was so sudden, and so well planned, that Hans was dismayed.
"Slay me not, good fellows," he cried; "I am but a poor man, and ye
shall have my all."

"So be it then. Live! but empty thy wallet."

"There is nought in my wallet, good friend, but one letter."

"That we shall see," said Sybrandt, who was the one in front.

"Well, it is a letter."

"Take it not from me, I pray you. 'Tis worth nought, and the good dame
would fret that writ it."

"There," said Sybrandt, "take back thy letter; and now empty thy pouch.
Come I tarry not!"

But by this time Hans had recovered his confusion; and from a certain
flutter in Sybrandt, and hard breathing of Cornelis, aided by an
indescribable consciousness, felt sure the pair he had to deal with were
no heroes. He pretended to fumble for his money: then suddenly thrust
his staff fiercely into Sybrandt's face, and drove him staggering, and
lent Cornelis a back-handed slash on the ear that sent him twirling like
a weathercock in March; then whirled his weapon over his head and danced
about the road like a figure on springs, shouting:

"Come on, ye thieving loons! Come on!"

It was a plain invitation; yet they misunderstood it so utterly as to
take to their heels, with Hans after them, he shouting "Stop thieves!"
and they howling with fear and pain as they ran.



CHAPTER XLI

Denys, placed in the middle of his companions, lest he should be so mad
as attempt escape was carried off in an agony of grief and remorse. For
his sake Gerard had abandoned the German route to Rome; and what was his
reward? left all alone in the centre of Burgundy. This was the thought
which maddened Denys most, and made him now rave at heaven and earth,
now fall into a gloomy silence so savage and sinister that it was deemed
prudent to disarm him. They caught up their leader just outside the
town, and the whole cavalcade drew up and baited at the "Tete d'Or."

The young landlady, though much occupied with the count, and still
more with the bastard, caught sight of Denys, and asked him somewhat
anxiously what had become of his young companion?

Denys, with a burst of grief, told her all, and prayed her to send after
Gerard. "Now he is parted from me, he will maybe listen to my rede,"
said he; "poor wretch, he loves not solitude."

The landlady gave a toss of her head. "I trow I have been somewhat
over-kind already," said she, and turned rather red.

"You will not?"

"Not I."

"Then,"--and he poured a volley of curses and abuse upon her.

She turned her back upon him, and went off whimpering, and Saying she
was not used to be cursed at; and ordered her hind to saddle two mules.

Denys went north with his troop, mute and drooping over his saddle,
and quite unknown to him, that veracious young lady made an equestrian
toilet in only forty minutes, she being really in a hurry, and spurred
away with her servant in the opposite direction.

At dark, after a long march, the bastard and his men reached "The White
Hart;" their arrival caused a prodigious bustle, and it was some time
before Manon discovered her old friend among so many. When she did, she
showed it only by heightened colour. She did not claim the acquaintance.
The poor soul was already beginning to scorn.

"The base degrees by which she did ascend."

Denys saw but could not smile. The inn reminded him too much of Gerard.

Ere the night closed the wind changed. She looked into the room and
beckoned him with her finger. He rose sulkily, and his guards with him.

"Nay, I would speak a word to thee in private."

She drew him to a corner of the room, and there asked him under her
breath would he do her a kindness.

He answered out loud, "No, he would not; he was not in the vein to do
kindnesses to man or woman. If he did a kindness it should be to a dog;
and not that if he could help it."

"Alas, good archer, I did you one eftsoons, you and your pretty
comrade," said Manon humbly.

"You did, dame, you did; well then, for his sake--what is't to do?"

"Thou knowest my story. I had been unfortunate. Now I am worshipful. But
a woman did cast him in my teeth this day. And so 'twill be ever while
he hangs there. I would have him ta'en down; well-a-day!"

"With all my heart."

"And none dare I ask but thee. Wilt do't?"

"Not I, even were I not a prisoner."

On this stern refusal the tender Manon sighed, and clasped her palms
together despondently. Denys told her she need not fret. There were
soldiers of a lower stamp who would not make two bites of such a cherry.
It was a mere matter of money; if she could find two angels, he would
find two soldiers to do the dirty work of "The White Hart."

This was not very palatable. However, reflecting that soldiers were
birds of passage, drinking here to-night, knocked on the head there
to-morrow, she said softly, "Send them out to me. But prithee, tell them
that 'tis for one that is my friend; let them not think 'tis for me; I
should sink into the earth; times are changed."

Denys found warriors glad to win an angel apiece so easily. He sent them
out, and instantly dismissing the subject with contempt, sat brooding on
his lost friend.

Manon and the warriors soon came to a general understanding. But what
were they to do with the body when taken down? She murmured, "The river
is nigh the--the place."

"Fling him in, eh?"

"Nay, nay; be not so cruel! Could ye not put him--gently--and--with
somewhat weighty?"

She must have been thinking on the subject in detail; for she was not
one to whom ideas came quickly.

All was speedily agreed, except the time of payment. The mail-clad
itched for it, and sought it in advance. Manon demurred to that.

What, did she doubt their word? then let her come along with them, or
watch them at a distance.

"Me?" said Manon with horror. "I would liever die than see it done."

"Which yet you would have done."

"Ay, for sore is my need. Times are changed."

She had already forgotten her precept to Denys.

An hour later the disagreeable relic of caterpillar existence ceased
to canker the worshipful matron's public life, and the grim eyes of the
past to cast malignant glances down into a white hind's clover field.

Total. She made the landlord an average wife, and a prime house-dog, and
outlived everybody.

Her troops, when they returned from executing with mediaeval naivete
the precept, "Off wi' the auld love," received a shock. They found
the market-place black with groups; it had been empty an hour ago.
Conscience smote them. This came of meddling with the dead. However, the
bolder of the two, encouraged by the darkness, stole forward alone, and
slily mingled with a group: he soon returned to his companion, saying,
in a tone of reproach not strictly reasonable,

"Ye born fool, it is only a miracle."



CHAPTER XLII

Letters of fire on the church wall had just inquired, with an appearance
of genuine curiosity, why there was no mass for the duke in this time of
trouble. The supernatural expostulation had been seen by many, and had
gradually faded, leaving the spectators glued there gaping. The upshot
was, that the corporation, not choosing to be behind the angelic powers
in loyalty to a temporal sovereign, invested freely in masses. By this
an old friend of ours, the cure, profited in hard cash; for which he had
a very pretty taste. But for this I would not of course have detained
you over so trite an occurrence as a miracle.


Denys begged for his arms. "Why disgrace him as well as break his
heart?"

"Then swear on the cross of thy sword not to leave the bastard's service
until the sedition shall be put down." He yielded to necessity, and
delivered three volleys of oaths, and recovered his arms and liberty.

The troops halted at "The Three Fish," and Marion at sight of him cried
out, "I'm out of luck; who would have thought to see you again?" Then
seeing he was sad, and rather hurt than amused at this blunt jest, she
asked him what was amiss? He told her. She took a bright view of the
case. Gerard was too handsome and well-behaved to come to harm. The
women too would always be on his side. Moreover, it was clear that
things must either go well or ill with him. In the former case he would
strike in with some good company going to Rome; in the latter he would
return home, perhaps be there before his friend; "for you have a trifle
of fighting to do in Flanders by all accounts." She then brought him
his gold pieces, and steadily refused to accept one, though he urged her
again and again. Denys was somewhat convinced by her argument, because
she concurred with his own wishes, and was also cheered a little by
finding her so honest. It made him think a little better of that world
in which his poor little friend was walking alone.

Foot soldiers in small bodies down to twos and threes were already on
the road, making lazily towards Flanders, many of them penniless, but
passed from town to town by the bailiffs, with orders for food and
lodging on the innkeepers.

Anthony of Burgundy overtook numbers of these, and gathered them under
his standard, so that he entered Flanders at the head of six hundred
men. On crossing the frontier he was met by his brother Baldwyn, with
men, arms, and provisions; he organized his whole force and marched on
in battle array through several towns, not only without impediment,
but with great acclamations. This loyalty called forth comments not
altogether gracious.

"This rebellion of ours is a bite," growled a soldier called Simon, who
had elected himself Denys's comrade.

Denys said nothing, but made a little vow to St. Mars to shoot this
Anthony of Burgundy dead, should the rebellion, that had cost him
Gerard, prove no rebellion.

That afternoon they came in sight of a strongly fortified town; and a
whisper went through the little army that this was a disaffected place.

But when they came in sight, the great gate stood open, and the towers
that flanked it on each side were manned with a single sentinel
apiece. So the advancing force somewhat broke their array and marched
carelessly.

When they were within a furlong, the drawbridge across the moat rose
slowly and creaking till it stood vertical against the fort and the
very moment it settled into this warlike attitude, down rattled the
portcullis at the gate, and the towers and curtains bristled with lances
and crossbows.

A stern hum ran through the bastard's front rank and spread to the rear.

"Halt!" cried he. The word went down the line, and they halted. "Herald
to the gate!" A pursuivant spurred out of the ranks, and halting twenty
yards from the gate, raised his bugle with his herald's flag hanging
down round it, and blew a summons. A tall figure in brazen armour
appeared over the gate. A few fiery words passed between him and the
herald, which were not audible, but their import clear, for the herald
blew a single keen and threatening note at the walls, and came galloping
back with war in his face. The bastard moved out of the line to meet
him, and their heads had not been together two seconds ere he turned in
his saddle and shouted, "Pioneers, to the van!" and in a moment hedges
were levelled, and the force took the field and encamped just out of
shot from the walls; and away went mounted officers flying south, east,
and west, to the friendly towns, for catapults, palisades, mantelets,
raw hides, tar-barrels, carpenters, provisions, and all the materials
for a siege.

The bright perspective mightily cheered one drooping soldier. At
the first clang of the portcullis his eyes brightened and his temple
flushed; and when the herald came back with battle in his eye he saw it
in a moment, and for the first time this many days cried, "Courage, tout
le monde, le diable est mort."

If that great warrior heard, how he must have grinned!

The besiegers encamped a furlong from the walls, and made roads; kept
their pikemen in camp ready for an assault when practicable; and sent
forward their sappers, pioneers, catapultiers, and crossbowmen. These
opened a siege by filling the moat, and mining, or breaching the wall,
etc. And as much of their work had to be done under close fire of
arrows, quarels, bolts, stones, and little rocks, the above artists "had
need of a hundred eyes," and acted in concert with a vigilance, and an
amount of individual intelligence, daring, and skill, that made a siege
very interesting, and even amusing: to lookers on.

The first thing they did was to advance their carpenters behind rolling
mantelets, to erect a stockade high and strong on the very edge of the
moat. Some lives were lost at this, but not many; for a strong force of
crossbowmen, including Denys, rolled their mantelets up and shot over
the workmen's heads at every besieged who showed his nose, and at every
loophole, arrow-slit, or other aperture, which commanded the particular
spot the carpenters happened to be upon. Covered by their condensed
fire, these soon raised a high palisade between them and the ordinary
missiles from the pierced masonry.

But the besieged expected this, and ran out at night their boards or
wooden penthouses on the top of the curtains. The curtains were built
with square holes near the top to receive the beams that supported these
structures, the true defence of mediaeval forts, from which the besieged
delivered their missiles with far more freedom and variety of range
than they could shoot through the oblique but immovable loopholes of the
curtain, or even through the sloping crenelets of the higher towers.
On this the besiegers brought up mangonels, and set them hurling
huge stones at these woodworks and battering them to pieces.
Contemporaneously they built a triangular wooden tower as high as the
curtain, and kept it ready for use, and just out of shot.

This was a terrible sight to the besieged. These wooden towers had taken
many a town. They began to mine underneath that part of the moat the
tower stood frowning at; and made other preparations to give it a warm
reception. The besiegers also mined, but at another part, their object
being to get under the square barbican and throw it down. All this time
Denys was behind his mantelet with another arbalestrier, protecting the
workmen and making some excellent shots. These ended by earning him
the esteem of an unseen archer, who every now and then sent a winged
compliment quivering into his mantelet. One came and struck within an
inch of the narrow slit through which Denys was squinting at the moment.
"Peste," cried he, "you shoot well, my friend. Come forth and receive my
congratulations! Shall merit such as thine hide its head? Comrade, it
is one of those cursed Englishmen, with his half ell shaft. I'll not die
till I've had a shot at London wall."

On the side of the besieged was a figure that soon attracted great
notice by promenading under fire. It was a tall knight, clad in complete
brass, and carrying a light but prodigiously long lance, with which he
directed the movements of the besieged. And when any disaster befell the
besiegers, this tall knight and his long lance were pretty sure to be
concerned in it.

My young reader will say, "Why did not Denys shoot him?" Denys did shoot
him; every day of his life; other arbalestriers shot him; archers shot
him. Everybody shot him. He was there to be shot, apparently. But the
abomination was, he did not mind being shot. Nay, worse, he got at last
so demoralised as not to seem to know when he was shot. He walked his
battlements under fire, as some stout skipper paces his deck in a
suit of Flushing, calmly oblivious of the April drops that fall on his
woollen armour. At last the besiegers got spiteful, and would not waste
any more good steel on him; but cursed him and his impervious coat of
mail.

He took those missiles like the rest.


Gunpowder has spoiled war. War was always detrimental to the solid
interests of mankind. But in old times it was good for something: it
painted well, sang divinely, furnished Iliads. But invisible butchery,
under a pall of smoke a furlong thick, who is any the better for that?
Poet with his note-book may repeat, "Suave etiam belli certamina magna
tueri;" but the sentiment is hollow and savours of cuckoo. You can't
tueri anything but a horrid row. He didn't say, "Suave etiam ingentem
caliginem tueri per campos instructam."

They managed better in the Middle Ages.

This siege was a small affair; but, such as it was, a writer or minstrel
could see it, and turn an honest penny by singing it; so far then the
sport was reasonable, and served an end.

It was a bright day, clear, but not quite frosty. The efforts of the
besieging force were concentrated against a space of about two hundred
and fifty yards, containing two curtains and two towers, one of which
was the square barbican, the other had a pointed roof that was built
to overlap, resting on a stone machicolade, and by this means a row of
dangerous crenelets between the roof and the masonry grinned down at the
nearer assailants, and looked not very unlike the grinders of a modern
frigate with each port nearly closed. The curtains were overlapped with
penthouses somewhat shattered by the mangonels, trebuchets, and other
slinging engines of the besiegers. On the besiegers' edge of the moat
was what seemed at first sight a gigantic arsenal, longer than it was
broad, peopled by human ants, and full of busy, honest industry,
and displaying all the various mechanical science of the age in full
operation. Here the lever at work, there the winch and pulley, here the
balance, there the capstan. Everywhere heaps of stones, and piles of
fascines, mantelets, and rows of fire-barrels. Mantelets rolling, the
hammer tapping all day, horses and carts in endless succession rattling
up with materials. Only, on looking closer into the hive of industry,
you might observe that arrows were constantly flying to and fro, that
the cranes did not tenderly deposit their masses of stone, but flung
them with an indifference to property, though on scientific principles,
and that among the tubs full of arrows, and the tar-barrels and the
beams, the fagots, and other utensils, here and there a workman or a
soldier lay flatter than is usual in limited naps, and something more
or less feathered stuck in them, and blood, and other essentials, oozed
out.

At the edge of the moat opposite the wooden tower, a strong penthouse,
which they called "a cat," might be seen stealing towards the curtain,
and gradually filling up the moat with fascines and rubbish, which the
workmen flung out at its mouth. It was advanced by two sets of ropes
passing round pulleys, and each worked by a windlass at some distance
from the cat. The knight burnt the first cat by flinging blazing
tar-barrels on it. So the besiegers made the roof of this one very
steep, and covered it with raw hides, and the tar-barrels could not harm
it. Then the knight made signs with his spear, and a little trebuchet
behind the walls began dropping stones just clear of the wall into the
moat, and at last they got the range, and a stone went clean through the
roof of the cat, and made an ugly hole.

Baldwyn of Burgundy saw this, and losing his temper, ordered the great
catapult that was battering the wood-work of the curtain opposite it to
be turned and levelled slantwise at this invulnerable knight. Denys and
his Englishman went to dinner. These two worthies being eternally on
the watch for one another had made a sort of distant acquaintance, and
conversed by signs, especially on a topic that in peace or war maintains
the same importance. Sometimes Denys would put a piece of bread on the
top of his mantelet, and then the archer would hang something of the
kind out by a string; or the order of invitation would be reversed.
Anyway, they always managed to dine together.

And now the engineers proceeded to the unusual step of slinging
fifty-pound stones at an individual.

This catapult was a scientific, simple, and beautiful engine, and very
effective in vertical fire at the short ranges of the period.

Imagine a fir-tree cut down, and set to turn round a horizontal axis on
lofty uprights, but not in equilibrio; three-fourths of the tree being
on the hither side. At the shorter and thicker end of the tree was
fastened a weight of half a ton. This butt end just before the discharge
pointed towards the enemy. By means of a powerful winch the long
tapering portion of the tree was forced down to the very ground, and
fastened by a bolt; and the stone placed in a sling attached to the
tree's nose. But this process of course raised the butt end with its
huge weight high in the air, and kept it there struggling in vain
to come down. The bolt was now drawn; Gravity, an institution which
flourished even then, resumed its sway, the short end swung furiously
down, the long end went as furiously round up, and at its highest
elevation flung the huge stone out of the sling with a tremendous jerk.
In this case the huge mass so flung missed the knight; but came down
near him on the penthouse, and went through it like paper, making an
awful gap in roof and floor. Through the latter fell out two inanimate
objects, the stone itself and the mangled body of a besieger it had
struck. They fell down the high curtain side, down, down, and struck
almost together the sullen waters of the moat, which closed bubbling
on them, and kept both the stone and the bone two hundred years, till
cannon mocked those oft perturbed waters, and civilization dried them.

"Aha! a good shot," cried Baldwyn of Burgundy.

The tall knight retired. The besiegers hooted him.

He reappeared on the platform of the barbican, his helmet being just
visible above the parapet. He seemed very busy, and soon an enormous
Turkish catapult made its appearance on the platform and aided by the
elevation at which it was planted, flung a twentypound stone some two
hundred and forty yards in the air; it bounded after that, and knocked
some dirt into the Lord Anthony's eye, and made him swear. The next
stone struck a horse that was bringing up a sheaf of arrows in a cart,
bowled the horse over dead like a rabbit, and spilt the cart. It was
then turned at the besiegers' wooden tower, supposed to be out of shot.
Sir Turk slung stones cut with sharp edges on purpose, and struck it
repeatedly, and broke it in several places. The besiegers turned two
of their slinging engines on this monster, and kept constantly slinging
smaller stones on to the platform of the barbican, and killed two of
the engineers. But the Turk disdained to retort. He flung a forty-pound
stone on to the besiegers' great catapult, and hitting it in the
neighbourhood of the axis, knocked the whole structure to pieces, and
sent the engineers skipping and yelling.

In the afternoon, as Simon was running back to his mantelet from a
palisade where he had been shooting at the besieged, Denys, peeping
through his slit, saw the poor fellow suddenly stare and hold out his
arms, then roll on his face, and a feathered arrow protruded from his
back. The archer showed himself a moment to enjoy his skill. It was the
Englishman. Denys, already prepared, shot his bolt, and the murderous
archer staggered away wounded. But poor Simon never moved. His wars were
over.

"I am unlucky in my comrades," said Denys.

The next morning an unwelcome sight greeted the besieged. The cat was
covered with mattresses and raw hides, and fast filling up the moat. The
knight stoned it, but in vain; flung burning tar-barrels on it, but in
vain. Then with his own hands he let down by a rope a bag of burning
sulphur and pitch, and stunk them out. But Baldwyn, armed like a
lobster, ran, and bounding on the roof, cut the string, and the work
went on. Then the knight sent fresh engineers into the mine, and
undermined the place and underpinned it with beams, and covered the
beams thickly with grease and tar.

At break of day the moat was filled, and the wooden tower began to move
on its wheels towards a part of the curtain on which two catapults
were already playing to breach the hoards, and clear the way. There was
something awful and magical in its approach without visible agency, for
it was driven by internal rollers worked by leverage. On the top was a
platform, where stood the first assailing party protected in front by
the drawbridge of the turret, which stood vertical till lowered on to
the wall; but better protected by full suits of armour. The beseiged
slung at the tower, and struck it often, but in vain. It was well
defended with mattresses and hides, and presently was at the edge of the
moat. The knight bade fire the mine underneath it.

Then the Turkish engine flung a stone of half a hundredweight right
amongst the knights, and carried two away with it off the tower on to
the plain. One lay and writhed: the other neither moved nor spake.

And now the besieging catapults flung blazing tar-barrels, and fired the
hoards on both sides, and the assailants ran up the ladders behind the
tower, and lowered the drawbridge on to the battered curtain, while the
catapults in concert flung tar-barrels and fired the adjoining works
to dislodge the defenders. The armed men on the platform sprang on the
bridge, led by Baldwyn. The invulnerable knight and his men-at-arms met
them, and a fearful combat ensued, in which many a figure was seen
to fall headlong down off the narrow bridge. But fresh besiegers kept
swarming up behind the tower, and the besieged were driven off the
bridge.

Another minute, and the town was taken; but so well had the firing of
the mine been timed, that just at this instant the underpinners gave
way, and the tower suddenly sank away from the walls, tearing the
drawbridge clear and pouring the soldiers off it against the masonry,
and on to the dry moat. The besieged uttered a fierce shout, and in a
moment surrounded Baldwyn and his fellows; but strange to say, offered
them quarter. While a party disarmed and disposed of these, others fired
the turret in fifty places with a sort of hand grenades. At this work
who so busy as the tall knight. He put the fire-bags on his long spear,
and thrust them into the doomed structure late so terrible. To do this
he was obliged to stand on a projecting beam of the shattered hoard,
holding on by the hand of a pikeman to steady himself. This provoked
Denys; he ran out from his mantelet, hoping to escape notice in the
confusion, and levelling his crossbow missed the knight clean, but sent
his bolt into the brain of the pikeman, and the tall knight fell heavily
from the wall, lance and all. Denys gazed wonder-struck; and in that
unlucky moment, suddenly he felt his arm hot, then cold, and there was
an English arrow skewering it.

This episode was unnoticed in a much greater matter. The knight, his
armour glittering in the morning sun, fell headlong, but turning as he
neared the water, struck it with a slap that sounded a mile off.

None ever thought to see him again. But he fell at the edge of the
fascines on which the turret stood all cocked on one side, and his spear
stuck into them under water, and by a mighty effort he got to the side,
but could not get out. Anthony sent a dozen knights with a white flag to
take him prisoner. He submitted like a lamb, but said nothing.

He was taken to Anthony's tent.

That worthy laughed at first at the sight of his muddy armour, but
presently, frowning, said, "I marvel, sir, that so good a knight as
you should know his devoir so ill as turn rebel, and give us all this
trouble."

"I am nun-nun-nun-nun-nun-no knight."

"What then?"

"A hosier."

"A what? Then thy armour shall be stripped off, and thou shalt be tied
to a stake in front of the works, and riddled with arrows for a warning
to traitors."

"N-n-n-n-no! duda-duda-duda-duda-don't do that."

"Why not?"

"Tuta-tuta-tuta-townsfolk will-h-h-h-hang t'other
buba-buba-buba-buba-bastard."

"What, whom?"

"Your bub-bub-bub-brother Baldwyn."

"What, have you knaves ta'en him?"

The warlike hosier nodded.

"Hang the fool!" said Anthony, peevishly.

The warlike hosier watched his eye, and doffing his helmet, took out of
the lining an intercepted letter from the duke, bidding the said Anthony
come to court immediately, as he was to represent the court of Burgundy
at the court of England; was to go over and receive the English king's
sister, and conduct her to her bridegroom, the Earl of Charolois. The
mission was one very soothing to Anthony's pride, and also to his love
of pleasure. For Edward the Fourth held the gayest and most luxurious
court in Europe. The sly hosier saw he longed to be off, and said,
"We'll gega-gega-gega-gega-give ye a thousand angels to raise the
siege."

"And Baldwyn?"

"I'll gega-gega-gega-gega-go and send him with the money."

It was now dinner-time; and a flag of truce being hoisted on both sides,
the sham knight and the true one dined together and came to a friendly
understanding.

"But what is your grievance, my good friend?"

"Tuta-tuta-tuta-tuta-too much taxes."

Denys, on finding the arrow in his right arm, turned his back, which was
protected by a long shield, and walked sulkily into camp. He was met by
the Comte de Jarnac, who had seen his brilliant shot, and finding him
wounded into the bargain, gave him a handful of broad pieces.

"Hast got the better of thy grief, arbalestrier, methinks."

"My grief, yes; but not my love. As soon as ever I have put down this
rebellion, I go to Holland, and there I shall meet with him."

This event was nearer than Denys thought. He was relieved from service
next day, and though his wound was no trifle, set out with a stout heart
to rejoin his friend in Holland.



CHAPTER XLIII

A change came over Margaret Brandt. She went about her household duties
