
"Nay," said the Marquis, "let it not chafe your Highness that a fool
should act according to his folly--"

"Speak not to me," said Richard, springing from his couch, and casting
on his clothes with a dispatch which seemed marvellous--"Speak not to
me, Lord Marquis!--De Multon, I command thee speak not a word to
me--he that breathes but a syllable is no friend to Richard
Plantagenet.--Hakim, be silent, I charge thee!"

All this while the King was hastily clothing himself, and, with the last
word, snatched his sword from the pillar of the tent, and without any
other weapon, or calling any attendance, he rushed out of his pavilion.
Conrade, holding up his hands as if in astonishment, seemed willing to
enter into conversation with De Vaux; but Sir Thomas pushed rudely past
him, and calling to one of the royal equerries, said hastily, "Fly to
Lord Salisbury's quarters, and let him get his men together and follow
me instantly to Saint George's Mount. Tell him the King's fever has left
his blood and settled in his brain."

Imperfectly heard, and still more imperfectly comprehended, by the
startled attendant whom De Vaux addressed thus hastily, the equerry and
his fellow-servants of the royal chamber rushed hastily into the tents
of the neighbouring nobility, and quickly spread an alarm, as general
as the cause seemed vague, through the whole British forces. The English
soldiers, waked in alarm from that noonday rest which the heat of the
climate had taught them to enjoy as a luxury, hastily asked each other
the cause of the tumult, and without waiting an answer, supplied by the
force of their own fancy the want of information. Some said the Saracens
were in the camp, some that the King's life was attempted, some that he
had died of the fever the preceding night, many that he was assassinated
by the Duke of Austria. The nobles and officers, at an equal loss with
the common men to ascertain the real cause of the disorder, laboured
only to get their followers under arms and under authority, lest their
rashness should occasion some great misfortune to the Crusading army.
The English trumpets sounded loud, shrill, and continuously. The
alarm-cry of "Bows and bills, bows and bills!" was heard from quarter
to quarter, again and again shouted, and again and again answered by the
presence of the ready warriors, and their national invocation, "Saint
George for merry England!"

The alarm went through the nearest quarter of the camp, and men of
all the various nations assembled, where, perhaps, every people in
Christendom had their representatives, flew to arms, and drew together
under circumstances of general confusion, of which they knew neither
the cause nor the object. It was, however, lucky, amid a scene so
threatening, that the Earl of Salisbury, while he hurried after De
Vaux's summons with a few only of the readiest English men-at-arms,
directed the rest of the English host to be drawn up and kept under
arms, to advance to Richard's succour if necessity should require, but
in fit array and under due command, and not with the tumultuary
haste which their own alarm and zeal for the King's safety might have
dictated.

In the meanwhile, without regarding for one instant the shouts, the
cries, the tumult which began to thicken around him, Richard, with
his dress in the last disorder, and his sheathed blade under his arm,
pursued his way with the utmost speed, followed only by De Vaux and one
or two household servants, to Saint George's Mount.

He outsped even the alarm which his impetuosity only had excited,
and passed the quarter of his own gallant troops of Normandy, Poitou,
Gascony, and Anjou before the disturbance had reached them, although the
noise accompanying the German revel had induced many of the soldiery to
get on foot to listen. The handful of Scots were also quartered in the
vicinity, nor had they been disturbed by the uproar. But the King's
person and his haste were both remarked by the Knight of the Leopard,
who, aware that danger must be afoot, and hastening to share in it,
snatched his shield and sword, and united himself to De Vaux, who with
some difficulty kept pace with his impatient and fiery master. De Vaux
answered a look of curiosity, which the Scottish knight directed towards
him, with a shrug of his broad shoulders, and they continued, side by
side, to pursue Richard's steps.

The King was soon at the foot of Saint George's Mount, the sides as well
as platform of which were now surrounded and crowded, partly by those
belonging to the Duke of Austria's retinue, who were celebrating, with
shouts of jubilee, the act which they considered as an assertion of
national honour; partly by bystanders of different nations, whom dislike
to the English, or mere curiosity, had assembled together to witness the
end of these extraordinary proceedings. Through this disorderly troop
Richard burst his way, like a goodly ship under full sail, which cleaves
her forcible passage through the rolling billows, and heeds not that
they unite after her passage and roar upon her stern.

The summit of the eminence was a small level space, on which were
pitched the rival banners, surrounded still by the Archduke's friends
and retinue. In the midst of the circle was Leopold himself, still
contemplating with self-satisfaction the deed he had done, and still
listening to the shouts of applause which his partisans bestowed with no
sparing breath. While he was in this state of self-gratulation, Richard
burst into the circle, attended, indeed, only by two men, but in his own
headlong energies an irresistible host.

"Who has dared," he said, laying his hands upon the Austrian
standard, and speaking in a voice like the sound which precedes an
earthquake--"Who has dared to place this paltry rag beside the banner of
England?"

The Archduke wanted not personal courage, and it was impossible he
could hear this question without reply. Yet so much was he troubled
and surprised by the unexpected arrival of Richard, and affected by the
general awe inspired by his ardent and unyielding character, that the
demand was twice repeated, in a tone which seemed to challenge heaven
and earth, ere the Archduke replied, with such firmness as he could
command, "It was I, Leopold of Austria."

"Then shall Leopold of Austria," replied Richard, "presentry see the
rate at which his banner and his pretensions are held by Richard of
England."

So saying, he pulled up the standard-spear, splintered it to pieces,
threw the banner itself on the ground, and placed his foot upon it.

"Thus," said he, "I trample on the banner of Austria. Is there a knight
among your Teutonic chivalry dare impeach my deed?"

There was a momentary silence; but there are no braver men than the
Germans.

"I," and "I," and "I," was heard from several knights of the Duke"s
followers; and he himself added his voice to those which accepted the
King of England's defiance.

"Why do we dally thus?" said the Earl Wallenrode, a gigantic warrior
from the frontiers of Hungary. "Brethren and noble gentlemen, this man's
foot is on the honour of your country--let us rescue it from violation,
and down with the pride of England!"

So saying, he drew his sword, and struck at the King a blow which might
have proved fatal, had not the Scot intercepted and caught it upon his
shield.

"I have sworn," said King Richard--and his voice was heard above all
the tumult, which now waxed wild and loud--"never to strike one whose
shoulder bears the cross; therefore live, Wallenrode--but live to
remember Richard of England."

As he spoke, he grasped the tall Hungarian round the waist, and,
unmatched in wrestling, as in other military exercises, hurled him
backwards with such violence that the mass flew as if discharged from a
military engine, not only through the ring of spectators who witnessed
the extraordinary scene, but over the edge of the mount itself, down
the steep side of which Wallenrode rolled headlong, until, pitching at
length upon his shoulder, he dislocated the bone, and lay like one dead.
This almost supernatural display of strength did not encourage either
the Duke or any of his followers to renew a personal contest so
inauspiciously commenced. Those who stood farthest back did, indeed,
clash their swords, and cry out, "Cut the island mastiff to pieces!"
but those who were nearer veiled, perhaps, their personal fears under an
affected regard for order, and cried, for the most part, "Peace! Peace!
the peace of the Cross--the peace of Holy Church and our Father the
Pope!"

These various cries of the assailants, contradicting each other, showed
their irresolution; while Richard, his foot still on the archducal
banner, glared round him with an eye that seemed to seek an enemy, and
from which the angry nobles shrunk appalled, as from the threatened
grasp of a lion. De Vaux and the Knight of the Leopard kept their places
beside him; and though the swords which they held were still sheathed,
it was plain that they were prompt to protect Richard's person to the
very last, and their size and remarkable strength plainly showed the
defence would be a desperate one.

Salisbury and his attendants were also now drawing near, with bills and
partisans brandished, and bows already bended.

At this moment King Philip of France, attended by one or two of his
nobles, came on the platform to inquire the cause of the disturbance,
and made gestures of surprise at finding the King of England raised from
his sick-bed, and confronting their common ally, the Duke of Austria, in
such a menacing and insulting posture. Richard himself blushed at being
discovered by Philip, whose sagacity he respected as much as he disliked
his person, in an attitude neither becoming his character as a monarch,
nor as a Crusader; and it was observed that he withdrew his foot, as
if accidentally, from the dishonoured banner, and exchanged his look of
violent emotion for one of affected composure and indifference. Leopold
also struggled to attain some degree of calmness, mortified as he was
by having been seen by Philip in the act of passively submitting to the
insults of the fiery King of England.

Possessed of many of those royal qualities for which he was termed by
his subjects the August, Philip might be termed the Ulysses, as Richard
was indisputably the Achilles, of the Crusade. The King of France was
sagacious, wise, deliberate in council, steady and calm in action,
seeing clearly, and steadily pursuing, the measures most for the
interest of his kingdom--dignified and royal in his deportment, brave in
person, but a politician rather than a warrior. The Crusade would
have been no choice of his own; but the spirit was contagious, and the
expedition was enforced upon him by the church, and by the unanimous
wish of his nobility. In any other situation, or in a milder age, his
character might have stood higher than that of the adventurous Coeur de
Lion. But in the Crusade, itself an undertaking wholly irrational, sound
reason was the quality of all others least estimated, and the chivalric
valour which both the age and the enterprise demanded was considered as
debased if mingled with the least touch of discretion. So that the merit
of Philip, compared with that of his haughty rival, showed like the
clear but minute flame of a lamp placed near the glare of a huge,
blazing torch, which, not possessing half the utility, makes ten times
more impression on the eye. Philip felt his inferiority in public
opinion with the pain natural to a high-spirited prince; and it cannot
be wondered at if he took such opportunities as offered for placing his
own character in more advantageous contrast with that of his rival. The
present seemed one of those occasions in which prudence and calmness
might reasonably expect to triumph over obstinacy and impetuous
violence.

"What means this unseemly broil betwixt the sworn brethren of the
Cross--the royal Majesty of England and the princely Duke Leopold? How
is it possible that those who are the chiefs and pillars of this holy
expedition--"

"A truce with thy remonstrance, France," said Richard, enraged inwardly
at finding himself placed on a sort of equality with Leopold, yet not
knowing how to resent it. "This duke, or prince, or pillar, if you will,
hath been insolent, and I have chastised him--that is all. Here is a
coil, forsooth, because of spurning a hound!"

"Majesty of France," said the Duke, "I appeal to you and every sovereign
prince against the foul indignity which I have sustained. This King of
England hath pulled down my banner-torn and trampled on it."

"Because he had the audacity to plant it beside mine," said Richard.

"My rank as thine equal entitled me," replied the Duke, emboldened by
the presence of Philip.

"Assert such equality for thy person," said King Richard, "and, by Saint
George, I will treat thy person as I did thy broidered kerchief there,
fit but for the meanest use to which kerchief may be put."

"Nay, but patience, brother of England," said Philip, "and I will
presently show Austria that he is wrong in this matter.--Do not think,
noble Duke," he continued, "that, in permitting the standard of England
to occupy the highest point in our camp, we, the independent sovereigns
of the Crusade, acknowledge any inferiority to the royal Richard. It
were inconsistent to think so, since even the Oriflamme itself--the
great banner of France, to which the royal Richard himself, in respect
of his French possessions, is but a vassal--holds for the present an
inferior place to the Lions of England. But as sworn brethren of the
Cross, military pilgrims, who, laying aside the pomp and pride of this
world, are hewing with our swords the way to the Holy Sepulchre, I
myself, and the other princes, have renounced to King Richard, from
respect to his high renown and great feats of arms, that precedence
which elsewhere, and upon other motives, would not have been yielded.
I am satisfied that, when your royal grace of Austria shall have
considered this, you will express sorrow for having placed your banner
on this spot, and that the royal Majesty of England will then give
satisfaction for the insult he has offered."

The SPRUCH-SPRECHER and the jester had both retired to a safe distance
when matters seemed coming to blows; but returned when words, their own
commodity, seemed again about to become the order of the day.

The man of proverbs was so delighted with Philip's politic speech that
he clashed his baton at the conclusion, by way of emphasis, and forgot
the presence in which he was, so far as to say aloud that he himself had
never said a wiser thing in his life.

"It may be so," whispered Jonas Schwanker, "but we shall be whipped if
you speak so loud."

The Duke answered sullenly that he would refer his quarrel to the
General Council of the Crusade--a motion which Philip highly applauded,
as qualified to take away a scandal most harmful to Christendom.

Richard, retaining the same careless attitude, listened to Philip until
his oratory seemed exhausted, and then said aloud, "I am drowsy--this
fever hangs about me still. Brother of France, thou art acquainted with
my humour, and that I have at all times but few words to spare. Know,
therefore, at once, I will submit a matter touching the honour
of England neither to Prince, Pope, nor Council. Here stands my
banner--whatsoever pennon shall be reared within three butts' length
of it--ay, were it the Oriflamme, of which you were, I think, but now
speaking--shall be treated as that dishonoured rag; nor will I yield
other satisfaction than that which these poor limbs can render in the
lists to any bold challenge--ay, were it against five champions instead
of one."

"Now," said the jester, whispering his companion, "that is as complete
a piece of folly as if I myself had said it; but yet, I think, there may
be in this matter a greater fool than Richard yet."

"And who may that be?" asked the man of wisdom.

"Philip," said the jester, "or our own Royal Duke, should either accept
the challenge. But oh, most sage SPRUCH-SPECHER, what excellent kings
wouldst thou and I have made, since those on whose heads these crowns
have fallen can play the proverb-monger and the fool as completely as
ourselves!"

While these worthies plied their offices apart, Philip answered calmly
to the almost injurious defiance of Richard, "I came not hither to
awaken fresh quarrels, contrary to the oath we have sworn, and the holy
cause in which we have engaged. I part from my brother of England as
brothers should part, and the only strife between the Lions of England
and the Lilies of France shall be which shall be carried deepest into
the ranks of the infidels."

"It is a bargain, my royal brother," said Richard, stretching out his
hand with all the frankness which belonged to his rash but generous
disposition; "and soon may we have the opportunity to try this gallant
and fraternal wager."

"Let this noble Duke also partake in the friendship of this happy
moment," said Philip; and the Duke approached half-sullenly,
half-willing to enter into some accommodation.

"I think not of fools, nor of their folly," said Richard carelessly; and
the Archduke, turning his back on him, withdrew from the ground.

Richard looked after him as he retired.

"There is a sort of glow-worm courage," he said, "that shows only by
night. I must not leave this banner unguarded in darkness; by daylight
the look of the Lions will alone defend it. Here, Thomas of Gilsland, I
give thee the charge of the standard--watch over the honour of England."

"Her safety is yet more dear to me," said De Vaux, "and the life of
Richard is the safety of England. I must have your Highness back to your
tent, and that without further tarriance."

"Thou art a rough and peremptory nurse, De Vaux," said the king,
smiling; and then added, addressing Sir Kenneth, "Valiant Scot, I
owe thee a boon, and I will pay it richly. There stands the banner of
England! Watch it as novice does his armour on the night before he is
dubbed. Stir not from it three spears' length, and defend it with thy
body against injury or insult. Sound thy bugle if thou art assailed by
more than three at once. Dost thou undertake the charge?"

"Willingly," said Kenneth; "and will discharge it upon penalty of my
head. I will but arm me, and return hither instantly."

The Kings of France and England then took formal leave of each other,
hiding, under an appearance of courtesy, the grounds of complaint which
either had against the other--Richard against Philip, for what he deemed
an officious interference betwixt him and Austria, and Philip against
Coeur de Lion, for the disrespectful manner in which his mediation had
been received. Those whom this disturbance had assembled now drew off in
different directions, leaving the contested mount in the same solitude
which had subsisted till interrupted by the Austrian bravado. Men judged
of the events of the day according to their partialities, and while the
English charged the Austrian with having afforded the first ground of
quarrel, those of other nations concurred in casting the greater blame
upon the insular haughtiness and assuming character of Richard.

"Thou seest," said the Marquis of Montserrat to the Grand Master of the
Templars, "that subtle courses are more effective than violence. I
have unloosed the bonds which held together this bunch of sceptres and
lances--thou wilt see them shortly fall asunder."

"I would have called thy plan a good one," said the Templar, "had there
been but one man of courage among yonder cold-blooded Austrians to sever
the bonds of which you speak with his sword. A knot that is unloosed may
again be fastened, but not so the cord which has been cut to pieces."



CHAPTER XII.

     'Tis woman that seduces all mankind.
        GAY.

In the days of chivalry, a dangerous post or a perilous adventure was a
reward frequently assigned to military bravery as a compensation for its
former trials; just as, in ascending a precipice, the surmounting one
crag only lifts the climber to points yet more dangerous.

It was midnight, and the moon rode clear and high in heaven, when
Kenneth of Scotland stood upon his watch on Saint George's Mount, beside
the banner of England, a solitary sentinel, to protect the emblem of
that nation against the insults which might be meditated among the
thousands whom Richard's pride had made his enemies. High thoughts
rolled, one after each other, upon the mind of the warrior. It seemed
to him as if he had gained some favour in the eyes of the chivalrous
monarch, who till now had not seemed to distinguish him among the crowds
of brave men whom his renown had assembled under his banner, and Sir
Kenneth little recked that the display of royal regard consisted in
placing him upon a post so perilous. The devotion of his ambitious and
high-placed affection inflamed his military enthusiasm. Hopeless as that
attachment was in almost any conceivable circumstances, those which had
lately occurred had, in some degree, diminished the distance between
Edith and himself. He upon whom Richard had conferred the distinction
of guarding his banner was no longer an adventurer of slight note, but
placed within the regard of a princess, although he was as far as ever
from her level. An unknown and obscure fate could not now be his. If
he was surprised and slain on the post which had been assigned him, his
death--and he resolved it should be glorious--must deserve the praises
as well as call down the vengeance of Coeur de Lion, and be followed
by the regrets, and even the tears, of the high-born beauties of the
English Court. He had now no longer reason to fear that he should die as
a fool dieth.

Sir Kenneth had full leisure to enjoy these and similar high-souled
thoughts, fostered by that wild spirit of chivalry, which, amid its
most extravagant and fantastic flights, was still pure from all selfish
alloy--generous, devoted, and perhaps only thus far censurable, that it
proposed objects and courses of action inconsistent with the frailties
and imperfections of man. All nature around him slept in calm moon-shine
or in deep shadow. The long rows of tents and pavilions, glimmering or
darkening as they lay in the moonlight or in the shade, were still and
silent as the streets of a deserted city. Beside the banner-staff lay
the large staghound already mentioned, the sole companion of Kenneth's
watch, on whose vigilance he trusted for early warning of the approach
of any hostile footstep. The noble animal seemed to understand the
purpose of their watch; for he looked from time to time at the rich
folds of the heavy pennon, and, when the cry of the sentinels came from
the distant lines and defences of the camp, he answered them with one
deep and reiterated bark, as if to affirm that he too was vigilant in
his duty. From time to time, also, he lowered his lofty head, and wagged
his tail, as his master passed and repassed him in the short turns which
he took upon his post; or, when the knight stood silent and abstracted
leaning on his lance, and looking up towards heaven, his faithful
attendant ventured sometimes, in the phrase of romance, "to disturb his
thoughts," and awaken him from his reverie, by thrusting his large rough
snout into the knight's gauntleted hand, to solicit a transitory caress.

Thus passed two hours of the knight's watch without anything remarkable
occurring. At length, and upon a sudden, the gallant staghound bayed
furiously, and seemed about to dash forward where the shadow lay
the darkest, yet waited, as if in the slips, till he should know the
pleasure of his master.

"Who goes there?" said Sir Kenneth, aware that there was something
creeping forward on the shadowy side of the mount.

"In the name of Merlin and Maugis," answered a hoarse, disagreeable
voice, "tie up your fourfooted demon there, or I come not at you."

"And who art thou that would approach my post?" said Sir Kenneth,
bending his eyes as keenly as he could on some object, which he
could just observe at the bottom of the ascent, without being able to
distinguish its form. "Beware--I am here for death and life."

"Take up thy long-fanged Sathanas," said the voice, "or I will conjure
him with a bolt from my arblast."

At the same time was heard the sound of a spring or check, as when a
crossbow is bent.

"Unbend thy arblast, and come into the moonlight," said the Scot, "or,
by Saint Andrew, I will pin thee to the earth, be what or whom thou
wilt!"

As he spoke he poised his long lance by the middle, and, fixing his eye
upon the object, which seemed to move, he brandished the weapon, as
if meditating to cast it from his hand--a use of the weapon sometimes,
though rarely, resorted to when a missile was necessary. But Sir Kenneth
was ashamed of his purpose, and grounded his weapon, when there stepped
from the shadow into the moonlight, like an actor entering upon the
stage, a stunted, decrepit creature, whom, by his fantastic dress and
deformity, he recognized, even at some distance, for the male of the two
dwarfs whom he had seen in the chapel at Engaddi. Recollecting, at the
same moment, the other and far different visions of that extraordinary
night, he gave his dog a signal, which he instantly understood, and,
returning to the standard, laid himself down beside it with a stifled
growl.

The little, distorted miniature of humanity, assured of his safety from
an enemy so formidable, came panting up the ascent, which the shortness
of his legs rendered laborious, and, when he arrived on the platform at
the top, shifted to his left hand the little crossbow, which was just
