
"So says Odda," replied Alfred, smiling. "He has piteous tales of
one Thord, whom you sent to teach him things, and the way in which
he was made to learn."

"Nevertheless," said Odda, "I will not have Thord blamed, for it is
in my mind that we should have learned in no other way so quickly."

Again the bishop signed to the king, and Alfred became grave.

"Here is one thing that our good Sigehelm minds me of. It seems
that you are a heathen."

"Why, no, if that means one who hates Christians," I said.
"Certainly I do not do that, having no cause to do so. Those whom I
know are yourself, and Neot, and Odda, and one or two more only."

"That is not it," said the king. "What we call a heathen is one who
worships the old gods--the Asir."

"Certainly I do that--ill enough."

"Then," said Alfred, while Odda shifted in his seat, seeming
anxious as to how I should take this, "it is our rule that before a
heathen man can serve with us, he shall at least be ready to learn
our faith, and also must be signed with the cross, in token that he
hates it not {viii}."

"Why should I not learn of your faith?" I said. "Neot asked me of
mine. As for the other, I do not know rightly what it means. I see
your people sign themselves crosswise, and I cannot tell why,
unless it is as we hallow a feast by signing it with Thor's
hammer."

"It is more than that," Alfred said, motioning to Sigehelm to say
nothing, for he was going to speak. "First you must know what it
means, and then say if you will be signed therewith."

Then he said to Sigehelm:

"Here is one who will listen to good words, not already set against
them, as some Danes are, by reason of ill report and the lives of
bad Christians. Have no fear of telling him what you will."

Now, if I were to serve King Alfred, it seemed to me to be only
reasonable that I should know the beliefs of those with whom I had
to do. Then I minded me of Neot, and his way of asking about my
gods, as if the belief of every man was of interest to him.

"Here is a deep matter to be talked of, King Alfred," I said. "It
does not do to speak lightly and carelessly of such things. Nor am
I more than your guest as yet, willing to hear what you would have
me know. When winter has gone, and you know if I shall be any good
to you, then will be question if I enter your service altogether,
and by that time I shall know enough. Maybe I shall see Neot again;
he and I began to speak of these things."

Then Sigehelm said:

"I think this is right, and Neot can tell you more in a few words
than I in many. Yet whatever you ask me I will try to tell you."

"I want to speak with Neot," answered the king, "and we will ride
together and seek him when peace is made. I have many things to say
to him and ask him. We will go as soon as it is safe."

So ended my talk with King Alfred at that time, and I was well
content therewith. So also were my men, for it was certain that
every one of them would find some place of command, were it but
over a watch, when Alfred's new sea levies were to be trained.

Many noble Saxons I met in the week before peace was made with the
Danes in Exeter, for all the best were gathered there. Most of all
I liked Ethered, the young ealdorman of Mercia, and Ethelnoth, the
Somerset ealdorman, and Heregar, the king's standard bearer, an
older warrior, who had seen every battle south of Thames since the
long ago day when Eahlstan the bishop taught his flock how to fight
for their land against the heathen.

These were very friendly with me, and I should see more of them if
I were indeed to ward the Wessex coasts, and for that reason they
made the more of me.

Now I saw no more of Osmund the jarl, for Odda knew that the lesser
folk would mistrust me if I had any doings with the Danes. Maybe I
was sorry not to see the Lady Thora; but if I had seen her, I do
not know what I should have said to her, having had no experience
of ladies' ways at any time, which would have made me seem foolish
perhaps.



Chapter VII. The Pixies' Dance.


I do not know that there is anything more pleasant after long weeks
at sea than to have a good horse under one, and to be riding in the
fresh winds of early autumn over new country that is beautiful in
sunlight. So when at last every Danish chief had made submission,
and the whole host had marched back to what they held as their own
land in Mercia, going to Gloucester, as was said, with Odda and
Ethered the ealdormen hanging on their rear with a great levy, I
rode with King Alfred to find Neot his cousin gaily enough. Thord
stayed with the ships, but the scald and Kolgrim were with me, and
the king mounted us well. Ethelnoth of Somerset came also, and some
forty men of the king's household; and all went armed, for the
country we had to cross was of the wildest, though we went by the
great road that runs from west to east of England, made even before
the Romans came. But it crossed the edge of Dartmoor, the most
desolate place in all the land, where outlaws and masterless men
found fastnesses whence none could drive them.

One could not wish for a more pleasant companion than Alfred, and
the miles went easily. We had both hawks and hounds with us, for
there was game in plenty, and the king said that with the ending of
the war, and the beginning of new hopes for his fleet, he would
cast care aside for a little. So he was joyous and free in speech,
and at times he would sing in lightness of heart, and would bid
Harek sing also, so that it was pleasant to hear them. Ever does
Harek say that no man sings better than Alfred of England.

In late afternoon we came to the wild fringe of Dartmoor, and here
the king had a guest house in a little village which he was wont to
use on these journeys to see Neot. We should rest there, and so
cross the wastes in full daylight. So he went in, maybe fearing his
sickness, which was indeed a sore burden to him, though he was wont
to make light of it; but Ethelnoth asked me if we should not spend
the hours of evening light in coursing a bustard or two, for many
were about the moorland close at hand. They would be welcome at the
king's table, he said; and I, fresh from the sea and camp, asked
for nothing better than a good gallop over the wide-stretching
hillsides.

So we took fresh horses from those that were led for us, and rode
away. We took hawks--the king had given me a good one when we
started, for a Saxon noble ever rides with hawk on wrist--and two
leash of greyhounds.

I was for putting my arms aside, but the ealdorman said it was
better not to do so, by reason of the moor folk, who were wild
enough to fall on a small party at times. It was of little moment,
however; for we rode in the lighter buff jerkins instead of heavy
mail, and were not going far.

Ethelnoth took two men with him, and my two comrades were with
me--Kolgrim leading the hounds in leash beside his horse. We went
across the first hillside, and from its top looked northward and
westward as far as one could see over the strange grey wastes of
the moorland.

Then from the heather almost under our feet rose a great bustard
that ran down wind with outstretched wings before us, seeking the
lonelier country. Kolgrim whooped, and slipped the leash, and the
hounds sprang after it, and we followed cheering. It was good to
feel the rush of hillside air in our faces, and the spring and
stretch of the horses under us, and to see the long-reached hounds
straining after the great bird that might well be able to escape
them.

I suppose that Ethelnoth started a second bird. I did not look
behind me to see what any man was doing, but followed the chase
round the spur of a granite-topped hillside, and forgot him. For
when the bustard took wing for a heavy flight, and lit and ran
again, and again flew with wings that failed each time more and
more, while the strong legs were the stronger for the short rest,
and when the good hounds were straining after it, one could not
expect me to care for aught but that.

It had been strange if I thought of anything but the sport. I knew
there were two horsemen close by, a little wide on either flank,
but behind me. So we took the bird after a good chase, and then I
knew that we had in some way shaken off the Saxons, and that we
three vikings were together. It did not trouble us, for one looks
for such partings, and Ethelnoth had his own bounds. So we went on,
and found another bustard, and took it.

"Now we must go back," I said; "one must have a thought for the
king's horses."

So we turned, and then a heron rose from a boggy stream below us,
and that was a quarry not to be let go. I unhooded the falcon and
cast her off, and straightway forgot everything but the most
wonderful sight that the field and forest can give us--the dizzy
upward climbing circles of hawk and heron, who strive to gain the
highest place cloudwards, one for attack, the other for safety.

The evening sunlight flashed red from the bright under feathers of
the strong wings as the birds swung into it from the shadow of the
westward hill, and still they soared, drifting westward with the
wind over our heads. Then with a great rushing sound the heron gave
up, and fell, stone-like, from the falcon that had won to air above
him at last. At once the long wings of his enemy closed halfway,
and she swooped after him.

Then back and up, like a sword drawn at need, went the heron's
sharp beak; and the falcon saw it, and swerved and shot past her
nearly-taken prey. Again the heron began to tower up and up with a
harsh croak that seemed like a cry of mockery; then the wondrous
swing and sweep of the long, tireless wings of the passage hawk,
and the cry of another heron far off, scared by its fellow's note;
and again for us a canter over the moorland, eye and hand and knee
together wary for both hawk above and good horse below, till the
falcon bound to the heron, and both came to the ground, and there
was an end in the grey shadow of the Dartmoor tors. Ay, but King
Alfred's hawk was a good one!

"Now, where shall we seek Ethelnoth?" I said.

"No good seeking him," said Harek. "We had better make our way back
to the village."

We coupled up the greyhounds again and hooded the falcon, and rode
leisurely back over our tracks for some way. The sun set about that
time into a purple bank of mist beyond the farther hills. One does
not note how the miles go when one finds sport such as this, and
presently we began to be sure that we had ridden farther than we
had thought. We knew, as we thought, the direction from which we
had come, and steered, sailor-wise, by the sunset. But we could
take no straight course because of the hills, and we were as often
off the line as on.

Then crept up the mist from the valleys, and we had nought to steer
by, for the wind dropped. Then I said:

"Let the horses take us home; they know better than we."

So we rode on slowly until darkness came, but never saw so much as
a light that might guide us. And presently we let the dogs loose,
thinking that they would go homewards. But a greyhound is not like
a mastiff, and they hung round us, careless, or helpless, in the
mists and darkness.

Presently we came to a place where the horses stopped of their own
accord. There was a sheer rock on one side, and the hill was steep
below us, and a stream brawled somewhere before us.

"Well," I said, "here we stay for the night. It is of no use
wandering any longer, and the night is warm."

We thought nothing of this, for any hunter knows that such a chance
may befall him in a strange and wild country. So we laughed
together and off-saddled and hobbled the horses, and so sat down
supperless to wait for morning under the rock. The mist was clammy
round us, thinning and then thickening again as the breaths of wind
took it; but the moon would rise soon, and then maybe it would go.

We had no means of making a fire, and no cloaks; so sleep came
hardly, and we talked long. Then the dogs grew uneasy, and
presently wandered away into the fog and darkness. I thought that
perhaps they heard some game stirring, and did not wonder at them.

Now I was just sleeping, when I heard the sharp yelp of a dog in
pain, and sat up suddenly. Then came a second, and after that the
distant sound of voices that rose for a moment and hushed again.

"We must be close to the village after all," I said, for my
comrades were listening also; "but why did the hounds yell like
that?"

"Some old dame has taken the broomstick to them," said Kolgrim.
"They are hungry, and have put their noses into her milk pails."

"It is too late for open doors," I said; "unless they have found
our own lodging, where some are waiting for us. But there they
would not be beaten."

"Ho!" said Kolgrim, in another minute or so, "yonder is a fire."

The wind had come round the hillside and swept the mist away for a
moment, and below us in the valley was a speck of red light that
made a wide glow in the denser fog that hung there. One could
hardly say how far off it was, for fog of any sort confuses
distance; but the brook seemed to run in the direction of the fire,
and it was likely that any house stood near its banks.

"Let us follow the brook and see what we can find," I said
therefore. "These mists are chill, and I will confess that I am
hungry. We cannot lose our way if we keep to the water, and the
horses will be safe enough."

Anything was better, as it seemed to us, than trying to think that
we slept comfortably here, and so we rose up and went down the
banks of the stream at once; and the way proved to be easy enough,
if rocky. The bank on this side was higher, and dry therefore, so
that we had no bogs to fear. We knew enough of them in the Orkneys
and on the Sutherland coast.

The white mist grew very thick, but the firelight glow grew redder
as we went on, and at last we came near enough to hear many voices
plainly; but presently, when one shouted, we found that the tongue
was not known to us.

"Now it is plain whom we have come across," I said. "This is a camp
of the Cornish tin traders, of whom the king told us. They are
honest folk enough, and will put us on the great road. They must be
close to it."

That seemed so likely that we left the brook and began to draw
nearer to the fire, the voices growing plainer every moment, though
we could see no man as yet.

Now, all of a sudden, every voice was silent, and we stopped,
thinking we were heard perhaps; though it did seem strange to me
that no dogs were about a camp of traders. I was just about to call
out that we were friends, when there began a low, even beating, as
of a drum of some sort, and then suddenly a wild howl that sounded
like a war cry of maddened men, and after that a measured tramping
of feet that went swiftly and in time to a chant, the like of which
I had never heard before, and which made me grasp Harek by the arm.

"What, in Odin's name, is this?" r said, whispering.

"Somewhat uncanny," answered the scald. "Let us get back to the
horses and leave this place."

