
"There will be a way," she said--"there will be a way.  I shall not swoon
again."

She left her divan and stood upright, the colour having come back to her
face; but the look Anne worshipped not having returned with it, 'twas as
though Mistress Clorinda Wildairs had been born again.

"To-morrow morning I go forth on Devil," she said; "and I shall be abroad
if any visitors come."

What passed in her chamber that night no human being knew.  Anne, who
left her own apartment and crept into a chamber near hers to lie and
watch, knew that she paced to and fro, but heard no other sound, and
dared not intrude upon her.

When she came forth in the morning she wore the high look she had been
wont to wear in the years gone by, when she ruled in her father's house,
and rode to the hunt with a following of gay middle-aged and elderly
rioters.  Her eye was brilliant, and her colour matched it.  She held her
head with the old dauntless carriage, and there was that in her voice
before which her women quaked, and her lacqueys hurried to do her
bidding.

Devil himself felt this same thing in the touch of her hand upon his
bridle when she mounted him at the door, and seemed to glance askance at
her sideways.

She took no servant with her, and did not ride to the Park, but to the
country.  Once on the highroad, she rode fast and hard, only galloping
straight before her as the way led, and having no intention.  Where she
was going she knew not; but why she rode on horseback she knew full well,
it being because the wild, almost fierce motion was in keeping with the
tempest in her soul.  Thoughts rushed through her brain even as she
rushed through the air on Devil's back, and each leaping after the other,
seemed to tear more madly.

"What shall I do?" she was saying to herself.  "What thing is there for
me to do?  I am trapped like a hunted beast, and there is no way forth."

The blood went like a torrent through her veins, so that she seemed to
hear it roaring in her ears; her heart thundered in her side, or 'twas so
she thought of it as it bounded, while she recalled the past and looked
upon the present.

"What else could have been?" she groaned.  "Naught else--naught else.
'Twas a trick--a trick of Fate to ruin me for my punishment."

When she had gone forth it had been with no hope in her breast that her
wit might devise a way to free herself from the thing which so beset her,
for she had no weak fancies that there dwelt in this base soul any germ
of honour which might lead it to relenting.  As she had sat in her dark
room at night, crouched upon the floor, and clenching her hands, as the
mad thoughts went whirling through her brain, she had stared her Fate in
the face and known all its awfulness.  Before her lay the rapture of a
great, sweet, honourable passion, a high and noble life lived in such
bliss as rarely fell to lot of woman--on this one man she knew that she
could lavish all the splendour of her nature, and make his life a heaven,
as hers would be.  Behind her lay the mad, uncared-for years, and one
black memory blighting all to come, though 'twould have been but a black
memory with no power to blight if the heaven of love had not so opened to
her and with its light cast all else into shadow.

"If 'twere not love," she cried--"if 'twere but ambition, I could defy it
to the last; but 'tis love--love--love, and it will kill me to forego
it."

Even as she moaned the words she heard hoof beats near her, and a
horseman leaped the hedge and was at her side.  She set her teeth, and
turning, stared into John Oxon's face.

"Did you think I would not follow you?" he asked.

"No," she answered.

"I have followed you at a distance hitherto," he said; "now I shall
follow close."

She did not speak, but galloped on.

"Think you you can outride me?" he said grimly, quickening his steed's
pace.  "I go with your ladyship to your own house.  For fear of scandal
you have not openly rebuffed me previous to this time; for a like reason
you will not order your lacqueys to shut your door when I enter it with
you."

My Lady Dunstanwolde turned to gaze at him again.  The sun shone on his
bright falling locks and his blue eyes as she had seen it shine in days
which seemed so strangely long passed by, though they were not five years
agone.

"'Tis strange," she said, with a measure of wonder, "to live and be so
black a devil."

"Bah! my lady," he said, "these are fine words--and fine words do not
hold between us.  Let us leave them.  I would escort you home, and speak
to you in private."  There was that in his mocking that was madness to
her, and made her sick and dizzy with the boiling of the blood which
surged to her brain.  The fury of passion which had been a terror to all
about her when she had been a child was upon her once more, and though
she had thought herself freed from its dominion, she knew it again and
all it meant.  She felt the thundering beat in her side, the hot flood
leaping to her cheek, the flame burning her eyes themselves as if fire
was within them.  Had he been other than he was, her face itself would
have been a warning.  But he pressed her hard.  As he would have slunk
away a beaten cur if she had held the victory in her hands, so feeling
that the power was his, he exulted over the despairing frenzy which was
in her look.

"I pay back old scores," he said.  "There are many to pay.  When you
crowned yourself with roses and set your foot upon my face, your ladyship
thought not of this!  When you gave yourself to Dunstanwolde and spat at
me, you did not dream that there could come a time when I might goad as
you did."

She struck Devil with her whip, who leaped forward; but Sir John followed
hard behind her.  He had a swift horse too, and urged him fiercely, so
that between these two there was a race as if for life or death.  The
beasts bounded forward, spurning the earth beneath their feet.  My lady's
face was set, her eyes were burning flame, her breath came short and
pantingly between her teeth.  Oxon's fair face was white with passion; he
panted also, but strained every nerve to keep at her side, and kept
there.

"Keep back!  I warn thee!" she cried once, almost gasping.

"Keep back!" he answered, blind with rage.  "I will follow thee to hell!"

And in this wise they galloped over the white road until the hedges
disappeared and they were in the streets, and people turned to look at
them, and even stood and stared.  Then she drew rein a little and went
slower, knowing with shuddering agony that the trap was closing about
her.

"What is it that you would say to me?" she asked him breathlessly.

"That which I would say within four walls that you may hear it all," he
answered.  "This time 'tis not idle threatening.  I have a thing to show
you."

Through the streets they went, and as her horse's hoofs beat the
pavement, and the passers-by, looking towards her, gazed curiously at so
fine a lady on so splendid a brute, she lifted her eyes to the houses,
the booths, the faces, and the sky, with a strange fancy that she looked
about her as a man looks who, doomed to death, is being drawn in his cart
to Tyburn tree.  For 'twas to death she went, nor to naught else could
she compare it, and she was so young and strong, and full of love and
life, and there should have been such bliss and peace before her but for
one madness of her all-unknowing days.  And this beside her--this man
with the fair face and looks and beauteous devil's eyes, was her hangman,
and carried his rope with him, and soon would fit it close about her
neck.

When they rode through the part of the town where abode the World of
Fashion, those who saw them knew them, and marvelled that the two should
be together.

"But perhaps his love has made him sue for pardon that he has so borne
himself," some said, "and she has chosen to be gracious to him, since she
is gracious in these days to all."

When they reached her house he dismounted with her, wearing an outward
air of courtesy; but his eye mocked her, as she knew.  His horse was in a
lather of sweat, and he spoke to a servant.

"Take my beast home," he said.  "He is too hot to stand, and I shall not
soon be ready."




CHAPTER XVI--Dealing with that which was done in the Panelled Parlour


He followed her to the Panelled Parlour, the one to which she had taken
Osmonde on the day of their bliss, the one in which in the afternoon she
received those who came to pay court to her over a dish of tea.  In the
mornings none entered it but herself or some invited guest.  'Twas not
the room she would have chosen for him; but when he said to her, "'Twere
best your ladyship took me to some private place," she had known there
was no other so safe.

When the door was closed behind them, and they stood face to face, they
were a strange pair to behold--she with mad defiance battling with mad
despair in her face; he with the mocking which every woman who had ever
trusted him or loved him had lived to see in his face when all was lost.
Few men there lived who were as vile as he, his power of villainy lying
in that he knew not the meaning of man's shame or honour.

"Now," she said, "tell me the worst."

"'Tis not so bad," he answered, "that a man should claim his own, and
swear that no other man shall take it from him.  That I have sworn, and
that I will hold to."

"Your own!" she said--"your own you call it--villain!"

"My own, since I can keep it," quoth he.  "Before you were my Lord of
Dunstanwolde's you were mine--of your own free will."

"Nay, nay," she cried.  "God! through some madness I knew not the
awfulness of--because I was so young and had known naught but evil--and
you were so base and wise."

"Was your ladyship an innocent?" he answered.  "It seemed not so to me."

"An innocent of all good," she cried--"of all things good on earth--of
all that I know now, having seen manhood and honour."

"His Grace of Osmonde has not been told this," he said; "and I should
make it all plain to him."

"What do you ask, devil?" she broke forth.  "What is't you ask?"

"That you shall not be the Duchess of Osmonde," he said, drawing near to
her; "that you shall be the wife of Sir John Oxon, as you once called
yourself for a brief space, though no priest had mumbled over us--"

"Who was't divorced us?" she said, gasping; "for I was an honest thing,
though I knew no other virtue.  Who was't divorced us?"

"I confess," he answered, bowing, "that 'twas I--for the time being.  I
was young, and perhaps fickle--"

"And you left me," she cried, "and I found that you had come but for a
bet--and since I so bore myself that you could not boast, and since I was
not a rich woman whose fortune would be of use to you, you followed
another and left me--me!"

"As his Grace of Osmonde will when I tell him my story," he answered.  "He
is not one to brook that such things can be told of the mother of his
heirs."

She would have shrieked aloud but that she clutched her throat in time.

"Tell him!" she cried, "tell him, and see if he will hear you.  Your word
against mine!"

"Think you I do not know that full well," he answered, and he brought
forth a little package folded in silk.  "Why have I done naught but
threaten till this time?  If I went to him without proof, he would run me
through with his sword as I were a mad dog.  But is there another woman
in England from whose head her lover could ravish a lock as long and
black as this?"

He unfolded the silk, and let other silk unfold itself, a great and thick
ring of raven hair which uncoiled its serpent length, and though he held
it high, was long enough after surging from his hand to lie upon the
floor.

"Merciful God!" she cried, and shuddering, hid her face.

"'Twas a bet, I own," he said; "I heard too much of the mad beauty and
her disdain of men not to be fired by a desire to prove to her and
others, that she was but a woman after all, and so was to be won.  I took
an oath that I would come back some day with a trophy--and this I cut
when you knew not that I did it."

She clutched her throat again to keep from shrieking in her--impotent
horror.

"Devil, craven, and loathsome--and he knows not what he is!" she gasped.
"He is a mad thing who knows not that all his thoughts are of hell."

'Twas, in sooth, a strange and monstrous thing to see him so unwavering
and bold, flinching before no ignominy, shrinking not to speak openly the
thing before the mere accusation of which other men's blood would have
boiled.

"When I bore it away with me," he said, "I lived wildly for a space, and
in those days put it in a place of safety, and when I was sober again I
had forgot where.  Yesterday, by a strange chance, I came upon it.  Think
you it can be mistaken for any other woman's hair?"

At this she held up her hand.

"Wait," she said.  "You will go to Osmonde, you will tell him this, you
will--"

"I will tell him all the story of the rose garden and of the sun-dial,
and the beauty who had wit enough to scorn a man in public that she might
more safely hold tryst with him alone.  She had great wit and cunning for
a beauty of sixteen.  'Twould be well for her lord to have keen eyes when
she is twenty."

He should have seen the warning in her eyes, for there was warning enough
in their flaming depths.

"All that you can say I know," she said--"all that you can say!  And I
love him.  There is no other man on earth.  Were he a beggar, I would
tramp the highroad by his side and go hungered with him.  He is my lord,
and I his mate--his mate!"

"That you will not be," he answered, made devilish by her words.  "He is
a high and noble gentleman, and wants no man's cast-off plaything for his
wife."

Her breast leaped up and down in her panting as she pressed her hand upon
it; her breath came in sharp puffs through her nostrils.

"And once," she breathed--"and once--I _loved_ thee--cur!"

He was mad with exultant villainy and passion, and he broke into a laugh.

"Loved me!" he said.  "Thou!  As thou lovedst me--and as thou lovest
him--so will Moll Easy love any man--for a crown."

Her whip lay upon the table, she caught and whirled it in the air.  She
was blind with the surging of her blood, and saw not how she caught or
held it, or what she did--only that she struck!

And 'twas his temple that the loaded weapon met, and 'twas wielded by a
wrist whose sinews were of steel, and even as it struck he gasped,
casting up his hands, and thereupon fell, and lay stretched at her feet!

But the awful tempest which swept over her had her so under its dominion
that she was like a branch whirled on the wings of the storm.  She scarce
noted that he fell, or noting it, gave it not one thought as she dashed
from one end of the apartment to the other with the fierce striding of a
mad woman.

"Devil!" she cried, "and cur! and for thee I blasted all the years to
come!  To a beast so base I gave all that an empress' self could give--all
life--all love--for ever.  And he comes back--shameless--to barter like a
cheating huckster, because his trade goes ill, and I--I could stock his
counters once again."

She strode towards him, raving.

"Think you I do not know, woman's bully and poltroon, that you plot to
sell yourself, because your day has come, and no woman will bid for such
an outcast, saving one that you may threaten.  Rise, vermin--rise, lest I
kill thee!"

In her blind madness she lashed him once across the face again.  And he
stirred not--and something in the resistless feeling of the flesh beneath
the whip, and in the quiet of his lying, caused her to pause and stand
panting and staring at the thing which lay before her.  For it was a
Thing, and as she stood staring, with wild heaving breast, this she saw.
'Twas but a thing--a thing lying inert, its fair locks outspread, its
eyes rolled upward till the blue was almost lost; a purple indentation on
the right temple from which there oozed a tiny thread of blood.

* * * * *

"There will be a way," she had said, and yet in her most mad despair, of
this way she had never thought; though strange it had been, considering
her lawless past, that she had not--never of this way--never!
Notwithstanding which, in one frenzied moment in which she had known
naught but her delirium, her loaded whip had found it for her--the way!

And yet it being so found, and she stood staring, seeing what she had
done--seeing what had befallen--'twas as if the blow had been struck not
at her own temple but at her heart--a great and heavy shock, which left
her bloodless, and choked, and gasping.

"What! what!" she panted.  "Nay! nay! nay!" and her eyes grew wide and
wild.

She sank upon her knees, so shuddering that her teeth began to chatter.
She pushed him and shook him by the shoulder.

"Stir!" she cried in a loud whisper.  "Move thee!  Why dost thou lie so?
Stir!"

Yet he stirred not, but lay inert, only with his lips drawn back, showing
his white teeth a little, as if her horrid agony made him begin to laugh.
Shuddering, she drew slowly nearer, her eyes more awful than his own.  Her
hand crept shaking to his wrist and clutched it.  There was naught
astir--naught!  It stole to his breast, and baring it, pressed close.
That was still and moveless as his pulse; for life was ended, and a
hundred mouldering years would not bring more of death.

"I have _killed_ thee," she breathed.  "I have _killed_ thee--though I
meant it not--even hell itself doth know.  Thou art a dead man--and this
is the worst of all!"

His hand fell heavily from hers, and she still knelt staring, such a look
coming into her face as throughout her life had never been there
before--for 'twas the look of a creature who, being tortured, the worst
at last being reached, begins to smile at Fate.

"I have killed him!" she said, in a low, awful voice; "and he lies
here--and outside people walk, and know not.  But _he_ knows--and I--and
as he lies methinks he smiles--knowing what he has done!"

She crouched even lower still, the closer to behold him, and indeed it
seemed his still face sneered as if defying her now to rid herself of
him!  'Twas as though he lay there mockingly content, saying, "Now that I
lie here, 'tis for _you_--for _you_ to move me."

She rose and stood up rigid, and all the muscles of her limbs were drawn
as though she were a creature stretched upon a rack; for the horror of
this which had befallen her seemed to fill the place about her, and leave
her no air to breathe nor light to see.

"Now!" she cried, "if I would give way--and go mad, as I could but do,
for there is naught else left--if I would but give way, that which is
I--and has lived but a poor score of years--would be done with for all
time.  All whirls before me.  'Twas I who struck the blow--and I am a
woman--and I could go raving--and cry out and call them in, and point to
him, and tell them how 'twas done--all!--all!"

She choked, and clutched her bosom, holding its heaving down so fiercely
that her nails bruised it through her habit's cloth; for she felt that
she had begun to rave already, and that the waves of such a tempest were
arising as, if not quelled at their first swell, would sweep her from her
feet and engulf her for ever.

"That--that!" she gasped--"nay--that I swear I will not do!  There was
always One who hated me--and doomed and hunted me from the hour I lay
'neath my dead mother's corpse, a new-born thing.  I know not whom it
was--or why--or how--but 'twas so!  I was made evil, and cast helpless
amid evil fates, and having done the things that were ordained, and there
was no escape from, I was shown noble manhood and high honour, and taught
to worship, as I worship now.  An angel might so love and be made higher.
And at the gate of heaven a devil grins at me and plucks me back, and
taunts and mires me, and I fall--on _this_!"

She stretched forth her arms in a great gesture, wherein it seemed that
surely she defied earth and heaven.

"No hope--no mercy--naught but doom and hell," she cried, "unless the
thing that is tortured be the stronger.  Now--unless Fate bray me
small--the stronger I will be!"

She looked down at the thing before her.  How its stone face sneered, and
even in its sneering seemed to disregard her.  She knelt by it again, her
blood surging through her body, which had been cold, speaking as if she
would force her voice to pierce its deadened ear.

"Ay, mock!" she said, setting her teeth, "thinking that I am
conquered--yet am I not!  'Twas an honest blow struck by a creature
goaded past all thought!  Ay, mock--and yet, but for one man's sake,
would I call in those outside and stand before them, crying: 'Here is a
villain whom I struck in madness--and he lies dead!  I ask not mercy, but
only justice.'"

She crouched still nearer, her breath and words coming hard and quick.
'Twas indeed as if she spoke to a living man who heard--as if she
answered what he had said.

"There would be men in England who would give it me," she raved,
whispering.  "That would there, I swear!  But there would be dullards and
dastards who would not.  He would give it--he!  Ay, mock as thou wilt!
But between his high honour and love and me thy carrion _shall_ not
come!"
