the lore of Scripture or the life of Christ.  To us, too, there would
seem little congenial in the doubts that occurred to a heathen priest,
and little learned in the answers they receive from men uneducated,
rude, and simple, possessing only the knowledge that they were greater
than they seemed.

There was one thing that greatly touched the Neapolitan: when the
lecture was concluded, they heard a very gentle knock at the door; the
password was given, and replied to; the door opened, and two young
children, the eldest of whom might have told its seventh year, entered
timidly; they were the children of the master of the house, that dark
and hardy Syrian, whose youth had been spent in pillage and bloodshed.
The eldest of the congregation (it was that old slave) opened to them
his arms; they fled to the shelter--they crept to his breast--and his
hard features smiled as he caressed them.  And then these bold and
fervent men, nursed in vicissitude, beaten by the rough winds of
life--men of mailed and impervious fortitude, ready to affront a world,
prepared for torment and armed for death--men, who presented all
imaginable contrast to the weak nerves, the light hearts, the tender
fragility of childhood, crowded round the infants, smoothing their
rugged brows and composing their bearded lips to kindly and fostering
smiles: and then the old man opened the scroll and he taught the infants
to repeat after him that beautiful prayer which we still dedicate to the
Lord, and still teach to our children; and then he told them, in simple
phrase, of God's love to the young, and how not a sparrow falls but His
eye sees it.  This lovely custom of infant initiation was long cherished
by the early Church, in memory of the words which said, 'Suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not'; and was perhaps the
origin of the superstitious calumny which ascribed to the Nazarenes the
crime which the Nazarenes, when victorious, attributed to the Jew, viz.
the decoying children to hideous rites, at which they were secretly
immolated.

And the stern paternal penitent seemed to feel in the innocence of his
children a return into early life--life ere yet it sinned: he followed
the motion of their young lips with an earnest gaze; he smiled as they
repeated, with hushed and reverent looks, the holy words: and when the
lesson was done, and they ran, released, and gladly to his knee, he
clasped them to his breast, kissed them again and again, and tears
flowed fast down his cheek--tears, of which it would have been
impossible to trace the source, so mingled they were with joy and
sorrow, penitence and hope--remorse for himself and love for them!

Something, I say, there was in this scene which peculiarly affected
Apaecides; and, in truth, it is difficult to conceive a ceremony more
appropriate to the religion of benevolence, more appealing to the
household and everyday affections, striking a more sensitive chord in
the human breast.

It was at this time that an inner door opened gently, and a very old man
entered the chamber, leaning on a staff.  At his presence, the whole
congregation rose; there was an expression of deep, affectionate respect
upon every countenance; and Apaecides, gazing on his countenance, felt
attracted towards him by an irresistible sympathy.  No man ever looked
upon that face without love; for there had dwelt the smile of the Deity,
the incarnation of divinest love--and the glory of the smile had never
passed away.

'My children, God be with you!' said the old man, stretching his arms;
and as he spoke the infants ran to his knee.  He sat down, and they
nestled fondly to his bosom.  It was beautiful to see that mingling of
the extremes of life--the rivers gushing from their early source--the
majestic stream gliding to the ocean of eternity!  As the light of
declining day seems to mingle earth and heaven, making the outline of
each scarce visible, and blending the harsh mountain-tops with the sky,
even so did the smile of that benign old age appear to hallow the aspect
of those around, to blend together the strong distinctions of varying
years, and to diffuse over infancy and manhood the light of that heaven
into which it must so soon vanish and be lost.

'Father,' said Olinthus, 'thou on whose form the miracle of the Redeemer
worked; thou who wert snatched from the grave to become the living
witness of His mercy and His power; behold! a stranger in our meeting--a
new lamb gathered to the fold!'

'Let me bless him,' said the old man: the throng gave way. Apaecides
approached him as by an instinct: he fell on his knees before him--the
old man laid his hand on the priest's head, and blessed him, but not
aloud.  As his lips moved, his eyes were upturned, and tears--those
tears that good men only shed in the hope of happiness to
another--flowed fast down his cheeks.

The children were on either side of the convert; his heart was
theirs--he had become as one of them--to enter into the kingdom of
Heaven.



Chapter IV

THE STREAM OF LOVE RUNS ON.  WHITHER?

DAYS are like years in the love of the young, when no bar, no obstacle,
is between their hearts--when the sun shines, and the course runs
smooth--when their love is prosperous and confessed.  Ione no longer
concealed from Glaucus the attachment she felt for him, and their talk
now was only of their love.  Over the rapture of the present the hopes
of the future glowed like the heaven above the gardens of spring.  They
went in their trustful thoughts far down the stream of time: they laid
out the chart of their destiny to come; they suffered the light of
to-day to suffuse the morrow. In the youth of their hearts it seemed as
if care, and change, and death, were as things unknown.  Perhaps they
loved each other the more because the condition of the world left to
Glaucus no aim and no wish but love; because the distractions common in
free states to men's affections existed not for the Athenian; because
his country wooed him not to the bustle of civil life; because ambition
furnished no counterpoise to love: and, therefore, over their schemes
and projects, love only reigned.  In the iron age they imagined
themselves of the golden, doomed only to live and to love.

To the superficial observer, who interests himself only in characters
strongly marked and broadly colored, both the lovers may seem of too
slight and commonplace a mould: in the delineation of characters
purposely subdued, the reader sometimes imagines that there is a want of
character; perhaps, indeed, I wrong the real nature of these two lovers
by not painting more impressively their stronger individualities.  But
in dwelling so much on their bright and birdlike existence, I am
influenced almost insensibly by the forethought of the changes that
await them, and for which they were so ill prepared.  It was this very
softness and gaiety of life that contrasted most strongly the
vicissitudes of their coming fate.  For the oak without fruit or
blossom, whose hard and rugged heart is fitted for the storm, there is
less fear than for the delicate branches of the myrtle, and the laughing
clusters of the vine.

They had now advanced far into August--the next month their marriage was
fixed, and the threshold of Glaucus was already wreathed with garlands;
and nightly, by the door of Ione, he poured forth the rich libations.
He existed no longer for his gay companions; he was ever with Ione.  In
the mornings they beguiled the sun with music: in the evenings they
forsook the crowded haunts of the gay for excursions on the water, or
along the fertile and vine-clad plains that lay beneath the fatal mount
of Vesuvius.  The earth shook no more; the lively Pompeians forgot even
that there had gone forth so terrible a warning of their approaching
doom.  Glaucus imagined that convulsion, in the vanity of his heathen
religion, an especial interposition of the gods, less in behalf of his
own safety than that of Ione.  He offered up the sacrifices of gratitude
at the temples of his faith; and even the altar of Isis was covered with
his votive garlands--as to the prodigy of the animated marble, he
blushed at the effect it had produced on him.  He believed it, indeed,
to have been wrought by the magic of man; but the result convinced him
that it betokened not the anger of a goddess.

Of Arbaces, they heard only that he still lived; stretched on the bed of
suffering, he recovered slowly from the effect of the shock he had
sustained--he left the lovers unmolested--but it was only to brood over
the hour and the method of revenge.

Alike in their mornings at the house of Ione, and in their evening
excursions, Nydia was usually their constant, and often their sole
companion.  They did not guess the secret fires which consumed her--the
abrupt freedom with which she mingled in their conversation--her
capricious and often her peevish moods found ready indulgence in the
recollection of the service they owed her, and their compassion for her
affliction.  They felt an interest in her, perhaps the greater and more
affectionate from the very strangeness and waywardness of her nature,
her singular alternations of passion and softness--the mixture of
ignorance and genius--of delicacy and rudeness--of the quick humors of
the child, and the proud calmness of the woman.  Although she refused to
accept of freedom, she was constantly suffered to be free; she went
where she listed; no curb was put either on her words or actions; they
felt for one so darkly fated, and so susceptible of every wound, the
same pitying and compliant indulgence the mother feels for a spoiled and
sickly child--dreading to impose authority, even where they imagined it
for her benefit.  She availed herself of this license by refusing the
companionship of the slave whom they wished to attend her. With the
slender staff by which she guided her steps, she went now, as in her
former unprotected state, along the populous streets: it was almost
miraculous to perceive how quickly and how dexterously she threaded
every crowd, avoiding every danger, and could find her benighted way
through the most intricate windings of the city.  But her chief delight
was still in visiting the few feet of ground which made the garden of
Glaucus--in tending the flowers that at least repaid her love.
Sometimes she entered the chamber where he sat, and sought a
conversation, which she nearly always broke off abruptly--for
conversation with Glaucus only tended to one subject--Ione; and that
name from his lips inflicted agony upon her.  Often she bitterly
repented the service she had rendered to Ione: often she said inly, 'If
she had fallen, Glaucus could have loved her no longer'; and then dark
and fearful thoughts crept into her breast.

She had not experienced fully the trials that were in store for her,
when she had been thus generous.  She had never before been present when
Glaucus and Ione were together; she had never heard that voice so kind
to her, so much softer to another.  The shock that crushed her heart
with the tidings that Glaucus loved, had at first only saddened and
benumbed--by degrees jealousy took a wilder and fiercer shape; it
partook of hatred--it whispered revenge.  As you see the wind only
agitate the green leaf upon the bough, while the leaf which has lain
withered and seared on the ground, bruised and trampled upon till the
sap and life are gone, is suddenly whirled aloft--now here--now
there--without stay and without rest; so the love which visits the happy
and the hopeful hath but freshness on its wings! its violence is but
sportive.  But the heart that hath fallen from the green things of life,
that is without hope, that hath no summer in its fibres, is torn and
whirled by the same wind that but caresses its brethren--it hath no
bough to cling to--it is dashed from path to path--till the winds fall,
and it is crushed into the mire for ever.

The friendless childhood of Nydia had hardened prematurely her
character; perhaps the heated scenes of profligacy through which she had
passed, seemingly unscathed, had ripened her passions, though they had
not sullied her purity.  The orgies of Burbo might only have disgusted,
the banquets of the Egyptian might only have terrified, at the moment;
but the winds that pass unheeded over the soil leave seeds behind them.
As darkness, too, favors the imagination, so, perhaps, her very
blindness contributed to feed with wild and delirious visions the love
of the unfortunate girl.  The voice of Glaucus had been the first that
had sounded musically to her ear; his kindness made a deep impression
upon her mind; when he had left Pompeii in the former year, she had
treasured up in her heart every word he had uttered; and when any one
told her that this friend and patron of the poor flower-girl was the
most brilliant and the most graceful of the young revellers of Pompeii,
she had felt a pleasing pride in nursing his recollection.  Even the
task which she imposed upon herself, of tending his flowers, served to
keep him in her mind; she associated him with all that was most charming
to her impressions; and when she had refused to express what image she
fancied Ione to resemble, it was partly, perhaps, that whatever was
bright and soft in nature she had already combined with the thought of
Glaucus.  If any of my readers ever loved at an age which they would now
smile to remember--an age in which fancy forestalled the reason, let
them say whether that love, among all its strange and complicated
delicacies, was not, above all other and later passions, susceptible of
jealousy? I seek not here the cause: I know that it is commonly the
fact.

When Glaucus returned to Pompeii, Nydia had told another year of life;
that year, with its sorrows, its loneliness, its trials, had greatly
developed her mind and heart; and when the Athenian drew her
unconsciously to his breast, deeming her still in soul as in years a
child--when he kissed her smooth cheek, and wound his arm round her
trembling frame, Nydia felt suddenly, and as by revelation, that those
feelings she had long and innocently cherished were of love.  Doomed to
be rescued from tyranny by Glaucus--doomed to take shelter under his
roof--doomed to breathe, but for so brief a time, the same air--and
doomed, in the first rush of a thousand happy, grateful, delicious
sentiments of an overflowing heart, to hear that he loved another; to be
commissioned to that other, the messenger, the minister; to feel all at
once that utter nothingness which she was--which she ever must be, but
which, till then, her young mind had not taught her--that utter
nothingness to him who was all to her; what wonder that, in her wild and
passionate soul, all the elements jarred discordant; that if love
reigned over the whole, it was not the love which is born of the more
sacred and soft emotions?  Sometimes she dreaded only lest Glaucus
should discover her secret; sometimes she felt indignant that it was not
suspected: it was a sign of contempt--could he imagine that she presumed
so far?  Her feelings to Ione ebbed and flowed with every hour; now she
loved her because he did; now she hated him for the same cause.  There
were moments when she could have murdered her unconscious mistress;
moments when she could have laid down life for her.  These fierce and
tremulous alternations of passion were too severe to be borne long.  Her
health gave way, though she felt it not--her cheek paled--her step grew
feebler--tears came to her eyes more often, and relieved her less.

One morning, when she repaired to her usual task in the garden of the
Athenian, she found Glaucus under the columns of the peristyle, with a
merchant of the town; he was selecting jewels for his destined bride.
He had already fitted up her apartment; the jewels he bought that day
were placed also within it--they were never fated to grace the fair form
of Ione; they may be seen at this day among the disinterred treasures of
Pompeii, in the chambers of the studio at Naples.

'Come hither, Nydia; put down thy vase, and come hither.  Thou must take
this chain from me--stay--there, I have put it on.  There, Servilius,
does it not become her?'

'Wonderfully!' answered the jeweller; for jewellers were well-bred and
flattering men, even at that day.  'But when these ear-rings glitter in
the ears of the noble Ione, then, by Bacchus! you will see whether my
art adds anything to beauty.'

'Ione?' repeated Nydia, who had hitherto acknowledged by smiles and
blushes the gift of Glaucus.

'Yes,' replied the Athenian, carelessly toying with the gems; 'I am
choosing a present for Ione, but there are none worthy of her.'

He was startled as he spoke by an abrupt gesture of Nydia; she tore the
chain violently from her neck, and dashed it on the ground.

'How is this?  What, Nydia, dost thou not like the bauble? art thou
offended?'

'You treat me ever as a slave and as a child,' replied the Thessalian,
with ill-suppressed sobs, and she turned hastily away to the opposite
corner of the garden.

Glaucus did not attempt to follow, or to soothe; he was offended; he
continued to examine the jewels and to comment on their fashion--to
object to this and to praise that, and finally to be talked by the
merchant into buying all; the safest plan for a lover, and a plan that
any one will do right to adopt, provided always that he can obtain an
Ione!

When he had completed his purchase and dismissed the jeweller, he
retired into his chamber, dressed, mounted his chariot, and went to
Ione.  He thought no more of the blind girl, or her offence; he had
forgotten both the one and the other.

He spent the forenoon with his beautiful Neapolitan, repaired thence to
the baths, supped (if, as we have said before, we can justly so
translate the three o'clock coena of the Romans) alone, and abroad, for
Pompeii had its restaurateurs--and returning home to change his dress
ere he again repaired to the house of Ione, he passed the peristyle, but
with the absorbed reverie and absent eyes of a man in love, and did not
note the form of the poor blind girl, bending exactly in the same place
where he had left her.  But though he saw her not, her ear recognized at
once the sound of his step. She had been counting the moments to his
return.  He had scarcely entered his favorite chamber, which opened on
the peristyle, and seated himself musingly on his couch, when he felt
his robe timorously touched, and, turning, he beheld Nydia kneeling
before him, and holding up to him a handful of flowers--a gentle and
appropriate peace-offering--her eyes, darkly upheld to his own, streamed
with tears.

'I have offended thee,' said she, sobbing, 'and for the first time.  I
would die rather than cause thee a moment's pain--say that thou wilt
forgive me. See! I have taken up the chain; I have put it on: I will
never part from it--it is thy gift.'

'My dear Nydia,' returned Glaucus, and raising her, he kissed her
forehead, 'think of it no more!  But why, my child, wert thou so
suddenly angry?  I could not divine the cause?'

'Do not ask!' said she, coloring violently.  'I am a thing full of
faults and humors; you know I am but a child--you say so often: is it
from a child that you can expect a reason for every folly?'

'But, prettiest, you will soon be a child no more; and if you would have
us treat you as a woman, you must learn to govern these singular
impulses and gales of passion.  Think not I chide: no, it is for your
happiness only I speak.'

'It is true,' said Nydia, 'I must learn to govern myself I must bide, I
must suppress, my heart.  This is a woman's task and duty; methinks her
virtue is hypocrisy.'

'Self-control is not deceit, my Nydia,' returned the Athenian; and that
is the virtue necessary alike to man and to woman; it is the true
senatorial toga, the badge of the dignity it covers!'

'Self-control! self-control!  Well, well, what you say is right! When I
listen to you, Glaucus, my wildest thoughts grow calm and sweet, and a
delicious serenity falls over me.  Advise, ah! guide me ever, my
preserver!'

'Thy affectionate heart will be thy best guide, Nydia, when thou hast
learned to regulate its feelings.'

'Ah! that will be never,' sighed Nydia, wiping away her tears.

'Say not so: the first effort is the only difficult one.'

'I have made many first efforts,' answered Nydia, innocently.  'But you,
my Mentor, do you find it so easy to control yourself?  Can you conceal,
can you even regulate, your love for Ione?'

'Love! dear Nydia: ah! that is quite another matter,' answered the young
preceptor.

'I thought so!' returned Nydia, with a melancholy smile.  'Glaucus, wilt
thou take my poor flowers?  Do with them as thou wilt--thou canst give
them to Ione,' added she, with a little hesitation.

'Nay, Nydia,' answered Glaucus, kindly, divining something of jealousy
in her language, though he imagined it only the jealousy of a vain and
susceptible child; 'I will not give thy pretty flowers to any one.  Sit
here and weave them into a garland; I will wear it this night: it is not
the first those delicate fingers have woven for me.'

The poor girl delightedly sat down beside Glaucus.  She drew from her
girdle a ball of the many-colored threads, or rather slender ribands,
used in the weaving of garlands, and which (for it was her professional
occupation) she carried constantly with her, and began quickly and
gracefully to commence her task.  Upon her young cheeks the tears were
already dried, a faint but happy smile played round her lips--childlike,
indeed, she was sensible only of the joy of the present hour: she was
reconciled to Glaucus: he had forgiven her--she was beside him--he
played caressingly with her silken hair--his breath fanned her
cheek--Ione, the cruel Ione, was not by--none other demanded, divided,
his care.  Yes, she was happy and forgetful; it was one of the few
moments in her brief and troubled life that it was sweet to treasure, to
recall. As the butterfly, allured by the winter sun, basks for a little
in the sudden light, ere yet the wind awakes and the frost comes on,
which shall blast it before the eve--she rested beneath a beam, which,
by contrast with the wonted skies, was not chilling; and the instinct
which should have warned her of its briefness, bade her only gladden in
its smile.

'Thou hast beautiful locks,' said Glaucus.  'They were once, I ween
well, a mother's delight.'

Nydia sighed; it would seem that she had not been born a slave; but she
ever shunned the mention of her parentage, and, whether obscure or
noble, certain it is that her birth was never known by her benefactors,
nor by any one in those distant shores, even to the last.  The child of
sorrow and of mystery, she came and went as some bird that enters our
chamber for a moment; we see it flutter for a while before us, we know
not whence it flew or to what region it escapes.

Nydia sighed, and after a short pause, without answering the remark,
said: 'But do I weave too many roses in my wreath, Glaucus?  They tell
me it is thy favorite flower.'

'And ever favored, my Nydia, be it by those who have the soul of poetry:
it is the flower of love, of festival; it is also the flower we dedicate
to silence and to death; it blooms on our brows in life, while life be
worth the having; it is scattered above our sepulchre when we are no
more.'

'Ah! would,' said Nydia, 'instead of this perishable wreath, that I
could take thy web from the hand of the Fates, and insert the roses
there!'

'Pretty one! thy wish is worthy of a voice so attuned to song; it is
uttered in the spirit of song; and, whatever my doom, I thank thee.'

'Whatever thy doom! is it not already destined to all things bright and
fair?  My wish was vain.  The Fates will be as tender to thee as I
should.'

'It might not be so, Nydia, were it not for love!  While youth lasts, I
may forget my country for a while.  But what Athenian, in his graver
manhood, can think of Athens as she was, and be contented that he is
happy, while she is fallen?--fallen, and for ever?'

'And why for ever?'

'As ashes cannot be rekindled--as love once dead can never revive, so
freedom departed from a people is never regained.  But talk we not of
these matters unsuited to thee.'

'To me, oh! thou errest.  I, too, have my sighs for Greece; my cradle
was rocked at the foot of Olympus; the gods have left the mountain, but
their traces may be seen--seen in the hearts of their worshippers, seen
in the beauty of their clime: they tell me it is beautiful, and I have
felt its airs, to which even these are harsh--its sun, to which these
skies are chill.  Oh! talk to me of Greece! Poor fool that I am, I can
comprehend thee! and methinks, had I yet lingered on those shores, had I
been a Grecian maid whose happy fate it was to love and to be loved, I
myself could have armed my lover for another Marathon, a new Plataea.
Yes, the hand that now weaves the roses should have woven thee the olive
crown!'

'If such a day could come!' said Glaucus, catching the enthusiasm of the
blind Thessalian, and half rising.--'But no! the sun has set, and the
night only bids us be forgetful--and in forgetfulness be gay--weave
still the roses!'

But it was with a melancholy tone of forced gaiety that the Athenian
uttered the last words: and sinking into a gloomy reverie, he was only
wakened from it, a few minutes afterwards, by the voice of Nydia, as she
sang in a low tone the following words, which he had once taught her:--


           THE APOLOGY FOR PLEASURE

                    I

           Who will assume the bays
              That the hero wore?
           Wreaths on the Tomb of Days
              Gone evermore!
           Who shall disturb the brave,
           Or one leaf on their holy grave?
           The laurel is vowed to them,
           Leave the bay on its sacred stem!
              But this, the rose, the fading rose,
              Alike for slave and freeman grows.

                    II

           If Memory sit beside the dead
              With tombs her only treasure;
           If Hope is lost and Freedom fled,
              The more excuse for Pleasure.
           Come, weave the wreath, the roses weave,
              The rose at least is ours:
           To feeble hearts our fathers leave,
              In pitying scorn, the flowers!


                    III

             On the summit, worn and hoary,
           Of Phyle's solemn hill,
           The tramp of the brave is still!
           And still in the saddening Mart,
           The pulse of that mighty heart,
              Whose very blood was glory!
           Glaucopis forsakes her own,
              The angry gods forget us;
           But yet, the blue streams along,
           Walk the feet of the silver Song;
           And the night-bird wakes the moon;
           And the bees in the blushing noon
              Haunt the heart of the old Hymettus.
           We are fallen, but not forlorn,
              If something is left to cherish;
           As Love was the earliest born,
              So Love is the last to perish.

                    IV

           Wreathe then the roses, wreathe
              The BEAUTIFUL still is ours,
           While the stream shall flow and the sky shall glow,
           The BEAUTIFUL still is ours!
           Whatever is fair, or soft, or bright,
           In the lap of day or the arms of night,
           Whispers our soul of Greece--of Greece,
           And hushes our care with a voice of peace.
              Wreathe then the roses, wreathe!
              They tell me of earlier hours;
           And I hear the heart of my Country breathe
              From the lips of the Stranger's flowers.



Chapter V

NYDIA ENCOUNTERS JULIA.  INTERVIEW OF THE HEATHEN SISTER AND CONVERTED
BROTHER.  AN ATHENIAN'S NOTION OF CHRISTIANITY.

'WHAT happiness to Ione! what bliss to be ever by the side of Glaucus,
to hear his voice!--And she too can see him!'

Such was the soliloquy of the blind girl, as she walked alone and at
twilight to the house of her new mistress, whither Glaucus had already
preceded her.  Suddenly she was interrupted in her fond thoughts by a
female voice.

'Blind flower-girl, whither goest thou?  There is no pannier under thine
arm; hast thou sold all thy flowers?'

The person thus accosting Nydia was a lady of a handsome but a bold and
unmaidenly countenance: it was Julia, the daughter of Diomed. Her veil
was half raised as she spoke; she was accompanied by Diomed himself, and
by a slave carrying a lantern before them--the merchant and his daughter
were returning home from a supper at one of their neighbors'.

'Dost thou not remember my voice?' continued Julia.  'I am the daughter
of Diomed the wealthy.'

'Ah! forgive me; yes, I recall the tones of your voice.  No, noble
Julia, I have no flowers to sell.'

'I heard that thou wert purchased by the beautiful Greek Glaucus; is
that true, pretty slave?' asked Julia.

'I serve the Neapolitan, Ione,' replied Nydia, evasively.

'Ah! and it is true, then...'

'Come, come!' interrupted Diomed, with his cloak up to his mouth, 'the
night grows cold; I cannot stay here while you prate to that blind girl:
come, let her follow you home, if you wish to speak to her.'

'Do, child,' said Julia, with the air of one not accustomed to be
refused; 'I have much to ask of thee: come.'

'I cannot this night, it grows late,' answered Nydia.  'I must be at
home; I am not free, noble Julia.'

'What, the meek Ione will chide thee?--Ay, I doubt not she is a second
Thalestris.  But come, then, to-morrow: do--remember I have been thy
friend of old.'

'I will obey thy wishes,' answered Nydia; and Diomed again impatiently
summoned his daughter: she was obliged to proceed, with the main
question she had desired to put to Nydia unasked.

Meanwhile we return to Ione.  The interval of time that had elapsed that
day between the first and second visit of Glaucus had not been too gaily
spent: she had received a visit from her brother.  Since the night he
had assisted in saving her from the Egyptian, she had not before seen
him.

Occupied with his own thoughts--thoughts of so serious and intense a
nature--the young priest had thought little of his sister; in truth,
men, perhaps of that fervent order of mind which is ever aspiring above
earth, are but little prone to the earthlier affections; and it had been
long since Apaecides had sought those soft and friendly interchanges of
thought, those sweet confidences, which in his earlier youth had bound
him to Ione, and which are so natural to that endearing connection which
