libraries were torn up and sold to grocers and soap boilers for
wrapping paper.

At Canterbury, Becket's tomb (S170) was broken open, and after he had
been nearly four centuries in his grave, the saint was summoned to
answer a charge of rebellion and treason.  The case was tried at
Westminster Abbey, the martyr's bones were sentenceeed to be burned,
and the jewels and rich offerings of his shrine were seized by the
King.

Among the few monastic buildings which escaped was the beautiful abbey
church, now the cathedral of Peterborough, where Catharine of Aragon
(S345), who died soon after the King's marriage with her rival, was
buried.  Henry had the grace to give orders that on her account it
should be spared, saying that he would leave to her memory "one of the
goodliest monuments in Christendom."

The great estates thus suddenly acquired by the Crown were granted to
favorites or thrown away at the gambling table.  "It is from this
date," says Hallam, "that the leading families of England, both within
and without the peerage, became conspicuous through having obtained
possession of the monastery lands."  These were estimated to comprise
about one fourth of the whole area of the kingdom.

353. Effects of the Destruction of Monasteries.

The sweeping character of this act had a twofold effect.  First, it
made the King more absolute than before, for, since it removed the
abbots, who had held seats in the House of Lords, that body was made
just so much smaller and less able to resist the royal will.

Next, the abolition of so many religious institutions necessarily
caused much misery, for the greater part of the monks and all of the
nuns were turned out upon the world destitute of means.  In the end,
however, no permanent injury was done, since the monasteries, by their
profuse and indiscriminate charity, had undoubtably encouraged much of
the very pauperism which they had relieved.

354. Distress among the Laboring Classes.

An industrial revolution was also in progress at this time, which was
productive of widespread suffering.  It had begun early in Henry's
reign through the great numbers of discharged soldiers, who could not
readily find work.

Sir Thomas More had given a striking picture of their miserable
condition in his "Utopia," a book in which he urged the government to
consider measures for their relief; but the evil had since become much
worse.  Farmers, having discovered that wool growing was more
profitable than the raising of grain, had turned their fields into
sheep pastures; so that a shepherd with his dog now took the place of
several families of laborers.

This change brought multitudes of poor people to the verge of
starvation; and as the monasteries no longer existed to hold out a
helping hand, the whole realm was overrun with beggars and thieves.
Bishop Latimer, a noted preacher of that day, declared that if every
farmer should raise two acres of hemp, it would not make rope enough
to hang them all.  Henry, however, set to work with characteristic
vigor and made away, it is said, with great numbers, but without
materially abating the evil (S403).

355. Execution of Anne Boleyn; Marriage with Jane Seymour (1536).

Less than three years after her coronation, the new Queen, Anne Boleyn
(SS343, 349), for whom Henry had "turned England and Europe upside
down," was accused of unfaithfulness.  She was sent a prisoner to the
Tower.  A short time after, her head rolled in the dust, the light of
its beauty gone out forever.

The next morning Henry married Jane Seymour, Anne's maid of honor.
Parliament passed an act of approval, declaring that it was all done
"of the King's most excellent goodness."  It also declared Henry's two
previous marriages, with Catharine and with Anne Boleyn, void, and
affirmed that their children, the Princesses Mary and Elizabeth, were
not lawfully the King's daughters.  A later act of Parliament gave
Henry the extraordinary power of naming his successor to the crown.[1]
A year afterwards Henry's new Queen died, leaving an infant son,
Edward.  She was no sooner gone than the King began looking about for
some one to take her place.

[1] By his last will he made Mary and Elizabeth heirs to the crown in
case all male and female issue by himself or his son Edward failed
(S361).  Henry's eldest sister, Margaret (see No. 3 in Genealogical
Table on page 207), was passed by entirely.  But long after Henry's
death, Parliament set his will aside (1603) and made James I (a
descendent of Margaret) King of England.

356. More Marriages (1540).

Thomas Cromwell, the King's trusted adviser (S351), succeeded in
persuading his master to agree to marry Anne of Cleves, a German
Protestant Princess.  Henry had never seen her, but her portrait
represented her as a woman of surpassing beauty.

When Anne reached England, Henry hurried to meet her with all a
lover's ardor.  To his dismay, he found that not only was she
ridiculously ugly, but that she could speak--so he said--"nothing but
Dutch," of which he did not understand a word.  Matters, however, had
gone too far to retract, and the marriage was duly solemnized (1540).
The King obtained a divorce within six months, and then took his
revenge by cutting off Cromwell's head.  What is more, he cut it off
by virtue of that very Act of Attainder which Cromwell had used so
unscrupulously in Henry's behalf (S351).

The same year (1540) Henry married Catharine Howard, a fascinating
girl still in her teens, whose charms so moved the King that it is
said he was tempted to have a special thanksgiving service prepared to
commemorate the day he found her.

Unfortunately, Catharine was accused of having been guilty of
misconduct before her marriage.  She confessed her fault, but for such
cases Henry had no mercy.  The Queen was tried for high treason, and
soon walked that fatal road in which Anne Boleyn had preceded her
(S355).

Not to be baffled in his matrimonial experiments, the King took
Catherine Parr for his sixth and last wife (1543).  She was inclined
to be a zealous Protestant, and she too might have gone to the block,
on a charge of heresy, but her quick wit came to her rescue.  She
flattered the King's self-conceit as a profound theologian and the
compliment saved her life.

357. Henry's Action respecting Religion.

Though occupied with these rather numerous domestic infelicities,
Henry was not idle in other directions.  By an act known as the Six
Articles, or, as the Protestants called it, the "Bloody Act," or the
"Whip with Six Lashes" (1539), the King established a new and peculiar
form of religion.  In words, at least, it seemed to be practically the
same as that upheld by the Pope, but with the Pope left out.[1]

[1] The Six Articles: The chief article ordered that all persons who
denied the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation should be burned at
the stake as heretics and that all their possessions should be
forfeited to the Crown.  The remaining five articles affirmed the
obligation of all persons to accept and obey certain other Catholic
doctrines under pain of punishment for felony, if they refused.

Geographically, the country was about equally divided between
Catholicism and Protestantism.  The northwestern half clung to the
ancient faith; the southeastern half, including most of the large
cities where Wycliffe's doctrines had formerly prevailed was favorable
to the Reformation.

On the one hand, Henry prohibited the Lutheran or Protestant doctrine
(S340); on the other, he caused the Bible to be translated (SS254,
339), and ordered a copy to be chained to a desk in every parish
church in England (1538); but though all persons might now freely read
the Scriptures, no one but the clergy was allowed to interpret them.
Later in his reign, the King became alarmed at the spread of
discussion about religious subjects, and prohibited the reading of the
Bible by the "lower sort of people."

358. Henry versus Treason.

Men now found themselves in a strange and cruel delimma.  If it was
dangerous to believe too much, it was equally dangerous to believe too
little.  Traitor and heretic were dragged to execution on the same
hurdle; for Henry burned as heretics those who declared their belief
in Protestantism, and hanged or beheaded, as traitors, those who
acknowledged the authority of the Pope and denied the supremacy of the
King (S349).

Thus Anne Askew, a young and beautiful woman, was nearly wrenched
asunder on the rack, in the hope of making her implicate the Queen in
her heresy.  She was afterward burned because she insisted that the
bread and wine used in the communion service seemed to her to be
simply bread and wine, and not in any sense the actual body and blood
of Christ, as the King's statute of the Six Articles (S357) solemnly
declared.

On the other hand, the aged Countess of Salisbury suffered for
treason; but with a spirit matching the King's, she refused to kneel
at the block, and told the executioner he must get her gray head off
as best he could.

359. Henry's Death.

But the time was at hand when Henry was to cease his hangings,
beheadings, and marriages.  Worn out with debauchery, he died at the
age of fifty-six, a loathsome, unwieldy, and helpless mass of
corruption.  In his will he left a large sum of money to pay for
perpetual prayers for the repose of his soul.  Sir Walter Raleigh said
of him, "If all the pictures and patterns of a merciless prince were
lost in the world, they might all again be painted to the life out of
the story of this king."

It may be well to remember this, and along with it this other saying
of one of the ablest writers on English constitutional history, that
"the world owes some of tis greatest debts to men from whose memory it
recoils."[1]  The obligation it is under to Henry VIII is that through
his influence--no matter what the motive--England was lifted up out of
the old medieval ruts, and placed squarely and securely on the new
highway of national progress.

[1] W. Stubbs's "Constitutional History of England."

360. Summary.

In this reign we find that though England lost much of her former
political freedom, yet she gained that order and peace which came from
the iron hand of absolute power.  Next, from the destruction of the
monasteries, and the sale or gift of their lands to favorites of the
King, three results ensued:

1. A new nobility was in great measure created, dependent on the
Crown.
2. The House of Lords was made less powerful by the removal of the
abbots who had had seats in it.
3. Pauperism and distress were temporarily increased.
4. Finally, England completely severed her connection with the Pope,
and established for the first time an independent National Church,
having the King as its head.

Edward VI--1547-1553

361. Bad Government; Seizure of Unenclosed Lands; High Rents;
Latimer's Sermon.

Edward, son of Henry VIII by Jane Seymour (S355), died at sixteen.  In
the first part of his reign of six years the goverment was managed by
his uncle, the Duke of Somerset, an extreme Protestant, whose
intentions were good, but who lacked practical judgement.  During the
latter part of his life Edward fell under the control of the Duke of
Northumberland, who was the head of a band of scheming and profligate
men.

They, with other nobles, seized the unenclosed lands of the country
and fenced them in for sheep pastures, thus driving into beggary many
who had formerly got a good part of their living from these commons.
At the same time farm rents rose in somee cases ten and even twenty
fold,[1] depriving thousands of the means of subsistence, and reducing
to poverty many who had been in comfortable circumstances.

[1] This was oweing to the greed for land on the part of the
mercantile classes, who had now acquired wealth, and wished to become
landed proprietors.  See Froude's "England."

The bitter complaints of the sufferers found expression in Bishop
Latimer's outspoken sermon, preached before King Edward, in which he
said: "My father was a yeoman [small farmer], and had no lands of his
own, only he had a farm of three or four pounds [rent] by year, and
hereupon tilled so much as kept half a dozen men; he had walk
[pasture] for a hundred sheep, and my mother milked thirty kine.

"He was able and did find the King a harness [suit of armor] with
himself and his horse, until he came to the place where he should
receive the King's wages.  I can remember that I buckled his harness
when he went into Blackheath Field.  He kept me to school, or else I
had not been able to have preached before the King's majesty now.  He
married my sisters with five pounds [dower] ... apiece.  He kept
hospitality for his poor neighbors, and some alms he gave to the poor.

"And all this he did off the said farm, where he that now hath it
payeth sixteen pounds a year or more, and is not able to do anything
for his prince, for himself, nor for his children, or give a cup of
drink to the poor."  But as Latimer patheticall said, "Let the
preacher preach till his tongue be worn to the stumps, nothing is
amended."[1]

[1] Latimer's first sermon before King Edward VI, 8th of March, 1549.

362. Edward establishes Protestantism, 1549.

Henry VIII had made the Church of England independent of the Pope
(S349).  His son took the next great step, and made it practically
Protestant in doctrine.  At his desire, Archbishop Cranmer compiled a
book of Common Prayer in English.  It was taken largely from the Roman
Catholic Prayer Book, which was in Latin (1549).  The first Act of
Uniformity, 1549 (reenacted 1552), obliged all churches to use the new
English Prayer Book, thereby, (for the time) establishing a modified
form of Protestantism throughout England (S405).[2]

[2] On the Church of England, see Macaulay's "England," I, 40-42.

Edward's sister, the Princess Mary, was a most devout Catholic.  She
refused to adopt the new service, saying to Bishop Ridley, who urged
her to accept it as God's word, "I cannot tell what you call God's
word, for that is not God's word now which was God's word in my
father's time."  It was at this period (1552) that the Articles of
Religion of the Church of England were first drawn up; but they did
not take their final form until the reign of Elizabeth (S383).

363. King Edward and Mary Stuart.

Henry VIII had attempted to marry his son Edward to young Queen Mary
Stuart, a daughter of the King of Scotland, but the match had been
broken off.  Edward's guardian now insisted that it should be carried
out.  He invaded Scotland with an army, and attempted to effect the
marriage by force of arms, at the battle of Pinkie (1547).

The English gained a decided victory, but the youthful Queen, instead
of giving her hand to young King Edward, left the country and married
the son of the King of France.  She will appear with melancholy
prominence in the reign of Elizabeth.  Had Mary Queen of Scots married
Edward, we should perhaps have been spared that tragedy in which she
was called to play both the leading and the losing part (SS394-397).

364. Renewed Confiscation of Church Property; Schools founded.

The confiscation of such Roman Catholic church property as had been
spared was now renewed (S352).  The result of this confiscation and of
the abandonment of Catholicism as the established form of worship was
in certain respects disastrous to the country.  In the general
break-up, many who had been held in restraint by the old form of faith
now went to the other extreme, and rejected all religion.

Part of the money obtained from the sale of church property was
devoted, mainly through Edward's influence, to the endowment of
upwards of forty grammar schools, besides a number of hospitals, in
different sections of the country.  But for a long time the
destruction of the monastic schools (SS45, 60), poor as many of them
had become, was a serious blow to the education of the common people.

365. Edward's London Charities; Christ's Hospital.

Just before his death Edward established Christ's Hospital, or home
for the support and education of fatherless children, and refounded
and renewed the St. Thomas and St. Bartholomew hospitals for the sick
in London.  Thus "he was the founder," says Burnet, "of those houses
which, by many great additions since that time, have risen to be
amongst the noblest of Europe."

Christ's Hospital was, perhaps, the first Protestant charity school
opened in England; many more were patterned on it.  It, and others
like it, are known as "Blue-Coat Schools," from the costume of the
boys,--a relic of the days of Edward VI.  This consists of a long,
blue coat, like a monk's gown, reaching to the ankles, girded with a
broad leather belt, long, bright yellow stockings, and buckle shoes.
Most of the boys go bareheaded winter and summer.

An exciting game of football, played in the schoolyard in this
peculiar medieval dress, used to seem strangely in contrast with the
sights of modern London streets.  It was as though the spectator, by
passing through a gateway, had gone back over three centuries of
time.  Coleridge, Lamb, and other noted men of letters were educated
there, and have left most interesting reminiscences of their school
life, especially Lamb, in his delightful "Essays of Elia."  Late in
the nineteenth century this famous institution was removed to the
country, and part of the site of the ancient school is now covered
with a great business structure.

366. Effect of Catholicism versus Protestantism.

Speaking of the Protestant Reformation, of which Edward VI may be
taken as a representative, Macaulay remarks that "it is difficult to
say whether England received most advantage from the Roman Catholic
religion or from the Reformation.  For the union of the Saxon and
Norman races, and the abolition of slavery, she is chiefly indebted to
the influence which the priesthood in the Middle Ages exercised over
the people" (S47); "for political and intellectual freedom, and for
all the blessings which they have brought in their train, she owes the
most to the great rebellion of the people against the priesthood."

367. Summary.

The establishment of the Protestant faith in England, and of a large
number of Protestant charity schools known as Edward VI's or
"Blue-Coat Schools" may be regarded as the leading events of Edward's
brief reign of six years.

Mary--1553-1558

368. Lady Jane Grey claims the Crown.

On the death of King Edward, Lady Jane Grey, a descendant of Henry
VII, and a relative of Edward VI, was persuaded by her father-in-lawe,
the Duke of Northumberland, to assume the crown, which had been left
to her by the will of the late King.

Edward's object in naming Lady Jane was to secure a Protestant
successor, since his elder sister, Mary, was a zealous Catholic, while
from his younger sister, Elizabeth, he seems to have been estranged.
By birth, though not directly by Henry VIII's will, Mary was without
doubt the rightful heir.[1]  Queen Mary received the support of the
country, and Lady Jane Grey and her husband, Lord Dudley, were
arrested and sent to the Tower of London.

[1] Table showing the respective claims of Queen Mary and Lady Jane
Grey to the crown.  By his last will Henry VIII left the crown to
Edward VI, and (in case he had no issue) to his daughters, Mary and
Elizabeth, followed by the issue of his sister Mary.  Edward VI's will
undertook to change this order of succession.

                        Henry VII
     1             2        |               3           4
     --------------=-------------------------------------
     |             H                        |           |
Arthur, b. 1486  Henry VIII             Margaret     Mary, m.
d. 1502, no        H                        |      Charles Brandon
issue       =======================     James V of      |
            H         H           H       Scotland,  Frances
        Mary, b.   Elizabeth,  Edward VI,  d. 1542  Brandon, m.
    1516, d. 1558   b. 1533,    b. 1538,    |        Henry Grey
                    d. 1603     d. 1553  Mary Queen     |
                                         of Scots,   JANE GREY,
                                         b. 1542,     m. Lord
                                         d. 1587  Guilford Dudley,
                                            |      beheaded 1554
                                            |
                                    James VI of Scotland
                                     and I of England,
                                        crowned 1603

369. Question of Mary's Marriage; Wyatt's Rebellion (1554).

While they were confined there, the question of the Queen's marriage
came up.  Out of several candidates for her hand, Mary gave preference
to her cousin, Philip II of Spain.  Her choice was very unpopular, for
it was known in England that Philip was a selfish and gloomy fanatic,
who cared for nothing but the advancement of the Roman Catholic faith.

An insurrection now broke out, led by Sir Thomas Wyatt, the object of
which was to place the Princess Elizabeth on the throne, and thus
secure the crown to Protestantism.  Lady Jane Grey's father was
implicated in the rebellion.  The movement ended in failure, the
leaders were executed, and Mary ordered her sister Elizabeth, who was
thought to be in the plot, to be seized and imprisoned in the Tower
(1554).

A little later, Lady Jane Grey and her husband perished on the
scaffold.  The name JANE, deeply cut in the stone wall of the
Beauchamp Tower,[1] remains as a memorial of the nine days' Queen.
She died at the age of seventeen, an innocent victim of the greatness
which had been thrust upon her.

[1] The Beauchamp Tower is part of the Tower of London.  On its walls
are scores of names cut by those who were imprisoned in it.

370. Mary marries Philip II of Spain (1554); Efforts to restore
Catholicism.

A few months afterward the royal marriage was celebrated, but Philip
soon found that the air of England had too much freedom in it to suit
his delicate constitution, and he returned to the more congenial
climate of Spain.

From that time Mary, who was left to rule alone, directed all her
efforts to the restoration of the Catholic Church.  Hallam says her
policy was acceptable to a large part of the nation.[2]  On the other
hand, the leaders in Scotland bound themselves by a solemn Covenant
(1557) to crush out all attempts to reestablish the Catholic faith.
Through her influence Parliament repealed the legislation of Henry
VIII's and Edward VI's reigns, in so far as it gave support to
Protestantism.  She revived the persecuting statutes against heretics
(S283).  The old relations with the Pope were resumed but the monastic
lands were left in the hands of their new owners (S352).  To
accomplish her object in supporting her religion, the Queen resorted
to the arguments of the dungeon, the rack, and the fagot, and when
Bishops Bonner and Gardiner slackened their work of persecution and
death, Mary, half crazed by Philip's desertion, urged them not to stay
their hands.

[2] See A. H. Hallam's "Constitutional History of England," and
compare J. Lingard's excellent "History of England," to the same
effect.

371. Devices for reading the Bible.

The penalty for reading the English Scriptures, or for offering
Protestant prayers, was death.  In his autobiography, Benjamin
Franklin says that one of his ancestors, who lived in England in
Mary's reign, adopted the following expedient for giving his family
religious instruction.  He fastened an open Bible with strips of tape
on the under side of a stool.  When he wished to read it aloud he
placed the stool upside down on his knees, and turned the pages under
the tape as he read them.  One of the children stood watching at the
door to give the alarm if any one approached; in that case, the stool
was set quickly on its feet again on the floor, so that nothing could
be seen.

372. Religious Toleration unknown in Mary's Age.

Mary would doubtless have bravely endured for her faith the full
measure of suffering which she inflicted.  Her state of mind was that
of all who then held strong convictions.  Each party believed it a
duty to convert or exterminate the other, and the alternative offered
to the heretic was to "turn or burn."

Sir Thomas More, who gave his life as a sacrifice to conscience in
Henry's reign (S351), was eager to put Tyndale to the torture for
translating the Bible.  Cranmer (S362), who perished at Oxford (1556),
had been zealous in sending to the flames those who differed from
him.  Even Latimer (S361), who died bravely at the stake, exhorting
his companion Ridley (1555) "to be of good cheer and play the man,
since they would light such a candle in England that day as in God's
grace should not be put out," had abetted the kindling of slow fires
under men as honest and determined as himself but on the opposite
side.

In like spirit Queen Mary kept Smithfield, London, ablaze with
martyrs, whose blood was the seed of Protestantism.  Yet persecution
under Mary never reached the proportions that it did on the
Continent.  At the most, but a few hundred died in England for the
sake of their religion, while Mary's husband, Philip II, during the
last of his reign, covered Holland with the graves of Protestants, who
had been tortured and put to cruel deaths, or buried alive, by tens of
thousands.

373. Mary's Death (1558).

But Mary's career was short.  She died (1558) near the close of an
inglorious war with France, which ended in the fall of Calais, the
last English possession on the Continent (S240).  It was a great blow
to her pride, and a serious humiliation to the country.  "After my
death," she said, "you will find Calais written on my heart."  Could
she have foreseen the future, her grief would have been greater
still.  For with the end of her reign the Pope lost all power in
England, never to regain it.

374. Mary deserving of Pity rather than Hatred.

Mary's name has come down to us associated with an epithet expressive
of the utmost abhorrence (S342); but she deserves pity rather than
detestation.  Froude justly says, "If any person may be excused for
hating the Reformation, it was Mary."

Separated from her mother, the unfortunate Catharine of Aragon, when
she was only sixteen, Mary was ill-treated by Henry's new Queen, Anne
Boleyn, and hated by her father.  Thus the springtime of her youth was
blighted.

Her marriage brought her no happiness; sickly, ill-favored, childless,
unloved, the poor woman spent herself for naught.  Her first great
mistake was that she resolutely turned her face toward the past; her
second, that she loved Philip II of Spain (S369) with all her heart,
soul, and strength; and so, out of devotion to a bigot, did a bigot's
work, and earned that execration which never fails to be a bigots
reward.  But the Queen's cruelty was the cruelty of sincerity, and
never, like her father's hangings, beheadings, and burnings (S358),
the result of tyranny, indifference, or caprice.  A little book of
prayers which she left, soiled by constant use and stained with many
tears, tells the story of her broken and disappointed life.

375. Summary.

This reign should be looked upon as a period of reaction.  The
temporary check which Mary gave to Protestantism deepened and
strengthened it.  Nothing builds up a religious faith like martyrdom,
and the next reign showed that every heretic that Mary had burned
helped to make at least a hundred more.

Elizabeth--1558-1603

376. Accession of Elizabeth.

Elizabeth, the last of the Tudor family, was the daughter of Henry
VIII and Anne Boleyn (S349).  At the time of Mary's death she was
living in seclusion in Hatfield House, near London, spending most of
her time in studying Greek and Latin authors.  When the news was
brought to her, she was deeply moved, and exclaimed, "It is the Lord's
doings; it is marvelous in our eyes."  Five days afterwards she went
up to London by that road over which the last time she had traveled it
she was being carried a prisoner to the Tower (S369).

377. Difficulty of Elizabeth's Position.

An act of Parliament declared Elizabeth to be the true and lawful heir
to the crown[1] (S355); but her position was full of difficulty, if
not absolute peril.  Mary Stuart of Scotland, now by marriage Queen of
France (S363),[2] claimed the English crown through descent from Henry
VII.  She based her claim on the ground that Elizabeth, the daughter
of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, was not lawfully entitled to the
throne, because the Pope had refused to recognize Henry's second
marriage (S349).  Both France and Rome supported Mary Stuart's claim.

[1] See Genealogical Table, p. 207.
[2] After Elizabeth, Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, stood next in order
of hereditary succession.  See Table, p. 207.

On the other hand, Philip II of Spain (SS370, 374) favored Elizabeth,
but solely because he hoped to marry her and annex her kingdom to his
dominions.  Scotland was divided between two religious factions, the
Catholics and the Protestants, and its attitude as an independent
kingdom could hardly be called friendly.  The Catholics in the greater
part of Ireland were in a state bordering on rebellion, and were ready
to join in any attack on an English sovereign.

378. The Religious Problem.

But the religious problem was more dangerous than any other, for
England itself was divided in its faith.  In the north, many noble
families stood by the Catholic faith, and hoped to see the Pope's
authority fully and permanently restored (S352).  In the towns of the
southeast, a majority favored the Church of England as it had been
organized under the Protestant influence of Edward VI (S362).[1]

[1] See Goldwin Smith's "England."

Within these two great parties there were two more, who made up in
zeal and determination what they lacked in numbers.  One was the
Jesuits; the other, the Puritans.  The Jesuits were a new Roman
Catholic order (1540), banded together by a solemn oath to restore the
complete power of the Church and to extend it throughout the world.
Openly or secretly their agents penetrated every country, and their
opponents declared that they hesitated at nothing to gain their ends.

The Puritans were the extreme Protestants who, like John Calvin of
Geneva and John Knox of Edinburgh, were bent on cleansing or
"purifying" the reformed faith from every vestige of Catholicism.
Many of them were what the rack and the stake had naturally made
them,--hard, fearless, narrow, bitter.

In Scotland the Puritans had got possession of the government, while
in England they were steadily gaining ground.  They were ready to
recognize the Queen as head of the Church of England, they even wished
that all persons should be compelled to worship as the government
prescribed, but they protested against what they considered the
halfway form of Church which Elizabeth and the bishops seemed inclined
to maintain.

379. The Queen's Choice of Counselors.

Elizabeth's policy from the beginning was one of compromise.  In order
to conciliate the Catholic party, she retained eleven of her sister
Mary's counselors.  But she added to them Sir William Cecil (Lord
Burghley), who was her chief adviser,[2] Sir Nicholas Bacon, and,
later, Sir Francis Walsingham, with others who were favorable to the
Protestant faith.

[2] See Macaulay's essay on "Lord Burghley."

On his appointment, Elizabeth said to Cecil, "This judgment I have of
you, that you will not be corrupted with any gifts, that you will be
faithful to the State, and that without respect to my private will you
give me that counsel which you think best."  Cecil served the Queen
until his death, forty years afterward.  The almost implicit obedience
with which Elizabeth followed his advice sufficiently proves that
Cecil was the real power not only behind, but generally above, the
throne.

380. The Coronation (1559).

The bishops were Roman Catholics, and Elizabeth found it difficult to
get one to perform the coronation services.  At length one consented,
but only on condition that the Queen should take the ancient form of
coronation oath, by which she virtually bound herself to support the
Roman Catholic Church.[1]  To this Elizabeth consented, and having
consulted an astrologer, Dr. Dee, he named a lucky day for the
ceremony, and she was crowned (1559).

[1] By this oath every English sovereign from William the Conqueror to
Elizabeth, inclusive, and even as late as James II, with the single
exception of Edward VI, swore "to preserve religion in the same state
as did Edward the Confessor."  The form of the coronation oath was
changed to support Protestantism by the Revolution of 1688.  Finally,
under George V, in 1910, the phraseology of the oath was modified by
Act of Parliament in order to make it less objectionable not only to
English Catholics, but to a large majority of the people of the
nation.

381. Changes in the Church Service (1559).

The late Queen Mary (S373), besides having repealed the legislation of
the two preceding reigns, in so far as it was opposed to her own
strong religious convictions (S370), had restored the Roman Catholic
Latin Prayer Book (S362).  At Elizabeth's coronation a petition was
presented stating that it was the custom to release a certain number
of prisoners on such occasions.  The petitioners, therefore, begged
her Majesty to set at liberty the four evangelists, Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John, and also the apostle Paul, who had been for some time
shut up in a strange language.  The English Book of Common Prayer
(S362), with some slight changes, was accordingly reinstated,
Parliament repealed the laws by which the late Queen Mary had
practically restored the Roman Catholic religion, and it authorized
the publication of a new and revised edition of the English Bible
(S357).

382. New Act of Supremacy; Act of Uniformity; High Commission Court, 1559.

No sooner was the Queen's accession announced to the Pope than he
declared her illegitimate (SS349, 355), and ordered her to lay aside
her crown and submit herself to his guidance.  Such a demand was a
signal for battle.  However much attached a large part of the nation,
especially the country people, may have been to the Catholic religion
of their fathers (S370), yet the majority of them were loyal to the
Queen and intended to stand by her.

The temper of Parliament manifested itself in the immediate
reenactment of the Act of Supremacy.  It way essentially the same,
"though with its edge a little blunted," as that by which Henry VIII
had freed England from the dominion of the Pope (S349).  It declared
Elizabeth not "supreme head" but "supreme governor" of the Church.
Later, the act was made more stringent (1563).

To this act, every member of the House of Commons was obliged to
subscribe; thus all Catholics were exclued from that body.  The Lords,
however, not being an elective body, were excused from the obligation
at that time (S478).

In order to enforce the Act of Supremacy, Parliament passed a new Act
of Uniformity (S362), which ordered the minister of every congregation
in England, whether Catholic or Protestant, to use the services laid
down in the recently established Book of Common Prayer, and to use no
other.  In fact the law forbade the holding of any other service, even
in a room with closed doors.  In case he failed to obey this law he
would be severely punished, and for a third offense would be
imprisoned for life.  The same act imposed a heavy fine on all persons
who failed to attend the Established Church of England on Sundays and
holidays.

The reason for these stringent measures was that in that age Church
and State were everywhere considered to be inseparable.  No country in
Europe--not even Protestant Germany--could then conceive the idea of
their existing independently of each other.  Whoever refused to
support the established form of worship, whatever that might be, was
looked upon as a "rebel" against the government.

In order to try such "rebels" Parliament now gave Queen Elizabeth
power to organize the High Commission Court.[1]  By that Court many
Catholics were imprisoned and tortured for refusing to comply with the
new Acts of Supremacy and Uniformity, and later on about two hundred
priests and Jesuits were put to death on charges of treason.  A number
of Puritans, also, were executed for publishing books or pamphlets
which attacked the government, and others were cast into prison or
banished from the realm.

[1] High Commission Court: so called because originally certain church
dignitaries were appointed commissioners to inquire into heresies and
kindred matters.  See, too, Summary of Constitutional History in the
Appendix, p. xiv, S15.

383. The Thirty-Nine Articles (1563); the Queen's Religion.
