thy deadly enemy."

"They may kill me," cried Halil, striking his bosom with both hands and
boldly stepping forward--"they may kill me it is true, but they shall
never be able to say that I was afraid of them. They may tear my limbs
to pieces, but when it comes to be recorded in the Chronicles that the
rabble of Constantinople were cowards, it shall be recorded at the same
time that, nevertheless, there was one man among them who could not only
talk about death but could look it fairly between the eyes when it
appeared before him."

"Listen, Halil! I and many more like me are capable of looking into the
very throat of loaded cannons. Many is the time, too, that I have seen
sharp swords drawn against me, and no lance that ever hath left the
smith's hand can boast that I have so much as winked an eye before its
glittering point. But what is the use of valour in a place where you
know that the very ground beneath your feet has Hell beneath it, and it
only needs a spark no bigger than that which flashes from a man's eye
when he has received a buffet, and we shall all fly into the air. Why,
even if both our hands were full of swords and pistols, not one of them
could protect us--so who would wish to be brave there?"

"Have I invited thee to come? Did I not say that I would go alone?"

"But we won't let thee go. What art thou thinking about? If they destroy
thee there we shall be without a leader, and we shall fall to pieces and
perish like the rush-roof of a cottage when the joists are suddenly
pulled from beneath it. And thou thyself wilt be a laughing-stock to the
people, like the cock of the fairy tale who spitted and roasted
himself."

"That will never happen," said Halil, unbuckling his sword (for no
weapon may enter the Seraglio) and handing it to Musli; "take care of it
for me till I return, and if I do not return it will be something to
remember me by."

"Then thou art really resolved to go?" inquired Musli. "Well, in that
case, I will go too."

At these words the others also began to bestir themselves, and when
they saw that Halil really was not joking, they accompanied him right up
to the Seraglio. Into it indeed they did not go; but, anyhow, they
surrounded the huge building which forms a whole quarter of the city by
itself, and as soon as they saw Halil pass through the Seraglio gates
they set up a terrific shout.

Alone, unarmed, and without an escort, the rebel leader passed through
the strange, unfamiliar rooms, and at every door armed resplendent
sentries made way before him, closing up again, with pikes crossed,
before every door when he had passed through them.

On reaching the Hall of Audience, a couple of Kapu-Agasis seized him by
the arm, and led him into the Cupola Chamber where Sultan Mahmud
received those who came to render homage.

In all the rooms was that extraordinary pomp which is only to be seen on
the day when a new Sultan has ascended the throne. The very
ante-chamber, "The Mat-Room," as it is called, because of the variegated
straw-mats with which it is usually covered, was now spread over with
costly Persian carpets. The floor of the Cupola Chamber looked like a
flower-bed. Its rich pile carpets were splendidly embroidered with gold,
silver, and silken flowers of a thousand hues, interspersed with wreaths
of pearls. At the foot of a sofa placed on an elevated dais glistened a
coverlet of pure pearls. On each side of this sofa stood a little round
writing-table inlaid with gold. On one of these tables lay an open
portfolio encrusted with precious stones and writing materials flashing
with rubies and emeralds; on the other lay a copy of the Alkoran, bound
in black velvet and studded with rose brilliants. Another copy of the
Alkoran lay open on a smaller table, written in the Talik script in
letters of gold, cinnabar, and ultramarine; and there were twelve other
Korans on just as many other tables, with gold clasps and
pearl-embroidered bindings. On both sides of the fire-place, on stands
that were masterpieces of carving, were heaped up the gala mantles
exhibited on such occasions; and side by side, along the wall, on raised
alabaster pedestals were nine clocks embellished with figures, each more
ingenious than the other, which moved and played music every time the
hour struck. Four large Venetian mirrors multiplied the extravagant
splendours of the stately room.

Around the room on divans sat the chief dignitaries of the Empire, the
viziers, the secretaries, the presenters of petitions according to rank,
in splendid robes, and with round, pyramidal or beehive-shaped turbans
according to the nature of their office.

Yet all this pomp was utterly eclipsed by the splendour which radiated
from the new Padishah; he seemed enveloped in a shower of pearls and
diamonds. Whichever way he turned the roses embroidered on his dress,
the girdle which encircled his loins, the clasp of his turban, and every
weapon about him seemed to scatter rainbow sparks, so that those who
gazed at him were dazzled into blindness before they could catch a
glimpse of his face.

Behind the back of the throne, flashing with carbuncles as large as
nuts, stood a whole army of ministering servants with their heads
plunged deep in their girdles.

It was into this room that Halil entered.

On the threshold his two conductors released his arm, and Halil advanced
alone towards the Padishah.

His face was not a whit the paler than at other times, he stepped forth
as boldly and gazed around him as confidently as ever.

His dress, too, was just the same as hitherto--a simple Janissary
mantle, a blue dolman with divided sleeves, without any ornament, a
short salavari, or jerkin, reaching to the knee, leaving the lower part
of the legs bare, and the familiar roundish kuka on his head.

As he passed through the long apartment he cast a glance upon the
dignitaries sitting around the throne, and there was not one among them
who could withstand the fire of his gaze. With head erect he advanced
in front of the Sultan, and placing his muscular, half-naked foot on the
footstool before the throne stood there, for a moment, like a figure
cast in bronze, a crying contrast to all this tremulous pomp and
obsequious splendour. Then he raised his hand to his head, and greeted
the Sultan in a strong sonorous voice:

"Aleikum unallah! The grace of God be upon thee!"

Then folding his hands across his breast he flung himself down before
the throne, pressing his forehead against its steps.

Mahmud descended towards him, and raised him from the ground with his
own hand.

"Speak! what can I do for thee?" he asked with condescension.

"My wishes have already been fulfilled," said Halil, and every word he
then uttered was duly recorded by the chronicler. "It was my wish that
the sword of Mahomet should pass into worthy hands; behold it is
accomplished, thou dost sit on the throne to which I have raised thee. I
know right well what is the usual reward for such services--a shameful
death awaits me."

Mahmud passionately interrupted him.

"And I swear to thee by my ancestors that no harm shall befall thee.
Ask thine own reward, and it shall be granted thee before thou hast yet
made an end of preferring thy request."

Halil reflected for a moment, and all the time his gaze rested calmly on
the faces of the dignitaries sitting before him. His gaze passed down
the whole row of them, and he took them all in one by one. Everyone of
them believed that he was seeking a victim whose place he coveted. The
rebel leader read this thought plainly in the faces of the dignitaries.
Once more he ran his eyes over them, then he spoke.

"Glorious Padishah! as the merit of thy elevation belongeth not to me
but to thy people, let the reward be theirs whose is the merit. A heavy
burden oppresses thy slaves, and the name of that burden is Malikane. It
is the farming out of the taxes for the lives of the holders thereof
which puts money into the pockets of the high officers of state and the
pashas, so that the Sublime Porte derives no benefit therefrom. Abolish,
O Padishah, this farming out of the revenue, so that the destiny of the
people may be in thy hands alone, and not in the hands of these rich
usurers!"

And with these words he waved his hand defiantly in the direction of the
viziers and the magnates.

Deep silence fell upon them. Through the closed doors resounded the
tempestuous roar of the multitudes assembled around the Seraglio. Those
within it trembled, and Halil Patrona stood there among them like an
enchanter who knows that he is invulnerable, immortal.

But the Sultan immediately commanded the Ciaus Aga to proclaim to the
people with a trumpet-blast at the gates of the Seraglio, that at the
desire of Halil Patrona the Malikane was from this day forth abolished.

The shout which arose the next moment and made the very walls of the
Seraglio tremble was ample evidence of the profound impression which
this announcement made.

"And now place thyself at the head of thy host," said Halil, "accept the
invitation of thy people to go to the Ejub mosque, in order that the
Silihdars may gird thee with the Sword of the Prophet according to
ancient custom."

The Sultan thereupon caused it to be announced that in an hour's time he
would proceed to the mosque of Ejub, there to be girded with the Sword
of the Prophet.

With a shout of joy the people pressed towards the mosque in their
thousands, crowding all the streets and all the house-tops between the
mosque and the Seraglio. The cannons of the Bosphorus sent thundering
messages to the distant mountains of the joy of Stambul, and an hour
later, to the sound of martial music, Mahmud held his triumphal progress
through the streets of his capital on horseback; and the people waved
rich tapestries at him from the house-tops and scattered flowers in his
path. Behind him came radiant knightly viziers and nobles, and venerable
councillors in splendid apparel on gorgeous full bloods; but in front of
him walked two men alone, Halil Patrona and Musli, both in plain, simple
garments, with naked calves, on their heads small round turbans, and
with drawn swords in their hands as is the wont of the common
Janissaries when on the march.

And the people sitting on the house-tops shouted the name of Halil just
as often and just as loudly as they shouted the name of Mahmud.

The firing of the last salvo announced that the Sultan had arrived at
the Ejub mosque.

Ispirizade, the chief imam of the Aja Sophia mosque, already awaited
him. He had asked Halil as a favour that he might bless the new Sultan,
and Halil had granted his request. Since he had ventured into the
Seraglio everyone had obeyed his words. The people now whispered
everywhere that the Sultan was doing everything which Halil Patrona
demanded.

Ispirizade had already mounted the lofty pulpit when Mahmud and his
suite took their places on the lofty dais set apart for them.

The chief priest's face was radiant with triumph. He extended his hands
above his head and thrice pronounced the name of Allah. And when he had
thus thrice called upon the name of God, his lips suddenly grew dumb,
and there for a few moments he stood stiffly, with his hands raised
towards Heaven and wide open eyes, and then he suddenly fell down dead
from the pulpit.

"'Tis the dumb curse of Achmed!" whispered the awe-stricken spectators
to one another.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] Farthing.




CHAPTER X.

THE FEAST OF HALWET.


The surgujal--the turban with the triple gold circlet--was on the head
of Mahmud, but the sword, the sword of dominion, was in the hand of
Halil Patrona. The people whose darling he had become were accustomed to
regard him as their go-between in their petty affairs, the host trembled
before him, and the magnates fawned upon him for favour.

In the Osman nation there is no hereditary nobility, everyone there has
risen to the highest places by his sword or his luck. Every single Grand
Vizier and Kapudan Pasha has a nickname which points to his lowly
origin; this one was a woodcutter, that one a stone-mason, that other
one a fisherman. Therefore a Mohammedan never looks down upon the most
abject of his co-religionists, for he knows very well that if he himself
happens to be uppermost to-day and the other undermost, by to-morrow the
whole world may have turned upside down, and this last may have become
the first.

So now also a petty huckster rules the realm, and Sultan Mahmud has
nothing to think about but his fair women. Who can tell whether any one
of us would not have done likewise? Suppose a man to have been kept in
rigorous, joyless servitude for twenty years, and then suddenly to be
confronted with the alternative--"reign over hearts or over an
empire"--would he not perhaps have chosen the hearts instead of the
empire for his portion?

At the desire of the beauteous Sultana Asseki the insurrection of the
people had no sooner subsided than the Sultan ordered the Halwet
Festival to be celebrated.

The Halwet Festival is the special feast of women, when nobody but
womankind is permitted to walk about the streets, and this blissful day
may come to pass twice or thrice in the course of the year.

On the evening before, it is announced by the blowing of horns that the
morrow will be the Feast of Halwet. On that day no man, of whatever
rank, may come forth in the streets, or appear on the roof of a house,
or show himself at a window, for death would be the penalty of his
curiosity. The black and white eunuchs keeping order in the streets
decapitate without mercy every man who does not remain indoors. Notices
that this will be done are posted up on all the boundary-posts in the
suburbs of the city, that strangers may regulate their conduct
accordingly.

On the day of the feast of Halwet all the damsels discard their veils,
without which at all other times they are not permitted to walk about
the streets. Then it is that the odalisks of one harem go forth to call
upon the odalisks of another. Rows upon rows of brightly variegated
tents appear in the midst of the streets and market-places, in which
sherbet and other beverages made of violets, cane-sugar, rose-water,
pressed raisins, and citron juice, together with sweetmeats,
honey-cakes, and such-like delicacies, to which women are so partial,
are sold openly, and all the sellers are also women.

Ah! what a spectacle that would be for the eyes of a man! Every street
is swarming with thousands and thousands of bewitching shapes. These
women, released from their prisons, are like so many gay and thoughtless
children. Group after group, singing to the notes of the cithern,
saunter along the public ways, decked out in gorgeous butterfly apparel,
which flutter around their limbs like gaily coloured wings. The suns and
stars of every climate flash and sparkle in those eyes. The whole
gigantic city resounds with merry songs and musical chatter, and any man
who could have seen them tripping along in whole lines might have
exclaimed in despair: "Why have I not a hundred, why have I not a
thousand hearts to give away!"

And then when the harem of the Sultan proudly paces forth! Half a
thousand odalisks, the lovelinesses of every province in the Empire, for
whom the youths of whole districts have raved in vain, in garments
radiant with pearls and precious stones, mounted on splendid prancing
steeds gaily caparisoned. And in the midst of them all the beautiful
Sultana, with the silver heron's plume in her turban, whose stem flashes
with sparkling diamonds. Her glorious figure is protected by a garment
of fine lace, scarce concealing the snowy shimmer of her well-rounded
arms. She sits upon the tiger-skin saddle of her haughty steed like an
Amazon. The regard of her flashing eyes seems to proclaim her the tyrant
of two Sultans, who has the right to say: "I am indeed my husband's
consort!"

In front and on each side of the fairy band march four hundred black
eunuchs, with naked broadswords across their shoulders, looking up at
the windows of the houses before which they march to see whether,
perchance, any inquisitive Peeping-Toms are lurking there.

Dancing and singing, this bevy of peris traverses the principal streets
of Stambul. Every now and then, a short sharp wail or scream may be
heard round the corner of the street the procession is approaching: the
eunuchs marching in front have got hold of some inquisitive man or
other. By the time the radiant cortege has reached the spot, only a few
bloodstains are visible in the street, and, dancing and singing, the
fair company of damsels passes over it and beyond. Scarce anyone would
believe that those wails and screams did not form part and parcel of the
all-pervading cries of joy.

Meanwhile in the Etmeidan a much more free-and-easy sort of
entertainment is taking place. The women of the lower orders are there
diverting themselves in gaily adorned tents, where they can buy as much
mead as they can drink, and in the midst of the piazza on round,
outspread carpets dance the bayaderes of the streets, whom Sultan Achmed
had once collected together and locked up in a dungeon where they had
remained till the popular rising set them free again. In their hands
they hold their nakaras (timbrels), clashing them together above their
heads as they whirl around; on their feet are bronze bangles; and their
long tresses and their light bulging garments flutter around them,
whilst with wild gesticulations they dance the most audacious of dances,
compared with whose voluptuous movements the passion of the fiercest
Spanish bailarina is almost tame and spiritless.

Suddenly one of these street dancing-girls scream aloud to her
companions in the midst of the mazy dance, bringing them suddenly to a
standstill.

"Look, look!" she cried, "there comes Guel-Bejaze! Guel-Bejaze, the wife
of Halil Patrona."

"Guel-Bejaze! Guel-Bejaze!" resound suddenly on every side. The bayaderes
recognise the woman who had been shut up with them in the same dungeon,
surround her, begin to kiss her feet and her garments, raise her up in
their arms on to their shoulders, and so exhibit her to all the women
assembled together on the piazza.

"Yonder is the wife of Halil Patrona!" they cry, and Rumour quickly
flies with the news all through the city. Everyone of the bayaderes
dancing among the people has something to say in praise of her. Some of
them she had cared for in sickness, others she had comforted in their
distress, to all of them she had been kind and gentle. And then, too, it
was she who had restored them their liberty, for was it not on her
account that Halil Patrona had set them all free?

Everyone hastened up to her. The poor thing could not escape from the
clamorous enthusiasm of the sturdy muscular fish-wives and bathing women
who, in their turn also, raised her upon their shoulders and carried her
about, finally resolving to carry her all the way home for the honour
of the thing. So for Halil Patrona's palace they set off with Guel-Bejaze
on their shoulders, she all the time vainly imploring them to put her
down that she might hide away among the crowd and disappear, for she
feared, she trembled at, the honour they did her. From street to street
they carried her, whirling along with them in a torrent of drunken
enthusiasm everyone they chanced to fall in with on the way; and before
them went the cry that the woman whom the others were carrying on their
shoulders was the wife of Halil Patrona, the feted leader of the people,
and ever denser and more violent grew the crowd. Any smaller groups they
might happen to meet were swept along with them. Now and then they
encountered the harems of the greatest dignitaries, such as pashas and
beglerbegs. It was all one, the august and exalted ladies had also to
follow in the suite of the wife of Halil Patrona, the most powerful man
in the realm, whose wife was the gentlest lady under Heaven.

Suddenly, just as they were about to turn into the great square in front
of the fortress of the Seven Towers, another imposing crowd encountered
them coming from the opposite direction. It was the escort of the
Sultana. The half a thousand odalisks and the four hundred eunuchs
occupied the whole width of the road, but face to face with them were
advancing ten thousand intoxicated viragoes led by the frantic
bayaderes.

"Make way for the Sultana!" cried the running eunuchs to the approaching
crowd, "make way for the Sultana and her suite!"

