hesitated to give a commission to a man allied by marriage with the
enemies of New France.  Radisson at last learned why preferment had
been denied him.  It was on account of his wife.  Twice Radisson
journeyed to London for Mary Kirke.  Those were times of an easy change
in faith.  Charles II was playing double with Catholics and
Protestants.  The Kirkes were closely attached to the court; and it
was, perhaps, not difficult for the Huguenot wife to abjure
Protestantism and declare herself a convert to the religion of her
husband.  But when Radisson proposed taking her back to France, that
was another matter.  Sir John Kirke forbade his daughter's departure
till the claims of the Kirke family against New France had been paid.
When Radisson returned without his wife, he was reproached by M.
Colbert for disloyalty.  The government refused its patronage to his
plans for the fur trade; but M. Colbert sent him to confer with La
Chesnaye, a prominent fur trader and member of the Council in New
France, who happened to be in Paris at that time.  La Chesnaye had been
sent out to Canada to look after the affairs of a Rouen fur-trading
company.  Soon he became a commissioner of the West Indies Company; and
when the merchants of Quebec organized the Company of the North, La
Chesnaye became a director.  No one knew better than he how bitterly
the monopolists of Quebec would oppose Radisson's plans for a trip to
Hudson Bay; but the prospects were alluring.  La Chesnaye was deeply
involved in the fur trade and snatched at the chance of profits to
stave off the bankruptcy that reduced him to beggary a few years later.
In defiance of the rival companies and independent of those with which
he was connected, he offered to furnish ships and share profits with
Radisson and Groseillers for a voyage to Hudson Bay.

M. Colbert did not give his patronage to the scheme; but he wished
Radisson a God-speed.  The Jesuits advanced Radisson money to pay his
passage; and in the fall of 1681, he arrived in Quebec.  La Chesnaye
met him, and Groseillers was summoned.  The three then went to the
Chateau Saint-Louis to lay their plans before the governor.  Though the
privileges of the West Indies Company had been curtailed, the fur trade
was again regulated by license.[1]  Frontenac had granted a license to
the Company of the North for the fur trade of Hudson Bay.  He could not
openly favor Radisson; but he winked at the expedition by granting
passports to the explorers, and the three men who were to accompany
him, Jean Baptiste, son of Groseillers, Pierre Allemand, the pilot who
was afterward given a commission to explore the Eskimo country, and
Jean Godefroy, an interpreter.[2]  Jean Baptiste, Radisson's nephew,
invested 500 pounds in goods for barter.  Others of Three Rivers and
Quebec advanced money, to provision the ship.[3]  Ten days after
Radisson's arrival in Quebec, the explorers had left the high fortress
of the St. Lawrence to winter in Acadia.  When spring came, they went
with the fishing fleets to Isle Percee, where La Chesnaye was to send
the ships.  Radisson's ship, the _St. Pierre_,--named after
himself,--came first, a rickety sloop of fifty tons with a crew of
twelve mutinous, ill-fed men, a cargo of goods for barter, and scant
enough supply of provisions.  Groseillers' ship, the _St. Anne_, was
smaller and better built, with a crew of fifteen.  The explorers set
sail on the 11th of July.  From the first there was trouble with the
crews.  Fresh-water _voyageurs_ make bad ocean sailors.  Food was
short.  The voyage was to be long.  It was to unknown waters, famous
for disaster.  The sea was boisterous.  In the months of June and July,
the North Atlantic is beset with fog and iceberg.  The ice sweeps south
in mountainous bergs that have thawed and split before they reach the
temperate zones.[4]  On the 30th of July the two ships passed the
Straits of Belle Isle.  Fog-banks hung heavy on the blue of the far
watery horizon.  Out of the fog, like ghosts in gloom, drifted the
shadowy ice-floes.  The coast of Labrador consists of bare, domed,
lonely hills alternated with rock walls rising sheer from the sea as
some giant masonry.  Here the rock is buttressed by a sharp angle
knife-edged in a precipice.  There, the beetling walls are guarded by
long reefs like the teeth of a saw.  Over these reefs, the drifting
tide breaks with multitudinous voices.  The French _voyageurs_ had
never known such seafaring.  In the wail of the white-foamed reefs,
their superstition heard the shriek of the demons.  The explorers had
anchored in one of the sheltered harbors, which the sailors call
"holes-in-the-wall."  The crews mutinied.  They would go no farther
through ice-drift and fog to an unknown sea.  Radisson never waited for
the contagion of fear to work.  He ordered anchors up and headed for
open sea.  Then he tried to encourage the sailors with promises.  They
would not hear him; for the ship's galley was nearly empty of food.
Then Radisson threatened the first mutineer to show rebellion with such
severe punishment as the hard customs of the age permitted.  The crew
sulked, biding its time.  At that moment the lookout shouted "Sail ho!"

All hands discerned a ship with a strange sail, such as Dutch and
Spanish pirates carried, bearing down upon them shoreward.  The lesser
fear was forgotten in the greater.  The _St. Pierre's_ crew crowded
sail.  Heading about, the two explorers' ships threaded the rock reefs
like pursued deer.  The pirate came on full speed before the wind.
Night fell while Radisson was still hiding among the rocks.
Notwithstanding reefs and high seas, while the pirate ship hove to for
the night, Radisson stole out in the dark and gave his pursuer the
slip.  The chase had saved him a mutiny.

As the vessels drove northward, the ice drifted past like a white world
afloat.  When Radisson approached the entrance to Hudson Bay, he met
floes in impenetrable masses.  So far the ships had avoided delay by
tacking along the edges of the ice-fields, from lake to lake of ocean
surrounded by ice.  Now the ice began to crush together, driven by wind
and tide with furious enough force to snap the two ships like
egg-shells.  Radisson watched for a free passage, and, with a wind to
rear, scudded for shelter of a hole-in-the-wall.  Here he met the
Eskimo, and provisions were replenished; but the dangers of the
ice-fields had frightened the crews again.  In two days Radisson put to
sea to avoid a second mutiny.  The wind was landward, driving the ice
back from the straits, and they passed safely into Hudson Bay.  The ice
again surrounded them; but it was useless for the men to mutiny.  Ice
blocked up all retreat.  Jammed among the floes, Groseillers was afraid
to carry sail, and fell behind.  Radisson drove ahead, now skirting the
ice-floes, now pounded by breaking icebergs, now crashing into surface
brash or puddled ice to the fore.  "We were like to have perished," he
writes, "but God was pleased to preserve us."

On the 26th of August, six weeks after sailing from Isle Percee,
Radisson rode triumphantly in on the tide to Hayes River, south of
Nelson River, where he had been with the English ships ten years
before.  Two weeks later the _Ste. Anne_, with Groseillers, arrived.
The two ships cautiously ascended the river, seeking a harbor.  Fifteen
miles from salt water, Radisson anchored.  At last he was back in his
native element, the wilderness, where man must set himself to conquer
and take dominion over earth.

Groseillers was always the trader, Radisson the explorer.  Leaving his
brother-in-law to build the fort, Radisson launched a canoe on Hayes
River to explore inland.  Young Jean Groseillers accompanied him to
look after the trade with the Indians.[5]  For eight days they paddled
up a river that was destined to be the path of countless traders and
pioneers for two centuries, and that may yet be destined to become the
path of a northern commerce.  By September the floodtide of Hayes River
had subsided.  In a week the _voyageurs_ had travelled probably three
hundred miles, and were within the region of Lake Winnipeg, where the
Cree hunters assemble in October for the winter.  Radisson had come to
this region by way of Lake Superior with the Cree hunters twenty years
before, and his visit had become a tradition among the tribes.  Beaver
are busy in October gnawing down young saplings for winter food.
Radisson observed chips floating past the canoe.  Where there are
beaver, there should be Indians; so the _voyageurs_ paddled on.  One
night, as they lay round the camp-fire, with canoes overturned, a deer,
startled from its evening drinking-place, bounded from the thicket.  A
sharp whistle--and an Indian ran from the brush of an island opposite
the camp, signalling the white men to head the deer back; but when
Radisson called from the waterside, the savage took fright and dashed
for the woods.

All that night the _voyageurs_ kept sleepless guard.  In the morning
they moved to the island and kindled a signal-fire to call the Indians.
In a little while canoes cautiously skirted the island, and the chief
of the band stood up, bow and arrow in hand.  Pointing his arrows to
the deities of north, south, east, and west, he broke the shaft to
splinters, as a signal of peace, and chanted his welcome:--

  "Ho, young men, be not afraid!
  The sun is favorable to us!
  Our enemies shall fear us!
  This is the man we have wished
  Since the days of our fathers!"


With a leap, the chief sprang into the water and swam ashore, followed
by all the canoes.  Radisson called out to know who was commander.  The
chief, with a sign as old and universal as humanity, bowed his head in
servility.  Radisson took the Indian by the hand, and, seating him by
the fire, chanted an answer in Cree:--

  "I know all the earth!
  Your friends shall be my friends!
  I come to bring you arms to destroy your enemies!
  Nor wife nor child shall die of hunger!
  For I have brought you merchandise!
  Be of good cheer!
  I will be thy son!
  I have brought thee a father!
  He is yonder below building a fort
  Where I have two great ships!" [6]


The chief kept pace with the profuse compliments by vowing the life of
his tribe in service of the white man.  Radisson presented pipes and
tobacco to the Indians.  For the chief he reserved a fowling-piece with
powder and shot.  White man and Indian then exchanged blankets.
Presents were sent for the absent wives.  The savages were so grateful
that they cast all their furs at Radisson's feet, and promised to bring
their hunt to the fort in spring.  In Paris and London Radisson had
been harassed by jealousy.  In the wilderness he was master of
circumstance; but a surprise awaited him at Groseillers' fort.

The French habitation--called Fort Bourbon--had been built on the north
shore of Hayes or Ste. Therese River.  Directly north, overland, was
another broad river with a gulflike entrance.  This was the Nelson.
Between the two rivers ran a narrow neck of swampy, bush-grown land.
The day that Radisson returned to the newly erected fort, there rolled
across the marshes the ominous echo of cannon-firing.  Who could the
newcomers be?  A week's sail south at the head of the bay were the
English establishments of the Hudson's Bay Company.  The season was far
advanced.  Had English ships come to winter on Nelson River?  Ordering
Jean Groseillers to go back inland to the Indians, Radisson launched
down Hayes River in search of the strange ship.  He went to the salt
water, but saw nothing.  Upon returning, he found that Jean Groseillers
had come back to the fort with news of more cannonading farther inland.
Radisson rightly guessed that the ship had sailed up Nelson River,
firing cannon as she went to notify Indians for trade.  Picking out
three intrepid men, Radisson crossed the marsh by a creek which the
Indian canoes used, to go to Nelson River.[7]  Through the brush the
scout spied a white tent on an island.  All night the Frenchmen lay in
the woods, watching their rivals and hoping that some workman might
pass close enough to be seized and questioned.  At noon, next day,
Radisson's patience was exhausted.  He paddled round the island, and
showed himself a cannon-shot distant from the fort.  Holding up a pole,
Radisson waved as if he were an Indian afraid to approach closer in
order to trade.  The others hallooed a welcome and gabbled out Indian
words from a guide-book.  Radisson paddled a length closer.  The others
ran eagerly down to the water side away from their cannon.  In signal
of friendship, they advanced unarmed.  Radisson must have laughed to
see how well his ruse worked.

"Who are you?" he demanded in plain English, "and what do you want?"
The traders called back that they were Englishmen come for beaver.
Again the crafty Frenchman must have laughed; for he knew very well
that all English ships except those of the Hudson's Bay Company were
prohibited by law from coming here to trade.[8]  Though the strange
ship displayed an English ensign, the flag did not show the magical
letters "H. B. C."

"Whose commission have you?" pursued Radisson.

"No commission--New Englanders," answered the others.

"Contrabands," thought Radisson to himself.  Then he announced that he
had taken possession of all that country for France, had built a strong
fort, and expected more ships.  In a word, he advised the New
Englanders to save themselves by instant flight; but his canoe had
glided nearer.  To Radisson's surprise, he discovered that the leader
of the New England poachers was Ben Gillam of Boston, son of Captain
Gillam, the trusted servant of the Hudson's Bay Company, who had
opposed Radisson and Groseillers on Rupert's River.  It looked as if
the contraband might be a venture of the father as well as the son.[9]
Radisson and young Gillam recognized each other with a show of
friendliness, Gillam inviting Radisson to inspect the ship with much
the same motive that the fabled spider invited the fly.  Radisson took
tactful precaution for his own liberty by graciously asking that two of
the New England servants go down to the canoe with the three Frenchmen.
No sooner had Radisson gone on the New England ship than young Gillam
ordered cannon fired and English flags run up.  Having made that brave
show of strength, the young man proposed that the French and the New
Englanders should divide the traffic between them for the winter.
Radisson diplomatically suggested that such an important proposal be
laid before his colleagues.  In leaving, he advised Gillam to keep his
men from wandering beyond the island, lest they suffer wrong at the
hands of the French soldiers.  Incidentally, that advice would also
keep the New Englanders from learning how desperately weak the French
really were.  Neither leader was in the slightest deceived by the
other; each played for time to take the other unawares, and each knew
the game that was being played.

[Illustration: Hudson's Bay Company Coins, made of Lead melted from Tea
Chests at York Factory, each Coin representing so many Beaver Skins.]

Instead of returning by the creek that cut athwart the neck of land
between the two rivers, Radisson decided to go down Nelson River to the
bay, round the point, and ascend Hayes River to the French quarters.
Cogitating how to frighten young Gillam out of the country or else to
seize him, Radisson glided down the swift current of Nelson River
toward salt water.  He had not gone nine miles from the New Englanders
when he was astounded by the spectacle of a ship breasting with
full-blown sails up the tide of the Nelson directly in front of the
French canoe.  The French dashed for the hiding of the brushwood on
shore.  From their concealment they saw that the ship was a Hudson's
Bay Company vessel, armed with cannon and commission for lawful trade.
If once the Hudson's Bay Company ship and the New Englanders united,
the English would be strong enough to overpower the French.

The majority of leaders would have escaped the impending disaster by
taking ingloriously to their heels.  Radisson, with that adroit
presence of mind which characterized his entire life, had provided for
his followers' safety by landing them on the south shore, where the
French could flee across the marsh to the ships if pursued.  Then his
only thought was how to keep the rivals apart.  Instantly he had an
enormous bonfire kindled.  Then he posted his followers in ambush.  The
ship mistook the fire for an Indian signal, reefed its sails, and
anchored.  Usually natives paddled out to the traders' ships to barter.
These Indians kept in hiding.  The ship waited for them to come; and
Radisson waited for the ship's hands to land.  In the morning a gig
boat was lowered to row ashore.  In it were Captain Gillam, Radisson's
personal enemy, John Bridgar,[10] the new governor of the Hudson's Bay
Company for Nelson River, and six sailors.  All were heavily armed, yet
Radisson stood alone to receive them, with his three companions posted
on the outskirts of the woods as if in command of ambushed forces.
Fortune is said to favor the dauntless, and just as the boat came
within gunshot of the shore, it ran aground.  A sailor jumped out to
drag the craft up the bank.  They were all at Radisson's mercy--without
cover.  He at once levelled his gun with a shout of "Halt!"  At the
same moment his own men made as if to sally from the woods.  The
English imagined themselves ambushed, and called out that they were the
officers of the Hudson's Bay Company.  Radisson declared who he was and
that he had taken possession of the country for France.  His musket was
still levelled.  His men were ready to dash forward.  The English put
their heads together and decided that discretion was the better part of
valor.  Governor Bridgar meekly requested permission to land and salute
the commander of the French.  Then followed a pompous melodrama of
bravado, each side affecting sham strength.  Radisson told the English
all that he had told the New Englanders, going on board the Company's
ship to dine, while English hostages remained with his French
followers.  For reasons which he did not reveal, he strongly advised
Governor Bridgar not to go farther up Nelson River.  Above all, he
warned Captain Gillam not to permit the English sailors to wander
inland.  Having exchanged compliments, Radisson took gracious leave of
his hosts, and with his three men slipped down the Nelson in their
canoe.  Past a bend in the river, he ordered the canoe ashore.  The
French then skirted back through the woods and lay watching the English
till satisfied that the Hudson's Bay Company ship would go no nearer
the island where Ben Gillam lay hidden.

Groseillers and his son looked after the trade that winter.  Radisson
had his hands full keeping the two English crews apart.  Ten days after
his return, he again left Hayes River to see what his rivals were
doing.  The Hudson's Bay Company ship had gone aground in the ooze a
mile from the fort where Governor Bridgar had taken up quarters.  That
division of forces weakened the English fort.  Introducing his man as
captain of a French ship, Radisson entered the governor's house.  The
visitors drained a health to their host and fired off muskets to learn
whether sentinels were on guard.  No attention was paid to the unwonted
noise.  "I judged," writes Radisson, "that they were careless, and
might easily be surprised."  He then went across to the river flats,
where the tide had left the vessel, and, calmly mounting the ladder,
took a survey of Gillam's ship.  When the irate old captain rushed up
to know the meaning of the intrusion Radisson suavely proffered
provisions, of which they were plainly in need.

The New Englanders had been more industrious.  A stoutly palisaded fort
had been completed on young Gillam's island, and cannon commanded all
approach.  Radisson fired a musket to notify the sentry, and took care
to beach his canoe below the range of the guns.  Young Gillam showed a
less civil front than before.  His lieutenant ironically congratulated
Radisson on his "safe" return, and invited him to visit the fort if he
would enter _alone_.  When Radisson would have introduced his four
followers, the lieutenant swore "if the four French were forty devils,
they could not take the New Englanders' fort."  The safety of the
French habitation now hung by a hair.  Everything depended on keeping
the two English companies apart, and they were distant only nine miles.
The scheme must have flashed on Radisson in an intuition; for he laid
his plans as he listened to the boastings of the New Englanders.  If
father and son could be brought together through Radisson's favor,
Captain Gillam would keep the English from coming to the New England
fort lest his son should be seized for poaching on the trade of the
Company; and Ben Gillam would keep his men from going near the English
fort lest Governor Bridgar should learn of the contraband ship from
Boston.  Incidentally, both sides would be prevented from knowing the
weakness of the French at Fort Bourbon.  At once Radisson told young
Gillam of his father's presence.  Ben was eager to see his father and,
as he thought, secure himself from detection in illegal trade.
Radisson was to return to the old captain with the promised provisions.
He offered to take young Gillam, disguised as a bush-ranger.  In
return, he demanded (1) that the New Englanders should not leave their
