numbered, that I will play you at dice for my kingdoms which you and
your forefathers have ever desired to win.'

'For what wager?' asked Montezuma.

'I will play you thus,' answered Neza. 'You shall stake three fighting
cocks, of which, should I win, I ask the spurs only. I set against them
all the wide empire of Tezcuco.'

'A small stake,' said Montezuma; 'cocks are many and kingdoms few.'

'Still, it shall serve our turn,' answered the aged king, 'for know that
we play against fate. As the game goes, so shall the issue be. If you
win my kingdoms all is well; if I win the cocks, then good-bye to
the glory of Anahuac, for its people will cease to be a people, and
strangers shall possess the land.'

'Let us play and see,' said Montezuma, and they went down to the place
that is called tlachco, where the games are set. Here they began the
match with dice and at first all went well for Montezuma, so that he
called aloud that already he was lord of Tezcuco.

'May it be so!' answered the aged Neza, and from that moment the chance
changed. For strive as he would, Montezuma could not win another point,
and presently the set was finished, and Neza had won the cocks. Now the
music played, and courtiers came forward to give the king homage on his
success. But he rose sighing, and said:

'I had far sooner lose my kingdoms than have won these fowls, for if I
had lost my kingdoms they would still have passed into the hands of one
of my own race. Now alas! my possessions and his must come under the
hand of strangers, who shall cast down our gods and bring our names to
nothing.'

And having spoken thus, he rose, and taking farewell of the emperor, he
departed for his own land, where, as it chanced, he died very shortly,
without living to see the fulfilment of his fears.

On the morrow of his departure came further accounts of the doings of
the Spaniards that plunged Montezuma into still greater alarm. In his
terror he sent for an astronomer, noted throughout the land for the
truth of his divinations. The astronomer came, and was received by the
emperor privately. What he told him I do not know, but at least it was
nothing pleasant, for that very night men were commanded to pull down
the house of this sage, who was buried in its ruins.

Two days after the death of the astronomer, Montezuma bethought
him that, as he believed, I also was a Teule, and could give him
information. So at the hour of sunset he sent for me, bidding me walk
with him in the gardens. I went thither, followed by my musicians and
attendants, who would never leave me in peace, but he commanded that all
should stand aside, as he wished to speak with me alone. Then he began
to walk beneath the mighty cedar trees, and I with him, but keeping one
pace behind.

'Teule,' he said at length, 'tell me of your countrymen, and why they
have come to these shores. See that you speak truth.'

'They are no countrymen of mine, O Montezuma,' I answered, 'though my
mother was one of them.'

'Did I not bid you speak the truth, Teule? If your mother was one of
them, must you not also be of them; for are you not of your mother's
bone and blood?'

'As the king pleases,' I answered bowing. Then I began and told him
of the Spaniards--of their country, their greatness, their cruelty and
their greed of gold, and he listened eagerly, though I think that
he believed little of what I said, for his fear had made him very
suspicious. When I had done, he spoke and said:

'Why do they come here to Anahuac?'

'I fear, O king, that they come to take the land, or at the least to rob
it of all its treasure, and to destroy its faiths.'

'What then is your counsel, Teule? How can I defend myself against these
mighty men, who are clothed in metal, and ride upon fierce wild beasts,
who have instruments that make a noise like thunder, at the sound of
which their adversaries fall dead by hundreds, and who bear weapons of
shining silver in their hands? Alas! there is no defence possible, for
they are the children of Quetzal come back to take the land. From my
childhood I have known that this evil overshadowed me, and now it is at
my door.'

'If I, who am only a god, may venture to speak to the lord of the
earth,' I answered, 'I say that the reply is easy. Meet force by force.
The Teules are few and you can muster a thousand soldiers for every
one of theirs. Fall on them at once, do not hesitate till their prowess
finds them friends, but crush them.'

'Such is the counsel of one whose mother was a Teule;' the emperor
answered, with sarcasm and bitter meaning. 'Tell me now, counsellor,
how am I to know that in fighting against them I shall not be fighting
against the gods; how even am I to learn the true wishes and purposes of
men or gods who cannot speak my tongue and whose tongue I cannot speak?'

'It is easy, O Montezuma,' I answered. 'I can speak their tongue; send
me to discover for you.'

Now as I spoke thus my heart bounded with hope, for if once I could come
among the Spaniards, perhaps I might escape the altar of sacrifice. Also
they seemed a link between me and home. They had sailed hither in ships,
and ships can retrace their path. For though at present my lot was not
all sorrow, it will be guessed that I should have been glad indeed to
find myself once more among Christian men.

Montezuma looked at me a while and answered:

'You must think me very foolish, Teule. What! shall I send you to tell
my fears and weakness to your countrymen, and to show them the joints in
my harness? Do you then suppose that I do not know you for a spy sent to
this land by these same Teules to gather knowledge of the land? Fool,
I knew it from the first, and by Huitzel! were you not vowed to Tezcat,
your heart should smoke to-morrow on the altar of Huitzel. Be warned,
and give me no more false counsels lest your end prove swifter than you
think. Learn that I have asked these questions of you to a purpose, and
by the command of the gods, as it was written on the hearts of those
sacrificed this day. This was the purpose and this was the command,
that I might discover your secret mind, and that I should shun whatever
advice you chanced to give. You counsel me to fight the Teules,
therefore I will not fight them, but meet them with gifts and fair
words, for I know well that you would have me to do that which should
bring me to my doom.'

Thus he spoke very fiercely and in a low voice, his head held low and
his arms crossed upon his breast, and I saw that he shook with passion.
Even then, though I was very much afraid, for god as I was, a nod from
this mighty king would have sent me to death by torment, I wondered at
the folly of one who in everything else was so wise. Why should he doubt
me thus and allow superstition to drag him down to ruin? To-day I see
the answer. Montezuma did not these things of himself, but because the
hand of destiny worked with his hand, and the voice of destiny spoke in
his voice. The gods of the Aztecs were false gods indeed, but I for one
believe that they had life and intelligence, for those hideous shapes of
stone were the habitations of devils, and the priests spoke truth when
they said that the sacrifice of men was pleasing to their gods.

To these devils the king went for counsel through the priests, and now
this doom was on them, that they must give false counsel to their own
destruction, and to the destruction of those who worshipped them, as was
decreed by One more powerful than they.


Now while we were talking the sun had sunk swiftly, so that all the
world was dark. But the light still lingered on the snowy crests of the
volcans Popo and Ixtac, staining them an awful red. Never before to my
sight had the shape of the dead woman whose everlasting bier is Ixtac's
bulk, seemed so clear and wonderful as on that night, for either it was
so or my fancy gave it the very shape and colour of a woman's corpse
steeped in blood and laid out for burial. Nor was it my phantasy alone,
for when Montezuma had finished upbraiding me he chanced to look up, and
his eyes falling on the mountain remained fixed there.

'Look now, Teule!' he said, presently, with a solemn laugh; 'yonder lies
the corpse of the nations of Anahuac washed in a water of blood and made
ready for burial. Is she not terrible in death?'

As he spoke the words and turned to go, a sound of doleful wailing came
from the direction of the mountain, a very wild and unearthly sound that
caused the blood in my veins to stand still. Now Montezuma caught my arm
in his fear, and we gazed together on Ixtac, and it seemed to us that
this wonder happened. For in that red and fearful light the red figure
of the sleeping woman arose, or appeared to rise, from its bier of
stone. It arose slowly like one who awakes from sleep, and presently
it stood upright upon the mountain's brow, towering high into the air.
There it stood a giant and awakened corpse, its white wrappings stained
with blood, and we trembled to see it.

For a while the wraith remained thus gazing towards the city of
Tenoctitlan, then suddenly it threw its vast arms upward as though in
grief, and at that moment the night rushed in upon it and covered it,
while the sound of wailing died slowly away.

'Say, Teule,' gasped the emperor, 'do I not well to be afraid when such
portents as these meet my eyes day by day? Hearken to the lamentations
in the city; we have not seen this sight alone. Listen how the people
cry aloud with fear and the priests beat their drums to avert the omen.
Weep on, ye people, and ye priests pray and do sacrifice; it is very
fitting, for the day of your doom is upon you. O Tenoctitlan, queen of
cities, I see you ruined and desolate, your palaces blackened with fire,
your temples desecrated, your pleasant gardens a wilderness. I see your
highborn women the wantons of stranger lords, and your princes their
servants; the canals run red with the blood of your children, your
gateways are blocked with their bones. Death is about you everywhere,
dishonour is your daily bread, desolation is your portion. Farewell
to you, queen of the cities, cradle of my forefathers in which I was
nursed!'

Thus Montezuma lamented in the darkness, and as he cried aloud the great
moon rose over the edge of the world and poured its level light through
the boughs of the cedars clothed in their ghostly robe of moss. It
struck upon Montezuma's tall shape, on his distraught countenance and
thin hands as he waved them to and fro in his prophetic agony, on my
glittering garments, and the terror-stricken band of courtiers, and the
musicians who had ceased from their music. A little wind sprang up
also, moaning sadly in the mighty trees above and against the rocks of
Chapoltepec. Never did I witness a scene more strange or more pregnant
with mystery and the promise of unborn horror, than that of this great
monarch mourning over the downfall of his race and power. As yet no
misfortune had befallen the one or the other, and still he knew that
both were doomed, and these words of lamentation burst from a heart
broken by a grief of which the shadow only lay upon it.

But the wonders of that night were not yet done with.

When Montezuma had made an end of crying his prophecies, I asked him
humbly if I should summon to him the lords who were in attendance on
him, but who stood at some distance.

'Nay,' he answered, 'I will not have them see me thus with grief and
terror upon my face. Whoever fears, at least I must seem brave. Walk
with me a while, Teule, and if it is in your mind to murder me I shall
not grieve.'

I made no answer, but followed him as he led the way down the darkest of
the winding paths that run between the cedar trees, where it would have
been easy for me to kill him if I wished, but I could not see how I
should be advantaged by the deed; also though I knew that Montezuma was
my enemy, my heart shrank from the thought of murder. For a mile or more
he walked on without speaking, now beneath the shadow of the trees, and
now through open spaces of garden planted with lovely flowers, till at
last we came to the gates of the place where the royal dead are laid to
rest. Now in front of these gates was an open space of turf on which the
moonlight shone brightly, and in the centre of this space lay something
white, shaped like a woman. Here Montezuma halted and looked at the
gates, then said:

'These gates opened four days since for Papantzin, my sister; how long,
I wonder, will pass before they open for me?'

As he spoke, the white shape upon the grass which I had seen and he had
not seen, stirred like an awakening sleeper. As the snow shape upon the
mountain had stirred, so this shape stirred; as it had arisen, so this
one arose; as it threw its arms upwards, so this one threw up her arms.
Now Montezuma saw and stood still trembling, and I trembled also.

Then the woman--for it was a woman--advanced slowly towards us, and
as she came we saw that she was draped in graveclothes. Presently she
lifted her head and the moonlight fell full upon her face. Now Montezuma
groaned aloud and I groaned, for we saw that the face was the thin pale
face of the princess Papantzin--Papantzin who had lain four days in the
grave. On she came toward us, gliding like one who walks in her sleep,
till she stopped before the bush in the shadow of which we stood. Now
Papantzin, or the ghost of Papantzin, looked at us with blind eyes, that
is with eyes that were open and yet did not seem to see.

'Are you there, Montezuma, my brother?' she said in the voice of
Papantzin; 'surely I feel your presence though I cannot see you.'

Now Montezuma stepped from the shadow and stood face to face with the
dead.

'Who are you?' he said, 'who wear the shape of one dead and are dressed
in the garments of the dead?'

'I am Papantzin,' she answered, 'and I am risen out of death to bring
you a message, Montezuma, my brother.'

'What message do you bring me?' he asked hoarsely.

'I bring you a message of doom, my brother. Your empire shall fall and
soon you shall be accompanied to death by tens of thousands of your
people. For four days I have lived among the dead, and there I have seen
your false gods which are devils. There also I have seen the priests
that served them, and many of those who worshipped them plunged into
torment unutterable. Because of the worship of these demon gods the
people of Anahuac is destined to destruction.'

'Have you no word of comfort for me, Papantzin, my sister?' he asked.

'None,' she answered. 'Perchance if you abandon the worship of the false
gods you may save your soul; your life you cannot save, nor the lives of
your people.'

Then she turned and passed away into the shadow of the trees; I heard
her graveclothes sweep upon the grass.


Now a fury seized Montezuma and he raved aloud, saying:

'Curses on you, Papantzin, my sister! Why then do you come back from the
dead to bring me such evil tidings? Had you brought hope with you, had
you shown a way of escape, then I would have welcomed you. May you go
back into darkness and may the earth lie heavy on your heart for ever.
As for my gods, my fathers worshipped them and I will worship them till
the end; ay, if they desert me, at least I will never desert them.
The gods are angry because the sacrifices are few upon their altars,
henceforth they shall be doubled; ay, the priests of the gods shall
themselves be sacrificed because they neglect their worship.'

Thus he raved on, after the fashion of a weak man maddened with terror,
while his nobles and attendants who had followed him at a distance,
clustered about him, fearful and wondering. At length there came an end,
for tearing with his thin hands at his royal robes and at his hair and
beard, Montezuma fell and writhed in a fit upon the ground.

Then they carried him into the palace and none saw him for three days
and nights. But he made no idle threat as to the sacrifices, for from
that night forward they were doubled throughout the land. Already the
shadow of the Cross lay deep upon the altars of Anahuac, but still the
smoke of their offerings went up to heaven and the cry of the captives
rang round the teocallis. The hour of the demon gods was upon them
indeed, but now they reaped their last red harvest, and it was rich.


Now I, Thomas Wingfield, saw these portents with my own eyes, but
I cannot say whether they were indeed warnings sent from heaven
or illusions springing from the accidents of nature. The land was
terror-struck, and it may happen that the minds of men thus smitten can
find a dismal meaning in omens which otherwise had passed unnoticed.
That Papantzin rose from the dead is true, though perhaps she only
swooned and never really died. At the least she did not go back there
for a while, for though I never saw her again, it is said that she lived
to become a Christian and told strange tales of what she had seen in the
land of Death.*

     * For the history of the resurrection of Papantzin, see note
     to Jourdanet's translation of Sahagun, page 870.--AUTHOR.



CHAPTER XVIII

THE NAMING OF THE BRIDES


Now some months passed between the date of my naming as the god Tezcat
and the entry of the Spaniards into Mexico, and during all this space
the city was in a state of ferment. Again and again Montezuma sent
embassies to Cortes, bearing with them vast treasures of gold and gems
as presents, and at the same time praying him to withdraw, for this
foolish prince did not understand that by displaying so much wealth
he flew a lure which must surely bring the falcon on himself. To these
ambassadors Cortes returned courteous answers together with presents of
small value, and that was all.

Then the advance began and the emperor learned with dismay of the
conquest of the warlike tribe of the Tlascalans, who, though they were
Montezuma's bitter and hereditary foes, yet made a stand against
the white man. Next came the tidings that from enemies the conquered
Tlascalans had become the allies and servants of the Spaniard, and that
thousands of their fiercest warriors were advancing with him upon the
sacred city of Cholula. A while passed and it was known that Cholula
also had been given to massacre, and that the holy, or rather the unholy
gods, had been torn from their shrines. Marvellous tales were told of
the Spaniards, of their courage and their might, of the armour that
they wore, the thunder that their weapons made in battle, and the fierce
beasts which they bestrode. Once two heads of white men taken in a
skirmish were sent to Montezuma, fierce-looking heads, great and hairy,
and with them the head of a horse. When Montezuma saw these ghastly
relics he almost fainted with fear, still he caused them to be set up on
pinnacles of the great temple and proclamation to be made that this fate
awaited every invader of the land.

Meanwhile all was confusion in his policies. Day by day councils were
held of the nobles, of high priests, and of neighbouring and friendly
kings. Some advised one thing, some another, and the end of it was
hesitation and folly. Ah! had Montezuma but listened to the voice of
that great man Guatemoc, Anahuac would not have been a Spanish fief
to-day. For Guatemoc prayed him again and yet again to put away his
fears and declare open war upon the Teules before it was too late; to
cease from making gifts and sending embassies, to gather his countless
armies and smite the foe in the mountain passes.

But Montezuma would answer, 'To what end, nephew? How can I struggle
against these men when the gods themselves have declared for them?
Surely the gods can take their own parts if they wish it, and if they
will not, for myself and my own fate I do not care, but alas! for my
people, alas! for the women and the children, the aged and the weak.'

Then he would cover his face and moan and weep like a child, and
Guatemoc would pass from his presence dumb with fury at the folly of
so great a king, but helpless to remedy it. For like myself, Guatemoc
believed that Montezuma had been smitten with a madness sent from heaven
to bring the land to ruin.

Now it must be understood that though my place as a god gave me
opportunities of knowing all that passed, yet I Thomas Wingfield, was
but a bubble on that great wave of events which swept over the world of
Anahuac two generations since. I was a bubble on the crest of the wave
indeed, but at that time I had no more power than the foam has over the
wave. Montezuma distrusted me as a spy, the priests looked on me as a
god and future victim and no more, only Guatemoc my friend, and Otomie
who loved me secretly, had any faith in me, and with these two I
often talked, showing them the true meaning of those things that were
happening before our eyes. But they also were strengthless, for though
his reason was no longer captain, still the unchecked power of Montezuma
guided the ship of state first this way and then that, just as a rudder
directs a vessel to its ruin when the helmsman has left it, and it
swings at the mercy of the wind and tide.

The people were distraught with fear of the future, but not the less on
that account, or perhaps because of it, they plunged with fervour into
pleasures, alternating them with religious ceremonies. In those days no
feast was neglected and no altar lacked its victim. Like a river that
quickens its flow as it draws near the precipice over which it must
fall, so the people of Mexico, foreseeing ruin, awoke as it were and
lived as they had never lived before. All day long the cries of victims
came from a hundred temple tops, and all night the sounds of revelry
were heard among the streets. 'Let us eat and drink,' they said, 'for
the gods of the sea are upon us and to-morrow we die.' Now women who had
been held virtuous proved themselves wantons, and men whose names were
honest showed themselves knaves, and none cried fie upon them; ay, even
children were seen drunken in the streets, which is an abomination among
the Aztecs.

The emperor had moved his household from Chapoltepec to the palace
in the great square facing the temple, and this palace was a town in
itself, for every night more than a thousand human beings slept beneath
its roof, not to speak of the dwarfs and monsters, and the hundreds of
wild birds and beasts in cages. Here every day I feasted with whom I
would, and when I was weary of feasting it was my custom to sally out
into the streets playing on the lute, for by now I had in some degree
mastered that hateful instrument, dressed in shining apparel and
attended by a crowd of nobles and royal pages. Then the people would
rush from their houses shouting and doing me reverence, the children
pelted me with flowers, and the maidens danced before me, kissing
my hands and feet, till at length I was attended by a mob a thousand
strong. And I also danced and shouted like any village fool, for I think
that a kind of mad humour, or perhaps it was the drunkenness of worship,
entered into me in those days. Also I sought to forget my griefs, I
desired to forget that I was doomed to the sacrifice, and that every day
brought me nearer to the red knife of the priest.

I desired to forget, but alas! I could not. The fumes of the mescal
and the pulque that I had drunk at feasts would pass from my brain, the
perfume of flowers, the sights of beauty and the adoration of the people
would cease to move me, and I could only brood heavily upon my doom and
think with longing of my distant love and home. In those days, had it
not been for the tender kindness of Otomie, I think that my heart would
have broken or I should have slain myself. But this great and beauteous
lady was ever at hand to cheer me in a thousand ways, and now and again
she would let fall some vague words of hope that set my pulses bounding.
It will be remembered that when first I came to the court of Montezuma,
I had found Otomie fair and my fancy turned towards her. Now I still
found her fair, but my heart was so full of terror that there was no
room in it for tender thoughts of her or of any other woman. Indeed when
I was not drunk with wine or adoration, I turned my mind to the making
of my peace with heaven, of which I had some need.

Still I talked much with Otomie, instructing her in the matters of my
faith and many other things, as I had done by Marina, who we now heard
was the mistress and interpreter of Cortes, the Spanish leader. She for
her part listened gravely, watching me the while with her tender eyes,
but no more, for of all women Otomie was the most modest, as she was the
proudest and most beautiful.


So matters went on until the Spaniards had left Cholula on their road
to Mexico. It was then that I chanced one morning to be sitting in the
gardens, my lute in hand, and having my attendant nobles and tutors
gathered at a respectful distance behind me. From where I sat I could
see the entrance to the court in which the emperor met his council
daily, and I noted that when the princes had gone the priests began to
come, and after them a number of very lovely girls attended by women of
middle age. Presently Guatemoc the prince, who now smiled but rarely,
came up to me smiling, and asked me if I knew what was doing yonder.
I replied that I knew nothing and cared less, but I supposed that
Montezuma was gathering a peculiar treasure to send to his masters the
Spaniards.

'Beware how you speak, Teule,' answered the prince haughtily. 'Your
words may be true, and yet did I not love you, you should rue them even
though you hold the spirit of Tezcat. Alas!' he added, stamping on the
ground, 'alas! that my uncle's madness should make it possible that such
words can be spoken. Oh! were I emperor of Anahuac, in a single week the
head of every Teule in Cholula should deck a pinnacle of yonder temple.'

'Beware how you speak, prince,' I answered mocking him, 'for there are
those who did they hear, might cause YOU to rue YOUR words. Still one
day you may be emperor, and then we shall see how you will deal with the
Teules, at least others will see though I shall not. But what is it now?
Does Montezuma choose new wives?'

'He chooses wives, but not for himself. You know, Teule, that your time
grows short. Montezuma and the priests name those who must be given to
you to wife.'

'Given me to wife!' I said starting to my feet; 'to me whose bride is
death! What have I to do with love or marriage? I who in some few short
weeks must grace an altar? Ah! Guatemoc, you say you love me, and once I
saved you. Did you love me, surely you would save me now as you swore to
do.'

'I swore that I would give my life for yours, Teule, if it lay in my
power, and that oath I would keep, for all do not set so high a store on
life as you, my friend. But I cannot help you; you are dedicated to the
gods, and did I die a hundred times, it would not save you from your
fate. Nothing can save you except the hand of heaven if it wills.
