home and went on with other preparations. But learning that Fabricius
and Pappus had been chosen consuls and had arrived in camp, he was not
constant in the same intention.

[Sidenote: B.C. 278 (_a.u._ 476)] The aforesaid consuls were now in
the midst of their army, when a certain Nicias, one of those believed
to be loyal to Pyrrhus, came to Fabricius and offered to murder him
treacherously. Fabricius, indignant at this (for he wanted to overcome
the enemy by valor and main force, like Camillus), informed Pyrrhus of
the plot. This action of his moved the king so strongly that he again
released the Roman captives without price and sent envoys once more in
regard to peace. But when the Romans made no reply about peace, but as
before bade him depart from Italy and only in that event make
propositions to them, and since they kept overrunning and capturing
the cities in alliance with him, [Sidenote: FRAG. 40^29] HE FELL INTO
PERPLEXITY; till at length some Syracusans called on him for
aid--they had been quarreling, as it chanced, ever since the death of
Agathocles--and surrendered to him both themselves and their city.
Hereupon he again breathed freely, hoping to subjugate all of Sicily.
Leaving Milo behind in Italy to keep guard over Tarentum and the other
positions, he himself sailed away after letting it be understood that
he would soon return. The Syracusans welcomed him and laid everything
at his feet, so that in brief time he had again become great and the
Carthaginians in fright secured additional mercenaries from Italy. But
presently his prospects fell to the other extreme of fortune
[Sidenote: FRAG. 40^30] BY REASON OF THE FACT THAT HE EITHER EXPELLED
OR SLEW MANY WHO HELD OFFICE AND HAD INCURRED HIS SUSPICIONS. Then the
Carthaginians, seeing that he was not strong in private forces and did
not possess the devotion of the natives, took up the war vigorously.
They harbored any Syracusans who were exiled and rendered his position
so uncomfortable that he abandoned not only Syracuse, but Sicily as
well.

[Sidenote: B.C. 277 (_a.u._ 477)] VIII, 6.--The Romans on finding out
his absence took courage and turned their attention to requiting those
who had invited him. Postponing till another occasion the case of the
Tarentini they invaded Samnium with their consuls Rufinus and Junius,
devastated the country as they went along, and took several deserted
forts. The Samnites had conveyed their dearest and most valuable
treasures into the hills called the _Cranita_, because they bear a
large growth of cornel-wood (_crania_). The Romans in contempt for
them dared to begin the ascent of the aforementioned hills. As the
region was tangled with shrubbery and difficult of access many were
killed and many, too, were taken prisoners.

The consuls now no longer carried on the war together, since each
blamed the other for the disaster, but Junius went on ravaging a
portion of Samnium, while Rufinus inflicted injury upon Lucanians and
Bruttians. He then started against Croton, which had revolted from
Rome. His friends had sent for him, but the other party got ahead of
them by bringing a garrison from Milo, of which Nicomachus was
commander. Ignorant of this fact he approached the walls carelessly,
supposing that his friends controlled affairs, and suffered a setback
by a sudden sortie made against him. Then, bethinking himself of a
trick, he captured the city. He sent two captives as pretended
deserters into Croton; one at once, declaring that he had despaired of
capturing the place and was about to set out into Locris, which was
being betrayed to him; the other later, corroborating the report with
the further detail that he was on his way. That the story might gain
credence he packed up the baggage and affected to be in haste.
Nicomachus trusted this news (for his scouts made the same report),
and leaving Croton set off with speed into Locrian territory by a
somewhat shorter road. When he had got well into Locris, Rufinus
turned back to Croton, and escaping observation because he was not
expected and because of a mist that then prevailed he captured the
city. Nicomachus learning this went back to Tarentum, and
encountering Rufinus on the way lost many men. The Locrians came over
to the Roman side.

[Sidenote: B.C. 276 (_a.u._ 478)] The next year the Romans made
expeditions into Samnium and into Lucania and fought with the
Bruttians. Pyrrhus, who had been driven out of Sicily and had
returned, was now troubling them grievously. He got back the Locrians
(by their killing the Roman garrison and changing their rulers), but
in a campaign against Rhegium was repulsed, was himself wounded, and
lost great numbers. He then retired into Locris and after executing a
few who opposed his cause he got food and money from the rest and made
his way back to Tarentum. The Samnites, hard pressed by the Romans,
caused him to leave the shelter of that town: [Sidenote: B.C. 275
(_a.u._ 479)] but on coming to their assistance he was put to flight.
A young elephant was wounded, and shaking off its riders wandered
about in search of its mother; the latter thereupon became
unmanageable, and as all the rest of the elephants raised a din
everything was thrown into dire confusion. Finally the Romans won the
day, killing many men and capturing eight elephants, and occupied the
enemy's entrenchments. Pyrrhus accompanied by a few horsemen made his
escape to Tarentum, and from there sailed back to Epirus, leaving Milo
behind with a garrison to take care of Tarentum because he expected to
come back again. He also gave them a chair fastened with straps made
from the skin of Nicias, whom he put to death for treachery. This was
the vengeance, then, that he took upon Nicias, [Sidenote: FRAG.
40^32] AND HE WAS INTENDING TO EXACT VENGEANCE FROM SOME YOUTHS WHO
HAD RIDICULED HIM AT A BANQUET; BUT HE ASKED THEM WHY THEY WERE
RIDICULING HIM, AND WHEN THEY ANSWERED: "WE SHOULD HAVE SAID A LOT
MORE THINGS A GOOD DEAL WORSE, IF THE WINE HADN'T FAILED US", HE
LAUGHED AND LET THEM GO.

Now Pyrrhus, who had made a most distinguished record among generals,
who had inspired the Romans with great fear and left Italy in the
fifth year to make a campaign against Greece, not long afterward met
his death in Argos. A woman, as the story runs, being eager to catch a
sight of him from the roof as he passed by, made a misstep and falling
upon him killed him. The same year Fabricius and Pappus became
censors; and among others whose names they erased from the lists of
the knights and the senators was Rufinus, though he had served as
dictator and had twice been consul. The reason was that he had in his
possession silver plate of ten pounds' weight. This shows how the
Romans regarded poverty as consisting not in the failure to possess
many things but in wanting many things. Accordingly, their officials
who went abroad and others who set out on any business of importance
to the State received besides other necessary allowances a seal-ring
as a public gift.

Some of the Tarentini who had been abused by Milo attacked him, with
Nico at their head. Not accomplishing anything they occupied a section
of their own wall, and with that as headquarters kept making assaults
upon Milo. When they found out that the Romans were disposed to make
war upon them, they despatched envoys to Rome and obtained peace.

[Sidenote: FRAG. 41] [Sidenote: B.C. 273 (_a.u._ 481)] AND PTOLEMY
PHILADELPHUS, KING OF EGYPT, WHEN HE LEARNED THAT PYRRHUS HAD FARED
POORLY AND THAT THE ROMANS WERE GROWING, SENT GIFTS TO THEM AND MADE A
COMPACT. AND THE ROMANS, PLEASED WITH THIS, DESPATCHED AMBASSADORS TO
HIM IN TURN. THE LATTER RECEIVED MAGNIFICENT GIFTS FROM HIM, WHICH
THEY WANTED TO PUT INTO THE TREASURY; THE SENATE, HOWEVER, WOULD NOT
ACCEPT THEM, BUT ALLOWED THEM TO KEEP THEM.

[Sidenote: B.C. 272 (_a.u._ 482)] After this, by the activity of
Carvilius they subdued the Samnites, and overcame the Lucanians and
Bruttians by the hands of Papirius. The same Papirius quelled the
Tarentini. The latter, angry at Milo and subjected to abuse by their
own men, who, as has been told, made the attack on Milo, called in the
Carthaginians to their aid when they learned that Pyrrhus was dead.
Milo, seeing that his chances had been contracted to narrow limits, as
the Romans beset him on the land side and the Carthaginians on the
water front, surrendered the citadel to Papirius on condition of being
permitted to depart unharmed with his immediate followers and his
money. Then the Carthaginians, as representatives of a nation friendly
to the Romans, sailed away, and the city made terms with Papirius.
They delivered to him their arms and their ships, demolished their
walls, and agreed to pay tribute.

The Romans, having thus secured control of the Tarentini, turned their
attention to Rhegium, whose inhabitants after taking Croton by
treachery had razed the city to the ground and had slain the Romans
there. They averted the danger that was threatening them from the
Mamertines holding Messana (whom the people of Rhegium wanted to get
as allies), by coming to an agreement with them; but in the siege of
Rhegium they suffered hardships through a scarcity of food and some
other causes until Hiero by sending from Sicily grain and soldiers to
the Romans strengthened their hands and materially aided them in
capturing the city. [Sidenote: B.C. 270 (_a.u._ 484)] The place was
restored to the survivors among the original inhabitants: those who
had plotted against it were punished.

Hiero, who was not of distinguished family on his father's side and on
his mother's was akin to the slave class, ruled almost the whole of
Sicily and was deemed a friend and ally of the Romans. After the
flight of Pyrrhus he became master of Syracuse, and having a cautious
eye upon the Carthaginians who were encroaching upon Sicily he was
inclined to favor the Romans; and the first mark of favor that he
showed them was the alliance and the forwarding of grain already
narrated.

After this came a winter so severe that the Tiber was frozen to a
great depth and trees were killed. The people of Rome suffered
hardships and the hay gave out, causing the cattle to perish.

[Sidenote: B.C. 269 (_a.u._ 485)] VIII, 7.--The next year a Samnite
named Lolius living in Rome as a hostage made his escape, gathered a
band and seized a strong position in his native country from which he
carried on brigandage. Quintus Gallus and Gaius Fabius made a
campaign against him. Him and the rabblement with him, most of them
unarmed, they suppressed; on proceeding, however, against the Carcini
in whose keeping the robbers had deposited their booty, they
encountered trouble. Finally one night, led by deserters, they scaled
the wall at a certain point and came dangerously near perishing on
account of the darkness,--not that it was a moonless night but because
it was snowing fiercely. But the moon shone out and they made
themselves absolute masters of the position.

A great deal of money fell to the share of Rome in those days, so that
they actually used silver denarii.

[Sidenote: B.C. 267 (_a.u._ 487)] Next they made a campaign into the
district now called Calabria. Their excuse was that the people had
harbored Pyrrhus and had been overrunning their allied territory, but
as a fact they wanted to gain sole possession of Brundusium, since
there was a fine harbor and for the traffic with Illyricum and Greece
the town had an approach and landing-place of such a character that
vessels would sometimes come to land and put out to sea wafted by the
same wind. [Sidenote: B.C. 266 (_a.u._ 488)] They captured it and sent
colonists to it and to other settlements as well. While the
accomplishment of these exploits [Sidenote: FRAG. 42] RAISED THEM TO A
HIGHER PLANE OF PROSPERITY, THEY SHOWED NO HAUGHTINESS: ON THE
CONTRARY THEY SURRENDERED TO THE APOLLONIATIANS ON THE IONIAN GULF
QUINTUS FABIUS, A SENATOR, BECAUSE HE HAD INSULTED THEIR AMBASSADORS.
BUT THESE ON RECEIVING HIM SENT HIM BACK HOME AGAIN UNHARMED.

[Sidenote: B.C. 265 (_a.u._ 489)] In the year of the consulship of
Quintus Fabius and AEmilius they went on a campaign to the Volsinii to
secure the freedom of the latter, for they were under treaty
obligations to them. These people were originally a branch of the
Etruscans, and they gathered power and erected an extremely strong
rampart; they enjoyed also a government guided by good laws. For these
reasons once, when they were involved in war with the Romans, they
offered resistance for a very long time. When they had been subdued,
they deteriorated into a state of effeminacy, left the management of
the city to their servants and let those servants, as a rule, also
carry on their campaigns. Finally they encouraged them to such an
extent that the servants possessed both spirit and power, and thought
they had a right to freedom. In the course of time their efforts to
obtain it were crowned with success. After that they were accustomed
to wed their mistresses, to inherit their masters, to be enrolled in
the senate, to secure the offices, and to hold the entire authority
themselves. Indeed, it was usual, when insults were offered them by
their masters, for them to requite the authors of them with rather
unbecoming speed. Hence the old-fashioned citizens, not being able to
endure them and yet possessing no power of their own to repress them,
despatched envoys by stealth to Rome. The envoys urged the senate to
convene with secrecy at night in a private house, so that no report
might get abroad, and they obtained their request. The meeting
accordingly deliberated under the idea that no one was listening: but
a sick Samnite, who was being entertained as a guest of the master of
the house, kept his bed unnoticed, learned what was voted, and gave
information to those against whom charges were preferred. The latter
seized and tortured the envoys on their return; when they found out
what was on foot they killed the messengers and also some of the
foremost men.

The above were the causes which led the Romans to send Fabius against
them. He routed the body of the foe that met him, destroyed many in
their flight, shut up the remainder within the wall, and made an
assault upon the city. In that action he was wounded and killed,
whereupon gaining confidence the enemy made a sortie. They were again
defeated, retired, and had to submit to siege. When they began to feel
the pangs of hunger, they surrendered. The consul delivered to outrage
and death the men who had appropriated the honors of the ruling class
and he razed the city to the ground; the native inhabitants, however,
and many servants who had rendered valuable service to their masters
he settled on another site.


_(BOOK 11, BOISSEVAIN.)_

VIII, 8.--From that time the Romans began struggles oversea: they had
previously had no experience at all in naval matters. They now became
seamen and crossed over to the islands and to other divisions of the
mainland. The first people they fought against were the Carthaginians.
These Carthaginians were no whit inferior to them in wealth or in the
excellence of their land; they were trained in naval operations to a
great degree of accuracy, were equipped with cavalry forces, with
infantry and elephants, ruled the Libyans, and held possession of both
Sardinia and the greater part of Sicily: as a result they had
cherished hopes of subjugating Italy. Various factors contributed to
increase their self-conceit. They were especially delighted with their
position of independence: their king they elected under the title of a
yearly office and not for permanent sovereignty. Animated by these
considerations they were at the point of most zealous eagerness.

[Sidenote: FRAG. 43^1] THE REASONS ALLEGED FOR THE WAR WERE--ON THE
PART OF THE ROMANS THAT THE CARTHAGINIANS HAD ASSISTED THE TARENTINI,
ON THE PART OF THE CARTHAGINIANS THAT THE ROMANS HAD MADE A TREATY OF
FRIENDSHIP WITH HIERO. THE FACT WAS, HOWEVER, THAT THEY VIEWED EACH
OTHER WITH JEALOUSY AND THOUGHT THAT THE ONLY SALVATION FOR THEIR OWN
POSSESSIONS LAY IN THE POSSIBILITY OF OBTAINING WHAT THE OTHER HELD.
AT A TIME WHEN THEIR ATTITUDE TOWARD EACH OTHER WAS OF THIS NATURE A
SLIGHT ACCIDENT THAT BEFELL BROKE THE TRUCE AND PROVOKED A CONFLICT
BETWEEN THEM. This is what happened.

The Mamertines, who had once conducted a colony from Campania to
Messana, were now being besieged by Hiero, and they called upon the
Romans as a nation of kindred blood. The latter readily voted to aid
them, knowing that in case the Mamertines should not secure an
alliance with them, they would have recourse to the Carthaginians; and
then the Carthaginians would sweep all Sicily and from there cross
over into Italy. For this island is such a short distance away from
the mainland that the story goes that it was itself once a part of the
mainland. [Sidenote: FRAG. 43^2] SO THE ISLAND THUS LYING OFF ITALY
SEEMED TO INVITE THE CARTHAGINIANS, AND IT APPEARED AS IF THEY MIGHT
LAY CLAIM TO THE LAND OVER OPPOSITE, COULD THEY BUT OCCUPY IT. AND THE
POSSESSION OF MESSANA GAVE TO ITS MASTERS THE RIGHT TO BE LORDS OF THE
STRAIT ALSO.

Though the Romans voted to assist the Mamertines, they did not quickly
come to their aid because of various hindrances that occurred. Hence
the Mamertines, under the spur of necessity, called upon the
Carthaginians. These brought about peace with Hiero both for
themselves and for the party that had invoked their help, so as to
prevent the Romans from crossing into the island; and under the
leadership of Hanno they retained the guardianship of strait and city.
[Sidenote: B.C. 264 (_a.u._ 490)] Meantime Gaius Claudius, military
tribune, sent in advance with a few ships by Appius Claudius, had
arrived at Rhegium. But to sail across was more than he dared, for he
saw that the Carthaginian fleet was far larger. So he embarked in a
skiff and approached Messana, where he held a conversation, as
extended as the case permitted, with the party in possession. When the
Carthaginians had made reply, he returned without accomplishing
anything. Subsequently he ascertained that the Mamertines were at odds
(they did not want to submit to the Romans, and yet they felt uneasy
about the Carthaginians), and he sailed over again. [Sidenote: FRAG.
43^3] AMONG OTHER REMARKS WHICH HE MADE TO TEMPT THEM HE DECLARED THAT
THE OBJECT OF HIS PRESENCE WAS TO FREE THE CITY, AND AS SOON AS HE
COULD SET THEIR AFFAIRS IN ORDER, HE SHOULD SAIL AWAY. HE BADE THE
CARTHAGINIANS ALSO EITHER TO WITHDRAW, OR, IF THEY HAD ANY JUST PLEA,
TO OFFER IT. NOW WHEN NOT ONE OF THE MAMERTINES (BY REASON OF FEAR)
OPENED HIS LIPS, AND THE CARTHAGINIANS SINCE THEY WERE OCCUPYING THE
CITY BY FORCE OF ARMS PAID NO HEED TO HIM, HE SAID: "THE SILENCE ON
BOTH SIDES AFFORDS SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE. IT SHOWS THAT THE ONE SIDE IS
IN THE WRONG, FOR THEY WOULD HAVE JUSTIFIED THEMSELVES IF THEIR
PURPOSES WERE AT ALL HONEST; AND THAT THE OTHER SIDE COVETS FREEDOM,
FOR THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN QUITE FREE TO SPEAK, IF THEY HAD ESPOUSED THE
CAUSE OF THE CARTHAGINIANS." AND HE VOLUNTEERED TO AID THEM. At this a
tumult of praise arose from the Mamertines. He then sailed back to
Rhegium and a little later with his entire fleet forced his passage
across. However, partly because of the numbers and skill of the
Carthaginians, but chiefly because of the difficulty of sailing and a
storm that suddenly broke [Sidenote: FRAG. 43^4] HE LOST SOME OF HIS
TRIREMES AND WITH THE REMAINDER BARELY SUCCEEDED IN GETTING BACK TO
RHEGIUM.

VIII, 9.--HOWEVER, THE ROMANS DID NOT SHUN THE SEA BECAUSE OF THEIR
DEFEAT. Claudius proceeded to repair his ships, [Sidenote: FRAG. 43^5]
WHILE HANNO, WISHING TO THROW THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR BREAKING THE
TRUCE UPON THE ROMANS, SENT TO CLAUDIUS THE CAPTURED TRIREMES AND
RESTORED THE CAPTIVES, URGING HIM TO AGREE TO PEACE. [Sidenote: FRAG.
43^6] BUT WHEN THE OTHER WOULD ACCEPT NOTHING, HE THREATENED THAT HE
WOULD NEVER PERMIT THE ROMANS EVEN TO WASH THEIR HANDS IN THE SEA.
