speak truth: such are those immediately about one, rather than those
who are more removed; familiar friends, and acquaintances, and one's
fellow citizens, rather than those who are at a distance; the present,
rather than a future generation; a man of practical wisdom, rather
than a mere ignoramus; many, than a few; for it is more likely that
these I have mentioned will adhere to the truth, than that the
opposite characters will: since one has no anxiety about the honor or
the opinion of such as one greatly despises, children and animals, for
instance, not at least for the sake of such opinion itself; but if one
is anxious about it, then it is on account of something else.

A friend, too, ranks among things pleasant; for the affection of love
is pleasant; since there is no lover of wine who does not delight in
wine: also the having affection felt toward one is pleasant; for there
is in this case also an idea of one's being an excellent person, which
all who have any sensibility to it are desirous of; now the having
affection felt for you is the being beloved yourself, on your own
account. Also the being held in admiration is pleasant, on the very
account of being honored by it. Flattery and the flatterer are
pleasant; since the flatterer is a seeming admirer and a seeming
friend. To continue the same course of action is also pleasant; for
what is habitual was laid down to be pleasant. To vary is also
pleasant; for change is an approach to what is natural: for sameness
produces an excess of a stated habit; whence it has been said, "In
everything change is pleasant." For on this principle, whatever occurs
at intervals of time is pleasant, whether persons or things; for it is
a variation of present objects; and at the same time that which
occurs merely at intervals possesses the merit of rarity. Also
learning and admiration, generally speaking, are pleasant; for under
admiration exists a desire [to learn], so that what is admired is
desired; and in the act of learning there is a settlement into a state
conformable to nature. To benefit and to be benefited are also of the
number of pleasant things; for to be benefited is to get what people
desire; but to benefit is to possess and abound; things, the both of
which men desire. And because a tendency to beneficence is pleasant,
it is also pleasant to a man to set his neighbor on his legs again,
and to put a finish to that which was deficient in some particular.




II

THE LIFE MOST DESIRABLE[76]


He who proposes to make the fitting inquiry as to which form of
government is the best, ought first to determine what manner of living
is most eligible; for while this remains uncertain, it will also be
equally uncertain what government is best. For, unless some unexpected
accident interfere, it is probable that those who enjoy the best
government will live best according to existing circumstances; he
ought, therefore, first to come to some agreement as to the manner of
life which, so to speak, is most desirable for all; and afterward,
whether this life is the same or different in the individual and the
member of a state.

Deeming then that we have already sufficiently shown what sort of life
is best, in our popular discourses on that subject, we must now make
use of what we there said. Certainly no one ever called in question
the propriety of one of the divisions; namely, that as there are three
kinds of things good for man, which are, what is external, what
belongs to the body, and to the soul, it is evident that all these
must conspire to make men truly happy. For no one would say that a man
was happy who had nothing of fortitude or temperance, justice or
prudence, but was afraid of the flies that flew round him; or who
would abstain from nothing, if he chanced to be desirous of meat or
drink, or who would murder his dearest friend for a farthing; or, in
like manner, one who was in every particular as wanting and misguided
in his understanding as an infant or a maniac. These truths are so
evident that all must agree to them, tho some may dispute about the
quantity and the degree: for they may think, that a very little amount
of virtue is sufficient for happiness; but as to riches, property,
power, honor, and all such things, they endeavor to increase them
without bounds. But to such we say, that it is easy to prove, from
what experience teaches us concerning these cases, that it is not
through these external goods that men acquire virtue, but through
virtue that they acquire them. As to a happy life, whether it is to be
found in pleasure or in virtue, or in both, certain it is that it
belongs more frequently to those whose morals are most pure, and whose
understandings are best cultivated, and who preserve moderation in
the acquisition of external goods, than to those who possess a
sufficiency of external good things, but are deficient in the rest.

And that such is the case will be clearly seen by any one who views
the matter with reflection. For whatsoever is external has its
boundary, as a machine; and whatsoever is useful is such that its
excess is either necessarily hurtful, or at best useless to the
possessor. But every good quality of the soul, the higher it is in
degree, becomes much the more useful, if it is permitted on this
subject to adopt the word "useful" as well as "noble." It is also
evident that the best disposition of each thing will follow in the
same proportion of excess, as the things themselves, of which we allow
they are accidents, differ from each other in value. So that if the
soul is more noble than any outward possession, or than the body, both
in itself and with respect to us, it must be admitted, of course, that
the best disposition of each must follow the same analogy. Besides, it
is for the sake of the soul that these things are desirable, and it is
on this account that wise men should desire them, and not the soul for
them.

Let us therefore be well agreed that so much of happiness falls to the
lot of every one as he possesses of virtue and wisdom, and in
proportion as he acts according to their dictates; since for this we
have the example of the God Himself, who is completely happy, not from
any external good, but in Himself, and because He is such by nature.
For good fortune is something of necessity different from happiness,
as every external good of the soul is produced by chance or by
fortune; but it is not from fortune that any one is just or wise.
Hence it follows, as established by the same reasoning, that the state
which is best, and acts best, will be happy: for no one can fare well
who acts not well; nor can the actions either of man or city be
praiseworthy without virtue and wisdom. For valor, justice and wisdom
have in a state the same force and form as in individuals; and it is
only as he shares in these virtues that each man is said to be just,
wise, and prudent.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 74: Aristotle has been recognized as a great name in the
classic literature of Greece, but this, as Mahaffy points out, is
rather as a critic than as a man of letters in the narrow sense of the
word. Physically he was unattractive. In his day he was thought ugly.
His features were small and his legs thin. A sitting portrait of him,
now preserved in Rome, shows a refined and careworn, tho somewhat hard
face, in which thought and perhaps bodily suffering have drawn deep
furrows. His writings are said to have numbered about four hundred.]

[Footnote 75: From Book I of the "Rhetoric." Translated by Theodore
Buckley.]

[Footnote 76: From Book VII of the "Politics." Translated by Edward
Walford.]




III

IDEAL HUSBANDS AND WIVES[77]


But as to man, the first object of his care should be respecting a
wife; for the society which exists between the male and female is
above all others natural. For it is laid down by us elsewhere, that
nature aims at producing many such creatures as the several kinds of
animals; but it is impossible for the female to accomplish this
without the male, or the male without the female, so that the society
between them exists of necessity. In all other animals indeed, this
association is irrational, and exists only so far as they possess a
natural instinct, and for the sake of procreation alone. But in the
milder and more intelligent animals, this bond more nearly approaches
perfection; for there seem to be in them more signs of mutual
assistance and good-will, and of cooperation with each other. But this
is especially the case with man, because the male and female here
cooperate not only for the sake of existence, but of living happily.
And the procreation of children is a means not only of subserving
nature, but also of solid benefit; for the labor which they expend
during their season of vigor upon their helpless young is given back
to them in the decay of age, from their children who are then in
vigor.

And at the same time, by this continual cycle, nature provides for the
continuance of the race as a species, since she can not do so
numerically. Thus divinely predisposed toward such a society is the
nature of both the male and the female. For the sexes are at once
divided, in that neither of them have powers adequate for all
purposes, nay, in some respects even opposite to each other, tho they
tend to the same end. For nature has made the one sex stronger and the
other weaker, that the one by reason of fear may be more adapted to
preserve property, while the other, by reason of its fortitude, may be
disposed to repel assaults; and that the one may provide things
abroad, while the other preserves them at home. And with respect to
labor, the one is by nature capable of attending to domestic duties,
but weak as to matters out-of-doors; the other is ill-adapted to works
where repose is necessary, but able to perform those which demand
exercise. And with respect to children, the bearing of them belongs to
one sex, but the advantage of them is common to both; for the one has
to rear them, and the other to educate them....

A good and perfect wife ought to be mistress of everything within the
house, and to have the care of everything according to fixt laws;
allowing no one to come in unbidden by her husband, and especially
keeping on her guard against everything which can be noised abroad
relating to a woman's dishonor. So that if any mischance has happened
within doors, she alone ought to know about it; but when those who
have come in have done anything wrong, the husband should bear the
blame. And she should manage the expenses laid out upon such festivals
as her husband has agreed with her in keeping, and make an outlay of
clothes and other ornaments on a somewhat lesser scale than is
encouraged by the laws of the state; considering that neither splendor
of vestments, nor preeminence of beauty, nor the amount of gold,
contributes so much to the commendation of a woman as good management
in domestic affairs, and a noble and comely manner of life; since all
such array of the soul is far more lovely, and has greater force (than
anything besides), to provide herself and her children true ornament
till old age.

A wife therefore ought to inspire herself with confidence, and
perpetually to be at the head of domestic affairs. For it is unseemly
for a man to know all that goes on in the house; in all respects
indeed she ought to be obedient to her husband, and not to busy
herself about public affairs, nor to take part in matrimonial
concerns. And when it is time to give his daughters in marriage, or to
get wives for his sons, by all means in these respects she should obey
her husband. And she ought to show herself a fellow counsellor to her
husband, so as to assent to what pleases him, remembering that it is
less unseemly for a husband to take in hand domestic matters, than for
a wife to busy herself in affairs out-of-doors. But the well-ordered
wife will justly consider the behavior of her husband as a model of
her own life, and a law to herself, invested with a divine sanction by
means of the marriage tie and the community of life. For if she can
persuade herself to bear her husband's ways patiently, she will most
easily manage matters in the house; but if she can not, she will have
greater difficulty. So that it will be seemly for her to show herself
of one mind with her husband, and tractable, not only when her husband
is in good luck and prosperity, but also when he is in misfortune; and
when good fortune has failed him or sickness has laid hold of his
bodily frame, or when he has been deprived of his senses, she ought
gently and sympathetically to yield in any matter which is not base
and unworthy; but if her husband has been ailing and made a mistake,
she ought not to keep it on her mind, but to lay the blame on disease
or ignorance....

But the husband in his turn should find out certain laws to regulate
his treatment of his wife, as one who entered the house of her husband
to share his children and his life, and to leave him a progeny
destined to bear the names of her husband's parents and her own. And
what in the world could there be more holy than these ties? or what is
there about which a man in his sound sense could strive more earnestly
than to beget the children who shall hereafter nurse his declining
years, from the best and most praiseworthy of wives; for they are to
be, as it were, the best and most pious preservers of their father and
mother, and guardians of the entire family. For it is probable that
they will turn out good, if they have been reared uprightly by their
parents in the habitual practise of what is just and holy but if the
contrary should be the case, they will suffer the loss themselves. For
unless parents afford their children a fit pattern of life, they will
leave them an obvious excuse to quote against themselves. And this is
to be feared, that if they have not lived well, their sons will
disregard them, and neglect them in their old age.

On this account nothing is to be omitted which tends to the fit
education of a bride, so that the children may be born of the best
possible mother. For the husbandman neglects nothing so as to cast his
seed upon the richest and best wrought ground, considering that it is
from such a soil that he will hereafter reap the fairest fruits; and
if any violence threatens, he fights against his enemy, and
deliberately chooses to die rather than endure to see it ravaged; and
such a disposition as this is praised by most persons. And as such is
the care which is spent by us on the support of our bodies, what
manner of men ought we to show ourselves on behalf of our children and
of the mother that is to rear them? Ought we not most readily to
strain every nerve? For in this way alone does the constitution of
man's nature, which is mortal, attain to prosperity, and the prayers
of parents all tend to this one end. And hence, whoever cares not for
this is sure to be regardless of the gods.

It was for the sake of the gods, then, who were present to him when
he offered the marriage sacrifice, that he not only took to himself a
wife, but also (what is far more) gave himself over to his bride to
honor her next to his own parents. But that which is most precious in
the eyes of a prudent wife is to see her husband preserving himself
entirely for her, thinking of no other woman in comparison with her,
and regarding herself, above all other women, as peculiarly his own,
and faithful toward him. For in proportion as a wife perceives that
she is faithfully and justly cared for, so much the more will she
exert her energies to show herself such. Whoever therefore is prudent
will not fail to remember with how much honor it becomes him to
requite his parents, his wife, and his children, in order that he may
gain the name of one who is just and upright in distributing to each
their due. For every one is indignant beyond measure at being deprived
of that which belongs to himself in a peculiar manner; and there is no
one who is content at being deprived of his own property, tho one were
to give him plenty of his neighbor's goods. And in very truth nothing
is so peculiarly the property of a wife as a chaste and hallowed
intercourse.

And hence it would not befit a prudent man to cast his seed wherever
chance might take it, lest children should be born to him from a bad
and base stock, on an equality with his legitimate sons; and by this
the wife is robbed of her conjugal rights, the children are injured,
and above all, the husband himself is enveloped in disgrace. He ought
therefore to approach his wife with much self-restraint and decency,
and to maintain modesty in his words, and in his deeds a regard to
what is lawful and honest, and in his intercourse he should be true
and discreet. And to little errors, even tho they be voluntary, he
ought to vouchsafe pardon; and if she has made any mistake through
ignorance, he ought to advise her, and not to inspire her with fear,
except such as is accompanied with reverence and respect. For such
treatment would be more suited to mistresses at the hands of their
gallants. Yet, nevertheless, justly to love her husband with reverence
and respect, and to be loved in turn, is that which befits a wife of
gentle birth, as to her intercourse with her own husband. For fear is
of two kinds; the one kind is reverent and full of respect; such is
that which good sons exhibit toward their parents, and well-ordered
citizens toward those who rule them in a kindly spirit. But the other
kind is attended by hatred and aversion: such is that which slaves
feel toward their masters, and citizens toward unjust and lawless
tyrants.

Furthermore, the husband ought to choose the best course out of all
that we have said above, and so to conciliate his wife to himself, and
to make her trustworthy and well disposed, as that whether her husband
be present or absent, she will be equally good, while he can turn his
attention to public matters: so that even in his absence she may feel
that no one is better, nor more suited to herself, nor more nearly
bound to her, than her own husband: and that he may always direct his
energies to the public good, and show from the very first that such is
the case, even tho she may be very young and quite inexperienced in
such matters. For if the husband should ever begin such a course of
conduct as this, and show himself to be perfect master of himself, he
would be the best guide of the entire course of his life, and he would
teach his wife to adopt a similar mode of action.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 77: From Book I of the "Economics." Translated by Edward
Walford.]




IV

HAPPINESS AS AN END OF HUMAN ACTION[78]


Since we have spoken of the virtues, of the different kinds of
friendships, and of pleasures, it remains that we should discuss the
subject of happiness in outline, since we assumed this to be the end
of human actions. Therefore, if we recapitulate what has been said
before, the argument will be more concise.

We have said that it is not a habit; for if it were, it might exist in
a man who slept throughout his life, living the life of a plant, and
suffering the greatest misfortunes. If, then, this does not please us,
but if we must rather bring it under a kind of energy, as was said
before; and if, of energies, some are necessary and eligible for the
sake of something else, others are eligible for their own sakes; it is
plain that we must consider happiness as one of those which are
eligible for their own sakes, and not one of those which are eligible
for the sake of something else; for happiness is in want of nothing,
but is self-sufficient. Now those energies are eligible for their own
sakes from which nothing more is sought for beyond the energy. But of
this kind, actions done according to virtue seem to be: for the
performance of honorable and good acts is among things eligible for
their own sakes. And of amusements, those are eligible for their own
sakes which are pleasant: for men do not choose these for the sake of
anything else: for they are rather injured by them than benefited,
since they neglect their persons and property. But the majority of
those who are called happy fly to such pastimes as these; and,
therefore, those who have a happy turn for such pastimes as these are
in favor with tyrants; for they make themselves agreeable in those
things which tyrants desire; and such are the men they want.

These things are thought to belong to happiness, because those who are
in power pass their leisure in them. But such men are perhaps no
proof; for neither virtue nor intellect consists in having power, and
from these two good energies proceed; nor if those, who have never
tasted pure and liberal pleasure, fly to bodily pleasures, must we
therefore think that these pleasures are more eligible; for children
think those things which are esteemed by them the best. It is
reasonable, therefore, to suppose, that as the things which appear
honorable to children and men differ, so also those which appear so to
the bad and the good will differ likewise, and therefore, as we have
very often said, those things are honorable and pleasant which are so
to the good man. But to every man that energy is most eligible which
is according to his proper habit; and, therefore, to the good man,
that is most eligible which is according to virtue.

Consequently happiness does not consist in amusement; for it is absurd
that the end should be amusement; and that men should toil and suffer
inconvenience all their life long for the sake of amusement; for we
choose everything, as we might say, for the sake of something else,
except happiness; for that is an end. But to be serious and to labor
for the sake of amusement appears foolish and very childish. But to
amuse ourselves in order that we may be serious, as Anacharsis said,
seems to be right: for amusement resembles relaxation. Relaxation,
therefore, is not the end, for we have recourse to it for the sake of
the energy. But the happy life seems to be according to virtue; and
this is serious, and does not consist in amusement. We say also that
serious things are better than those which are ridiculous and joined
with amusement; and that the energy of the better part and of the
better man is more serious; and the energy of the better man is at
once superior, and more tending to happiness. Besides, any person
whatever, even a slave, may enjoy bodily pleasures no less than the
best man; but no one allows that a slave partakes of happiness except
so far as that he partakes of life: for happiness does not consist in
such modes of passing life, but in energies according to virtue, as
has been said already.

If happiness be an energy according to virtue, it is reasonable to
suppose that it is according to the best virtue; and this must be the
virtue of the best part of man. Whether, then, this best part be the
intellect, or something else--which is thought naturally to bear rule
and to govern, and to possess ideas upon honorable and divine
subjects, or whether it is itself divine, or the most divine of any
property which we possess; the energy of this part according to its
proper virtue must be perfect happiness: and that this energy is
contemplative has been stated. This also would seem to agree with what
was said before, and with the truth: for this energy is the noblest;
since the intellect is the noblest thing within us, and of subjects of
knowledge, those are noblest with which the intellect is conversant.

It is also most continuous; for we are better able to contemplate
continuously than to do anything else continuously. We think also that
pleasure must be united to happiness: but of all the energies
according to virtue, that according to wisdom is confessedly the most
pleasant: at any rate, wisdom seems to contain pleasures worthy of
admiration, both in point of purity and stability: and it is
reasonable to suppose that his mode of life should be pleasanter to
those who know it than to those who are only seeking it. Again, that
