my prize, possesses it, himself having wrested it [from me]."

Thus he spoke, weeping. But to him his venerable mother hearkened,
sitting in the depths of the ocean beside her aged sire. And immediately
she rose up from the hoary deep, like a mist. And then she sat before
him weeping, and soothed him with her hand, and addressed him, and spoke
aloud:

"Son, why weepest thou--on account of what has grief come upon thy mind?
Declare it, nor hide it in thy soul, that we both may know it."

But her, sighing deeply, swift-footed Achilles addressed: "Thou knowest;
why should I tell all these things to thee, already knowing [them]? We
went against Thebe,[46] the sacred city of Eetion; and this we
plundered, and brought hither all [the spoil]. And these things indeed
the sons of the Greeks fairly divided among themselves, and selected for
Agamemnon the fair-cheeked daughter of Chryses. But Chryses, priest of
the far-darting Apollo, came afterwards to the fleet ships of the
brazen-mailed Greeks, about to ransom his daughter, and bringing
invaluable ransoms, having in his hand the fillets of far-darting
Apollo, on his golden sceptre. And he supplicated all the Greeks, but
chiefly the two sons of Atreus, the leaders of the people. Upon this all
the other Greeks shouted assent, that the priest should be reverenced,
and the splendid ransoms accepted: yet it was not pleasing to Agamemnon,
son of Atreus, in his mind; but he dismissed him evilly, and added a
harsh mandate. The old man therefore went back enraged; but Apollo
hearkened to him praying, for he was very dear to him. And he sent a
destructive arrow against the Greeks; and the forces were now dying one
upon another, and the shafts of the god went on all sides through the
wide army of the Greeks. But to us the skilful seer unfolded the divine
will of the Far-darter. Straightway I first exhorted that we should
appease the god; but then rage seized upon the son of Atreus, and
instantly rising, he uttered a threatening speech, which is now
accomplished; for the rolling-eyed Greeks attend her to Chrysa with a
swift bark, and bring presents to the king; but the heralds have just
now gone from my tent, conducting the virgin daughter of Briseis, whom
the sons of the Greeks gave to me. But do thou, if thou art able, aid
thy son. Going to Olympus, supplicate Jove, if ever thou didst delight
the heart of Jove as to anything, by word or deed; for I frequently
heard thee boasting in the palaces of my sire, when thou saidest that
thou alone, amongst the immortals, didst avert unworthy destruction from
the cloud-collecting son of Saturn, when the other Olympian inhabitants,
Juno, and Neptune, and Pallas Minerva, wished to bind him. But thou, O
goddess, having approached, freed him from his chains, having quickly
summoned to lofty Olympus, the hundred-handed, whom the gods call
Briareus, and all men AEgeon, because he was superior to his father in
strength,[47] who then sat by the son of Saturn, exulting in renown. Him
then the blessed gods dreaded, nor did they bind [Jove]. Of these things
now reminding him, sit beside him, and embrace his knees, if in anywise
he may consent to aid the Trojans, and hem in[48] at their ships, and
along the sea, the Greeks [while they get] slaughtered, that all may
enjoy their king, and that the son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, may
know his baleful folly,[49] when he in no wise honoured the bravest of
the Greeks."

   [Footnote 46: Thebe was situated on the border of Mysia, on the
   mountain Placus, in the district afterwards called Adramyttium.
   The inhabitants were Cilicians.--See Heyne, and De Pinedo on
   Steph. Byz. s.v. p. 307, n. 58.]

   [Footnote 47: There is some doubt whether Homer considered
   Briareus as the son of Neptune or of Uranus and Terra.--See
   Arnold. The fable is ridiculed by Minucius Felix, Sec. 22.]

   [Footnote 48: See Buttm. Lexil. pp. 257, 261, Fishlake's
   translation.]

   [Footnote 49: The idea of infatuation is not, however,
   necessarily implied in [Greek: ate]. See Buttm. Lex. p. 5, sq.]

But him Thetis then answered, shedding down a tear: "Alas! my son,
wherefore have I reared thee, having brought thee forth in an evil hour.
Would that thou wert seated at the ships tearless and uninjured; for thy
destined life is but for a very short period, nor very long; but now art
thou both swift-fated and wretched above all mortals: therefore have I
brought thee forth in my palace under an evil fate. However, to tell thy
words to thunder-delighting Jove, I myself will go to snow-clad Olympus,
if by chance he will be persuaded. But do thou, now sitting at the
swift ships, wage resentment against the Greeks, and totally abstain
from war. For yesterday Jove went to Oceanus,[50] to the blameless
AEthiopians, to a banquet, and with him went all the gods. But on the
twelfth day he will return to Olympus; and then will I go to the
brazen-floored palace of Jove, and suppliantly embrace his knees, and I
think that he will be persuaded."

   [Footnote 50: According to Homer, the earth is a circular plane,
   and Oceanus is an immense stream encircling it, from which the
   different rivers run inward.]

Thus having said, she departed, and left him there wrathful in his soul
for his well-girded maid, whom they had taken from him against his will.
But Ulysses, meantime, came to Chrysa, bringing the sacred hecatomb. But
they, when they had entered the deep haven, first furled their sails,
and stowed them in the sable bark; they next brought the mast to its
receptacle, lowering it quickly by its stays, and they rowed the vessel
forwards with oars into its moorage; they heaved out the sleepers, and
tied the hawsers. They themselves then went forth on the breakers of the
sea, and disembarked the hecatomb to far-darting Apollo, and then they
made the daughter of Chryses descend from the sea-traversing bark. Then
wise Ulysses, leading her to the altar, placed her in the hands of her
dear father, and addressed him:

"O Chryses, Agamemnon, king of men, sent me forth to conduct to thee thy
daughter, and to sacrifice a sacred hecatomb to Phoebus for the Greeks,
that we may appease the king, who now has sent evils fraught with
groanings upon the Argives."

Thus having spoken, he placed her in his hands; but he rejoicing
received his beloved daughter. Then they immediately placed in order the
splendid hecatomb for the god around the well-built altar. After that
they washed their hands, and held up the pounded barley.[51] But for
them, Chryses, uplifting his hands, prayed with loud voice:

   [Footnote 51: "Salted barley meal,"--Anthon; "whole
   barley,"--Voss; but Buttmann, Lexil. p. 454, in a highly amusing
   note, observes, "no supposition of a regular and constant
   distinction between the Greeks and Romans, the one using barley
   whole and the other coarsely ground, possible as the thing may
   be in itself, is to be entertained without the express testimony
   of the ancients."]

"Hear me, O thou of the silver bow, who art wont to protect Chrysa and
divine Cilla, and who mightily rulest over Tenedos! already indeed at a
former time didst thou hear me praying, and didst honour me, and didst
very much afflict the people of the Greeks, now also accomplish for me
this further request: even now avert from the Greeks this unseemly
pestilence."

Thus he spoke praying, and him Phoebus Apollo heard. But after they had
prayed, and sprinkled the pounded barley, they first bent back [the neck
of the victims], killed them, and flayed them, and cut out the thighs,
and wrapped them round with the fat, having arranged it in double folds;
then laid the raw flesh upon them. Then the old man burned them on
billets, and poured sparkling wine upon them; and near him the youths
held five-pronged spits in their hands. But after the thighs were
roasted, and they had tasted the entrails, they then cut the rest of
them into small pieces, and fixed them on spits, and roasted them
skilfully, and drew all the viands [off the spits].

But when they had ceased from their labour, and had prepared the
banquet, they feasted; nor did their soul in anywise lack a due
allowance of the feast: but when they had dismissed the desire of drink
and food, the youths on the one hand filled the goblets with wine to the
brim,[52] and handed round the wine to all, having poured the first of
the wine into the cups.[53] But the Grecian youths throughout the day
were appeasing the god by song, chanting the joyous Paean,[54] hymning
the Far-darter, and he was delighted in his mind as he listened. But
when the sun had set, and darkness came on, then they slept near the
hawsers of their ships. But when the mother of dawn,[55] rosy-fingered
morning, appeared, straightway then they set sail for the spacious camp
of the Achaeans, and to them far-darting Apollo sent a favourable gale.
But they erected the mast and expanded the white sails. The wind
streamed[56] into the bosom of the sail; and as the vessel briskly ran,
the dark wave roared loudly around the keel; but she scudded through the
wave, holding on her way. But when they reached the wide armament of the
Greeks, they drew up the black ship on the continent, far upon the sand,
and stretched long props under it; but they dispersed themselves through
their tents and ships.

   [Footnote 52: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 291, sqq. The custom of
   crowning the goblets with flowers was of later origin.]

   [Footnote 53: See Battm. p. 168. The customary libation is
   meant.]

   [Footnote 54: On the Paean, see Mueller, Gk. Lit. iii. Sec. 4. and
   Dorians, vol. i. p. 370.]

   [Footnote 55: See Loewe on Odyss. ii. 1, and my translation.
   Kennedy renders it "ushering in the dawn."]

   [Footnote 56: See Buttm. p. 484. I am partly indebted to Anthon
   in rendering this expression.]

But the Jove-sprung son of Peleus, swift-footed Achilles, continued his
wrath, sitting at his swift ships, nor ever did he frequent the assembly
of noble heroes, nor the fight, but he pined away his dear heart,
remaining there, although he longed for the din and the battle.

Now when the twelfth morning from that time arose,[57] then indeed all
the gods who are for ever went together to Olympus, but Jupiter
preceded. But Thetis was not forgetful of the charges of her son, but
she emerged from the wave of the sea, and at dawn ascended lofty heaven
and Olympus;[58] and she found the far-seeing son of Saturn sitting
apart from the others, on the highest summit of many-peaked Olympus, and
then she sat down before him, and embraced his knees with her left hand,
but with the right taking him by the chin, imploring, she thus addressed
king Jove, the son of Saturn:

"O father Jove, if ever I have aided thee among the immortals, either in
word or deed, accomplish for me this desire: honour my son, who is the
most short-lived of others; for now indeed Agamemnon, the king of men,
has disgraced him; for he possesses his prize, he himself having borne
it away. Do thou at least, Olympian Jove all counselling, honour him:
and so long grant victory to the Trojans, until the Greeks shall
reverence my son, and shall advance him in honour."

   [Footnote 57: Cf. ver. 425.]

   [Footnote 58: [Greek: Ouranos] is here the upper clear region of
   air,--the ether, into which Olympus soared up.--Voss.]

Thus she spoke; but cloud-compelling Jove answered her nothing, but sat
silent for a long time. And as Thetis seized his knees, fast clinging
she held them, and thus again entreated: "Do but now promise to me
explicitly, and grant or refuse, (for in thee there is no dread,) that I
may well know how far I am the most dishonoured goddess amongst all."

But her cloud-compelling Jove, deeply moved, addressed: "Truly now this
[will be] a grievous matter, since thou wilt cause me to give offence to
Juno, when she shall irritate me with reproachful words. For, even
without reason, she is perpetually chiding me amongst the immortal gods,
and also says that I aid the Trojans in battle. But do thou on thy part
now depart, lest Juno behold thee: but these things shall be my care,
until I perform them. But if [thou wilt have it thus], so be it; I will
nod to thee with my head, that thou mayest feel confidence. For this
from me is the greatest pledge among the immortals: for my pledge, even
whatsoever I shall sanction by nod, is not to be retracted, neither
fallacious nor unfulfilled."

The son of Saturn spoke, and nodded thereupon with his dark eyebrows.
And then the ambrosial locks of the king were shaken over him from his
immortal head; and he made mighty Olympus tremble. Thus having
conferred, they separated. She at once plunged from splendid Olympus
into the profound sea. But Jove on the other hand [returned] to his
palace. But all the gods rose up together from their seats to meet their
sire; nor did any dare to await[59] him approaching, but all rose in his
presence. Thus indeed he sat there on his throne; nor was Juno
unconscious, having seen that silver-footed Thetis, the daughter of the
marine old man, had joined in deliberation with him. Forthwith with
reproaches she accosted Saturnian Jove:

"Which of the gods again, O deceitful one, has been concerting measures
with thee? Ever is it agreeable to thee, being apart from me, plotting
secret things, to decide thereon; nor hast thou ever yet deigned
willingly to tell me one word of what thou dost meditate."

   [Footnote 59: Heyne supplies "sedendo."]

To her then replied the father of men and gods: "O Juno, build up no
hopes of knowing all my counsels; difficult would they be for thee,
although thou art my consort. But whatever it may be fit for thee to
hear, none then either of gods or men shall know it before thee: but
whatever I wish to consider apart from the gods, do thou neither inquire
into any of these things, nor investigate them."

But him the large-eyed, venerable Juno then answered: "Most dread son
of Saturn, what a word hast thou spoken? Heretofore have I ever
questioned thee much, nor pryed [into thy secrets]; but thou mayest very
quietly deliberate on those things which thou desirest. But at present I
greatly fear in my soul, lest silver-footed Thetis, the daughter of the
marine old man, may have influenced thee: for at dawn she sat by thee
and embraced thy knees: to her I suspect thou didst plainly promise that
thou wouldest honour Achilles, and destroy many at the ships of the
Greeks."

But her answering, cloud-compelling Jove addressed: "Perverse one! thou
art always suspecting, nor do I escape thee. Nevertheless thou shalt
produce no effect at all, but thou shalt be farther from my heart: and
this will be more bitter to thee. But granted this be so, it appears to
be my pleasure.[60] But sit down in peace, and obey my mandate, lest as
many deities as are in Olympus avail thee not against me, I drawing
near,[61] when I shall lay my resistless hands upon thee."

   [Footnote 60: _I.e._, say that what you suspect is correct; well
   then, such is my will.]

   [Footnote 61: I prefer taking [Greek: ionth'] for [Greek: ionta],
   not for [Greek: ionte], as Buttmann wished.--See Anthon.]

Thus he spoke: but venerable, large-eyed Juno feared, and sat down
silent, having bent her heart to submission. But the heavenly gods
murmured throughout the palace of Jove. And the renowned artificer,
Vulcan, began to harangue them, doing kind offices to his beloved
mother, white-armed Juno:

"Truly now these will be grievous matters, and no longer tolerable, if
ye twain contend thus on account of mortals, and excite uproar among the
deities. Nor will there be any enjoyment in the delightful banquet,
since the worse things prevail.[62] But to my mother I advise, she
herself being intelligent, to gratify my dear father Jove, lest my sire
may again reprove her, and disturb our banquet. For if the Olympian
Thunderer wishes to hurl [us] from our seats[63]--for he is much the
most powerful. But do thou soothe him with gentle words; then will the
Olympian king straightway be propitious to us."

   [Footnote 62: Cf. Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 9. The saying is almost
   proverbial.]

   [Footnote 63: An aposiopesis; understand, "he can easily do so."]

Thus then he spoke, and rising, he placed the double cup[64] in the hand
of his dear mother, and addressed her:

"Be patient, my mother, and restrain thyself, although grieved, lest
with my own eyes I behold thee beaten, being very dear to me; nor then
indeed should I be able, though full of grief, to assist thee; for
Olympian Jove is difficult to be opposed. For heretofore, having seized
me by the foot, he cast me, desiring at one time to assist you, down
from the heavenly threshold. All day was I carried down through the air,
and I fell on Lemnos[65] with the setting sun: and but little life was
in me by that time. There the Sintian[66] men forthwith received and
tended[67] me, having fallen."

Thus he spoke: but the white-armed goddess Juno smiled; and smiling she
received the cup from the hand of her son. But he, beginning from left
to right,[68] kept pouring out for all the other gods, drawing nectar
from the goblet. And then inextinguishable laughter arose among the
immortal gods, when they saw Vulcan bustling about[69] through the
mansion.

   [Footnote 64: See my note on Od. iii. p. 30, n. 13, ed. Bohn. It
   was "a double cup with a common bottom in the middle."--Crusius.]

   [Footnote 65: Hercules having sacked Troy, was, on his return,
   driven to Cos by a storm raised by Juno, who was hostile to him,
   and who had contrived to cast Jupiter into a sleep, that he might
   not interrupt her purpose. Jupiter awaking, in resentment of the
   artifice practised upon him, bound her feet to iron anvils, which
   Vulcan attempting to loose, was cast headlong down to Lemnos by
   his enraged sire.]

   [Footnote 66: A race of robbers, of Tyrrhenian origin (according
   to Mueller), and the ancient inhabitants of Lemnos. This island
   was ever after sacred to Vulcan. Cf. Lactant. i. 15; Milton, P.L.
   i. 740, sqq.]

   [Footnote 67: See Arnold.]

   [Footnote 68: This meaning of [Greek: endexia] is due to Buttmann.]

   [Footnote 69: See Buttmann, Lexil. p. 481.]

Thus, then, they feasted[70] the entire day till the setting sun; nor
did the soul want anything of the equal feast, nor of the beautiful
harp, which Apollo held, nor of the Muses, who accompanied him,
responding in turn, with delicious voice.

   [Footnote 70: "The gods formed a sort of political community of
   their own, which had its hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and
   duties, its contentions for power and occasional revolutions, its
   public meetings in the agora of Olympus, and its multitudinous
   banquets or festivals."--Grote, vol. i. p. 463. Cf. Mueller, Gk.
   Lit. ii. Sec. 2.]

But when the splendid light of the sun was sunk, they retired to repose,
each one to his home, where renowned Vulcan, lame of both legs, with
cunning skill had built a house for each. But the Olympian thunderer
Jove went to his couch, where he lay before, when sweet sleep came upon
him. There, having ascended, he lay down to rest, and beside him
golden-throned Juno.




                           BOOK THE SECOND.


                              ARGUMENT.

Jove sends a dream to Agamemnon, in consequence of which he re-assembles
the army. Thersites is punished for his insolent speech, and the troops
are restrained from seeking a return homewards. The catalogue of the
ships and the forces of the confederates follows.


The rest, then, both gods and horse-arraying men,[71] slept all the
night: but Jove sweet sleep possessed not; but he was pondering in his
mind how he might honour Achilles, and destroy many at the ships of the
Greeks. But this device appeared best to him in his mind, to send a
fatal dream[72] to Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. And addressing him, he
spoke winged words:

"Haste away, pernicious dream, to the swift ships of the Greeks. Going
into the tent of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, utter very accurately
everything as I shall command thee. Bid him arm the long-haired
Achaeans[73] with all their array; for now perhaps he may[74] take the
wide-wayed city of the Trojans; for the immortals who possess the
Olympian mansions no longer think dividedly, for Juno, supplicating,
hath bent all [to her will]. And woes are impending over the Trojans."

Thus he spake: and the dream[75] accordingly departed, as soon as it
heard the mandate. And quickly it came to the swift ships of the Greeks,
and went unto Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. But him it found sleeping in
his tent, and ambrosial slumber was diffused around. And he stood over
his head, like unto Nestor, the son of Neleus, him, to wit, whom
Agamemnon honoured most of the old men. To him assimilating himself, the
divine dream addressed him:

   [Footnote 71: See Anthon, who observes that "fighting from on
   horseback was not practised in the Homeric times."]

   [Footnote 72: Some would personify Oneirus, as god of dreams.]

   [Footnote 73: Observe the distinction, for the Abantes, ver. 542,
   and the Thracians, iv. 533, wore their hair differently.]

   [Footnote 74: [Greek: ken] limits the assertion to _probability_,
   so that Jupiter does not utter a _direct_ falsehood.]

   [Footnote 75: In defence of this cheating conduct of Jove, at
   which Plato was much scandalized, Coleridge, p. 154, observes:
   "The [Greek: oulos oneiros] was a lying spirit, which the father
   of gods and men had a supreme right to commission for the purpose
   of working out his ultimate will."]

"Sleepest thou, son of the warrior, horse-taming Atreus? It becomes not
a counsel-giving man, to whom the people have been intrusted, and to
whom so many things are a care, to sleep all the night. But now quickly
attend to me; for I am a messenger to thee from Jove, who, although far
distant, greatly regards and pities thee. He orders thee to arm the
long-haired Greeks with all their array, for now mayest thou take the
wide-wayed city of the Trojans, since the immortals, who possess the
Olympian mansions, no longer think dividedly; for Juno, supplicating,
hath bent all [to her will], and woes from Jove are impending over the
Trojans. But do thou preserve this in thy recollection, nor let
forgetfulness possess thee, when sweet sleep shall desert thee."

Thus then having spoken, he departed, and left him there pondering these
things in his mind, which were not destined to be accomplished. For he,
foolish, thought that he would take the city of Priam on that day; nor
knew he the deeds which Jupiter was really devising; for even he was
about yet to impose additional hardships and sorrows upon both Trojans
and Greeks, through mighty conflicts. But he awoke from his sleep, and
the heavenly voice was diffused around him. He sat up erect, and put on
his soft tunic, beautiful, new; and around him he threw his large cloak.
And he bound his beautiful sandals on his shining feet, and slung from
his shoulders the silver-studded sword. He also took his paternal
sceptre, ever imperishable, with which he went to the ships of the
brazen-mailed Greeks.

The goddess Aurora now[76] ascended wide Olympus, announcing the dawn to
Jove and the other immortals. But he[77] on his part ordered the
clear-voiced heralds to summon the long-haired Achaeans[78] to an
assembly. They therefore summoned them, and the people were very
speedily assembled. First the assembly of magnanimous elders sat at the
ship of Nestor, the Pylus-born king. Having called them together, he
propounded a prudent counsel:

   [Footnote 76: [Greek: oa] appears to mark the regular transition
   from one event to another.]

   [Footnote 77: Agamemnon.]

   [Footnote 78: See on ver. 11.]

"Hear me, my friends: a divine dream came to me in sleep, during the
ambrosial night, very like unto the noble Nestor, in form, in stature,
and in mien. And it stood above my head, and addressed me: 'Sleepest
thou, son of the warrior, horse-taming Atreus? It becomes not a
counsellor, to whom the people have been intrusted, and to whom so many
things are a care, to sleep all the night. But now quickly attend to me;
for I am a messenger to thee from Jove, who, although far distant,
greatly regards and pities thee. He orders thee to arm the long-haired
Greeks with all their array, for now mayest thou take the wide-wayed
city of the Trojans; for the immortals, who possess the Olympian
mansions, no longer think dividedly, for Juno, supplicating, has bent
all [to her will], and woes from Jove are impending over the Trojans;
but do thou preserve this in thy thoughts.' Thus having spoken, flying
away, it departed; but sweet sleep resigned me. But come, [let us try]
if by any means we can arm the sons of the Greeks. But first with words
will I sound their inclinations, as is right, and I will command them to
fly with their many-benched ships; but do you restrain them with words,
one in one place, another in another."

He indeed having thus spoken, sat down; but Nestor, who was king of
sandy Pylus, rose up, who wisely counselling, harangued them, and said:

"O friends, generals and counsellors of the Argives, if any other of the
Greeks had told this dream, we should have pronounced it a fabrication,
and withdrawn ourselves [from the reciter]. But now he has seen it, who
boasts himself [to be] by far the greatest man in the army. But come on,
if by any means we can arm the sons of the Greeks."

Thus then having spoken, he began to depart from the assembly; and they,
the sceptre-bearing princes, arose, and obeyed the shepherd of the
tribes, and the hosts rushed forward. Even as the swarms of clustering
bees,[79] issuing ever anew from the hollow rock, go forth, and fly in
troops over the vernal[80] flowers, and some have flitted in bodies
here, and some there; thus of these [Greeks] many nations from the ships
and tents kept marching in troops in front of the steep shore to the
assembly. And in the midst of them blazed Rumour, messenger of Jove,
urging them to proceed; and they kept collecting together. The assembly
was tumultuous, and the earth groaned beneath, as the people seated
themselves, and there was a clamour; but nine heralds vociferating
restrained them, if by any means they would cease from clamour, and
hear the Jove-nurtured princes. With difficulty at length the people sat
down, and were kept to their respective[81] seats, having desisted from
their clamour, when king Agamemnon arose, holding the sceptre, which
Vulcan had laboriously wrought. Vulcan in the first place gave it to
king Jove, the son of Saturn, and Jove in turn gave it to his messenger,
the slayer of Argus.[82] But king Mercury gave it to steed-taming
Pelops, and Pelops again gave it to Atreus, shepherd of the people. But
Atreus, dying, left it to Thyestes, rich in flocks; but Thyestes again
left it to Agamemnon to be borne, that he might rule over many
islands,[83] and all Argos.[84] Leaning upon this, he spoke words
amongst the Greeks:

   [Footnote 79: The dative here implies direction, [Greek: epi]
   increasing its force, according to Stadelmann and Kuehner, who are
   followed by Anthon. I have restored the old interpretation, which
   is much less far-fetched, and is placed beyond doubt by Virgil's
   imitations.--"_per_ florea rura," AEn. i. 430; "floribus insidunt
   variis." AEn. vi. 708. "Among fresh dews and flowers, Fly to and
   fro."--Milton. P.L. i. 771.]

   [Footnote 80: _I. e._ over the flowers in the spring-time, when
   bees first appear. See Virg. l. c. Eurip. Hipp. 77, [Greek:
   melissa leimon' erinon oierchetai].--Nicias, Anthol. i. 31,
   [Greek: era phainousa melissa].--Longus, i. 4.]

   [Footnote 81: Observe the distributive use of [Greek: kata]. Cf.
   Od. iii. 7.]

   [Footnote 82: Mercury. Cf. Ovid. Met. i. 624. sqq.]

   [Footnote 83: On the extended power of Agamemnon, see Thucyd. i.
   9.]

   [Footnote 84: On this sceptre, the type of the wealth and
   influence of the house of the Atrides, see Grote. vol. i. p.
   212.]

"O friends, Grecian heroes, servants of Mars, Jove, the son of Saturn,
has entangled me in a heavy misfortune. Cruel, who before indeed
promised to me, and vouchsafed by his nod, that I should return home,
having destroyed well-fortified Ilium. But now he has devised an evil
deception, and commands me to return to Argos, inglorious, after I have
lost many of my people. So forsooth it appears to be agreeable to
all-powerful Jove, who has already overthrown the citadels of many
cities, yea, and will even yet overthrow them, for transcendent is his
power. For this were disgraceful even for posterity to hear, that so
brave and so numerous a people of the Greeks warred an ineffectual war,
and fought with fewer men; but as yet no end has appeared. For if we,
Greeks and Trojans, having struck a faithful league,[85] wished that
both should be numbered, and [wished] to select the Trojans, on the one
hand, as many as are townsmen; and if we Greeks, on the other hand, were
to be divided into decades, and to choose a single man of the Trojans to
pour out wine [for each decade], many decades would be without a
cupbearer.[86] So much more numerous, I say, the sons of the Greeks are
than the Trojans who dwell in the city. But there are spear-wielding
auxiliaries from many cities, who greatly stand in my way, and do not
permit me wishing to destroy the well-inhabited city. Already have nine
years of mighty Jove passed away, and now the timbers of our ships have
rotted, and the ropes have become untwisted.[87] Our wives and infant
children sit in our dwellings expecting us; but to us the work for which
we came hither remains unaccomplished, contrary to expectation. But
come, as I shall recommend, let us all obey; let us fly with the ships
to our dear native land, for at no future time shall we take wide-wayed
Troy."

   [Footnote 85: [Greek: Orkia] is probably used as an adjective,
   understanding [Greek: iereia], the victims that were slain in
   order to ratify the oath. See however Buttm. Lexil. p. 439.]

   [Footnote 86: The Greeks doubled the Trojans in number. See
   Anthon.]

   [Footnote 87: Observe the change of construction in [Greek:
   leluntai] with the neuter plural. Apollon. de Syntaxi, iii. 11.
   [Greek: Ta sparta leluntai katalleloteron tou doura sesepe].]

Thus he spoke; and to them he aroused the heart in their breasts, to all
throughout the multitude, whoever had not heard his scheme.[88] And the
assembly was moved, as the great waves of the Icarian Sea, which,
indeed, both the south-east wind and the south are wont to raise,[89]
rushing from the clouds of father Jove. And as when the west wind[90]
agitates the thick-standing corn, rushing down upon it impetuous, and it
[the crop] bends with its ears; so was all the assembly agitated. Some
with shouting rushed to the ships, but from beneath their feet the dust
stood suspended aloft; and some exhorted one another to seize the
vessels, and drag them to the great ocean; and they began to clear the
channels. The shout of them, eager [to return] home, rose to the sky,
and they withdrew the stays from beneath the vessels. Then truly a
return had happened to the Argives, contrary to destiny, had not Juno
addressed herself to Minerva:

   [Footnote 88: _I. e._ his real object. Cf. vs. 75, sqq.]

   [Footnote 89: Spitzner and the later editors unite in reading
   [Greek: kinese] for [Greek: kinesei] from the Venice MS. See
   Arnold.]

   [Footnote 90:

                     ----"As thick as when a field
            Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends
            Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
            Sways them."--Paradise Lost, iv. 980.]

"Alas! indomitable daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, thus now shall the
Argives fly home to their dear native land, over the broad back of the
deep, and leave to Priam glory, and to the Trojans Argive Helen, on
whose account many Greeks have perished at Troy, far from their dear
native land? But go now to the people of the brazen-mailed Greeks, and
restrain each man with thy own flattering words, nor suffer them to
launch to the sea their evenly-plied[91] barks." Thus she spoke, nor did
the azure-eyed goddess Minerva refuse compliance. But she, hastening,
descended down from the summits of Olympus, and quickly reached the
swift ships of the Achaeans. Then she found Ulysses, of equal weight with
Jove in counsel, standing still; nor was he touching his well-benched,
sable bark, since regret affected him in heart and mind. But standing
near him, azure-eyed Minerva said:

   [Footnote 91: _I.e._ rowed on both sides. But Rost and Liddell
   (s.v.) prefer "swaying, rocking on both sides."]

"Jove-sprung son of Laertes, Ulysses of many wiles, thus then will ye
fly home to your dear native land, embarking in your many-benched ships?
And will ye then leave to Priam glory, and to the Trojans Argive Helen,
on whose account many Greeks have fallen at Troy, far from their dear
native land? But go now to the people of the Greeks, delay not; and
restrain each man by thy own flattering words, nor suffer them to launch
to the sea their evenly-plied barks."

Thus she spoke, but he knew the voice of the goddess speaking. Then he
hastened to run, and cast away his cloak, but the herald Eurybates, the
Ithacensian, who followed him, took it up. But he, meeting Agamemnon,
son of Atreus, received from him[92] the ever-imperishable paternal
sceptre, with which he went through the ships of the brazen-mailed
Greeks.

   [Footnote 92: This is an instance of the [Greek: schema
   Sikelikon], as in H. O. 88, [Greek: ginetai de paralamxanomenes
   dotikes ptoseos anti genikes kai kata paraleipsin tou para
   protheseos].--Lesbonax, [Greek: peri schem.] r. 181, ed. Valck.]

Whatsoever king, indeed, or distinguished man he chanced to find
standing beside him, he checked him with gentle words:

"Strange man! it ill becomes thee, coward-like, to be in trepidation;
but both sit down thyself, and make the other people sit down, for thou
hast not as yet clearly ascertained what the intention of Atrides is. He
is now making trial of, and will quickly punish the sons of the Greeks.
We have not all heard what he said in council. Take care lest he, being
incensed, do some mischief to the sons of the Greeks. For the anger of a
Jove-nurtured king is great; his honour too is from Jove, and
great-counselling Jove loves him."

But on the other hand, whatever man of the common people he chanced to
