softened toward Joan by her courage, her presence of mind, her
fortitude, her constancy, her piety, her simplicity and candor, her
manifest purity, the nobility of her character, her fine intelligence,
and the good brave fight she was making, all friendless and alone,
against unfair odds, and there was grave room for fear that this
softening process would spread further and presently bring Cauchon's
plans in danger.

Something must be done, and it was done. Cauchon was not distinguished
for compassion, but he now gave proof that he had it in his character.
He thought it pity to subject so many judges to the prostrating fatigues
of this trial when it could be conducted plenty well enough by a
handful of them. Oh, gentle judge! But he did not remember to modify the
fatigues for the little captive.

He would let all the judges but a handful go, but he would select the
handful himself, and he did.

He chose tigers. If a lamb or two got in, it was by oversight, not
intention; and he knew what to do with lambs when discovered.

He called a small council now, and during five days they sifted the huge
bulk of answers thus far gathered from Joan. They winnowed it of all
chaff, all useless matter--that is, all matter favorable to Joan; they
saved up all matter which could be twisted to her hurt, and out of this
they constructed a basis for a new trial which should have the semblance
of a continuation of the old one. Another change. It was plain that the
public trial had wrought damage: its proceedings had been discussed
all over the town and had moved many to pity the abused prisoner. There
should be no more of that. The sittings should be secret hereafter, and
no spectators admitted. So Noel could come no more. I sent this news
to him. I had not the heart to carry it myself. I would give the pain a
chance to modify before I should see him in the evening.

On the 10th of March the secret trial began. A week had passed since I
had seen Joan. Her appearance gave me a great shock. She looked tired
and weak. She was listless and far away, and her answers showed that
she was dazed and not able to keep perfect run of all that was done and
said. Another court would not have taken advantage of her state, seeing
that her life was at stake here, but would have adjourned and spared
her. Did this one? No; it worried her for hours, and with a glad and
eager ferocity, making all it could out of this great chance, the first
one it had had.

She was tortured into confusing herself concerning the "sign" which
had been given the King, and the next day this was continued hour after
hour. As a result, she made partial revealments of particulars forbidden
by her Voices; and seemed to me to state as facts things which were but
allegories and visions mixed with facts.

The third day she was brighter, and looked less worn. She was almost
her normal self again, and did her work well. Many attempts were made
to beguile her into saying indiscreet things, but she saw the purpose in
view and answered with tact and wisdom.

"Do you know if St. Catherine and St. Marguerite hate the English?"

"They love whom Our Lord loves, and hate whom He hates."

"Does God hate the English?"

"Of the love or the hatred of God toward the English I know nothing."
Then she spoke up with the old martial ring in her voice and the old
audacity in her words, and added, "But I know this--that God will send
victory to the French, and that all the English will be flung out of
France but the dead ones!"

"Was God on the side of the English when they were prosperous in
France?"

"I do not know if God hates the French, but I think that He allowed them
to be chastised for their sins."

It was a sufficiently naive way to account for a chastisement which had
now strung out for ninety-six years. But nobody found fault with it.
There was nobody there who would not punish a sinner ninety-six years if
he could, nor anybody there who would ever dream of such a thing as the
Lord's being any shade less stringent than men.

"Have you ever embraced St. Marguerite and St. Catherine?"

"Yes, both of them."

The evil face of Cauchon betrayed satisfaction when she said that.

"When you hung garlands upon L'Arbre Fee Bourlemont, did you do it in
honor of your apparitions?"

"No."

Satisfaction again. No doubt Cauchon would take it for granted that she
hung them there out of sinful love for the fairies.

"When the saints appeared to you did you bow, did you make reverence,
did you kneel?"

"Yes; I did them the most honor and reverence that I could."

A good point for Cauchon if he could eventually make it appear that
these were no saints to whom she had done reverence, but devils in
disguise.

Now there was the matter of Joan's keeping her supernatural commerce a
secret from her parents. Much might be made of that. In fact, particular
emphasis had been given to it in a private remark written in the margin
of the proces: "She concealed her visions from her parents and from
every one." Possibly this disloyalty to her parents might itself be the
sign of the satanic source of her mission.

"Do you think it was right to go away to the wars without getting your
parents' leave? It is written one must honor his father and his mother."

"I have obeyed them in all things but that. And for that I have begged
their forgiveness in a letter and gotten it."

"Ah, you asked their pardon? So you knew you were guilty of sin in going
without their leave!"

Joan was stirred. Her eyes flashed, and she exclaimed:

"I was commanded of God, and it was right to go! If I had had a hundred
fathers and mothers and been a king's daughter to boot I would have
gone."

"Did you never ask your Voices if you might tell your parents?"

"They were willing that I should tell them, but I would not for anything
have given my parents that pain."

To the minds of the questioners this headstrong conduct savored of
pride. That sort of pride would move one to see sacrilegious adorations.

"Did not your Voices call you Daughter of God?"

Joan answered with simplicity, and unsuspiciously:

"Yes; before the siege of Orleans and since, they have several times
called me Daughter of God."

Further indications of pride and vanity were sought.

"What horse were you riding when you were captured? Who gave it you?"

"The King."

"You had other things--riches--of the King?"

"For myself I had horses and arms, and money to pay the service in my
household."

"Had you not a treasury?"

"Yes. Ten or twelve thousand crowns." Then she said with naivete "It was
not a great sum to carry on a war with."

"You have it yet?"

"No. It is the King's money. My brothers hold it for him."

"What were the arms which you left as an offering in the church of St.
Denis?"

"My suit of silver mail and a sword."

"Did you put them there in order that they might be adored?"

"No. It was but an act of devotion. And it is the custom of men of war
who have been wounded to make such offering there. I had been wounded
before Paris."

Nothing appealed to these stony hearts, those dull imaginations--not
even this pretty picture, so simply drawn, of the wounded girl-soldier
hanging her toy harness there in curious companionship with the grim
and dusty iron mail of the historic defenders of France. No, there
was nothing in it for them; nothing, unless evil and injury for that
innocent creature could be gotten out of it somehow.

"Which aided most--you the Standard, or the Standard you?"

"Whether it was the Standard or whether it was I, is nothing--the
victories came from God."

"But did you base your hopes of victory in yourself or in your
Standard?"

"In neither. In God, and not otherwise."

"Was not your Standard waved around the King's head at the Coronation?"

"No. It was not."

"Why was it that your Standard had place at the crowning of the King in
the Cathedral of Rheims, rather than those of the other captains?"

Then, soft and low, came that touching speech which will live as long
as language lives, and pass into all tongues, and move all gentle hearts
wheresoever it shall come, down to the latest day:

"It had borne the burden, it had earned the honor." (1) How simple it
is, and how beautiful. And how it beggars the studies eloquence of the
masters of oratory. Eloquence was a native gift of Joan of Arc; it came
from her lips without effort and without preparation. Her words were as
sublime as her deeds, as sublime as her character; they had their source
in a great heart and were coined in a great brain.

(1) What she said has been many times translated, but never with
success. There is a haunting pathos about the original which eludes all
efforts to convey it into our tongue. It is as subtle as an odor, and
escapes in the transmission. Her words were these:

"Il avait, a la peine, c'etait bien raison qu'il fut a l'honneur."

Monseigneur Ricard, Honorary Vicar-General to the Archbishop of Aix,
finely speaks of it (Jeanne d'Arc la Venerable, page 197) as "that
sublime reply, enduring in the history of celebrated sayings like the
cry of a French and Christian soul wounded unto death in its patriotism
and its faith." -- TRANSLATOR.




12 Joan's Master-Stroke Diverted

NOW, as a next move, this small secret court of holy assassins did a
thing so base that even at this day, in my old age, it is hard to speak
of it with patience.

In the beginning of her commerce with her Voices there at Domremy, the
child Joan solemnly devoted her life to God, vowing her pure body and
her pure soul to His service. You will remember that her parents tried
to stop her from going to the wars by haling her to the court at Toul
to compel her to make a marriage which she had never promised to make--a
marriage with our poor, good, windy, big, hard-fighting, and most dear
and lamented comrade, the Standard-Bearer, who fell in honorable battle
and sleeps with God these sixty years, peace to his ashes! And you will
remember how Joan, sixteen years old, stood up in that venerable court
and conducted her case all by herself, and tore the poor Paladin's case
to rags and blew it away with a breath; and how the astonished old judge
on the bench spoke of her as "this marvelous child."

You remember all that. Then think what I felt, to see these false
priests, here in the tribunal wherein Joan had fought a fourth lone
fight in three years, deliberately twist that matter entirely around
and try to make out that Joan haled the Paladin into court and pretended
that he had promised to marry her, and was bent on making him do it.

Certainly there was no baseness that those people were ashamed to stoop
to in their hunt for that friendless girl's life. What they wanted to
show was this--that she had committed the sin of relapsing from her vow
and trying to violate it.

Joan detailed the true history of the case, but lost her temper as she
went along, and finished with some words for Cauchon which he remembers
yet, whether he is fanning himself in the world he belongs in or has
swindled his way into the other.

The rest of this day and part of the next the court labored upon the
old theme--the male attire. It was shabby work for those grave men to be
engaged in; for they well knew one of Joan's reasons for clinging to the
male dress was, that soldiers of the guard were always present in her
room whether she was asleep or awake, and that the male dress was a
better protection for her modesty than the other.

The court knew that one of Joan's purposes had been the deliverance of
the exiled Duke of Orleans, and they were curious to know how she had
intended to manage it. Her plan was characteristically businesslike, and
her statement of it as characteristically simple and straightforward:

"I would have taken English prisoners enough in France for his ransom;
and failing that, I would have invaded England and brought him out by
force."

That was just her way. If a thing was to be done, it was love first, and
hammer and tongs to follow; but no shilly-shallying between. She added
with a little sigh:

"If I had had my freedom three years, I would have delivered him."

"Have you the permission of your Voices to break out of prison whenever
you can?"

"I have asked their leave several times, but they have not given it."

I think it is as I have said, she expected the deliverance of death, and
within the prison walls, before the three months should expire.

"Would you escape if you saw the doors open?"

She spoke up frankly and said:

"Yes--for I should see in that the permission of Our Lord. God helps
who help themselves, the proverb says. But except I thought I had
permission, I would not go."

Now, then, at this point, something occurred which convinces me, every
time I think of it--and it struck me so at the time--that for a moment,
at least, her hopes wandered to the King, and put into her mind the same
notion about her deliverance which Noel and I had settled upon--a rescue
by her old soldiers. I think the idea of the rescue did occur to her,
but only as a passing thought, and that it quickly passed away.

Some remark of the Bishop of Beauvais moved her to remind him once more
that he was an unfair judge, and had no right to preside there, and that
he was putting himself in great danger.

"What danger?" he asked.

"I do not know. St. Catherine has promised me help, but I do not know
the form of it. I do not know whether I am to be delivered from this
prison or whether when you sent me to the scaffold there will happen a
trouble by which I shall be set free. Without much thought as to this
matter, I am of the opinion that it may be one or the other." After a
pause she added these words, memorable forever--words whose meaning she
may have miscaught, misunderstood; as to that we can never know; words
which she may have rightly understood, as to that, also, we can never
know; but words whose mystery fell away from them many a year ago and
revealed their meaning to all the world:

"But what my Voices have said clearest is, that I shall be delivered by
a great victory." She paused, my heart was beating fast, for to me that
great victory meant the sudden bursting in of our old soldiers with the
war-cry and clash of steel at the last moment and the carrying off of
Joan of Arc in triumph. But, oh, that thought had such a short life! For
now she raised her head and finished, with those solemn words which men
still so often quote and dwell upon--words which filled me with fear,
they sounded so like a prediction. "And always they say 'Submit to
whatever comes; do not grieve for your martyrdom; from it you will
ascend into the Kingdom of Paradise."

Was she thinking of fire and the stake? I think not. I thought of it
myself, but I believe she was only thinking of this slow and cruel
martyrdom of chains and captivity and insult. Surely, martyrdom was the
right name for it.

It was Jean de la Fontaine who was asking the questions. He was willing
to make the most he could out of what she had said:

"As the Voices have told you you are going to Paradise, you feel certain
that that will happen and that you will not be damned in hell. Is that
so?"

"I believe what they told me. I know that I shall be saved."

"It is a weighty answer."

"To me the knowledge that I shall be saved is a great treasure."

"Do you think that after that revelation you could be able to commit
mortal sin?"

"As to that, I do not know. My hope for salvation is in holding fast to
my oath to keep by body and my soul pure."

"Since you know you are to be saved, do you think it necessary to go to
confession?"

The snare was ingeniously devised, but Joan's simple and humble answer
left it empty:

"One cannot keep his conscience too clean."

We were now arriving at the last day of this new trial. Joan had come
through the ordeal well. It had been a long and wearisome struggle for
all concerned. All ways had been tried to convict the accused, and
all had failed, thus far. The inquisitors were thoroughly vexed and
dissatisfied.

However, they resolved to make one more effort, put in one more day's
work. This was done--March 17th. Early in the sitting a notable trap was
set for Joan:

"Will you submit to the determination of the Church all your words and
deeds, whether good or bad?"

That was well planned. Joan was in imminent peril now. If she should
heedlessly say yes, it would put her mission itself upon trial, and
one would know how to decide its source and character promptly. If she
should say no, she would render herself chargeable with the crime of
heresy.

But she was equal to the occasion. She drew a distinct line of
separation between the Church's authority over her as a subject member,
and the matter of her mission. She said she loved the Church and was
ready to support the Christian faith with all her strength; but as to
the works done under her mission, those must be judged by God alone, who
had commanded them to be done.

The judge still insisted that she submit them to the decision of the
Church. She said:

"I will submit them to Our Lord who sent me. It would seem to me that
He and His Church are one, and that there should be no difficulty about
this matter." Then she turned upon the judge and said, "Why do you make
a difficulty when there is no room for any?"

Then Jean de la Fontaine corrected her notion that there was but one
Church. There were two--the Church Triumphant, which is God, the saints,
the angels, and the redeemed, and has its seat in heaven; and the Church
Militant, which is our Holy Father the Pope, Vicar of God, the prelates,
the clergy and all good Christians and Catholics, the which Church has
its seat in the earth, is governed by the Holy Spirit, and cannot err.
"Will you not submit those matters to the Church Militant?"

"I am come to the King of France from the Church Triumphant on high by
its commandant, and to that Church I will submit all those things which
I have done. For the Church Militant I have no other answer now."

The court took note of this straitly worded refusal, and would hope to
get profit out of it; but the matter was dropped for the present, and a
long chase was then made over the old hunting-ground--the fairies, the
visions, the male attire, and all that.

In the afternoon the satanic Bishop himself took the chair and presided
over the closing scenes of the trial. Along toward the finish, this
