'weans'; and the three sisters loaded her with gifts, letters, and
messages for all. Eleanor promised never to forget her counsel, and
to strive not to let the bright new world drive away all those devout
feelings and hopes that Mother Clare and King Henry had inspired, and
that Lady Drummond had done her best to keep up.

Duke Sigismund had communicated to Sir Patrick his intention of making a
formal request to King James for the hand of the Lady Eleanor. He was
to find an envoy to make his proposal in due form, who would join Sir
Patrick at Terreforte after the wedding was over, so as to go with the
party to Scotland.

Meantime, with many fond embraces and tears, Lady Drummond took leave
of her princesses, and they owned themselves to feel as if a protecting
wall had been taken away in her and her husband.

'It is folly, though, thus to speak,' said Jean, 'when we have our
sister, and her husband, and his father, and all his Court to protect
us.'

'We ought to be happy,' said Eleanor gravely. 'Outside here at Nanci,
it is all that my fancy ever shaped, and yet--and yet there is a strange
sense of fear beyond.'

'Oh, talk not that gate,' cried Jean, 'as thou wilt be having thy
gruesome visions!'

'No; it is not of that sort,' returned Eleanor. 'I trow not! It may be
rather the feeling of the vanity of all this world's show.'

'Oh, for mercy's sake, dinna let us have clavers of that sort, or we
shall have thee in yon nunnery!' exclaimed Jean. 'See this girdle of
Maggie's, which she has given me. Must I not make another hole to draw
it up enough for my waist?'

'Jean herself was much disappointed when Margaret, with great regret,
told her that the Dauphin had to go out of his way to visit some castles
on his way to Chalons sur Marne, and that he could not encumber his
hosts with so large a train as the presence of two royal ladies rendered
needful. They were, therefore, to travel by another route, leading
through towns where there were hostels. Madame de Ste. Petronelle was to
go with them, and an escort of trusty Scots archers, and all would meet
again in a fortnight's time.

All sounded simple and easy, and Margaret repeated, 'It will be a troop
quite large enough to defend you from all ecorcheurs; indeed, they dare
not come near our Scottish archers, whom Messire, my husband, has told
off for your escort. And you will have your own squire,' she added,
looking at Jean.

'That's as he lists,' said Jean scornfully.

'Ah, Jeanie, Jeanie, thou mayst have to rue it if thou turn'st lightly
from a leal heart.'

'I'm not damsel-errant of romance, as thou and Elleen would fain be,'
said Jean.

'Nay,' said Margaret, 'love is not mere romance. And oh, sister, credit
me, a Scots lassie's heart craves better food than crowns and coronets.
Hard and unco' cold be they, where there is no warmth to meet the
yearning soul beneath, that would give all and ten times more for one
glint of a loving eye, one word from a tender lip.' Again she had one of
those hysteric bursts of tears, but she laughed herself back, crying,
'But what is the treason wifie saying of her gudeman--her Louis, that
never yet said a rough word to his Meg?'

Then came another laugh, but she gathered herself up at a summons to
come down and mount.

She was tenderly embraced by all, King Rene kissing her and calling her
his dear niece and princess of minstrelsy, who should come to him at
Toulouse and bestow the golden violet.

She rode away, looking back smiling and kissing her hand, but Eleanor's
eyes grew wide and her cheeks pale.

'Jean,' she murmured, low and hoarsely, 'Margaret's shroud is up to her
throat.'

'Hoots with thy clavers,' exclaimed Jeanie in return. 'I never let thee
sing that fule song, but Meg's fancies have brought the megrims into
thine head! Thou and she are pair.'

'That we shall be nae longer,' sighed Eleanor. 'I saw the shroud as
clear as I see yon cross on the spire.'




CHAPTER 8. STINGS


     'Yet one asylum is my own,
        Against the dreaded hour;
      A long, a silent, and a lone,
        Where kings have little power.'--SCOTT.


At Chalons, the Sieur de Terreforte and his son Olivier, a very
quiet, stiff, and well-trained youth, met Sir Patrick and the Lady of
Glenuskie. Terreforte was within the province of Champagne, and as
long as the Court remained at Chalons the Sieur felt bound to remain in
attendance on the King--lodging at his own house, or hotel, as he called
it, in the city. Dame Lilias did not regret anything which gave her a
little more time with her daughter, and enabled Annis to make a little
more acquaintance with her bridegroom and his family before being
left alone with them. Moreover, she hoped to see something more of her
cousins the princesses.

But they came not. The Dauphin and his wife arrived from their excursion
and took up their abode in the Castle of Surry le Chateau, at a short
distance from thence and thither went the Lady of Glenuskie with her
husband to pay her respects, and present the betrothed of her daughter.

Margaret was sitting in a shady nook of the walls, under the shade of a
tall, massive tower, with a page reading to her, but in that impulsive
manner which the Court of France thought grossiere and sauvage; she
ran down the stone stairs and threw herself on the neck of her cousin,
exclaiming, however, 'But where are my sisters?'

'Are they not with your Grace? I thought to find them here!'

'Nay! They were to start two days after us, with an escort of archers,
while we visited the shrine of St. Menehould. They might have been here
before us,' exclaimed Margaret, in much alarm. 'My husband thought our
train would be too large if they went with us.'

'If we had known that they were not to be with your Grace, we would have
tarried for them,' said Dame Lilias.

'Oh, cousin, would that you bad!'

'Mayhap King Rene and his daughter persuaded them to wait a few days.'

That was the best hope, but there was much uneasiness when another day
passed and the Scottish princesses did not appear. Strange whispers,
coming from no one knew where, began to be current that they had
disappeared in company with some of those wild and gay knights who had
met at the tournament at Nanci.

In extreme alarm and indignation, Margaret repaired to her husband.
He was kneeling before the shrine of the Lady in the Chapel of Surry,
telling his beads, and he did not stir, or look round, or relax one
murmur of his Aves, while she paced about, wrung her hands, and vainly
tried to control her agitation. At last he rose, and coldly said, 'I
knew it could be no other who thus interrupted my devotions.'

'My sisters!' she gasped.

'Well, what of them?'

'Do you know what wicked things are said of them--the dear maids?
Ah!'--as she saw his strange smile--'you have heard! You will silence
the fellows, who deserve to have their tongues torn out for defaming a
king's daughters.'

'Verily, ma mie,' said Louis, 'I see no such great improbability in the
tale. They have been bred up to the like, no doubt a mountain kite of
the Vosges is a more congenial companion than a chevalier bien courtois.'

'You speak thus simply to tease your poor Margot,' she said, pleading
yet trembling; 'but I know better than to think you mean it.'

'As my lady pleases,' he said.

'Then will I send Sir Patrick with an escort to seek them at Nanci and
bring them hither?'

'Where is this same troop to come from?' demanded Louis.

'Our own Scottish archers, who will see no harm befall my blessed
father's daughters.'

'Ha! say you so? I had heard a different story from Buchan, from the
Grahams, the Halls. Revenge is sweet--as your mother found it.'

'The murderers had only their deserts.'

Louis shrugged his shoulders, 'That is as their sons may think.'

'No one would be so dastardly as to wreak vengeance on two young
helpless maids,' cried Margaret. 'Oh! sir, help me; what think you?'

'Madame knows better than I do the spirit alike of her sisters and of
her own countrymen.'

'Nay, nay, Monsieur, husband, do but help me! My poor sisters in this
strange land! You, who are wiser than all, tell me what can have become
of them?'

'What can I say, Madame? Love--love of the minstrel kind seems to run
in the family. You all have supped full thereof at Nanci. If report said
true, there was a secret lover in their suite. What so likely as that
the May game should have become earnest?'

'But, sir, we are accountable. My sisters were entrusted to us.'

'Not to me,' said Louis. 'If the boy, your brother, expected me to
find husbands and dowers for a couple of wild, penniless, feather-pated
damsels-errant, he expected far too much. I know far too well what are
Scotch manners and ideas of decorum to charge myself with the like.'

'Sir, do you mean to insult me?' demanded Margaret, rising to the full
height of her tall stature.

'That is as Madame may choose to fit the cap,' he said, with a bow; 'I
accuse her of nothing,' but there was an ironical smile on his thin lips
which almost maddened her.

'Speak out; oh, sir, tell me what you dare to mean!' she said, with a
stamp of her foot, clasping her hands tightly. He only bowed again.

'I know there are evil tongues abroad,' said Margaret, with a desperate
effort to command her voice; 'but I heeded them no more than the midges
in the air while I knew my lord and husband heeded them not! But--oh!
say you do not.'

'Have I said that I did?'

'Then for a proof--dismiss and silence that foul-slandering wretch,
Jamet de Tillay.'

'A true woman's imagination that to dismiss is to silence,' he laughed.

'It would show at least that you will not brook to have your wife
defamed! Oh! sir, sir,' she cried, 'I only ask what any other husband
would have done long ago of his own accord and rightful anger. Smile not
thus--or you will see me frenzied.'

'Smiles best befit woman's tears,' said Louis coolly. 'One moment for
your sisters, the next for yourself.'

'Ah! my sisters! my sisters! Wretch that I am, to have thought of
my worthless self for one moment. Ah! you are only teasing your poor
Margot! You will act for your own honour and theirs in sending out to
seek them!'

'My honour and theirs may be best served by their being forgotten.'

Margaret became inarticulate with dismay, indignation, disappointment,
as these envenomed stings went to her very soul, further pointed by the
curl of Louis's thin lips and the sinister twinkle of his little eyes.
Almost choked, she stammered forth the demand what he meant, only to
be answered that he did not pretend to understand the Scottish errant
nature, and pointing to a priest entering the church, he bade her not
make herself conspicuous, and strolled away.

Margaret's despair and agony were inexpressible. She stood for some
minutes leaning against a pillar to collect her senses. Then her first
thought was of consulting the Drummonds, and she impetuously dashed
back to her own apartments and ordered her palfrey and suite to be ready
instantly to take her to Chalons.

Madame la Dauphine's palfreys were all gone to Ghalons to be shod.
In fact, there were some games going on there, and trusting to the
easy-going habits of their mistress, almost all her attendants had
lounged off thither, even the maidens, as well as the pages, who felt
Madame de Ste. Petronelle's sharp eyes no longer over them.

'Tell me,' said Margaret, to the one lame, frightened old man who alone
seemed able to reply to her call, 'do you know who commanded the escort
which were with my sisters, the Princesses of Scotland?'

The old man threw up his hands. How should he know? 'The escort was of
the savage Scottish archers.'

'I know that; but can you not tell who they were--nor their commander?'

'Ah! Madame knows that their names are such as no Christian ears can
understand, nor lips speak!'

'I had thought it was the Sire Andrew Gordon who was to go with them. He
with the blue housings on the dapple grey.'

'No, Madame; I heard the Captain Mercour say Monsieur le Dauphin
had other orders for him. It was the little dark one--how call they
him?--ah! with a more reasonable name--Le Halle, who led the party of
Mesdames. Madame! Madame! let me call some of Madame's women!'

'No, no,' gasped Margaret, knowing indeed that none whom she wished to
see were within call. 'Thanks, Jean, here--now go,' and she flung him a
coin.

She knew now that whatever had befallen her sisters had been by the
connivance if not the contrivance of her husband, unwilling to have the
charge and the portioning of the two penniless maidens imposed upon him.
And what might not that fate be, betrayed into the hands of one who had
so deadly a blood-feud with their parents! For Hall was the son of one
of the men whose daggers had slain James I., and whose crime had been
visited with such vindictive cruelty by Queen Joanna. The man's eyes
had often scowled at her, as if he longed for vengeance--and thus had it
been granted him.

Margaret, with understanding to appreciate Louis's extraordinary
ability, had idolised him throughout in spite of his constant coldness
and the satire with which he treated all her higher tastes and
aspirations, continually throwing her in and back upon herself, and
blighting her instincts wherever they turned. She had accepted all this
as his superiority to her folly, and though the thwarted and unfostered
inclinations in her strong unstained nature had occasioned those
aberrations and distorted impulses which brought blame on her, she had
accepted everything hitherto as her own fault, and believed in, and
adored the image she had made of him throughout. Now it was as if her
idol had turned suddenly into a viper in her bosom, not only stinging
her by implied acquiescence in the slanders upon her discretion, if not
upon her fair fame, but actually having betrayed her innocent sisters by
means of the deadly enemy of their family--to what fate she knew not.

To act became an immediate need to the unhappy Dauphiness at once, as
the only vent to her own misery, and because she must without loss of
time do something for the succour of her young sisters, or ascertain
their fate.

She did not spend a moment's thought on the censure any imprudent
measure of her own might bring on her, but hastily summoning the only
tirewoman within reach, she exchanged her blue and gold embroidered robe
for a dark serge which she wore on days of penance, with a mantle and
hood of the same, and, to Linette's horror and dismay, bade her attend
her on foot to the Hotel de Terreforte, in Chalons.

Linette was in no position to remonstrate, but could only follow, as the
lady, wrapped in her cloak, descended the steps, and crossed the empty
hall. The porter let her pass unquestioned, but there were a few guards
at the great gateway, and one shouted, 'Whither away, pretty Linette?'

Margaret raised her hood and looked full at him, and he fell back. He
knew her, and knew that Madame la Dauphine did strange things. The road
was stony and bare and treeless, unfrequented at first, and it was very
sultry, the sun shining with a heavy melting heat on Margaret's weighty
garments; but she hurried on, never feeling the heat, or hearing
Linette's endeavours to draw her attention to the heavy bank of gray
clouds tinged with lurid red gradually rising, and whence threatening
growls of thunder were heard from time to time. She really seemed to
rush forward, and poor, panting Linette toiled after her, feeling ready
to drop, while the way was as yet unobstructed, as the two beautiful
steeples of the Cathedral and Notre Dame de l'Epine rose before them;
but after a time, as they drew nearer, the road became obstructed by
carts, waggons, donkeys, crowded with country-folks and their wares,
with friars and ragged beggars, all pressing into the town, and jostling
one another and the two foot-passengers all the more as rain-drops began
to fall, and the thunder sounded nearer.

Margaret had been used to walking, but it was all within parks and
pleasances, and she was not at all used to being pushed about and
jostled. Linette knew how to make her way far better, and it was well
for them that their dark dresses and hoods and Linette's elderly face
gave the idea of their being votaresses of some sacred order, and so
secured them from actual personal insult; but as they clung together
they were thrust aside and pushed about, while the throng grew thicker,
the streets narrower, the storm heavier, the air more stifling and
unsavoury.

A sudden rush nearly knocked them down, driving them under a gargoyle,
whose spout was streaming with wet, and completed the drenching; but
there was a porch and an open door of a church close behind, and into
this Linette dragged her mistress. Dripping, breathless, bruised, she
leant against a pillar, not going forward, for others, much more gaily
dressed, had taken refuge there, and were chattering away, for little
reverence was paid at that date to the sanctity of buildings.

'Will the King be there, think you?' eagerly asked a young girl, who had
been anxiously wiping the wet from her pink kirtle.

'Certes--he is to give the prizes,' replied a portly dame in crimson.

'And the Lady of Beauty? I long to see her.'

'Her beauty is passing--except that which was better worth the solid
castle the King gave her,' laughed the stout citizen, who seemed to be
in charge of them.

'The Dauphiness, too--will she be there?'

'Ah, the Dauphiness!' said the elder woman, with a meaning sound and
shake of the head.

'Scandal--evil tongues!' growled the man.

'Nay, Master Jerome, there's no denying it, for a merchant of Bourges
told me. She runs about the country on foot, like no discreet woman, let
alone a princess, with a good-for-nothing minstrel after her. Ah, you
may grunt and make signs, but I had it from the Countess de Craylierre's
own tirewoman, who came for a bit of lace, that the Dauphin is about to
 the Sire Jamet de Tillay caught her kissing the minstrel on a bench in
the garden at Nanci.'

'I would not trust the Sire de Tillay's word. He is in debt to every
merchant of the place--a smooth-tongued deceiver. Belike he is bribed
to defame the poor lady, that the Dauphin may rid himself of a childless
wife.'

The young girl was growing restless, declaring that the rain was over,
