sleeping with their shields beneath their heads, but their spears were
driven into the ground erect on the spikes of the butts, and afar shone
the bronze, like the lightning of father Zeus. Now that hero was asleep,
and under him was strewn the hide of an ox of the field, but beneath his
head was stretched a shining carpet. Beside him went and stood knightly
Nestor of Gerenia and stirred him with a touch of his foot, and aroused
him, chiding him to his face, saying: "Wake, son of Tydeus, why all
night long dost thou sleep? Knowest thou not that the Trojans on the
high place of the plain are camped near the ships, and but a little
space holdeth them apart?"

So spake he, and Diomedes sprang swiftly up out of sleep, and spake to
him winged words: "Hard art thou, old man, and from toil thou never
ceasest. Now are there not other younger sons of the Achaians, who might
rouse when there is need each of the kings, going all around the host?
but thou, old man, art indomitable."

And him knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered again, "Nay verily, my son,
all this that thou sayest is according unto right. Noble sons have I,
and there be many of the host, of whom each man might go and call the
others. But a right great need hath assailed the Achaians. For now to
all of us it standeth on a razor's edge, either pitiful ruin for the
Achaians, or life. But come now, if indeed thou dost pity me, rouse
swift Aias, and the son of Phyleus, for thou art younger than I."

So spake he, and Diomedes cast round his shoulders the skin of a great
fiery lion, that reached to his feet, and he grasped his spear, and
started on his way, and roused the others from their place and led them
on.

Now when they had come among the assembled sentinels, they found not the
leaders of the sentinels asleep, but they all sat wide awake with their
arms. And even as hounds keep difficult guard round the sheep in a fold,
having heard a hardy wild beast that cometh through the wood among the
hills, and much clamour riseth round him of hounds and men, and sleep
perisheth from them, even so sweet sleep did perish from their eyes, as
they watched through the wicked night, for ever were they turning toward
the plains, when they heard the Trojans moving.

And that old man was glad when he saw them, and heartened them with his
saying, and calling out to them he spake winged words: "Even so now,
dear children, do ye keep watch, nor let sleep take any man, lest we
become a cause of rejoicing to them that hate us."

So saying he sped through the moat, and they followed with him, the
kings of the Argives, who had been called to the council. And with them
went Meriones, and the glorious son of Nestor, for they called them to
share their counsel. So they went clean out of the delved foss, and sat
down in the open, where the mid-space was clear of dead men fallen,
where fierce Hector had turned again from destroying the Argives, when
night covered all. There sat they down, and declared their saying each
to the other, and to them knightly Nestor of Gerenia began discourse: "O
friends, is there then no man that would trust to his own daring spirit,
to go among the great-hearted Trojans, if perchance he might take some
straggler of the enemy, yea, or hear perchance some rumour among the
Trojans, and what things they devise among themselves, whether they are
fain to abide there by the ships, away from the city, or will retreat
again to the city, now that they have conquered the Achaians? All this
might such an one learn, and back to us come scathless: great would be
his fame under heaven among all men, and a goodly gift will be given
him. For all the best men that bear sway by the ships, each and all of
them will give him a black ewe, with her lamb at her foot, and ever will
he be present at feasts and clan-drinkings."

So spake he, and thereon were they all silent, holding their peace, but
to them spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry: "Nestor, my heart and manful
spirit urge me to enter the camp of the foemen hard by, even of the
Trojans: and if some other man will follow with me, more comfort and
more courage will there be. If two go together, one before another
perceiveth a matter, how there may be gain therein; but if one alone
perceive aught, even so his wit is shorter, and weak his device."

So spake he, and many were they that wished to follow Diomedes. The two
Aiantes were willing, men of Ares' company, and Meriones was willing,
and right willing the son of Nestor, and the son of Atreus, Menelaos,
spearman renowned, yea and the hardy Odysseus was willing to steal into
the throng of Trojans, for always daring was his heart within him. But
among them spake the king of men, Agamemnon: "Diomedes son of Tydeus,
joy of mine heart, thy comrade verily shalt thou choose, whomsoever thou
wilt, the best of them that be here, for many are eager. But do not
thou, out of reverent heart, leave the better man behind, and give
thyself the worse companion, yielding to regard for any, and looking to
their lineage, even if one be more kingly born."

So spake he, but was in fear for the sake of fair-haired Menelaos. But
to them again answered Diomedes of the loud war-cry: "If indeed ye bid
me choose myself a comrade, how then could I be unmindful of godlike
Odysseus, whose heart is passing eager, and his spirit so manful in all
manner of toils; and Athene loveth him. But while he cometh with me,
even out of burning fire might we both return, for he excelleth in
understanding."

Then him again answered the steadfast noble Odysseus: "Son of Tydeus,
praise me not overmuch, neither blame me aught, for thou speakest thus
among the Argives that themselves know all. But let us be going, for
truly the night is waning, and near is the dawn, and the stars have gone
onward, and the night has advanced more than two watches, but the third
watch is yet left."

So spake they, and harnessed them in their dread armour. To the son of
Tydeus did Thrasymedes steadfast in war give a two-edged sword (for his
own was left by his ship) and a shield, and about his head set a helm of
bull's hide, without cone or crest, that is called a skull-cap, and
keeps the heads of stalwart youths. And Meriones gave Odysseus a bow and
a quiver, and a sword, and on his head set a helm made of leather, and
with many a thong was it stiffly wrought within, while without the white
teeth of a boar of flashing tusks were arrayed thick set on either side,
well and cunningly, and in the midst was fixed a cap of felt.

So when these twain had harnessed them in their dread armour, they set
forth to go, and left there all the best of the host. And to them did
Pallas Athene send forth an omen on the right, a heron hard by the way,
and they beheld it not with their eyes, through the dark night, but they
heard its shrill cry. And Odysseus was glad in the omen of the bird, and
prayed to Athene: "Listen to me, thou child of aegis-bearing Zeus, that
ever in all toils dost stand by me, nor doth any motion of mine escape
thee: but now again above all be thou friendly to me, Athene, and grant
that we come back with renown to the ships, having wrought a great work,
that shall be sorrow to the Trojans."

Next again prayed Diomedes of the loud war-cry: "Listen now likewise to
me, thou child of Zeus, unwearied maiden, and follow with me as when
with my father thou didst follow, even noble Tydeus, into Thebes, when
he went forth as a messenger from the Achaians. Even so now stand thou
by me willingly, and protect me. And to thee will I sacrifice a yearling
heifer, broad of brow, unbroken, that never yet hath man led below the
yoke. Her will I sacrifice to thee, and gild her horns with gold."

So spake they in their prayer, and Pallas Athene heard them. And when
they had prayed to the daughter of mighty Zeus, they went forth on their
way, like two lions, through the dark night, amid the slaughter, amid
the slain men, through the arms and the black blood.

Nay, nor the stout-hearted Trojans did Hector suffer to sleep, but he
called together all the best of them, all that were chiefs and leaders
of the Trojans, them did he call together, and contrived a crafty
counsel: "Who is there that would promise and perform for me this deed,
for a great gift? yea his reward shall be sufficient. For I will give
him a chariot, and two horses of arching neck, the best that be at the
swift ships of the Achaians, to whosoever shall dare the deed, and for
himself shall win glory. And the deed is this; to go near the
swift-faring ships, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded, as
of old, or whether already, being subdued beneath our hands, the foes
are devising of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch
through the night, being fordone with dread weariness."

So spake he, but they were all silent and held their peace. Now there
was among the Trojans one Dolon, the son of Eumedes the godlike herald,
and he was rich in gold, and rich in bronze: and verily he was ill
favoured to look upon, but swift of foot. So he spake then a word to the
Trojans and to Hector: "Hector, my heart and manful spirit urge me to go
near the swift-faring ships, and spy out all. But come, I pray thee,
hold up the staff, and swear to me, that verily thou wilt give me the
horses and the chariots bedight with bronze that bear the noble son of
Peleus. But to thee I will prove no vain spy, nor disappoint thy hope.
For I will go straight to the camp, until I may come to the ship of
Agamemnon, where surely the chiefs are like to hold council, whether to
fight or flee."

So spake he, and Hector took the staff in his hand, and sware to him:
"Now let Zeus himself be witness, the loud-thundering lord of Hera, that
no other man of the Trojans shall mount those horses, but thou, I
declare, shalt rejoice in them for ever."

So spake he, and sware a bootless oath thereto, and aroused Dolon to go.
And straightway he cast on his shoulders his crooked bow, and did on
thereover the skin of a grey wolf, and on his head a helm of
ferret-skin, and took a sharp javelin, and went on his way to the ships
from the host. But he was not like to come back from the ships and bring
word to Hector.

But when he had left the throng of men and horses, he went forth eagerly
on the way, and Odysseus of the seed of Zeus was ware of him as he
approached, and said unto Diomedes: "Lo, here is some man, Diomedes,
coming from the camp, I know not whether as a spy to our ships, or to
strip certain of the dead men fallen. But let us suffer him to pass by
us a little way on the plain, and thereafter may we rush on him and take
him speedily, and if it chance that he outrun us by speed of foot, ever
do thou hem him in towards the ships and away from the camp, rushing on
him with thy spear, lest in any wise he escape towards the city."

So they spake, and turning out of the path they lay down among the
bodies of the dead; and swiftly Dolon ran past them in his witlessness.
But when he was as far off as is the length of the furrow made by mules,
these twain ran after him, and he stood still when he heard the sound,
supposing in his heart that they were friends come from among the
Trojans to turn him back, at the countermand of Hector. But when they
were about a spear-cast off, or even less, he knew them for foe-men, and
stirred his swift limbs to fly, and speedily they started in pursuit.

And as when two sharp-toothed hounds, well skilled in the chase, press
ever hard on a doe or a hare through a wooded land, and it runs
screaming before them, even so Tydeus' son and Odysseus the sacker of
cities cut Dolon off from the host, and ever pursued hard after him. But
when he was just about to come among the sentinels, in his flight
towards the ships, then Athene poured strength into the son of Tydeus,
that none of the mail-clad Achaians might boast himself the first to
smite, and he come second. And strong Diomedes leaped upon him with the
spear, and said: "Stand, or I shall overtake thee with the spear, and
methinks that thou shalt not long avoid sheer destruction at my hand."

So spake he, and threw his spear, but of his own will he missed the man,
and passing over his right shoulder the point of the polished spear
stuck fast in the ground: and Dolon stood still, in great dread and
trembling, and the teeth chattered in his mouth, and he was green with
fear. Then the twain came up with him, panting, and gripped his hands,
and weeping he spake: "Take me alive, and I will ransom myself, for
within our house there is bronze, and gold, and smithied iron, wherefrom
my father would do you grace with ransom untold, if he should learn that
I am alive among the ships of the Achaians."

Then Odysseus of the many counsels answered him and said: "Take courage,
let not death be in thy mind, but come speak and tell me truly all the
tale, why thus from the host lost thou come all alone among the ships,
through the black night, when other mortals are sleeping? Comest thou to
strip certain of the dead men fallen, or did Hector send thee forth to
spy out everything at the hollow ships, or did thine own spirit urge
thee on?"

Then Dolon answered him, his limbs trembling beneath him: "With many a
blind hope did Hector lead my wits astray, who vowed to give me the
whole-hooved horses of the proud son of Peleus, and his car bedight with
bronze: and he bade me fare through the swift black night, and draw nigh
the foemen, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded, as of old,
or whether, already, being subdued beneath our hands, they are devising
of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch through the night,
being fordone with dread weariness."

And smiling thereat did Odysseus of the many counsels make him answer:
"Verily now thy soul was set on great rewards, even the horses of the
wise son of Aiakos, but hard are they for mortal men to master, and hard
to drive, for any but Achilles only, whom a deathless mother bare. But
come, tell me all this truly, all the tale: where when thou camest
hither didst thou leave Hector, shepherd of the host, and where lie his
warlike gear, and where his horses? And how are disposed the watches,
and the beds of the other Trojans? And what counsel take they among
themselves; are they fain to abide there nigh the ships afar from the
city, or will they return to the city again, seeing that they have
subdued unto them the Achaiana?"

Then Dolon son of Eumedes made him answer again: "Lo, now all these
things will I recount to thee most truly. Hector with them that are
counsellors holdeth council by the barrow of godlike Ilos, apart from
the din, but as for the guards whereof thou askest, oh hero, no chosen
watch nor guard keepeth the host. As for all the watch fires of the
Trojans--on them is necessity, so that they watch and encourage each
other to keep guard; but, for the allies called from many lands, they
are sleeping and to the Trojans they leave it to keep watch, for no wise
near dwell the children and wives of the allies." Then Odysseus of the
many counsels answered him and said: "How stands it now, do they sleep
amidst the horse-taming Trojans, or apart? tell me clearly, that I may
know."

Then answered him Dolon son of Eumedes: "Verily all this likewise will I
recount to thee truly. Towards the sea lie the Karians, and Paionians of
the bended bow, and the Leleges and Kaukones, and noble Pelasgoi. And
towards Thymbre the Lykians have their place, and the haughty Mysians,
and the Phrygians that fight from chariots, and Maionians lords of
chariots. But wherefore do ye inquire of me throughly concerning all
these things? for if ye desire to steal into the throng of Trojans, lo,
there be those Thracians, new comers, at the furthest point apart from
the rest, and among them their king Rhesos, son of Eioneus. His be the
fairest horses that ever I beheld, and the greatest, whiter than snow,
and for speed like the winds. And his chariot is fashioned well with
gold and silver, and golden is his armour that he brought with him,
marvellous, a wonder to behold; such as it is in no wise fit for mortal
men to bear, but for the deathless gods. But bring me now to the swift
ships, or leave me here, when ye have bound me with a ruthless bond,
that ye may go and make trial of me whether I have spoken to you truth,
or lies."

Then strong Diomedes, looking grimly on him, said: "Put no thought of
escape, Dolon, in thy heart, for all the good tidings thou hast brought,
since once thou halt come into our hands. For if now we release thee or
let thee go, on some later day wilt thou come to the swift ships of the
Achaians, either to play the spy, or to fight in open war, but if
subdued beneath my hands thou lose thy life, never again wilt thou prove
a bane to the Argives."

He spake, and that other with strong hand was about to touch his chin,
and implore his mercy, but Diomedes smote him on the midst of the neck,
rushing on him with the sword, and cut through both the sinews, and the
head of him still speaking was mingled with the dust. And they stripped
him of the casque of ferret's skin from off his head, and of his
wolf-skin, and his bended bow, and his long spear, and these to Athene
the Giver of Spoil did noble Odysseus hold aloft in his hand, and he
prayed and spake a word: "Rejoice, O goddess, in these, for to thee
first of all the immortals in Olympus will we call for aid; nay, but yet
again send us on against the horses and the sleeping places of the
Thracian men."

So spake he aloud, and lifted from him the spoils on high, and set them
on a tamarisk bush, and raised thereon a mark right plain to see,
gathering together reeds, and luxuriant shoots of tamarisk, lest they
should miss the place as they returned again through the swift dark
night.

So the twain went forward through the arms, and the black blood, and
quickly they came to the company of Thracian men. Now they were
slumbering, fordone with toil, but their goodly weapons lay by them on
the ground, all orderly, in three rows, and by each man his pair of
steeds. And Rhesos slept in the midst, and beside him his swift horses
were bound with thongs to the topmost rim of the chariot. Him Odysseus
spied from afar, and showed him unto Diomedes: "Lo, Diomedes, this is
the man, and these are the horses whereof Dolon that we slew did give us
tidings. But come now, put forth thy great strength; it doth not behove
thee to stand idle with thy weapons: nay, loose the horses; or do thou
slay the men, and of the horses will I take heed."

So spake he, and into that other bright-eyed Athene breathed might, and
he began slaying on this side and on that, and hideously went up their
groaning, as they were smitten with the sword, and the earth was
reddened with blood. And like as a lion cometh on flocks without a
herdsman, on goats or sheep, and leaps upon them with evil will, so set
the son of Tydeus on the men of Thrace, till he had slain twelve. But
whomsoever the son of Tydeus drew near and smote with the sword, him did
Odysseus of the many counsels seize by the foot from behind, and drag
him out of the way, with this design in his heart, that the fair-maned
horses might lightly issue forth, and not tremble in spirit, when they
trod over the dead; for they were not yet used to dead men. But when the
son of Tydeus came upon the king, he was the thirteenth from whom he
took sweet life away, as he was breathing hard, for an evil dream stood
above his head that night through the device of Athens. Meanwhile the
hardy Odysseus loosed the whole-hooved horses, and bound them together
with thongs, and drave them out of the press, smiting them with his bow,
since he had not taken thought to lift the shining whip with his hands
from the chariot; then he whistled for a sign to noble Diomedes.

But Diomedes stood and pondered what most daring deed he might do,
whether he should take the chariot, where lay the armour, and drag it
out by the pole, or lift it upon high, and so bear it forth, or whether
he should take the life away from yet more of the Thracians. And while
he was pondering this in his heart, then Athene drew near, and stood,
and spake to noble Diomedes: "Bethink thee of returning, O son of
great-hearted Tydeus, to the hollow ships, lest perchance thou come
thither in flight, and perchance another god rouse up the Trojans
likewise."

So spake she, and he observed the voice of the utterance of the goddess,
and swiftly he sprang upon the steeds, and Odysseus smote them with his
bow, and they sped to the swift ships of the Achaians.

Nay, nor a vain watch kept Apollo of the silver bow, when he beheld
Athene caring for the son of Tydeus; in wrath against her he stole among
the crowded press of Trojans, and aroused a counsellor of the Thracians,
Hippokoon, the noble kinsman of Rhesos. And he started out of sleep,
when he beheld the place desolate where the swift horses had stood, and
beheld the men gasping in the death struggle; then he groaned aloud, and
called out by name to his comrade dear. And a clamour arose and din
unspeakable of the Trojans hasting together, and they marvelled at the
terrible deeds, even all that the heroes had wrought, and had gone
thereafter to the hollow ships.

But when those others came to the place where they had slain the spy of
Hector, there Odysseus, dear to Zeus, checked the swift horses, and
Tydeus' son, leaping to the ground, set the bloody spoil in the hands of
Odysseus, and again mounted, and lashed the horses, and they sped onward
nothing loth. But Nestor first heard the sound, and said: "O friends,
leaders and counsellors of the Argives, shall I be wrong or speak sooth?
for my heart bids me speak. The sound of swift-footed horses strikes
upon mine ears. Would to god that Odysseus and that strong Diomedes may
even instantly be driving the whole-hooved horses from among the
Trojans; but terribly I fear in mine heart lest the bravest of the
Argives suffer aught through the Trojans' battle din."

Not yet was his whole word spoken, when they came themselves, and leaped
down to earth, but gladly the others welcomed them with hand-clasping,
and with honeyed words. And first did knightly Nestor of Gerenia make
question: "Come, tell me now, renowned Odysseus, great glory of the
Achaians, how ye twain took those horses? Was it by stealing into the
press of Trojans? Or did some god meet you, and give you them? Wondrous
like are they to rays of the sun. Ever with the Trojans do I mix in
fight, nor methinks do I tarry by the ships, old warrior as I am. But
never yet saw I such horses, nor deemed of such. Nay, methinks some god
must have encountered you and given you these. For both of you doth Zeus
the cloud-gatherer love, and the maiden of aegis-bearing Zeus,
bright-eyed Athene."

And him answered Odysseus of the many counsels: "O Nestor, son of
Neleus, great glory of the Achaians, lightly could a god, if so he
would, give even better steeds than these, for the gods are far stronger
than we. But as for these new-come horses, whereof, old man, thou askest
me, they are Thracian, but their lord did brave Diomedes slay, and
beside him all the twelve best men of his company. The thirteenth man
was a spy we took near the ships, one that Hector and the other haughty
Trojans sent forth to pry upon our camp."

So spake he, and drave the whole-hooved horses through the foss,
laughing; and the other Achaians went with him joyfully. But when they
had come to the well-built hut of the son of Tydeus, they bound the
horses with well-cut thongs, at the mangers where the swift horses of
Diomedes stood eating honey-sweet barley.

And Odysseus placed the bloody spoils of Dolon in the stern of the ship,
that they might make ready a sacred offering to Athene. But for
themselves, they went into the sea, and washed off the thick sweat from
shins, and neck, and thighs. But when the wave of the sea had washed the
thick sweat from their skin, and their hearts revived again, they went
into polished baths, and were cleansed.

And when they had washed, and anointed them with olive oil, they sat
down at supper, and from the full mixing bowl they drew off the
honey-sweet wine, and poured it forth to Athene.



BOOK XI.

    Despite the glorious deeds of Agamemnon, the Trojans press
    hard on the Achaians, and the beginning of evil comes on
    Patroklos.

Now Dawn arose from her couch beside proud Tithonos, to bring light to
the immortals and to mortal men. But Zeus sent forth fierce Discord unto
the fleet ships of the Achaians, and in her hands she held the signal of
war. And she stood upon the huge black ship of Odysseus, that was in the
