John's reign, as I have heard say."

"Yours is indeed an old family."

"Ay, we have some English blood in our veins, though peasants and the
sons of peasants. But there was one of us who drew a bow at Azincourt;
and I have heard greater things, but I believe they are old wives'
tales."

"At least we have nothing left," said Sybil, "but our old faith; and
that we have clung to through good report and evil report."

"And now," said Gerard, "I rise with the lark, good neighbour Franklin;
but before you go, Sybil will sing to us a requiem that I love: it
stills the spirit before we sink into the slumber which may this night
be death, and which one day must be."




Book 3 Chapter 6



A bloom was spread over the morning sky. A soft golden light bathed with
its fresh beam the bosom of the valley, except where a delicate haze,
rather than a mist, still partially lingered over the river, which yet
occasionally gleamed and sparkled in the sunshine. A sort of shadowy
lustre suffused the landscape, which, though distinct, was mitigated in
all its features--the distant woods, the clumps of tall trees that rose
about the old grey bridge, the cottage chimneys that sent their smoke
into the blue still air, amid their clustering orchards and garden of
flowers and herbs.

Ah! what is there so fresh and joyous as a summer morn! That spring time
of the day, when the brain is bright, and the heart is brave; the season
of daring and of hope; the renovating hour!

Came forth from his cottage room the brother of Lord Marney, to feel the
vigorous bliss of life amid sunshiny gardens and the voices of bees and
birds.

"Ah! this is delicious!" he felt. "This is existence! Thank God I am
here; that I have quitted for ever that formal and heartless Marney.
Were it not for my mother, I would remain Mr Franklin for ever. Would I
were indeed a journalist; provided I always had a mission to the vale
of Mowbray. Or anything, so that I were ever here. As companions,
independent of everything else, they are superior to any that I have
been used to. Why do these persons interest me? They feel and they
think: two habits that have quite gone out of fashion, if ever they
existed, among my friends. And that polish of manners, that studied and
factitious refinement, which is to compensate for the heartlessness or
the stupidity we are doomed to--is my host of last night deficient in
that refinement? If he do want our conventional discipline, he has a
native breeding which far excels it. I observe no word or action which
is not prompted by that fine feeling which is the sure source of good
taste. This Gerard appears to me a real genuine man; full of knowledge
worked out by his own head; with large yet wholesome sympathies; and a
deuced deal better educated than Lord de Mowbray or my brother--and they
do occasionally turn over a book, which is not the habit of our set.

"And his daughter--ay, his daughter! There is something almost sublime
about that young girl, yet strangely sweet withal; a tone so lofty
combined with such simplicity is very rare. For there is no affectation
of enthusiasm about her; nothing exaggerated, nothing rhapsodical. Her
dark eyes and lustrous face, and the solemn sweetness of her thrilling
voice--they haunt me; they have haunted me from the first moment I
encountered her like a spirit amid the ruins of our abbey. And I am
one of 'the family of sacrilege.' If she knew that! And I am one of the
conquering class she denounces. If also she knew that! Ah! there is much
to know! Above all--the future. Away! the tree of knowledge is the tree
of death. I will have no thought that is not as bright and lovely as
this morn."

He went forth from his little garden, and strolled along the road in the
direction of the cottage of Gerard, which was about three quarters of
a mile distant. You might see almost as far; the sunshiny road a little
winding and rising a very slight ascent. The cottage itself was hid by
its trees. While Egremont was still musing of one who lived under that
roof, he beheld in the distance Sybil.

She was springing along with a quick and airy step. Her black dress
displayed her undulating and elastic figure. Her little foot bounded
from the earth with a merry air. A long rosary hung at her side; and
her head was partly covered with a hood which descended just over her
shoulders. She seemed gay, for Harold kept running before her with a
frolicsome air, and then returning to his mistress, danced about her,
and almost overpowered her with his gambols.

"I salute thee, holy sister," said Egremont.

"Oh! is not this a merry morn!" she exclaimed with a bright and happy
face.

"I feel it as you. And whither do you go?"

"I go to the convent; I pay my first visit to our Superior since I left
them."

"Not very long ago," said Egremont, with a smile, and turning with her.

"It seems so," said Sybil.

They walked on together; Sybil glad as the hour; noticing a thousand
cheerful sights, speaking to her dog in her ringing voice, as he
gambolled before them, or seized her garments in his mouth, and ever and
anon bounded away and then returned, looking up in his mistress' face to
inquire whether he had been wanted in his absence.

"What a pity it is that your father's way each morning lies up the
valley," said Egremont; "he would be your companion to Mowbray."

"Ah! but I am so happy that he has not to work in a town," said Sybil.
"He is not made to be cooped up in a hot factory in a smoky street. At
least he labours among the woods and waters. And the Traffords are such
good people! So kind to him and to all."

"You love your father very much."

She looked at him a little surprised; and then her sweet serious face
broke into a smile and she said, "And is that strange?"

"I think not," said Egremont; "I am inclined to love him myself."

"Ah! you win my heart," said Sybil, "when you praise him. I think that
is the real reason why I like Stephen; for otherwise he is always saying
something with which I cannot agree, which I disapprove; and yet he is
so good to my father!"

"You speak of Mr Morley--"

"Oh! we don't call him 'Mr'," said Sybil slightly laughing.

"I mean Stephen Morley," said Egremont recalling his position, "whom I
met in Marney Abbey. He is very clever, is he not?"

"He is a great writer and a great student; and what he is he has made
himself. I hear too that you follow the same pursuit," said Sybil.

"But I am not a great writer or a great student," said Egremont.

"Whatever you be, I trust," said Sybil, in a more serious tone, "that
you will never employ the talents that God has given you against the
People."

"I have come here to learn something of their condition," said Egremont.
"That is not to be done in a great city like London. We all of us live
too much in a circle. You will assist me, I am sure," added Egremont;
"your spirit will animate me. You told me last night that there was no
other subject, except one, which ever occupied your thoughts."

"Yes," said Sybil, "I have lived under two roofs, only two roofs; and
each has given me a great idea; the Convent and the Cottage. One has
taught me the degradation of my faith, the other of my race. You should
not wonder, therefore, that my heart is concentrated on the Church and
the People."

"But there are other ideas," said Egremont, "that might equally be
entitled to your thought."

"I feel these are enough," said Sybil; "too great, as it is, for my
brain."




Book 3 Chapter 7



At the end of a court in Wodgate, of rather larger dimensions than usual
in that town, was a high and many-windowed house, of several stories
in height, which had been added to it at intervals. It was in a most
dilapidated state; the principal part occupied as a nail-workshop, where
a great number of heavy iron machines were working in every room on each
floor; the building itself in so shattered a condition that every part
of it creaked and vibrated with their motion. The flooring was so broken
that in many places one could look down through the gaping and rotten
planks, while the upper floors from time to time had been shored up with
props.

This was the Palace of the Bishop of Wodgate, and here with his arms
bare and black, he worked at those locks, which defied any skeleton key
that was not made by himself. He was a short, thickset man, powerfully
made, with brawny arms disproportionately short even for his height, and
with a countenance, as far as one could judge of a face so disfigured by
his grimy toil, rather brutal than savage. His choice apprentices, full
of admiration and terror, worked about him; lank and haggard youths, who
never for an instant dared to raise their dingy faces and lack-lustre
eyes from their ceaseless labour. On each side of their master, seated
on a stool higher than the rest, was an urchin of not more than four or
five years of age, serious and demure, and as if proud of his eminent
position, or working incessantly at his little file;--these were two
sons of the bishop.

"Now boys," said the bishop, in a hoarse, harsh voice, "steady, there;
steady. There's a file what don't sing; can't deceive my ear; I know all
their voices. Don't let me find that un out, or I won't walk into him,
won't I? Ayn't you lucky boys, to have reg'lar work like this, and the
best of prog! It worn't my lot, I can tell you that. Give me that shut,
you there, Scrubbynose, can't you move? Look sharp, or I won't move you,
won't I? Steady, steady! All right! That's music. Where will you hear
music like twenty files all working at once! You ought to be happy boys,
oughtn't you? Won't there be a treat of fish after this, that's all!
Hulloa, there, you red-haired varmint, what are you looking after? Three
boys looking about them; what's all this? Won't I be among you?" and he
sprang forward and seized the luckless ears of the first apprentice he
could get hold off, and wrung them till the blood spouted forth.

"Please, bishop," sang out the boy, "it worn't my fault. Here's a man
what wants you."

"Who wants me?" said the bishop, looking round, and he caught the figure
of Morley who had just entered the shop.

"Well, what's your will? Locks or nails?"

"Neither," said Morley; "I wish to see a man named Hatton."

"Well, you see a man named Hatton," said the bishop; "and now what do
want of him?"

"I should like to say a word to you alone," said Morley.

"Hem! I should like to know who is to finish this lock, and to look
after my boys! If it's an order, let us have it at once."

"It is not an order," said Morley.

"Then I don't want to hear nothing about it," said the bishop.

"It's about family matters," said Morley.

"Ah!" said Hatton, eagerly, "what, do you come from him?"

"It may be," said Morley.

Upon this the bishop, looking up to the ceiling of the room in which
there were several large chinks, began calling out lustily to some
unseen person above, and immediately was replied to in a shrill voice of
objurgation, demanding in peremptory words, interlarded with many oaths,
what he wanted. His reply called down his unseen correspondent, who soon
entered his workshop. It was the awful presence of Mrs Hatton; a tall,
bearded virago, with a file in her hand, for that seemed the distinctive
arm of the house, and eyes flashing with unbridled power.

"Look after the boys," said Hatton, "for I have business."

"Won't I?" said Mrs Hatton; and a thrill of terror pervaded the
assembly. All the files moved in regular melody; no one dared to raise
his face; even her two young children looked still more serious and
demure. Not that any being present flattered himself for an instant that
the most sedulous attention on his part could prevent an outbreak; all
that each aspired to, and wildly hoped, was that he might not be the
victim singled out to have his head cut open, or his eye knocked out, or
his ears half pulled off by the being who was the terror not only of the
workshop, but of Wodgate itself,--their bishop's gentle wife.

In the meantime, that worthy, taking Morley into a room where there were
no machines at work except those made of iron, said, "Well, what have
you brought me?"

"In the first place," said Morley, "I would speak to you of your
brother."

"I concluded that," said Hatton, "when you spoke of family matters
bringing you here; he is the only relation I have in this world, and
therefore it must be of him."

"It is of him," said Morley.

"Has he sent anything?"

"Hem!" said Morley, who was by nature a diplomatist, and instantly
comprehended his position, being himself pumped when he came to pump;
but he resolved not to precipitate the affair. "How late is it since you
heard from him?" he asked.

"Why, I suppose you know," said Hatton, "I heard as usual."

"From his usual place?" inquired Morley.

"I wish you would tell me where that is," said Hatton, eagerly.

"Why, he writes to you?"

"Blank letters; never had a line except once, and that is more than
twelve year ago. He sends me a twenty-pound note every Christmas; and
that is all I know about him."

"Then he is rich, and well to do in the world? said Morley."

"Why, don't you know?" said Hatton; "I thought you came from him!"

"I came about him. I wished to know whether he were alive, and that you
have been able to inform me: and where he was; and that you have not
been able to inform me."

"Why, you're a regular muff!" said the bishop.




Book 3 Chapter 8



A few days after his morning walk with Sybil, it was agreed that
Egremont should visit Mr Trafford's factory, which he had expressed
a great desire to inspect. Gerard always left his cottage at break of
dawn, and as Sybil had not yet paid her accustomed visit to her friend
and patron, who was the employer of her father, it was arranged that
Egremont should accompany her at a later and more convenient hour in the
morning, and then that they should all return together.

The factory was about a mile distant from their cottage, which belonged
indeed to Mr Trafford, and had been built by him. He was the younger son
of a family that had for centuries been planted in the land, but who,
not satisfied with the factitious consideration with which society
compensates the junior members of a territorial house for their
entailed poverty, had availed himself of some opportunities that offered
themselves, and had devoted his energies to those new sources of wealth
that were unknown to his ancestors. His operations at first had been
extremely limited, like his fortunes; but with a small capital, though
his profits were not considerable, he at least gained experience. With
gentle blood in his veins, and old English feelings, he imbibed, at an
early period of his career, a correct conception of the relations which
should subsist between the employer and the employed. He felt that
between them there should be other ties than the payment and the receipt
of wages.

A distant and childless relative, who made him a visit, pleased with
his energy and enterprise, and touched by the development of his social
views, left him a considerable sum, at a moment too when a great opening
was offered to manufacturing capital and skill. Trafford, schooled in
rigid fortunes, and formed by struggle, if not by adversity, was ripe
for the occasion, and equal to it. He became very opulent, and he lost
no time in carrying into life and being the plans which he had brooded
over in the years when his good thoughts were limited to dreams. On the
banks of his native Mowe he had built a factory which was now one of the
marvels of the district; one might almost say, of the country: a
single room, spreading over nearly two acres, and holding more than two
thousand work-people. The roof of groined arches, lighted by ventilating
domes at the height of eighteen feet, was supported by hollow cast-iron
columns, through which the drainage of the roof was effected. The height
of the ordinary rooms in which the work-people in manufactories are
engaged is not more than from nine to eleven feet; and these are built
in stories, the heat and effluvia of the lower rooms communicated to
those above, and the difficulty of ventilation insurmountable. At Mr
Trafford's, by an ingenious process, not unlike that which is practised
in the House of Commons, the ventilation was also carried on from below,
so that the whole building was kept at a steady temperature, and little
susceptible to atmospheric influence. The physical advantages of thus
carrying on the whole work in one chamber are great: in the improved
health of the people, the security against dangerous accidents for women
and youth, and the reduced fatigue resulting from not having to ascend
and descend and carry materials to the higher rooms. But the moral
advantages resulting from superior inspection and general observation
are not less important: the child works under the eye of the parent, the
parent under that of the superior workman; the inspector or employer at
a glance can behold all.

When the workpeople of Mr Trafford left his factory they were not
forgotten. Deeply had he pondered on the influence of the employer on
the health and content of his workpeople. He knew well that the domestic
virtues are dependent on the existence of a home, and one of his first
efforts had been to build a village where every family might be well
lodged. Though he was the principal proprietor, and proud of that
character, he nevertheless encouraged his workmen to purchase the fee:
there were some who had saved sufficient money to effect this: proud of
their house and their little garden, and of the horticultural society,
where its produce permitted them to be annual competitors. In every
street there was a well: behind the factory were the public baths; the
schools were under the direction of the perpetual curate of the church,
which Mr Trafford, though a Roman Catholic, had raised and endowed. In
the midst of this village, surrounded by beautiful gardens, which
gave an impulse to the horticulture of the community, was the house of
Trafford himself, who comprehended his position too well to withdraw
himself with vulgar exclusiveness from his real dependents, but
recognized the baronial principle reviving in a new form, and adapted to
the softer manners and more ingenious circumstances of the times.

And what was the influence of such an employer and such a system of
employment on the morals and manners of the employed? Great: infinitely
beneficial. The connexion of a labourer with his place of work, whether
agricultural or manufacturing, is itself a vast advantage. Proximity to
the employer brings cleanliness and order, because it brings observation
and encouragement. In the settlement of Trafford crime was positively
unknown: and offences were very slight. There was not a single person in
the village of a reprobate character. The men were well clad; the women
had a blooming cheek; drunkenness was unknown; while the moral condition
of the softer sex was proportionately elevated.

The vast form of the spreading factory, the roofs and gardens of the
village, the Tudor chimneys of the house of Trafford, the spire of the
gothic church, with the sparkling river and the sylvan hack-ground, came
rather suddenly on the sight of Egremont. They were indeed in the
pretty village-street before he was aware he was about to enter it. Some
beautiful children rushed out of a cottage and flew to Sybil, crying
out, "the queen, the queen;" one clinging to her dress, another seizing
her arm, and a third, too small to struggle, pouting out its lips to be
embraced.

"My subjects," said Sybil laughing, as she greeted them all; and then
they ran away to announce to others that their queen had arrived.

Others came: beautiful and young. As Sybil and Egremont walked along,
the race too tender for labour, seemed to spring out of every cottage
to greet "their queen." Her visits had been very rare of late, but they
were never forgotten; they formed epochs in the village annals of the
children, some of whom knew only by tradition the golden age when Sybil
Gerard lived at the great house, and daily glanced like a spirit among
their homes, smiling and met with smiles, blessing and ever blessed.

"And here," she said to Egremont, "I must bid you good bye; and this
little boy," touching gently on his head a very serious urchin who had
never left her side for a moment, proud of his position, and holding
tight her hand with all his strength, "this little boy shall be your
guide. It is not a hundred yards. Now, Pierce, you must take Mr Franklin
to the factory, and ask for Mr Gerard." And she went her way.

They had not separated five minutes when the sound of whirling wheels
caught the ear of Egremont, and, looking round, he saw a cavalcade of
great pretension rapidly approaching; dames and cavaliers on horseback;
a brilliant equipage, postilions and four horses; a crowd of grooms.
Egremont stood aside. The horsemen and horsewomen caracoled gaily by
him; proudly swept on the sparkling barouche; the saucy grooms pranced
in his face. Their masters and mistresses were not strangers to him: he
recognized with some dismay the liveries, and then the arms of Lord de
Mowbray, and caught the cold, proud countenance of Lady Joan, and the
flexible visage of Lady Maud, both on horseback, and surrounded by
admiring cavaliers.

Egremont flattered himself that he had not been recognised, and
dismissing his little guide, instead of proceeding to the factory he
sauntered away in an opposite direction, and made a visit to the church.

The wife of Trafford embraced Sybil, and then embraced her again. She
seemed as happy as the children of the village, that the joy of her
roof, as of so many others, had returned to them, though only for a few
hours. Her husband she said had just quitted the house; he was obliged
to go to the factory to receive a great and distinguished party who were
expected this morning, having written to him several days before for
permission to view the works. "We expect them to lunch here afterwards,"
said Mrs Trafford, a very refined woman, but unused to society, and who
rather trembled at the ceremony; "Oh! do stay with me, Sybil, to receive
them."

This intimation so much alarmed Sybil that she rose as soon as was
practicable; and saying that she had some visits to make in the village,
she promised to return when Mrs Trafford was less engaged.

An hour elapsed; there was a loud ring at the hall-door, the great
and distinguished party had arrived. Mrs Trafford prepared for the
interview, and tried to look very composed as the doors opened, and her
husband ushered in and presented to her Lord and Lady de Mowbray, their
daughters, Lady Firebrace, Mr Jermyn, who still lingered at the castle,
and Mr Alfred Mountchesney and Lord Milford, who were mere passing
guests, on their way to Scotland, but reconnoitering the heiresses in
their course.

Lord de Mowbray was profuse of praise and compliments. His lordship was
apt to be too civil. The breed would come out sometimes. To-day he was
quite the coffee-house waiter. He praised everything: the machinery, the
workmen, the cotton manufactured and the cotton raw, even the smoke. But
Mrs Trafford would not have the smoke defended, and his lordship gave
the smoke up, but only to please her. As for Lady de Mowbray, she was as
usual courteous and condescending, with a kind of smouldering smile on
her fair aquiline face, that seemed half pleasure and half surprise at
the strange people she was among. Lady Joan was haughty and scientific,
approved of much, but principally of the system of ventilation, of which
she asked several questions which greatly perplexed Mrs Trafford, who
slightly blushed, and looked at her husband for relief, but he was
engaged with Lady Maud, who was full of enthusiasm, entered into
everything with the zest of sympathy, identified herself with the
factory system almost as much as she had done with the crusades, and
longed to teach in singing schools, found public gardens, and bid
fountains flow and sparkle for the people.

"I think the works were very wonderful," said Lord Milford, as he was
cutting a pasty; "and indeed, Mrs Trafford, everything here is quite
charming; but what I have most admired at your place is a young girl we
met--the most beautiful I think I ever saw."

"With the most beautiful dog," said Mr Mountchesney.

"Oh! that must have been Sybil!" exclaimed Mrs Trafford.

"And who is Sybil?" asked Lady Maud. "That is one of our family names.
We all thought her quite beautiful."

"She is a child of the house," said Mrs Trafford, "or rather was, for I
am sorry to say she has long quitted us."

"Is she a nun?" asked Lord Milford, "for her vestments had a conventual
air."

"She has just left your convent at Mowbray," said Mr Trafford,
addressing his answer to Lady Maud, "and rather against her will. She
clings to the dress she was accustomed to there."

"And now she resides with you?"

"No; I should be very happy if she did. I might almost say she was
brought up under this roof. She lives now with her father."

"And who is so fortunate as to be her father?" enquired Mr Mountchesney.

"Her father is the inspector of my works; the person who accompanied us
over them this morning."

"What! that handsome man I so much admired," said Lady Maud, "so very
aristocratic-looking. Papa," she said, addressing herself to Lord de
Mowbray, "the inspector of Mr Trafford's works we are speaking of, that
aristocratic-looking person that I observed to you, he is the father of
the beautiful girl."

"He seemed a very intelligent person," said Lord de Mowbray with many
smiles.

"Yes," said Mr Trafford; "he has great talents and great integrity. I
would trust him with anything and to any amount. All I wish," he added,
with a smile and in a lower tone to Lady de Mowbray, "all I wish is,
that he was not quite so fond of politics."

"Is he very violent?" enquired her ladyship in a sugary tone.

"Too violent," said Mr Trafford, "and wild in his ideas."

"And yet I suppose," said Lord Milford, "he must be very well off?"

"Why I must say for him it is not selfishness that makes him a
malcontent," said Mr Trafford; "he bemoans the condition of the people."

"If we are to judge of the condition of the people by what we see here,"
said Lord de Mowbray, "there is little to lament in it. But I fear these
are instances not so common as we could wish. You must have been at a
great outlay, Mr Trafford?"

"Why," said Mr Trafford, "for my part. I have always considered that
there was nothing so expensive as a vicious population. I hope I had
other objects in view in what I have done than a pecuniary compensation.
They say we all have our hobbies; and it was ever mine to improve the
condition of my workpeople, to see what good tenements and good
schools and just wages paid in a fair manner, and the encouragement of
civilizing pursuits, would do to elevate their character. I should
find an ample reward in the moral tone and material happiness of this
community; but really viewing it in a pecuniary point of view, the
investment of capital has been one of the most profitable I ever made;
and I would not, I assure you, for double its amount, exchange my
workpeople for the promiscuous assemblage engaged in other factories."

"The influence of the atmosphere on the condition of the labourer is a
subject which deserves investigation," said Lady Joan to Mr Jermyn, who
stared and bowed.

"And you do not feel alarmed at having a person of such violent
opinions as your inspector at the head of your establishment," said Lady
Firebrace to Mr Trafford, who smiled a negative.

"What is the name of the intelligent individual who accompanied us?"
enquired Lord de Mowbray.

"His name is Gerard," said Mr Trafford.

"I believe a common name in these parts," said Lord de Mowbray looking a
little confused.

"Not very," said Mr Trafford; "'tis an old name and the stock has
spread; but all Gerards claim a common lineage I believe, and my
inspector has gentle blood, they say, in his veins."

"He looks as if he had," said Lady Maud.

"All persons with good names affect good blood," said Lord de Mowbray;
and then turning to Mrs Trafford he overwhelmed her with elaborate
courtesies of phrase; praised everything again; first generally and then
in detail; the factory, which he seemed to prefer to his castle--the
house, which he seemed to prefer even to the factory--the gardens, from
which he anticipated even greater gratification than from the house. And
this led to an expression of a hope that he would visit them. And so in
due time the luncheon was achieved. Mrs Trafford looked at her guests,
there was a rustling and a stir, and everybody was to go and see the
gardens that Lord de Mowbray had so much praised.

"I am all for looking after the beautiful Nun," said Mr Mountchesney to
Lord Milford.

"I think I shall ask the respectable manufacturer to introduce me to
her," replied his lordship.

In the meantime Egremont had joined Gerard at the factory.

"You should have come sooner," said Gerard, "and then you might have
gone round with the fine folks. We have had a grand party here from the
castle."

"So I perceived," said Egremont, "and withdrew."

"Ah! they were not in your way, eh?" he said in a mocking smile. "Well,
they were very condescending--at least for such great people. An earl!
Earl de Mowbray,--I suppose he came over with William the Conqueror. Mr
Trafford makes a show of the place, and it amuses their visitors I dare
say, like anything else that's strange. There were some young gentlemen
with them, who did not seem to know much about anything. I thought I had
a right to be amused too; and I must say I liked very much to see one of
them looking at the machinery through his eye-glass. There was one very
venturesome chap: I thought he was going to catch hold of the fly-wheel,
but I gave him a spin which I believed saved his life, though he did
