own mind.'

'But had you asked the Baron's consent,' said Waverley, 'or
Rose's?'

'To what purpose? To have spoke to the Baron before I had assumed
my title would have only provoked a premature and irritating
discussion on the subject of the change of name, when, as Earl of
Glennaquoich, I had only to propose to him to carry his d--d bear
and bootjack party per pale, or in a scutcheon of pretence, or in
a separate shield perhaps--any way that would not blemish my own
coat of arms. And as to Rose, I don't see what objection she could
have made if her father was satisfied.'

'Perhaps the same that your sister makes to me, you being
satisfied.'

Fergus gave a broad stare at the comparison which this supposition
implied, but cautiously suppressed the answer which rose to his
tongue. 'O, we should easily have arranged all that. So, sir, I
craved a private interview, and this morning was assigned; and I
asked you to meet me here, thinking, like a fool, that I should
want your countenance as bride's-man. Well, I state my pretension
--they are not denied; the promises so repeatedly made and the
patent granted--they are acknowledged. But I propose, as a natural
consequence, to assume the rank which the patent bestowed. I have
the old story of the jealousy of C----and M----trumped up
against me. I resist this pretext, and offer to procure their
written acquiescence, in virtue of the date of my patent as prior
to their silly claims; I assure you I would have had such a
consent from them, if it had been at the point of the sword. And
then out comes the real truth; and he dares to tell me to my face
that my patent must be suppressed for the present, for fear of
disgusting that rascally coward and faineant (naming the rival
chief of his own clan), who has no better title to be a chieftain
than I to be Emperor of China, and who is pleased to shelter his
dastardly reluctance to come out, agreeable to his promise twenty
times pledged, under a pretended jealousy of the Prince's
partiality to me. And, to leave this miserable driveller without a
pretence for his cowardice, the Prince asks it as a personal
favour of me, forsooth, not to press my just and reasonable
request at this moment. After this, put your faith in princes!'

'And did your audience end here?'

'End? O no! I was determined to leave him no pretence for his
ingratitude, and I therefore stated, with all the composure I
could muster,--for I promise you I trembled with passion,--the
particular reasons I had for wishing that his Royal Highness would
impose upon me any other mode of exhibiting my duty and devotion,
as my views in life made what at any other time would have been a
mere trifle at this crisis a severe sacrifice; and then I
explained to him my full plan.'

'And what did the Prince answer?'

'Answer? why--it is well it is written, "Curse not the king, no,
not in thy thought!"--why, he answered that truly he was glad I
had made him my confidant, to prevent more grievous
disappointment, for he could assure me, upon the word of a prince,
that Miss Bradwardine's affections were engaged, and he was under
a particular promise to favour them. "So, my dear Fergus," said
he, with his most gracious cast of smile, "as the marriage is
utterly out of question, there need be no hurry, you know, about
the earldom." And so he glided off and left me plante la.'

'And what did you do?'

'I'll tell you what I COULD have done at that moment--sold myself
to the devil or the Elector, whichever offered the dearest
revenge. However, I am now cool. I know he intends to marry her to
some of his rascally Frenchmen or his Irish officers, but I will
watch them close; and let the man that would supplant me look well
to himself. Bisogna coprirsi, Signor.'

After some further conversation, unnecessary to be detailed,
Waverley took leave of the Chieftain, whose fury had now subsided
into a deep and strong desire of vengeance, and returned home,
scarce able to analyse the mixture of feelings which the narrative
had awakened in his own bosom.





CHAPTER LIV

'TO ONE THING CONSTANT NEVER'


'I am the very child of caprice,' said Waverley to himself, as he
bolted the door of his apartment and paced it with hasty steps.
'What is it to me that Fergus Mac-Ivor should wish to marry Rose
Bradwardine? I love her not; I might have been loved by her
perhaps; but rejected her simple, natural, and affecting
attachment, instead of cherishing it into tenderness, and
dedicated myself to one who will never love mortal man, unless old
Warwick, the King-maker, should arise from the dead The Baron too
--I would not have cared about his estate, and so the name would
have been no stumbling-block. The devil might have taken the
barren moors and drawn off the royal caligae for anything I would
have minded. But, framed as she is for domestic affection and
tenderness, for giving and receiving all those kind and quiet
attentions which sweeten life to those who pass it together, she
is sought by Fergus Mac-Ivor. He will not use her ill, to be sure;
of that he is incapable. But he will neglect her after the first
month; he will be too intent on subduing some rival chieftain or
circumventing some favourite at court, on gaining some heathy hill
and lake or adding to his bands some new troop of caterans, to
inquire what she does, or how she amuses herself.

    And then will canker sorrow eat her bud,
    And chase the native beauty from her cheek;
    And she will look as hollow as a ghost,
    And dim and meagre as an ague fit,
    And so she'll die.

And such a catastrophe of the most gentle creature on earth might
have been prevented if Mr. Edward Waverley had had his eyes! Upon
my word, I cannot understand how I thought Flora so much, that is,
so very much, handsomer than Rose. She is taller indeed, and her
manner more formed; but many people think Miss Bradwardine's more
natural; and she is certainly much younger. I should think Flora
is two years older than I am. I will look at them particularly
this evening.'

And with this resolution Waverley went to drink tea (as the
fashion was Sixty Years Since) at the house of a lady of quality
attached to the cause of the Chevalier, where he found, as he
expected, both the ladies. All rose as he entered, but Flora
immediately resumed her place and the conversation in which she
was engaged. Rose, on the contrary, almost imperceptibly made a
little way in the crowded circle for his advancing the corner of a
chair. 'Her manner, upon the whole, is most engaging,' said
Waverley to himself.

A dispute occurred whether the Gaelic or Italian language was most
liquid, and best adapted for poetry; the opinion for the Gaelic,
which probably might not have found supporters elsewhere, was here
fiercely defended by seven Highland ladies, who talked at the top
of their lungs, and screamed the company deaf with examples of
Celtic euphonia. Flora, observing the Lowland ladies sneer at the
comparison, produced some reasons to show that it was not
altogether so absurd; but Rose, when asked for her opinion, gave
it with animation in praise of Italian, which she had studied with
Waverley's assistance. "She has a more correct ear than Flora,
though a less accomplished musician," said Waverley to himself. 'I
suppose Miss Mac-Ivor will next compare Mac-Murrough nan Fonn to
Ariosto!'

Lastly, it so befell that the company differed whether Fergus
should be asked to perform on the flute, at which he was an adept,
or Waverley invited to read a play of Shakspeare; and the lady of
the house good-humouredly undertook to collect the votes of the
company for poetry or music, under the condition that the
gentleman whose talents were not laid under contribution that
evening should contribute them to enliven the next. It chanced
that Rose had the casting vote. Now Flora, who seemed to impose it
as a rule upon herself never to countenance any proposal which
might seem to encourage Waverley, had voted for music, providing
the Baron would take his violin to accompany Fergus. 'I wish you
joy of your taste, Miss Mac-Ivor,' thought Edward, as they sought
for his book. 'I thought it better when we were at Glennaquoich;
but certainly the Baron is no great performer, and Shakspeare is
worth listening to.'

'Romeo and Juliet' was selected, and Edward read with taste,
feeling, and spirit several scenes from that play. All the company
applauded with their hands, and many with their tears. Flora, to
whom the drama was well known, was among the former; Rose, to whom
it was altogether new, belonged to the latter class of admirers.
'She has more feeling too,' said Waverley, internally.

The conversation turning upon the incidents of the play and upon
the characters, Fergus declared that the only one worth naming, as
a man of fashion and spirit, was Mercutio. 'I could not,' he said,
'quite follow all his old-fashioned wit, but he must have been a
very pretty fellow, according to the ideas of his time.'

'And it was a shame,' said Ensign Maccombich, who usually followed
his Colonel everywhere, 'for that Tibbert, or Taggart, or whatever
was his name, to stick him under the other gentleman's arm while
he was redding the fray.'

The ladies, of course, declared loudly in favour of Romeo, but
this opinion did not go undisputed. The mistress of the house and
several other ladies severely reprobated the levity with which the
hero transfers his affections from Rosalind to Juliet. Flora
remained silent until her opinion was repeatedly requested, and
then answered, she thought the circumstance objected to not only
reconcilable to nature, but such as in the highest degree evinced
the art of the poet. 'Romeo is described,' said she, 'as a young
man peculiarly susceptible of the softer passions; his love is at
first fixed upon a woman who could afford it no return; this he
repeatedly tells you,--

    From love's weak, childish bow she lives unharmed,

and again--

    She hath forsworn to love.

Now, as it was impossible that Romeo's love, supposing him a
reasonable being, could continue to subsist without hope, the poet
has, with great art, seized the moment when he was reduced
actually to despair to throw in his way an object more
accomplished than her by whom he had been rejected, and who is
disposed to repay his attachment. I can scarce conceive a
situation more calculated to enhance the ardour of Romeo's
affection for Juliet than his being at once raised by her from the
state of drooping melancholy in which he appears first upon the
scene to the ecstatic state in which he exclaims--

    --come what sorrow can,
    It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
    That one short moment gives me in her sight.'

'Good now, Miss Mac-Ivor,' said a young lady of quality, 'do you
mean to cheat us out of our prerogative? will you persuade us love
cannot subsist without hope, or that the lover must become fickle
if the lady is cruel? O fie! I did not expect such an
unsentimental conclusion.'

'A lover, my dear Lady Betty,' said Flora, 'may, I conceive,
persevere in his suit under very discouraging circumstances.
Affection can (now and then) withstand very severe storms of
rigour, but not a long polar frost of downright indifference.
Don't, even with YOUR attractions, try the experiment upon any
lover whose faith you value. Love will subsist on wonderfully
little hope, but not altogether without it.'

'It will be just like Duncan Mac-Girdie's mare,' said Evan, 'if
your ladyships please, he wanted to use her by degrees to live
without meat, and just as he had put her on a straw a day the poor
thing died!'

Evan's illustration set the company a-laughing, and the discourse
took a different turn. Shortly afterwards the party broke up, and
Edward returned home, musing on what Flora had said. 'I will love
my Rosalind no more,' said he; 'she has given me a broad enough
hint for that; and I will speak to her brother and resign my suit.
But for a Juliet--would it be handsome to interfere with Fergus's
pretensions? though it is impossible they can ever succeed; and
should they miscarry, what then? why then alors comme alors.' And
with this resolution of being guided by circumstances did our hero
commit himself to repose.





CHAPTER LV

A BRAVE MAN IN SORROW


Ifmy fair readers should be of opinion that my hero's levity in
love is altogether unpardonable, I must remind them that all his
griefs and difficulties did not arise from that sentimental
source. Even the lyric poet who complains so feelingly of the
pains of love could not forget, that at the same time he was 'in
debt and in drink,' which, doubtless, were great aggravations of
his distress. There were, indeed, whole days in which Waverley
thought neither of Flora nor Rose Bradwardine, but which were
spent in melancholy conjectures on the probable state of matters
at Waverley-Honour, and the dubious issue of the civil contest in
which he was pledged. Colonel Talbot often engaged him in
discussions upon the justice of the cause he had espoused. 'Not,'
he said, 'that it is possible for you to quit it at this present
moment, for, come what will, you must stand by your rash
engagement. But I wish you to be aware that the right is not with
you; that you are fighting against the real interests of your
country; and that you ought, as an Englishman and a patriot, to
take the first opportunity to leave this unhappy expedition before
the snowball melts.'

In such political disputes Waverley usually opposed the common
arguments of his party, with which it is unnecessary to trouble
the reader. But he had little to say when the Colonel urged him to
compare the strength by which they had undertaken to overthrow the
government with that which was now assembling very rapidly for its
support. To this statement Waverley had but one answer: 'If the
cause I have undertaken be perilous, there would be the greater
disgrace in abandoning it.' And in his turn he generally silenced
Colonel Talbot, and succeeded in changing the subject.

One night, when, after a long dispute of this nature, the friends
had separated and our hero had retired to bed, he was awakened
about midnight by a suppressed groan. He started up and listened;
it came from the apartment of Colonel Talbot, which was divided
from his own by a wainscotted partition, with a door of
communication. Waverley approached this door and distinctly heard
one or two deep-drawn sighs. What could be the matter? The Colonel
had parted from him apparently in his usual state of spirits. He
must have been taken suddenly ill. Under this impression he opened
the door of communication very gently, and perceived the Colonel,
in his night-gown, seated by a table, on which lay a letter and a
picture. He raised his head hastily, as Edward stood uncertain
whether to advance or retire, and Waverley perceived that his
cheeks were stained with tears.

As if ashamed at being found giving way to such emotion, Colonel
Talbot rose with apparent displeasure and said, with some
sternness, 'I think, Mr. Waverley, my own apartment and the hour
might have secured even a prisoner against--'

'Do not say INTRUSION, Colonel Talbot; I heard you breathe hard
and feared you were ill; that alone could have induced me to break
in upon you.'

'I am well,' said the Colonel, 'perfectly well.'

'But you are distressed,' said Edward; 'is there anything can be
done?'

'Nothing, Mr. Waverley; I was only thinking of home, and some
unpleasant occurrences there.'

'Good God, my uncle!' exclaimed Waverley.

'No, it is a grief entirely my own. I am ashamed you should have
seen it disarm me so much; but it must have its course at times,
that it may be at others more decently supported. I would have
kept it secret from you; for I think it will grieve you, and yet
you can administer no consolation. But you have surprised me,--I
see you are surprised yourself,--and I hate mystery. Read that
letter.'

The letter was from Colonel Talbot's sister, and in these words:--

'I received yours, my dearest brother, by Hodges. Sir E. W. and
Mr. R. are still at large, but are not permitted to leave London.
I wish to Heaven I could give you as good an account of matters in
the square. But the news of the unhappy affair at Preston came
upon us, with the dreadful addition that you were among the
fallen. You know Lady Emily's state of health, when your
friendship for Sir E. induced you to leave her. She was much
harassed with the sad accounts from Scotland of the rebellion
having broken out; but kept up her spirits, as, she said, it
became your wife, and for the sake of the future heir, so long
hoped for in vain. Alas, my dear brother, these hopes are now
ended! Notwithstanding all my watchful care, this unhappy rumour
reached her without preparation. She was taken ill immediately;
and the poor infant scarce survived its birth. Would to God this
were all! But although the contradiction of the horrible report by
your own letter has greatly revived her spirits, yet Dr.----
apprehends, I grieve to say, serious, and even dangerous,
consequences to her health, especially from the uncertainty in
which she must necessarily remain for some time, aggravated by the
ideas she has formed of the ferocity of those with whom you are a
prisoner.

'Do therefore, my dear brother, as soon as this reaches you,
endeavour to gain your release, by parole, by ransom, or any way
that is practicable. I do not exaggerate Lady Emily's state of
health; but I must not--dare not--suppress the truth. Ever, my
dear Philip, your most affectionate sister,

'Lucy TALBOT.'

Edward stood motionless when he had perused this letter; for the
conclusion was inevitable, that, by the Colonel's journey in quest
of him, he had incurred this heavy calamity. It was severe enough,
even in its irremediable part; for Colonel Talbot and Lady Emily,
long without a family, had fondly exulted in the hopes which were
now blasted. But this disappointment was nothing to the extent of
