rather than that wily scoundrel Glossin, that's risen on the ruin of
the best friend he ever had. And now I think on't, I'll slip on my hood
and pattens, and gang to Mr. Mac-Morlan mysell, he's at hame e'en now;
it's hardly a step.'

'Do so, my good landlady, and many thanks; and bid my servant step here
with my portfolio in the meantime.'

In a minute or two Colonel Mannering was quietly seated with his
writing materials before him. We have the privilege of looking over his
shoulder as he writes, and we willingly communicate its substance to
our readers. The letter was addressed to Arthur Mervyn, Esq., of Mervyn
Hall, Llanbraithwaite, Westmoreland. It contained some account of the
writer's previous journey since parting with him, and then proceeded as
follows:--

'And now, why will you still upbraid me with my melancholy, Mervyn? Do
you think, after the lapse of twenty-five years, battles, wounds,
imprisonment, misfortunes of every description, I can be still the same
lively, unbroken Guy Mannering who climbed Skiddaw with you, or shot
grouse upon Crossfell? That you, who have remained in the bosom of
domestic happiness, experience little change, that your step is as
light and your fancy as full of sunshine, is a blessed effect of health
and temperament, cooperating with content and a smooth current down the
course of life. But MY career has been one of difficulties and doubts
and errors. From my infancy I have been the sport of accident, and,
though the wind has often borne me into harbour, it has seldom been
into that which the pilot destined. Let me recall to you--but the task
must be brief--the odd and wayward fates of my youth, and the
misfortunes of my manhood.

'The former, you will say, had nothing very appalling. All was not for
the best; but all was tolerable. My father, the eldest son of an
ancient but reduced family, left me with little, save the name of the
head of the house, to the protection of his more fortunate brothers.
They were so fond of me that they almost quarrelled about me. My uncle,
the bishop, would have had me in orders, and offered me a living; my
uncle, the merchant, would have put me into a counting-house, and
proposed to give me a share in the thriving concern of Mannering and
Marshall, in Lombard Street. So, between these two stools, or rather
these two soft, easy, well-stuffed chairs of divinity and commerce, my
unfortunate person slipped down, and pitched upon a dragoon saddle.
Again, the bishop wished me to marry the niece and heiress of the Dean
of Lincoln; and my uncle, the alderman, proposed to me the only
daughter of old Sloethorn, the great wine-merchant, rich enough to play
at span-counter with moidores and make thread-papers of bank-notes; and
somehow I slipped my neck out of both nooses, and married--poor, poor
Sophia Wellwood.

'You will say, my military career in India, when I followed my regiment
there, should have given me some satisfaction; and so it assuredly has.
You will remind me also, that if I disappointed the hopes of my
guardians, I did not incur their displeasure; that the bishop, at his
death, bequeathed me his blessing, his manuscript sermons, and a
curious portfolio containing the heads of eminent divines of the church
of England; and that my uncle, Sir Paul Mannering, left me sole heir
and executor to his large fortune. Yet this availeth me nothing; I told
you I had that upon my mind which I should carry to my grave with me, a
perpetual aloes in the draught of existence. I will tell you the cause
more in detail than I had the heart to do while under your hospitable
roof. You will often hear it mentioned, and perhaps with different and
unfounded circumstances. I will therefore speak it out; and then let
the event itself, and the sentiments of melancholy with which it has
impressed me, never again be subject of discussion between us.

'Sophia, as you well know, followed me to India. She was as innocent as
gay; but, unfortunately for us both, as gay as innocent. My own manners
were partly formed by studies I had forsaken, and habits of seclusion
not quite consistent with my situation as commandant of a regiment in a
country where universal hospitality is offered and expected by every
settler claiming the rank of a gentleman. In a moment of peculiar
pressure (you know how hard we were sometimes run to obtain white faces
to countenance our line-of-battle), a young man named Brown joined our
regiment as a volunteer, and, finding the military duty more to his
fancy than commerce, in which he had been engaged, remained with us as
a cadet. Let me do my unhappy victim justice: he behaved with such
gallantry on every occasion that offered that the first vacant
commission was considered as his due. I was absent for some weeks upon
a distant expedition; when I returned I found this young fellow
established quite as the friend of the house, and habitual attendant of
my wife and daughter. It was an arrangement which displeased me in many
particulars, though no objection could be made to his manners or
character. Yet I might have been reconciled to his familiarity in my
family, but for the suggestions of another. If you read over--what I
never dare open--the play of "Othello," you will have some idea of what
followed--I mean of my motives; my actions, thank God! were less
reprehensible. There was another cadet ambitious of the vacant
situation. He called my attention to what he led me to term coquetry
between my wife and this young man. Sophia was virtuous, but proud of
her virtue; and, irritated by my jealousy, she was so imprudent as to
press and encourage an intimacy which she saw I disapproved and
regarded with suspicion. Between Brown and me there existed a sort of
internal dislike. He made an effort or two to overcome my prejudice;
but, prepossessed as I was, I placed them to a wrong motive. Feeling
himself repulsed, and with scorn, he desisted; and as he was without
family and friends, he was naturally more watchful of the deportment of
one who had both.

'It is odd with what torture I write this letter. I feel inclined,
nevertheless, to protract the operation, just as if my doing so could
put off the catastrophe which has so long embittered my life. But--it
must be told, and it shall be told briefly.

'My wife, though no longer young, was still eminently handsome,
and--let me say thus far in my own justification-she was fond of being
thought so--I am repeating what I said before. In a word, of her virtue
I never entertained a doubt; but, pushed by the artful suggestions of
Archer, I thought she cared little for my peace of mind, and that the
young fellow Brown paid his attentions in my despite, and in defiance
of me. He perhaps considered me, on his part, as an oppressive
aristocratic man, who made my rank in society and in the army the means
of galling those whom circumstances placed beneath me. And if he
discovered my silly jealousy, he probably considered the fretting me in
that sore point of my character as one means of avenging the petty
indignities to which I had it in my power to subject him. Yet an acute
friend of mine gave a more harmless, or at least a less offensive,
construction to his attentions, which he conceived to be meant for my
daughter Julia, though immediately addressed to propitiate the
influence of her mother. This could have been no very flattering or
pleasing enterprise on the part of an obscure and nameless young man;
but I should not have been offended at this folly as I was at the
higher degree of presumption I suspected. Offended, however, I was, and
in a mortal degree.

'A very slight spark will kindle a flame where everything lies open to
catch it. I have absolutely forgot the proximate cause of quarrel, but
it was some trifle which occurred at the card-table which occasioned
high words and a challenge. We met in the morning beyond the walls and
esplanade of the fortress which I then commanded, on the frontiers of
the settlement. This was arranged for Brown's safety, had he escaped. I
almost wish he had, though at my own expense; but he fell by the first
fire. We strove to assist him; but some of these looties, a species of
native banditti who were always on the watch for prey, poured in upon
us. Archer and I gained our horses with difficulty, and cut our way
through them after a hard conflict, in the course of which he received
some desperate wounds. To complete the misfortunes of this miserable
day, my wife, who suspected the design with which I left the fortress,
had ordered her palanquin to follow me, and was alarmed and almost made
prisoner by another troop of these plunderers. She was quickly released
by a party of our cavalry; but I cannot disguise from myself that the
incidents of this fatal morning gave a severe shock to health already
delicate. The confession of Archer, who thought himself dying, that he
had invented some circumstances, and for his purposes put the worst
construction upon others, and the full explanation and exchange of
forgiveness with me which this produced, could not check the progress
of her disorder. She died within about eight months after this
incident, bequeathing me only the girl of whom Mrs. Mervyn is so good
as to undertake the temporary charge. Julia was also extremely ill; so
much so that I was induced to throw up my command and return to Europe,
where her native air, time, and the novelty of the scenes around her
have contributed to dissipate her dejection and restore her health.

'Now that you know my story, you will no longer ask me the reason of my
melancholy, but permit me to brood upon it as I may. There is, surely,
in the above narrative enough to embitter, though not to poison, the
chalice which the fortune and fame you so often mention had prepared to
regale my years of retirement.

'I could add circumstances which our old tutor would have quoted as
instances of DAY FATALITY,--you would laugh were I to mention such
particulars, especially as you know I put no faith in them. Yet, since
I have come to the very house from which I now write, I have learned a
singular coincidence, which, if I find it truly established by
tolerable evidence, will serve as hereafter for subject of curious
discussion. But I will spare you at present, as I expect a person to
speak about a purchase of property now open in this part of the
country. It is a place to which I have a foolish partiality, and I hope
my purchasing may be convenient to those who are parting with it, as
there is a plan for buying it under the value. My respectful
compliments to Mrs. Mervyn, and I will trust you, though you boast to
be so lively a young gentleman, to kiss Julia for me. Adieu, dear
Mervyn.--Thine ever, GUY MANNERING.'

Mr. Mac-Morlan now entered the room. The well-known character of
Colonel Mannering at once disposed this gentleman, who was a man of
intelligence and probity, to be open and confidential. He explained the
advantages and disadvantages of the property. 'It was settled,' he
said, 'the greater part of it at least, upon heirs-male, and the
purchaser would have the privilege of retaining in his hands a large
proportion of the price, in case of the reappearance, within a certain
limited term, of the child who had disappeared.'

'To what purpose, then, force forward a sale?' said Mannering.
Mac-Morlan smiled. 'Ostensibly,' he answered, 'to substitute the
interest of money instead of the ill-paid and precarious rents of an
unimproved estate; but chiefly it was believed, to suit the wishes and
views of a certain intended purchaser, who had become a principal
creditor, and forced himself into the management of the affairs by
means best known to himself, and who, it was thought, would find it
very convenient to purchase the estate without paying down the price.'

Mannering consulted with Mr. Mac-Morlan upon the steps for thwarting
this unprincipled attempt. They then conversed long on the singular
disappearance of Harry Bertram upon his fifth birthday, verifying thus
the random prediction of Mannering, of which, however, it will readily
be supposed he made no boast. Mr. Mac-Morlan was not himself in office
when that incident took place; but he was well acquainted with all the
circumstances, and promised that our hero should have them detailed by
the sheriff-depute himself, if, as he proposed, he should become a
settler in that part of Scotland. With this assurance they parted, well
satisfied with each other and with the evening's conference.

On the Sunday following, Colonel Mannering attended the parish church
with great decorum. None of the Ellangowan family were present; and it
was understood that the old Laird was rather worse than better. Jock
Jabos, once more despatched for him, returned once more without his
errand; but on the following day Miss Bertram hoped he might be removed.




CHAPTER XIII

     They told me, by the sentence of the law,
     They had commission to seize all thy fortune.
     Here stood a ruffian with a horrid face,
     Lording it o'er a pile of massy plate,
     Tumbled into a heap for public sale;
     There was another, making villainous jests
     At thy undoing; he had ta'en possession
     Of all thy ancient most domestic ornaments.

          OTWAY.


Early next morning Mannering mounted his horse and, accompanied by his
servant, took the road to Ellangowan. He had no need to inquire the
way. A sale in the country is a place of public resort and amusement,
and people of various descriptions streamed to it from all quarters.

After a pleasant ride of about an hour, the old towers of the ruin
presented themselves in the landscape. The thoughts, with what
different feelings he had lost sight of them so many years before,
thronged upon the mind of the traveller. The landscape was the same;
but how changed the feelings, hopes, and views of the spectator! Then
life and love were new, and all the prospect was gilded by their rays.
And now, disappointed in affection, sated with fame and what the world
calls success, his mind, goaded by bitter and repentant recollection,
his best hope was to find a retirement in which he might nurse the
melancholy that was to accompany him to his grave. 'Yet why should an
individual mourn over the instability of his hopes and the vanity of
his prospects? The ancient chiefs who erected these enormous and
massive towers to be the fortress of their race and the seat of their
power,--could they have dreamed the day was to come when the last of
their descendants should be expelled, a ruined wanderer, from his
possessions! But Nature's bounties are unaltered. The sun will shine as
fair on these ruins, whether the property of a stranger or of a sordid
and obscure trickster of the abused law, as when the banners of the
founder first waved upon their battlements.'

These reflections brought Mannering to the door of the house, which was
that day open to all. He entered among others, who traversed the
apartments, some to select articles for purchase, others to gratify
their curiosity. There is something melancholy in such a scene, even
under the most favourable circumstances. The confused state of the
furniture, displaced for the convenience of being easily viewed and
carried off by the purchasers, is disagreeable to the eye. Those
articles which, properly and decently arranged, look creditable and
handsome, have then a paltry and wretched appearance; and the
apartments, stripped of all that render them commodious and
comfortable, have an aspect of ruin and dilapidation. It is disgusting
also to see the scenes of domestic society and seclusion thrown open to
the gaze of the curious and the vulgar, to hear their coarse
speculations and brutal jests upon the fashions and furniture to which
they are unaccustomed,--a frolicsome humour much cherished by the
whisky which in Scotland is always put in circulation on such
occasions. All these are ordinary effects of such a scene as Ellangowan
now presented; but the moral feeling, that in this case they indicated
the total ruin of an ancient and honourable family, gave them treble
weight and poignancy.

It was some time before Colonel Mannering could find any one disposed
to answer his reiterated questions concerning Ellangowan himself. At
length an old maidservant, who held her apron to her eyes as she spoke,
told him 'the Laird was something better, and they hoped he would be
able to leave the house that day. Miss Lucy expected the chaise every
moment, and, as the day was fine for the time o' year, they had carried
him in his easychair up to the green before the auld castle, to be out
of the way of this unco spectacle.' Thither Colonel Mannering went in
quest of him, and soon came in sight of the little group, which
consisted of four persons. The ascent was steep, so that he had time to
reconnoitre them as he advanced, and to consider in what mode he should
make his address.

Mr. Bertram, paralytic and almost incapable of moving, occupied his
easy-chair, attired in his nightcap and a loose camlet coat, his feet
wrapped in blankets. Behind him, with his hands crossed on the cane
upon which he rested, stood Dominie Sampson, whom Mannering recognised
at once. Time had made no change upon him, unless that his black coat
seemed more brown, and his gaunt cheeks more lank, than when Mannering
last saw him. On one side of the old man was a sylph-like form--a young
woman of about seventeen, whom the Colonel accounted to be his
daughter. She was looking from time to time anxiously towards the
avenue, as if expecting the post-chaise; and between whiles busied
herself in adjusting the blankets so as to protect her father from the
cold, and in answering inquiries, which he seemed to make with a
captious and querulous manner. She did not trust herself to look
towards the Place, although the hum of the assembled crowd must have
drawn her attention in that direction. The fourth person of the group
was a handsome and genteel young man, who seemed to share Miss
Bertram's anxiety, and her solicitude to soothe and accommodate her
parent.

This young man was the first who observed Colonel Mannering, and
immediately stepped forward to meet him, as if politely to prevent his
drawing nearer to the distressed group. Mannering instantly paused and
explained. 'He was,' he said, 'a stranger to whom Mr. Bertram had
formerly shown kindness and hospitality; he would not have intruded
himself upon him at a period of distress, did it not seem to be in some
degree a moment also of desertion; he wished merely to offer such
services as might be in his power to Mr. Bertram and the young lady.'

He then paused at a little distance from the chair. His old
acquaintance gazed at him with lack-lustre eye, that intimated no
tokens of recognition; the Dominie seemed too deeply sunk in distress
even to observe his presence. The young man spoke aside with Miss
Bertram, who advanced timidly, and thanked Colonel Mannering for his
goodness; 'but,' she said, the tears gushing fast into her eyes, 'her
father, she feared, was not so much himself as to be able to remember
him.'

She then retreated towards the chair, accompanied by the Colonel.
'Father,' she said, 'this is Mr. Mannering, an old friend, come to
inquire after you.'

'He's very heartily welcome,' said the old man, raising himself in his
chair, and attempting a gesture of courtesy, while a gleam of
hospitable satisfaction seemed to pass over his faded features; 'but,
Lucy, my dear, let us go down to the house; you should not keep the
gentleman here in the cold. Dominie, take the key of the wine-cooler.
Mr. a--a--the gentleman will surely take something after his ride.'
