
Their road was strewn with myrtle and palm-branches, roses, poppy
and oleander-blossoms, and with leaves of the silver poplar, palm and
laurel; the air perfumed with incense, myrrh, and a thousand other sweet
odors. Carpets and flags waved and fluttered from the houses.

Music too was there; the shrill peal of the Median trumpet, and soft
tone of the Phrygian flute; the Jewish cymbal and harp, Paphlagonian
tambourines and the stringed instruments of Ionia; Syrian kettle-drums
and cymbals, the shells and drums of the Arians from the mouth of the
Indus, and the loud notes of the Bactrian battle-trumpets. But above
all these resounded the rejoicing shouts of the Babylonian multitude,
subjugated by the Persians only a few short years before, and yet, like
all Asiatics, wearing their fetters with an air of gladness so long as
the fear of their tyrant was before their eyes.

The fragrant odors, the blaze of color and sparkling of gold and jewels,
the neighing of the horses, and shouts and songs of human beings, all
united to produce a whole, at once bewildering and intoxicating to the
senses and the feelings.

The messengers had not been sent up to Babylon empty-handed. Beautiful
horses, huge elephants and comical monkeys; rhinoceroses and buffaloes
adorned with housings and tassels; double-humped Bactrian camels with
gold collars on their shaggy necks; waggon-loads of rare woods and
ivory, woven goods of exquisite texture, casks of ingots and gold-dust,
gold and silver vessels, rare plants for the royal gardens, and foreign
animals for the preserves, the most remarkable of which were antelopes,
zebras, and rare monkeys and birds, these last being tethered to a tree
in full leaf and fluttering among the branches. Such were the offerings
sent to the great king of Persia.

They were the tribute of the conquered nations and, after having
been shown to the king, were weighed and tested by treasurers and
secretaries, either declared satisfactory, or found wanting and
returned, in which case the niggardly givers were condemned to bring a
double tribute later.

   [At the time of which we are writing, the kings of Persia taxed
   their kingdom at whatever time and to whatever extent seemed good in
   their own eyes. Cambyses' successor, Darius, was the first to
   introduce a regular system of taxation, in consequence of which he
   was nicknamed "the shopkeeper." Up to a much later period it still
   remained the duty of certain districts to send natural products to
   the court Herod. I. 192. Xenoph. Anab. IV. 5.]

The palace-gates were reached without hindrance, the way being kept
clear by lines of soldiers and whipbearers stationed on either side of
the street.

If the royal progress to the place of sacrifice, when five hundred
richly-caprisoned horses had been led behind the king's chariot,
could be called magnificent, and the march of the envoys a brilliant
spectacle, the great throne-room presented a vision of dazzling and
magic beauty.

In the background, raised on six steps, each of which was guarded, as it
were, by two golden clogs, stood the throne of gold; above it, supported
by four golden pillars studded with precious stones, was a purple
canopy, on which appeared two winged discs, the king's Feruer.

   [The Feruer or Ferwer is the spiritual part of every man-his soul
   and reason. It was in existence before the man was horn, joins him
   at his birth and departs at his death. The Ferwer keeps up a war
   with the Diws or evil spirits, and is the element of man's
   preservation in life. The moment he departs, the body returns to
   its original elements. After death he becomes immortal if he has
   done well, but if his deeds have been evil he is cast into hell. It
   is right to call upon the Ferwer and entreat his help. He will
   bring the prayer before God and on this account is represented as a
   winged disc.]

Fan-bearers, high in office at the court, stood behind the throne, and,
on either side, those who sat at the king's table, his relations
and friends, and the most important among the officers of state, the
priestly caste and the eunuchs.

The walls and ceiling of the entire hall were covered with plates of
burnished gold, and the floor with purple carpets.

Before the silver gates lay winged bulls, and the king's
body-guard-their dress consisting of a gold cuirass under a purple
overcoat, and the high Persian cap, their swords in golden scabbards
glittering with jewels, and their lances ornamented with gold and silver
apples, were stationed in the court of the palace. Among them the band
of the "Immortals" was easily to be distinguished by their stately forms
and dauntless bearing.

Officers, whose duty consisted in announcing and presenting strangers,
and who carried short ivory staves, led the deputies into the hall, and
up to the throne, where they cast themselves on the ground as though
they would kiss the earth, concealing their hands in the sleeves of
their robes. A cloth was bound over the mouth of every man before he was
allowed to answer the king's questions, lest the pure person of the king
should be polluted by the breath of common men.

Cambyses' severity or mildness towards the deputations with whose chiefs
he spoke, was proportioned to the obedience of their province and
the munificence of their tribute-offerings. Near the end of the train
appeared an embassy from the Jews, led by two grave men with sharply-cut
features and long beards. Cambyses called on them in a friendly tone to
stop.

The first of these men was dressed in the fashion of the Babylonian
aristocracy. The other wore a purple robe woven without seam, trimmed
with bells and tassels, and held in at the waist by a girdle of blue,
red and white. A blue garment was thrown over his shoulders and a little
bag suspended around his neck containing the sacred lots, the Urim and
Thummin, adorned with twelve precious stones set in gold, and bearing
the names of the tribes of Israel. The high-priest's brow was grave and
thoughtful. A white cloth was wound round his head, the ends of which
hung down to the shoulders.

"I rejoice to behold you once more, Belteshazzar," exclaimed the king
to the former of the two men. "Since the death of my father you have not
been seen at my gate."

The man thus addressed bowed humbly and answered: "The favor of the king
rejoices his servant! If it seem good unto thee, to cause the sun of
thy favor to shine on me, thine unworthy servant, so hearken unto my
petition for my nation, which thy great father caused to return unto the
land of their fathers' sepulchres. This old man at my side, Joshua, the
high-priest of our God, hath not feared the long journey to Babylon,
that he might bring his request before thy face. Let his speech be
pleasing in thine ears and his words bring forth fruit in thine heart."

"I foresee what ye desire of me," cried the king. "Am I wrong, priest,
in supposing that your petition refers to the building of the temple in
your native land?"

"Nothing can be hidden from the eyes of my lord," answered the priest,
bowing low. "Thy servants in Jerusalem desire to behold the face of
their ruler, and beseech thee by my mouth to visit the land of their
fathers, and to grant them permission to set forward the work of the
temple, concerning which thine illustrious father (the favor of our God
rest upon him), made a decree."

The king answered with a smile: "You have the craft of your nation, and
understand how to choose the right time and words for your petition. On
my birthday it is difficult for me to refuse my faithful people even
one request. I promise you, therefore, so soon as possible to visit
Jerusalem and the land of your fathers."

"By so doing thou wilt make glad the hearts of thy servants," answered
the priest; "our vines and olives will bear more fruit at thine
approach, our gates will lift up their heads to receive thee, and Israel
rejoice with shouts to meet his lord doubly blessed if as lord of the
building--"

"Enough, priest, enough!" cried Cambyses. "Your first petition, I have
said it, shall not remain unfulfilled; for I have long desired to visit
the wealthy city of Tyre, the golden Sidon, and Jerusalem with its
strange superstitions; but were I to give permission for the building
now, what would remain for me to grant you in the coming year?"

"Thy servants will no more molest thee by their petitions, if thou
grant unto them this one, to finish the temple of the Lord their God,"
answered the priest.

"Strange beings, these men of Palestine!" exclaimed Cambyses. "I have
heard it said that ye believe in one God alone, who can be represented
by no likeness, and is a spirit. Think ye then that this omnipresent
Being requires a house? Verily, your great spirit can be but a weak and
miserable creature, if he need a covering from the wind and rain, and a
shelter from the heat which he himself has created. If your God be like
ours, omnipresent, fall down before him and worship as we do, in every
place, and feel certain that everywhere ye will be heard of him!"

"The God of Israel hears his people in every place," exclaimed the
high-priest. "He heard us when we pined in captivity under the Pharaohs
far from our land; he heard us weeping by the rivers of Babylon. He
chose thy father to be the instrument of our deliverance, and will hear
my prayer this day and soften thine heart like wise. O mighty king,
grant unto thy servants a common place of sacrifice, whither our
twelve tribes may repair, an altar on the steps of which they can
pray together, a house in which to keep their holy feasts! For this
permission we will call down the blessing of God upon thine head and his
curse upon thine enemies."

"Grant unto my brethren the permission to build their temple!" added
Belteshazzar, who was the richest and most honorable and respected of
the Jews yet remaining in Babylon; a man whom Cyrus had treated with
much consideration, and of whom he had even taken counsel from time to
time.

"Will ye then be peaceable, if I grant your petition?" asked the king.
"My father allowed you to begin the work and granted the means for its
completion. Of one mind, happy and content, ye returned to your native
land, but while pursuing your work strife and contention entered among
you. Cyrus was assailed by repeated letters, signed by the chief men of
Syria, entreating him to forbid the work, and I also have been lately
besought to do the same. Worship your God when and where ye will, but
just because I desire your welfare, I cannot consent to the prosecution
of a work which kindles discord among you."

"And is it then thy pleasure on this day to take back a favor, which thy
father made sure unto us by a written decree?" asked Belteshazzar.

"A written decree?"

"Which will surely be found even to this day laid up in the archives of
thy kingdom."

"Find this decree and show it me, and I will not only allow the building
to be continued, but will promote the same," answered the king; "for my
father's will is as sacred to me as the commands of the gods."

"Wilt thou allow search to be made in the house of the rolls at
Ecbatana?" asked Belteshazzar. "The decree will surely be found there."

"I consent, but I fear ye will find none. Tell thy nation, priest, that
I am content with the equipment of the men of war they have sent to take
the field against the Massagetae. My general Megabyzus commends their
looks and bearing. May thy people prove as valiant now as in the wars of
my father! You, Belteshazzar, I bid to my marriage feast, and charge you
to tell your fellows, Meshach and Abednego, next unto you the highest in
the city of Babylon, that I expect them this evening at my table."

"The God of my people Israel grant thee blessing and happiness,"
answered Belteshazzar bowing low before the king.

"A wish which I accept!" answered the king, "for I do not despise
the power of your wonder-working great Spirit. But one word more,
Belteshazzar. Many Jews have lately been punished for reviling the
gods of the Babylonians. Warn your people! They bring down hatred on
themselves by their stiff-necked superstition, and the pride with
which they declare their own great spirit to be the only true God. Take
example by us; we are content with our own faith and leave others to
enjoy theirs in peace. Cease to look upon yourselves as better than the
rest of the world. I wish you well, for a pride founded on self-respect
is pleasing in mine eyes; but take heed lest pride degenerate into
vainglory. Farewell! rest assured of my favor."

The Jews then departed. They were disappointed, but not hopeless; for
Belteshazzar knew well that the decree, relative to the building of the
temple, must be in the archives at Ecbatana.

They were followed by a deputation from Syria, and by the Greeks
of Ionia; and then, winding up the long train, appeared a band of
wild-looking men, dressed in the skins of animals, whose features
bespoke them foreigners in Babylon. They wore girdles and shoulderbands
of solid, unwrought gold; and of the same precious metal were their
bow-cases, axes, lance-points, and the ornaments on their high fur caps.
They were preceded by a man in Persian dress, whose features proved him,
however, to be of the same race as his followers.

The king gazed at first on these envoys with wonder; then his brow
darkened, and beckoning the officer whose duty it was to present
strangers, he exclaimed "What can these men have to crave of me? If I
mistake not they belong to the Massagetae, to that people who are so
soon to tremble before my vengeance. Tell them, Gobryas, that an armed
host is standing on the Median plains ready to answer their demands with
the sword."

Gobryas answered, bowing low: "These men arrived this morning during
the sacrifice bringing huge burdens of the purest gold to purchase your
forbearance. When they heard that a great festival was being celebrated
in your honor, they urgently besought to be admitted into your presence,
that they might declare the message entrusted to them by their country."

The king's brow cleared and, after sharply scrutinizing the tall,
bearded Massageta, he said: "Let them come nearer. I am curious to know
what proposals my father's murderers are about to make me."

Gobryas made a sign, and the tallest and eldest of the Massagetae came
up close to the throne and began to speak loudly in his native tongue.
He was accompanied by the man in a Persian dress, who, as one of Cyrus'
prisoners of war, had learnt the Persian language, and now interpreted
one by one the sentences uttered by the spokesman of this wandering
tribe.

"We know," began the latter, "that thou, great king, art wroth with the
Massagetae because thy father fell in war with our tribe--a war which he
alone had provoked with a people who had done naught to offend him."

"My father was justified in punishing your nation," interrupted the
king. "Your Queen Tomyris had dared to refuse him her hand in marriage."

"Be not wroth, O King," answered the Massagetan, "when I tell thee that
our entire nation approved of that act. Even a child could see that the
great Cyrus only desired to add our queen to the number of his wives,
hoping, in his insatiable thirst for more territories, to gain our land
with her."

Cambyses was silent and the envoy went on. "Cyrus caused a bridge to be
made over our boundary river, the Araxes. We were not dismayed at this,
and Tomyris sent word that he might save himself this trouble, for that
the Massagetae were willing either to await him quietly in their own
land, leaving the passage of the river free, or to meet him in his.
Cyrus decided, by the advice of the dethroned king of Lydia, (as we
learnt afterwards, through some prisoners of war) on meeting us in our
own land and defeating us by a stratagem. With this intention he sent at
first only a small body of troops, which could be easily dispersed and
destroyed by our arrows and lances, and allowed us to seize his camp
without striking a blow. Believing we had defeated this insatiable
conqueror, we feasted on his abundant stores, and, poisoned by the sweet
unknown drink which you call wine, fell into a stupefied slumber, during
which his soldiers fell upon us, murdered the greater number of our
warriors and took many captives. Among the latter was the brave, young
Spargapises, our queen's son.

"Hearing in his captivity, that his mother was willing to conclude
peace with your nation as the price of his liberty, he asked to have his
chains taken off. The request was granted, and on obtaining the use
of his hands he seized a sword and stabbed himself, exclaiming: 'I
sacrifice my life for the freedom of my nation.'"

"No sooner did we hear the news that the young prince we loved so well
had died thus, than we assembled all the forces yet left to us from your
swords and fetters. Even old men and boys flew to arms to revenge our
noble Spargapises, and sacrifice themselves, after his example, for
Massagetaen freedom. Our armies met; ye were worsted and Cyrus fell.
When Tomyris found his body lying in a pool of human blood, she cried:
'Methinks, insatiable conqueror, thou art at last sated with blood!'
The troop, composed of the flower of your nobility, which you call the
Immortals, drove us back and carried your father's dead body forth from
our closest ranks. You led them on, fighting like a lion. I know you
well, and that wound across your manly face, which adorns it like a
purple badge of honor, was made by the sword now hanging at my side."

A movement passed through the listening crowd; they trembled for
the bold speaker's life. Cambyses, however, looked pleased, nodded
approvingly to the man and answered: "Yes, I recognize you too now; you
rode a red horse with golden trappings. You shall see that the Persians
know how to honor courage. Bow down before this man, my friends, for
never did I see a sharper sword nor a more unwearied arm than his; and
such heroic courage deserves honor from the brave, whether shown by
friend or foe. As for you, Massagetae, I would advise you to go home
quickly and prepare for war; the mere recollection of your strength
and courage increases my longing to test it once more. A brave foe, by
Mithras, is far better than a feeble friend. You shall be allowed to
return home in peace; but beware of remaining too long within my reach,
lest the thought of the vengeance I owe my father's soul should rouse my
anger, and your end draw suddenly nigh."

A bitter smile played round the bearded mouth of the warrior as he made
answer to this speech. "The Massagetae deem your father's soul too well
avenged already. The only son of our queen, his people's pride, and in
no way inferior to Cyrus, has bled for him. The shores of the Araxes
have been fertilized by the bodies of fifty thousand of my countrymen,
slain as offerings for your dead king, while only thirty thousand fell
there on your own side. We fought as bravely as you, but your armor is
better able to resist the arrows which pierce our clothing of skins. And
lastly, as the most cruel blow of all, ye slew our queen."

"Tomyris is dead?" exclaimed Cambyses interrupting him. "You mean to
tell me that the Persians have killed a woman? Answer at once, what has
happened to your queen?"

"Tomyris died ten months ago of grief for the loss of her only son, and
I have therefore a right to say that she too fell a sacrifice to the war
with Persia and to your father's spirit."

"She was a great woman," murmured Cambyses, his voice unsteady from
emotion. "Verily, I begin to think that the gods themselves have
undertaken to revenge my father's blood on your nation. Yet I tell you
that, heavy as your losses may seem, Spargapises, Tomyris and fifty
thousand Massagetae can never outweigh the spirit of one king of Persia,
least of all of a Cyrus."

"In our country," answered the envoy, "death makes all men equal. The
spirits of the king and the slave are of equal worth. Your father was a
great man, but we have undergone awful sufferings for his sake. My tale
is not yet ended. After the death of Tomyris discord broke out among the
Massagetae. Two claimants for the crown appeared; half our nation fought
for the one, half for the other, and our hosts were thinned, first by
this fearful civil war and then by the pestilence which followed in its
track. We can no longer resist your power, and therefore come with heavy
loads of pure gold as the price of peace."

"Ye submit then without striking a blow?" asked Cambyses. "Verily, I had
expected something else from such heroes; the numbers of my host, which
waits assembled on the plains of Media, will prove that. We cannot go to
battle without an enemy. I will dismiss my troops and send a satrap. Be
welcome as new subjects of my realm."

The red blood mounted into the cheeks of the Massagetan warrior
on hearing these words, and he answered in a voice trembling with
excitement: "You err, O King, if you imagine that we have lost our old
courage, or learnt to long for slavery. But we know your strength; we
know that the small remnant of our nation, which war and pestilence have
spared, cannot resist your vast and well-armed hosts. This we admit,
freely and honestly as is the manner of the Massagetae, declaring
however at the same time, that we are determined to govern ourselves
as of yore, and will never receive laws or ordinances from a Persian
satrap. You are wroth, but I can bear your angry gaze and yet repeat my
declaration."

"And my answer," cried Cambyses, "is this: Ye have but one choice:
either to submit to my sceptre, become united to the kingdom of Persia
under the name of the Massagetan province, and receive a satrap as my
representative with due reverence, or to look upon yourselves as my
enemies, in which case you will be forced by arms to conform to those
conditions which I now offer you in good part. To-day you could secure
a ruler well-affected to your cause, later you will find in me only a
conqueror and avenger. Consider well before you answer."

"We have already weighed and considered all," answered the warrior,
"and, as free sons of the desert, prefer death to bondage. Hear what the
council of our old men has sent me to declare to you:--The Massageta;
have become too weak to oppose the Persians, not through their own
fault, but through the heavy visitation of our god, the sun. We know
that you have armed a vast host against us, and we are ready to buy
peace and liberty by a yearly tribute. But if you persist in compelling
us to submit by force of arms, you can only bring great damage on
yourselves. The moment your army nears the Araxes, we shall depart
with our wives and children and seek another home, for we have no fixed
dwellings like yours, but are accustomed to rove at will on our swift
horses, and to rest in tents. Our gold we shall take with us, and shall
fill up, destroy, and conceal the pits in which you could find new
treasures. We know every spot where gold is to be found, and can give
it in abundance, if you grant us peace and leave us our liberty; but, if
you venture to invade our territory, you win nothing but an empty
desert and an enemy always beyond your reach,--an enemy who may become
formidable, when he has had time to recover from the heavy losses which
have thinned his ranks. Leave us in peace and freedom and we are ready
to give every year five thousand swift horses of the desert, besides
the yearly tribute of gold; we will also come to the help of the Persian
nation when threatened by any serious danger."

The envoy ceased speaking. Cambyses did not answer at once; his eyes
were fixed on the ground in deep thought. At last he said, rising at the
same time from his throne: "We will take counsel on this matter over the
wine to-night, and to-morrow you shall hear what answer you can bring
to your people. Gobryas, see that these men are well cared for, and send
the Massagetan, who wounded me in battle, a portion of the best dishes
from my own table."




CHAPTER XV.

During these events Nitetis had been sitting alone in her house on the
hanging-gardens, absorbed in the saddest thoughts. To-day, for the first
time, she had taken part in the general sacrifice made by the king's
wives, and had tried to pray to her new gods in the open air, before the
fire-altars and amidst the sound of religious songs strange to her ears.

Most of the inhabitants of the harem saw her to-day for the first time,
and instead of raising their eyes to heaven, had fixed them on her
during the ceremony. The inquisitive, malevolent gaze of her rivals, and
the loud music resounding from the city, disquieted and distracted her
mind. Her thoughts reverted painfully to the solemn, sultry stillness
of the gigantic temples in her native land where she had worshipped the
gods of her childhood so earnestly at the side of her mother and sister;
and much as she longed, just on this day, to pray for blessings on
her beloved king, all her efforts were in vain; she could arouse no
devotional feeling. Kassandane and Atossa knelt at her side, joining
heartily in the very hymns which to Nitetis were an empty sound.

It cannot be denied, that many parts of these hymns contain true poetry;
but they become wearisome through the constant repetition and invocation
of the names of good and bad spirits. The Persian women had been taught
from childhood, to look upon these religious songs as higher and holier
than any other poetry. Their earliest prayers had been accompanied by
such hymns, and, like everything else which has come down to us from
our fathers, and which we have been told in the impressionable time of
childhood is divine and worthy of our reverence, they were still sacred
and dear to them and stirred their most devotional feelings.

But for Nitetis, who had been spoilt for such things by an intimate
acquaintance with the best Greek poets, they could have but little
charm. What she had lately been learning in Persia with difficulty had
not yet become a part of herself, and so, while Kassandane and Atossa
went through all the outward rites as things of course and perfectly
natural to them, Nitetis could only prevent herself from forgetting the
prescribed ceremonials by a great mental effort, and dreaded lest she
should expose her ignorance to the jealous, watchful gaze of her rivals.

And then, too, only a few minutes before the sacrifice, she had received
her first letter from Egypt. It lay unread on her dressing-table, and
came into her mind whenever she attempted to pray. She could not help
wondering what news it might bring her. How were her parents? and how
had Tachot borne the parting from herself, and from the prince she loved
so well?

The ceremony over, Nitetis embraced Kassandane and Atossa, and drew a
long, deep breath, as if delivered from some threatening danger. Then
ordering her litter, she was carried back to her dwelling, and hastened
eagerly to the table where her letter lay. Her principal attendant,
the young girl who on the journey had dressed her in her first Persian
robes, received her with a smile full of meaning and promise, which
changed however, into a look of astonishment, on seeing her mistress
seize the letter, without even glancing at the articles of dress and
jewelery which lay on the table.

Nitetis broke the seal quickly and was sitting down, in order to begin
the difficult work of reading her letter, when the girl came up, and
with clasped hands, exclaimed: "By Mithras, my mistress, I cannot
understand you. Either you are ill, or that ugly bit of grey stuff must
contain some magic which makes you blind to everything else. Put
that roll away and look at the splendid presents that the great king
(Auramazda grant him victory!) has sent while you were at the sacrifice.
Look at this wonderful purple robe with the white stripe and the rich
silver embroidery; and then the tiara with the royal diamonds! Do not
you know the high meaning of these gifts? Cambyses begs, (the messenger
said 'begs,' not 'commands') you to wear these splendid ornaments at
the banquet to-day. How angry Phaedime will be! and how the others
will look, for they have never received such presents. Till now only
Kassandane has had a right to wear the purple and diamonds; so by
sending you these gifts, Cambyses places you on a level with his mother,
and chooses you to be his favorite wife before the whole world.' O pray
allow me to dress you in these new and beautiful things. How lovely you
will look! How angry and envious the others will feel! If I could only
be there when you enter the hall! Come, my mistress, let me take off
your simple dress, and array you, (only as a trial you know,) in the
robes that as the new queen you ought to wear."

Nitetis listened in silence to the chattering girl, and admired the
gifts with a quiet smile. She was woman enough to rejoice at the sight,
for he, whom she loved better than life itself, had sent them; and
they were a proof that she was more to the king than all his other
wives;--that Cambyses really loved her. The long wished-for letter fell
unread to the ground, the girl's wish to dress her was granted without a
word, and in a short time the splendid toilette was completed. The royal
purple added to her beauty, the high flashing tiara made her slender,
perfect figure seem taller than it really was, and when, in the metal
mirror which lay on her dressing table, she beheld herself for the first
time in the glorious likeness of a queen, a new expression dawned on her
features. It seemed as if a portion of her lord's pride were reflected
there. The frivolous waiting-woman sank involuntarily on her knees,
as her eyes, full of smiling admiration, met the radiant glance of
Nitetis,--of the woman who was beloved by the most powerful of men.

For a few moments Nitetis gazed on the girl, lying in the dust at her
feet; but soon shook her beautiful head, and blushing for shame, raised
her kindly, kissed her forehead, gave her a gold bracelet, and then,
perceiving her letter on the ground, told her she wished to be alone.
Mandane ran, rather than walked, out of the room in her eagerness
to show the splendid present she had just received to the inferior
attendants and slaves; and Nitetis, her eyes glistening and her heart
beating with excess of happiness, threw herself on to the ivory chair
which stood before her dressing-table, uttered a short prayer of
thanksgiving to her favorite Egyptian goddess, the beautiful Hathor,
kissed the gold chain which Cambyses had given her after plunging into
the water for her ball, then her letter from home, and rendered almost
over-confident by her great happiness, began to unroll it, slowly
sinking back into the purple cushions as she did so and murmuring: "How
very, very happy I am! Poor letter, I am sure your writer never thought
Nitetis would leave you a quarter of an hour on the ground unread."

In this happy mood she began to read, but her face soon grew serious and
when she had finished, the letter fell once more to the ground.

Her eyes, whose proud glance had brought the waiting-maid to her feet,
were dimmed by tears; her head, carried so proudly but a few minutes
before, now lay on the jewels which covered the table. Tears rolled down
among the pearls and diamonds, as strange a contrast as the proud tiara
and its unhappy, fainting wearer.

The letter read as follows:

"Ladice the wife of Amasis and Queen of Upper and Lower Egypt, to her
daughter Nitetis, consort of the great King of Persia.

"It has not been our fault, my beloved daughter, that you have remained
so long without news from home. The trireme by which we sent our letters
for you to AEgae was detained by Samian ships of war, or rather pirate
vessels, and towed into the harbor of Astypalaea.

"Polykrates' presumption increases with the continual success of his
undertakings, and since his victory over the Lesbians and Milesians, who
endeavored to put a stop to his depredations, not a ship is safe from
the attacks of his pirate vessels.

"Pisistratus is dead," but his sons are friendly to Polykrates. Lygdamis
is under obligations to him, and cannot hold his own in Naxos without
Samian help. He has won over the Amphiktyonic council to his side by
presenting the Apollo of Delos with the neighboring island of Rhenea.
His fifty-oared vessels, requiring to be manned by twenty-thousand men,
do immense damage to all the seafaring nations; yet not one dares to
attack him, as the fortifications of his citadel and his splendid
harbor are almost impregnable, and he himself always surrounded by a
well-drilled body-guard.

"Through the traders, who followed the fortunate Kolxus to the far west,
and these pirate ships, Samos will become the richest of islands and
Polykrates the most powerful of men, unless, as your father says, the
gods become envious of such unchanging good fortune and prepare him a
sudden and speedy downfall.

"In this fear Amasis advised Polykrates as his old friend, to put away
from him the thing he held dearest, and in such a manner that he might
be sure of never receiving it again. Polykrates adopted this advice and
threw into the sea, from the top of the round tower on his citadel,
his most valuable signet-ring, an unusually large sardonyx held by two
dolphins. This ring was the work of Theodorus, and a lyre, the symbol of
the ruler, was exquisitely engraved on the stone."

"Six days later, however, the ring was found by Polykrates' cooks in the
body of a fish. He sent us news at once of this strange occurrence, but
instead of rejoicing your father shook his grey head sadly, saying: 'he
saw now it was impossible for any one to avoid his destiny!' On the same
day he renounced the friendship of Polykrates and wrote him word, that
he should endeavor to forget him in order to avoid the grief of seeing
his friend in misfortune.

"Polykrates laughed at this message and returned the letters his pirates
had taken from our trireme, with a derisive greeting. For the future all
your letters will be sent by Syria.

"You will ask me perhaps, why I have told you this long story, which
has so much less interest for you than any other home news. I answer:
to prepare you for your father's state. Would you have recognized the
cheerful, happy, careless Amasis in that gloomy answer to his Samian
friend?

"Alas, my husband has good reason to be sad, and since you left us, my
own eyes have seldom been free from tears. My time is passed either at
the sick-bed of your sister or in comforting your father and guiding
his steps; and though much in need of sleep I am now taking advantage of
night to write these lines.

"Here I was interrupted by the nurses, calling me to your sister Tachot,
your own true friend.

"How often the dear child has called you in her feverish delirium;
and how carefully she treasures your likeness in wax, that wonderful
portrait which bears evidence not only of the height to which Greek art
has risen, but of the master hand of the great Theodorus. To-morrow it
will be sent to AEgina, to be copied in gold, as the soft wax becomes
injured from frequent contact with your sister's burning hands and lips.

"And now, my daughter, you must summon all your courage to hear what I
need all my strength of mind to tell-the sad story of the fate which the
gods have decreed for our house.

"For three days after you left us Tachot wept incessantly. Neither our
comforting words nor your father's good advice--neither offerings nor
prayers--could avail to lessen her grief or divert her mind. At last on
the fourth day she ceased to weep and would answer our questions in
a low voice, as if resigned; but spent the greater part of every day
sitting silently at her wheel. Her fingers, however, which used to be so
skilful, either broke the threads they tried to spin, or lay for hours
idle in her lap, while she was lost in dreams. Your father's jokes, at
which she used to laugh so heartily, made no impression on her, and when
I endeavored to reason with her she listened in anxious suspense.

"If I kissed her forehead and begged her to control herself, she would
spring up, blushing deeply, and throw herself into my arms, then sit
down again to her wheel and begin to pull at the threads with almost
frantic eagerness; but in half an hour her hands would be lying idle in
her lap again and her eyes dreamily fixed, either on the ground, or
on some spot in the air. If we forced her to take part in any
entertainment, she would wander among the guests totally uninterested in
everything that was passing.

"We took her with us on the great pilgrimage to Bubastis, during which
the Egyptians forget their usual gravity, and the shores of the Nile
look like a great stage where the wild games of the satyrs are being
performed by choruses, hurried on in the unrestrained wantonness of
intoxication. When she saw thus for the first time an entire people
given up to the wildest and most unfettered mirth and enjoyment, she
woke up from her silent brooding thoughts and began to weep again, as in
the first days after you went away.

"Sad and perplexed, we brought our poor child back to Sais.

"Her looks were not those of a common mortal. She grew thinner, and we
all fancied, taller; her complexion was white, and almost transparent,
with a tender bloom on her cheek, which I can only liken to a young
rose-leaf or the first faint blush of sunrise. Her eyes are still
wonderfully clear and bright. It always seems to me as if they looked
beyond the heaven and earth which we see.

"As she continued to suffer more and more from heat in the head and
hands, while her tender limbs often shivered with a slight chill, we
sent to Thebes for Thutmes, the most celebrated physician for inward
complaints.

"The experienced priest shook his head on seeing your sister and
foretold a serious illness. He forbade her to spin or to speak much.
Potions of all kinds were given her to drink, her illness was discussed
and exorcised, the stars and oracles consulted, rich presents and
sacrifices made to the gods. The priest of Hathor from the island of
Philae sent us a consecrated amulet, the priest of Osiris in Abydos
a lock of hair from the god himself set in gold, and Neithotep, the
