"How do you mean, Joanna?" returned the earl, doubting her words and
looks; "you surely cannot blame our daughter for being sensible of
gratitude."

"I blame all young women," replied she, "who give themselves airs of
unnatural coldness; and then, when the proof comes, behave in a manner
so extraordinary, so indelicately, I must say."

"My Lady Mar!" ejaculated the earl, with an amazed look, "what am I to
think of you from this?  How has my daughter behaved indelicately?  She
did not lay her head on Sir William Wallace's bosom and weep there till
he replaced her on her natural pillow, mine.  Have a care, madam, that
I do not see more in this spleen than would be honorable to you for me
to discover."

Fearing nothing so much as that her husband should really suspect the
passion which possessed her, and so remove her from the side of
Wallace, she presently recalled her former duplicity, and with a
surprised and uncomprehending air replied, "I do not understand what
you mean, Donald."  Then turning to Lord Ruthven, who stood uneasily
viewing this scene, "How," cried she, "can my lord discover spleen in
my maternal anxiety respecting the daughter of the husband I love and
honor above all the earth?  But men do not properly estimate female
reserve.  Any woman would say with me, that to faint at the sight of
Sir William Wallace was declaring an emotion not to be revealed before
so large a company! a something from which men might not draw the most
agreeable inferences."

"It only declared surprise, madam," cried Murray, "the surprise of a
modest and ingenuous mind that did not expect to recognize its mountain
friend in the person of the protector of Scotland."

Lady mar put up her lip, and turning to the still silent Lord Ruthven,
again addressed him.  "Stepmothers, my lord," said she, "have hard
duties to perform; and when we think we fulfill them best, our
suspicious husband comes with a magician's wand, and turns all our good
to evil."

"Array your good in a less equivocal garb, my dear Joanna," answered
the Earl of Mar, rather ashamed of the hasty words which indeed the
suspicion of a moment had drawn from his lips; "judge my child by her
usual conduct, not by an accidental appearance of inconsistency, and I
shall ever be grateful for your solicitude.  But in this instance,
though she might betray the weakness of an enfeebled constitution, it
was certainly not the frailty of a love-sick heart."

"Judge me by your own rule, dear Donald," cried his wife, blandishly
kissing his forehead, "and you will not again wither the mother of your
boy with such a look as I just now received!"

Glad to see this reconciliation, Lord Ruthven made a sign to Murray,
and they withdrew together.

Meanwhile, the honest earl surrendering his whole heart to the wiles of
his wife, poured into her not inattentive ear all his wishes for Helen:
all the hopes to which her late meeting with Wallace, and their present
recognition, had given birth.  "I had rather have that man my son,"
said he, "than see my beloved daughter placed on an imperial throne."

"I do not doubt it," thought Lady Mar; "for there are many emperors,
but only one William Wallace!"  However, her sentiments she confined to
herself: neither assenting nor dissenting, but answering so as to
secure the confidence by which she hoped to traverse his designs.

According to the inconsistency of the wild passion that possessed her,
one moment she saw nothing but despair before her, and in the next it
seemed impossible that Wallace should in heart be proof against her
tenderness and charms.  She remembered Murray's words: that he was sent
to set her free, and that recollection reawakened every hope.  Sir
William had placed Lord Mar in a post as dangerous as honorable.
Should the Southrons return in any force into Scotland, Stirling must
be one of the first places they would attack.  The earl was brave, but
his wounds had robbed him of much of his martial vigor.  Might she not
then be indeed set free?  And might not Wallace, on such an event, mean
to repay her for all those sighs he now sought to repress from ideas of
a virtue which she could admire, but had not the courage to imitate?

These wicked meditations passed even at the side of her husband, and,
with a view to further every wish of her intoxicated imagination, she
determined to spare no exertion to secure the support of her own
family, which, when agreeing in one point, was the most powerful of any
in the kingdom.  Her father, the Earl of Strathearn, was now a
misanthrope recluse in the Orkneys; she therefore did not calculate on
his assistance, but she resolved on requesting Wallace to put the names
of her cousins, Athol and Badenoch, into the exchange of prisoners, for
by their means she expected to accomplish all she hoped.  On Mar's
probable speedy death she so long thought that she regarded it as a
certainty, and so pressed forward to the fulfillment of her love and
ambition with as much eagerness as if he were already in his grave.

She recollected that Wallace had not this time thrown her from his
bosom, when in the transports of her joy she cast herself upon it; he
only gently whispered, "Beware, lady, there are those present who may
think my services too richly paid."  With these words he had
relinquished her to her husband.  But in them she saw nothing inimical
to her wishes; it was a caution, not a reproof, and had not his warmer
address to Helen conjured up all the fiends of jealousy, she would have
been perfectly satisfied with these grounds of hope-slippery though
they were, like the sands of the sea.

Eager, therefore, to break away from Lord Mar's projects relating to
his daughter, at the first decent opportunity she said: "We will
consider more of this, Donald.  I now resign you to the duties of your
office, and shall pay mine to her, whose interest is our own."

Lord Mar pressed her hand to his lips, and they parted.

Prior to Wallace's visit to the citadel, which was to be at an early
hour the same morning, a list of the noble prisoners was put into his
hand.  Edwin pointed to the name of Lord Montgomery.

"That," said he, "is the name of the person you already esteem; but how
will you regard him when I tell you who he was?"

Wallace turned on him an inquiring look.

"You have often spoken to me of Sir Gilbert Hambledon-"

"And this be he!" interrupted Wallace.

Edwin recounted the manner of the earl discovering himself, and how he
came to bear that title.  Wallace listened in silence and when his
young friend ended, sighed heavily, "I will thank him," was all he
said; and rising, he proceeded to the chamber of Montgomery.  Even at
that early hour it was filled with his officers come to inquire after
their late commander's health.  Wallace advanced to the couch, and the
Southrons drew back.  The expression of his countenance told the earl
that he now knew him.

"Noblest of Englishmen!" cried Wallace, in a low voice, "I come to
express a gratitude to you, as lasting as the memory of the action
which gave it birth.  Your generous conduct to all that was dearest to
me on earth was that night in the garden of Ellerslie witnessed by
myself.  I was in the tree above your head, and nothing but a
conviction that I should embarrass the honor of my wife's protector
could at that moment have prevented my springing from my covert and
declaring my gratitude on the spot.

"Receive my thanks now, inadequate as they are to express what I feel.
But you offered me your heart on the field of Cambus-Kenneth; I will
take that as a generous intimation how I may best acknowledge my debt.
Receive then my never-dying friendship, the eternal gratitude of my
immortal spirit."

The answer of Montgomery could not but refer to the same subject, and
by presenting the tender form of his wife and her devoted love, almost
visibly again before her widowed husband, nearly forced open the
fountain of tears which he had buried deep in his heart; and rising
suddenly, for fear his emotions might betray themselves, he warmly
pressed the hand of his English friend, and left the room.

In the course of the same day the Southron nobles were transported into
the citadel, and the family of Mar removed from the fortress, to take
up their residence in the palace of Snawdoun.




Chapter XXXVI.

The Carse of Stirling.


The fame of these victories, the seizure of Stirling, the conquest of
above sixty thousand men, and the lord warden with his late deputy
taken prisoners, all spread through the country on the wings of the
wind.

Messengers were dispatched by Wallace, not only to the nobles who had
already declared for the cause by sending him their armed followers,
but to the clans who yet stood irresolute.  To the chiefs who had taken
the side of Edward, he sent no exhortation.  And when Lord Ruthven
advised him to do so, "No, my lord," said he, "we must not spread a
snare under our country, and as they had the power to befriend her,
they would not have colleagued with her enemies.  They remember her
happiness under the rule of our Alexanders; they see her sufferings
beneath the sway of a usurper; and if they can know these things, and
require arguments to bring them to their duty, should they then come to
it, it would not be to fulfill, but to betray.  Ours, my dear Lord
Ruthven, is a commission from Heaven.  The truth of our cause is God's
own signet, and is so clear, that it need only be seen to be
acknowledged.  All honest minds will come to us of themselves; and
those who are not so, had better be avoided, than shown the way by
which treachery may effect what open violence cannot accomplish."

This reasoning, drawn from the experience of nature, neither encumbered
by the subtleties of policy nor the sophistry of the schools, was
evident to every honest understanding, and decided the question.

Lady Mar, unknown to any one, again applied to her fatal pen; but with
other views than for the ruin of the cause, or the destruction of
Wallace.  It was to strengthen his hands with the power of all her
kinsmen; and finally, by the crown which they should place on his head,
exalt her to the dignity of a queen.  She wrote first to John Cummin,
Earl of Buchan, enforcing a thousand reasons why he should now leave a
sinking cause and join the rising fortunes of his country.

"You see," said she, "that the happy star of Edward is setting.  The
King of France not only maintains possession of that monarch's
territory at Guienne, but he holds him in check on the shores of
Flanders.  Baffled abroad, an insurrection awaits him at home; the
priesthood whom he has insulted, trample name with anathemas; the
nobles whom he has insulted, trample on his prerogative; and the
people, whose privileges he has invaded, call aloud for redress.  The
proud barons of England are ready to revolt; and the Lords Hereford and
Norfolk (those two earls whom, after madly threatening to hang,** he
sought to bribe to their allegiance by leaving them in the full powers
of Constable and Marshal of England), they are now conducting
themselves with such domineering consequence, that even the Prince of
Wales submits to their directions, and the throne of the absent tyrant
is shaken to its center.

**Edward intended to send out forces to Guienne, under the command of
Humphrey Earl of Hereford, the constable, and Roger Earl of Norfolk,
the Marshal of England, when these two powerful nobles refused to
execute his commands.  A violent altercation ensued; and the king, in
the height of his passion, exclaimed to the constable, "Sir Earl, by
G-, you shall either go or hang."  "By G-, Sir King," replied Hereford,
"I will neither go nor hang."  And he immediately departed with the
marshal and their respective trains.

"Sir William Wallace has rescued Scotland from his yoke.  The country
now calls for her ancient lords--those who made her kings, and supported
them.  Come, then, my cousin! espouse the cause of right; the cause
that is in power; the cause that may aggrandize the house of Cummin
with still higher dignities than any with which it has hitherto been
blazoned."

With these arguments, and with others more adapted to his Belial mind,
she tried to bring him to her purpose; to awaken what ambition he
possessed; and to entice his baser passions, by offering security in a
rescued country to the indulgence of senses to which he had already
sacrificed the best properties of man.  She dispatched her letter by a
messenger, whom she bribed to secrecy; and added in her postscript,
"that the answer she should hope to receive would be an offer of his
services to Sir William Wallace."

While the Countess of Mar was devising her plans (for the gaining of
Lord Buchan was only a preliminary measure), the dispatches of Wallace
had taken effect.  Their simple details, and the voice of fame, had
roused a general spirit throughout the land; and in the course of a
very short time after the different messengers had left Stirling, the
plain around the city was covered with a mixed multitude.  All Scotland
seemed pressing to throw itself at the feet of its preserver.  A large
body of men brought from Mar by Murray according to his uncle's orders,
were amongst the first encamped on the Carse; and that part of
Wallace's own particular band which he had left at Dumbarton, to
recover their wounds, now, under the command of Stephen Ireland,
rejoined their lord at Stirling.

Neil Campbell, the brave Lord of Loch-awe, and Lord Bothwell, the
father of Lord Andrew Murray, with a strong reinforcement, arrived from
Argyleshire.  The chiefs of Ross, Dundas, Gordon, Lockhart, Logan,
Elphinstone, Scott, Erskine, Lindsay, Cameron, and of almost every
noble family in Scotland, sent their sons at the heads of detachments
from their clans, to swell the ranks of Sir William Wallace.

When this patriotic host assembled on the Carse of Stirling, every
inmate of the city, who had not duty to confine him within the walls,
turned out to view the glorious sight.  Mounted within the walls,
turned out to view the glorious sight.  Mounted on a rising ground,
they saw each little army, and the emblazoned banners of all the
chivalry of Scotland floating afar over the lengthened ranks.

At this moment, the lines which guarded the outworks of Stirling opened
from right to left, and discovered Wallace advancing on a white
charger.  When the conqueror of Edward's hosts appeared--the deliverer
of Scotland--a mighty shout, from the thousands around, rent the skies,
and shook the earth on which they stood.

Wallace raised his helmet from his brow, as by an instinctive motion
every hand bent the sword or banner it contained.

"He comes in the strength of David!" cried the venerable bishop of
Dunkeld, who appeared at the head of his church's tenantry; "Scots,
behold the Lord's anointed!"

The exclamation, which burst like inspiration from the lips of the
bishop, struck to every heart.  "Long live our William the Lion! our
Scottish King!" was echoed with transport by every follower on the
ground; and while the reverberating heavens seemed to ratify the voice
of the people, the lords themselves (believing that he who won had the
best right to enjoy) joined in the glorious cry.  Galloping up from the
front of their ranks, they threw themselves from their steeds, and
before Wallace could recover from the surprise into which this
unexpected salutation had thrown him, Lord Bothwell and Lord Loch-awe,
followed by the rest, had bent their knees, and acknowledged him to be
their sovereign.  The Bishop of Dunkeld at the same moment drawing from
his breast a silver dove of sacred oil, poured it upon the unbonneted
head of Wallace.  "Thus, O King!" cried he, "do I consecrate on earth,
what has already received the unction of Heaven!"

Wallace, at this action, was awe-struck, and raising his eyes to that
Heaven, his soul in silence breathed its unutterable devotion.  Then
looking on the bishop: "Holy father," said he, "this unction may have
prepared my brows for a crown, but it is not of this world, and Divine
Mercy must bestow it.  Rise, lords!" and as he spoke, he flung himself
from his horse, and taking Lord Bothwell by the hand, as the eldest of
the band, "kneel not to me," cried he; "I am to you what Gideon was to
the Israelites--your fellow-soldier.  I cannot assume the scepter you
would bestow; for He who rules us all has yet preserved to you a lawful
monarch.  Bruce lives.  And were he extinct, the blood royal flows in
too many noble veins in Scotland for me to usurp its rights."

"The rights of the crown lie with the only man in Scotland who knows
how to defend them! else reason is blind, or the nation abandons its
own prerogative.  What we have this moment vowed, is not to be
forsworn.  Baliol has abdicated our throne; the Bruce deserted it; all
our nobles slept till you awoke; and shall we bow to men who may
follow, but will not lead?  No, bravest Wallace, from the moment you
drew the first sword for Scotland, you made yourself her lawful king."

Wallace turned to the veteran Lord of Loch-awe, who uttered this with a
blunt determination that meant to say, the election which had passed
should not be recalled.  "I made myself her champion, to fight for her
freedom, not my own aggrandizement.  Were I to accept the honor with
which this too grateful nation would repay my service, I should not
bring it that peace for which I contend.  Struggling for liberty, the
toils of my brave countrymen would be redoubled; for they would have to
maintain the tights of an unallied king against a host of enemies.  The
circumstances of a man from the private stations of life being elevated
to such a dignity would be felt as an insult by every royal house, and
foes and friends would arm against us.  On these grounds of policy
alone, even were my heart not loyal to the vows of my ancestors, I
should repel the mischief you would bring upon yourselves by making me
your king.  As it is, my conscience, as well as my judgment, compels me
reject it.  As your general, I may serve you gloriously; as your
monarch, in spite of myself, I should incur your ultimate destruction."

"From whom, noblest of Scots!" asked the Lord of Bothwell.

"From yourselves, my friends," answered Wallace, with a gentle smile.
"Could I take advantage of the generous enthusiasm of a grateful
nation; could I forget the duty I owe to the blood of our Alexanders,
and leap into the throne, there are many who would soon revolt against
their own election.  You cannot be ignorant, that there are natures who
would endure no rule, did it not come by the right of inheritance; a
right by dispute, lest they teach their inferiors the same refractory
lesson.  But to bend with voluntary subjection, to long obey a power
raised by themselves, would be a sacrifice abhorrent to their pride.
After having displayed their efficiency in making a king, they would
prove their independence by striving to pull him down the moment he
made them feel his specter.

"Such would be the fate of this election.  Jealousies and rebellions
would mark my reign; till even my closest adherents, seeing the
miseries of civil war, would fall from my side, and leave the country
again open to the inroads of her enemies.

"These, my friends and countrymen, would be my reasons for rejecting
the crown did my ambition point that way.  But as I have no joy in
titles, no pleasure in any power that does not spring hourly from the
heart, let my reign be in your bosoms; and with the appellation of your
fellow-soldier, your friend!  I will fight for you, I will conquer for
you--I will live or die!"

"This man," whispered Lord Buchan, who having arrived in the rear of
the troops on the appearance of Wallace, advanced within hearing of
what he said-"this man shows more cunning in repulsing a crown than
most are capable of exerting to obtain one."

"Ay, but let us see," returned the Earl of March, who accompanied him,
"whether it be not Caesar's coyness; he thrice refused the purple, and
yet he died Emperor of the Romans!"

"He that offers me a crown," returned Buchan, "shall never catch me
playing the coquette with its charms.  I warrant you, I would embrace
the lovely mischief in the first presentation."  A shout rent the air.
"What is that?" cried he, interrupting himself.

"He has followed your advice," answered March, with a satirical smile,
"it is the preliminary trumpet to long live King William the Great!"

Lord Buchan spurred forward to Scrymgeour, whom he knew, and inquired,
"where the new king was to be crowned?  We have not yet to thank him
for the possession of Scone!"

"True," cried Sir Alexander, comprehending the sarcasm; "but did Sir
William Wallace accept the prayers of Scotland, neither Scone nor any
other spot in the kingdom would refuse the place of his coronation."

"Not accept them!" replied Buchan; "then why the shout?  Do the
changelings rejoice in being refused?"

"When we cannot gain the altitude of our desires," returned the knight,
"it is yet subject for thankfulness when we reach a step toward it.
Sir William Wallace has consented to be considered as the protector of
the kingdom; to hold it for the rightful sovereign, under the name of
regent."

"Ay," cried March, "he has only taken a mistress instead of a wife;
and, trust me, when once he has got her into his arms, it will not be
all the gray beards in Scotland that can wrest her thence again.  I
marvel to see how men can be cajoled and call the visor virtue."

Scrymgeour had not waited for this reply of the insolent earl, and
Buchan answered him: "I care not," said he; "whoever keeps my castle
over my head, and my cellars full, is welcome to reign over John of
Buchan.  So onward, my gallant Cospatrick, to make our bow to royalty
in masquerade."

When these scorners approached, they found Wallace standing uncovered
in the midst of his happy nobles.  There was not a man present to whom
he had not given proofs of his divine commission; each individual was
snatched from a state of oppression and disgrace, and placed in
security and honor.  With overflowing gratitude, they all thronged
around him; and the young, the isolated Wallace, found a nation waiting
on his nod; the hearts of half a million of people offered to his hand
to turn and wind them as he pleased.  No crown sat on his brows; but
the bright halo of true glory beamed from his godlike countenance.  It
even checked the arrogant smiles with which the haughty March and the
voluptuous Buchan came forward to mock him with their homage.

As the near relations of Lady Mar, he received them with courtesy; but
one glance of his eye penetrated to the hollowness of both; and then,
remounting his steed, the stirrups of which were held by Edwin and Ker,
he touched the head of the former with his hand; "Follow me, my friend;
I now go to pay my duty to your mother.  For you, my lords," said he,
turning to the nobles around, "I shall hope to meet you at noon in the
citadel, where we must consult together on further prompt movements.
Nothing with us can be considered as won till all is gained."

The chieftains, with bows, acquiesced in his mandate, and fell back
toward their troops.  But the foremost ranks of those brave fellows,
having heard much of what had passed, were so inflamed with admiration
of their regent, that they rushed forward, and collecting in crowds
around his horse, and in his path, some pressed to kiss his hand, and
others his way, shouting and calling down blessings upon him, till he
stopped at the gate of Snawdoun.




Chapter XXXVII.

Snawdoun Palace.


Owing to the multiplicity of affairs which engaged Wallace's attention
after the capture of Stirling, the ladies of Mar had not seen him since
his first visit to the citadel.  The countess passed this time in
writing her dispatches to the numerous lords of her house, both in
Scotland and in England; and by her subtle arguments she completely
persuaded her husband of the cogency of putting the names of Lord Athol
and Lord Badenoch into the list of noble prisoners he should request.

When this was proposed to Wallace, he recollected the conduct of Athol
at Montrose; and, being alone with Lord Mar, he made some objections
against inviting him back into the country.  But the earl, who was
prepared by his wife to overcome every obstacle in the way of her
kinsman's return, answered, "That he believed, from the representations
he had received of the private opinions both of Badenoch and Athol,
that their treason was more against Baliol than the kingdom; and that
now that prince was irretrievably removed, he understood they would be
glad to take a part in its recovery."

"That may be the case with the Earl of Badenoch," replied Wallace, "but
something less friendly to Scotland must be in the breast of the man
who could betray Lord Douglas into the hands of his enemies."

"So I should have thought," replied the earl, "had not the earnestness
with which my wife pleads his cause convinced me she knows more of his
mind than she chooses to intrust me with, and therefore I suppose his
conduct to Douglas arose from personal pique."

Though these explanations did not at all raise the absent lords in his
esteem, yet to appear hostile to the return of Lady Mar's relations
would be a violence to her, which, in proportion as Wallace shrunk from
the guilty affection she was so eager to lavish upon him, he was averse
to committing; wishing, by showing her every proper consideration, to
lead her to apprehend the turpitude of her conduct; by convincing her
that his abhorrence of her advances had its origin in principle, rather
than from personal repugnance to herself; and so she might see the
foulness of her crime, and be recalled to virtue.  He was therefore not
displeased to have this opportunity of obliging her; and, as he hoped
that amongst so many warm friends a few cool ones could not do much
injury, he gave in the names of Badenoch and Athol, with those of Lord
Douglas, Sir  William Maitland (the only son of the venerable knight of
Thirlestane), Sir John Monteith, and many other brave Scots.

For these, the Earls de Warenne, De Valence, and Montgomery, the Barons
Hilton and Blenkinsopp, and others of note, were to exchanged.  Those
of lesser consequence, man for man, were to be returned for Scots of
the same degree.

In arranging preliminaries to effect the speedy return of the Scots
from England (who must be known to have arrived on the borders, before
the English would be permitted to cross them); in writing dispatches on
this subject, and on others of equal moment, had passed the time
between the surrender of Stirling and the hour when Wallace was called
to the plain, to receive the offered homage of his grateful country.

Impatient to behold again the object of her fond machinations, Lady Mar
hastened to the window of her apartment, when the shouts in the streets
informed her of the approach of Wallace.  The loud huzzas, accompanied
by the acclamations of "Our protector and prince!" seemed already to
bind her brows with her anticipated diadem, and for a moment, vanity
lost the image of love in the purple with which she enveloped it.

Her ambitious vision was disturbed by the crowd rushing forward; the
gates were thronged with people of every age and sex, and Wallace
himself appeared on his white charger, with his helmet off, bowing and
smiling upon the populace.  There was a mild effulgence in his eye; a
divine benevolence in his countenance, as his parted lips showed the
brightness of his smile, which seemed to speak of happiness within, of
joy to all around.  She hastily snatched a chaplet of flowers form her
head, and threw it from the window.  Wallace looked up; his brow and
his smile were then directed to her! but they were altered.  The moment
he met the congratulation of her eager eyes, he remembered what would
have been the soft welcome of his Marion's under the like circumstance!
But that tender eye was closed--that ear was shut, to whom he would
have wished these plaudits to have given rapture--and they were now as
nothing to him.  The countess saw not what was passing in his mind, but
kissing her hand to him, disappeared from the window when he entered
the palace.

Another eye beside Lady Mar's had witnessed the triumphant entry of
Wallace.  Triumphant in the true sense of the word; for he came a
victor over the hearts of men; he came, not attended by his captives
won in the war, but by the people he had blessed, by throngs calling
him preserver, father, friend, and prince!  By every title which can
inspire the soul of man with the happy consciousness of fulfilling his
embassy here below.

Helen was this witness.  She had passed the long interval, since she
had seen Wallace, in the state of one in a dream.  The glance had been
so transient, that every succeeding hour seemed to lessen the evidence
of her senses that she had really beheld him.  It appeared impossible
to her that the man whom her thoughts had hitherto dwelt on as the
widowed husband of Marion, as the hero whom sorrow had wholly dedicated
to patriotism and to Heaven, should ever awaken in her breast feelings
which would seem to break like a sacrilegious host upon the holy
consecration of his.  Once she had contemplated this idea with the
pensive impressions of one leaning over the grave of a hero; and she
could then turn as if emerging from the glooms of sepulchral monuments
to upper day, to the image of her unknown knight! she could then
blamelessly recollect the matchless graces of his figure! the noble
soul that breathed from his every word and action; the sweet, though
thoughtful, serenity that sat on his brow!  "There," whispered she to
herself, "are the lofty meditations of a royal mind, devising the
freedom of his people.  When that is effected, how will the perfect
sunshine break out from that face!  Ah! how blest must Scotland be
under his reign, when all will be light, virtue, and joy!"  Bliss
hovered like an angel over the image of this imaginary Bruce; while
sorrow, in mourning weeds, seemed ever dropping tears, when any
circumstance recalled that of the real Wallace.

Such was the state of Helen's thoughts, when in the moment beholding
the chief Ellerslie in the citadel she recognized, in his expected
melancholy form, the resplendent countenance of him whom she supposed
the prince of Scotland.  That two images so opposite should at once
unite; that in one bosom should be mingled all the virtues she had
believed peculiar to each, struck her with overwhelming amazement.  But
when she recovered from her short swoon, and found Wallace at her feet;
when she felt that all the devotion her heart had hitherto paid to the
simple idea of virtue alone would now be attracted to that glorious
mortal, in whom all human excellence appeared summed up, she trembled
under an emotion that seemed to rob her of herself, and place a new
principle of being within her.

All was so extraordinary, so unlooked for, so bewildering, that from
the moment in which she had retired in such a paroxysm of
highly-wrought feelings from her first interview in the gallery with
him, she became altogether like a person in a trance; and hardly
answering her aunt, when she then led her up the stairs, only
complained she was ill, and threw herself upon a couch.

At the very time that her heart told her in a language she could not
misunderstand, that she irrevocably loved this too glorious, too
amiable Wallace, it as powerfully denounced to her, that she had
devoted herself to one who must ever be to her as a being of air.  No
word of sympathy would ever whisper felicity to her heart; no--the flame
that was within her (which she found would be immortal as the vestal
fires which resemble its purity) must burn there unknown; hidden, but
not smothered.

"Were this a canonized saint," cried she, as she laid her throbbing
head upon her pillow, "how gladly should I feel these emotions!  For,
could I not fall down and worship him?  Could I not think it a world of
bliss, to live forever within the influence of his virtues; looking at
him, listening to him, rejoicing in his praises, happy in his
happiness!  Yes, though I were a peasant girl, and he not know that
Helen Mar even existed!  And I may live thus," said she; "and I may
steal some portion of the rare lot that was Lady Marion's-to die for
such a man!  Ah! could I be in Edwin's place and wait upon his smiles!
But that may not be; I am a woman, and formed to suffer in silence and
seclusion.  But even at a distance, brave Wallace, my spirit shall
watch over you in the form of this Edwin; I will teach him a double
care of the light of Scotland.  And my prayers, also, shall follow you;
so that when we meet in heaven, the Blessed Virgin shall say with what
hosts of angels her intercessions, through my vigils have surrounded
thee!"




Chapter XXXVIII.

The Bower, or Ladies' Apartment.


Thus did Lady Helen commune with her own strangely-affected heart;
sometimes doubting the evidence of her eyes; then, convinced of their
fidelity, striving to allay the tumults in her mind.  She seldom
appeared from her own rooms.  And such retirement was not questioned,
her father being altogether engaged at the citadel, the countess
absorbed in her own speculations, and Lady Ruthven alone interrupted
the solitude of her niece by frequent visits.  Little suspecting the
cause of Helen's prolonged indisposition, she generally selected
Wallace for the subject of conversation.  She descanted with enthusiasm
on the rare perfection of his character; told her all that Edwin had
related of his actions from the taking of Dumbarton to the present
moment; and then bade Helen remark the miracle of such wisdom, valor,
and goodness being found in one so young and handsome.

"So, my child," added she, "depend on it; before he was Lady Marion's
husband he must have heard sighs enough from the fairest in our land to
have turned the wits of half the male world.  There is something in his
very look, did you meet him on the heath without better barg than a
shepherd's plaid, sufficient to declare him the noblest of men; and,
methinks, would excuse the gentlest lady in the land for leaving hall
and bower to share his sheep-cote.  But, alas!" and then the playful
expression of her countenance altered, "he is now for none on earth!"

With these words she turned the subject to the confidential hours he
passed with the young adopted brother of his heart.  Every fond emotion
seemed then centered in his wife and child.  When Lady Ruthven repeated
his pathetic words to Edwin, she wept; she even sobbed, and paused to
recover; while the deep and silent tears which flowed from the heart to
the eyes of Lady Helen bathed the side of the couch on which she
leaned.  "Alas!" cried Lady Ruthven, "that a man, so formed to grace
every relation in life--so noble a creature in all respects--so fond of a
husband--so full of parental tenderness--that he should be deprived of
the wife on whom he doted; that he should be cut off from all hope of
posterity; that when he shall die, nothing will be left of William
Wallace--breaks my heart!"

"Ah, my aunt," cried Helen, raising her head with animation, "will he
not leave behind him the liberty of Scotland?  That is an offspring
worthy of his god-like soul."

"True, my dear Helen; but had you ever been a parent, you would know
that no achievements, however great, can heal the wound made in a
father's heart by the loss of a beloved child.  And though Sir William
Wallace never saw the infant, ready to bless his arms, yet it perished
in the bosom of its mother; and that circumstance must redouble his
affliction; horribly does it enhance the cruelty of the deed!"

"He has in all things been a direful sacrifice," returned Helen; "and
with God alone dwells the power to wipe the tears from his heart."

"They flow not from his eyes," answered her aunt; "but deep, deep is
the grief that, my Edwin says, is settled there."

While Lady Ruthven was uttering these words, shouts in the street made
her pause; and soon recognizing the name of Wallace sounding from the
lips of the rejoicing multitude, she turned to Helen: "Here comes our
deliverer!" cried she, taking her by the hand; "we have not seen him
since the first day of our liberty.  It will do you good, as it will
me, to look on his beneficent face!"

She obeyed the impulse of her aunt's arm, and reached the window just
as he passed into the courtyard.  Helen's soul seemed rushing from her
eyes.  "Ah! it is indeed he!" thought she; "no dream, no illusion, but
his very self."

He looked up; but not on her side of the building; it was to the window
of Lady Mar; and as he bowed, he smiled.  All the charms of that smile
struck upon the soul of Helen; and, hastily retreating, she sunk
breathless into a seat.

"O, no! that man cannot be born for the isolated state I have just
lamented.  He is not to be forever cut off from communicating that
happiness to which he would give so much enchantment!"  Lady Ruthven
ejaculated this with fervor, her matron cheeks flushing with a sudden
and more forcible admiration of the person and mien of Wallace.  "There
was something in that smile, Helen, which tells me all is not chilled
within.  And, indeed, how should it be otherwise?  That generous
interest in the happiness of all, which seems to flow in a tide of
universal love, cannot spring from a source incapable of dispensing the
softer screams of it again."

Helen, whose well-poised soul was not affected by the agitation of her
body (agitation she was determined to conquer), calmly answered: "Such
a hope little agrees with all you have been telling me of his
conversation with Edwin.  Sir William Wallace will never love woman
more; and even to name the idea seems an offense against the sacredness
of his sorrow."

"Blame me not, Helen," returned Lady Ruthven, "that I forgot
probability, in grasping at possibility which might give me such a
nephew as Sir William Wallace, and you a husband worthy of your merits!
I had always, in my own mind, fixed on the unknown knight for your
future lord; and now that I find that he and the deliverer of Scotland
are one, I am not to be looked grave at for wishing to reward him with
the most precious heart that ever beat in a female breast."

"No more of this, if you love me, my dear aunt!" returned Helen; "it
neither can nor ought to be.  I revere the memory of Lady Marion too
much not to be agitated by the subject; so, no more!"-she was agitated.
But at that instant Edwin throwing open the door, put an end to the
conversation.

He came to apprise his mother that Sir William Wallace was in the state
apartments, come purposely to pay his respects to her, not having even
been introduced to her when the sudden illness of her niece in the
castle had made them part so abruptly.

"I will not interrupt his introduction now," said Helen, with a faint
smile; "a few days' retirement will strengthen me, and then I shall see
our protector as I ought."

"I will stay with you," cried Edwin, "and I dare say Sir William
Wallace will have no objection to be speedily joined by my mother; for,
as I came along, I met my aunt Mar hastening through the gallery; and,
between ourselves, my sweet coz, I do not think my noble friend quite
likes a private conference with your fair stepmother."

Lady Ruthven had withdrawn before he made this observation.

"Why, Edwin?-surely she would not do anything ungracious to one to whom
she owes so great a weight of obligations?"  When Helen asked this, she
remembered the spleen Lady Mar once cherished against Wallace; and she
feared it might now be revived.

"Ungracious!  O, no! the reverse of that; but her gratitude is full of
absurdity.  I will not repeat the fooleries with which she sought to
detain him at Bute.  And that some new fancy respecting him is now
about to menace his patience.  I am convinced; for, on my way hither, I
met her hurrying along, and as she passed me she exclaimed, 'Is Lord
Buchan arrived?' I answered.  'Yes.'  'Ah, then he proclaimed him
king?' cried she; and into the great gallery she darted."

"You do not mean to say," demanded Helen, turning her eyes with an
expression which seemed confident of his answer, "that Sir William
Wallace has accepted the crown of Scotland?"

"Certainly not," replied Edwin; "but as certainly it has been offered
to him, and he has refused it."

"I could have sworn it!" returned Helen, rising from her chair; "all is
loyal, all is great and consistent there, Edwin!"

"He is, indeed, the perfect exemplar of all nobleness," rejoined the
youth; "and I believe I shall even love you better, my dear cousin,
because you seem to have so clear an apprehension of his real
character."  He then proceeded, with all the animation of the most
zealous affection, to narrate to Helen the particulars of the late
scene on the Carse of Stirling.  And while he deepened still more the
profound impression the virtues of Wallace had made on her heart, he
reopened its more tender sympathies by repeating, with even minuter
accuracy than he had done to his mother, details of those hours which
he passed with him in retirement.  He spoke of the beacon-hill; of
moonlight walks in the camp, when all but the sentinels and his general
and himself were sunk in sleep.

These were the seasons when the suppressed feelings of Wallace would by
fits break from his lips, and at last pour themselves out,
unrestrainedly, to the ear of sympathy.  As the young narrator
described all the endearing qualities of his friend, the cheerful
heroism with which he quelled every tender remembrance to do his duty
in the day-"for it is only in the night," said Edwin, "that my general
remembers Ellerslie"--Helen's tears again stole silently down her
cheeks.  Edwin perceived them, and throwing his arms gently around her.
"Weep not, my sweet cousin," said he; "for, with all his sorrow, I
never saw true happiness till I beheld it in the eyes and heard it in
the voice of Sir William Wallace.  He has talked to me of the joy he
should experience in giving liberty to Scotland, and establishing her
peace, till his enthusiastic soul, grasping hope, as if it were
possession, he has looked on me with a consciousness of enjoyment which
seemed to say that all bliss was summed up in a patriot's breast.

"And at other times, when, after a conversation on his beloved Marion,
a few natural regrets would pass his lips, and my tears tell how deep
was my sympathy, then he would turn to comfort me; then he would show
me the world beyond this--that world which is the aim of all his deeds,
the end of all his travails--and, lost in the rapturous idea of meeting
his Marion there, a foretaste of all would seem to seize his soul: and
were I then called upon to point out the most enviable felicity on
earth, I should say it is that of Sir William Wallace.  It is this
enthusiasm in all he believes and feels that makes him what he is.  It
is this eternal spirit of hope, infused into him by Heaven itself, that
makes him rise from sorrow, like the sun from a cloud, brighter, and
with more ardent beams.  It is this that bathes his lips in the smiles
of Paradise, that throws a divine luster over his eyes, and makes all
dream of love and happiness that look upon him."

Edwin paused.  "Is it not so, my cousin?"

Helen raised her thoughtful face.  "He is not a being of this earth,
Edwin.  We must learn to imitate him, as well as to-"  She hesitated,
then added, "As well as to revere him, I do before the altars of the
saints.  But not to worship," said she, interrupting herself; "that
would be a crime.  To look on him as a glorious example of patient
suffering--of invincible courage in the behalf of truth and mercy!  This
is the end of my reverence for him, and this sentiment, my dear Edwin,
you partake."

"It possesses me wholly," cried the energetic youth; "I have no
thought, no wish, nor ever move or speak, but with the intent to be
like him.  He calls me his brother! and I will be so in soul, though I
cannot in blood; and then, my dear Helen, you shall have two Sir
William Wallaces to love!"

"Sweetest, sweetest boy!" cried Helen, putting her quivering lips to
his forehead; "you will then always remember that Helen so dearly loves
Scotland as to be jealous, above all earthly things, for the lord
regent's safety.  Be his guardian angel.  Beware of treason in man and
woman, friend and kindred.  It lurks, my cousin, under the most
specious forms; and, as one, mark Lord Buchan; in short, have a care of
all whom any of the house of Cummin may introduce.  Watch over your
general's life in the private hour.  It is not the public field I fear
for him; his valiant arm will there be his own guard!  But, in the
unreserved day of confidence, envy will point its dagger; and then, be
as eyes to his too trusting soul--as a shield to his too confidently
exposed breast!"

As she spoke she strove to conceal her too eloquent face in the silken
ringlets of her hair.

"I will be all this," cried Edwin, who saw nothing in her tender
solicitude but the ingenuous affection which glowed in his own heart;
"and I will be your eyes, too, my cousin; for when I am absent with Sir
William Wallace I shall consider myself your representative, and so
will send you regular dispatches of all that happens to him."

Thanks would have been a poor means of imparting what she felt at this
assurance; and, rising from her seat, with some of Wallace's own
resigned and enthusiastic expression in her face, she pressed Edwin's
hand to her heart; then bowing her head to him, in token of gratitude,
withdrew into an inner apartment.




Chapter XXXIX.

Stirling Castle and Council Hall.


The countess' chivalric tribute from the window gave Wallace reason to
anticipate her company in his visit to Lady Ruthven; and on finding the
room vacant, he dispatched Edwin for his mother, that he might not be
distressed by the unchecked advances of a woman whom, as the wife of
Lord Mar, he was obliged to see, and whose weakness he pitied, as she
belonged to a sex for which, in consideration of the felicity once
bestowed on him by woman, he felt a peculiar tenderness.  Respect the
countess he could not; nor, indeed, could he feel any gratitude for a
preference which seemed to him to have no foundations in the only true
basis of love--the virtues of the object.  For, as she acted against
every moral law, against his declared sentiments, it was evident that
she placed little value on his esteem; and therefore he despised, while
he pitied, a human creature ungovernably yielding herself to the sway
of her passions.

In the midst of thoughts so little to her advantage, Lady Mar entered
the room.  Wallace turned to meet her; while she, hastening toward him,
and dropping on one knee, exclaimed, "Let me be the first woman in
Scotland to acknowledge its king!"

Wallace put forth both his hands to raise her; and smiling, replied,
"Lady Mar, you would do me an honor I can never claim."

"How?" cried she, starting up.  "What, then, was that cry I heard?  Did
they not call you 'prince,' and 'sovereign?'  Did not my Lord Buchan-"

Confused, disappointed, overpowered, she left the sentence unfinished,
sunk on a seat, and burst into tears.  At that moment she saw her
anticipated crown fall from her head, and having united the gaining of
Wallace with his acquisition of this dignity, all her hopes seemed
again the sport of winds.  She felt as if Wallace had eluded her power,
for it was by the ambition-serving acts of her kinsman that she had
meant to bind him to her love; and now all was rejected, and she wept
in despair.  He gazed at her with amazement.  What these emotions and
his elevation had to do with each other, he could not guess; but,
recollecting her manner of mentioning Lord Buchan's name, he answered,
"Lord Buchan I have just seen.  He and Lord March came upon the carse
at the time I went thither to meet my gallant countrymen; and these two
noblemen, though so lately the friends of Edward, united with the rest
in proclaiming me regent."

This word dried the tears of Lady Mar.  She saw the shadow of royalty
behind it; and summoning artifice, to conceal the joy of her heart, she
calmly said, "Do not too severely condemn this weakness; it is not that
of vain wishes for your aggrandizement.  You are the same to Joanna Mar
whether as a monarch or a private man, so long as you possess that
supremacy in all, excellence which first gained her esteem.  It is for
Scotland's sake alone that I wish you to be her king.  You have taught
me to forget all selfish desires--to respect myself," cried she; "and,
from this hour I conjure you to wipe from your memory all my folly--all
my love-"

With the last word her bosom heaved tumultuously, and she rose in
agitation.  Wallace now gazed on her with redoubled wonder.  She saw
it; and hearing a foot in the passage, turned, and grasping his hand,
said in a soft and hurried tone, "Forgive, that which is entwined with
my heart should cost me some pangs to wrest thence again.  Only respect
me and I am comforted."  Wallace in silence pressed her hand, and the
door opened.

Lady Ruthven entered.  The countess, whose present aim was to throw the
virtue of Wallace off its guard, and to take that by sap, which she
found resisted open attack, with a penitential air disappeared by
another passage.  Edwin's gentle mother was followed by the same youth
who had brought Helen's packet to Berwick.  It was Walter Hay, anxious
to be recognized by his benefactor, to whom his recovered health had
rendered his person strange.  Wallace received him with kindness, and
told him to bear his grateful respects to his lady for her care of her
charge.  Lord Ruthven with others soon entered; and at the appointed
hour they attended their chief to the citadel.

The council-hall was already filled with the lords who had brought
their clans to the Scottish standard.  On the entrance of Wallace they
rose; and Mar coming forward, followed by the heralds and other
officers of ceremony, saluted him with the due forms of regent, and led
him to the throne.  Wallace ascended; but it was only to take thence a
packet which had been deposited for him on its cushion, and coming down
again, he laid the parchment on the council-table.

"I can do all things best," said he, "when I am upon a level with my
friends."  He then broke the seal of the packet.  It was from the
Prince of Wales, agreeing to Wallace's proposed exchange of prisoners,
but denouncing him as the instigator of the rebellion, and threatening
him with a future judgment from his incensed king for the mischief he
had wrought in the realm of Scotland.  The letter was finished with a
demand that the town and citadel of Berwick should be surrendered to
England, as a gauge for the quiet of the borders till Edward should
return.

Kirkpatrick scoffed at the audacious menace of the young prince.  "He
should come amongst us, like a man," cried he; "and we would soon show
him who it is that works mischief in Scotland!  Ay, even on his back,
we would write the chastisement due to the offender."

"Be not angry with him, my friend," returned Wallace; "these threats
are words of course from the son of Edward.  Did he not fear both our
rights and our arms, he would not so readily accord with our
propositions.  You see every Scottish prisoner is to be on the borders
by a certain day; and to satisfy that impatient valor (which I, your
friend, would never check, but when it loses itself in a furor too
nearly resembling that of our enemies), I intend to make your prowess
once again the theme of their discourse.  You will retake your castles
in Annandale!"

"Give me but the means to recover those stout gates of our country,"
cried Kirkpatrick, "and I will warrant you to keep the keys in my hand
till doomsday."

Wallace resumed: "Three thousand men are at your command.  When the
prisoners pass each other on the Cheviots, the armistice will
terminate.  You may then fall back upon Annandale, and that night,
light your own fires in Torthorald!  Send the expelled garrison into
Northumberland, and show this haughty prince that we know how to
replenish his depopulated towns!"

"But first I will set my mark on them!" cried Kirkpatrick, with one of
those laughs which ever preluded some savage proposal.

"I can guess it would be no gentle one," returned Wallace.  "Why, brave
knight, will you ever sully the fair field of your fame with an
ensanguined tide?"

"It is the fashion of the times," replied Kirkpatrick, roughly, "You
only, my victorious general, who, perhaps, had most cause to go with
the stream, have chosen a path of your own.  But look around! see our
burns, which the Southrons made run with Scottish blood; our hillocks,
swollen with the cairns of our slain; the highways blocked up with the
graves of the murdered; our lands filled with maimed clansmen, who
purchased life of our ruthless tyrants, by the loss of eyes and limbs!
And, shall we talk of gentle methods, with the perpetrators of these
horrors?  Sir William Wallace, you would make women of us!"

"Shame, shame, Kirkpatrick!" resounded from every voice, "you insult
the regent!"

Kirkpatrick stood, proudly frowning, with his left hand on the hilt of
his sword.  Wallace, by a motion, hushed the tumult, and spoke: "No
true chief of Scotland can offer me greater respect, than frankly to
trust me with his sentiments."

"Though we disagree in some points," cried Kirkpatrick, "I am ready to
die for him at any time, for I believe a trustier Scot treads not the
earth; but I repeat, why, by this mincing mercy, seek to turn our
soldiers into women?"

"I seek to make them men," replied Wallace; "to be aware that they
fight with fellow-creatures, with whom they may one day be friends; and
not like the furious savages of old Scandinavia, drink the blood of
eternal enmity.  I would neither have my chieftains set examples of
cruelty, nor degrade themselves by imitating the barbarities of our
enemies.  That Scotland bleeds every pore is true; but let peace be our
aim, and we shall heal all her wounds."

"Then I am not to cut off the ears of the freebooters in Annandale?"
