faithless servants.  Only one good priest was true to him, and attended
him to the last.

Besides being famous for the great victories I have related, the reign of
King Edward the Third was rendered memorable in better ways, by the
growth of architecture and the erection of Windsor Castle.  In better
ways still, by the rising up of WICKLIFFE, originally a poor parish
priest: who devoted himself to exposing, with wonderful power and
success, the ambition and corruption of the Pope, and of the whole church
of which he was the head.

Some of those Flemings were induced to come to England in this reign too,
and to settle in Norfolk, where they made better woollen cloths than the
English had ever had before.  The Order of the Garter (a very fine thing
in its way, but hardly so important as good clothes for the nation) also
dates from this period.  The King is said to have picked 'up a lady's
garter at a ball, and to have said, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_--in
English, 'Evil be to him who evil thinks of it.'  The courtiers were
usually glad to imitate what the King said or did, and hence from a
slight incident the Order of the Garter was instituted, and became a
great dignity.  So the story goes.




CHAPTER XIX--ENGLAND UNDER RICHARD THE SECOND


Richard, son of the Black Prince, a boy eleven years of age, succeeded to
the Crown under the title of King Richard the Second.  The whole English
nation were ready to admire him for the sake of his brave father.  As to
the lords and ladies about the Court, they declared him to be the most
beautiful, the wisest, and the best--even of princes--whom the lords and
ladies about the Court, generally declare to be the most beautiful, the
wisest, and the best of mankind.  To flatter a poor boy in this base
manner was not a very likely way to develop whatever good was in him; and
it brought him to anything but a good or happy end.

The Duke of Lancaster, the young King's uncle--commonly called John of
Gaunt, from having been born at Ghent, which the common people so
pronounced--was supposed to have some thoughts of the throne himself;
but, as he was not popular, and the memory of the Black Prince was, he
submitted to his nephew.

The war with France being still unsettled, the Government of England
wanted money to provide for the expenses that might arise out of it;
accordingly a certain tax, called the Poll-tax, which had originated in
the last reign, was ordered to be levied on the people.  This was a tax
on every person in the kingdom, male and female, above the age of
fourteen, of three groats (or three four-penny pieces) a year; clergymen
were charged more, and only beggars were exempt.

I have no need to repeat that the common people of England had long been
suffering under great oppression.  They were still the mere slaves of the
lords of the land on which they lived, and were on most occasions harshly
and unjustly treated.  But, they had begun by this time to think very
seriously of not bearing quite so much; and, probably, were emboldened by
that French insurrection I mentioned in the last chapter.

The people of Essex rose against the Poll-tax, and being severely handled
by the government officers, killed some of them.  At this very time one
of the tax-collectors, going his rounds from house to house, at Dartford
in Kent came to the cottage of one WAT, a tiler by trade, and claimed the
tax upon his daughter.  Her mother, who was at home, declared that she
was under the age of fourteen; upon that, the collector (as other
collectors had already done in different parts of England) behaved in a
savage way, and brutally insulted Wat Tyler's daughter.  The daughter
screamed, the mother screamed.  Wat the Tiler, who was at work not far
off, ran to the spot, and did what any honest father under such
provocation might have done--struck the collector dead at a blow.

Instantly the people of that town uprose as one man.  They made Wat Tyler
their leader; they joined with the people of Essex, who were in arms
under a priest called JACK STRAW; they took out of prison another priest
named JOHN BALL; and gathering in numbers as they went along, advanced,
in a great confused army of poor men, to Blackheath.  It is said that
they wanted to abolish all property, and to declare all men equal.  I do
not think this very likely; because they stopped the travellers on the
roads and made them swear to be true to King Richard and the people.  Nor
were they at all disposed to injure those who had done them no harm,
merely because they were of high station; for, the King's mother, who had
to pass through their camp at Blackheath, on her way to her young son,
lying for safety in the Tower of London, had merely to kiss a few dirty-
faced rough-bearded men who were noisily fond of royalty, and so got away
in perfect safety.  Next day the whole mass marched on to London Bridge.

There was a drawbridge in the middle, which WILLIAM WALWORTH the Mayor
caused to be raised to prevent their coming into the city; but they soon
terrified the citizens into lowering it again, and spread themselves,
with great uproar, over the streets.  They broke open the prisons; they
burned the papers in Lambeth Palace; they destroyed the DUKE OF
LANCASTER'S Palace, the Savoy, in the Strand, said to be the most
beautiful and splendid in England; they set fire to the books and
documents in the Temple; and made a great riot.  Many of these outrages
were committed in drunkenness; since those citizens, who had well-filled
cellars, were only too glad to throw them open to save the rest of their
property; but even the drunken rioters were very careful to steal
nothing.  They were so angry with one man, who was seen to take a silver
cup at the Savoy Palace, and put it in his breast, that they drowned him
in the river, cup and all.

The young King had been taken out to treat with them before they
committed these excesses; but, he and the people about him were so
frightened by the riotous shouts, that they got back to the Tower in the
best way they could.  This made the insurgents bolder; so they went on
rioting away, striking off the heads of those who did not, at a moment's
notice, declare for King Richard and the people; and killing as many of
the unpopular persons whom they supposed to be their enemies as they
could by any means lay hold of.  In this manner they passed one very
violent day, and then proclamation was made that the King would meet them
at Mile-end, and grant their requests.

The rioters went to Mile-end to the number of sixty thousand, and the
King met them there, and to the King the rioters peaceably proposed four
conditions.  First, that neither they, nor their children, nor any coming
after them, should be made slaves any more.  Secondly, that the rent of
land should be fixed at a certain price in money, instead of being paid
in service.  Thirdly, that they should have liberty to buy and sell in
all markets and public places, like other free men.  Fourthly, that they
should be pardoned for past offences.  Heaven knows, there was nothing
very unreasonable in these proposals!  The young King deceitfully
pretended to think so, and kept thirty clerks up, all night, writing out
a charter accordingly.

Now, Wat Tyler himself wanted more than this.  He wanted the entire
abolition of the forest laws.  He was not at Mile-end with the rest, but,
while that meeting was being held, broke into the Tower of London and
slew the archbishop and the treasurer, for whose heads the people had
cried out loudly the day before.  He and his men even thrust their swords
into the bed of the Princess of Wales while the Princess was in it, to
make certain that none of their enemies were concealed there.

So, Wat and his men still continued armed, and rode about the city.  Next
morning, the King with a small train of some sixty gentlemen--among whom
was WALWORTH the Mayor--rode into Smithfield, and saw Wat and his people
at a little distance.  Says Wat to his men, 'There is the King.  I will
go speak with him, and tell him what we want.'

Straightway Wat rode up to him, and began to talk.  'King,' says Wat,
'dost thou see all my men there?'

'Ah,' says the King.  'Why?'

'Because,' says Wat, 'they are all at my command, and have sworn to do
whatever I bid them.'

Some declared afterwards that as Wat said this, he laid his hand on the
King's bridle.  Others declared that he was seen to play with his own
dagger.  I think, myself, that he just spoke to the King like a rough,
angry man as he was, and did nothing more.  At any rate he was expecting
no attack, and preparing for no resistance, when Walworth the Mayor did
the not very valiant deed of drawing a short sword and stabbing him in
the throat.  He dropped from his horse, and one of the King's people
speedily finished him.  So fell Wat Tyler.  Fawners and flatterers made a
mighty triumph of it, and set up a cry which will occasionally find an
echo to this day.  But Wat was a hard-working man, who had suffered much,
and had been foully outraged; and it is probable that he was a man of a
much higher nature and a much braver spirit than any of the parasites who
exulted then, or have exulted since, over his defeat.

Seeing Wat down, his men immediately bent their bows to avenge his fall.
If the young King had not had presence of mind at that dangerous moment,
both he and the Mayor to boot, might have followed Tyler pretty fast.  But
the King riding up to the crowd, cried out that Tyler was a traitor, and
that he would be their leader.  They were so taken by surprise, that they
set up a great shouting, and followed the boy until he was met at
Islington by a large body of soldiers.

The end of this rising was the then usual end.  As soon as the King found
himself safe, he unsaid all he had said, and undid all he had done; some
fifteen hundred of the rioters were tried (mostly in Essex) with great
rigour, and executed with great cruelty.  Many of them were hanged on
gibbets, and left there as a terror to the country people; and, because
their miserable friends took some of the bodies down to bury, the King
ordered the rest to be chained up--which was the beginning of the
barbarous custom of hanging in chains.  The King's falsehood in this
business makes such a pitiful figure, that I think Wat Tyler appears in
history as beyond comparison the truer and more respectable man of the
two.

Richard was now sixteen years of age, and married Anne of Bohemia, an
excellent princess, who was called 'the good Queen Anne.'  She deserved a
better husband; for the King had been fawned and flattered into a
treacherous, wasteful, dissolute, bad young man.

There were two Popes at this time (as if one were not enough!), and their
quarrels involved Europe in a great deal of trouble.  Scotland was still
troublesome too; and at home there was much jealousy and distrust, and
plotting and counter-plotting, because the King feared the ambition of
his relations, and particularly of his uncle, the Duke of Lancaster, and
the duke had his party against the King, and the King had his party
against the duke.  Nor were these home troubles lessened when the duke
went to Castile to urge his claim to the crown of that kingdom; for then
the Duke of Gloucester, another of Richard's uncles, opposed him, and
influenced the Parliament to demand the dismissal of the King's favourite
ministers.  The King said in reply, that he would not for such men
dismiss the meanest servant in his kitchen.  But, it had begun to signify
little what a King said when a Parliament was determined; so Richard was
at last obliged to give way, and to agree to another Government of the
kingdom, under a commission of fourteen nobles, for a year.  His uncle of
Gloucester was at the head of this commission, and, in fact, appointed
everybody composing it.

Having done all this, the King declared as soon as he saw an opportunity
that he had never meant to do it, and that it was all illegal; and he got
the judges secretly to sign a declaration to that effect.  The secret
oozed out directly, and was carried to the Duke of Gloucester.  The Duke
of Gloucester, at the head of forty thousand men, met the King on his
entering into London to enforce his authority; the King was helpless
against him; his favourites and ministers were impeached and were
mercilessly executed.  Among them were two men whom the people regarded
with very different feelings; one, Robert Tresilian, Chief Justice, who
was hated for having made what was called 'the bloody circuit' to try the
rioters; the other, Sir Simon Burley, an honourable knight, who had been
the dear friend of the Black Prince, and the governor and guardian of the
King.  For this gentleman's life the good Queen even begged of Gloucester
on her knees; but Gloucester (with or without reason) feared and hated
him, and replied, that if she valued her husband's crown, she had better
beg no more.  All this was done under what was called by some the
wonderful--and by others, with better reason, the merciless--Parliament.

But Gloucester's power was not to last for ever.  He held it for only a
year longer; in which year the famous battle of Otterbourne, sung in the
old ballad of Chevy Chase, was fought.  When the year was out, the King,
turning suddenly to Gloucester, in the midst of a great council said,
'Uncle, how old am I?'  'Your highness,' returned the Duke, 'is in your
twenty-second year.'  'Am I so much?' said the King; 'then I will manage
my own affairs!  I am much obliged to you, my good lords, for your past
services, but I need them no more.'  He followed this up, by appointing a
new Chancellor and a new Treasurer, and announced to the people that he
had resumed the Government.  He held it for eight years without
opposition.  Through all that time, he kept his determination to revenge
himself some day upon his uncle Gloucester, in his own breast.

At last the good Queen died, and then the King, desiring to take a second
wife, proposed to his council that he should marry Isabella, of France,
the daughter of Charles the Sixth: who, the French courtiers said (as the
English courtiers had said of Richard), was a marvel of beauty and wit,
and quite a phenomenon--of seven years old.  The council were divided
about this marriage, but it took place.  It secured peace between England
and France for a quarter of a century; but it was strongly opposed to the
prejudices of the English people.  The Duke of Gloucester, who was
anxious to take the occasion of making himself popular, declaimed against
it loudly, and this at length decided the King to execute the vengeance
he had been nursing so long.

He went with a gay company to the Duke of Gloucester's house, Pleshey
Castle, in Essex, where the Duke, suspecting nothing, came out into the
court-yard to receive his royal visitor.  While the King conversed in a
friendly manner with the Duchess, the Duke was quietly seized, hurried
away, shipped for Calais, and lodged in the castle there.  His friends,
the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, were taken in the same treacherous
manner, and confined to their castles.  A few days after, at Nottingham,
they were impeached of high treason.  The Earl of Arundel was condemned
and beheaded, and the Earl of Warwick was banished.  Then, a writ was
sent by a messenger to the Governor of Calais, requiring him to send the
Duke of Gloucester over to be tried.  In three days he returned an answer
that he could not do that, because the Duke of Gloucester had died in
prison.  The Duke was declared a traitor, his property was confiscated to
the King, a real or pretended confession he had made in prison to one of
the Justices of the Common Pleas was produced against him, and there was
an end of the matter.  How the unfortunate duke died, very few cared to
know.  Whether he really died naturally; whether he killed himself;
whether, by the King's order, he was strangled, or smothered between two
beds (as a serving-man of the Governor's named Hall, did afterwards
declare), cannot be discovered.  There is not much doubt that he was
killed, somehow or other, by his nephew's orders.  Among the most active
nobles in these proceedings were the King's cousin, Henry Bolingbroke,
whom the King had made Duke of Hereford to smooth down the old family
quarrels, and some others: who had in the family-plotting times done just
such acts themselves as they now condemned in the duke.  They seem to
have been a corrupt set of men; but such men were easily found about the
court in such days.

The people murmured at all this, and were still very sore about the
French marriage.  The nobles saw how little the King cared for law, and
how crafty he was, and began to be somewhat afraid for themselves.  The
King's life was a life of continued feasting and excess; his retinue,
down to the meanest servants, were dressed in the most costly manner, and
caroused at his tables, it is related, to the number of ten thousand
persons every day.  He himself, surrounded by a body of ten thousand
archers, and enriched by a duty on wool which the Commons had granted him
for life, saw no danger of ever being otherwise than powerful and
absolute, and was as fierce and haughty as a King could be.

He had two of his old enemies left, in the persons of the Dukes of
Hereford and Norfolk.  Sparing these no more than the others, he tampered
with the Duke of Hereford until he got him to declare before the Council
that the Duke of Norfolk had lately held some treasonable talk with him,
as he was riding near Brentford; and that he had told him, among other
things, that he could not believe the King's oath--which nobody could, I
should think.  For this treachery he obtained a pardon, and the Duke of
Norfolk was summoned to appear and defend himself.  As he denied the
charge and said his accuser was a liar and a traitor, both noblemen,
according to the manner of those times, were held in custody, and the
truth was ordered to be decided by wager of battle at Coventry.  This
wager of battle meant that whosoever won the combat was to be considered
in the right; which nonsense meant in effect, that no strong man could
ever be wrong.  A great holiday was made; a great crowd assembled, with
much parade and show; and the two combatants were about to rush at each
other with their lances, when the King, sitting in a pavilion to see
fair, threw down the truncheon he carried in his hand, and forbade the
battle.  The Duke of Hereford was to be banished for ten years, and the
Duke of Norfolk was to be banished for life.  So said the King.  The Duke
of Hereford went to France, and went no farther.  The Duke of Norfolk
made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and afterwards died at Venice of a
broken heart.

Faster and fiercer, after this, the King went on in his career.  The Duke
of Lancaster, who was the father of the Duke of Hereford, died soon after
the departure of his son; and, the King, although he had solemnly granted
to that son leave to inherit his father's property, if it should come to
him during his banishment, immediately seized it all, like a robber.  The
judges were so afraid of him, that they disgraced themselves by declaring
this theft to be just and lawful.  His avarice knew no bounds.  He
outlawed seventeen counties at once, on a frivolous pretence, merely to
raise money by way of fines for misconduct.  In short, he did as many
dishonest things as he could; and cared so little for the discontent of
his subjects--though even the spaniel favourites began to whisper to him
that there was such a thing as discontent afloat--that he took that time,
of all others, for leaving England and making an expedition against the
Irish.

He was scarcely gone, leaving the DUKE OF YORK Regent in his absence,
when his cousin, Henry of Hereford, came over from France to claim the
rights of which he had been so monstrously deprived.  He was immediately
joined by the two great Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland; and his
uncle, the Regent, finding the King's cause unpopular, and the
disinclination of the army to act against Henry, very strong, withdrew
with the Royal forces towards Bristol.  Henry, at the head of an army,
came from Yorkshire (where he had landed) to London and followed him.
They joined their forces--how they brought that about, is not distinctly
understood--and proceeded to Bristol Castle, whither three noblemen had
taken the young Queen.  The castle surrendering, they presently put those
three noblemen to death.  The Regent then remained there, and Henry went
on to Chester.

All this time, the boisterous weather had prevented the King from
receiving intelligence of what had occurred.  At length it was conveyed
to him in Ireland, and he sent over the EARL OF SALISBURY, who, landing
at Conway, rallied the Welshmen, and waited for the King a whole
fortnight; at the end of that time the Welshmen, who were perhaps not
very warm for him in the beginning, quite cooled down and went home.  When
the King did land on the coast at last, he came with a pretty good power,
but his men cared nothing for him, and quickly deserted.  Supposing the
Welshmen to be still at Conway, he disguised himself as a priest, and
made for that place in company with his two brothers and some few of
their adherents.  But, there were no Welshmen left--only Salisbury and a
hundred soldiers.  In this distress, the King's two brothers, Exeter and
Surrey, offered to go to Henry to learn what his intentions were.  Surrey,
who was true to Richard, was put into prison.  Exeter, who was false,
took the royal badge, which was a hart, off his shield, and assumed the
rose, the badge of Henry.  After this, it was pretty plain to the King
what Henry's intentions were, without sending any more messengers to ask.

The fallen King, thus deserted--hemmed in on all sides, and pressed with
hunger--rode here and rode there, and went to this castle, and went to
that castle, endeavouring to obtain some provisions, but could find none.
He rode wretchedly back to Conway, and there surrendered himself to the
Earl of Northumberland, who came from Henry, in reality to take him
prisoner, but in appearance to offer terms; and whose men were hidden not
far off.  By this earl he was conducted to the castle of Flint, where his
cousin Henry met him, and dropped on his knee as if he were still
respectful to his sovereign.

'Fair cousin of Lancaster,' said the King, 'you are very welcome' (very
welcome, no doubt; but he would have been more so, in chains or without a
head).

'My lord,' replied Henry, 'I am come a little before my time; but, with
your good pleasure, I will show you the reason.  Your people complain
with some bitterness, that you have ruled them rigorously for two-and-
twenty years.  Now, if it please God, I will help you to govern them
better in future.'

'Fair cousin,' replied the abject King, 'since it pleaseth you, it
pleaseth me mightily.'

After this, the trumpets sounded, and the King was stuck on a wretched
horse, and carried prisoner to Chester, where he was made to issue a
proclamation, calling a Parliament.  From Chester he was taken on towards
London.  At Lichfield he tried to escape by getting out of a window and
letting himself down into a garden; it was all in vain, however, and he
was carried on and shut up in the Tower, where no one pitied him, and
where the whole people, whose patience he had quite tired out, reproached
him without mercy.  Before he got there, it is related, that his very dog
left him and departed from his side to lick the hand of Henry.

The day before the Parliament met, a deputation went to this wrecked
King, and told him that he had promised the Earl of Northumberland at
Conway Castle to resign the crown.  He said he was quite ready to do it,
and signed a paper in which he renounced his authority and absolved his
people from their allegiance to him.  He had so little spirit left that
he gave his royal ring to his triumphant cousin Henry with his own hand,
and said, that if he could have had leave to appoint a successor, that
same Henry was the man of all others whom he would have named.  Next day,
the Parliament assembled in Westminster Hall, where Henry sat at the side
of the throne, which was empty and covered with a cloth of gold.  The
paper just signed by the King was read to the multitude amid shouts of
joy, which were echoed through all the streets; when some of the noise
had died away, the King was formally deposed.  Then Henry arose, and,
making the sign of the cross on his forehead and breast, challenged the
realm of England as his right; the archbishops of Canterbury and York
seated him on the throne.

The multitude shouted again, and the shouts re-echoed throughout all the
streets.  No one remembered, now, that Richard the Second had ever been
the most beautiful, the wisest, and the best of princes; and he now made
living (to my thinking) a far more sorry spectacle in the Tower of
London, than Wat Tyler had made, lying dead, among the hoofs of the royal
horses in Smithfield.

The Poll-tax died with Wat.  The Smiths to the King and Royal Family,
could make no chains in which the King could hang the people's
recollection of him; so the Poll-tax was never collected.




CHAPTER XX--ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FOURTH, CALLED BOLINGBROKE


During the last reign, the preaching of Wickliffe against the pride and
cunning of the Pope and all his men, had made a great noise in England.
Whether the new King wished to be in favour with the priests, or whether
he hoped, by pretending to be very religious, to cheat Heaven itself into
the belief that he was not a usurper, I don't know.  Both suppositions
are likely enough.  It is certain that he began his reign by making a
strong show against the followers of Wickliffe, who were called Lollards,
or heretics--although his father, John of Gaunt, had been of that way of
thinking, as he himself had been more than suspected of being.  It is no
less certain that he first established in England the detestable and
atrocious custom, brought from abroad, of burning those people as a
punishment for their opinions.  It was the importation into England of
one of the practices of what was called the Holy Inquisition: which was
the most _un_holy and the most infamous tribunal that ever disgraced
mankind, and made men more like demons than followers of Our Saviour.

No real right to the crown, as you know, was in this King.  Edward
Mortimer, the young Earl of March--who was only eight or nine years old,
and who was descended from the Duke of Clarence, the elder brother of
Henry's father--was, by succession, the real heir to the throne.  However,
the King got his son declared Prince of Wales; and, obtaining possession
of the young Earl of March and his little brother, kept them in
confinement (but not severely) in Windsor Castle.  He then required the
Parliament to decide what was to be done with the deposed King, who was
quiet enough, and who only said that he hoped his cousin Henry would be
'a good lord' to him.  The Parliament replied that they would recommend
his being kept in some secret place where the people could not resort,
and where his friends could not be admitted to see him.  Henry
accordingly passed this sentence upon him, and it now began to be pretty
clear to the nation that Richard the Second would not live very long.

It was a noisy Parliament, as it was an unprincipled one, and the Lords
quarrelled so violently among themselves as to which of them had been
loyal and which disloyal, and which consistent and which inconsistent,
that forty gauntlets are said to have been thrown upon the floor at one
time as challenges to as many battles: the truth being that they were all
false and base together, and had been, at one time with the old King, and
at another time with the new one, and seldom true for any length of time
to any one.  They soon began to plot again.  A conspiracy was formed to
invite the King to a tournament at Oxford, and then to take him by
surprise and kill him.  This murderous enterprise, which was agreed upon
at secret meetings in the house of the Abbot of Westminster, was betrayed
by the Earl of Rutland--one of the conspirators.  The King, instead of
going to the tournament or staying at Windsor (where the conspirators
suddenly went, on finding themselves discovered, with the hope of seizing
him), retired to London, proclaimed them all traitors, and advanced upon
them with a great force.  They retired into the west of England,
proclaiming Richard King; but, the people rose against them, and they
were all slain.  Their treason hastened the death of the deposed monarch.
Whether he was killed by hired assassins, or whether he was starved to
death, or whether he refused food on hearing of his brothers being killed
(who were in that plot), is very doubtful.  He met his death somehow; and
his body was publicly shown at St. Paul's Cathedral with only the lower
part of the face uncovered.  I can scarcely doubt that he was killed by
the King's orders.

The French wife of the miserable Richard was now only ten years old; and,
when her father, Charles of France, heard of her misfortunes and of her
lonely condition in England, he went mad: as he had several times done
before, during the last five or six years.  The French Dukes of Burgundy
and Bourbon took up the poor girl's cause, without caring much about it,
but on the chance of getting something out of England.  The people of
Bordeaux, who had a sort of superstitious attachment to the memory of
Richard, because he was born there, swore by the Lord that he had been
the best man in all his kingdom--which was going rather far--and promised
to do great things against the English.  Nevertheless, when they came to
consider that they, and the whole people of France, were ruined by their
own nobles, and that the English rule was much the better of the two,
they cooled down again; and the two dukes, although they were very great
men, could do nothing without them.  Then, began negotiations between
France and England for the sending home to Paris of the poor little Queen
with all her jewels and her fortune of two hundred thousand francs in
gold.  The King was quite willing to restore the young lady, and even the
jewels; but he said he really could not part with the money.  So, at last
she was safely deposited at Paris without her fortune, and then the Duke
