Indian road which led us the best way over the mountains, which are not
very high but ar ruggid and approach the river closely on both sides
just below these mountains I saw several bald Eagles and two large
white headed fishinghawks boath these birds were the same common to our
country.

from the number of rattle snakes about the Clifts at which we halted we
called them the rattle snake clifts. this serpent is the same before
discribed with oval spots of yellowish brown. the river below the
mountains is rapid rocky, very crooked, much divided by islands and
withal shallow. after it enters the mountains it's bends are not so
circuetous and it's general course more direct, but it is equally
shallow les divided more rocky and rapid. we continued our rout along
the Indian road which led us sometimes over the hills and again in the
narrow bottoms of the river till at the distance of fifteen Ms. from
the rattle snake Clifts we arrived in a hadsome open and leavel vally
where the river divided itself nearly into two equal branches; here I
halted and examined those streams and readily discovered from their
size that it would be vain to attempt the navigation of either any
further. here also the road forked one leading up the vally of each of
these streams. I therefore sent Drewer on one and Shields on the other
to examine these roads for a short distance and to return and compare
their information with respect to the size and apparent plainness of
the roads as I was now determined to pursue that which appeared to have
been the most traveled this spring. in the mean time I wrote a note to
Capt. Clark informing him of the occurrences which had taken place,
recommending it to him to halt at this place untill my return and
informing him of the rout I had taken which from the information of the
men on their return seemed to be in favour of the S W or Left hand fork
which is reather the smallest. accordingly I put up my note on a dry
willow pole at the forks, and set out up the S. E. fork, after
proceeding about 11/2 miles I discovered that the road became so blind
that it could not be that which we had followed to the forks of
Jefferson's river, neither could I find the tracks of the horses which
had passed early in the spring along the other; I therefore determined
to return and examine the other myself, which I did, and found that the
same horses had passed up the West fork which was reather largest, and
more in the direction that I wished to pursue; I therefore did not
hesitate about changing my rout but determined to take the western
road. I now wrote a second note to Capt C. informing him of this change
and sent Drewyer to put it with the other at the forks and waited
untill he returned. there is scarcely any timber on the river above the
R. Snake Clifts, nor is there anything larger than willow brush in
sight of these forks. immediately in the level plain between the forks
and about 1/2 a mile distance from them stands a high rocky mountain,
the base of which is surrounded by the level plain; it has a singular
appearance. the mountains do not appear very high in any direction tho
the tops of some of them are partially covered with snow. this
convinces me that we have ascended to a great hight since we have
entered the rocky Mountains, yet the ascent has been so gradual along
the vallies that it was scarcely perceptable by land. I do not beleive
that the world can furnish an example of a river runing to the extent
which the Missouri and Jefferson's rivers do through such a mountainous
country and at the same time so navigable as they are. if the Columbia
furnishes us such another example, a communication across the continent
by water will be practicable and safe. but this I can scarcely hope
from a knowledge of its having in it comparitively short course to the
ocean the same number of feet to decend which the Missouri and
Mississippi have from this point to the Gulph of Mexico.

The valley of the west fork through which we passed for four miles boar
a little to N of West and was about 1 mile wide hemned in on either
side by rough mountain and steep Clifts of rock at 41/2 miles this
stream enters a beatifull and extensive plain about ten miles long and
from 5 to six in width. this plain is surrounded on all sides by a
country of roling or high wavy plains through which several little
rivulets extend their wide vallies quite to the Mountains which
surround the whole in an apparent Circular manner; forming one of the
handsomest coves I ever saw, of about 16 or 18 miles in diameter. just
after entering this cove the river bends to the N. W. and runs close
under the Stard. hills. here we killed a deer and encamped on the
Stard.,side and made our fire of dry willow brush, the only fuel which
the country produces. there are not more than three or four cottonwood
trees in this extensive cove and they are but small. the uplands are
covered with prickly pears and twisted or bearded grass and are but
poor; some parts of the bottom lands are covered with grass and
tolerably fertile; but much the greater proportion is covered with
prickly pears sedge twisted grass the pulpy leafed thorn southernwood
wild sage &c and like the uplands is very inferior in point of soil. we
traveled by estimate 30 Ms. today, that is 10 to the Rattle snake
Clift, 15 to the forks of Jefferson's river and 5 to our camp in the
cove. at the apparent extremity of the bottom above us two
perpendicular clifts of considerable hight stand on either side of the
river and appers at this distance like a gate, it is about 10 M. due
West.

Capt Clark set out at sunrise this morning and pursued his rout; found
the river not rapid but shallow also very crooked. they were obliged to
drag the canoes over many riffles in the course of the day. they passed
the point which the natives call the beaver's head. it is a steep rocky
clift of 150 feet high near the Stard. side of the river, opposite to
it at the distance of 300 yards is a low clift of about 50 feet which
is the extremity of a spur of the mountains about 4 miles distant on
Lard. at 4 P.M. they experienced a heavy shower of rain attended with
hail thunder and Lightning which continued about an hour. the men
defended themselves from the hail by means of the willow bushes but all
the party got perfectly wet. after the shower was over they pursued
their march and encamped on the stard side only one deer killed by
their hunters today. tho they took up another by the way which had been
killed three days before by Jos. Fields and hung up near the river.




[Clark, August 10, 1805]
August 10th Satturday 1805
Some rain this morning at Sun rise and Cloudy we proceeded on passed a
remarkable Clift point on the Stard. Side about 150 feet high, this
Clift the Indians Call the Beavers head, opposit at 300 yards is a low
clift of 50 feet which is a Spur from the Mountain on the Lard. about 4
miles, the river verry Crooked, at 4 oClock a hard rain from the S W
accompanied with hail Continued half an hour, all wet, the men
Sheltered themselves from the hail with bushes We Encamped on the Stard
Side near a Bluff, only one Deer killed to day, the one killed Jo
Fields 3 Days past & hung up we made use of river narrow, & Sholey but
not rapid.




[Lewis, August 11, 1805]
Sunday August 11th 1805.
We set out very early this morning; but the track which we had pursued
last evening soon disappeared. I therefore resolved to proceed to the
narrow pass on the creek about 10 miles West in hopes that I should
again find the Indian road at the place, accordingly I passed the river
which was about 12 yards wide and bared in several places entirely
across by beaver dams and proceeded through the level plain directly to
the pass. I now sent Drewyer to keep near the creek to my right and
Shields to my left, with orders to surch for the road which if they
found they were to notify me by placing a hat in the muzzle of their
gun. I kept McNeal with me; after having marched in this order for
about five miles I discovered an Indian on horse back about two miles
distant coming down the plain toward us. with my glass I discovered
from his dress that he was of a different nation from any that we had
yet seen, and was satisfyed of his being a Sosone; his arms were a bow
and quiver of arrows, and was mounted on an eligant horse without a
saddle, and a small string which was attatched to the underjaw of the
horse which answered as a bridle. I was overjoyed at the sight of this
stranger and had no doubt of obtaining a friendly introduction to his
nation provided I could get near enough to him to convince him of our
being whitemen. I therefore proceeded towards him at my usual pace.
when I had arrived within about a mile he mad a halt which I did also
and unloosing my blanket from my pack, I mad him the signal of
friendship known to the Indians of the Rocky mountains and those of the
Missouri, which is by holding the mantle or robe in your hands at two
corners and then throwing up in the air higher than the head bringing
it to the earth as if in the act of spreading it, thus repeating three
times. this signal of the robe has arrisen from a custom among all
those nations of spreading a robe or skin for ther gests to set on when
they are visited. this signal had not the desired effect, he still kept
his position and seemed to view Drewyer an Shields who were now
comiming in sight on either hand with an air of suspicion, I wold
willingly have made them halt but they were too far distant to hear me
and I feared to make any signal to them least it should increase the
suspicion in the mind of the Indian of our having some unfriendly
design upon him. I therefore haistened to take out of my sack some
beads a looking glas and a few trinkets which I had brought with me for
this purpose and leaving my gun and pouch with McNeal advanced unarmed
towards him. he remained in the same stedfast poisture untill I arrived
in about 200 paces of him when he turn his hose about and began to move
off slowly from me; I now called to him in as loud a voice as I could
command repeating the word tab-ba-bone, which in their language
signifyes white man. but loking over his sholder he still kept his eye
on Drewyer and Sheilds who wer still advancing neither of them haveing
segacity enough to recollect the impropriety of advancing when they saw
me thus in parley with the Indian. I now made a signal to these men to
halt, Drewyer obeyed but Shields who afterwards told me that he did not
obseve the signal still kept on the Indian halted again and turned his
horse about as if to wait for me, and I beleive he would have remained
untill I came up whith him had it not been for Shields who still
pressed forward. whe I arrived within about 150 paces I again
repepeated the word tab-ba-bone and held up the trinkits in my hands
and striped up my shirt sieve to give him an opportunity of seeing the
colour of my skin and advanced leasure towards him but he did not
remain untill I got nearer than about 100 paces when he suddonly turned
his hose about, gave him the whip leaped the creek and disapeared in
the willow brush in an instant and with him vanished all my hopes of
obtaining horses for the preasent. I now felt quite as much
mortification and disappointment as I had pleasure and expectation at
the first sight of this indian. I fet soarly chargrined at the conduct
of the men particularly Sheilds to whom I principally attributed this
failure in obtaining an introduction to the natives. I now called the
men to me and could not forbare abraiding them a little for their want
of attention and imprudence on this occasion. they had neglected to
bring my spye-glass which in haist I had droped in the plain with the
blanket where I made the signal before mentioned. I sent Drewyer and
Shields back to surche it, they soon found it and rejoined me. we now
set out on the track of the horse hoping by that means to be lead to an
indian camp, the trail of inhabitants of which should they abscond we
should probably be enabled to pursue to the body of the nation to which
they would most probably fly for safety. this rout led us across a
large Island framed by nearly an equal division of the creek in this
bottom; after passing to the open ground on the N. side of the creek we
observed that the track made out toward the high hills about 3 m.
distant in that direction. I thought it probable that their camp might
probably be among those hills & that they would reconnoiter us from the
tops of them, and that if we advanced haistily towards them that they
would become allarmed and probably run off; I therefore halted in an
elivated situation near the creek had a fire kindled of willow brush
cooked and took breakfast. during this leasure I prepared a small
assortment of trinkits consisting of some mockkerson awls a few strans
of several kinds of beads some paint a looking glass &c which I
attatched to the end of a pole and planted it near our fire in order
that should the Indians return in surch of us they might from this
token discover that we were friendly and white persons. before we had
finised our meal a heavy shower of rain came on with some hail wich
continued abot 20 minutes and wet us to the skin, after this shower we
pursued the track of the horse but as the rain had raised the grass
which he had trodden down it was with difficulty that we could follow
it. we pursued it however about 4 miles it turning up the valley to the
left under the foot of the hills. we pas several places where the
Indians appeared to have been diging roots today and saw the fresh
tracks of 8 or ten horses but they had been wandering about in such a
confused manner that we not only lost the track of the hose which we
had been pursuing but could make nothing of them. in the head of this
valley we passed a large bog covered with tall grass and moss in which
were a great number of springs of cold pure water, we now turned a
little to the left along the foot of the high hills and arrived at a
small branch on which we encamped for the night, having traveled in
different directions about 20 Miles and about 10 from the camp of last
evening on a direct line. after meeting with the Indian today I fixed a
small flag of the U'S. to a pole which I made McNeal carry. and planted
in the ground where we halted or encamped.

This morning Capt Clark dispatched several hunters a head; the morning
being rainy and wet did not set out untill after an early breakfast. he
passed a large Island which he called the 3000 mile Island from the
circumstance of it's being that distance from the entrance of the
Missouri by water. a considerable proportion of the bottom on Lard.
side is a bog covered with tall grass and many parts would afford fine
turf; the bottom is about 8 Ms. wide and the plains which succeed it on
either side extend about the same distance to the base of the
mountains. they passed a number of small Islands and bayous on both
sides which cut and intersect the bottoms in various directions. found
the river shallow and rapid, insomuch that the men wer compelled to be
in the water a considerable proportion of the day in drageing the
canoes over the shoals and riffles. they saw a number of geese ducks
beaver & otter, also some deer and antelopes. the men killed a beaver
with a seting pole and tommahawked several Otter. the hunters killed 3
deer and an Antelope. Capt. C. observed some bunches of privy near the
river. there are but few trees in this botom and those small narrow
leafed Cottonwood. the principal growth is willow with the narrow leaf
and Currant bushes. they encamped this evening on the upper point of a
large Island near the Stard. shore.-




[Clark, August 11, 1805]
August 11th Sunday 1805.
a Shower of rain this morning at Sun rise, Cloudy all the morning wind
from the S W passed a large Island which I call the 3000 mile Island as
it is Situated that distance from the mouth of the Missouri by water, a
number of Small Bayoes running in different directions thro the Bottom,
which is about 5 miles wide, then rises to an ellivated plain on each
Side which extends as far. passed Several Small Islands and a number of
Bayoes on each Side and Encamped on the upper point of a large Island,
our hunters killed three Deer, one antilope, and Tomahawked Several
Orter to day killed one Beaver with a Setting pole. I observed Some
bunches of Privey on the banks




[Lewis, August 12, 1805]
Monday August 12th 1805
This morning I sent Drewyer out as soon as it was light, to try and
discover what rout the Indians had taken. he followed the track of the
horse we had pursued yesterday to the mountain wher it had ascended,
and returned to me in about an hour and a half. I now determined to
pursue the base of the mountains which form this cove to the S. W. in
the expectation of finding some Indian road which lead over the
Mountains, accordingly I sent Drewyer to my right and Shields to my
left with orders to look out for a road or the fresh tracks of horses
either of which we should first meet with I had determined to pursue.
at the distance of about 4 miles we passed 4 small rivulets near each
other on which we saw som resent bowers or small conic lodges formed
with willow brush. near them the indians had geathered a number of
roots from the manner in which they had toarn up the ground; but I
could not discover the root which they seemed to be in surch of. I saw
several large hawks that were nearly black near this place we fell in
with a large and plain Indian road which came into the cove from the N.
E. and led along the foot of the mountains to the S. W. oliquely
approaching the main stream which we had left yesterday. this road we
now pursued to the S. W. at 5 miles it passed a stout stream which is a
principal fork of the man stream and falls into it just above the
narrow pass between the two clifts before mentioned and which we now
saw below us. here we halted and breakfasted on the last of our
venison, having yet a small peice of pork in reseve. after eating we
continued our rout through the low bottom of the main stream along the
foot of the mountains on our right the valley for 5 mes. further in a
S. W. direction was from 2 to 3 miles wide the main stream now after
discarding two stream on the left in this valley turns abruptly to the
West through a narrow bottom betwen the mountains. the road was still
plain, I therefore did not dispair of shortly finding a passage over
the mountains and of taisting the waters of the great Columbia this
evening. we saw an animal which we took to be of the fox kind as large
or reather larger than the small wolf of the plains. it's colours were
a curious mixture of black, redis-brown and yellow. Drewyer shot at him
about 130 yards and knocked him dow bet he recovered and got out of our
reach. it is certainly a different animal from any that we have yet
seen. we also saw several of the heath cock with a long pointed tail
and an uniform dark brown colour but could not kill one of them. they
are much larger than the common dunghill fowls, and in their habits and
manner of flying resemble the growse or prarie hen. at the distance of
4 miles further the road took us to the most distant fountain of the
waters of the mighty Missouri in surch of which we have spent so many
toilsome days and wristless nights. thus far I had accomplished one of
those great objects on which my mind has been unalterably fixed for
many years, judge then of the pleasure I felt in allying my thirst with
this pure and ice cold water which issues from the base of a low
mountain or hill of a gentle ascent for 1/2 a mile. the mountains are
high on either hand leave this gap at the head of this rivulet through
which the road passes. here I halted a few minutes and rested myself.
two miles below McNeal had exultingly stood with a foot on each side of
this little rivulet and thanked his god that he had lived to bestride
the mighty & heretofore deemed endless Missouri. after refreshing
ourselves we proceeded on to the top of the dividing ridge from which I
discovered immence ranges of high mountains still to the West of us
with their tops partially covered with snow. I now decended the
mountain about 3/4 of a mile which I found much steeper than on the
opposite side, to a handsome bold running Creek of cold Clear water.
here I first tasted the water of the great Columbia river. after a
short halt of a few minutes we continued our march along the Indian
road which lead us over steep hills and deep hollows to a spring on the
side of a mountain where we found a sufficient quantity of dry willow
brush for fuel, here we encamped for the night having traveled about 20
Miles. as we had killed nothing during the day we now boiled and eat
the remainder of our pork, having yet a little flour and parched meal.
at the creek on this side of the mountain I observed a species of deep
perple currant lower in its growth, the stem more branched and leaf
doubly as large as that of the Missouri. the leaf is covered on it's
under disk with a hairy pubersence. the fruit is of the ordinary size
and shape of the currant and is supported in the usual manner, but is
ascid & very inferior in point of flavor.

this morning Capt. Clark set out early. found the river shoally, rapid
shallow, and extreemly difficult. the men in the water almost all day.
they are geting weak soar and much fortiegued; they complained of the
fortiegue to which the navigation subjected them and wished to go by
land Capt. C. engouraged them and passifyed them. one of the canoes was
very near overseting in a rapid today. they proceeded but slowly. at
noon they had a thunderstorm which continued about half an hour. their
hunters killed 3 deer and a fawn. they encamped in a smoth plain near a
few cottonwood trees on the Lard. side.-




[Clark, August 12, 1805]
August 12th Monday 1805
We Set out early (Wind N E) proceeded on passed Several large Islands
and three Small ones, the river much more Sholey than below which
obliges us to haul the Canoes over those Sholes which Suckceed each
other at Short intervales emencely laborious men much fatigued and
weakened by being continualy in the water drawing the Canoes over the
Sholes encamped on the Lard Side men complain verry much of the emence
labour they are obliged to undergo & wish much to leave the river. I
passify them. the weather Cool, and nothing to eate but venison, the
hunters killed three Deer to day




[Lewis, August 13, 1805]
Tuesday August 13th 1805.
We set out very early on the Indian road which still led us through an
open broken country in a westerly direction. a deep valley appeared to
our left at the base of a high range of mountains which extended from
S. E. to N. W. having their sides better clad with pine timber than we
had been accustomed to see the mountains and their tops were also
partially covered with snow. at the distance of five miles the road
after leading us down a long decending valley for 2 Ms. brought us to a
large creek about 10 yds. wide; this we passed and on rising the hill
beyond it had a view of a handsome little valley to our left of about a
mile in width through which from the appearance of the timber I
conjectured that a river passed. I saw near the creek some bushes of
the white maple, the shumate of the small species with the winged rib,
and a species of honeysuckle much in it's growth and leaf like the
small honeysuckle of the Missouri only reather larger and bears a
globular berry as large as a garden pea and as white as wax. this berry
is formed of a thin smooth pellicle which envellopes a soft white
musilagenous substance in which there are several small brown seed
irregularly scattered or intermixed without any sell or perceptable
membranous covering.--we had proceeded about four miles through a wavy
plain parallel to the valley or river bottom when at the distance of
about a mile we saw two women, a man and some dogs on an eminence
immediately before us. they appeared to vew us with attention and two
of them after a few minutes set down as if to wait our arrival we
continued our usual pace towards them. when we had arrived within half
a mile of them I directed the party to halt and leaving my pack and
rifle I took the flag which I unfurled and avanced singly towards them
the women soon disappeared behind the hill, the man continued untill I
arrived within a hundred yards of him and then likewise absconded. tho
I frequently repeated the word tab-ba-bone sufficiently loud for him to
have heard it. I now haistened to the top of the hill where they had
stood but could see nothing of them. the dogs were less shye than their
masters they came about me pretty close I therefore thought of tying a
handkerchief about one of their necks with some beads and other
trinkets and then let them loose to surch their fugitive owners
thinking by this means to convince them of our pacific disposition
towards them but the dogs would not suffer me to take hold of them;
they also soon disappeared. I now made a signal fror the men to come
on, they joined me and we pursued the back tarck of these Indians which
lead us along the same road which we had been traveling. the road was
dusty and appeared to have been much traveled lately both by men and
horses. these praries are very poor the soil is of a light yellow clay,
intermixed with small smooth gravel, and produces little else but
prickly pears, and bearded grass about 3 inches high. the prickley pear
are of three species that with a broad leaf common to the missouri;
that of a globular form also common to the upper part of the Missouri
and more especially after it enters the Rocky Mountains, also a 3rd
peculiar to this country. it consists of small circular thick leaves
with a much greater number of thorns. these thorns are stronger and
appear to be barbed. the leaves grow from the margins of each other as
in the broad leafed pear of the missouri, but are so slightly attatched
that when the thorn touches your mockerson it adhears and brings with
it the leaf covered in every direction with many others. this is much
the most troublesome plant of the three. we had not continued our rout
more than a mile when we were so fortunate as to meet with three female
savages. the short and steep ravines which we passed concealed us from
each other untill we arrived within 30 paces. a young woman immediately
took to flight, an Elderly woman and a girl of about 12 years old
remained. I instantly laid by my gun and advanced towards them. they
appeared much allarmed but saw that we were to near for them to escape
by flight they therefore seated themselves on the ground, holding down
their heads as if reconciled to die which the expected no doubt would
be their fate; I took the elderly woman by the hand and raised her up
repeated the word tab-babone and strip up my shirt sieve to sew her my
skin; to prove to her the truth of the ascertion that I was a white man
for my face and hads which have been constantly exposed to the sun were
quite as dark as their own. they appeared instantly reconciled, and the
men coming up I gave these women some beads a few mockerson awls some
pewter looking-glasses and a little paint. I directed Drewyer to
request the old woman to recall the young woman who had run off to some
distance by this time fearing she might allarm the camp before we
approached and might so exasperate the natives that they would perhaps
attack us without enquiring who we were. the old woman did as she was
requested and the fugitive soon returned almost out of breath. I
bestoed an equvolent portion of trinket on her with the others. I now
painted their tawny cheeks with some vermillion which with this nation
is emblematic of peace. after they had become composed I informed them
by signs that I wished them to conduct us to their camp that we wer
anxious to become acquainted with the chiefs and warriors of their
nation. they readily obeyed and we set out, still pursuing the road
down the river. we had marched about 2 miles when we met a party of
about 60 warriors mounted on excellent horses who came in nearly full
speed, when they arrived I advanced towards them with the flag leaving
my gun with the party about 50 paces behid me. the chief and two others
who were a little in advance of the main body spoke to the women, and
they informed them who we were and exultingly shewed the presents which
had been given them these men then advanced and embraced me very
affectionately in their way which is by puting their left arm over you
wright sholder clasping your back, while they apply their left cheek to
yours and frequently vociforate the word ah-hi'-e, &h-hi'-e that is, I
am much pleased, I am much rejoiced. bothe parties now advanced and we
wer all carresed and besmeared with their grease and paint till I was
heartily tired of the national hug. I now had the pipe lit and gave
them smoke; they seated themselves in a circle around us and pulled of
their mockersons before they would receive or smoke the pipe. this is a
custom among them as I afterwards learned indicative of a sacred
obligation of sincerity in their profession of friendship given by the
act of receiving and smoking the pipe of a stranger. or which is as
much as to say that they wish they may always go bearfoot if they are
not sincere; a pretty heavy penalty if they are to march through the
plains of their country. after smoking a few pipes with them I
distributed some trifles among them, with which they seemed much
pleased particularly with the blue beads and vermillion. I now informed
the chief that the object of our visit was a friendly one, that after
we should reach his camp I would undertake to explain to him fully
those objects, who we wer, from whence we had come and wither we were
going; that in the mean time I did not care how soon we were in motion,
as the sun was very warm and no water at hand. they now put on their
mockersons, and the principal chief Ca-me-ah-wait made a short speach
to the warriors. I gave him the flag which I informed him was an emblem
of peace among whitemen and now that it had been received by him it was
to be respected as the bond of union between us. I desired him to march
on, which did and we followed him; the dragoons moved on in squadron in
our rear. after we had marched about a mile in this order he halted
them ang gave a second harang; after which six or eight of the young
men road forward to their encampment and no further regularity was
observed in the order of march. I afterwards understood that the
Indians we had first seen this morning had returned and allarmed the
camp; these men had come out armed cap a pe for action expecting to
meet with their enemies the Minnetares of Fort de Prarie whome they
Call Rah'-kees. they were armed with bows arrow and Shield except three
whom I observed with small pieces such as the N. W. Company furnish the
natives with which they had obtained from the Rocky Mountain Indians on
the yellow stone river with whom they are at peace. on our arrival at
their encampmen on the river in a handsome level and fertile bottom at
the distance of 4 Ms. from where we had first met them they introduced
us to a londge made of willow brush and an old leather lodge which had
been prepared for our reception by the young men which the chief had
dispatched for that purpose. Here we were seated on green boughs and
the skins of Antelopes. one of the warriors then pulled up the grass in
the center of the lodge forming a smal circle of about 2 feet in
diameter the chief next produced his pipe and native tobacco and began
a long cerimony of the pipe when we were requested to take of our
mockersons, the Chief having previously taken off his as well as all
the warriors present. this we complyed with; the Chief then lit his
pipe at the fire kindled in this little magic circle, and standing on
the oposite side of the circle uttered a speach of several minutes in
length at the conclusion of which he pointed the stem to the four
cardinal points of the heavens first begining at the East and ending
with the North. he now presented the pipe to me as if desirous that I
should smoke, but when I reached my hand to receive it, he drew it back
and repeated the same cremony three times, after which he pointed the
stern first to the heavens then to the center of the magic circle
smoked himself with three whifs and held the pipe untill I took as many
as I thought proper; he then held it to each of the white persons and
then gave it to be consumed by his warriors. this pipe was made of a
dense simitransparent green stone very highly polished about 21/2
inches long and of an oval figure, the bowl being in the same direction
with the stem. a small piece of birned clay is placed in the bottom of
the bowl to seperate the tobacco from the end of the stem and is of an
irregularly rounded figure not fitting the tube purfectly close in
order that the smoke may pass. this is the form of the pipe. their
tobacco is of the same kind of that used by the Minnetares Mandans and
Ricares of the Missouri. the Shoshonees do not cultivate this plant,
but obtain it from the Rocky mountain Indians and some of the bands of
their own nation who live further south. I now explained to them the
objects of our journey &c. all the women and children of the camp were
shortly collected about the lodge to indulge themselves with looking at
us, we being the first white persons they had ever seen. after the
cerimony of the pipe was over I distributed the remainder of the small
articles I had brought with me among the women and children. by this
time it was late in the evening and we had not taisted any food since
the evening before. the Chief informed us that they had nothing but
berries to eat and gave us some cakes of serviceberries and Choke
cherries which had been dryed in the sun; of these I made a hearty
meal, and then walked to the river, which I found about 40 yards wide
very rapid clear and about 3 feet deep. the banks low and abrupt as
those of the upper part of the Missouri, and the bed formed of loose
stones and gravel. Cameahwait informed me that this stream discharged
itself into another doubly as large at the distance of half a days
march which came from the S. W. but he added on further enquiry that
there was but little more timber below the junction of those rivers
than I saw here, and that the river was confined between inacessable
mountains, was very rapid and rocky insomuch that it was impossible for
us to pass either by land or water down this river to the great lake
where the white men lived as he had been informed. this was unwelcome
information but I still hoped that this account had been exagerated
with a view to detain us among them. as to timber I could discover not
any that would answer the purpose of constructing canoes or in short
more than was bearly necessary for fuel consisting of the narrow leafed
cottonwood and willow, also the red willow Choke Cherry service berry
and a few currant bushes such as were common on the Missouri. these
people had been attacked by the Minetares of Fort de prarie this spring
and about 20 of them killed and taken prisoners. on this occasion they
lost a great part of their horses and all their lodges except that
which they had erected for our accomodation; they were now living in
lodges of a conic figure made of willow brush. I still observe a great
number of horses feeding in every direction around their camp and
therefore entertain but little doubt but we shall be enable to furnish
ourselves with an adiquate number to transport our stores even if we
are compelled to travel by land over these mountains. on my return to
my lodge an indian called me in to his bower and gave me a small morsel
of the flesh of an antelope boiled, and a peice of a fresh salmon
roasted; both which I eat with a very good relish. this was the first
salmon I had seen and perfectly convinced me that we were on the waters
of the Pacific Ocean. the course of this river is a little to the North
of west as far as I can discover it; and is bounded on each side by a
range of high Mountains. tho those on the E. side are lowest and more
distant from the river.

This evening the Indians entertained us with their dancing nearly all
night. at 12 O'Ck. I grew sleepy and retired to rest leaving the men to
amuse themselves with the Indians. I observe no essential difference
between the music and manner of dancing among this nation and those of
the Missouri. I was several times awoke in the course of the night by
their yells but was too much fortiegued to be deprived of a tolerable
sound night's repose.

This morning Capt Clark set out early having previously dispatched some
hunters ahead. it was cool and cloudy all the forepart of the day. at 8
A.M. they had a slight rain. they passed a number of shoals over which
they were obliged to drag the canoes; the men in the water 3/4ths of
the day, they passed a bold runing stream 7 yds. wide on the Lard. side
just below a high point of Limestone rocks. this stream we call
McNeal's Creek after Hugh McNeal one of our party. this creek heads in
the Mountains to the East and forms a handsome valley for some miles
between the mountains. from the top of this limestone Clift above the
creek The beaver's head boar N 24 deg. E. 12 Ms. the course of Wisdom river
or that which the opening of it's valley makes through the mountains is
N. 25 W. to the gap through which Jefferson's river enters the
mountains above is S 18 deg. W 10 M. they killed one deer only today. saw a
number of Otter some beaver Antelopes ducks gees and Grains. they
caught a number of fine trout as they have every day since I left them.
they encamped on Lrd. in a smooth level prarie near a few cottonwood
trees, but were obliged to make use of the dry willow brush for fuel.




[Clark, August 13, 1805]
August 13th Tuesday 1805
a verry Cool morning the Thermometer Stood at 52 a 0 all the fore part
of the day. Cloudy at 8 oClock a mist of rain we proceeded on passed
inumerable Sholes obliged to haul the boat 3/4 of the Day over the
Shole water. passed the mouth of a bold running Stream 7 yards wide on
the Lard Side below a high Point of Limestone rocks on the Stard Side
this Creek heads in the mountains to the easte and forms a Vallie
between two mountains. Call this stream McNeal Creek From the top of
this rock the Point of the Beaver head hill bears N. 24 deg. E 12 ms.

The Course of the Wisdom river is--N. 25 W

The gap at the place the river passes thro a mountain in advance is--S.
18 deg. W. 10 ms.

proceeded on and Encamped on the Lard side no wood except dry willows
and them Small, one Deer killed to day. The river obliges the men to
undergo great fatigue and labour in hauling the Canoes over the Sholes
in the Cold water naked.




[Lewis, August 14, 1805]
Wednesday August 14th
In order to give Capt. Clark time to reach the forks of Jefferson's
river I concluded to spend this day at the Shoshone Camp and obtain
what information I could with rispect to the country. as we had nothing
but a little flour and parched meal to eat except the berries with
which the Indians furnished us I directed Drewyer and Shields to hunt a
few hours and try to kill something, the Indians furnished them with
horses and most of their young men also turned out to hunt. the game
which they principally hunt is the Antelope which they pursue on
horseback and shoot with their arrows. this animal is so extreemly
fleet and dureable that a single horse has no possible chance to
overtake them or run them down. the Indians are therefore obliged to
have recorce to strategem when they discover a herd of the Antelope
they seperate and scatter themselves to the distance of five or six
miles in different directions arround them generally scelecting some
commanding eminence for a stand; some one or two now pursue the herd at
full speed over the hills values gullies and the sides of precipices
that are tremendious to view. thus after runing them from five to six
or seven miles the fresh horses that were in waiting head them and
drive them back persuing them as far or perhaps further quite to the
other extreem of the hunters who now in turn pursue on their fresh
horses thus worrying the poor animal down and finally killing them with
their arrows. forty or fifty hunters will be engaged for half a day in
this manner and perhaps not kill more than two or three Antelopes. they
have but few Elk or black tailed deer, and the common red deer they
cannot take as they secrete themselves in the brush when pursued, and
they have only the bow and arrow wich is a very slender dependence for
killing any game except such as they can run down with their horses. I
was very much entertained with a view of this indian chase; it was
after a herd of about 10 Antelope and about 20 hunters. it lasted about
2 hours and considerable part of the chase in view from my tent. about
1 A.M. the hunters returned had not killed a single Antelope, and their
horses foaming with sweat. my hunters returned soon after and had been
equally unsuccessfull. I now directed McNeal to make me a little paist
with the flour and added some berries to it which I found very
pallateable.

The means I had of communicating with these people was by way of
Drewyer who understood perfectly the common language of jesticulation
or signs which seems to be universally understood by all the Nations we
have yet seen. it is true that this language is imperfect and liable to
error but is much less so than would be expected. the strong parts of
the ideas are seldom mistaken.

I now prevailed on the Chief to instruct me with rispect to the
geography of his country. this he undertook very cheerfully, by
delienating the rivers on the ground. but I soon found that his
information fell far short of my expectation or wishes. he drew the
river on which we now are to which he placed two branches just above
us, which he shewed me from the openings of the mountains were in view;
he next made it discharge itself into a large river which flowed from
the S. W. about ten miles below us, then continued this joint stream in
the same direction of this valley or N. W. for one days march and then
enclined it to the West for 2 more days march, here he placed a number
of beeps of sand on each side which he informed me represented the vast
mountains of rock eternally covered with snow through which the river
passed. that the perpendicular and even juting rocks so closely hemned
in the river that there was no possibilyte of passing along the shore;
that the bed of the river was obstructed by sharp pointed rocks and the
rapidity of the stream such that the whole surface of the river was
beat into perfect foam as far as the eye could reach. that the
mountains were also inaccessible to man or horse. he said that this
being the state of the country in that direction that himself nor none
of his nation had ever been further down the river than these
mountains. I then enquired the state of the country on either side of
the river but he could not inform me. he said there was an old man of
his nation a days march below who could probably give me some
information of the country to the N. W. and refered me to an old man
then present for that to the S. W.--the Chief further informed me that
he had understood from the persed nosed Indians who inhabit this river
below the rocky mountains that it ran a great way toward the seting sun
and finally lost itself in a great lake of water which was illy
taisted, and where the white men lived. I next commenced my enquiries
of the old man to whom I had been refered for information relative the
country S W. of us. this he depicted with horrors and obstructions
scarcely inferior to that just mentioned. he informed me that the band
of this nation to which he belonged resided at the distance of 20 days
march from hence not far from the white people with whom they traded
for horses mules cloth metal beads and the shells which they woar as
orniment being those of a species of perl oister. that the course to
his relations was a little to the West of South. that in order to get
to his relations the first seven days we should be obliged to climb
over steep and rocky mountains where we could find no game to kill nor
anything but roots such as a ferce and warlike nation lived on whom he
called the broken mockersons or mockersons with holes, and said
inhabited those mountains and lived like the bear of other countries
among the rocks and fed on roots or the flesh of such horses as they
could take or steel from those who passed through their country. that
in passing this country the feet of our horses would be so much wounded
with the stones many of them would give out. the next part of the rout
was about 10 days through a dry and parched sandy desert in which no
food at this season for either man or horse, and in which we must
suffer if not perish for the want of water. that the sun had now dryed
up the little pools of water which exist through this desert plain in
the spring season and had also scorched all the grass. that no animal
inhabited this plain on which we could hope to subsist. that about the
center of this plain a large river passed from S. E. to N. W. which was
navigable but afforded neither Salmon nor timber. that beyond this
plain thee or four days march his relations lived in a country
tolerable fertile and partially covered with timber on another large
river which ran in the same direction of the former. that this last
discharged itself into a large river on which many numerous nations
lived with whom his relations were at war but whether this last
discharged itself into the great lake or not he did not know. that from
his relations it was yet a great distance to the great or stinking lake
as they call the Ocean. that the way which such of his nation as had
been to the Stinking lake traveled was up the river on which they lived
and over to that on which the white people lived which last they knew
discharged itself into the Ocean, and that this was the way which he
would advise me to travel if I was determined to proceed to the Ocean
but would advise me to put off the journey untill the next spring when
he would conduct me. I thanked him for his information and advise and
gave him a knife with which he appeared to be much gratifyed. from this
narative I was convinced that the streams of which he had spoken as
runing through the plains and that on which his relations lived were
southern branches of the Columbia, heading with the rivers Apostles and
Collorado, and that the rout he had pointed out was to the Vermillion
Sea or gulph of Callifornia. I therefore told him that this rout was
more to the South than I wished to travel, and requested to know if
there was no rout on the left of this river on which we now are, by
means of which, I could intercept it below the mountains through which
it passes; but he could not inform me of any except that of the barren
plain which he said joined the mountain on that side and through which
it was impossible for us to pass at this season even if we were
fortunate enough to escape from the broken mockerson Indians. I now
asked Cameahwait by what rout the Pierced nosed indians, who he
informed me inhabited this river below the mountains, came over to the
Missouri; this he informed me was to the north, but added that the road
was a very bad one as he had been informed by them and that they had
suffered excessively with hunger on the rout being obliged to subsist
for many days on berries alone as there was no game in that part of the
mountains which were broken rockey and so thickly covered with timber
that they could scarcely pass. however knowing that Indians had passed,
and did pass, at this season on that side of this river to the same
below the mountains, my rout was instantly settled in my own mind,
povided the account of this river should prove true on an investigation
of it, which I was determined should be made before we would undertake
the rout by land in any direction. I felt perfectly satisfyed, that if
the Indians could pass these mountains with their women and Children,
that we could also pass them; and that if the nations on this river
below the mountains were as numerous as they were stated to be that
they must have some means of subsistence which it would be equally in
our power to procure in the same country. they informed me that there
was no buffaloe on the West side of these mountains; that the game
consisted of a few Elk deer and Antelopes, and that the natives
subsisted on fish and roots principally. in this manner I spent the day
smoking with them and acquiring what information I could with respect
to their country. they informed me that they could pass to the
Spaniards by the way of the yellowstone river in 10 days. I can
discover that these people are by no means friendly to the Spaniard
their complaint is, that the Spaniards will not let them have fire arms
and amunition, that they put them off by telling them that if they
suffer them to have guns they will kill each other, thus leaving them
defenceless and an easy prey to their bloodthirsty neighbours to the
East of them, who being in possession of fire arms hunt them up and
murder them without rispect to sex or age and plunder them of their
horses on all occasions. they told me that to avoid their enemies who
were eternally harrassing them that they were obliged to remain in the
interior of these mountains at least two thirds of the year where the
suffered as we then saw great heardships for the want of food sometimes
living for weeks without meat and only a little fish roots and berries.
but this added Cameahwait, with his ferce eyes and lank jaws grown
meager for the want of food, would not be the case if we had guns, we
could then live in the country of buffaloe and eat as our enimies do
and not be compelled to hide ourselves in these mountains and live on
roots and berries as the bear do. we do not fear our enimies when
placed on an equal footing with them. I told them that the Minnetares
Mandans & Recares of the Missouri had promised us to desist from making
war on them & that we would indevour to find the means of making the
Minnetares of fort d Prarie or as they call them Pahkees desist from
waging war against them also. that after our finally returning to our
homes towards the rising sun whitemen would come to them with an
abundance of guns and every other article necessary to their defence
and comfort, and that they would be enabled to supply themselves with
these articles on reasonable terms in exchange for the skins of the
beaver Otter and Ermin so abundant in their country. they expressed
great pleasure at this information and said they had been long anxious
to see the whitemen that traded guns; and that we might rest assured of
their friendship and that they would do whatever we wished them.

I now told Cameahwait that I wished him to speak to his people and
engage them to go with me tomorrow to the forks of Jeffersons river
where our baggage was by this time arrived with another Chief and a
large party of whitemen who would wait my return at that place. that I
wish them to take with them about 30 spare horses to transport our
baggage to this place where we would then remain sometime among them
and trade with them for horses, and finally concert our future plans
for geting on to the ocean and of the traid which would be extended to
them after our return to our homes. he complyed with my request and
made a lengthey harrangue to his village. he returned in about an hour
and a half and informed me that they would be ready to accompany me in
the morning. I promised to reward them for their trouble. Drewyer who
had had a good view of their horses estimated them at 400. most of them
are fine horses. indeed many of them would make a figure on the South
side of James River or the land of fine horses.--I saw several with
Spanish brands on them, and some mules which they informed me that they
had also obtained from the Spaniards. I also saw a bridle bit of
spanish manufactary, and sundry other articles which I have no doubt
were obtained from the same source. notwithstanding the extreem poverty
of those poor people they are very merry they danced again this evening
untill midnight. each warrior keep one ore more horses tyed by a cord
to a stake near his lodge both day and night and are always prepared
for action at a moments warning. they fight on horseback altogether.
lobserve that the large flies are extreemly troublesome to the horses
as well as ourselves.

The morning being cold and the men stif and soar from the exertions of
yesterday Capt. Clark did not set out this morning untill 7 A.M. the
river was so crooked and rapid that they made but little way at one
mile he passed a bold runing stream on Stard. which heads in a mountain
to the North, on which there is snow. this we called track Creek. it is
4 yard wide and 3 feet deep at 7 Ms. passed a stout stream which heads
in some springs under the foot of the mountains on Lard. the river near
the mountain they found one continued rapid, with was extreemly
laborious and difficult to ascend. this evening Charbono struck his
indian Woman for which Capt. C. gave him a severe repremand. Joseph and
Reubin Fields killed 4 deer and an Antelope, Capt. C. killed a buck.
several of the men have lamed themselves by various accedents in
working the canoes through this difficult part of the river, and Capt.
C. was obliged personally to assist them in this labour. they encamped
this evening on Lard. side near the rattlesnake clift




[Clark, August 14, 1805]
August 14th Wednesday 1805.
a Cold morning wind from the S. W. The Thermometer Stood at 51 deg. a 0, at
Sunrise the morning being cold and men Stiff. I deturmind to delay &
take brackfast at the place we Encamped. we Set out at 7 oClock and
proceeded on river verry Crooked and rapid as below Some fiew trees on
the borders near the mountain, passed a bold running Stream at 1 mile
on the Stard. Side which heads in a mountain to the North on which
there is Snow passed a bold running Stream on the Lard. Side which
heads in a Spring undr. a mountain, the river near the mountain is one
continued rapid, which requres great labour to push & haul the Canoes
up. We Encamped on the Lard Side near the place the river passes thro
the mountain. I checked our interpreter for Strikeing his woman at
their Dinner.

The hunters Jo. & R. Fields killed 4 Deer & a antilope, I killed a fat
Buck in the evening, Several men have hurt themselves pushing up the
Canoes. I am oblige to a pole occasionally.




[Lewis, August 15, 1805]
Thursday August 15th 1805.
This morning I arrose very early and as hungary as a wolf. I had eat
nothing yesterday except one scant meal of the flour and berries except
the dryed cakes of berries which did not appear to satisfy my appetite
as they appeared to do those of my Indian friends. I found on enquiry
of McNeal that we had only about two pounds of flour remaining. this I
directed him to divide into two equal parts and to cook the one half
this morning in a kind of pudding with the hurries as he had done
yesterday and reserve the ballance for the evening. on this new
fashoned pudding four of us breakfasted, giving a pretty good allowance
also to the Chief who declared it the best thing he had taisted for a
long time. he took a little of the Hour in his hand, taisted and
examined very scrutinously and asked me if we made it of roots. I
explained to him the manner in which it grew. I hurried the departure
of the Indians. the Chief addressed them several times before they
would move they seemed very reluctant to accompany me. I at length
asked the reason and he told me that some foolish persons among them
had suggested the idea that we were in league with the Pahkees and had
come on in order to decoy them into an ambuscade where their enimies
were waiting to receive them. but that for his part he did not believe
it. I readily perceived that our situation was not entirely free from
danger as the transision from suspicion to the confermation of the fact
would not be very difficult in the minds of these ignorant people who
have been accustomed from their infancy to view every stranger as an
enimy. I told Cameahwait that I was sorry to find that they had put so
little confidence in us, that I knew they were not acquainted with
whitemen and therefore could forgive them. that among whitemen it was
considered disgracefull to lye or entrap an enimy by falsehood. I told
him if they continued to think thus meanly of us that they might rely
on it that no whitemen would ever come to trade with them or bring them
arms and amunition and that if the bulk of his nation still entertained
this opinion I still hoped that there were some among them that were
not affraid to die, that were men and would go with me and convince
themselves of the truth of what I had asscerted. that there was a party
of whitemen waiting my return either at the forks of Jefferson's river
or a little below coining on to that place in canoes loaded with
provisions and merchandize. he told me for his own part he was
determined to go, that he was not affraid to die. I soon found that I
had touched him on the right string; to doubt the bravery of a savage
is at once to put him on his metal. he now mounted his horse and
haranged his village a third time; the perport of which as he
afterwards told me was to inform them that he would go with us and
convince himself of the truth or falsity of what we had told him if he
was sertain he should be killed, that he hoped there were some of them
who heard him were not affraid to die with him and if there was to let
him see them mount their horses and prepare to set out. shortly after
this harange he was joined by six or eight only and with these I smoked
a pipe and directed the men to put on their packs being determined to
set out with them while I had them in the humour at half after 12 we
set out, several of the old women were crying and imploring the great
sperit to protect their warriors as if they were going to inevitable
distruction. we had not proceeded far before our party was augmented by
ten or twelve more, and before we reached the Creek which we had passed
in the morning of the 13th it appeared to me that we had all the men of
the village and a number of women with us. this may serve in some
measure to ilustrate the capricious disposition of those people who
never act but from the impulse of the moment. they were now very
cheerfull and gay, and two hours ago they looked as sirly as so many
imps of satturn. when we arrived at the spring on the side of the
mountain where we had encamped on the 12th the Chief insited on halting
to let the horses graize with which I complyed and gave the Indians
smoke. they are excessively fond of the pipe; but have it not much in
their power to indulge themselves with even their native tobacco as
they do not cultivate it themselves.--after remaining about an hour we
again set out, and by engaging to make compensation to four of them for
their trouble obtained the previlege of riding with an indian myself
and a similar situation for each of my party. I soon found it more
tiresome riding without tirrups than walking and of course chose the
latter making the Indian carry my pack. about sunset we reached the
upper part of the level valley of the Cove which now called Shoshone
Cove. the grass being birned on the North side of the river we passed
over to the south and encamped near some willow brush about 4 miles
above the narrow pass between the hills noticed as I came up this cove
the river was here about six yards wide, and frequently darned up by
the beaver. I had sent Drewyer forward this evening before we halted to
kill some meat but he was unsuccessfull and did not rejoin us untill
after dark I now cooked and among six of us eat the remaining pound of
flour stired in a little boiling water.--Capt. Clark delayed again this
morning untill after breakfast, when he set out and passed between low
and rugged mountains which had a few pine trees distributed over them
the clifts are formed of limestone and a hard black rock intermixed. no
trees on the river, the bottoms narrow river crooked shallow shoally
and rapid. the water is as coald as that of the best springs in our
country. the men as usual suffered excessively with fatiegue and the
coldness of the water to which they were exposed for hours together. at
the distance of 6 miles by water they passed the entrance of a bold
creek on Stard. side 10 yds. wide and 3 f. 3 i. deep which we called
Willard's Creek after Alexander Willard one of our party. at 4 miles by
water from their encampment of las evening passed a bold branch which
tumbled down a steep precipice of rocks from the mountains on the Lard.
Capt Clark was very near being bitten twice today by rattlesnakes, the
Indian woman also narrowly escaped. they caught a number of fine trout.
Capt. Clark killed a buck which was the only game killed today. the
venison has an uncommon bitter taist which is unpleasent. I presume it
proceeds from some article of their food, perhaps the willow on the
leaves of which they feed very much. they encamped this evening on the
Lard. side near a few cottonwood trees about which there were the
remains of several old Indian brush lodges.




[Clark, August 15, 1805]
August 15th Thursday 1805
a Cool windey morning wind from the S W we proceeded on thro a ruged
low mountain water rapid as usial passed a bold running Stream which
falls from the mountain on the Lard. Side at 4 miles, also a bold
running Stream 10 yards wide on the Stard Side 8 feet 3 In. Deep at 6
miles, Willards Creek the bottoms narrow, the Clifs of a Dark brown
Stone Some limestone intermixed--an Indian road passes on the Lard Side
latterly used. Took a Meridian altitude at the Comsnt. of the Mountain
with Octent 65 deg. 47' 0". The Latd. 44 deg. 0' 48 1/10" proceeded on with great
labour & fatigue to the Mouth of a Small run on the Lard. Side

passed Several Spring runs, the men Complain much of their fatigue and
being repetiedly in the water which weakens them much perticularly as
they are obliged to live on pore Deer meet which has a Singular bitter
taste. I have no accounts of Capt Lewis Sence he Set out

In walking on Shore I Saw Several rattle Snakes and narrowly escaped at
two different times, as also the Squar when walking with her husband on
Shore--I killed a Buck nothing else killed to day--This mountn. I call
rattle Snake mountain. not one tree on either Side to day




[Lewis, August 16, 1805]
Friday August 16th 1805.
I sent Drewyer and Shields before this morning in order to kill some
meat as neither the Indians nor ourselves had any thing to eat. I
informed the Ceif of my view in this measure, and requested that he
would keep his young men with us lest by their hooping and noise they
should allarm the game and we should get nothing to eat, but so
strongly were there suspicions exited by this measure that two parties
of discovery immediately set out one on ech side of the valley to watch
the hunters as I beleive to see whether they had not been sent to give
information of their approach to an enemy that they still preswaided
themselves were lying in wait for them. I saw that any further effort
to prevent their going would only add strength to their suspicions and
therefore said no more. after the hunters had been gone about an hour
we set out. we had just passed through the narrows when we saw one of
the spies comeing up the level plain under whip, the chief pawsed a
little and seemed somewhat concerned. I felt a good deel so myself and
began to suspect that by some unfortunate accedent that perhaps some of
there enimies had straggled hither at this unlucky moment; but we were
all agreeably disappointed on the arrival of the young man to learn
that he had come to inform us that one of the whitemen had killed a
deer. in an instant they all gave their horses the whip and I was taken
nearly a mile before I could learn what were the tidings; as I was
without tirrups and an Indian behind me the jostling was disagreeable I
therefore reigned up my horse and forbid the indian to whip him who had
given him the lash at every jum for a mile fearing he should loose a
part of the feast. the fellow was so uneasy that he left me the horse
dismounted and ran on foot at full speed, I am confident a mile. when
they arrived where the deer was which was in view of me they dismounted
and ran in tumbling over each other like a parcel of famished dogs each
seizing and tearing away a part of the intestens which had been
previously thrown out by Drewyer who killed it; the seen was such when
I arrived that had I not have had a pretty keen appetite myself I am
confident I should not have taisted any part of the venison shortly.
each one had a peice of some discription and all eating most
ravenously. some were eating the kidnies the melt and liver and the
blood runing from the corners of their mouths, others were in a similar
situation with the paunch and guts but the exuding substance in this
case from their lips was of a different discription. one of the last
who attacted my attention particularly had been fortunate in his
allotment or reather active in the division, he had provided himself
with about nine feet of the small guts one end of which he was chewing
on while with his hands he was squezzing the contents out at the other.
I really did not untill now think that human nature ever presented
itself in a shape so nearly allyed to the brute creation. I viewed
these poor starved divils with pity and compassion I directed McNeal to
skin the deer and reserved a quarter, the ballance I gave the Chief to
be divided among his people; they devoured the whole of it nearly
without cooking. I now boar obliquely to the left in order to
interscept the creek where there was some brush to make a fire, and
arrived at this stream where Drewyer had killed a second deer; here
nearly the same seene was encored. a fire being kindled we cooked and
eat and gave the ballance of the two deer to the Indians who eat the
whole of them even to the soft parts of the hoofs. Drewyer joined us at
breakfast with a third deer. of this I reserved a quarter and gave the
ballance to the Indians. they all appeared now to have filled
themselves and were in a good humour. this morning early soon after the
hunters set out a considerable part of our escort became allarmed and
returned 28 men and three women only continued with us. after eating
and suffering the horses to graize about 2 hours we renued our march
and towads evening arrived at the lower part of the cove Shields killed
an Antelope on the way a part of which we took and gave the remainder
to the Indians. being now informed of the place at which I expected to
meat Capt C. and the party they insisted on making a halt, which was
complyed with. we now dismounted and the Chief with much cerimony put
tippets about our necks such as they temselves woar I redily perceived
that this was to disguise us and owed it's origine to the same cause
already mentioned. to give them further confidence I put my cocked hat
with feather on the chief and my over shirt being of the Indian form my
hair deshivled and skin well browned with the sun I wanted no further
addition to make me a complete Indian in appearance the men followed my
example and we were son completely metamorphosed. I again repeated to
them the possibility of the party not having arrived at the place which
I expected they were, but assured them they could not be far below,
lest by not finding them at the forks their suspicions might arrise to
such hight as to induce them to return precipitately. we now set out
and rode briskly within sight of the forks making one of the Indians
carry the flag that our own party should know who we were. when we
arrived in sight at the distance of about 2 miles I discovered to my
mortification that the party had not arrived, and the Indians slackened
their pace. I now scarcely new what to do and feared every moment when
they would halt altogether, I now determined to restore their
confidence cost what it might and therefore gave the Chief my gun and
told him that if his enimies were in those bushes before him that he
could defend himself with that gun, that for my own part I was not
affraid to die and if I deceived him he might make what uce of the gun
he thought proper or in other words that he might shoot me. the men
also gave their guns to other indians which seemed to inspire them with
more confidence; they sent their spies before them at some distance and
when I drew near the place I thought of the notes which I had left and
directed Drewyer to go with an Indian man and bring them to me which he
did. the indian seeing him take the notes from the stake on which they
had been plased I now had recource to a stratagem in which I thought
myself justifyed by the occasion, but which I must confess set a little
awkward. it had it's desired effect. after reading the notes which were
the same I had left I told the Chief that when I had left my brother
Chief with the party below where the river entered the mountain that we
both agreed not to bring the canoes higher up than the next forks of
the river above us wherever this might happen, that there he was to
wait my return, should he arrive first, and that in the event of his
not being able to travel as fast as usual from the difficulty of the
water, that he was to send up to the first forks above him and leave a
note informing me where he was, that this note was left here today and
that he informed me that he was just below the mountains and was coming
on slowly up, and added that I should wait here for him, but if they
did not beleive me that I should send a man at any rate to the Chief
and they might also send one of their young men with him, that myself
and two others would remain with them at this place. this plan was
readily adopted and one of the young men offered his services; I
promised him a knife and some beads as a reward for his confidence in
us. most of them seemed satisfyed but there were several that
complained of the Chief's exposing them to danger unnecessarily and
said that we told different stories, in short a few were much
dissatisfyed. I wrote a note to Capt. Clark by the light of some willow
brush and directed Drewyer to set out early being confident that there
was not a moment to spare. the chief and five or six others slept about
my fire and the others hid themselves in various parts of the willow
brush to avoid the enimy whom they were fearfull would attack them in
the course of the night. I now entertained various conjectures myself
with rispect to the cause of Capt. Clarks detention and was even fearful
l that he had found the river so difficult that he had halted below the
Rattlesnake bluffs. I knew that if these people left me that they would
immediately disperse and secrete themselves in the mountains where it
would be impossible to find them or at least in vain to pursue them and
that they would spread the allarm to all other bands within our reach &
of course we should be disappointed in obtaining horses, which would
vastly retard and increase the labour of our voyage and I feared might
so discourage the men as to defeat the expedition altogether. my mind
was in reallity quite as gloomy all this evening as the most affrighted
indian but I affected cheerfullness to keep the Indians so who were
about me. we finally laid down and the Chief placed himself by the side
of my musquetoe bier. I slept but little as might be well expected, my
mind dwelling on the state of the expedition which I have ever held in
equal estimation with my own existence, and the fait of which appeared
at this moment to depend in a great measure upon the caprice of a few
savages who are ever as fickle as the wind. I had mentioned to the
chief several times that we had with us a woman of his nation who had
been taken prisoner by the Minnetares, and that by means of her I hoped
to explain myself more fully than I could do by signs. some of the
party had also told the Indians that we had a man with us who was black
and had short curling hair, this had excited their curiossity very
much. and they seemed quite as anxious to see this monster as they wer
the merchandize which we had to barter for their horses.

at 7 A M. Capt. C. set out after breakfast. he changed the hands in
some of the canoes; they proceeded with more ease than yesterday, yet
they found the river still rapid and shallow insomuch that they were
obliged to drag the large canoes the greater part of the day. the water
excessively cold. in the evening they passed several bad rapids.
considerable quantities of the buffaloe clover grows along the narrow
bottoms through which they passed. there was no timber except a few
scatiring small pine on the hills. willow service berry and currant
bushes were the growth of the river bottoms. they geatherd considerable
quantities of service berries, and caught some trout. one deer was
killed by the hunters who slept out last night. and did not join the
party untill 10 A.M.

Capt. Clark sent the hunters this evening up to the forks of the river
which he discovered from an eminence; they mus have left this place but
a little time before we arrived. this evening they encamped on the
Lard. side only a few miles below us. and were obliged like ourselves
to make use of small willow brush for fuel. the men were much fatigued
and exhausted this evening.




[Clark, August 16, 1805]
August 16th Friday 1805
as this morning was cold and the men fatigued Stiff and Chilled
deturmined me to detain & take brackfast before I Set out. I changed
the hands and Set out at 7 oClock proceeded on Something better than
yesterday for the fore part of the Day passed Several rapids in the
latter part of the day near the hills river passed between 2 hills I
saw a great number of Service berries now ripe. the Yellow Current are
also Common I observe the long leaf Clover in great plenty in the
vallie below this vallie--Some fiew tres on the river no timber on the
hills or mountn. except a fiew Small Pine & Cedar. The Thmtr. Stood at
48 deg. a. 0 at Sunrise wind S W. The hunters joined me at 1 oClock, I
dispatched 2 men to prosue an Indian roade over the hills for a fiew
miles, at the narrows I assended a mountain from the top of which I
could See that the river forked near me the left hand appeared the
largest & bore S. E. the right passed from the West thro an extensive
Vallie, I could See but three Small trees in any Direction from the top
of this mountain. passed an Isld. and Encamped ion the Lard. Side the
only wood was Small willows




[Lewis, August 17, 1805]
Saturday August 17th 1805.
This morning I arrose very early and dispatched Drewyer and the Indian
down the river. sent Shields to hunt. I made McNeal cook the remainder
of our meat which afforded a slight breakfast for ourselves and the
Cheif. Drewyer had been gone about 2 hours when an Indian who had
straggled some little distance down the river returned and reported
that the whitemen were coming, that he had seen them just below. they
all appeared transported with joy, & the chef repeated his fraturnal
hug. I felt quite as much gratifyed at this information as the Indians
appeared to be. Shortly after Capt. Clark arrived with the Interpreter
Charbono, and the Indian woman, who proved to be a sister of the Chif
Cameahwait. the meeting of those people was really affecting,
particularly between Sah cah-gar-we-ah and an Indian woman, who had
been taken prisoner at the same time with her, and who had afterwards
escaped from the Minnetares and rejoined her nation. At noon the Canoes
arrived, and we had the satisfaction once more to find ourselves all
together, with a flattering prospect of being able to obtain as many
horses shortly as would enable us to prosicute our voyage by land
should that by water be deemed unadvisable.

We now formed our camp just below the junction of the forks on the
Lard. side in a level smooth bottom covered with a fine terf of
greenswoard. here we unloaded our canoes and arranged our baggage on
shore; formed a canopy of one of our large sails and planted some
willow brush in the ground to form a shade for the Indians to set under
while we spoke to them, which we thought it best to do this evening.
acordingly about 4 P.M. we called them together and through the medium
of Labuish, Charbono and Sah-cah-gar-weah, we communicated to them
fully the objects which had brought us into this distant part of the
country, in which we took care to make them a conspicuous object of our
own good wishes and the care of our government. we made them sensible
of their dependance on the will of our government for every species of
merchandize as well for their defence & comfort; and apprized them of
the strength of our government and it's friendly dispositions towards
them. we also gave them as a reason why we wished to petrate the
country as far as the ocean to the west of them was to examine and find
out a more direct way to bring merchandize to them. that as no trade
could be carryed on with them before our return to our homes that it
was mutually advantageous to them as well as to ourselves that they
should render us such aids as they had it in their power to furnish in
order to haisten our voyage and of course our return home. that such
were their horses to transport our baggage without which we could not
subsist, and that a pilot to conduct us through the mountains was also
necessary if we could not decend the river by water. but that we did
not ask either their horses or their services without giving a
satisfactory compensation in return. that at present we wished them to
collect as many horses as were necessary to transport our baggage to
their village on the Columbia where we would then trade with them at
our leasure for such horses as they could spare us.--They appeared well
pleased with what had been said. the chief thanked us for friendship
towards himself and nation & declared his wish to serve us in every
rispect; that he was sorry to find that it must yet be some time before
they could be furnished with firearms but said they could live as they
had done heretofore untill we brought them as we had promised. he said
they had not horses enough with them at present to remove our baggage
to their village over the mountain, but that he would return tomorrow
and encourage his people to come over with their horses and that he
would bring his own and assist us. this was complying with all we
wished at present. we next enquired who were chiefs among them.
Cameahwait pointed out two others whom he said were Chiefs we gave him
a medal of the small size with the likeness of Mr. Jefferson the
President of the U States in releif on one side and clasp hands with a
pipe and tomahawk on the other, to the other Chiefs we gave each a
small medal which were struck in the Presidency of George Washing Esqr.
we also gave small medals of the last discription to two young men whom
the 1st Chief informed us wer good young men and much rispected among
them. we gave the 1st Chief an uniform coat shirt a pair of scarlet
legings a carrot of tobacco and some small articles to each of the
others we gave a shirt leging handkerchief a knife some tobacco and a
few small articles we also distributed a good quantity paint mockerson
awls knives beads lookingglasses &c among the other Indians and gave
them a plentifull meal of lyed corn which was the first they had ever
eaten in their lives. they were much pleased with it. every article
about us appeared to excite astonishment in ther minds; the appearance
of the men, their arms, the canoes, our manner of working them, the
back man york and the segacity of my dog were equally objects of
admiration. I also shot my air-gun which was so perfectly
incomprehensible that they immediately denominated it the great
medicine. the idea which the indians mean to convey by this appellation
is something that eminates from or acts immediately by the influence or
power of the great sperit; or that in which the power of god is
manifest by it's incomprehensible power of action. our hunters killed 4
deer and an Antelope this evening of which we also gave the Indians a
good proportion. the cerimony of our council and smoking the pipe was
in conformity of the custom of this nation perfomed bearfoot. on those
occasions points of etiquet are quite as much attended to by the
Indians as among scivilized nations. To keep indians in a good humour
you must not fatiegue them with too much business at one time.
therefore after the council we gave them to eat and amused them a while
by shewing them such articles as we thought would be entertaining to
them, and then renewed our enquiries with rispect to the country. the
information we derived was only a repetition of that they had given me
before and in which they appeared to be so candid that I could not
avoid yealing confidence to what they had said. Capt. Clark and myself
now concerted measures for our future operations, and it was mutually
agreed that he should set out tomorrow morning with eleven men
furnished with axes and other necessary tools for making canoes, their
arms accoutrements and as much of their baggage as they could carry.
also to take the indians Carbono and the indian woman with him; that on
his arrival at the Shoshone camp he was to leave Charbono and the
Indian woman to haisten the return of the Indians with their horses to
this place, and to proceede himself with the eleven men down the
Columbia in order to examine the river and if he found it navigable and
could obtain timber to set about making canoes immediately. In the mean
time I was to bring on the party and baggage to the Shoshone Camp,
calculating that by the time I should reach that place that he would
have sufficiently informed himself with rispect to the state of the
river &c. as to determine us whether to prosicute our journey from
thence by land or water. in the former case we should want all the
horses which we could perchase, the latter only to hire the Indians to
transport our baggage to the place at which we made the canoes. in
order to inform me as early as possible of the state of the river he
was to send back one of the men with the necessary information as soon
as he should satisfy himself on this subject. this plan being settled
we gave orders accordingly and the men prepared for an early march. the
nights are very cold and the sun excessively hot in the day. we have no
fuel here but a few dry willow brush. and from the appearance of
country I am confident we shall not find game here to subsist us many
days. these are additional reasons why I conceive it necessary to get
under way as soon as possible.--this morning Capt. Clark had delayed
untill 7 A.M. before he set out just about which time Drewyer arrived
with the Indian; he left the canoes to come on after him, and
immediately set out and joined me as has been before mentioned.The
sperits of the men were now much elated at the prospect of geting
horses.




[Clark, August 17, 1805]
August 17th Satturday 1805
a fair Cold morning wind S. W. the Thermometer at 42 a. 0 at Sunrise,
We Set out at 7 oClock and proceeded on to the forks I had not
proceeded on one mile before I saw at a distance Several Indians on
horsback Comeing towards me, The Intertrepeter & Squar who were before
me at Some distance danced for the joyful Sight, and She made signs to
me that they were her nation, as I aproached nearer them descovered one
of Capt Lewis party With them dressed in their Dress; the met me with
great Signs of joy, as the Canoes were proceeding on nearly opposit me
I turned those people & joined Capt Lewis who had Camped with 16 of
those Snake Indians at the forks 2 miles in advance. those Indians Sung
all the way to their Camp where the others had provd. a cind of Shade
of Willows Stuck up in a Circle the Three Chiefs with Capt. Lewis met
me with great cordialliaty embraced and took a Seat on a white robe,
the Main Chief imedeately tied to my hair Six Small pieces of Shells
resembling perl which is highly Valued by those people and is prcured
from the nations resideing near the Sea Coast. we then Smoked in their
fassion without Shoes and without much cerimoney and form.

Capt Lewis informed me he found those people on the Columbia River
about 40 miles from the forks at that place there was a large camp of
them, he had purswaded those with him to Come and See that what he said
was the truth, they had been under great apprehension all the way, for
fear of their being deceived. The Great Chief of this nation proved to
be the brother of the Woman with us and is a man of Influence Sence &
easey & reserved manners, appears to possess a great deel of Cincerity.
The Canoes arrived & unloaded--every thing appeared to asstonish those
people. the appearance of the men, their arms, the Canoes, the Clothing
my black Servent. & the Segassity of Capt Lewis's Dog. we Spoke a fiew
words to them in the evening respecting our rout intentions our want of
horses &c. & gave them a fiew presents & medals--we made a number of
inquires of those people about the Columbia River the Countrey game &c.
The account they gave us was verry unfavourable, that the River
abounded in emence falls, one perticularly much higher than the falls
of the Missouri & at the place the mountains Closed So Close that it
was impracticable to pass, & that the ridge Continued on each Side of
perpendicular Clifts inpenetratable, and that no Deer Elk or any game
was to be found in that Countrey, aded to that they informed us that
there was no timber on the river Sufficiently large to make Small
Canoes, This information (if true is alarming) I deturmined to go in
advance and examine the Countrey, See if those dificueltes presented
themselves in the gloomey picture in which they painted them, and if
the river was practiable and I could find timber to build Canoes, those
Ideas & plan appeard to be agreeable to Capt Lewis's Ideas on this
point, and I selected 11 men, directed them to pack up their baggage
Complete themselves with amunition, take each an ax and Such tools as
will be Soutable to build Canoes, and be ready to Set out at 10 oClock
tomorrow morning. Those people greatly pleased our hunters killed three
Deer & an antilope which was eaten in a Short time the Indians being so
harrassed & compelled to move about in those rugid mountains that they
are half Starved liveing at this time on berries & roots which they
geather in the plains. Those people are not begerley but generous, only
one has asked me for anything and he for powder.

This nation Call themselves Cho-shop-ne the Chief is name
Too-et-te-con'l Black Gun is his war name Ka-me-ah-wah--or Come &
Smoke. this Chief gave me the following name and pipe Ka-me-ah-wah.




[Lewis, August 18, 1805]
Sunday August 18th 1805.
This morning while Capt Clark was busily engaged in preparing for his
rout, I exposed some articles to barter with the Indians for horses as
I wished a few at this moment to releive the men who were going with
Capt Clark from the labour of carrying their baggage and also one to
keep here in order to pack the meat to camp which the hunters might
kill. I soon obtained three very good horses for which I gave an
uniform coat, a pair of legings, a few handkerchiefs, three knives and
some other small articles the whole of which did not cost more than
about 20$ in the U States. the Indians seemed quite as well pleased
with their bargin as I was. the men also purchased one for an old
checked shirt a pair of old legings and a knife. two of those I
purchased Capt. C. took on with him. at 10 A.M. Capt. Clark departed
with his detatchment and all the Indians except 2 men and 2 women who
remained with us. Two of the inferior chiefs were a little displeased
at not having received a present equivolent to that given the first
Chief. to releive this difficulty Capt. Clark bestoed a couple of his
old coats on them and I promised that if they wer active in assisting
me over the mountains with horses that I would give them an additional
present; this seemed perfectly to satisfy them and they all set out in
a good humour. Capt. Clark encamped this evening near the narrow pass
between the hills on Jefferson's river in the Shoshone Cove. his
hunters killed one deer which the party with the aid of the Indians
readily consumed in the course of the evening.--after there departure
this morning I had all the stores and baggage of every discription
opened and aired. and began the operation of forming the packages in
proper parsels for the purpose of transporting them on horseback. the
rain in the evening compelled me to desist from my operations. I had
the raw hides put in the water in order to cut them in throngs proper
for lashing the packages and forming the necessary geer for pack
horses, a business which I fortunately had not to learn on this
occasion. Drewyer Killed one deer this evening. a beaver was also
caught by one of the party. I had the net arranged and set this evening
to catch some trout which we could see in great abundance at the bottom
of the river. This day I completed my thirty first year, and conceived
that I had in all human probability now existed about half the period
which I am to remain in this Sublunary world. I reflected that I had as
yet done but little, very little indeed, to further the hapiness of the
human race, or to advance the information of the succeeding generation.
I viewed with regret the many hours I have spent in indolence, and now
soarly feel the want of that information which those hours would have
given me had they been judiciously expended. but since they are past
and cannot be recalled, I dash from me the gloomy thought and resolved
in future, to redouble my exertions and at least indeavour to promote
those two primary objects of human existence, by giving them the aid of
that portion of talents which nature and fortune have bestoed on me; or
in future, to live for mankind, as I have heretofore lived for myself.




[Clark, August 18, 1805]
August 18th Sunday 1805
Purchased of the Indians three horses for which we gave a Chiefs Coat
Some Handkerchiefs a Shirt Legins & a fiew arrow points &c. I gave two
of my coats to two of the under Chiefs who appeared not well Satisfied
that the first Chief was dressed so much finer than themselves. at 10
oClock I Set out accompanied by the Indians except 3 the interpreter
and wife, the fore part of the day worm, at 12 oClock it became hasey
with a mist of rain wind hard from the S. W. and Cold which increased
untill night the rain Seased in about two hours. We proceeded on thro a
wide leavel vallie without wood except willows & Srubs for 15 miles and
Encamped at a place the high lands approach within 200 yards in 2
points the River here only 10 yards wide Several Small Streams
branching out on each Side below. all the Indians proceeded on except
the 3 Chiefs & two young men. my hunters killed two Deer which we eate.
The Course from the forks is West 9 miles N. 60 deg. W. 6 miles. The Laid. of
the forks agreeable to observations is 43 deg. 30' 43" North-




[Lewis, August 19, 1805]
Monday August 19th 1805.
This morning I arrose at dylight. and sent out three hunters. some of
the men who were much in want of legings and mockersons I suffered to
dress some skins. the others I employed in repacking the baggage,
making pack saddles &c. we took up the net this morning but caugt no
fish. one beaver was caught in a trap. the frost which perfectly
whitened the grass this morning had a singular appearance to me at this
season. this evening I made a few of the men construct a sein of willow
brush which we hawled and caught a large number of fine trout and a
kind of mullet about 16 Inhes long which I had not seen before. the
scales are small, the nose is long and obtusely pointed and exceedes
the under jaw. the mouth is not large but opens with foalds at the
sides, the colour of it's back and sides is of a bluish brown and
belley white; it has the faggot bones, from which I have supposed it to
be of the mullet kind. the tongue and pallate are smooth and it has no
teeth. it is by no means as good as the trout. the trout are the same
which I first met with at the falls of the Missouri, they are larger
than the speckled trout of our mountains and equally as well flavored.-
The hunters returned this evening with two deer. from what has been
said of the Shoshones it will be readily perceived that they live in a
wretched stait of poverty. yet notwithstanding their extreem poverty
they are not only cheerfull but even gay, fond of gaudy dress and
amusements; like most other Indians they are great egotists and
frequently boast of heroic acts which they never performed. they are
also fond of games of wrisk. they are frank, communicative, fair in
dealing, generous with the little they possess, extreemly honest, and
by no means beggarly. each individual is his own sovereign master, and
acts from the dictates of his own mind; the authority of the Cheif
being nothing more than mere admonition supported by the influence
which the propiety of his own examplery conduct may have acquired him
in the minds of the individuals who compose the band. the title of
cheif is not hereditary, nor can I learn that there is any cerimony of
instalment, or other epoh in the life of a Cheif from which his title
as such can be dated. in fact every man is a chief, but all have not an
equal influence on the minds of the other members of the community, and
he who happens to enjoy the greatest share of confidence is the
principal Chief. The Shoshonees may be estimated at about 100 warriors,
and about three times that number of woomen and children. they have
more children among them than I expected to have seen among a people
who procure subsistence with such difficulty. there are but few very
old persons, nor did they appear to treat those with much tenderness or
rispect. The man is the sole propryetor of his wives and daughters, and
can barter or dispose of either as he thinks proper. a plurality of
wives is common among them, but these are not generally sisters as with
the Minnetares & Mandans but are purchased of different fathers. The
father frequently disposes of his infant daughters in marriage to men
who are grown or to men who have sons for whom they think proper to
provide wives. the compensation given in such cases usually consists of
horses or mules which the father receives at the time of contract and
converts to his own uce. the girl remains with her parents untill she
is conceived to have obtained the age of puberty which with them is
considered to be about the age of 13 or 14 years. the female at this
age is surrendered to her sovereign lord and husband agreeably to
contract, and with her is frequently restored by the father quite as
much as he received in the first instance in payment for his daughter;
but this is discretionary with the father. Sah-car-gar-we-ah had been
thus disposed of before she was taken by the Minnetares, or had arrived
to the years of puberty. the husband was yet living and with this band.
he was more than double her age and had two other wives. he claimed her
as his wife but said that as she had had a child by another man, who
was Charbono, that he did not want her. They seldom correct their
children particularly the boys who soon become masters of their own
acts. they give as a reason that it cows and breaks the Sperit of the
boy to whip him, and that he never recovers his independence of mind
after he is grown. They treat their women but with little rispect, and
compel them to perform every species of drudgery. they collect the wild
fruits and roots, attend to the horses or assist in that duty cook
dreess the skins and make all their apparal, collect wood and make
their fires, arrange and form their lodges, and when they travel pack
the horses and take charge of all the baggage; in short the man dose
little else except attend his horses hunt and fish. the man considers
himself degraded if he is compelled to walk any distance, and if he is
so unfortunately poor as only to possess two horses he rides the best
himself and leavs the woman or women if he has more than one, to
transport their baggage and children on the other, and to walk if the
horse is unable to carry the additional weight of their persons--the
chastity of their women is not held in high estimation, and the husband
will for a trifle barter the companion of his bead for a night or
longer if he conceives the reward adiquate; tho they are not so
importunate that we should caress their women as the siouxs were and
some of their women appear to be held more sacred than in any nation we
have seen I have requested the men to give them no cause of jealousy by
having connection with their women without their knowledge, which with
them strange as it may seem is considered as disgracefull to the
husband as clandestine connections of a similar kind are among
civilized nations. to prevent this mutual exchange of good officies
altogether I know it impossible to effect, particularly on the part of
our young men whom some months abstinence have made very polite to
those tawney damsels. no evil has yet resulted and I hope will not from
these connections.--notwithstanding the late loss of horses which this
people sustained by the Minnetares the stock of the band may be very
safely estimated at seven hundred of which they are perhaps about 40
coalts and half that number of mules.these people are deminutive in
stature, thick ankles, crooked legs, thick flat feet and in short but
illy formed, at least much more so in general than any nation of
Indians I ever saw. their complexion is much that of the Siouxs or
darker than the Minnetares mandands or Shawnees. generally both men and
women wear their hair in a loos lank flow over the sholders and face;
tho I observed some few men who confined their hair in two equal cues
hanging over each ear and drawnn in front of the body. the cue is
formed with throngs of dressed lather or Otterskin aternately crossing
each other. at present most of them have cut short in the neck in
consequence of the loss of their relations by the Minnetares.
Cameahwait has his cut close all over his head. this constitutes their
cerimony of morning for their deceased relations. the dress of the men
consists of a robe long legings, shirt, tippet and Mockersons, that of
the women is also a robe, chemise, and Mockersons; sometimes they make
use of short legings. the ornements of both men and women are very
similar, and consist of several species of sea shells, blue and white
beads, bras and Iron arm bands, plaited cords of the sweet grass, and
collars of leather ornamented with the quills of the porcupine dyed of
various colours among which I observed the red, yellow, blue, and
black. the ear is purforated in the lower part to receive various
ornaments but the nose is not, nor is the ear lasserated or disvigored
for this purpose as among many nations. the men never mark their skins
by birning, cuting, nor puncturing and introducing a colouring matter
as many nations do. there women sometimes puncture a small circle on
their forehead nose or cheeks and thus introduce a black matter usually
soot and grease which leaves an indelible stane. tho this even is by no
means common. their arms offensive and defensive consist in the bow and
arrows sheild, some lances, and a weapon called by the Cippeways who
formerly used it, the pog-gal'-mag-gon'. in fishing they employ wairs,
gigs, and fishing hooks. the salmon is the principal object of their
pursuit. they snair wolves and foxes. I was anxious to learn whether
these people had the venerial, and made the enquiry through the
intrepreter and his wife; the information was that they sometimes had
it but I could not learn their remedy; they most usually die with it's
effects. this seems a strong proof that these disorders bothe
gonaroehah and Louis venerae are native disorders of America. tho these
people have suffered much by the small pox which is known to be
imported and perhaps those other disorders might have been contracted
from other indian tribes who by a round of communication might have
obtained from the Europeans since it was introduced into that quarter
of the globe. but so much detatched on the other had from all
communication with the whites that I think it most probable that those
disorders are original with them. from the middle of May to the firt of
September these people reside on the waters of the Columbia where they
consider themselves in perfect security from their enimies as they have
not as yet ever found their way to this retreat; during this season the
salmon furnish the principal part of their subsistence and as this
firsh either perishes or returns about the 1st of September they are
compelled at this season in surch of subsistence to resort to the
Missouri, in the vallies of which, there is more game even within the
mountains. here they move slowly down the river in order to collect and
join other bands either of their own nation or the Flatheads, and
having become sufficiently strong as they conceive venture on the
Eastern side of the Rockey mountains into the plains, where the
buffaloe abound. but they never leave the interior of the mountains
while they can obtain a scanty subsistence, and always return as soon
as they have acquired a good stock of dryed meat in the plains; when
this stock is consumed they venture again into the plains; thus
alternately obtaining their food at the risk of their lives and
retiring to the mountains, while they consume it.--These people are now
on the eve of their departure for the Missouri, and inform us that they
expect to be joined at or about the three forks by several bands of
their own nation, and a band of the Flatheads. as I am now two busily
engaged to enter at once into a minute discription of the several
articles which compose their dress, impliments of war hunting fishing
&c I shall pursue them at my leasure in the order they have here
occurred to my mind, and have been mentioned. This morning capt. Clark
continued his rout with his party, the Indians accompanying him as
yesterday; he was obliged to feed them. nothing remarkable happened
during the day. he was met by an Indian with two mules on this side of
the dividing ridge at the foot of the mountain, the Indian had the
politeness to offer Capt. C. one of his mules to ride as he was on
foot, which he accepted and gave the fellow a waistcoat as a reward for
his politeness. in the evening he reached the creek on this side of the
Indian camp and halted for the night. his hunters killed nothing today.
The Indians value their mules very highly. a good mule can not be
obtained for less than three and sometimes four horses, and the most
indifferent are rated at two horses. their mules generally are the
finest I ever saw without any comparison.--today I observed time and
distance of sun's and moon's nearest limbs with sextant sun East.




[Clark, August 19, 1805]
August 19th Monday 1805
A verry Cold morning Frost to be Seen we Set out at 7 oClock and
proceeded on thro a wide leavel Vallie the Chief Shew me the place that
a number of his nation was killed about 1 years past this Vallie
Continues 5 miles & then becoms narrow, the beaver has Darned up the
River in maney places we proceeded on up the main branch with a gradial
assent to the head and passed over a low mountain and Decended a Steep
Decent to a butifull Stream, passed over a Second hill of a verry Steep
assent & thro a hilley Countrey for 8 miles an Encamped on a Small
Stream the Indians with us we wer oblige to feed--one man met one with
a mule & Spanish Saddle to ride, I gave him a wistoat a mule is
considered a of great value among those people we proceeded on over a
verry mountanious Countrey across the head of hollows & Springs




[Lewis, August 20, 1805]
Tuesday August 20th 1805.
This morning I sent out the two hunters and employed the ballance of
the party pretty much as yesterday. I walked down the river about--3/4
of a mile and scelected a place near the river bank unperceived by the
Indians for a cash, which I set three men to make, and directed the
centinel to discharge his gun if he pereceived any of the Indians going
down in that direction which was to be the signal for the men at work
on the cash to desist and seperate, least these people should discover
our deposit and rob us of the baggage we intend leaving here. by
evening the cash was completed unperceived by the Indians, and all our
packages made up. the Pack-saddles and harries is not yet complete. in
this operation we find ourselves at a loss for nails and boards; for
the first we substitute throngs of raw hide which answer verry well,
and for the last to cut off the blades of our oars and use the plank of
some boxes which have heretofore held other articles and put those
articles into sacks of raw hide which I have had made for the purpose.
by this means I have obtained as many boards as will make 20 saddles
which I suppose will be sufficient for our present exegencies. The
Indians with us behave themselves extreemly well; the women have been
busily engaged all day making and mending the mockersons of our party.
In the evening the hunters returned unsuccessfull. Drewyer went in
search of his trap which a beaver had taken off last night; he found
the beaver dead with the trap to his foot about 2 miles below the place
he had set it. this beaver constituted the whole of the game taken
today. the fur of this animal is as good as I ever saw any, and beleive
that they are never out of season on the upper part of the Missouri and
it's branches within the Mountains. Goodrich caught several douzen fine
trout. today. I made up a small assortment of medicines, together with
the specemines of plants, minerals, seeds &c. which, I have collected
betwen this place and the falls of the Missouri which I shall deposit
here. the robe woarn by the Shoshonees is the same in both sexes and is
loosly thrown about their sholders, and the sides at pleasure either
hanging loose or drawn together with the hands, sometimes if the
weather is cold they confine it with a girdel arround the waist; they
are generally about the size of a 21/2 point blanket for grown persons
and reach as low as the middle of the leg. this robe forms a garment in
the day and constitutes their only covering at night. with these people
the robe is formed most commonly of the skins of Antelope, Bighorn, or
deer, dressed with the hair on, tho they prefer the buffaloe when they
can procure them. I have also observed some robes among them of beaver,
moonax, and small wolves. the summer robes of both sexes are also
frequently made of the Elk's skin dressed without the hair. The shirt
of the men is really a commodious and decent garment. it roomy and
reaches nearly half way the thye, there is no collar, the apperture
being sufficiently large to admit the head and is left square at top,
or most frequently, both before and behind terminate in the tails of
the animals of which they are made and which foald outwards being
frequently left entire or somtimes cut into a fring on the edges and
ornimented with the quills of the Porcupine. the sides of the shirt are
sewed deeply fringed, and ornamented in a similar manner from the
bottom upwards, within six or eight inches of the sieve from whence it
is left open as well as the sieve on it's under side to the elbow
nearly. from the elbow the sieve fits the arm tight as low as the wrist
and is not ornimented with a fringe as the sides and under parts of the
sieve are above the elbow. the sholder straps are wide and on them is
generally displayed the taste of the manufacterer in a variety of
figures wrought with the quills of the porcupine of several colours;
beads when they have them are also displayed on this part. the tail of
the shirt is left in the form which the fore legs and neck give it with
the addition of a slight fringe. the hair is usually left on the tail,
& near the hoofs of the animal; part of the hoof is also retained to
the skin and is split into a fring by way of orniment. these shirts are
generally made of deer's Antelope's, Bighorn's, or Elk's skins dressed
without the hair. the Elk skin is less used for this purpose than
either of the others. their only thread used on this or any other
occasion is the sinews taken from the back and loins of the deer Elk
buffaloe &c. Their legings are most usually formed of the skins of the
Antelope dressed without the hair. in the men they are very long and
full each leging being formed of a skin nearly entire. the legs, tail
and neck are also left on these, and the tail woarn upwards; and the
neck deeply fringed and ornimented with porcupine qulls drags or trails
on the ground behind the heel. the skin is sewn in such manner as to
fit the leg and thye closely; the upper part being left open a
sufficient distance to permit the legs of the skin to be dran
underneath a girdle both before and behind, and the wide part of the
skin to cover the buttock and lap before in such manner that the
breechcloth is unnecessary. they are much more decent in concealing
those parts than any nation on the Missouri the sides of the legings
are also deeply fringed and ornimented. sometimes this part is
ornimented with little fassicles of the hair of an enimy whom they have
slain in battle. The tippet of the Snake Indians is the most eligant
peice of Indian dress I ever saw, the neck or collar of this is formed
of a strip of dressed Otter skin with the fur. it is about four or five
inches wide and is cut out of the back of the skin the nose and eyes
forming one extremity and the tail the other. begining a little behind
the ear of the animal at one edge of this collar and proceeding towards
the tail, they attatch from one to two hundred and fifty little roles
of Ermin skin formed in the following manner. the skin is first dressed
with the fur on it and a narrow strip is cut out of the back of the
skin reaching from the nose and imbracing the tail. this is sewed
arround a small cord of the silk-grass twisted for the purpose and
regularly tapering in such manner as to give it ajust proportion to the
tail which is to form the lower extremity of the stran. thus arranged
they are confined at the upper point in little bundles of two-three, or
more as the disign may be to make them more full; these are then
attatched to the collars as before mentioned, and to conceal the
connection of this part which would otherwise have a course appearance
they attatch a broad fringe of the Ermin skin to the collar overlaying
that part. little bundles of fine fringe of the same materials is
fastened to the extremity of the tails in order to shew their black
extremities to greater advantage. the center of the otterskin collar is
also ornamented with the shells of the perl oister. the collar is
confined arond the neck and the little roles of Ermin skin about the
size of a large quill covers the solders and body nearly to the waist
and has the appearance of a short cloak and is really handsome. these
they esteem very highly, and give or dispose of only on important
occasions. the ermin whic is known to the traiders of the N. W. by the
name of the white weasel is the genuine ermine, and might no doubt be
turned to great advantage by those people if they would encourage the
Indians to take them. they are no doubt extreemly plenty and readily
taken, from the number of these tippets which I have seen among these
people and the great number of skins employed in the construction of
each timppet. scarcely any of them have employed less than one hundred
of these skins in their formation.--This morning Capt. Clark set out at
6 in the morning and soon after arrived near their camp they having
removed about 2 miles higher up the river than the camp at which they
were when I first visited them. the chief requested a halt, which was
complyed with, and a number of the indians came out from the village
and joined them after smoking a few pipes with them they all proceeded
to the village where Capt C. was conducted to a large lodge prepared in
the center of the encampment for himself and party. here they gave him
one salmon and some cakes of dryed berries. he now repeated to them
what had been said to them in council at this place which was repeated
to the village by the Cheif. when he had concluded this address he
requested a guide to accompany him down the river and an elderly man
was pointed out by the Cheif who consented to undertake this task. this
was the old man of whom Cameahwait had spoken as a person well
acquainted with the country to the North of this river. Capt. C.
encouraged the Indians to come over with their horses and assist me
over with the baggage. he distrubuted some presents among the Indians.
about half the men of the village turned out to hunt the antelope but
were unsuccessfull. at 3 P.M. Capt. Clark departed, accompanyed by his
guide and party except one man whom he left with orders to purchase a
horse if possible and overtake him as soon as he could. he left
Charbono and the indian woman to return to my camp with the Indians. he
passed the river about four miles below the Indians, and encamped on a
small branch, eight miles distant. on his way he met a rispectable
looking indian who returned and continued with him all night; this
indian gave them three salmon. Capt. C. killed a cock of the plains or
mountain cock. it was of a dark brown colour with a long and pointed
tail larger than the dunghill fowl and had a fleshey protuberant
substance about the base of the upper chap, something like that of the
turkey tho without the snout.




[Clark, August 20, 1805]
August 20th Tuesday 1805
Set out at half past 6 oClock and proceeded on (met maney parties of
Indians) thro a hilley Countrey to the Camp of the Indians on a branch
of the Columbia River, before we entered this Camp a Serimonious hault
was requested by the Chief and I Smoked with all that Came around for
Several pipes, we then proceeded on to the Camp & I was introduced into
the only Lodge they had which was pitched in the Center for my party
all the other Lodges made of bushes, after a fiew Indian Seremonies I
informed the Indians the object of our journey our good intentions
towards them my consern for their distressed Situation, what we had
done for them in makeing a piece with the Minitarras Mandans Rickara
&c. for them-. and requested them all to take over their horses &
assist Capt Leiwis across &c. also informing them the oject of my
journey down the river and requested a guide to accompany me, all of
which was repeited by the Chief to the whole village.

Those pore people Could only raise a Sammon & a little dried Choke
Cherris for us half the men of the tribe with the Chief turned out to
hunt the antilopes, at 3 oClock after giveing a fiew Small articles as
presents I set out accompanied by an old man as a Guide (I endevered to
procure as much information from thos people as possible without much
Suckcess they being but little acquainted or effecting to be So-) I lef
one man to purchase a horse and overtake me and proceeded on thro a
wide rich bottom on a beaten Roade 8 miles Crossed the river and
encamped on a Small run, this evening passed a number of old lodges,
and met a number of men women children & horses, met a man who appeared
of Some Consideration who turned back with us, he halted a woman & gave
us 3 Small Sammon, this man continued with me all night and partook of
what I had which was a little Pork verry Salt. Those Indians are verry
attentive to Strangers &c. I left our interpreter & his woman to
accompany the Indians to Capt Lewis tomorrow the Day they informed me
they would Set out I killed a Pheasent at the Indian Camp larger than a
dungal fowl with feshey protuberances about the head like a turkey.
Frost last night




[Lewis, August 21, 1805]
Wednesday August 21st 1805.
This morning was very cold. the ice 1/4 of an inch thick on the water
which stood in the vessels exposed to the air. some wet deerskins that
had been spread the grass last evening are stiffly frozen. the ink
feizes in my pen. the bottoms are perfectly covered with frost insomuch
that they appear to be covered with snow. This morning early I
dispatched two hunters to kill some meat if possible before the Indians
arrive; Drewyer I sent with the horse into the cove for that purpose.
The party pursued their several occupations as yesterday. by evening I
had all the baggage, saddles, and harness completely ready for a march.
after dark, I made the men take the baggage to the cash and deposit it.
I beleve we have been unperceived by the Indians in this movement.
notwithstanding the coldness of the last night the day has proved
excessively warm. neither of the hunters returned this evening and I
was obliged to issue pork and corn. The mockersons of both sexes are
usually the same and are made of deer Elk or buffaloe skin dressed
without the hair. sometimes in the winter they make them of buffaloe
skin dressed with the hair on and turn the hair inwards as the Mandans
Minetares and most of the nations do who inhabit the buffaloe country.
the mockerson is formed with one seem on the outer edge of the foot is
cut open at the instep to admit the foot and sewed up behind. in this
rispect they are the same with the Mandans. they sometimes ornament
their mockersons with various figures wrought with the quills of the
Porcupine. some of the dressey young men orniment the tops of their
mockersons with the skins of polecats and trale the tail of that animal
on the ground at their heels as they walk.the robe of the woman is
generally smaller than that of the man but is woarn in the same manner
over the sholders. the Chemise is roomy and comes down below the middle
of the leg the upper part of this garment is formed much like the shirt
of the men except the sholder strap which is never used with the
Chemise. in women who give suck, they are left open at the sides nearly
as low as the waist, in others, close as high as the sleeve. the sleeve
underneath as low as the elbow is open, that part being left very full.
the sides tail and upper part of the sleeves are deeply fringed and
sometimes ornimented in a similar manner with the shirts of the men
with the addition of little patches of red cloth about the tail edged
around with beads. the breast is usually ornament with various figures
of party colours rought with the quills of the Porcupine. it is on this
part of the garment that they appear to exert their greatest ingenuity.
a girdle of dressed leather confines the Chemise around the waist. when
either the man or woman wish to disengage their arm from the sleeve
they draw it out by means of the opening underneath the arm an throw
the sleeve behind the body. the legings of the women reach as high as
the knee and are confined with a garter below. the mockerson covers and
confins it's lower extremity. they are neither fringed nor ornamented.
these legings are made of the skins of the antelope and the Chemise
usually of those of the large deer Bighorn and the smallest elk.--They
seldom wear the beads they possess about their necks at least I have
never seen a grown person of either sex wear them on this part; some
their children are seen with them in this way. the men and women were
them suspen from the ear in little bunches or intermixed with
triangular peices of the shells of the perl oister. the men also were
them attached in a similar manner to the hare of the fore part of the
crown of the head; to which they sometimes make the addition of the
wings and tails of birds. the nose in neither sex is pierced nor do
they wear any ornament in it. they have a variety of small sea shells
of which they form collars woarn indiscriminately by both sexes. these
as well as the shell of the perl oister they value very highly and
inform us that they obtain them from their friends and relations who
live beyond the barren plain towards the Ocean in a S. Westerly
direction. these friends of theirs they say inhabit a good country
abounding with Elk, deer, bear, and Antelope, and possess a much
greater number of horses and mules than they do themselves; or using
their own figure that their horses and mules are as numerous as the
grass of the plains. the warriors or such as esteem themselves brave
men wear collars made of the claws of the brown bear which are also
esteemed of great value and are preserved with great care. these claws
are ornamented with beads about the thick end near which they are
peirced through their sides and strung on a throng of dressed leather
and tyed about the neck commonly with the upper edge of the tallon next
the breast or neck but sometimes are reversed. it is esteemed by them
an act of equal celebrity the killing one of these bear or an enimy,
and with the means they have of killing this animal it must really be a
serious undertaking. the sweet sented grass which grows very abundant
on this river is either twisted or plaited and woarn around the neck in
ether sex, but most commonly by the men. they have a collar also woarn
by either sex. it generally round and about the size of a man's finger;
formed of leather or silk-grass twisted or firmly rolled and covered
with the quills of the porcupine of different colours. the tusks of the
Elk are pierced strung on a throng and woarn as an orniment for the
neck, and is most generally woarn by the women and children. the men
frequently wear the skin of a fox or a broad strip of that of the otter
around the forehead and head in form of a bando. they are also fond of
the feathers of the tail of the beautifull eagle or callumet birds with
which they ornament their own hair and the tails and mains of their
horses. The dress of these people is quite as desent and convenient as
that of any nation of Indians I ever saw.

This morning early Capt. C. resumed his march; at the distance of five
miles he arrived at some brush lodges of the Shoshones inhabited by
about seven families here he halted and was very friendly received by
these people, who gave himself and party as much boiled salmon as they
could eat; they also gave him several dryed salmon and a considerable
quantity of dryed chokecherries. after smoking with them he visited
their fish wear which was abut 200 yds. distant. he found the wear
extended across four channels of the river which was here divided by
three small islands. three of these channels were narrow, and were
stoped by means of trees fallen across, supported by which stakes of
willow were driven down sufficiently near each other to prevent the
salmon from passing. about the center of each a cilindric basket of
eighteen or 20 feet in length terminating in a conic shape at it's
lower extremity, formed of willows, was opposed to a small apperture in
the wear with it's mouth up stream to receive the fish. the main
channel of the water was conducted to this basket, which was so narrow
at it's lower extremity that the fish when once in could not turn
itself about, and were taken out by untying the small ends of the
longitudinal willows, which frormed the hull of the basket. the wear in
the main channel was somewhat differently contrived. there were two
distinct wears formed of poles and willow sticks, quite across the
river, at no great distance from each other. each of these, were
furnished with two baskets; the one wear to take them ascending and the
other in decending. in constructing these wears, poles were first tyed
together in parcels of three near the smaller extremity; these were set
on end, and spread in a triangular form at the base, in such manner,
that two of the three poles ranged in the direction of the intended
work, and the third down the stream. two ranges of horizontal poles
were next lashed with willow bark and wythes to the ranging poles, and
on these willow sticks were placed perpendicularly, reaching from the
bottom of the river to about 3 or four feet above it's surface; and
placed so near each other, as not to permit the passage of the fish,
and even so thick in some parts, as with the help of gravel and stone
to give a direction to the water which they wished.--the baskets were
the same in form of the others. this is the form of the work, and
disposition of the baskets.

After examining the wears Capt. C. returned to the lodges, and shortly
continued his rout and passed the river to the Lard. side a little
distance below the wears. he sent Collins with an Indian down the Lard.
side of the river to the forks 5 me. in surch of Cruzatte who was left
at the upper camp yesterday to purchase a horse and had followed on
today and passed them by another road while they were at the lodges and
had gone on to the forks. while Capt. Clark was at these lodges an
Indian brought him a tomehawk which he said he found in the grass near
the lodge where I had staid at the upper camp when I was first with his
nation the tommahawk was Drewyer's he missed it in the morning before
we had set out and surched for it but it was not to be found I beleive
the young fellow stole it, but if he did it is the only article they
have pilfered and this was now returned. Capt. C. after traveling about
20 miles through the valley with the course of the river nearly N. W.
encamped on the Stard. side in a small bottom under a high Clift of
rocks. on his way one of the party killed a very large Salmon in a
creek which they passed at the distance of 14 ms. he was joined this
evening by Cruzatte and Collins who brought with them five fresh salmon
which had been given them by the Indians at the forks. the forks of
this river is famous as a gig fishery and is much resorted by the
natives.--They killed one deer today. The Guide apeared to be a very
friendly intelligent old man, Capt. C. is much pleased with him.




[Clark, August 21, 1805]
August 21st Wednesday 1805
Frost last night proceeded on with the Indians I met about 5 miles to
there Camp, I entered a lodge and after Smokeing with all who Came
about me I went to See the place those people take the fish, a wear
across the Creek in which there is Stuk baskets Set in different
derections So as to take the fish either decending or assending on my
return to the Camp which was 200 yards only the different lodges (which
is only bushes) brought in to the lodge I was introduced into, Sammon
boiled, and dried Choke Chers. Sufficent for all my party.--one man
brought me a tomahawk which we expected they had Stolen from a man of
Capt Lewis's party, this man informed me he found the tomk in the grass
near the place the man Slept. Crossed the River and went over a point
of high land & Struck it again near a Bluff on the right Side the man I
left to get a horse at the upper Camp missed me & went to the forks
which is about five miles below the last Camp.

I sent one man by the forks with derections to join me to night with
the one now at that place, those two men joined me at my Camp on the
right Side below the 1st Clift with 5 Sammon which the Indians gave
them at the forks, the place they gig fish at this Season. Their method
of takeing fish with a gig or bone is with a long pole, about a foot
from one End is a Strong String attached to the pole, this String is a
little more than a foot long and is tied to the middle of a bone from 4
to 6 inches long, one end Sharp the other with a whole to fasten on the
end of the pole with a beard to the large end, the fasten this bone on
one end & with the other, feel for the fish & turn and Strike them So
hard that the bone passes through and Catches on the opposit Side,
Slips off the End of the pole and holds the Center of the bone Those
Indians are mild in their disposition appear Sincere in their
friendship, punctial, and decided. kind with what they have, to Spare.
They are excessive pore, nothing but horses there Enemies which are
noumerous on account of there horses & Defenceless Situation, have
Deprived them of tents and all the Small Conveniances of life. They
have only a few indifferent Knives, no ax, make use of Elk's horn
Sharpened to Spit ther wood, no clothes except a Short Legins & robes
of different animals, Beaver, Bear, Buffalow, wolf Panthor, Ibex, Sheep
Deer, but most commonly the antilope Skins which they ware loosely
about them--Their ornements are Orter Skin dcurated with See Shells &
the Skins & tales of the white weasel, Sea Shels of different size hung
to their Ears hair and breast of their Shirts, beeds of Shells platted
grass, and Small Strings of otter Skin dressed, they are fond of our
trinkets, and give us those ornements as the most valueable of their
possession. The women are held Sacred and appear to have an equal Shere
in all Conversation, which is not the Case in any othe nation I have
Seen. their boeys & Girls are also admited to Speak except in Councils,
the women doe all the drugery except fishing and takeing care of the
horses, which the men apr. to take upon themselves.--The men ware the
hair loose flowing over ther Sholders & face the women Cut Short,
orniments of the back bones of fish Strung plated grass grains of Corn
Strung Feathers and orniments of Birds Claws of the Bear encurcling
their necks the most Sacred of all the orniments of this nation is the
Sea Shells of various Sizes and Shapes and colours, of the bassterd
perl kind, which they inform us they get from the Indians to the South
on the other Side of a large fork of this river in passing to which
they have to pass thro Sandy & barron open plains without water to
which place they can travel in 15 or 20 days--The men who passed by the
forks informed me that the S W. fork was double the Size of the one I
came down, and I observed that it was a handsom river at my camp I
shall injustice to Capt Lewis who was the first white man ever on this
fork of the Columbia Call this Louis's river. one Deer killed this
morning, and a Sammon in the last Creek 21/2 feet long The Westerley
fork of the Columbia River is double the Size of the Easterley fork &
below those forks the river is about the Size Jeffersons River near its
mouth or 100 yards wide, it is verry rapid & Sholey water Clear but
little timber. This Clift is of a redish brown Colour the rocks which
fall from it is a dark brown flint tinged with that Colour. Some
Gullies of white Sand Stone and Sand fine & as white as Snow. The
mountains on each Side are high, and those on the East ruged & Contain
a fiew Scattering pine, those on the West contain pine on ther tops &
high up the hollows--The bottoms of this is wide & rich from some
distance above the place I struck the East fork they are also wide on
the East Passed a large Creek which fall in on the right Side 6 miles
below the forks a road passes up this Creek & to the Missouri.




[Lewis, August 22, 1805]
Thursday August 22ed 1805
This morning early I sent a couple of men to complete the covering of
the cash which could not be done well last night in the dark, they soon
accomplished their work and returned. late last night Drewyer returned
with a fawn he had killed and a considerable quantity of Indian
plunder. the anecdote with rispect to the latter is perhaps worthy of
relation. he informed me that while hunting in the Cove yesterday about
12 OCk. he came suddonly upon an Indian Camp, at which there were a
young man an Old man a boy and three women, that they seemed but little
supprised at seeing him and he rode up to them and dismounted turning
horse out to graize. these people had just finished their repast on
some roots, he entered into conversation with them by signs, and after
about 20 minutes one of the women spoke to the others of the party and
they all went immediately and collected their horses brought them to
camp and saddled them at this moment he thought he would also set out
and continue his hunt, and accorgingly walked to catch his horse at
some little distance and neglected to take up his gun which, he left at
camp. the Indians perceiving him at the distance of fifty paces
immediately mounted their horses, the young man took the gun and the
whole of them left their baggage and laid whip to their horses
directing their course to the pass of the mountains. finding himself
deprived of his gun he immediately mounted his horse and pursued; after
runing them about 10 miles the horses of two of the women nearly gave
out and the young fellow with the gun from their frequent crys
slackened his pace and being on a very fleet horse road around the
women at a little distance at length Drewer overtook the women and by
signs convinced them that he did not wish to hirt them they then halted
and the young fellow approached still nearer, he asked him for his gun
but the only part of the answer which he could understand was pah kee
which he knew to be the name by which they called their enimies.
watching his opportunity when the fellow was off his guard he suddonly
rode along side of him seized his gun and wrest her out of his hands.
the fellow finding Drewyer too strong for him and discovering that he
must yeald the gun had pesents of mind to open the pan and cast the
priming before he let the gun escape from his hands; now finding
