
Solomon Daisy raised his glass to his lips; put it down upon the floor
with such a trembling hand that the spoon tinkled in it like a little
bell; and continued thus:

'Have I ever said that we are always brought back to this subject in
some strange way, when the nineteenth of this month comes round? Do
you suppose it was by accident, I forgot to wind up the church-clock? I
never forgot it at any other time, though it's such a clumsy thing that
it has to be wound up every day. Why should it escape my memory on this
day of all others?

'I made as much haste down there as I could when I went from here, but
I had to go home first for the keys; and the wind and rain being dead
against me all the way, it was pretty well as much as I could do at
times to keep my legs. I got there at last, opened the church-door, and
went in. I had not met a soul all the way, and you may judge whether it
was dull or not. Neither of you would bear me company. If you could have
known what was to come, you'd have been in the right.

'The wind was so strong, that it was as much as I could do to shut the
church-door by putting my whole weight against it; and even as it was,
it burst wide open twice, with such strength that any of you would have
sworn, if you had been leaning against it, as I was, that somebody was
pushing on the other side. However, I got the key turned, went into the
belfry, and wound up the clock--which was very near run down, and would
have stood stock-still in half an hour.

'As I took up my lantern again to leave the church, it came upon me all
at once that this was the nineteenth of March. It came upon me with a
kind of shock, as if a hand had struck the thought upon my forehead;
at the very same moment, I heard a voice outside the tower--rising from
among the graves.'

Here old John precipitately interrupted the speaker, and begged that if
Mr Parkes (who was seated opposite to him and was staring directly over
his head) saw anything, he would have the goodness to mention it. Mr
Parkes apologised, and remarked that he was only listening; to which Mr
Willet angrily retorted, that his listening with that kind of expression
in his face was not agreeable, and that if he couldn't look like other
people, he had better put his pocket-handkerchief over his head.
Mr Parkes with great submission pledged himself to do so, if again
required, and John Willet turning to Solomon desired him to proceed.
After waiting until a violent gust of wind and rain, which seemed to
shake even that sturdy house to its foundation, had passed away, the
little man complied:

'Never tell me that it was my fancy, or that it was any other sound
which I mistook for that I tell you of. I heard the wind whistle through
the arches of the church. I heard the steeple strain and creak. I heard
the rain as it came driving against the walls. I felt the bells shake. I
saw the ropes sway to and fro. And I heard that voice.'

'What did it say?' asked Tom Cobb.

'I don't know what; I don't know that it spoke. It gave a kind of cry,
as any one of us might do, if something dreadful followed us in a dream,
and came upon us unawares; and then it died off: seeming to pass quite
round the church.'

'I don't see much in that,' said John, drawing a long breath, and
looking round him like a man who felt relieved.

'Perhaps not,' returned his friend, 'but that's not all.'

'What more do you mean to say, sir, is to come?' asked John, pausing in
the act of wiping his face upon his apron. 'What are you a-going to tell
us of next?'

'What I saw.'

'Saw!' echoed all three, bending forward.

'When I opened the church-door to come out,' said the little man, with
an expression of face which bore ample testimony to the sincerity of
his conviction, 'when I opened the church-door to come out, which I did
suddenly, for I wanted to get it shut again before another gust of wind
came up, there crossed me--so close, that by stretching out my finger
I could have touched it--something in the likeness of a man. It was
bare-headed to the storm. It turned its face without stopping, and fixed
its eyes on mine. It was a ghost--a spirit.'

'Whose?' they all three cried together.

In the excess of his emotion (for he fell back trembling in his chair,
and waved his hand as if entreating them to question him no further),
his answer was lost on all but old John Willet, who happened to be
seated close beside him.

'Who!' cried Parkes and Tom Cobb, looking eagerly by turns at Solomon
Daisy and at Mr Willet. 'Who was it?'

'Gentlemen,' said Mr Willet after a long pause, 'you needn't ask. The
likeness of a murdered man. This is the nineteenth of March.'

A profound silence ensued.

'If you'll take my advice,' said John, 'we had better, one and all, keep
this a secret. Such tales would not be liked at the Warren. Let us keep
it to ourselves for the present time at all events, or we may get into
trouble, and Solomon may lose his place. Whether it was really as he
says, or whether it wasn't, is no matter. Right or wrong, nobody would
believe him. As to the probabilities, I don't myself think,' said Mr
Willet, eyeing the corners of the room in a manner which showed that,
like some other philosophers, he was not quite easy in his theory,
'that a ghost as had been a man of sense in his lifetime, would be out
a-walking in such weather--I only know that I wouldn't, if I was one.'

But this heretical doctrine was strongly opposed by the other three,
who quoted a great many precedents to show that bad weather was the very
time for such appearances; and Mr Parkes (who had had a ghost in his
family, by the mother's side) argued the matter with so much ingenuity
and force of illustration, that John was only saved from having to
retract his opinion by the opportune appearance of supper, to which they
applied themselves with a dreadful relish. Even Solomon Daisy himself,
by dint of the elevating influences of fire, lights, brandy, and good
company, so far recovered as to handle his knife and fork in a highly
creditable manner, and to display a capacity both of eating and
drinking, such as banished all fear of his having sustained any lasting
injury from his fright.

Supper done, they crowded round the fire again, and, as is common on
such occasions, propounded all manner of leading questions calculated
to surround the story with new horrors and surprises. But Solomon Daisy,
notwithstanding these temptations, adhered so steadily to his original
account, and repeated it so often, with such slight variations, and with
such solemn asseverations of its truth and reality, that his hearers
were (with good reason) more astonished than at first. As he took John
Willet's view of the matter in regard to the propriety of not bruiting
the tale abroad, unless the spirit should appear to him again, in which
case it would be necessary to take immediate counsel with the clergyman,
it was solemnly resolved that it should be hushed up and kept quiet.
And as most men like to have a secret to tell which may exalt their own
importance, they arrived at this conclusion with perfect unanimity.

As it was by this time growing late, and was long past their usual hour
of separating, the cronies parted for the night. Solomon Daisy, with a
fresh candle in his lantern, repaired homewards under the escort of long
Phil Parkes and Mr Cobb, who were rather more nervous than himself. Mr
Willet, after seeing them to the door, returned to collect his thoughts
with the assistance of the boiler, and to listen to the storm of wind
and rain, which had not yet abated one jot of its fury.



Chapter 34


Before old John had looked at the boiler quite twenty minutes, he got
his ideas into a focus, and brought them to bear upon Solomon Daisy's
story. The more he thought of it, the more impressed he became with
a sense of his own wisdom, and a desire that Mr Haredale should be
impressed with it likewise. At length, to the end that he might sustain
a principal and important character in the affair; and might have the
start of Solomon and his two friends, through whose means he knew the
adventure, with a variety of exaggerations, would be known to at least
a score of people, and most likely to Mr Haredale himself, by
breakfast-time to-morrow; he determined to repair to the Warren before
going to bed.

'He's my landlord,' thought John, as he took a candle in his hand, and
setting it down in a corner out of the wind's way, opened a casement in
the rear of the house, looking towards the stables. 'We haven't met of
late years so often as we used to do--changes are taking place in the
family--it's desirable that I should stand as well with them, in point
of dignity, as possible--the whispering about of this here tale will
anger him--it's good to have confidences with a gentleman of his natur',
and set one's-self right besides. Halloa there! Hugh--Hugh. Hal-loa!'

When he had repeated this shout a dozen times, and startled every pigeon
from its slumbers, a door in one of the ruinous old buildings opened,
and a rough voice demanded what was amiss now, that a man couldn't even
have his sleep in quiet.

'What! Haven't you sleep enough, growler, that you're not to be knocked
up for once?' said John.

'No,' replied the voice, as the speaker yawned and shook himself. 'Not
half enough.'

'I don't know how you CAN sleep, with the wind a bellowsing and roaring
about you, making the tiles fly like a pack of cards,' said John; 'but
no matter for that. Wrap yourself up in something or another, and come
here, for you must go as far as the Warren with me. And look sharp about
it.'

Hugh, with much low growling and muttering, went back into his lair;
and presently reappeared, carrying a lantern and a cudgel, and enveloped
from head to foot in an old, frowzy, slouching horse-cloth. Mr Willet
received this figure at the back-door, and ushered him into the bar,
while he wrapped himself in sundry greatcoats and capes, and so tied and
knotted his face in shawls and handkerchiefs, that how he breathed was a
mystery.

'You don't take a man out of doors at near midnight in such weather,
without putting some heart into him, do you, master?' said Hugh.

'Yes I do, sir,' returned Mr Willet. 'I put the heart (as you call it)
into him when he has brought me safe home again, and his standing steady
on his legs an't of so much consequence. So hold that light up, if you
please, and go on a step or two before, to show the way.'

Hugh obeyed with a very indifferent grace, and a longing glance at the
bottles. Old John, laying strict injunctions on his cook to keep the
doors locked in his absence, and to open to nobody but himself on pain
of dismissal, followed him into the blustering darkness out of doors.

The way was wet and dismal, and the night so black, that if Mr Willet
had been his own pilot, he would have walked into a deep horsepond
within a few hundred yards of his own house, and would certainly have
terminated his career in that ignoble sphere of action. But Hugh, who
had a sight as keen as any hawk's, and, apart from that endowment, could
have found his way blindfold to any place within a dozen miles, dragged
old John along, quite deaf to his remonstrances, and took his own course
without the slightest reference to, or notice of, his master. So they
made head against the wind as they best could; Hugh crushing the wet
grass beneath his heavy tread, and stalking on after his ordinary savage
fashion; John Willet following at arm's length, picking his steps, and
looking about him, now for bogs and ditches, and now for such stray
ghosts as might be wandering abroad, with looks of as much dismay and
uneasiness as his immovable face was capable of expressing.

At length they stood upon the broad gravel-walk before the Warren-house.
The building was profoundly dark, and none were moving near it save
themselves. From one solitary turret-chamber, however, there shone a
ray of light; and towards this speck of comfort in the cold, cheerless,
silent scene, Mr Willet bade his pilot lead him.

'The old room,' said John, looking timidly upward; 'Mr Reuben's own
apartment, God be with us! I wonder his brother likes to sit there, so
late at night--on this night too.'

'Why, where else should he sit?' asked Hugh, holding the lantern to his
breast, to keep the candle from the wind, while he trimmed it with his
fingers. 'It's snug enough, an't it?'

'Snug!' said John indignantly. 'You have a comfortable idea of snugness,
you have, sir. Do you know what was done in that room, you ruffian?'

'Why, what is it the worse for that!' cried Hugh, looking into John's
fat face. 'Does it keep out the rain, and snow, and wind, the less for
that? Is it less warm or dry, because a man was killed there? Ha, ha,
ha! Never believe it, master. One man's no such matter as that comes
to.'

Mr Willet fixed his dull eyes on his follower, and began--by a species
of inspiration--to think it just barely possible that he was something
of a dangerous character, and that it might be advisable to get rid
of him one of these days. He was too prudent to say anything, with the
journey home before him; and therefore turned to the iron gate before
which this brief dialogue had passed, and pulled the handle of the bell
that hung beside it. The turret in which the light appeared being at
one corner of the building, and only divided from the path by one of
the garden-walks, upon which this gate opened, Mr Haredale threw up the
window directly, and demanded who was there.

'Begging pardon, sir,' said John, 'I knew you sat up late, and made bold
to come round, having a word to say to you.'

'Willet--is it not?'

'Of the Maypole--at your service, sir.'

Mr Haredale closed the window, and withdrew. He presently appeared at
a door in the bottom of the turret, and coming across the garden-walk,
unlocked the gate and let them in.

'You are a late visitor, Willet. What is the matter?'

'Nothing to speak of, sir,' said John; 'an idle tale, I thought you
ought to know of; nothing more.'

'Let your man go forward with the lantern, and give me your hand. The
stairs are crooked and narrow. Gently with your light, friend. You swing
it like a censer.'

Hugh, who had already reached the turret, held it more steadily, and
ascended first, turning round from time to time to shed his light
downward on the steps. Mr Haredale following next, eyed his lowering
face with no great favour; and Hugh, looking down on him, returned his
glances with interest, as they climbed the winding stairs.

It terminated in a little ante-room adjoining that from which they had
seen the light. Mr Haredale entered first, and led the way through it
into the latter chamber, where he seated himself at a writing-table from
which he had risen when they had rung the bell.

'Come in,' he said, beckoning to old John, who remained bowing at the
door. 'Not you, friend,' he added hastily to Hugh, who entered also.
'Willet, why do you bring that fellow here?'

'Why, sir,' returned John, elevating his eyebrows, and lowering his
voice to the tone in which the question had been asked him, 'he's a good
guard, you see.'

'Don't be too sure of that,' said Mr Haredale, looking towards him as he
spoke. 'I doubt it. He has an evil eye.'

'There's no imagination in his eye,' returned Mr Willet, glancing over
his shoulder at the organ in question, 'certainly.'

'There is no good there, be assured,' said Mr Haredale. 'Wait in that
little room, friend, and close the door between us.'

Hugh shrugged his shoulders, and with a disdainful look, which showed,
either that he had overheard, or that he guessed the purport of their
whispering, did as he was told. When he was shut out, Mr Haredale turned
to John, and bade him go on with what he had to say, but not to speak
too loud, for there were quick ears yonder.

Thus cautioned, Mr Willet, in an oily whisper, recited all that he
had heard and said that night; laying particular stress upon his own
sagacity, upon his great regard for the family, and upon his solicitude
for their peace of mind and happiness. The story moved his auditor much
more than he had expected. Mr Haredale often changed his attitude, rose
and paced the room, returned again, desired him to repeat, as nearly as
he could, the very words that Solomon had used, and gave so many other
signs of being disturbed and ill at ease, that even Mr Willet was
surprised.

'You did quite right,' he said, at the end of a long conversation, 'to
bid them keep this story secret. It is a foolish fancy on the part of
this weak-brained man, bred in his fears and superstition. But Miss
Haredale, though she would know it to be so, would be disturbed by it
if it reached her ears; it is too nearly connected with a subject very
painful to us all, to be heard with indifference. You were most prudent,
and have laid me under a great obligation. I thank you very much.'

This was equal to John's most sanguine expectations; but he would have
preferred Mr Haredale's looking at him when he spoke, as if he really
did thank him, to his walking up and down, speaking by fits and starts,
often stopping with his eyes fixed on the ground, moving hurriedly on
again, like one distracted, and seeming almost unconscious of what he
said or did.

This, however, was his manner; and it was so embarrassing to John that
he sat quite passive for a long time, not knowing what to do. At length
he rose. Mr Haredale stared at him for a moment as though he had quite
forgotten his being present, then shook hands with him, and opened the
door. Hugh, who was, or feigned to be, fast asleep on the ante-chamber
floor, sprang up on their entrance, and throwing his cloak about him,
grasped his stick and lantern, and prepared to descend the stairs.

'Stay,' said Mr Haredale. 'Will this man drink?'

'Drink! He'd drink the Thames up, if it was strong enough, sir,' replied
John Willet. 'He'll have something when he gets home. He's better
without it, now, sir.'

'Nay. Half the distance is done,' said Hugh. 'What a hard master you
are! I shall go home the better for one glassful, halfway. Come!'

As John made no reply, Mr Haredale brought out a glass of liquor, and
gave it to Hugh, who, as he took it in his hand, threw part of it upon
the floor.

'What do you mean by splashing your drink about a gentleman's house,
sir?' said John.

'I'm drinking a toast,' Hugh rejoined, holding the glass above his head,
and fixing his eyes on Mr Haredale's face; 'a toast to this house and
its master.' With that he muttered something to himself, and drank the
rest, and setting down the glass, preceded them without another word.

John was a good deal scandalised by this observance, but seeing that
Mr Haredale took little heed of what Hugh said or did, and that his
thoughts were otherwise employed, he offered no apology, and went in
silence down the stairs, across the walk, and through the garden-gate.
They stopped upon the outer side for Hugh to hold the light while Mr
Haredale locked it on the inner; and then John saw with wonder (as he
often afterwards related), that he was very pale, and that his face
had changed so much and grown so haggard since their entrance, that he
almost seemed another man.

They were in the open road again, and John Willet was walking on behind
his escort, as he had come, thinking very steadily of what he had just
now seen, when Hugh drew him suddenly aside, and almost at the same
instant three horsemen swept past--the nearest brushed his shoulder even
then--who, checking their steeds as suddenly as they could, stood still,
and waited for their coming up.



Chapter 35


When John Willet saw that the horsemen wheeled smartly round, and drew
up three abreast in the narrow road, waiting for him and his man to join
them, it occurred to him with unusual precipitation that they must be
highwaymen; and had Hugh been armed with a blunderbuss, in place of his
stout cudgel, he would certainly have ordered him to fire it off at a
venture, and would, while the word of command was obeyed, have consulted
his own personal safety in immediate flight. Under the circumstances of
disadvantage, however, in which he and his guard were placed, he deemed
it prudent to adopt a different style of generalship, and therefore
whispered his attendant to address them in the most peaceable and
courteous terms. By way of acting up to the spirit and letter of this
instruction, Hugh stepped forward, and flourishing his staff before the
very eyes of the rider nearest to him, demanded roughly what he and his
fellows meant by so nearly galloping over them, and why they scoured the
king's highway at that late hour of night.

The man whom he addressed was beginning an angry reply in the same
strain, when he was checked by the horseman in the centre, who,
interposing with an air of authority, inquired in a somewhat loud but
not harsh or unpleasant voice:

'Pray, is this the London road?'

'If you follow it right, it is,' replied Hugh roughly.

'Nay, brother,' said the same person, 'you're but a churlish Englishman,
if Englishman you be--which I should much doubt but for your tongue.
Your companion, I am sure, will answer me more civilly. How say you,
friend?'

'I say it IS the London road, sir,' answered John. 'And I wish,' he
added in a subdued voice, as he turned to Hugh, 'that you was in any
other road, you vagabond. Are you tired of your life, sir, that you go
a-trying to provoke three great neck-or-nothing chaps, that could keep
on running over us, back'ards and for'ards, till we was dead, and then
take our bodies up behind 'em, and drown us ten miles off?'

'How far is it to London?' inquired the same speaker.

'Why, from here, sir,' answered John, persuasively, 'it's thirteen very
easy mile.'

The adjective was thrown in, as an inducement to the travellers to
ride away with all speed; but instead of having the desired effect, it
elicited from the same person, the remark, 'Thirteen miles! That's a
long distance!' which was followed by a short pause of indecision.

'Pray,' said the gentleman, 'are there any inns hereabouts?' At the word
'inns,' John plucked up his spirit in a surprising manner; his fears
rolled off like smoke; all the landlord stirred within him.

'There are no inns,' rejoined Mr Willet, with a strong emphasis on the
plural number; 'but there's a Inn--one Inn--the Maypole Inn. That's a
Inn indeed. You won't see the like of that Inn often.'

'You keep it, perhaps?' said the horseman, smiling.

'I do, sir,' replied John, greatly wondering how he had found this out.

'And how far is the Maypole from here?'

'About a mile'--John was going to add that it was the easiest mile in
all the world, when the third rider, who had hitherto kept a little in
the rear, suddenly interposed:

'And have you one excellent bed, landlord? Hem! A bed that you can
recommend--a bed that you are sure is well aired--a bed that has been
slept in by some perfectly respectable and unexceptionable person?'

'We don't take in no tagrag and bobtail at our house, sir,' answered
John. 'And as to the bed itself--'

'Say, as to three beds,' interposed the gentleman who had spoken before;
'for we shall want three if we stay, though my friend only speaks of
one.'

'No, no, my lord; you are too good, you are too kind; but your life is
of far too much importance to the nation in these portentous times, to
be placed upon a level with one so useless and so poor as mine. A great
cause, my lord, a mighty cause, depends on you. You are its leader and
its champion, its advanced guard and its van. It is the cause of our
altars and our homes, our country and our faith. Let ME sleep on a
chair--the carpet--anywhere. No one will repine if I take cold or fever.
Let John Grueby pass the night beneath the open sky--no one will
repine for HIM. But forty thousand men of this our island in the wave
(exclusive of women and children) rivet their eyes and thoughts on Lord
George Gordon; and every day, from the rising up of the sun to the going
down of the same, pray for his health and vigour. My lord,' said the
speaker, rising in his stirrups, 'it is a glorious cause, and must not
be forgotten. My lord, it is a mighty cause, and must not be endangered.
My lord, it is a holy cause, and must not be deserted.'

'It IS a holy cause,' exclaimed his lordship, lifting up his hat with
great solemnity. 'Amen.'

'John Grueby,' said the long-winded gentleman, in a tone of mild
reproof, 'his lordship said Amen.'

'I heard my lord, sir,' said the man, sitting like a statue on his
horse.

'And do not YOU say Amen, likewise?'

To which John Grueby made no reply at all, but sat looking straight
before him.

'You surprise me, Grueby,' said the gentleman. 'At a crisis like the
present, when Queen Elizabeth, that maiden monarch, weeps within
her tomb, and Bloody Mary, with a brow of gloom and shadow, stalks
triumphant--'

'Oh, sir,' cied the man, gruffly, 'where's the use of talking of Bloody
Mary, under such circumstances as the present, when my lord's wet
through, and tired with hard riding? Let's either go on to London, sir,
or put up at once; or that unfort'nate Bloody Mary will have more to
answer for--and she's done a deal more harm in her grave than she ever
did in her lifetime, I believe.'

By this time Mr Willet, who had never heard so many words spoken
together at one time, or delivered with such volubility and emphasis as
by the long-winded gentleman; and whose brain, being wholly unable to
sustain or compass them, had quite given itself up for lost; recovered
so far as to observe that there was ample accommodation at the Maypole
for all the party: good beds; neat wines; excellent entertainment
for man and beast; private rooms for large and small parties; dinners
dressed upon the shortest notice; choice stabling, and a lock-up
coach-house; and, in short, to run over such recommendatory scraps of
language as were painted up on various portions of the building, and
which in the course of some forty years he had learnt to repeat with
tolerable correctness. He was considering whether it was at all possible
to insert any novel sentences to the same purpose, when the gentleman
who had spoken first, turning to him of the long wind, exclaimed, 'What
say you, Gashford? Shall we tarry at this house he speaks of, or press
forward? You shall decide.'

'I would submit, my lord, then,' returned the person he appealed to,
in a silky tone, 'that your health and spirits--so important, under
Providence, to our great cause, our pure and truthful cause'--here his
lordship pulled off his hat again, though it was raining hard--'require
refreshment and repose.'

'Go on before, landlord, and show the way,' said Lord George Gordon; 'we
will follow at a footpace.'

'If you'll give me leave, my lord,' said John Grueby, in a low voice,
'I'll change my proper place, and ride before you. The looks of the
landlord's friend are not over honest, and it may be as well to be
cautious with him.'

'John Grueby is quite right,' interposed Mr Gashford, falling back
hastily. 'My lord, a life so precious as yours must not be put in peril.
Go forward, John, by all means. If you have any reason to suspect the
fellow, blow his brains out.'

John made no answer, but looking straight before him, as his custom
seemed to be when the secretary spoke, bade Hugh push on, and followed
close behind him. Then came his lordship, with Mr Willet at his bridle
rein; and, last of all, his lordship's secretary--for that, it seemed,
was Gashford's office.

Hugh strode briskly on, often looking back at the servant, whose horse
was close upon his heels, and glancing with a leer at his holster
case of pistols, by which he seemed to set great store. He was a
square-built, strong-made, bull-necked fellow, of the true English
breed; and as Hugh measured him with his eye, he measured Hugh,
regarding him meanwhile with a look of bluff disdain. He was much older
than the Maypole man, being to all appearance five-and-forty; but was
one of those self-possessed, hard-headed, imperturbable fellows, who, if
they are ever beaten at fisticuffs, or other kind of warfare, never know
it, and go on coolly till they win.

'If I led you wrong now,' said Hugh, tauntingly, 'you'd--ha ha
ha!--you'd shoot me through the head, I suppose.'

John Grueby took no more notice of this remark than if he had been deaf
and Hugh dumb; but kept riding on quite comfortably, with his eyes fixed
on the horizon.

'Did you ever try a fall with a man when you were young, master?' said
Hugh. 'Can you make any play at single-stick?'

John Grueby looked at him sideways with the same contented air, but
deigned not a word in answer.

'--Like this?' said Hugh, giving his cudgel one of those skilful
flourishes, in which the rustic of that time delighted. 'Whoop!'

'--Or that,' returned John Grueby, beating down his guard with his whip,
and striking him on the head with its butt end. 'Yes, I played a little
once. You wear your hair too long; I should have cracked your crown if
it had been a little shorter.'

It was a pretty smart, loud-sounding rap, as it was, and evidently
astonished Hugh; who, for the moment, seemed disposed to drag his new
acquaintance from his saddle. But his face betokening neither malice,
triumph, rage, nor any lingering idea that he had given him offence;
his eyes gazing steadily in the old direction, and his manner being as
careless and composed as if he had merely brushed away a fly; Hugh was
so puzzled, and so disposed to look upon him as a customer of almost
supernatural toughness, that he merely laughed, and cried 'Well done!'
then, sheering off a little, led the way in silence.

Before the lapse of many minutes the party halted at the Maypole door.
Lord George and his secretary quickly dismounting, gave their horses to
their servant, who, under the guidance of Hugh, repaired to the stables.
Right glad to escape from the inclemency of the night, they followed
Mr Willet into the common room, and stood warming themselves and drying
their clothes before the cheerful fire, while he busied himself with
such orders and preparations as his guest's high quality required.

As he bustled in and out of the room, intent on these arrangements, he
had an opportunity of observing the two travellers, of whom, as yet, he
knew nothing but the voice. The lord, the great personage who did the
Maypole so much honour, was about the middle height, of a slender make,
and sallow complexion, with an aquiline nose, and long hair of a reddish
brown, combed perfectly straight and smooth about his ears, and slightly
powdered, but without the faintest vestige of a curl. He was attired,
under his greatcoat, in a full suit of black, quite free from any
ornament, and of the most precise and sober cut. The gravity of his
dress, together with a certain lankness of cheek and stiffness of
deportment, added nearly ten years to his age, but his figure was that
of one not yet past thirty. As he stood musing in the red glow of
the fire, it was striking to observe his very bright large eye, which
betrayed a restlessness of thought and purpose, singularly at variance
with the studied composure and sobriety of his mien, and with his
quaint and sad apparel. It had nothing harsh or cruel in its expression;
neither had his face, which was thin and mild, and wore an air of
melancholy; but it was suggestive of an indefinable uneasiness; which
infected those who looked upon him, and filled them with a kind of pity
for the man: though why it did so, they would have had some trouble to
explain.

Gashford, the secretary, was taller, angularly made, high-shouldered,
bony, and ungraceful. His dress, in imitation of his superior, was
demure and staid in the extreme; his manner, formal and constrained.
This gentleman had an overhanging brow, great hands and feet and ears,
and a pair of eyes that seemed to have made an unnatural retreat into
his head, and to have dug themselves a cave to hide in. His manner was
smooth and humble, but very sly and slinking. He wore the aspect of a
man who was always lying in wait for something that WOULDN'T come to
pass; but he looked patient--very patient--and fawned like a spaniel
dog. Even now, while he warmed and rubbed his hands before the blaze,
he had the air of one who only presumed to enjoy it in his degree as a
commoner; and though he knew his lord was not regarding him, he looked
into his face from time to time, and with a meek and deferential manner,
smiled as if for practice.

Such were the guests whom old John Willet, with a fixed and leaden
eye, surveyed a hundred times, and to whom he now advanced with a state
candlestick in each hand, beseeching them to follow him into a worthier
chamber. 'For my lord,' said John--it is odd enough, but certain people
seem to have as great a pleasure in pronouncing titles as their owners
have in wearing them--'this room, my lord, isn't at all the sort of
place for your lordship, and I have to beg your lordship's pardon for
keeping you here, my lord, one minute.'

With this address, John ushered them upstairs into the state apartment,
which, like many other things of state, was cold and comfortless. Their
own footsteps, reverberating through the spacious room, struck upon
their hearing with a hollow sound; and its damp and chilly atmosphere
was rendered doubly cheerless by contrast with the homely warmth they
had deserted.

It was of no use, however, to propose a return to the place they had
quitted, for the preparations went on so briskly that there was no time
to stop them. John, with the tall candlesticks in his hands, bowed them
up to the fireplace; Hugh, striding in with a lighted brand and pile
of firewood, cast it down upon the hearth, and set it in a blaze; John
Grueby (who had a great blue cockade in his hat, which he appeared
to despise mightily) brought in the portmanteau he had carried on his
horse, and placed it on the floor; and presently all three were busily
engaged in drawing out the screen, laying the cloth, inspecting the
beds, lighting fires in the bedrooms, expediting the supper, and making
everything as cosy and as snug as might be, on so short a notice. In
less than an hour's time, supper had been served, and ate, and cleared
away; and Lord George and his secretary, with slippered feet, and legs
stretched out before the fire, sat over some hot mulled wine together.

'So ends, my lord,' said Gashford, filling his glass with great
complacency, 'the blessed work of a most blessed day.'

'And of a blessed yesterday,' said his lordship, raising his head.

'Ah!'--and here the secretary clasped his hands--'a blessed yesterday
indeed! The Protestants of Suffolk are godly men and true. Though others
of our countrymen have lost their way in darkness, even as we, my lord,
did lose our road to-night, theirs is the light and glory.'

'Did I move them, Gashford?' said Lord George.

'Move them, my lord! Move them! They cried to be led on against the
Papists, they vowed a dreadful vengeance on their heads, they roared
like men possessed--'

'But not by devils,' said his lord.

'By devils! my lord! By angels.'

'Yes--oh surely--by angels, no doubt,' said Lord George, thrusting his
hands into his pockets, taking them out again to bite his nails, and
looking uncomfortably at the fire. 'Of course by angels--eh Gashford?'

'You do not doubt it, my lord?' said the secretary.

'No--No,' returned his lord. 'No. Why should I? I suppose it would be
decidedly irreligious to doubt it--wouldn't it, Gashford? Though there
certainly were,' he added, without waiting for an answer, 'some plaguy
ill-looking characters among them.'

'When you warmed,' said the secretary, looking sharply at the other's
downcast eyes, which brightened slowly as he spoke; 'when you warmed
into that noble outbreak; when you told them that you were never of
the lukewarm or the timid tribe, and bade them take heed that they were
prepared to follow one who would lead them on, though to the very death;
when you spoke of a hundred and twenty thousand men across the Scottish
border who would take their own redress at any time, if it were not
conceded; when you cried "Perish the Pope and all his base adherents;
the penal laws against them shall never be repealed while Englishmen
have hearts and hands"--and waved your own and touched your sword; and
when they cried "No Popery!" and you cried "No; not even if we wade in
blood," and they threw up their hats and cried "Hurrah! not even if we
wade in blood; No Popery! Lord George! Down with the Papists--Vengeance
on their heads:" when this was said and done, and a word from you, my
lord, could raise or still the tumult--ah! then I felt what greatness
was indeed, and thought, When was there ever power like this of Lord
George Gordon's!'

'It's a great power. You're right. It is a great power!' he cried with
sparkling eyes. 'But--dear Gashford--did I really say all that?'

'And how much more!' cried the secretary, looking upwards. 'Ah! how much
more!'

'And I told them what you say, about the one hundred and forty thousand
men in Scotland, did I!' he asked with evident delight. 'That was bold.'

'Our cause is boldness. Truth is always bold.'

'Certainly. So is religion. She's bold, Gashford?'

'The true religion is, my lord.'

'And that's ours,' he rejoined, moving uneasily in his seat, and biting
his nails as though he would pare them to the quick. 'There can be no
doubt of ours being the true one. You feel as certain of that as I do,
Gashford, don't you?'

'Does my lord ask ME,' whined Gashford, drawing his chair nearer with
an injured air, and laying his broad flat hand upon the table; 'ME,'
he repeated, bending the dark hollows of his eyes upon him with an
unwholesome smile, 'who, stricken by the magic of his eloquence in
Scotland but a year ago, abjured the errors of the Romish church, and
clung to him as one whose timely hand had plucked me from a pit?'

'True. No--No. I--I didn't mean it,' replied the other, shaking him by
the hand, rising from his seat, and pacing restlessly about the room.
'It's a proud thing to lead the people, Gashford,' he added as he made a
sudden halt.

'By force of reason too,' returned the pliant secretary.

'Ay, to be sure. They may cough and jeer, and groan in Parliament, and
call me fool and madman, but which of them can raise this human sea and
make it swell and roar at pleasure? Not one.'

'Not one,' repeated Gashford.

'Which of them can say for his honesty, what I can say for mine; which
of them has refused a minister's bribe of one thousand pounds a year, to
resign his seat in favour of another? Not one.'

'Not one,' repeated Gashford again--taking the lion's share of the
mulled wine between whiles.

'And as we are honest, true, and in a sacred cause, Gashford,' said Lord
George with a heightened colour and in a louder voice, as he laid his
fevered hand upon his shoulder, 'and are the only men who regard the
mass of people out of doors, or are regarded by them, we will uphold
them to the last; and will raise a cry against these un-English Papists
which shall re-echo through the country, and roll with a noise like
thunder. I will be worthy of the motto on my coat of arms, "Called and
chosen and faithful."'

'Called,' said the secretary, 'by Heaven.'

'I am.'

'Chosen by the people.'

'Yes.'

'Faithful to both.'

'To the block!'

It would be difficult to convey an adequate idea of the excited manner
in which he gave these answers to the secretary's promptings; of the
rapidity of his utterance, or the violence of his tone and gesture; in
which, struggling through his Puritan's demeanour, was something wild
and ungovernable which broke through all restraint. For some minutes he
walked rapidly up and down the room, then stopping suddenly, exclaimed,

'Gashford--YOU moved them yesterday too. Oh yes! You did.'

'I shone with a reflected light, my lord,' replied the humble secretary,
laying his hand upon his heart. 'I did my best.'

'You did well,' said his master, 'and are a great and worthy instrument.
If you will ring for John Grueby to carry the portmanteau into my room,
and will wait here while I undress, we will dispose of business as
usual, if you're not too tired.'

'Too tired, my lord!--But this is his consideration! Christian from head
to foot.' With which soliloquy, the secretary tilted the jug, and looked
very hard into the mulled wine, to see how much remained.

John Willet and John Grueby appeared together. The one bearing the great
candlesticks, and the other the portmanteau, showed the deluded lord
into his chamber; and left the secretary alone, to yawn and shake
himself, and finally to fall asleep before the fire.

'Now, Mr Gashford sir,' said John Grueby in his ear, after what appeared
to him a moment of unconsciousness; 'my lord's abed.'

'Oh. Very good, John,' was his mild reply. 'Thank you, John. Nobody need
sit up. I know my room.'

'I hope you're not a-going to trouble your head to-night, or my lord's
head neither, with anything more about Bloody Mary,' said John. 'I wish
the blessed old creetur had never been born.'

'I said you might go to bed, John,' returned the secretary. 'You didn't
hear me, I think.'

'Between Bloody Marys, and blue cockades, and glorious Queen Besses,
and no Poperys, and Protestant associations, and making of speeches,'
pursued John Grueby, looking, as usual, a long way off, and taking no
notice of this hint, 'my lord's half off his head. When we go out o'
doors, such a set of ragamuffins comes a-shouting after us, "Gordon
forever!" that I'm ashamed of myself and don't know where to look. When
we're indoors, they come a-roaring and screaming about the house like so
many devils; and my lord instead of ordering them to be drove away, goes
out into the balcony and demeans himself by making speeches to 'em, and
calls 'em "Men of England," and "Fellow-countrymen," as if he was fond
of 'em and thanked 'em for coming. I can't make it out, but they're all
mixed up somehow or another with that unfort'nate Bloody Mary, and call
her name out till they're hoarse. They're all Protestants too--every man
and boy among 'em: and Protestants are very fond of spoons, I find, and
silver-plate in general, whenever area-gates is left open accidentally.
I wish that was the worst of it, and that no more harm might be to come;
but if you don't stop these ugly customers in time, Mr Gashford (and I
know you; you're the man that blows the fire), you'll find 'em grow a
little bit too strong for you. One of these evenings, when the weather
gets warmer and Protestants are thirsty, they'll be pulling London
down,--and I never heard that Bloody Mary went as far as THAT.'

Gashford had vanished long ago, and these remarks had been bestowed on
empty air. Not at all discomposed by the discovery, John Grueby fixed
his hat on, wrongside foremost that he might be unconscious of the
shadow of the obnoxious cockade, and withdrew to bed; shaking his head
in a very gloomy and prophetic manner until he reached his chamber.



Chapter 36


Gashford, with a smiling face, but still with looks of profound
deference and humility, betook himself towards his master's room,
smoothing his hair down as he went, and humming a psalm tune. As he
approached Lord George's door, he cleared his throat and hummed more
vigorously.

There was a remarkable contrast between this man's occupation at the
moment, and the expression of his countenance, which was singularly
repulsive and malicious. His beetling brow almost obscured his eyes;
his lip was curled contemptuously; his very shoulders seemed to sneer in
stealthy whisperings with his great flapped ears.

'Hush!' he muttered softly, as he peeped in at the chamber-door. 'He
seems to be asleep. Pray Heaven he is! Too much watching, too much care,
too much thought--ah! Lord preserve him for a martyr! He is a saint, if
ever saint drew breath on this bad earth.'

Placing his light upon a table, he walked on tiptoe to the fire, and
sitting in a chair before it with his back towards the bed, went on
communing with himself like one who thought aloud:

'The saviour of his country and his country's religion, the friend of
his poor countrymen, the enemy of the proud and harsh; beloved of the
rejected and oppressed, adored by forty thousand bold and loyal English
hearts--what happy slumbers his should be!' And here he sighed, and
warmed his hands, and shook his head as men do when their hearts are
full, and heaved another sigh, and warmed his hands again.

'Why, Gashford?' said Lord George, who was lying broad awake, upon his
side, and had been staring at him from his entrance.

'My--my lord,' said Gashford, starting and looking round as though in
great surprise. 'I have disturbed you!'

'I have not been sleeping.'

'Not sleeping!' he repeated, with assumed confusion. 'What can I say
for having in your presence given utterance to thoughts--but they were
sincere--they were sincere!' exclaimed the secretary, drawing his sleeve
in a hasty way across his eyes; 'and why should I regret your having
heard them?'

'Gashford,' said the poor lord, stretching out his hand with manifest
emotion. 'Do not regret it. You love me well, I know--too well. I don't
deserve such homage.'

Gashford made no reply, but grasped the hand and pressed it to his lips.
Then rising, and taking from the trunk a little desk, he placed it on
a table near the fire, unlocked it with a key he carried in his pocket,
sat down before it, took out a pen, and, before dipping it in the
inkstand, sucked it--to compose the fashion of his mouth perhaps, on
which a smile was hovering yet.

'How do our numbers stand since last enrolling-night?' inquired Lord
George. 'Are we really forty thousand strong, or do we still speak in
round numbers when we take the Association at that amount?'

'Our total now exceeds that number by a score and three,' Gashford
replied, casting his eyes upon his papers.

'The funds?'

'Not VERY improving; but there is some manna in the wilderness, my lord.
Hem! On Friday night the widows' mites dropped in. "Forty scavengers,
three and fourpence. An aged pew-opener of St Martin's parish, sixpence.
A bell-ringer of the established church, sixpence. A Protestant infant,
newly born, one halfpenny. The United Link Boys, three shillings--one
bad. The anti-popish prisoners in Newgate, five and fourpence. A friend
in Bedlam, half-a-crown. Dennis the hangman, one shilling."'
