of a dog. He had therefore bristled up at Boxtel's hatred, whom he had
suspected to be a warm friend of the prisoner, making trifling inquiries
to contrive with the more certainty some means of escape for him.

Thus to the very first proposals which Boxtel made to Gryphus to filch
the bulbs which Cornelius van Baerle must be supposed to conceal, if not
in his breast, at least in some corner of his cell, the surly jailer had
only answered by kicking Mynheer Isaac out, and setting the dog at him.

The piece which the mastiff had torn from his hose did not discourage
Boxtel. He came back to the charge, but this time Gryphus was in bed,
feverish, and with a broken arm. He therefore was not able to admit the
petitioner, who then addressed himself to Rosa, offering to buy her a
head-dress of pure gold if she would get the bulbs for him. On this, the
generous girl, although not yet knowing the value of the object of the
robbery, which was to be so well remunerated, had directed the tempter
to the executioner, as the heir of the prisoner.

In the meanwhile the sentence had been pronounced. Thus Isaac had no
more time to bribe any one. He therefore clung to the idea which Rosa
had suggested: he went to the executioner.

Isaac had not the least doubt that Cornelius would die with the bulbs on
his heart.

But there were two things which Boxtel did not calculate upon:--

Rosa, that is to say, love;

William of Orange, that is to say, clemency.

But for Rosa and William, the calculations of the envious neighbour
would have been correct.

But for William, Cornelius would have died.

But for Rosa, Cornelius would have died with his bulbs on his heart.

Mynheer Boxtel went to the headsman, to whom he gave himself out as
a great friend of the condemned man; and from whom he bought all the
clothes of the dead man that was to be, for one hundred guilders; rather
an exorbitant sum, as he engaged to leave all the trinkets of gold and
silver to the executioner.

But what was the sum of a hundred guilders to a man who was all but sure
to buy with it the prize of the Haarlem Society?

It was money lent at a thousand per cent., which, as nobody will deny,
was a very handsome investment.

The headsman, on the other hand, had scarcely anything to do to earn his
hundred guilders. He needed only, as soon as the execution was over, to
allow Mynheer Boxtel to ascend the scaffold with his servants, to remove
the inanimate remains of his friend.

The thing was, moreover, quite customary among the "faithful brethren,"
when one of their masters died a public death in the yard of the
Buytenhof.

A fanatic like Cornelius might very easily have found another fanatic
who would give a hundred guilders for his remains.

The executioner also readily acquiesced in the proposal, making only one
condition,--that of being paid in advance.

Boxtel, like the people who enter a show at a fair, might be
disappointed, and refuse to pay on going out.

Boxtel paid in advance, and waited.

After this, the reader may imagine how excited Boxtel was; with what
anxiety he watched the guards, the Recorder, and the executioner; and
with what intense interest he surveyed the movements of Van Baerle. How
would he place himself on the block? how would he fall? and would he
not, in falling, crush those inestimable bulbs? had not he at least
taken care to enclose them in a golden box,--as gold is the hardest of
all metals?

Every trifling delay irritated him. Why did that stupid executioner thus
lose time in brandishing his sword over the head of Cornelius, instead
of cutting that head off?

But when he saw the Recorder take the hand of the condemned, and raise
him, whilst drawing forth the parchment from his pocket,--when he heard
the pardon of the Stadtholder publicly read out,--then Boxtel was no
more like a human being; the rage and malice of the tiger, of the hyena,
and of the serpent glistened in his eyes, and vented itself in his yell
and his movements. Had he been able to get at Van Baerle, he would have
pounced upon him and strangled him.

And so, then, Cornelius was to live, and was to go with him to
Loewestein, and thither to his prison he would take with him his bulbs;
and perhaps he would even find a garden where the black tulip would
flower for him.

Boxtel, quite overcome by his frenzy, fell from the stone upon some
Orangemen, who, like him, were sorely vexed at the turn which affairs
had taken. They, mistaking the frantic cries of Mynheer Isaac for
demonstrations of joy, began to belabour him with kicks and cuffs, such
as could not have been administered in better style by any prize-fighter
on the other side of the Channel.

Blows were, however, nothing to him. He wanted to run after the coach
which was carrying away Cornelius with his bulbs. But in his hurry
he overlooked a paving-stone in his way, stumbled, lost his centre of
gravity, rolled over to a distance of some yards, and only rose again,
bruised and begrimed, after the whole rabble of the Hague, with their
muddy feet, had passed over him.

One would think that this was enough for one day, but Mynheer Boxtel did
not seem to think so, as, in addition to having his clothes torn, his
back bruised, and his hands scratched, he inflicted upon himself the
further punishment of tearing out his hair by handfuls, as an offering
to that goddess of envy who, as mythology teaches us, wears a head-dress
of serpents.




Chapter 14. The Pigeons of Dort


It was indeed in itself a great honour for Cornelius van Baerle to be
confined in the same prison which had once received the learned master
Grotius.

But on arriving at the prison he met with an honour even greater. As
chance would have it, the cell formerly inhabited by the illustrious
Barneveldt happened to be vacant, when the clemency of the Prince of
Orange sent the tulip-fancier Van Baerle there.

The cell had a very bad character at the castle since the time when
Grotius, by means of the device of his wife, made escape from it in that
famous book-chest which the jailers forgot to examine.

On the other hand, it seemed to Van Baerle an auspicious omen that this
very cell was assigned to him, for according to his ideas, a jailer
ought never to have given to a second pigeon the cage from which the
first had so easily flown.

The cell had an historical character. We will only state here that,
with the exception of an alcove which was contrived there for the use
of Madame Grotius, it differed in no respect from the other cells of the
prison; only, perhaps, it was a little higher, and had a splendid view
from the grated window.

Cornelius felt himself perfectly indifferent as to the place where he
had to lead an existence which was little more than vegetation. There
were only two things now for which he cared, and the possession of which
was a happiness enjoyed only in imagination.

A flower, and a woman; both of them, as he conceived, lost to him for
ever.

Fortunately the good doctor was mistaken. In his prison cell the most
adventurous life which ever fell to the lot of any tulip-fancier was
reserved for him.

One morning, whilst at his window inhaling the fresh air which came from
the river, and casting a longing look to the windmills of his dear
old city Dort, which were looming in the distance behind a forest of
chimneys, he saw flocks of pigeons coming from that quarter to perch
fluttering on the pointed gables of Loewestein.

These pigeons, Van Baerle said to himself, are coming from Dort, and
consequently may return there. By fastening a little note to the wing of
one of these pigeons, one might have a chance to send a message there.
Then, after a few moments' consideration, he exclaimed,--

"I will do it."

A man grows very patient who is twenty-eight years of age, and condemned
to a prison for life,--that is to say, to something like twenty-two or
twenty-three thousand days of captivity.

Van Baerle, from whose thoughts the three bulbs were never absent,
made a snare for catching the pigeons, baiting the birds with all the
resources of his kitchen, such as it was for eight slivers (sixpence
English) a day; and, after a month of unsuccessful attempts, he at last
caught a female bird.

It cost him two more months to catch a male bird; he then shut them up
together, and having about the beginning of the year 1673 obtained some
eggs from them, he released the female, which, leaving the male behind
to hatch the eggs in her stead, flew joyously to Dort, with the note
under her wing.

She returned in the evening. She had preserved the note.

Thus it went on for fifteen days, at first to the disappointment, and
then to the great grief, of Van Baerle.

On the sixteenth day, at last, she came back without it.

Van Baerle had addressed it to his nurse, the old Frisian woman; and
implored any charitable soul who might find it to convey it to her as
safely and as speedily as possible.

In this letter there was a little note enclosed for Rosa.

Van Baerle's nurse had received the letter in the following way.

Leaving Dort, Mynheer Isaac Boxtel had abandoned, not only his house,
his servants, his observatory, and his telescope, but also his pigeons.

The servant, having been left without wages, first lived on his little
savings, and then on his master's pigeons.

Seeing this, the pigeons emigrated from the roof of Isaac Boxtel to that
of Cornelius van Baerle.

The nurse was a kind-hearted woman, who could not live without something
to love. She conceived an affection for the pigeons which had thrown
themselves on her hospitality; and when Boxtel's servant reclaimed them
with culinary intentions, having eaten the first fifteen already, and
now wishing to eat the other fifteen, she offered to buy them from him
for a consideration of six stivers per head.

This being just double their value, the man was very glad to close the
bargain, and the nurse found herself in undisputed possession of the
pigeons of her master's envious neighbour.

In the course of their wanderings, these pigeons with others visited
the Hague, Loewestein, and Rotterdam, seeking variety, doubtless, in the
flavour of their wheat or hempseed.

Chance, or rather God, for we can see the hand of God in everything, had
willed that Cornelius van Baerle should happen to hit upon one of these
very pigeons.

Therefore, if the envious wretch had not left Dort to follow his
rival to the Hague in the first place, and then to Gorcum or to
Loewestein,--for the two places are separated only by the confluence of
the Waal and the Meuse,--Van Baerle's letter would have fallen into his
hands and not the nurse's: in which event the poor prisoner, like
the raven of the Roman cobbler, would have thrown away his time, his
trouble, and, instead of having to relate the series of exciting events
which are about to flow from beneath our pen like the varied hues of a
many coloured tapestry, we should have naught to describe but a weary
waste of days, dull and melancholy and gloomy as night's dark mantle.

The note, as we have said, had reached Van Baerle's nurse.

And also it came to pass, that one evening in the beginning of February,
just when the stars were beginning to twinkle, Cornelius heard on the
staircase of the little turret a voice which thrilled through him.

He put his hand on his heart, and listened.

It was the sweet harmonious voice of Rosa.

Let us confess it, Cornelius was not so stupefied with surprise, or
so beyond himself with joy, as he would have been but for the pigeon,
which, in answer to his letter, had brought back hope to him under her
empty wing; and, knowing Rosa, he expected, if the note had ever reached
her, to hear of her whom he loved, and also of his three darling bulbs.

He rose, listened once more, and bent forward towards the door.

Yes, they were indeed the accents which had fallen so sweetly on his
heart at the Hague.

The question now was, whether Rosa, who had made the journey from the
Hague to Loewestein, and who--Cornelius did not understand how--had
succeeded even in penetrating into the prison, would also be fortunate
enough in penetrating to the prisoner himself.

Whilst Cornelius, debating this point within himself, was building all
sorts of castles in the air, and was struggling between hope and fear,
the shutter of the grating in the door opened, and Rosa, beaming with
joy, and beautiful in her pretty national costume--but still more
beautiful from the grief which for the last five months had blanched her
cheeks--pressed her little face against the wire grating of the window,
saying to him,--

"Oh, sir, sir! here I am!"

Cornelius stretched out his arms, and, looking to heaven, uttered a cry
of joy,--

"Oh, Rosa, Rosa!"

"Hush! let us speak low: my father follows on my heels," said the girl.

"Your father?"

"Yes, he is in the courtyard at the bottom of the staircase, receiving
the instructions of the Governor; he will presently come up."

"The instructions of the Governor?"

"Listen to me, I'll try to tell you all in a few words. The Stadtholder
has a country-house, one league distant from Leyden, properly speaking a
kind of large dairy, and my aunt, who was his nurse, has the management
of it. As soon as I received your letter, which, alas! I could not read
myself, but which your housekeeper read to me, I hastened to my aunt;
there I remained until the Prince should come to the dairy; and when he
came, I asked him as a favour to allow my father to exchange his post at
the prison of the Hague with the jailer of the fortress of Loewestein.
The Prince could not have suspected my object; had he known it, he would
have refused my request, but as it is he granted it."

"And so you are here?"

"As you see."

"And thus I shall see you every day?"

"As often as I can manage it."

"Oh, Rosa, my beautiful Rosa, do you love me a little?"

"A little?" she said, "you make no great pretensions, Mynheer
Cornelius."

Cornelius tenderly stretched out his hands towards her, but they were
only able to touch each other with the tips of their fingers through the
wire grating.

"Here is my father," said she.

Rosa then abruptly drew back from the door, and ran to meet old Gryphus,
who made his appearance at the top of the staircase.




Chapter 15. The Little Grated Window


Gryphus was followed by the mastiff.

The turnkey took the animal round the jail, so that, if needs be, he
might recognize the prisoners.

"Father," said Rosa, "here is the famous prison from which Mynheer
Grotius escaped. You know Mynheer Grotius?"

"Oh, yes, that rogue Grotius, a friend of that villain Barneveldt,
whom I saw executed when I was a child. Ah! so Grotius; and that's the
chamber from which he escaped. Well, I'll answer for it that no one
shall escape after him in my time."

And thus opening the door, he began in the dark to talk to the prisoner.

The dog, on his part, went up to the prisoner, and, growling, smelled
about his legs just as though to ask him what right he had still to be
alive, after having left the prison in the company of the Recorder and
the executioner.
