woman by turns in the district. Now it was the two Misses Wynns--first
the dark, then the light one; now the red-haired Miss Armitage; then the
mature Ann Pearson. At present you throw on my shoulders all the tribe
of the Misses Sykes. On what grounds this gossip rests God knows. I
visit nowhere; I seek female society about as assiduously as you do, Mr.
Malone. If ever I go to Whinbury, it is only to give Sykes or Pearson a
call in their counting-house, where our discussions run on other topics
than matrimony, and our thoughts are occupied with other things than
courtships, establishments, dowries. The cloth we can't sell, the hands
we can't employ, the mills we can't run, the perverse course of events
generally, which we cannot alter, fill our hearts, I take it, pretty
well at present, to the tolerably complete exclusion of such figments as
love-making, etc."

"I go along with you completely, Moore. If there is one notion I hate
more than another, it is that of marriage--I mean marriage in the vulgar
weak sense, as a mere matter of sentiment--two beggarly fools agreeing
to unite their indigence by some fantastic tie of feeling. Humbug! But
an advantageous connection, such as can be formed in consonance with
dignity of views and permanency of solid interests, is not so bad--eh?"

"No," responded Moore, in an absent manner. The subject seemed to have
no interest for him; he did not pursue it. After sitting for some time
gazing at the fire with a preoccupied air, he suddenly turned his head.

"Hark!" said he. "Did you hear wheels?"

Rising, he went to the window, opened it, and listened. He soon closed
it. "It is only the sound of the wind rising," he remarked, "and the
rivulet a little swollen, rushing down the hollow. I expected those
wagons at six; it is near nine now."

"Seriously, do you suppose that the putting up of this new machinery
will bring you into danger?" inquired Malone. "Helstone seems to think
it will."

"I only wish the machines--the frames--were safe here, and lodged within
the walls of this mill. Once put up, I defy the frame-breakers. Let them
only pay me a visit and take the consequences. My mill is my castle."

"One despises such low scoundrels," observed Malone, in a profound vein
of reflection. "I almost wish a party would call upon you to-night; but
the road seemed extremely quiet as I came along. I saw nothing astir."

"You came by the Redhouse?"

"Yes."

"There would be nothing on that road. It is in the direction of Stilbro'
the risk lies."

"And you think there is risk?"

"What these fellows have done to others they may do to me. There is only
this difference: most of the manufacturers seem paralyzed when they are
attacked. Sykes, for instance, when his dressing-shop was set on fire
and burned to the ground, when the cloth was torn from his tenters and
left in shreds in the field, took no steps to discover or punish the
miscreants: he gave up as tamely as a rabbit under the jaws of a ferret.
Now I, if I know myself, should stand by my trade, my mill, and my
machinery."

"Helstone says these three are your gods; that the 'Orders in Council'
are with you another name for the seven deadly sins; that Castlereagh is
your Antichrist, and the war-party his legions."

"Yes; I abhor all these things because they ruin me. They stand in my
way. I cannot get on. I cannot execute my plans because of them. I see
myself baffled at every turn by their untoward effects."

"But you are rich and thriving, Moore?"

"I am very rich in cloth I cannot sell. You should step into my
warehouse yonder, and observe how it is piled to the roof with pieces.
Roakes and Pearson are in the same condition. America used to be their
market, but the Orders in Council have cut that off."

Malone did not seem prepared to carry on briskly a conversation of this
sort. He began to knock the heels of his boots together, and to yawn.

"And then to think," continued Mr. Moore who seemed too much taken up
with the current of his own thoughts to note the symptoms of his guest's
_ennui_--"to think that these ridiculous gossips of Whinbury and
Briarfield will keep pestering one about being married! As if there was
nothing to be done in life but to 'pay attention,' as they say, to some
young lady, and then to go to church with her, and then to start on a
bridal tour, and then to run through a round of visits, and then, I
suppose, to be 'having a family.' Oh, que le diable emporte!" He broke
off the aspiration into which he was launching with a certain energy,
and added, more calmly, "I believe women talk and think only of these
things, and they naturally fancy men's minds similarly occupied."

"Of course--of course," assented Malone; "but never mind them." And he
whistled, looked impatiently round, and seemed to feel a great want of
something. This time Moore caught and, it appeared, comprehended his
demonstrations.

"Mr. Malone," said he, "you must require refreshment after your wet
walk. I forget hospitality."

"Not at all," rejoined Malone; but he looked as if the right nail was at
last hit on the head, nevertheless. Moore rose and opened a cupboard.

"It is my fancy," said he, "to have every convenience within myself, and
not to be dependent on the feminity in the cottage yonder for every
mouthful I eat or every drop I drink. I often spend the evening and sup
here alone, and sleep with Joe Scott in the mill. Sometimes I am my own
watchman. I require little sleep, and it pleases me on a fine night to
wander for an hour or two with my musket about the hollow. Mr. Malone,
can you cook a mutton chop?"

"Try me. I've done it hundreds of times at college."

"There's a dishful, then, and there's the gridiron. Turn them quickly.
You know the secret of keeping the juices in?"

"Never fear me; you shall see. Hand a knife and fork, please."

The curate turned up his coat-cuffs, and applied himself to the cookery
with vigour. The manufacturer placed on the table plates, a loaf of
bread, a black bottle, and two tumblers. He then produced a small copper
kettle--still from the same well-stored recess, his cupboard--filled it
with water from a large stone jar in a corner, set it on the fire beside
the hissing gridiron, got lemons, sugar, and a small china punch-bowl;
but while he was brewing the punch a tap at the door called him away.

"Is it you, Sarah?"

"Yes, sir. Will you come to supper, please, sir?"

"No; I shall not be in to-night; I shall sleep in the mill. So lock the
doors, and tell your mistress to go to bed."

He returned.

"You have your household in proper order," observed Malone approvingly,
as, with his fine face ruddy as the embers over which he bent, he
assiduously turned the mutton chops. "You are not under petticoat
government, like poor Sweeting, a man--whew! how the fat spits! it has
burnt my hand--destined to be ruled by women. Now you and I,
Moore--there's a fine brown one for you, and full of gravy--you and I
will have no gray mares in our stables when we marry."

"I don't know; I never think about it. If the gray mare is handsome and
tractable, why not?"

"The chops are done. Is the punch brewed?"

"There is a glassful. Taste it. When Joe Scott and his minions return
they shall have a share of this, provided they bring home the frames
intact."

Malone waxed very exultant over the supper. He laughed aloud at trifles,
made bad jokes and applauded them himself, and, in short, grew
unmeaningly noisy. His host, on the contrary, remained quiet as before.
It is time, reader, that you should have some idea of the appearance of
this same host. I must endeavour to sketch him as he sits at table.

He is what you would probably call, at first view, rather a
strange-looking man; for he is thin, dark, sallow, very foreign of
aspect, with shadowy hair carelessly streaking his forehead. It appears
that he spends but little time at his toilet, or he would arrange it
with more taste. He seems unconscious that his features are fine, that
they have a southern symmetry, clearness, regularity in their
chiselling; nor does a spectator become aware of this advantage till he
has examined him well, for an anxious countenance and a hollow, somewhat
haggard, outline of face disturb the idea of beauty with one of care.
His eyes are large, and grave, and gray; their expression is intent and
meditative, rather searching than soft, rather thoughtful than genial.
When he parts his lips in a smile, his physiognomy is agreeable--not
that it is frank or cheerful even then, but you feel the influence of a
certain sedate charm, suggestive, whether truly or delusively, of a
considerate, perhaps a kind nature, of feelings that may wear well at
home--patient, forbearing, possibly faithful feelings. He is still
young--not more than thirty; his stature is tall, his figure slender.
His manner of speaking displeases. He has an outlandish accent, which,
notwithstanding a studied carelessness of pronunciation and diction,
grates on a British, and especially on a Yorkshire, ear.

Mr. Moore, indeed, was but half a Briton, and scarcely that. He came of
a foreign ancestry by the mother's side, and was himself born and partly
reared on a foreign soil. A hybrid in nature, it is probable he had a
hybrid's feeling on many points--patriotism for one; it is likely that
he was unapt to attach himself to parties, to sects, even to climes and
customs; it is not impossible that he had a tendency to isolate his
individual person from any community amidst which his lot might
temporarily happen to be thrown, and that he felt it to be his best
wisdom to push the interests of Robert Gerard Moore, to the exclusion of
philanthropic consideration for general interests, with which he
regarded the said Gerard Moore as in a great measure disconnected. Trade
was Mr. Moore's hereditary calling: the Gerards of Antwerp had been
merchants for two centuries back. Once they had been wealthy merchants;
but the uncertainties, the involvements, of business had come upon them;
disastrous speculations had loosened by degrees the foundations of their
credit. The house had stood on a tottering base for a dozen years; and
at last, in the shock of the French Revolution, it had rushed down a
total ruin. In its fall was involved the English and Yorkshire firm of
Moore, closely connected with the Antwerp house, and of which one of the
partners, resident in Antwerp, Robert Moore, had married Hortense
Gerard, with the prospect of his bride inheriting her father Constantine
Gerard's share in the business. She inherited, as we have seen, but his
share in the liabilities of the firm; and these liabilities, though duly
set aside by a composition with creditors, some said her son Robert
accepted, in his turn, as a legacy, and that he aspired one day to
discharge them, and to rebuild the fallen house of Gerard and Moore on a
scale at least equal to its former greatness. It was even supposed that
he took by-past circumstances much to heart; and if a childhood passed
at the side of a saturnine mother, under foreboding of coming evil, and
a manhood drenched and blighted by the pitiless descent of the storm,
could painfully impress the mind, _his_ probably was impressed in no
golden characters.

If, however, he had a great end of restoration in view, it was not in
his power to employ great means for its attainment. He was obliged to be
content with the day of small things. When he came to Yorkshire,
he--whose ancestors had owned warehouses in this seaport, and factories
in that inland town, had possessed their town-house and their
country-seat--saw no way open to him but to rent a cloth-mill in an
out-of-the-way nook of an out-of-the-way district; to take a cottage
adjoining it for his residence, and to add to his possessions, as
pasture for his horse, and space for his cloth-tenters, a few acres of
the steep, rugged land that lined the hollow through which his
mill-stream brawled. All this he held at a somewhat high rent (for these
war times were hard, and everything was dear) of the trustees of the
Fieldhead estate, then the property of a minor.

At the time this history commences, Robert Moore had lived but two years
in the district, during which period he had at least proved himself
possessed of the quality of activity. The dingy cottage was converted
into a neat, tasteful residence. Of part of the rough land he had made
garden-ground, which he cultivated with singular, even with Flemish,
exactness and care. As to the mill, which was an old structure, and
fitted up with old machinery, now become inefficient and out of date, he
had from the first evinced the strongest contempt for all its
arrangements and appointments. His aim had been to effect a radical
reform, which he had executed as fast as his very limited capital would
allow; and the narrowness of that capital, and consequent check on his
progress, was a restraint which galled his spirit sorely. Moore ever
wanted to push on. "Forward" was the device stamped upon his soul; but
poverty curbed him. Sometimes (figuratively) he foamed at the mouth when
the reins were drawn very tight.

In this state of feeling, it is not to be expected that he would
deliberate much as to whether his advance was or was not prejudicial to
others. Not being a native, nor for any length of time a resident of the
neighbourhood, he did not sufficiently care when the new inventions
threw the old workpeople out of employ. He never asked himself where
those to whom he no longer paid weekly wages found daily bread; and in
this negligence he only resembled thousands besides, on whom the
starving poor of Yorkshire seemed to have a closer claim.

The period of which I write was an overshadowed one in British history,
and especially in the history of the northern provinces. War was then
at its height. Europe was all involved therein. England, if not weary,
was worn with long resistance--yes, and half her people were weary too,
and cried out for peace on any terms. National honour was become a mere
empty name, of no value in the eyes of many, because their sight was dim
with famine; and for a morsel of meat they would have sold their
birthright.

The "Orders in Council," provoked by Napoleon's Milan and Berlin
decrees, and forbidding neutral powers to trade with France, had, by
offending America, cut off the principal market of the Yorkshire woollen
trade, and brought it consequently to the verge of ruin. Minor foreign
markets were glutted, and would receive no more. The Brazils, Portugal,
Sicily, were all overstocked by nearly two years' consumption. At this
crisis certain inventions in machinery were introduced into the staple
manufactures of the north, which, greatly reducing the number of hands
necessary to be employed, threw thousands out of work, and left them
without legitimate means of sustaining life. A bad harvest supervened.
Distress reached its climax. Endurance, overgoaded, stretched the hand
of fraternity to sedition. The throes of a sort of moral earthquake were
felt heaving under the hills of the northern counties. But, as is usual
in such cases, nobody took much notice. When a food-riot broke out in a
manufacturing town, when a gig-mill was burnt to the ground, or a
manufacturer's house was attacked, the furniture thrown into the
streets, and the family forced to flee for their lives, some local
measures were or were not taken by the local magistracy. A ringleader
was detected, or more frequently suffered to elude detection; newspaper
paragraphs were written on the subject, and there the thing stopped. As
to the sufferers, whose sole inheritance was labour, and who had lost
that inheritance--who could not get work, and consequently could not get
wages, and consequently could not get bread--they were left to suffer
on, perhaps inevitably left. It would not do to stop the progress of
invention, to damage science by discouraging its improvements; the war
could not be terminated; efficient relief could not be raised. There was
no help then; so the unemployed underwent their destiny--ate the bread
and drank the waters of affliction.

Misery generates hate. These sufferers hated the machines which they
believed took their bread from them; they hated the buildings which
contained those machines; they hated the manufacturers who owned those
buildings. In the parish of Briarfield, with which we have at present to
do, Hollow's Mill was the place held most abominable; Gerard Moore, in
his double character of semi-foreigner and thorough-going progressist,
the man most abominated. And it perhaps rather agreed with Moore's
temperament than otherwise to be generally hated, especially when he
believed the thing for which he was hated a right and an expedient
thing; and it was with a sense of warlike excitement he, on this night,
sat in his counting-house waiting the arrival of his frame-laden wagons.
Malone's coming and company were, it may be, most unwelcome to him. He
would have preferred sitting alone; for he liked a silent, sombre,
unsafe solitude. His watchman's musket would have been company enough
for him; the full-flowing beck in the den would have delivered
continuously the discourse most genial to his ear.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the queerest look in the world had the manufacturer for some ten
minutes been watching the Irish curate, as the latter made free with the
punch, when suddenly that steady gray eye changed, as if another vision
came between it and Malone. Moore raised his hand.

"Chut!" he said in his French fashion, as Malone made a noise with his
glass. He listened a moment, then rose, put his hat on, and went out at
the counting-house door.

The night was still, dark, and stagnant: the water yet rushed on full
and fast; its flow almost seemed a flood in the utter silence. Moore's
ear, however, caught another sound, very distant but yet dissimilar,
broken and rugged--in short, a sound of heavy wheels crunching a stony
road. He returned to the counting-house and lit a lantern, with which he
walked down the mill-yard, and proceeded to open the gates. The big
wagons were coming on; the dray-horses' huge hoofs were heard splashing
in the mud and water. Moore hailed them.

"Hey, Joe Scott! Is all right?"

Probably Joe Scott was yet at too great a distance to hear the inquiry.
He did not answer it.

"Is all right, I say?" again asked Moore, when the elephant-like
leader's nose almost touched his.

Some one jumped out from the foremost wagon into the road; a voice cried
aloud, "Ay, ay, divil; all's raight! We've smashed 'em."

And there was a run. The wagons stood still; they were now deserted.

"Joe Scott!" No Joe Scott answered. "Murgatroyd! Pighills! Sykes!" No
reply. Mr. Moore lifted his lantern and looked into the vehicles. There
was neither man nor machinery; they were empty and abandoned.

Now Mr. Moore loved his machinery. He had risked the last of his capital
on the purchase of these frames and shears which to-night had been
expected. Speculations most important to his interests depended on the
results to be wrought by them. Where were they?

The words "we've smashed 'em" rang in his ears. How did the catastrophe
affect him? By the light of the lantern he held were his features
visible, relaxing to a singular smile--the smile the man of determined
spirit wears when he reaches a juncture in his life where this
determined spirit is to feel a demand on its strength, when the strain
is to be made, and the faculty must bear or break. Yet he remained
silent, and even motionless; for at the instant he neither knew what to
say nor what to do. He placed the lantern on the ground, and stood with
his arms folded, gazing down and reflecting.

An impatient trampling of one of the horses made him presently look up.
His eye in the moment caught the gleam of something white attached to a
part of the harness. Examined by the light of the lantern this proved to
be a folded paper--a billet. It bore no address without; within was the
superscription:--

"To the Divil of Hollow's Miln."

We will not copy the rest of the orthography, which was very peculiar,
but translate it into legible English. It ran thus:--

"Your hellish machinery is shivered to smash on Stilbro' Moor, and your
men are lying bound hand and foot in a ditch by the roadside. Take this
as a warning from men that are starving, and have starving wives and
children to go home to when they have done this deed. If you get new
machines, or if you otherwise go on as you have done, you shall hear
from us again. Beware!"

"Hear from you again? Yes, I'll hear from you again, and you shall hear
from me. I'll speak to you directly. On Stilbro' Moor you shall hear
from me in a moment."

Having led the wagons within the gates, he hastened towards the cottage.
Opening the door, he spoke a few words quickly but quietly to two
females who ran to meet him in the passage. He calmed the seeming alarm
of one by a brief palliative account of what had taken place; to the
other he said, "Go into the mill, Sarah--there is the key--and ring the
mill-bell as loud as you can. Afterwards you will get another lantern
and help me to light up the front."

Returning to his horses, he unharnessed, fed, and stabled them with
equal speed and care, pausing occasionally, while so occupied, as if to
listen for the mill-bell. It clanged out presently, with irregular but
loud and alarming din. The hurried, agitated peal seemed more urgent
than if the summons had been steadily given by a practised hand. On that
still night, at that unusual hour, it was heard a long way round. The
guests in the kitchen of the Redhouse were startled by the clamour, and
declaring that "there must be summat more nor common to do at Hollow's
Miln," they called for lanterns, and hurried to the spot in a body. And
scarcely had they thronged into the yard with their gleaming lights,
when the tramp of horses was heard, and a little man in a shovel hat,
sitting erect on the back of a shaggy pony, "rode lightly in," followed
by an aide-de-camp mounted on a larger steed.

Mr. Moore, meantime, after stabling his dray-horses, had saddled his
hackney, and with the aid of Sarah, the servant, lit up his mill, whose
wide and long front now glared one great illumination, throwing a
sufficient light on the yard to obviate all fear of confusion arising
from obscurity. Already a deep hum of voices became audible. Mr. Malone
had at length issued from the counting-house, previously taking the
precaution to dip his head and face in the stone water-jug; and this
precaution, together with the sudden alarm, had nearly restored to him
the possession of those senses which the punch had partially scattered.
He stood with his hat on the back of his head, and his shillelah grasped
in his dexter fist, answering much at random the questions of the
newly-arrived party from the Redhouse. Mr. Moore now appeared, and was
immediately confronted by the shovel hat and the shaggy pony.

"Well, Moore, what is your business with us? I thought you would want us
to-night--me and the hetman here (patting his pony's neck), and Tom and
his charger. When I heard your mill-bell I could sit still no longer, so
I left Boultby to finish his supper alone. But where is the enemy? I do
not see a mask or a smutted face present; and there is not a pane of
glass broken in your windows. Have you had an attack, or do you expect
one?"

"Oh, not at all! I have neither had one nor expect one," answered Moore
coolly. "I only ordered the bell to be rung because I want two or three
neighbours to stay here in the Hollow while I and a couple or so more go
over to Stilbro' Moor."

"To Stilbro' Moor! What to do? To meet the wagons?"

"The wagons are come home an hour ago."

"Then all's right. What more would you have?"

"They came home empty; and Joe Scott and company are left on the moor,
and so are the frames. Read that scrawl."

Mr. Helstone received and perused the document of which the contents
have before been given.

"Hum! They've only served you as they serve others. But, however, the
poor fellows in the ditch will be expecting help with some impatience.
This is a wet night for such a berth. I and Tom will go with you. Malone
may stay behind and take care of the mill. What is the matter with him?
His eyes seem starting out of his head."

"He has been eating a mutton chop."

"Indeed!--Peter Augustus, be on your guard. Eat no more mutton chops
to-night. You are left here in command of these premises--an honourable
post!"

"Is anybody to stay with me?"

"As many of the present assemblage as choose.--My lads, how many of you
will remain here, and how many will go a little way with me and Mr.
Moore on the Stilbro' road, to meet some men who have been waylaid and
assaulted by frame-breakers?"

The small number of three volunteered to go; the rest preferred staying
behind. As Mr. Moore mounted his horse, the rector asked him in a low
voice whether he had locked up the mutton chops, so that Peter Augustus
could not get at them? The manufacturer nodded an affirmative, and the
rescue-party set out.




CHAPTER III.

MR. YORKE.


Cheerfulness, it would appear, is a matter which depends fully as much
on the state of things within as on the state of things without and
around us. I make this trite remark, because I happen to know that
Messrs. Helstone and Moore trotted forth from the mill-yard gates, at
the head of their very small company, in the best possible spirits. When
a ray from a lantern (the three pedestrians of the party carried each
one) fell on Mr. Moore's face, you could see an unusual, because a
lively, spark dancing in his eyes, and a new-found vivacity mantling on
his dark physiognomy; and when the rector's visage was illuminated, his
hard features were revealed all agrin and ashine with glee. Yet a
drizzling night, a somewhat perilous expedition, you would think were
not circumstances calculated to enliven those exposed to the wet and
engaged in the adventure. If any member or members of the crew who had
been at work on Stilbro' Moor had caught a view of this party, they
would have had great pleasure in shooting either of the leaders from
behind a wall: and the leaders knew this; and the fact is, being both
men of steely nerves and steady-beating hearts, were elate with the
knowledge.

I am aware, reader, and you need not remind me, that it is a dreadful
thing for a parson to be warlike; I am aware that he should be a man of
peace. I have some faint outline of an idea of what a clergyman's
mission is amongst mankind, and I remember distinctly whose servant he
is, whose message he delivers, whose example he should follow; yet, with
all this, if you are a parson-hater, you need not expect me to go along
with you every step of your dismal, downward-tending, unchristian road;
you need not expect me to join in your deep anathemas, at once so narrow
and so sweeping, in your poisonous rancour, so intense and so absurd,
against "the cloth;" to lift up my eyes and hands with a Supplehough,
or to inflate my lungs with a Barraclough, in horror and denunciation of
the diabolical rector of Briarfield.

He was not diabolical at all. The evil simply was--he had missed his
vocation. He should have been a soldier, and circumstances had made him
a priest. For the rest, he was a conscientious, hard-headed,
hard-handed, brave, stern, implacable, faithful little man; a man almost
without sympathy, ungentle, prejudiced, and rigid, but a man true to
principle, honourable, sagacious, and sincere. It seems to me, reader,
that you cannot always cut out men to fit their profession, and that you
ought not to curse them because their profession sometimes hangs on them
ungracefully. Nor will I curse Helstone, clerical Cossack as he was. Yet
he _was_ cursed, and by many of his own parishioners, as by others he
was adored--which is the frequent fate of men who show partiality in
friendship and bitterness in enmity, who are equally attached to
principles and adherent to prejudices.

Helstone and Moore being both in excellent spirits, and united for the
present in one cause, you would expect that, as they rode side by side,
they would converse amicably. Oh no! These two men, of hard, bilious
natures both, rarely came into contact but they chafed each other's
moods. Their frequent bone of contention was the war. Helstone was a
high Tory (there were Tories in those days), and Moore was a bitter
Whig--a Whig, at least, as far as opposition to the war-party was
concerned, that being the question which affected his own interest; and
only on that question did he profess any British politics at all. He
liked to infuriate Helstone by declaring his belief in the invincibility
of Bonaparte, by taunting England and Europe with the impotence of their
efforts to withstand him, and by coolly advancing the opinion that it
was as well to yield to him soon as late, since he must in the end crush
every antagonist, and reign supreme.

Helstone could not bear these sentiments. It was only on the
consideration of Moore being a sort of outcast and alien, and having but
half measure of British blood to temper the foreign gall which corroded
his veins, that he brought himself to listen to them without indulging
the wish he felt to cane the speaker. Another thing, too, somewhat
allayed his disgust--namely, a fellow-feeling for the dogged tone with
which these opinions were asserted, and a respect for the consistency
of Moore's crabbed contumacy.

As the party turned into the Stilbro' road, they met what little wind
there was; the rain dashed in their faces. Moore had been fretting his
companion previously, and now, braced up by the raw breeze, and perhaps
irritated by the sharp drizzle, he began to goad him.

"Does your Peninsular news please you still?" he asked.

"What do you mean?" was the surly demand of the rector.

"I mean, have you still faith in that Baal of a Lord Wellington?"

"And what do you mean now?"

"Do you still believe that this wooden-faced and pebble-hearted idol of
England has power to send fire down from heaven to consume the French
holocaust you want to offer up?"

"I believe Wellington will flog Bonaparte's marshals into the sea the
day it pleases him to lift his arm."

"But, my dear sir, you can't be serious in what you say. Bonaparte's
marshals are great men, who act under the guidance of an omnipotent
master-spirit. Your Wellington is the most humdrum of commonplace
martinets, whose slow, mechanical movements are further cramped by an
ignorant home government."

"Wellington is the soul of England. Wellington is the right champion of
a good cause, the fit representative of a powerful, a resolute, a
sensible, and an honest nation."

"Your good cause, as far as I understand it, is simply the restoration
of that filthy, feeble Ferdinand to a throne which he disgraced. Your
fit representative of an honest people is a dull-witted drover, acting
for a duller-witted farmer; and against these are arrayed victorious
supremacy and invincible genius."

"Against legitimacy is arrayed usurpation; against modest,
single-minded, righteous, and brave resistance to encroachment is
arrayed boastful, double-tongued, selfish, and treacherous ambition to
possess. God defend the right!"

"God often defends the powerful."

"What! I suppose the handful of Israelites standing dryshod on the
Asiatic side of the Red Sea was more powerful than the host of the
Egyptians drawn up on the African side? Were they more numerous? Were
they better appointed? Were they more mighty, in a word--eh? Don't
speak, or you'll tell a lie, Moore; you know you will. They were a poor,
overwrought band of bondsmen. Tyrants had oppressed them through four
hundred years; a feeble mixture of women and children diluted their thin
ranks; their masters, who roared to follow them through the divided
flood, were a set of pampered Ethiops, about as strong and brutal as the
lions of Libya. They were armed, horsed, and charioted; the poor Hebrew
wanderers were afoot. Few of them, it is likely, had better weapons than
their shepherds' crooks or their masons' building-tools; their meek and
mighty leader himself had only his rod. But bethink you, Robert Moore,
right was with them; the God of battles was on their side. Crime and the
lost archangel generalled the ranks of Pharaoh, and which triumphed? We
know that well. 'The Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore'--yea,
'the depths covered them, they sank to the bottom as a stone.' The right
hand of the Lord became glorious in power; the right hand of the Lord
dashed in pieces the enemy!"

"You are all right; only you forget the true parallel. France is Israel,
and Napoleon is Moses. Europe, with her old overgorged empires and
rotten dynasties, is corrupt Egypt; gallant France is the Twelve Tribes,
and her fresh and vigorous Usurper the Shepherd of Horeb."

"I scorn to answer you."

Moore accordingly answered himself--at least, he subjoined to what he
had just said an additional observation in a lower voice.

"Oh, in Italy he was as great as any Moses! He was the right thing
there, fit to head and organize measures for the regeneration of
nations. It puzzles me to this day how the conqueror of Lodi should have
condescended to become an emperor, a vulgar, a stupid humbug; and still
more how a people who had once called themselves republicans should have
sunk again to the grade of mere slaves. I despise France! If England had
gone as far on the march of civilization as France did, she would hardly
have retreated so shamelessly."

"You don't mean to say that besotted imperial France is any worse than
bloody republican France?" demanded Helstone fiercely.

"I mean to say nothing, but I can think what I please, you know, Mr.
Helstone, both about France and England; and about revolutions, and
regicides, and restorations in general; and about the divine right of
kings, which you often stickle for in your sermons, and the duty of
non-resistance, and the sanity of war, and----"

Mr. Moore's sentence was here cut short by the rapid rolling up of a
gig, and its sudden stoppage in the middle of the road. Both he and the
rector had been too much occupied with their discourse to notice its
approach till it was close upon them.

"Nah, maister; did th' wagons hit home?" demanded a voice from the
vehicle.

"Can that be Joe Scott?"

"Ay, ay!" returned another voice; for the gig contained two persons, as
was seen by the glimmer of its lamp. The men with the lanterns had now
fallen into the rear, or rather, the equestrians of the rescue-party had
outridden the pedestrians. "Ay, Mr. Moore, it's Joe Scott. I'm bringing
him back to you in a bonny pickle. I fand him on the top of the moor
yonder, him and three others. What will you give me for restoring him to
you?"

"Why, my thanks, I believe; for I could better have afforded to lose a
better man. That is you, I suppose, Mr. Yorke, by your voice?"

"Ay, lad, it's me. I was coming home from Stilbro' market, and just as I
got to the middle of the moor, and was whipping on as swift as the wind
(for these, they say, are not safe times, thanks to a bad government!),
I heard a groan. I pulled up. Some would have whipt on faster; but I've
naught to fear that I know of. I don't believe there's a lad in these
parts would harm me--at least, I'd give them as good as I got if they
offered to do it. I said, 'Is there aught wrong anywhere?' ''Deed is
there,' somebody says, speaking out of the ground, like. 'What's to do?
Be sharp and tell me,' I ordered. 'Nobbut four on us ligging in a
ditch,' says Joe, as quiet as could be. I telled 'em more shame to 'em,
and bid them get up and move on, or I'd lend them a lick of the
gig-whip; for my notion was they were all fresh. 'We'd ha' done that an
hour sin', but we're teed wi' a bit o' band,' says Joe. So in a while I
got down and loosed 'em wi' my penknife; and Scott would ride wi' me, to
tell me all how it happened; and t' others are coming on as fast as
their feet will bring them."

"Well, I am greatly obliged to you, Mr. Yorke."

"Are you, my lad? You know you're not. However, here are the rest
approaching. And here, by the Lord, is another set with lights in their
pitchers, like the army of Gideon; and as we've th' parson wi',
us--good-evening, Mr. Helstone--we'se do."

Mr. Helstone returned the salutation of the individual in the gig very
stiffly indeed. That individual proceeded,--

"We're eleven strong men, and there's both horses and chariots amang us.
If we could only fall in wi' some of these starved ragamuffins of
frame-breakers we could win a grand victory. We could iv'ry one be a
Wellington--that would please ye, Mr. Helstone--and sich paragraphs as
we could contrive for t' papers! Briarfield suld be famous. But we'se
hev a column and a half i' th' _Stilbro' Courier_ ower this job, as it
is, I dare say. I'se expect no less."

"And I'll promise you no less, Mr. Yorke, for I'll write the article
myself," returned the rector.

"To be sure--sartainly! And mind ye recommend weel that them 'at brake
t' bits o' frames, and teed Joe Scott's legs wi' band, suld be hung
without benefit o' clergy. It's a hanging matter, or suld be. No doubt
o' that."

"If I judged them I'd give them short shrift!" cried Moore. "But I mean
to let them quite alone this bout, to give them rope enough, certain
that in the end they will hang themselves."

"Let them alone, will ye, Moore? Do you promise that?"

"Promise! No. All I mean to say is, I shall give myself no particular
trouble to catch them; but if one falls in my way----"

"You'll snap him up, of course. Only you would rather they would do
something worse than merely stop a wagon before you reckon with them.
Well, we'll say no more on the subject at present. Here we are at my
door, gentlemen, and I hope you and the men will step in. You will none
of you be the worse of a little refreshment."

Moore and Helstone opposed this proposition as unnecessary. It was,
however, pressed on them so courteously, and the night, besides, was so
inclement, and the gleam from the muslin-curtained windows of the house
before which they had halted looked so inviting, that at length they
yielded. Mr. Yorke, after having alighted from his gig, which he left in
charge of a man who issued from an outbuilding on his arrival, led the
way in.

It will have been remarked that Mr. Yorke varied a little in his
phraseology. Now he spoke broad Yorkshire, and anon he expressed himself
in very pure English. His manner seemed liable to equal alternations. He
could be polite and affable, and he could be blunt and rough. His
station then you could not easily determine by his speech and demeanour.
Perhaps the appearance of his residence may decide it.

The men he recommended to take the kitchen way, saying that he would
"see them served wi' summat to taste presently." The gentlemen were
ushered in at the front entrance. They found themselves in a matted
hall, lined almost to the ceiling with pictures. Through this they were
conducted to a large parlour, with a magnificent fire in the grate--the
most cheerful of rooms it appeared as a whole, and when you came to
examine details, the enlivening effect was not diminished. There was no
splendour, but there was taste everywhere, unusual taste--the taste, you
would have said, of a travelled man, a scholar, and a gentleman. A
series of Italian views decked the walls. Each of these was a specimen
of true art. A connoisseur had selected them; they were genuine and
valuable. Even by candle-light the bright clear skies, the soft
distances, with blue air quivering between the eye and the hills, the
fresh tints, and well-massed lights and shadows, charmed the view. The
subjects were all pastoral, the scenes were all sunny. There was a
guitar and some music on a sofa; there were cameos, beautiful
miniatures; a set of Grecian-looking vases on the mantelpiece; there
were books well arranged in two elegant bookcases.

Mr. Yorke bade his guests be seated. He then rang for wine. To the
servant who brought it he gave hospitable orders for the refreshment of
the men in the kitchen. The rector remained standing; he seemed not to
like his quarters; he would not touch the wine his host offered him.

"E'en as you will," remarked Mr. Yorke. "I reckon you're thinking of
Eastern customs, Mr. Helstone, and you'll not eat nor drink under my
roof, feared we suld be forced to be friends; but I am not so particular
or superstitious. You might sup the contents of that decanter, and you
might give me a bottle of the best in your own cellar, and I'd hold
myself free to oppose you at every turn still--in every vestry-meeting
and justice-meeting where we encountered one another."

"It is just what I should expect of you, Mr. Yorke."

"Does it agree wi' ye now, Mr. Helstone, to be riding out after rioters,
of a wet night, at your age?"

"It always agrees with me to be doing my duty; and in this case my duty
is a thorough pleasure. To hunt down vermin is a noble occupation, fit
for an archbishop."

"Fit for ye, at ony rate. But where's t' curate? He's happen gone to
visit some poor body in a sick gird, or he's happen hunting down vermin
in another direction."

"He is doing garrison-duty at Hollow's Mill."

"You left him a sup o' wine, I hope, Bob" (turning to Mr. Moore), "to
keep his courage up?"

He did not pause for an answer, but continued, quickly, still addressing
Moore, who had thrown himself into an old-fashioned chair by the
fireside--"Move it, Robert! Get up, my lad! That place is mine. Take the
sofa, or three other chairs, if you will, but not this. It belangs to
me, and nob'dy else."

"Why are you so particular to that chair, Mr. Yorke?" asked Moore,
lazily vacating the place in obedience to orders.

"My father war afore me, and that's all t' answer I sall gie thee; and
it's as good a reason as Mr. Helstone can give for the main feck o' his
notions."

"Moore, are you ready to go?" inquired the rector.

"Nay; Robert's not ready, or rather, I'm not ready to part wi' him. He's
an ill lad, and wants correcting."

"Why, sir? What have I done?"

"Made thyself enemies on every hand."

"What do I care for that? What difference does it make to me whether
your Yorkshire louts hate me or like me?"

"Ay, there it is. The lad is a mak' of an alien amang us. His father
would never have talked i' that way.--Go back to Antwerp, where you were
born and bred, mauvaise tete!"

"Mauvaise tete vous-meme; je ne fais que mon devoir; quant a vos
lourdauds de paysans, je m'en moque!"

"En ravanche, mon garcon, nos lourdauds de paysans se moqueront de toi;
sois en certain," replied Yorke, speaking with nearly as pure a French
accent as Gerard Moore.

"C'est bon! c'est bon! Et puisque cela m'est egal, que mes amis ne s'en
inquietent pas."

"Tes amis! Ou sont-ils, tes amis?"

"Je fais echo, ou sont-ils? et je suis fort aise que l'echo seul y
repond. Au diable les amis! Je me souviens encore du moment ou mon pere
et mes oncles Gerard appellerent autour d'eux leurs amis, et Dieu sait
si les amis se sont empresses d'accourir a leur secours! Tenez, M.
Yorke, ce mot, ami, m'irrite trop; ne m'en parlez plus."

"Comme tu voudras."

And here Mr. Yorke held his peace; and while he sits leaning back in his
three-cornered carved oak chair, I will snatch my opportunity to sketch
the portrait of this French-speaking Yorkshire gentleman.




CHAPTER IV.

MR. YORKE (_continued_).


A Yorkshire gentleman he was, _par excellence_, in every point; about
fifty-five years old, but looking at first sight still older, for his
hair was silver white. His forehead was broad, not high; his face fresh
and hale; the harshness of the north was seen in his features, as it was
heard in his voice; every trait was thoroughly English--not a Norman
line anywhere; it was an inelegant, unclassic, unaristocratic mould of
visage. Fine people would perhaps have called it vulgar; sensible people
would have termed it characteristic; shrewd people would have delighted
in it for the pith, sagacity, intelligence, the rude yet real
originality marked in every lineament, latent in every furrow. But it
was an indocile, a scornful, and a sarcastic face--the face of a man
difficult to lead, and impossible to drive. His stature was rather tall,
and he was well made and wiry, and had a stately integrity of port;
there was not a suspicion of the clown about him anywhere.

I did not find it easy to sketch Mr. Yorke's person, but it is more
difficult to indicate his mind. If you expect to be treated to a
Perfection, reader, or even to a benevolent, philanthropic old gentleman
in him, you are mistaken. He has spoken with some sense and with some
good feeling to Mr. Moore, but you are not thence to conclude that he
always spoke and thought justly and kindly.

Mr. Yorke, in the first place, was without the organ of veneration--a
