Then we turned back, and Kolgrim's foot lit on a stone that rolled
from under it, and he fell heavily with a clatter of weapons on the
scattered rocks of the stream bank.

There was a howl from the firelight, and the chanting stopped, and
voices cried in the uncouth tongue angrily, and there came a
pattering of unshod feet round us in the thickness, with a word or
two that seemed as if of command, and then silence, but for
stealthy footfalls drawing nearer to us. And I liked it not.

We pulled Kolgrim up, and went on upstream, drawing our swords,
though I yet thought of nothing but tin merchants whom we had
disturbed in some strange play of their own. Doubtless they would
take us for outlaws.

Now through the fog, dark against the flickering glow of the fire,
and only seen against it, came creeping figures; and I suppose that
some dull glitter of steel from helms or sword hilts betrayed us to
them, for word was muttered among them, and the rattle of stones
shifted by bare feet seemed to be all round us. I thought it time
to speak to them.

"We are friends, good people," I said. "We mean no harm, and have
but lost our way."

There was a whistle, and in a moment the leaping shadows were on
us. Kolgrim went down under a heavy blow on his helm, and lay
motionless; and Harek was whirled by a dozen pairs of hands off his
feet, and fell heavily with his foes upon him. I slew one, or
thought I slew him, and I stood over Kolgrim and kept them back
with long sword sweeps, crying to them to hold, for we were
friends--King Alfred's guests.

Now they were yelling to one another, and one threw a long-noosed
line over me from behind. It fell over my arms, and at once they
drew it tight, jerking me off my feet. As I went down, a howling
crowd fell on me and took the good sword from me, and bound me hand
and foot, having overpowered me by sheer numbers.

Then they looked at Kolgrim, and laughed, and left him. I was sure
he was dead then, and I fell into a great dumb rage that seemed
like to choke me.

They dragged the scald and me to the fire, and I saw into what
hands we had fallen, and I will say that I was fairly afraid. For
these were no thrifty Cornish folk, but wild-looking men, black
haired and bearded, clad in skins of wolf, and badger, and deer,
and sheep, with savage-eyed faces, and rough weapons of rusted iron
and bronze and stone. So strange were their looks and terrible in
the red light of the great fire, that I cried to Harek:

"These be trolls, scald! Sing the verses that have power to scare
them."

Now it says much for Harek's courage that at once he lifted up no
trembling voice and sang lustily, roaring verses old as Odin
himself, such as no troll can abide within hearing of, so that
those who bore him fell back amazed, and stared at him. Then I saw
that on the arms and necks of one or two of these weird folk were
golden rings flashing, and I saw, too, that our poor greyhounds lay
dead near where I was, and I feared the more for ourselves.

But they did not melt away or fly before the spells that Harek
hurled at them.

"These be mortal men," he said at last, "else had they fled ere
now."

By this time they had left me, helpless as a log, and were standing
round us in a sort of ring, talking together of slaying us, as I
thought. I mind that the flint-tipped spears seemed cruel weapons.
At last one of them said somewhat that pleased the rest, for they
broke into a great laugh and clapped their hands.

"Here is a word I can understand," said Harek, "and that is
'pixies.'"

But I was looking to see where our swords were, and I saw a man
take them beyond the fire and set them on what seemed a bank, some
yards from it. Then they went to the scald and began to loosen his
bonds, laughing the while.

"Have a care, Harek," I cried. "Make a rush for the swords beyond
the fire so soon as you are free."

"I am likely to be hove into the said fire," said the scald, very
coolly. "Howbeit I see the place where they are."

Then he gave a great bound and shout: but the numbers round him
were too great, and they had him down again, and yet he struggled.
This was sport to these savages, and those who were not wrestling
with him leaped and yelled with delight to see it. And I wrestled
and tore at my bonds; but they were of rawhide, and I could do
nothing.

Then Harek said, breathing heavily:

"No good; their arms are like steel about me."

Then some came and dragged me back a little, and set me up sitting
against a great stone, so I could see all that went on. Now I
counted fifty men, and there were no women that I could see
anywhere. Half of these were making a great ring with joined hands
round the fire, and some piled more fuel on it--turf and branches
of dwarf oak trees--and others sat round, watching the dozen or so
that minded Harek. One sat cross-legged near me, with a great pot
covered tightly with skin held between his knees.

Next they set Harek on his feet, and led him to the ring round the
fire. Two of the men--and they were among the strongest of
all--loosened their hands, and each gripped the scald by the wrist
and yelled aloud, and at once the man beat on the great pot's cover
drum-wise, and the ring of men whirled away round the fire in the
wild dance whose foot beats we had heard as we came. Then those who
sat round raised the chant we heard also.

I saw Harek struggle and try to break away; but at that they
whirled yet more quickly, and he lost his footing, and fell, and
was dragged up; and then he too must dance, or be haled along the
ground. My eyes grew dizzy with watching, while the drum and the
chant dulled into a humming in my brain.

"This cannot go on for long," I thought.

But then, from among those who sat round and chanted, I saw now one
and now another dart to the ring and take the place of a dancer who
seemed to tire; and so at last one came and gripped Harek's wrist
and swung into the place of his first holder before he knew that
any change was coming, and so with the one on the other side of
him.

Then it was plain that my comrade must needs fall worn out before
long, and I knew what I was looking on at. It was the dance of the
pixies, in truth--the dance that ends but with the death of him who
has broken in on their revels--and I would that I and Harek had
been slain rather with Kolgrim by the stream yonder.

At last the scald fell, and then with a great howl they let him go,
flinging him out of the circle like a stone, and he lay in a heap
where they tossed him, and was quite still.

Then the dancers raised a shout, and came and sat down, and some
brought earthen vessels of drink to refresh them, while they began
to turn their eyes to me, whose turn came next.

Whereon a thought came into my mind, and I almost laughed, for a
hope seemed to lie in a simple trick enough. That I would try
presently.

Now I looked, and hoped to see Harek come to himself; but he did
not stir. He lay near the swords, and for the first time now,
because of some thinning of the mist, I saw what was on the bank
where these had been placed. There was a great stone dolmen, as
they call it--a giant house, as it were, made of three flat stones
for walls, and a fourth for a roof, so heavy that none know how
such are raised nowadays. They might have served for a table, or
maybe a stool, for a Jotun. The two side walls came together from
the back, so that the doorway was narrow; and a man might stand and
keep it against a dozen, for it was ten feet high, and there was
room for sword play. One minds all these things when they are of no
use to him, and only the wish that they could be used is left.
Nevertheless, as I say, I had one little hope.

It was not long before the savage folk were ready for my dance, and
they made the ring again, refreshed. The drum was taken up once
more, and a dozen men came and unbound me. I also struggled as
Harek had struggled, unavailingly. When I was quiet they led me to
the circle, and I watched for my plan to work.

When I was within reach of the two who should hold me, I held out
my hands to grasp theirs, without waiting for them to seize me. The
man on my right took my wrist in a grasp like steel; but the other
was tricked, and took my hand naturally enough. Whereat my heart
leaped.

"Now will one know what a grip on the mainsheet is like!" I
thought; and even as the hand closed there came the yell, and the
thud of the earthen drum, and I was whirled away.

Now I kept going, for my great fear was that I should grow dizzy
quickly. I was taller than any man in the ring, and once I found
out the measure of the chant I went on easily, keeping my eyes on
the man ahead of me. That was the one to my right; for they went
against the sun, which is an unlucky thing to do at any time.

Once we went round, and I saw the great dolmen and the gleam of
sword Helmbiter beneath it. Then it was across the fire, and again
I passed it. I could not choose my place, as it seemed, and
suddenly with all my force I gripped the hand I held and around the
hones of it together, so that no answering grip could come. In a
moment the man let go of his fellow with the other hand, and
screamed aloud, and cast himself on the ground, staying the dance,
so that those after him fell over us. I let go, and swung round and
smote my other holder across the face; and he too let go, and I was
free, and in the uproar the dancers knew not what had happened.
Smiting and kicking, I got clear of them, and saw that the dolmen
towered across the fire, and straightway I knew that through the
smoke was the only way. I leaped at it, and cleared it fairly,
felling a man on the other side as I did so.

Then I had Helmbiter in my hand, and I shouted, and stepped back to
the narrow door of the dolmen, and there stood, while the wild men
gathered in a ring and howled at me. One ran and brought the long
line that had noosed me before, but the stone doorway protected me
from that; and one or two hurled spears at me, clumsily enough for
me to ward them off.

So we stood and watched each other, and I thought they would make a
rush on me. Harek lay within sweep of my sword, and his weapon was
nearer them than me, and one of them picked it up and went to
plunge it in him.

Then I stepped out and cut that man down, and the rest huddled back
a little at my onslaught. Whereon I drew my comrade back to my
feet, lest they should bring me out again and noose me.

As I did that, the one who seemed to be the chief leaped at me,
club in air; but I was watching for him, and he too fell, and I
shouted, to scare back the rest.

There was an answering shout, and Kolgrim, with the Berserker fury
on him, was among the wild crowd from out of the darkness, and his
great sword was cutting a way to my side.

Then they did not stay for my sword to be upon them also, but they
fled yelling and terror stricken, seeming to melt into the mist. In
two minutes the firelit circle was quiet and deserted, save for
those who had fallen; and my comrade and I stared in each other's
faces in the firelight.

"Comrade," I cried in gladness, "I thought you were slain."

"The good helm saved me," he answered; "but I came round in time.
What are these whom we have fought?"

I suppose the fury kept him up so far, for now I saw that his face
was ashy pale, and his knees shook under him.

"Are you badly hurt?" I asked.

"My head swims yet--that is all. Where is the scald?"

I turned to him and pointed. Kolgrim sat down beside him and bent
over him, leaning against the stone of the great dolmen.

"I do not think he is dead, master," he said. "Let us draw him
inside this house, and then he will be safe till daylight--unless
the trolls come back and we cannot hold this doorway till the sun
rises."

"They are men, not trolls," I said, pointing to the slain who lay
between us and the fire in a lane where Kolgrim had charged through
them, "else had we not slain them thus."

"One knows not what Sigurd's sword will not bite," he said.

"Why, most of that is your doing," I said, laughing a little.

But he looked puzzled, and shook his head.

"I mind leaping among them, but not that I slew any."

Now I thought that he would be the better for food. There had been
plenty of both food and drink going among these wild people,
whatever they were, and they had not waited to take anything. So I
said I would walk round the fire and see what I could find, and
went before he could stay me.

I had not far to go either, for there were plentiful remains of a
roasted sheep or two set aside with the skins, and alongside them a
pot of heather ale; so that we had a good meal, sitting in the door
of the dolmen, while the moon rose. But first we tried to make
Harek drink of the strong ale. He was beginning to breathe heavily
now, and I thought he would come round presently. Whether he had
been hurt by the whirling of the dance or by the fall when they
cast him aside, I could not tell, and we could do no more for him.

"Sleep, master," said Kolgrim, when we had supped well; "I will
watch for a time."

And he would have it so, and I, seeing that he was refreshed, was
glad to lie down and sleep inside the dolmen, bidding him wake me
in two hours and rest in turn.

But he did not. It was daylight when I woke, and the first ray of
the sun came straight into the narrow doorway and woke me. And it
waked Harek also. Kolgrim sat yet in the door with his sword across
his knees.

"Ho, scald!" I said, "you have had a great sleep."

"Ay, and a bad dream also," he answered, "if dream it was."

For now he saw before us the burnt-out fire, and the slain, and the
strangely-trampled circle of the dance.

"No dream, therefore," he said. "Is it true that I was made to
dance round yon fire till I was nigh dead?"

"True enough. I danced also in turn," I said.

And then I told him how things had gone after his fall.

"Kolgrim has fought, therefore, a matter of fifty trolls," I said;
"which is more than most folk can say for themselves."

Whereat he growled from the doorway:

"Maybe I was too much feared to know what I was doing."

We laughed at him, but he would have it so; and then we ate and
drank, and spoke of going to where we had left the horses, being
none so sure that we should find them at all.

Now the sun drank up the mists, and they cleared suddenly; and when
