will run beside you, and guide you to the trysting place, where my
Jack will be awaiting me, and his great roan will carry the pair of
us. Now silence, and follow me. There is a narrow exit from this
inner recess in the cave known only to me and to Madge. Not one of
the robbers, not even my father himself, knows of it. They think
they have you in a safe trap, and will not even keep watch tonight
after their weary search.

"Tread softly when you reach the open, lest our footsteps be heard.
But it is far from the mouth of the cave, and I have never raised
an alarm yet, often as I have slipped out unawares. Give me your
hand--so; now stoop your head, and squeeze through this narrow
aperture. There, here are we beneath the clear stars of heaven, and
here is my pretty Mayflower waiting patiently for her mistress.

"Yes, pretty one; you must bear a heavier burden tonight, but you
will do it gladly for your mistress's sake.

"Mount, good sir; we shall soon be out of reach of all danger."

It must be a dream thought Paul, as, mounted on a light palfrey, he
went speeding through the dun wood by intricate paths, a fairy-like
figure springing through the gloom beside him, and guiding the
horse, as he was utterly unable to do.

It seemed as if his strength had deserted him. His hands had lost
their power, and it was all he could do to maintain his seat on the
animal that bounded lightly along with her unaccustomed burden. At
last they reached an open glade; a dark, motionless figure was
standing in the moonlight.

"It is he--it is my Jack!" cried the fairy, springing forward with
a faint cry of welcome.

"O Jack, I have brought your old friend Paul Stukely back to you.
You must take care of him as well as of me, for he has been in
deadly peril tonight."



Chapter 7: The Protection Of The Protected.


"Nay, wife, why sit up for him? Since he has taken to these roving
habits at night there is no depending upon him. I must put an end
to them if they are to disturb you so. The boy is safe enough. Why
are you anxious about him tonight?"

It was Farmer Devenish who spoke these words to his wife, half an
hour after the rest of the household had retired to rest, and he
found her still sitting beside the fire, which she had piled up
high on the hearth, as if she meant to remain downstairs for some
time; which indeed she distinctly told him was her intention, as
she did not wish to go to bed until Jack had come in.

"He asked me to sit up for him tonight," she answered, "and he
never did so before. I was glad of it; for I have been uneasy for
the boy, wondering what could take him out so often at night."

"Oh, he's going courting, you may depend upon it," laughed the
farmer in his hearty way; "and courting some young lass not of our
village, but one who lives a pretty step from here, I'll be bound.
I've held my peace, and let the boy go his own way. He'll speak out
when the time comes, depend upon it."

"I believe he will speak out this very night," answered the mother.
"He told me he had a surprise in store for me, and begged that I
would sit up till his return, and stand his friend with you, if you
should be displeased at his choice. One might have thought he was
bringing his bride home with him, to hear him talk; but he would
never get wedded without speaking first. He is a good lad and a
dutiful, and his parents have the right to be told."

The farmer's curiosity was piqued by what he heard, and he resolved
to share his wife's vigil. Jack, their only son, was very dear to
them, and they were proud of him in their own hearts, and thought
such a son had never lived before. Both were anxiously looking
forward to the day when he should bring home a wife to brighten up
the old home, since it had lost the sweet presence of the daughter
Joan; and they neither of them believed that Jack's choice would
fall upon anyone unworthy of him.

The farmer dozed in his chair by the glowing hearth. The woman got
a large book from some secret receptacle upstairs, and read with
deep attention, though with cautious glance around her from time to
time, as if half afraid of what she was doing. It was long before
the silence outside was broken by any sound of approaching
footfalls; and when the ring of a horse hoof upon the frosty ground
became distinctly audible through the silence of the night, the
farmer would not unbar the door until his wife had glided away with
the volume she had been reading.

A minute later and the parents both stood in the doorway, peering
out into the cloudy night, that was not altogether dark.

"By holy St. Anthony, there are two horses and three riders," said
the farmer, shading his eyes from the glare of the lantern as he
peered out into the darkness beyond.

"Jack, is that you, my son? And who are these that you have brought
with you?"

"Friends--friends claiming the shelter and protection of your roof,
father," answered Jack's hearty voice as he rode up to the door;
and then it was seen that he was greatly encumbered by some burden
he supported before him on his horse. But from the other lighter
palfrey there leaped down a small and graceful creature of
fairy-like proportions, and Mistress Devenish found herself
suddenly confronted by the sweetest, fairest face she had ever seen
in her life, whilst a pair of soft arms stole caressingly about her
neck.

"You are Jack's mother," said a sweet, soft voice in accents of
confident yet timid appeal that went at once to her heart. "He has
told me so much of you--he has said that you would be a mother to
me. And I have so longed for a mother all my life. I never had one.
Mine own mother died almost ere I saw the light. He said you would
love me; and I have loved you long. Yet it is not of myself I must
talk now, but of yon poor lad whom you know well. We have brought
Paul Stukely back to you. Oh, he has been sorely handled by those
cruel robbers--the band of Black Notley! He has been like a dead
man these last miles of the road. But Jack says he is not dead, and
that your kindly skill will make him live again."

And before Mistress Devenish was well aware whether she were not in
a dream herself, her husband had lifted into the house the
apparently inanimate form of Paul Stukely, and had laid him down
upon the oak settle near to the hospitable hearth.

Jack had gone to the stable with the horses; but one of the serving
men having been aroused and having come to his assistance, he was
able quickly to join the party beside the fire, and coming forward
with a glad and confident step, he took the hand of the fairy-like
girl in his own, and placed it within that of his mother.

"Father, mother," he said, "I have brought you home my bride that
is to be. Listen, and I will tell you a strange story, and I know
you will not then withhold your love from one who has known little
of it, and who has led a strange, hard life amid all that is bad
and cruel, and is yet all that you can wish to find in woman--all
that is true and pure and lovely."

And then Jack, with the sort of rude eloquence sometimes found in
his class, told of his wooing of the robber's daughter; told of her
hatred and loathing of the scenes she was forced to witness, of the
life she was forced to lead; told of her fierce father's fierce
love gradually waning and turning to anger as he discovered that
she was not pliable material in his hands, to be bent to his stern
will; told how he had of late wished to wed her to the terrible
Simon Dowsett, and how she had felt at last that flight alone with
her own lover could save her from that fate.

Then he told of Paul's capture upon the very night for which the
flight had been planned; told how gallantly he had defied the
cruelty of the robber band, and how his Eva had effected his
liberation and had brought him with her to the trysting place. They
had planned before the details of the flight, and it would be death
to her to be sent back; but after her liberation of the captive,
the thought of facing that lawless band again was not to be thought
of.

And the farmer, who had listened to the tale with kindling eyes and
many a smothered ejaculation of anger and pity, suddenly put his
strong arms about the slight figure of the girl, and gave her a
hearty kiss on both cheeks.

"Thou art a good wench and a brave one," he said, "and I am proud
that my roof is the one to shelter thee from those lawless men, who
are the curse of our poor country.

"Jack, I told the mother that you must be going courting, and that
I should be right glad when you brought a bride to the old home.
And a bride this brave girl shall be as soon as Holy Church can
make you man and wife; and we will love her none the less for what
her father was. I always heard that the Fire Eater, as they call
him, had carried off and married a fair maiden, too good by a
thousand times for the like of him; and if this is that poor lady's
daughter, I can well believe the tale. But she is her mother's
child, not her fierce father's, and we will love her as our own.

"Take her to your heart, good mother. A brave lass deserves a warm
welcome to her husband's home."

The gentle but high-spirited Eva had gone through the dangers of
the night with courage and resolution, but tears sprang to her eyes
at hearing these kindly words; and whilst Jack wrung his father's
hand and thanked him warmly for his goodwill. The girl buried her
face upon the shoulder of Mistress Devenish, and was once more
wrapped in a maternal embrace.

And then, having got the question of Eva's adoption as Jack's
betrothed bride so quickly and happily settled, they all turned
their attention to poor Paul, who for a few minutes had been almost
forgotten.

There was a warm little chamber scarce larger than a closet opening
from the room where the farmer and his wife slept, and as there was
a bed therein always in readiness against the arrival of some
unlooked-for guest, Paul was quickly transported thither, and
tenderly laid between the clean but coarse coverings. He only
moaned a little, and never opened his eyes or recognized where he
was or by whom he was tended; whilst the sight of his lacerated
back and shoulders drew from the woman many an exclamation of pity,
and from the farmer those of anger and reprobation.

It was some time before they understood what had happened, or
realized that the young kinsman (as they had called him) of Paul's
was really the Prince of Wales, the son of the now reigning Henry,
and that the two lads had been actually living and travelling
together with this secret between them. But Eva had heard much
about both, and told how the presence of the prince in the country
had become known to her father and his band first through the
suspicions of the peddler, who had seen the one pearl clasp still
owned and kept by the robber chief, and had at once recognized its
fellow; and secondly, from the identification of Paul's companion
with the Prince of Wales by one of the band who had been over to
France not long ago, and had seen the prince there.

The old likeness between the two youths was remembered well by the
band, who had been fooled by it before; and they had been for weeks
upon the track of the fugitives, who had, however, left Figeon's
before their enemies had convinced themselves of their identity;
and in London they were less easily found. Eva did not know the
whole story--it was Paul who supplied the missing links later; but
she told how a great part of the band had gone forth to seek them
in the city--how word had presently been brought by a mounted
messenger that the fugitives had escaped, just when they were
certain they had them fast--that all roads were being watched for
them, but that those who still remained in the forest were to keep
a close lookout, lest by some chance they should return by the way
they had come.

The band had been scouring the woods all that day in different
detachments, and they had brought in Paul just before dark. The
prince had escaped their vigilance, and Paul had maintained silence
under their cruel questioning. Eva knew no more of him than the
farmer, but all were full of hope that he had escaped. Well indeed
for both--if Paul knew his hiding place--that he was out of the
power of the robbers. They would scarce in any case have let him
escape with his life, after the ill will many of them bore him; but
had he continued to set them at defiance by his silence, there is
no knowing to what lengths their baffled rage might not have gone.
Eva had heard of things in bygone days which she could not recall
without a shudder, and the farmer and Jack, with clenched hands and
stern faces, vowed that they would leave no stone unturned until
the country was rid of these lawless and terrible marauders.

"We have stood enough; this is the last!" cried the burly owner of
Figeon's. "We will raise the whole countryside; we will send a
deputation to the bold Earl of Warwick; we will tell him Paul's
history, and beg him to come himself, or to send a band of five
hundred of his good soldiers, and destroy these bandits root and
branch. If these outrages are committed in the name of the House of
York, then I and mine will henceforth wear the badge of Lancaster.
What we simple country folks want is a king who can keep order in
this distracted land; and if that brave boy who dwelt beneath our
roof, and was kindly and gracious to all, is our future king, well,
God bless and keep him, say I, and let the sceptre long be held in
his kindly hands!"

In the village of Much Waltham next day the wildest excitement
prevailed. Jack was down at his sister's house with the dawn to
tell how Paul had been rescued from the hands of the robbers the
previous night, and what cruel treatment he had received at their
hands. He was going off on a secret errand to the Priory that very
day on Paul's behalf, to ask for news of the prince; and when it
was known that the bright-haired lad (Paul's kinsman, as he had
been called) who had won all hearts was none other than their
future Prince of Wales, a great revulsion of feeling swept over the
hearts of the simple and loving rustics, and they became as warm in
their sympathies for Lancaster as they had been loyal hitherto to
York.

But the burning feeling of the hour was the desire to put down by a
strong hand the depredations of these lawless robber hordes. Not a
house in the place but had suffered from them, not a farmer but had
complaints to make of hen roost robbed or beasts driven off in the
night. Others had darker tales to tell; and Will Ives clenched his
fists and vowed that he would be glad indeed to see the day when he
and Simon Dowsett might meet face to face in equal combat. But it
would be impossible to attack the robbers in their forest
fastnesses unless they had military help; and a deputation was to
start forthwith to London, to lay before the mighty earl the story
of the ravages committed, and the deadly peril which had just
threatened the heir of England, from which he might not yet have
escaped.

Jack was in hopes that he might still be at the Priory, and that he
might bring him back and set him at the head of a party of loyal
rustics, who should escort him in triumph to his royal father in
London. But that hope was of short duration; for the news he
received at the Priory told that the prince was already far away,
and safe at sea on his way to France.

He had arrived just at dusk the previous evening, and when he had
told his adventures and proved his identity to the satisfaction of
the Prior, strenuous efforts were made to convey him safely away
before further peril could menace him. It chanced that one of the
brothers was about to start for the coast on a mission for the
Prior; and disguised in a friar's gown, Edward could travel with
him in the most perfect safety. Stout nags were in readiness for
the pair; and after the lad had been well fed, and had enjoyed a
couple of hours' sleep beside the fire, he was sufficiently
refreshed to proceed on his way, only charging the Prior either to
send Paul after him if he should arrive in time, or to keep him in
safe hiding if that should not be possible.

Before Jack left the place, the brother who had been the prince's
companion returned with the news that Edward had been safely
embarked in a small trading vessel bound for France, the captain of
which, an ardent Lancastrian, would defend his passenger from every
peril at risk of his own life if need be. The wind was favourable
and light, and there was every hope of a rapid and safe passage.
Before nightfall this very day Edward would probably be landed upon
French soil, out of all chance of danger from foeman's steel.

As to the purposed overthrow of the robber band, the brothers most
heartily approved of it. They too, though in some sort protected by
the awe inspired by Holy Church, suffered from the bold dealings of
these lawless men, and gladly would they see the band scattered or
exterminated.

The Prior shook his head somewhat as Jack explained how he wished
to wed the daughter of the chief of the crew; but when the lover
