excelled; as an orator, no other American has ever equalled him. He had
in supreme degree the orator's equipment of a dominant and impressive
personality, a moving voice, an eloquent countenance, and a command of
words little less than inspired. The last sentences of his reply to
Hayne have come ringing down the years, and stand unequalled as sheer
eloquence:

    "When my eyes shall be turned to behold for the last time the sun
    in heaven, may I not see him shining on the broken and dishonored
    fragments of a once glorious Union; on States dissevered,
    discordant, belligerent; on a land rent with civil feuds or
    drenched, it may be, in fraternal blood! Let their last feeble and
    lingering glance rather behold the gorgeous ensign of the Republic,
    now known and honored throughout the earth, still full high
    advanced, its arms and trophies streaming in their original lustre,
    not a stripe erased or polluted, nor a single star obscured,
    bearing for its motto no such miserable interrogatory as 'What is
    all this worth'? nor those other words of delusion and folly,
    'Liberty first and Union afterwards'; but everywhere, spread all
    over in characters of living light, blazing on all its ample folds,
    as they float over the sea and over the land, and in every wind
    under the whole heavens, that other sentiment, dear to every true
    American heart--Liberty _and_ Union, now and forever, one and
    inseparable!"

The great audience that listened spellbound to that oration, arose and
left the Capitol like persons in a dream. Never were they to forget the
effect of that tremendous speech.

But the last years of his life were ruined by his ambition to be
President. In spite of his commanding talents, or, perhaps, because of
them, he never at any time had a chance of receiving the nomination of
his party, and his final defeat in 1852, by Winfield Scott, practically
killed him.

[Illustration: WEBSTER]

Webster was the son of a New Hampshire farmer, who managed to send him
to Dartmouth College, from which he graduated in 1801. Four years later
he was admitted to the bar at Boston, and in 1812 he was elected to
Congress. We find him at once violently opposing the second war with
England, for which Clay was working so aggressively. For ten years after
that, he devoted himself to the practice of his profession, and soon
became the foremost lawyer of New England, especially on constitutional
questions. In 1823, he was again sent to Congress; entered the Senate in
1828, and remained in public life practically until his death.

It was in 1830 that he delivered the speech already referred to--perhaps
the most remarkable ever heard within the walls of the Capitol. Senator
Hayne, of South Carolina, had made a remarkable address, lasting two
days, advocating the right of a state to render null and void an
unconstitutional law of Congress--in other words, the right of secession
from the Union. Two days later, Webster rose to reply. His appearance,
always impressive, was unusually so that day; his argument, always
close-knit and logical, was the very summation of these qualities; his
words seemed edged with fire as he argued that the Constitution is
supreme, the Union indissoluble, and that no state has, or can have the
right to resist or nullify a national law. It was the greatest oration
of America's greatest orator.

Of its effect upon the people who heard it we have spoken; throughout
the country it produced a profound impression. The North felt that a new
prophet had arisen; the South, a new foeman. The great advocate of
nullification, however, was not Hayne, who would be scarcely remembered
to-day but for the fact that it was to him Webster addressed his reply,
but that formidable giant of a man, John C. Calhoun--the man whom the
South felt to be her peculiar representative on the question of state
rights, of nullification, and, at last, of slavery. His fate was one of
the saddest in American history, for the cause he fought for was a
doomed cause, and as he sank into his grave, he saw tottering down upon
him the great structure which he had devoted his whole life to
upholding.

Not much is known of Calhoun's youth. He was the grandson of an Irish
immigrant who had settled in South Carolina, graduated from Yale in
1804, studied law, was admitted to the bar, and, returning to his native
state, was, in 1811, elected a member of Congress. That was the
beginning of a public career which was to last until his death.

Almost from the first, he was consumed with an ambition to be President,
and perhaps would have been, but for an incident so trivial that, under
ordinary circumstances, it would have had no consequences. In 1818, as
Monroe's secretary of war, Calhoun had occasion at a cabinet meeting to
express some censure of Andrew Jackson's conduct of the Seminole war--a
censure which was deserved, since Jackson had violated the law of
nations in pursuing his enemy into a foreign country. Twelve years
later, when Jackson was President and Calhoun, as Vice-President, was in
direct line of succession, so to speak, Jackson heard of Calhoun's
remarks, flew into a violent rage, came out as Calhoun's declared enemy,
and dealt the death-blow to his presidential aspirations.

Smarting from this injustice, Calhoun turned his attention to the
question of state sovereignty, and in February, 1833, South Carolina
passed the nullification ordinance to which we have already referred.
Calhoun at once resigned the vice-presidency and took his seat in the
Senate, prepared to defend the attitude of his state. But Jackson did
not wait for that. Seeing that here was an opportunity to strike his
enemy, he ordered troops to South Carolina, and threatened to hang
Calhoun as high as Haman--a threat which he very possibly would have
attempted to carry out had not hostilities been averted by the genius
for compromise of Henry Clay. From that time forward, Calhoun became the
high priest of the doctrine of state rights and the great defender of
slavery. He fought inch by inch the growing sentiment against it; he
knew it was a losing fight, and almost the last words uttered by his
dying lips were, "The South! The poor South! God knows what will become
of her!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The great triumvirate left no successors to compare with them in
prestige or power. Two survivals from the war of 1812 were still on the
scene, Thomas Hart Benton and Lewis Cass. Benton was a North Carolina
man who had removed to Nashville, and at the outbreak of the war,
enlisted under Andrew Jackson, and got into a disgraceful street fight
with him, in the course of which Jackson was nearly killed. Strange to
say, that doughty old hero chose to forget the matter long years
afterwards, when Benton was in the Senate--a Union senator from the
slave state of Missouri.

Cass also served through the war, but at the North; was involved in
Hull's surrender of Detroit and broke his sword in rage at the disgrace
of it; and was afterwards governor of Michigan and Jackson's secretary
of war; then, in 1848, Democratic nominee for President and defeated
because of Martin Van Buren's disaffection; finally, in 1857, Buchanan's
secretary of state, resigning, in 1860, because that shilly-shally
President could not make up his mind to send reinforcements to Bob
Anderson at Fort Sumter, in Charleston harbor. A man who played many
parts, filled many positions, and filled them well, Cass's name deserves
to be more widely remembered than it is.

In those days, a strange, pompous and ineffective figure was flitting
across the stage, impressing men with a respect and significance which
it did not possess, its name, Stephen A. Douglas, nicknamed "The Little
Giant," but giant in little else than power to create disturbance.
Perhaps no other man ever possessed that power in quite the same degree;
nor possessed in a greater degree that fascination of personality which
makes friends and gains adherents.

Consumed by a gnawing desire of the presidency, beaten for the
nomination in 1852, destroying the serenity of the land two years later
by contending that Congress had no right to limit slavery in the
territories, in the vain hope of winning southern support, but finding
himself instead dubbed traitor and Judas Iscariot, receiving thirty
pieces of silver from a club of Ohio women, travelling from Boston to
Chicago "by the light of his own effigies," which yelling crowds were
burning at the stake, and finally hooted off the stage in his own city,
certainly it would seem that Douglas's public career was over forever.

But he managed to live down his blunder and to regain much of his old
strength by reason of his winning personality; yet made another blunder
when he agreed to meet Abraham Lincoln in debate--and one which cost him
the presidency. For his opponent drove him into corners from which he
could find no way out except at the risk of offending the South. In
those days, one had to be either for or against slavery; there was no
middle course, and the man who attempted to find one, fell between two
stools, as Douglas himself soon learned.

Last scene of all, pitted against that same Abraham Lincoln who had
greased the plank for him and shorn him of his southern support, in the
presidential contest of 1860, defeated and wounded to death by it, for
he knew that never again would he be within sight of that long-sought
prize; yet rising nobly at the last to a height of purest patriotism,
declaring for the Union, pledging his support to Lincoln, pointing the
way of duty to his million followers, and destroying at a blow the
South's hope of a divided North--let us do Stephen A. Douglas, that
justice, and render him that meed of praise; for whatever the mistakes
and turnings and evasions of his career, that last great work of his
outweighed them all.

A man who had a great reputation in his own day as an orator and
statesman, but whose polished periods appeal less and less to succeeding
generations was Edward Everett--an evidence, perhaps, that the head
alone can never win lasting fame. Everett was a New Englander; a Harvard
man, graduating with the highest honors; and two years later, pastor of
a Unitarian church in Boston. There his eloquence soon attracted
attention, and won him a wide reputation. At the age of twenty-one, he
was appointed professor of Greek at Harvard; and in 1824, at the age of
thirty, he was chosen to represent the Boston district in Congress. He
remained there for ten years, served four terms as governor of
Massachusetts, was ambassador to England, and then, president of Harvard
from 1846-1849; was appointed secretary of state on the death of Daniel
Webster in 1852; and finally, in the following year, was elected to the
Senate, but was soon forced to resign on account of ill-health.

Soon afterwards, he threw himself into the project to purchase Mount
Vernon by private subscription, delivered his oration on Washington 122
times, netting more than $58,000 toward the project; obtained another
$10,000 from the _Public Ledger_ by writing for it a weekly article for
the period of a year, and added $3,000 more, secured from the readers of
that paper. From that time on, he delivered various lectures for
philanthropic causes, the receipts aggregating nearly a hundred thousand
dollars. They are little read to-day because, in spite of his erudition,
polish and high attainments, Everett really had no new message to
deliver.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the coming of the Civil War, another triumvirate emerges to control
the destinies of the nation--Thaddeus Stevens, Charles Sumner and
William Henry Seward. Stevens and Seward had been introduced to politics
by the ineffectual and absurd anti-Masonic party, which flitted across
the stage in the early thirties. In 1851, Massachusetts rebuked Daniel
Webster for his supposed surrender to the slavery party, made in hope of
attaining the presidency, by placing Sumner in his seat in the Senate,
and retiring him to private life, where he still remained the most
commanding figure in the country.

Seward was already in the Senate, had spoken in reply to Webster, and
assumed the leadership which Webster forfeited. In the House, too, was
Stevens, who soon gained prominence by a certain vitriolic force which
was in him, and these three men labored unceasingly for the defeat of
the South--indeed, for more than its defeat--for payment, to the last
drop, for the sins it had committed. They were bound together by party
ties and in other ways, but most closely of all by a hatred of slavery,
which, with Stevens and Sumner, mounted at times to fanaticism and led
them into the errors always awaiting the fanatic.

Thaddeus Stevens, the oldest of the three, had been born in Vermont, but
removed to Pennsylvania at the age of twenty-two, and began to practice
law there. In 1831, he was one of the moving spirits in the formation of
the anti-Masonic party, which fancied it saw, in the spread of Masonry,
a grave danger to the republic. Two years later, Stevens was chosen a
member of the Pennsylvania legislature, but his career did not really
begin until, in 1848, at the age of fifty-seven, he was elected a member
of the national House of Representatives, where he soon took his place
as the leader of the anti-slavery faction. From that time forward, he
was unceasing in his warfare against slavery, frequently going to
lengths where few cared to follow, and which would seem to indicate that
there was a trace of madness in the man. He developed an exaggerated and
sentimental regard for the negro, and grew radical and relentless toward
the South.

At the close of the war, he regarded the southern states as conquered
territory, to be treated as such, and his ideas of treatment seem to
have been founded upon those of the Middle Ages. He wished to confiscate
the property of all Confederates; endeavored to impeach President
Johnson, who was trying to enforce a system of reconstruction which was
at least better than that which Stevens advocated. For a time he seemed
to suffer from a very vertigo of hatred, which ate into his soul and
destroyed him. The plan of reconstruction adopted by Congress was an
embodiment of his ideas; but Johnson was acquitted of the charges
Stevens brought against him, and Stevens's poison, as it were, turned in
upon himself and killed him. His last request, that his body be buried
in an obscure private cemetery, because public cemeteries excluded
negroes, shows the man's unbalanced condition, the length to which his
ideas had led him.

Charles Sumner, who was to the Senate much what Stevens was to the
House, although a larger and better-balanced man, was a typical
Bostonian and inheritor of the New England conscience, which, of course,
meant that he was opposed through and through to slavery. He was a
successful lawyer, and as his sentiments were well known, he was chosen
to succeed Webster when the latter wavered on the anti-slavery question,
and threw some pledges of assistance to the South. There was never any
doubt about Sumner's position, no sign of wavering or coquetting with
the enemy, and in 1856, he was assaulted by a southern senator and so
severely injured that three years passed before he could resume his
seat.

He did so in time to oppose any compromise with slavery or the slave
power, which the threatening attitude of the South had almost scared the
North into considering, and urged the immediate emancipation of the
slaves. When this had been accomplished, his first thought was to make
sure that the slaves would remain free, and he began the contest for
negro suffrage, as the only guarantee of negro freedom, which he finally
won. In the reconstruction period following the war, he was inevitably
an ally of Thaddeus Stevens, though the latter far surpassed him in
vindictiveness toward the South.

Let us not forget that the South had shown itself blind to its own
interests when, as soon as reconstructed by Andrew Johnson, it had,
state by state, adopted laws virtually enslaving the black man again.
But for this fatuity, there would probably have been no such feeling of
vindictiveness at the North as soon developed there; certainly there
would have been no excuse for such severity as was afterwards exhibited.
So it is true in a sense that the South has itself to blame for the
horrors of the reconstruction period, and for the suspicion with which
its good faith toward the negro was for many years regarded. Sumner was
not a vindictive man, and in his last years, incurred a vote of censure
from his own State for offering a bill to remove the names of battles of
the Civil War from the Army Register and from the regimental colors of
the United States. He practically died in harness in 1874. Looking back
at him, one sees how much larger he looms than Stevens; one cannot but
admire his courage and honesty of purpose; his public life was a
continual struggle for the right, as he saw it, and, remembering that,
his faults need not trouble us.

When Sumner arrived in the Senate, he found William H. Seward, of New
York, already there. Seward, who had been admitted to the bar in 1822,
at the age of twenty-one, was carried into the New York legislature by
the anti-Masonic wave of 1830. Eight years later, he was the Whig
governor of the state, and in 1849 was sent to the Senate. There he soon
rivetted attention by his rebuke of Webster for condoning the Fugitive
Slave Law, and caught the reins of party leadership as they fell from
Webster's hands. It was then that he made his famous statement that the
war against slavery was waged under a "higher law than the
Constitution," and that the fall of slavery was inevitable.

In 1856, when the newly-formed anti-slavery party, known as the
Republican, met to name a national ticket, Seward was the logical
candidate, but refused to allow his name to be considered, and the
choice fell upon that brilliant adventurer, John C. Fremont. Fremont
was, of course, defeated, and Seward continued to be the leader of
Republican thought, and the chief originator of Republican doctrine.
Indeed, he was, in a sense, the Republican party, so that, four years
later, he seemed not only the logical but the inevitable choice of the
party for President. His most formidable opponent was Abraham Lincoln,
of Illinois, who had been carefully working for the nomination, and who
was blessed with the shrewdest of campaign managers. Seward led on the
first ballot, and would have won but for the expert trading already
referred to in the story of Lincoln's nomination.

It was natural that Lincoln should offer him the state portfolio, and
Seward accepted it. From first to last, he held true to the President,
and the services he rendered the country were second only to those of
Lincoln himself. When Lincoln was killed, an attempt was also made to
murder Seward, and was very nearly successful--so nearly that for days
Seward lingered between life and death. He recovered, however, to resume
his place in Johnson's cabinet. Over the new President he had great
influence; he had long been an advocate of mercy toward the South, and
he did much to persuade the President to the course he followed in
restoring the southern states to the Union, without reference to the
wishes of Congress. Even John Sherman pronounced the plan "wise and
judicious," but Stevens, Sumner, and their powerful coterie in Congress
violently opposed it, and Seward came in for his share of the
vituperation and bitter accusation which the plan called forth.
Johnson's defeat closed his political career, and the last years of his
life were spent in travel.

The very cause of his downfall marks him as the greatest of the three,
for he placed justice above expediency, and not even the attempt upon
his life changed his feeling toward the South. Perhaps the wisdom of his
judgment was never better exemplified than in his purchase from Russia
of the great territory known as Alaska, for the sum of $7,200,000.
Alaska was regarded at the time as an icy desert of no economic value,
but time has changed that estimate, and the discovery of gold there made
it one of the richest of the country's possessions.

Outside of Seward, Sumner and Stevens, the most prominent public man of
the time was Salmon P. Chase, an Ohioan who had for many years taken an
important part in the anti-slavery controversy. Although sent to the
Senate in 1849 as a Democrat, he left the party on the nomination of
Pierce in 1852, when it stood committed to the support and extension of
slavery. Three years later, he was elected governor of Ohio by the
Republicans. He was Lincoln's secretary of the treasury, and financed
the country during its most trying period in a way that compelled the
admiration even of his enemies. He served afterwards as Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court, dying in 1873. He was another man whose life was
embittered by failure to attain the prize of the presidency. Three times
he tried for it, in 1860, in 1864, and in 1868, but he never came within
measurable distance of it. For he lacked the capacity for making
