But Ottar would not pretend to be braver than he felt, having no
shame in fear of things other than earthly, a matter wherein I
think that he was right.

"Why," said the king, "if Dame Gunnhild tries to fray us, do you
but turn that cloak of yours inside out, and you will frighten
her"--for it chanced that the scald's red cloak had a white woollen
lining, whereof he was somewhat proud, being a lover of bright
dress.

"It is ill to mock a spirit," the scald said; "wherefore do I
believe the less that a Wise Woman will bide in the place that it
haunts."

So they talked until we came to the woodland; and when we came
among the trees a silence fell on us.

"It is of no use," I said, "let us go back. You are right, and she
cannot bide here."

"Why, now that I have got over my fear so far," Olaf said, "I will
go on, even to the water's edge. Then will we go back."

I could not gainsay him, as may be known, and so we went on. It was
easy at first to thread our way through the trees, but presently
they were thicker, and it was dark. There was no wind moving in the
boughs overhead, and there is no denying that the silence of that
deserted place weighed heavily on us all.

And when we drew close to the water's edge, and saw the still
water, starlit, stretching before us, a water hen sprang from the
reeds almost at our feet with her shrill warning cry, and flapped
out into the middle of the dark mere, leaving a long trail of
broken water behind her that gleamed for a moment with dancing star
sparks from the sky, as if it might have been the path of the White
Lady herself. And from all round the lake came the answering cries
of her mates, sounding weird and strange through the silent gloom.
I heard Ottar draw a deep breath, and we all three started, and
stood still, as if turned to stone.

"We have taken fright easily," said Olaf, as if angry with himself
for being thus startled. "My heart beats like a hammer, and I will
bide here till I can do better than that."

Yet he spoke in a whisper; and I saw no reason to try to answer him
if I could. Then he walked on, keeping to the right, where the
ground is high, at the hill foot, but still skirting the water's
edge. Then I saw something beside the reeds, and went aside to see
what it was; and, as I thought, it was a canoe that some fisher had
left. There was a paddle still in it, and a bow net set on hoops,
such as we were wont to use for eels and tench.

"Here is how Gunnhild might find food," I thought, but it was not
likely.

Ottar stood and looked into it with me, but the king had walked on.

Now it grew darker as we followed him, and Ottar tripped and fell,
and I lost him, though I could hear him close behind me as he broke
a branch now and then in passing.

The king stayed in a clear place that I remembered well. Great
trees stood round, and it was pleasant to sit there and look out
over the water on a summers noonday.

"Where is Ottar?" he said, when I stood by him.

"Close behind me. I heard him even now," I answered. "Let us go
back, my king. There is nought here."

"Aye, we will go back now," he said. "But Ottar is before me."

"Listen," I said, "the scald is behind us. I lost him in the dark."

"Nay, but I heard him in front of me even as you came," the king
said.

And when we stood still we could hear the scald where I thought;
but also we heard footsteps and breaking branches before us.

We could see anything that was not in shadow pretty plainly; and
now Olaf whispered to me:

"Someone is forward, and coming nearer. Get your sword loose."

At that there came a cry like the moor hen's from the thicket
before us, and in a moment, with a great shout and crashing, there
broke out on us many men, and I was down and held fast before I
could draw on them. I saw Olaf draw the long dagger that hung ready
to his right hand, and smite backwards over his shoulder in the
face of a man who was pinioning him from behind, and the man
shrieked and reeled backward into the bushes, hands to face. And
then Olaf cried, "We are beset," and was borne down.

Then the men tied us roughly with belts, and stood round us.

I looked every moment to see the rush of Ottar into the midst,
sword in hand; and saw that it would go hard with him, for all the
men were armed, and some wore mail that rattled as they moved. But
he came not; and I wondered if he too were taken, or if he had
turned craven and had fled, a thought that I put from me as sorely
wronging the brave scald; and then wondered how long it would take
him to reach the nearest outpost of our men and come to rescue us.

But now one was hammering flint on steel and making a fire in haste
that he might see who they had caught. And when it blazed up I saw
that the men were Danes. No doubt they were strangers to the place,
men who had wandered here from the Leavenheath woods after the
battle; for no Dane who came from close at hand would have dared to
shelter in this place. There were fourteen of them in all.

"Ho," said one who seemed to take the lead, "we have trapped some
gay birds. Now, who might you be?"

He spoke to Olaf, who answered nothing. So the man turned to me
with the same question. But I followed the king's plan and made no
answer. Whereat the man kicked me, saying:

"Answer, you Norway rat!"

I ground my teeth with rage, and said nothing.

"Fetch the English churl, and ask him if he knows who these are,"
said the Dane. "Then shall we see if this is a question of drowning
or ransom."

Two of tho men went back into the woods, and presently returned,
dragging with them my thrall Brand, whose teeth chattered with
terror, more of the place than of the Danes as it seemed, for he
kept his eyes on the mere.

When he saw me I shook my head ever so little in token that he
should not own us. If Olaf thought best we could do that for
ourselves.

Then they cuffed the poor thrall, and asked him if he knew us; and
for answer he did but point out over the mere, whose waters looked
black as ink beyond the fire lit circle of trees and shore.

"Let us go hence, lord Danes," he said trembling, "then will I say
what I can. The Lady is wroth with men who come here at night."

"We care for no ladies," said the leading Dane. "What are you
feared of?"

"The White Lady who dwells in the mere. To look on her in her wrath
is death," Brand said--and one might well see that his terror was
real.

The Danes looked on one another, and there were white faces among
them. Then, as luck would have it, one said:

"This must be the mere of which I have heard strange tales. Let us
go," and he began to edge away towards the fire.

Then the leader said:

"Let us find out if these men are worth taking with us," and he
came and questioned us again, and again we answered not.

"I will make you speak," he said savagely. "Take them up and make
ready to cast them into the water."

Now I wondered where Ottar was. Surely he must be back with more
men soon.

"Aye, throw them in, and let us be going," said one or two, for
they had been asking Brand many questions, and now were eager to
leave the place and its terrors.

So one brawny Dane took my feet and another my shoulders and began
to lift me; while I could not so much as struggle, so tightly was I
bound.

"Hold!" said the leader. "Will you throw away a sword like that?"

It was certain now that they were in haste, for they had forgotten
to strip me in their wish to have done.

They set me down again, and that was the saving of us. For even as
they loosed their grip on me, one who stood near the water cried
out in a sharp voice:

"Listen--what is that!"

And they all stayed motionless as had we when the bird scared us.

There was a sound of wondrously sweet singing from away across the
mere. Such a voice it was as I had never heard before, neither like
the singing of man or woman, nor had the song words that I could
catch.

The Danes forgot us as they heard that, and huddled together in
twos and threes, looking out to whence the sound came. As for Brand
the thrall, he fell on his knees and hid his face against a tree
trunk, crying faintly:

"It is the White Lady."

So too thought I; and now I will not say that I feared her, for she
was of my own race, and maybe she came to my help.

Then I saw some of the Danes gasp and start, and point across the
water, speechless, and I looked also.

Plain enough in the firelight stood a tall white figure on the
water of the mere, coming slowly towards us, and singing the while
that wondrous song. And ever as it drew nearer the song grew
wilder; and the long white-robed arm pointed towards us.

Then the thrall leapt up and yelled, and fled into the dark wood.
And that was enough for the Danes. They gave not another thought to
us, but cried out in mortal terror and fled also, tripping and
crashing through the underwood as they went; while the song of the
White Lady grew louder, and she still neared us.

Then, still singing, her pace quickened, and suddenly I saw that
she came in no magic wise, but in the fisher's canoe which I had
seen. And then the bows touched the shore, while with a wholesome
clank of sword, and throwing back his long white cloak, Ottar the
scald leapt ashore and came to us, dagger in hand, and cut our
bonds.

"Into the boat, lord king--quick!" he said. "We shall be safe
there."

Dazed and stiff I was, but I rose and followed Olaf; then Ottar
pushed off, and we shot out towards the midst of the mere into
safety.

Then the king stared at me and at Ottar for a moment in amazement,
and then laughed until the woods rang again, and I and the scald
were fain to join him. Never had I heard such sounds before in that
haunted place.

"Now, Ottar," he said, when he could speak again, "never say more
that you fear troll, or nix, or ghost--for you have done what you
told me but half an hour ago was most unwise."

"I needs must do somewhat, lord king," said Ottar gravely, "and it
came into my mind that these Danes would be as badly scared as
should I have been had I met Gunnhild; and methought that Redwald's
lady would forgive me for his sake."

"Aye, surely," I said.

Then--was it fancy, or a vision wrought on me by long looking at
Ottar as he came across the red track of the firelight on the
water, still dimpled by the boat, glided the white form of no
earthly maiden, and was gone.

I saw it and said nought. Ottar sat in the stern facing us, and his
eyes were away from the fire, and Olaf was beside me, and I thought
that he started.

Then Ottar said:

"Can we go back by water, Redwald? It would be safer."

I showed him the channel which leads to the river, and he took the
paddle with which he had so deftly sculled the boat across the
mere, and as we left the overhanging trees and saw the faint glow
of the rising moon across the open river we breathed more freely,
and were safe.

Surely had it not been for the scald's ready wit both Olaf and I
had been lying even now in the dark mere. For it would have been
death to us all three had Ottar tried to rescue us sword in hand.
It is his saying that he was so frozen with fear at first--until he
knew we had met with mortals only--that he stood still and
helpless, listening. Then came to him the thought of what to do,
when he heard the talk of either ransom or drowning and knew that
we were not slain. So even as Olaf had bidden him in jest, he had
turned his cloak and had saved us.

But Ottar the scald's courage and craft are well known, and I have
other thoughts concerning his fear. But I know this, that never
again could he find that strange and sweet voice that had come to
him in the need of his master.

Brand the thrall cowered in the house porch when we returned, and
he was pale as a sheet, while his knees trembled even yet. We took
him in and gave him wine and meat, and then asked him how the Danes
got hold of him.

"Master," he said, "they caught me but a little while after I had
left you--as I set snares for rabbits on the hill. I let them come
to me, thinking them some of the king's men who are kindly. Then
they said they needed a guide through the country to the sea, and
kept me with them."

Then Olaf said to him:

"No ill will come of this seeing of the White Lady, for she came to
save Redwald your lord; you may sleep in peace therefore, but it
would be unlucky to say that you saw her."

Then the man said that he would not speak of the matter, and it was
plain that he dared not do so. But he went away cheerfully enough,
with his mind at rest from its fears.

"It would be ill luck for me if Rani heard of this," said Olaf,
looking ruefully at us; "for we cannot deny that he warned us. My
foster father loves rating a king now and then, though it be only a
small one like myself."

So we said nought that night, and none asked where we had been. Now
I slept next to Olaf, and in the night I woke with a new terror on
me, and I put my hand on his and woke him.

"My king," I whispered, "what if Gunnhild and Hertha are indeed in
the woods yonder? These Danes will have found them."

The king was silent for a moment, for the fear that my guess as to
their hiding place might be right came to him also before he gave
the matter thought.

"It is not likely. The thought of danger makes it seem possible
again," he said. "But I like not these prowling Danes--they are
looking for hiding places for themselves."

"She was safe before," I said, but a great fear came to me with his
words.

There had been nought to drive the Danes to seek sheltered spots
before, now they were sure to do so.

"This matter is not in our hands," said the king, when I said as
much. "We can do nought. Pray, therefore, and sleep again. I think
that you need fear little."

Then after a while he spoke once more.

"Redwald, saw you aught upon the mere while we sat in the canoe in
its midst?"

"Aye, my king," I answered, knowing what he meant.

"I saw her also," he said.

So it had been no fancy of mine, but the White Lady of our house
had indeed passed before my eyes. I began to wonder if this
portended aught to me, but soon I thought that it did not, for the
like peril in which I had been, and even then had hardly escaped
from, had not befallen any of my kin, as I was in peril at her own
place, which was a new thing. So I judged that she showed her
thought of us only.

In the morning matters fell out so that we had never need to say
what danger we had run. For the men had seen Brand's plight, which
was pitiful, after Danes and thickets had done their work on him,
and told Olaf that the man had met with and escaped Danes from the
mere woods.

So with twenty men we searched those covers in broad daylight, and
found no token of any dwellers in the place. Nor were any Danes
left, save one, and that was the man whom Olaf had smitten, for he
had died. The embers of the fire were near him, and on the bank lay
the severed belts that had bound us.

"These Danes have fought among themselves," said our men, and hove
the body into the water. So the Dane lies there instead of Olaf the
king and me, with the Welshmen whom my heathen forefathers cast
into the black depths, in revenge for the death of the White Lady.

Now when we came back to Bures there was a tired horse standing by
the house door, and in the hall waited a messenger from Colchester,
and he brought the news that we looked for and yet feared, so that
we had hoped against hope that it would not come.

A Frisian trader had put into the Colchester river, and he brought
word that even now Cnut might be taking the sea for England, for in
all the western havens of Denmark was gathered such a mighty host
and fleet that no man had ever known the like, and he had heard
that the day for sailing would soon come.

Then Olaf made no delay but rode to Colchester to see this
shipmaster and speak with him, for he thought that he might find
out from him what point on our coasts would be that at which Cnut
aimed first.

So Gunnhild and Olaf were right, and the little peace we had had
was to end. Now would come the last struggle of English and Dane
for mastery in our land, and in my heart I wished that we had such
a king as Olaf Haraldsson. For it seemed to me that we were not
ready, though we had had a year and more in which to prepare.

