
In a moment every soldier was on his feet; and five minutes later
the regiment, marching side by side with the infantry, advanced up
the hill.

This time the assault was successful. The enemy, confused by the
fact that the allies had already forced their line on the left,
wavered. Their fire was wild and ineffectual; and with a tremendous
cheer the allies scaled the height and burst into the works. Close
behind them General Lumley led his cavalry, who made their way
through the gaps in the entrenchments, and fell upon the fugitives
with dreadful slaughter. The French and Bavarians fled to a bridge
across the Danube below Donauwoerth, which, choked by their weight,
gave way, and great numbers were drowned. The rest retreated
through Donauwoerth, their rear being gallantly covered by General
D'Arco, with a small body of troops who held together. Sixteen guns
and thirteen standards fell into the victors' hands.

The loss of the allies, considering the force that they brought
into the field--for the main army had not arrived when the victory
was decided--was extraordinary, for out of a total of 10,500 men,
including cavalry, they lost 1500 killed, and 4000 wounded, or more
than half their force; and the greater part of these were English,
for upon them fell the whole brunt of the fighting.

The enemy suffered comparatively little in the battle, but great
numbers were killed in the pursuit or drowned in the Danube. Still
greater numbers of Bavarians scattered to their homes; and out of
12000 men, only 3000 joined the army on the other side of the
Danube.

The Elector of Bavaria fell back with his army to Augsburg, under
the cannon of which fortress he encamped, in a position too strong
to be attacked. His strong places all fell into the hands of the
allies; and every effort was made to induce him to break off from
his alliance with France. The elector, however, relying upon the
aid of Marshal Tallard, who was advancing with 45,000 men to his
assistance, refused to listen to any terms; and the allied powers
ordered Marlborough to harry his country, and so force him into
submission by the misery of his subjects.

Such an order was most repugnant to the duke, who was one of the
most humane of men, and who by the uniform kind treatment of his
prisoners, not only did much to mitigate the horrors of the war in
which he was engaged, but set an example which has since his time
been followed by all civilized armies. He had, however, no resource
but to obey orders; and the cavalry of the allies were sent to
carry fire through Bavaria. No less than 300 towns and villages
were destroyed in this barbarous warfare.

This duty was abhorrent to Rupert, who waited on the duke, and
begged him as the greatest of favours to attach him for a short
time to the staff, in order that he might not be obliged to
accompany his regiment. The duke--who had already offered Rupert an
appointment on his staff, an offer he had gratefully declined, as
he preferred to do duty with his regiment--at once acceded to his
request, and he was thus spared the horror of seeing the agony of
the unhappy peasantry and townspeople, at the destruction of their
houses. Rupert, in his rides with messages across the country, saw
enough to make him heartsick at the distress into which the people
of the country were plunged.

One day when riding, followed by Hugh, he came upon a sad group. By
a hut which had recently been burned, after some resistance, as was
shown by the dead body of a Hessian trooper, a peasant knelt by the
body of his wife. A dead child of some five years old lay by, and a
baby kicked and cried by the side of its mother. The peasant looked
up with an air of bewildered grief, and on seeing the British
uniform sprang to his feet, and with a fierce but despairing
gesture placed himself as if to defend his children to the last.

Rupert drew his rein.

"I would not hurt you, my poor fellow," he said in Dutch.

The man did not understand, but the gentleness of the tone showed
him that no harm was meant, and he again flung himself down by his
wife.

"I do not think that she is dead, Hugh," Rupert said. "Hold my
horse, I will soon see."

So saying, he dismounted and knelt by the woman. There was a wound
on her forehead, and her face was covered with blood. Rupert ran to
a stream that trickled by the side of the road, dipped his
handkerchief in water, and returning, wiped the blood from the face
and wound.

"It is a pistol bullet, I imagine," he said to him; "but I do not
think the ball has entered her head; it has, I think, glanced off.
Fasten the horses up to that rail, Hugh, get some water in your
hands, and dash it in her face."

The peasant paid no attention to what was being done, but sat
absorbed in grief; mechanically patting the child beside him.

"That's it, Hugh. Now another. I do believe she is only stunned.
Give me that flask of spirits out of my holster."

Hugh again dashed water in the woman's face, and Rupert distinctly
saw a quiver in her eyelid as he did so. Then forcing open her
teeth, he poured a little spirit into her mouth, and was in a
minute rewarded by a gasping sigh.

"She lives," he exclaimed, shaking the peasant by the shoulder.

The man looked round stupidly, but Rupert pointed to his wife, and
again poured some spirits between her lips. This time she made a
slight movement and opened her eyes. The peasant gave a wild scream
of delight, and poured forth a volume of words, of which Rupert
understood nothing; but the peasant kneeling beside him, bent his
forehead till it touched the ground, and then kissed the lappet of
his coat--an action expressive of the intensity of his gratitude.

Rupert continued his efforts until the woman was able to sit up,
and look round with a frightened and bewildered air. When her eye
caught her husband, she burst into tears; and as Hugh raised the
baby and placed it in her arms she clasped it tightly, and rocked
to and fro, sobbing convulsively.

"Look, Hugh, see if you can find something like a spade in that
little garden. Let us bury this poor little child."

Hugh soon found a spade, and dug a little grave in the corner of a
garden under the shade of an old tree.

Then the lads returned to the spot where the husband and wife,
quiet now, were sitting hand in hand crying together. Rupert made a
sign to him to lift the body of his little girl, and then led the
way to the little grave. The father laid her in, and then fell on
his knees by it with his wife, and prayed in a loud voice, broken
with sobs. Rupert and Hugh stood by uncovered, until the peasant
had finished. Then the little grave was filled in; and Rupert,
pointing to the ruined house, placed five gold pieces in the
woman's hand. Then they mounted their horses again and rode on, the
man and his wife both kneeling by the roadside praying for
blessings on their heads.

A week later, Rupert again had occasion to pass through the
village, and dismounted and walked to the little grave. A rough
cross had been placed at one end, and some flowers lay strewn upon
it. Rupert picked a few of the roses which were blooming neglected
near, and laid them on the grave, and then rode on, sighing at the
horrors which war inflicts on an innocent population.

This time their route lay through a thickly wooded mountain, to a
town beyond, where one of the cavalry regiments had its
headquarters. Rupert was the bearer of orders for it to return to
headquarters, as a general movement of the army was to take place.
The road was a mere track, hilly and wild, and the lads rode with
pistols cocked, in case of any sudden attack by deserters or
stragglers from the Bavarian army. The journey was, however,
performed without adventure; and having delivered their orders,
they at once started on their homeward way.



Chapter 13: Blenheim.

Although the sun had not set when Rupert and Hugh rode into the
forest on their return journey, they had not been long among the
trees when the light began to fade. The foliage met overhead, and
although above the sky seemed still bright, the change was
distinctly felt in the gloom of the forest. The ride had been a
long one, and Rupert feared to press his horse, consequently they
wound but slowly up the hill, and by the time they reached its
crest, it was night.

"This is unpleasant, Hugh, for I can scarcely see my horse's head;
and as there are several tracks crossing this, we are likely enough
to go wrong."

"I think, Master Rupert, we had better dismount and lead our
horses. We shall break our necks if they tread on a stone on this
rocky path."

For half an hour they walked on in silence, then Hugh said, "I
think we are going wrong, Master Rupert, for we are not descending
now; and we ought to have been at the foot of the hill, if we had
been right, by this time."

"I am afraid you are right, Hugh. In that case we had better make
up our minds to halt where we are till morning. It is no use
wandering on, and knocking up the horses. It seems rather lighter
just ahead, as if the trees opened a little; we may find a better
place to halt."

In another minute they stood in a small clearing. The stars were
shining brightly; and after the dense darkness of the forest, they
were able to see clearly in the open. It was a clearing of some
sixty feet diameter, and in the middle stood, by the path, a hut.

"Stay where you are, Hugh, with the horses. I will go quietly
forward. If the place is occupied, we will go back. We can't expect
hospitality in Bavaria."

The hut proved to be empty. The door hung loosely on its hinges,
and clearly the place was deserted.

Rupert called Hugh up, and fastening the horses outside, the lads
entered.

"Shall we light a fire, Master Rupert?"

"No, Hugh; at any rate unless we see that the shutters and door
will close tightly. There may be scores of deserters in the wood,
and we had better run no risk. The night is not cold. We will just
sit down against the wall till morning. Before we do, though, we
will look round, outside the hut. If it has been lately inhabited,
there may be a few vegetables or something the horses can munch."

Nothing, however, was found.

"We will take it by turns to watch, Hugh. I will take first watch;
when I am sleepy I will wake you."

Without a word Hugh unstrapped his cloak, felt for a level piece of
ground in the hut, and with his cloak for his pillow, was soon
asleep.

Rupert sat down on the log of a tree, that lay outside the hut, and
leaned against its wall. For two hours he sat, and thought over the
adventures and the prospects of the war, and then gradually a
drowsiness crept over him, and he fell fast asleep.

His waking was not pleasant. Indeed, he was hardly aware that he
was awake; for he first came to the consciousness that he was lying
on the ground, with a number of wild-looking figures around him,
some of whom bore torches, while Hugh, held by two of them, was
close by.

It was Hugh's voice, indeed, that first recalled him to a
consciousness of what had happened.

"Master Rupert, Master Rupert!" he exclaimed. "Tell me that you are
not killed!"

"No, I am not killed, Hugh," Rupert said, raising himself on his
elbow. "But it would have served me right if I had been, for going
to sleep on my watch."

One of their captors now stooped down, seized Rupert by the
shoulder, and gave him a rough kick to intimate that he was to get
up.

"I am sorry, Hugh, that I have sacrificed your life as well as my
own by my folly, for I have no doubt these fellows mean to kill us.
They are charcoal burners, as rough a lot as there exists in
Europe, and now naturally half mad at the flames they see all over
the land."

In the meantime, a dialogue was going on between their captors as
to the best and most suitable method of putting them to death.

"They are fond of burning houses," one said at last, "let them try
how they like it. Let us make a blaze here, and toss them in, and
let them roast in their own shells."

The proposal was received with a shout of approval. Some of them
scattered in the forest, and soon returned laden with dry branches
and small logs, which were piled up in a great heap against the
hut, which was itself constructed of rough-hewn logs. The heap of
dry wood was then lighted, and ere long a great sheet of flame
arose, the logs and the shingles of the roof caught, and ere many
minutes the hut was a pile of fire.

"They're going to throw us in there, Hugh."

"God's will be done, Master Rupert; but I should like to have died
sword in hand."

"And I too, Hugh. I wish I could snatch at a weapon and die
fighting; but this man holds my hands like a vise, and those heavy
axes of theirs would make short work of us. Well, the fire will not
take an instant, Hugh; it will be a momentary death to be thrown
into that mass of flame. Say a prayer to God, Hugh, for those at
home, for it is all up with us now."

The blaze of fire had attracted other bodies of charcoal burners
and others, and their captors only delayed to obtain as large a
number of spectators as possible for their act of vengeance.

The fire was now at its height, and even the savage charcoal
burners felt a grudging admiration for the calm demeanour, and
fearless, if pale faces, with which these lads faced death. There
was, however, no change of purpose. The horrors that had been
perpetrated on the plains had extinguished the last spark of pity
from their breasts, and the deed that they were about to do seemed
to them one of just and praiseworthy retribution.

The man who acted as leader gave the word, and the powerful
woodsmen lifted the two lads as if they had been bundles of straw,
and advanced towards the hut.

"Goodbye, Master Rupert!"

"Goodbye, Hugh. May God receive"--when a terrible scream rent the
air, and a wild shout.

Then from the back of the crowd, two figures who had just arrived
at the spot burst their way. With piercing cries a woman with a
baby in her arms flung herself down on the ground on her knees,
between Rupert and the flames, and clasping the legs of the men who
held him, arrested their movement; while the man, with a huge club
swinging round his head, planted himself also in the way, shouting
at the top of his voice.

A mighty uproar arose; and then the leader obtained silence enough
to hear the cause of the interruption.

Then the man began, and told the tale of the restoration to life
and consciousness of his wife, and of the burial of his child, with
an eloquence and pathos that moved many of his rough audience to
tears; and when he had finished, his wife, who had been sobbing on
her knees while he spoke, rose to her feet, and told how that
morning, as she went down from the wood towards her little one's
grave, she saw Rupert ride up and dismount, and how when she
reached the place she found fresh-gathered flowers laid on her
darling's grave.

A dead hush fell upon the whole assembly. Without a word the leader
of the charcoal burners strode away into the forest, and returned
in another minute with the two horses. Rupert and Hugh wrung the
hands of the peasants to whom they owed their lives, and leapt into
the saddle.

The leader took a torch and strode on ahead along the path, to show
them their way; and the crowd, who had hitherto stood still and
silent, broke into a shout of farewell and blessing.

It was some time before either Rupert or Hugh spoke. The emotion had been
too great for them. That terrible, half hour facing death--the sudden
revulsion at their wonderful deliverance--completely prostrated them,
and they felt exhausted and weak, as if after some great exertion.  On
the previous occasions in which they had seen great danger together--at
the mill of Dettingheim, the fight on the Dykes, the scuttling of the
boat--they had been actively engaged. Their energies were fully
employed, and they had had no time to think. Now they had faced
death in all his terrors, but without the power of action; and both
felt they would far rather go through the three first risks again,
than endure five minutes of that terrible watching the fire burn up.

Hugh was the first to speak when, nearly an hour after starting,
they emerged from the wood into the plain at the foot of the hill.

"My mother used to say, Master Rupert, that curses, like chickens,
came home to roost, and surely we have proved it's the case with
blessings. Who would have thought that that little act of kindness
was to save our lives?"

"No, indeed, Hugh. Let it be a lesson to us to do good always when
we can."

At this moment they reached the main road from which that over the
hill branched off. Their guide paused, pointed in the direction
they were to go, and with a "Godspeed you," in his own language,
extinguished his torch on the road, turned, and strode back by the
path that they had come by.

The lads patted their horses, and glad to be again on level ground,
the animals went on at a sharp canter along the road. Two hours
later they reached camp.

The Duke of Marlborough had already laid siege to the fortress of
Ingoldstadt, the siege operations being conducted by Prince Louis
of Baden with a portion of his troops, while the main army covered
the siege. But early in August the Elector of Bavaria left Augsburg
with his army, and, altogether abandoning his dominions, marched to
join Marshal Tallard, who was now coming up.

Marlborough at once broke up his camp, leaving Prince Louis to
continue the siege of Ingoldstadt, and collecting as many of his
troops as he could, marched with all speed in the same direction;
as Prince Eugene, who, with his army, had marched in a parallel
line with the French, now ran the risk of being crushed by their
united force.

By dint of great exertion, Marlborough joined the prince with his
cavalry on the tenth of August, and the infantry came up next day.

The two great armies now faced each other, their numerical force
being not unequal, the French being about 60,000 strong; and the
allies 66,000. In other respects, however, the advantage lay wholly
with the enemy. They had ninety guns, while the allies had but
fifty-one; while out of the 60,000 troops under Marshal Tallard
45,000 were the best troops France could produce. The allied army
was a motley assembly, composed of nearly equal numbers of English,
Prussians, Danes, Wurtemburghers, Dutch, Hanoverians, and Hessians.
But although not more numerous than the troops of other
nationalities, it was felt by all that the brunt of the battle
would fall upon the British.

These had, throughout the three campaigns, shown fighting qualities
of so high a character, that the whole army had come to look upon
them as their mainstay in battle. The heavy loss which had taken
place among these, the flower of his troops, at the assault of
Schlessingen greatly decreased the fighting power of Marlborough's
army.

The weakness caused by the miscellaneous character of the army was
so much felt, that Marlborough was urged to draw off, and not to
tempt fortune under such unfavourable circumstances.

Marshal Villeroi was, however, within a few days march with a large
force, and Marlborough felt that if he effected a junction with
Tallard, Austria was lost. It was therefore necessary, at all
hazards, to fight at once.

The French position was an exceedingly strong one. Their right
rested on the Danube; and the village of Blenheim, close to its
