The execution of this command bordered on the impossible. The whole
space of the square was filled with women--a perfect sea of heads--and
visible above them all was a quivering, tremulous white figure which
they had raised on high.

"Make way for the Sultana!" screamed the Kadun-Kiet-Khuda, who led the
procession; a warty old woman she was, who had had charge of the harem
for years and grown grey in it.

At this one of the boldest of the bayaderes thrust herself forward.

"Make way thyself, thou bearded old witch," she cried; "make way, I say,
before the wife of Halil Patrona. Why, thou art not worthy to kiss the
dust off her feet. Stand aside if thou wilt not come along with us."

And with these words she banged her tambourine right under the nose of
the Kadun-Kiet-Khuda.

And then the bad idea occurred to some of the eunuchs to lift their
broadswords against the boisterous viragoes, possibly with a view of
cutting a path through them for the Sultana.

Ah! before they had time to whirl their swords above their heads, in the
twinkling of an eye, their weapons were torn from their hands, and their
backs were well-belaboured with the broad blades. The furious maenads
fell upon their assailants, flung them to the ground, and the next
instant had seized the bridles of the steeds of the odalisks.

The Kizlar-Aga was fully alive to the danger which threatened the
Sultana. The whole square was thronged with angry women who, with faces
flushed and sparkling eyes, were rushing upon the odalisks. Any single
eunuch they could lay hold of was pretty certain to meet with a martyr's
death in a few seconds. They tore him to pieces, and pelted each other
with the bloody fragments before scattering them to the winds. Elhaj
Beshir, therefore, earnestly implored the Sultana to turn back and try
to regain the Seraglio.

Adsalis cast a contemptuous look on the Aga.

"One can see that thou art neither man nor woman," cried she, "for if
thou wert one or the other, thou wouldst know how to be courageous."

Then she buried the point of her golden spurs in the flank of her steed,
and urged it towards the spot where the most frantic of the maenads stood
fighting with the mounted odalisks, tearing some from their horses,
rending their clothes, and then by way of mockery remounting them with
their faces to the horses' tails.

Suddenly the Sultana stood amongst them with a haughty, commanding look,
like a demi-goddess.

"Who is the presumptuous wretch who would bar the way before me?" she
cried in her clear, penetrating voice.

One of the odalisks planted herself in front of the Sultana and, resting
one hand upon her hip, pointed with the other at Guel-Bejaze!

"Look!" she cried, "there is Guel-Bejaze, and she it is who bars thy way
and compels thee to make room for her."

Guel-Bejaze, whom the women had brought to the spot on their shoulders,
wrung her hands in her desperation, and begged and prayed the Sultana
for forgiveness. She endeavoured to explain by way of pantomime, for
speaking was impossible, that she was there against her will, and it was
her dearest wish to humble herself before the face of the Sultana. It
was all of no use. The yells of the wild Bacchantes drowned every sound,
and Adsalis did not even condescend to look at her.

"Ye street-sweepings!" exclaimed Adsalis passionately, "what evil spirit
has entered into you that ye would thus compel the Sultana Asseki to
give way before a pale doll?"

"This woman comes before thee," replied the bayadere.

"Comes before me?" said Adsalis, "wherefore, then, does she come before
me?"

"Because she is fairer than thou."

Adsalis' face turned blood-red with rage at these words, while
Guel-Bejaze went as white as a lily, as if the other woman had robbed all
her colour from her. There was shame on one side and fury on the other.
To tell a haughty dame in the presence of ten, of twenty thousand
persons, that another woman is fairer than she!

"And she is more powerful than thou art," cried the enraged bayadere,
accumulating insult on the head of Adsalis, "for she is the wife of
Halil Patrona."

Adsalis, in the fury of despair, raised her clenched hands towards
Heaven and could not utter a word. Impotent rage forced the tears from
her eyes; and only after these tears could she stammer:

"This is the curse of Achmed!"

When they saw the tears in the eyes of the Sultana, everyone for a
moment was silent, and suddenly, amidst the stillness of that dumb
moment, from the highest window of the prison-fortress of the Seven
Towers, a man's voice called loudly into the square below:

"Sultana Adsalis! Sultana Adsalis!"

"Ha! a man! a man!" cried the furious mob; and in an instant they all
gazed in that direction--and then in a murmur which immediately died
away in an awe-struck whisper: "Achmed! Achmed!"

Only Adsalis was incapable of pronouncing that name, only her mouth
remained gaping open as she gazed upwards.

There at the window of the Seven Towers stood Achmed, in whose hands was
now a far more terrible power than when they held the wand of dominion,
for in his fingers now rests the power of cursing. It is sufficient now
for him to point the finger at those he loves not, in order that they
may wither away in the bloom of their youth. Whomsoever he now breathes
upon, however distant they may be, will collapse and expire, and none
can save them; and he has but to pronounce the name of his enemies, and
torments will consume their inner parts. The destroying angel of Allah
watches over his every look, so that on whomsoever his eye may fall,
that soul is instantly accursed. Since the death of Ispirizade the
people fear him more than when he sat on the throne.

A deep silence fell upon the mob. Nobody dared to speak.

And Achmed stretched forth his hand towards Adsalis. Those who stood
around the Sultana felt a feeling of shivering awe, and began to
withdraw from her, and she herself durst not raise her eyes.

"Salute that pure woman!" cried the tremulous voice of Achmed, "do
obeisance to the wife of Halil Patrona, and cover thy face before her,
for she is the true consort of her husband."

And having uttered these words, Achmed withdrew from the window whither
the noise of the crowd had enticed him, and the multitude clamoured as
before; but now they no longer tried to force the suite of the Sultana
to make way before Guel-Bejaze, but escorted Halil Patrona's wife back to
the dwelling-place of her husband.

Adsalis, desperate with rage and shame, returned to the Seraglio.
Sobbing aloud, she cast herself at the feet of the Sultan, and told him
of the disgrace that had befallen her.

Mahmud only smiled as he heard the whole story, but who can tell what
was behind that smile.

"Dost thou not love me, then, that thou smilest when I weep? Ought not
blood to flow because tears have flowed from my eyes?"

Mahmud gently stroked the head of the Sultana and said, still smiling:

"Oh, Adsalis! who would ever think of plucking fruit before it is
_ripe_?"




CHAPTER XI.

GLIMPSES INTO THE FUTURE.


Halil Patrona was sitting on the balcony of the palace which the Sultan
and the favour of the people had bestowed upon him. The sun was about to
set. It sparkled on the watery mirror of the Golden Horn, hundreds and
hundreds of brightly gleaming flags and sails flapped and fluttered in
the evening breeze.

Guel-Bejaze was lying beside him on an ottoman, her beautiful head, with
a feeling of languid bliss, reposed on her husband's bosom, her long
eyelashes drooping, whilst with her swan-like arms she encircled his
neck. She dozes away now and then, but the warm throb-throb of the
strong heart which makes her husband's breast to rise and fall
continually arouses her again. Halil Patrona is reading in a big clasped
book beautifully written in the ornamental Talik script. Guel-Bejaze does
not know this writing; its signs are quite strange to her, but she
feasts her delighted eyes on the beautifully painted festoons and
lilies and the variegated birds with which the initial letters are
embellished, and scarce observes what a black shadow those pretty gaily
coloured, butterfly-like letters cast upon Halil's face.

"What is the book thou art reading?" inquired Guel-Bejaze.

"Fairy tales and magic sentences," replied Patrona.

"Is it there that thou readest all those nice stories which thou tellest
me every evening?"

"Yes, they are here."

"Tell me, I pray thee, what thou hast just been reading?"

"When thou art quite awake," said Halil, rapturously gazing at the fair
face of the girl who was sleeping in his arms--and he continued turning
over the leaves of the book.

And what then was in it? What did those brightly coloured letters
contain? What was the name of the book?

That book is the "Takimi Vekai."

Ah! ask not a Mussulman what the "Takimi Vekai" is, else wilt thou make
him sorrowful; neither mention it before a Mohammedan woman, else the
tears will gush from her eyes. The "Takimi Vekai" is "The Book of the
Sentences of the Future," which was written a century and a half ago by
Said Achmed-ibn Mustafa, and which has since been preserved in the
Muhamedije mosque, only those high in authority ever having the
opportunity of seeing it face to face.

Those golden letters embellished with splendid flowers contain dark
sayings. Let us listen:

"Takimi Vekai"--The Pages of the Future.

"On the eighth-and-twentieth day of the month Rubi-Estani, in the year
of the Hegira, 886,[3] I, Said Achmed-ibn Mustafa, Governor of Scutari
and scribe of the Palace, having accomplished the Abdestan[4] and
recited the Fateha[5] with hands raised heavenwards, ascended to the
tower of Ujuk Kule, from whence I could survey all Stambul, and there I
began to meditate.

"And lo! the Prophet appeared before me, and breathed upon my eyes and
ears in order that I might see and hear nothing but what he commanded me
to hear and see.

"And I wrote down those things which the Prophet said to me.

"The Giaours already see the tents of the foreign hosts pitched on the
Tsiragan piazza, already see the half-moon cast down, and the double
cross raised on the towers of the mosques, the khanze[6] plundered, and
the faithful led forth to execution. In the Fanar quarters[7] they are
already assembling the people, and saying to one another: 'To-morrow!
to-morrow!'

"Yet Allah is the God who defends the Padishah of the Ottomans. Their
Odzhakjaiks[8] will scatter terror. Allah Akbar! God is mighty!

"And the captains of the galleys, and the rowers thereof, and the chief
of the gunners, and the corsairs of the swift ships will share with one
another the treasures and the spoils of the unbelievers.

"And the Padishah shall rule over thirteen nations.

"But lo! a dark cloud arises in the cold and distant North. A foe
appears more terrible and persistent than the Magyars, the Venetians, or
the Persians. He is still tender like the fledgelings of the hawks of
the Balkans, but soon, very soon, he will learn to spread his pinions.
Up, up, Silihdar Aga, the Sultan's Sword-bearer! Up, up, Rechenbtar Aga,
the Sultan's Stirrup-holder; up, up, and do your duty. And ye viziers,
assemble the reserves. Those men who come from the land where the pines
and firs raise their virgin branches towards Heaven, they long after the
warm climates where the olive, the lestisk, the terebinth, and the palm
lift their crowns towards Heaven. The fathers point out Stambul to their
sons, they point it out as the booty that will give them sustenance;
tender women lay their hands upon the sword to use it against the
Osmanli, and will fight like heroes. Yet the days of the Sons of the
Prophet will not yet come to an end; they will resist the enemy, and
stand fast like a Salamander in the midst of the burning embers.

"The years pass over the world, again the Giaours assemble in their
myriads and threaten vengeance. But the Divan answers them: 'Olmaz!'--it
cannot be. The Anatolian and the Rumelian lighthouses, at the entrance
of the Bosphorus, will signal from their watch-towers the approach of
the foreign war-ships.

"But this shall be much later, after three-and-twenty Padishahs have
ruled over the thirteen nations; then and not till then will the armies
of the Unbelievers assemble before Stambul. Woe, woe unto us! Eternally
invincible should the Osmanlis remain if they walked, with firm
footsteps, according to the commands of the Koran. But a time will come
when the old customs will fall into oblivion, when new ways will creep
in among Mussulmen like a rattlesnake crawling into a bed of roses.
Faith will no longer give strength against those men of ice, and they
will enter the nine-and-twenty gates of the seven-hilled city.

"Lo! this did the Prophet reveal to me in the season of El-Ashsoer,
beginning at the time of sundown.

"Allah give his blessing to the rulers of this world."

Thus ran the message of the "Takimi Vekai."

Halil Patrona had read these lines over and over again until he knew
every letter of them by heart. They were continually in his thoughts, in
his dreams, and the eternally recurring tumult of these anxious bodings
allowed his soul no rest. What if it were possible to falsify this
prophecy! What if his strong hand could but stay the flying wheel of
Fate in mid career, hold it fast, and turn it in a different direction!
so that what was written in the Book of Thora before Sun and Moon were
ever yet created might be expunged therefrom, and the guardian angels be
compelled to write other things in place thereof!

But such an idea ill befits a Mussulman; it is not the mental expression
of that pious resignation with which the Mohammedan fortifies himself
against the future, submissive as he is to the decrees of Fate, with
never a thought of striving against the Powers of Omnipotence with a
mortal hand. Ambitious, world-disturbing were the thoughts which ran
riot in the brain of Halil Patrona--thoughts meet for no mere mortal.
Poor indeed are the thoughts of man. He piles world upon world, and sets
about building for the ages, and then a light breath of air strikes upon
that which he has built and it becomes dust. Wherefore, then, does man
take thought for the morrow?

The night slowly descended, the glow of the southern sky grew ever paler
on the half-moons of the minarets, till they grew gradually quite dark
and the cry of the muezzin resounded from the towers of the mosques.

"Allah Kerim! Allah Akbar! La illah il Allah, Mohammed rasul Allah! God
is sublime. God is mighty. There is one God and Mohammed is his
Prophet."

And after a few moments he called again:

"Come, ye people, to the rest of God, to the abode of righteousness;
come to the abode of felicity!"

Guel-Bejaze awoke. Halil washed his hands and feet, and turning towards
the mehrab[9] began to pray.

But in vain he sent away Guel-Bejaze (for women are not permitted to be
present at the prayers of men nor men at the prayers of women); in vain
he raised his hands heavenwards; in vain he went down on his knees and
lay with his face touching the ground; other thoughts were abroad in his
heart--terrifying, disturbing thoughts which suggested to him that the
God to Whom he prayed no longer existed, but just as His Kingdom here
on earth was falling to pieces so also in Heaven it was on the point of
vanishing. Thrice he was obliged to begin his prayer all over again, for
thrice it was interrupted by a cough, and it is not lawful to go on with
a prayer that has once been interrupted. Once more he cast a glance upon
the darkened city, and it grieved him sorely that nowhere could he
perceive a half-moon; whereupon he went in again, sought for Guel-Bejaze,
and told her lovely fairy tales which, he pretended, he had been reading
in the Talik book.

The next day Halil gathered together in his secret chamber all those in
whom he had confidence. Among them were Kaplan Giraj, a kinsman of the
Khan of the Crimea, Musli, old Vuodi, Mohammed the dervish, and Sulali.

Sulali wrote down what Halil said.

"Mussulmans. Yesterday, before the Abdestan, I was reading the book
whose name is the 'Takimi Vekai.'"

"Mashallah!" exclaimed all the Mohammedans mournfully.

"In that book the overthrow of the Ottoman Empire is predicted. The
year, the day is at hand when the name of Allah will no longer be
glorified on this earth, when the tinkling of the sheep-bells will be
heard on the ruins of the marble fountains, and those other bells so
hateful to Allah will resound from the towers of the minarets. In those
days the Giaours will play at quoits with the heads of the true
believers, and build mansions over their tombs."

"Mashallah! the will of God be done!" said old dervish Mohammed with a
shaking voice, "by then we shall all of us be in Paradise, up in the
seventh Heaven, the soil whereof is of pure starch, ambergris, musk, and
saffron. There, too, the very stones are jacinths and the pebbles pure
pearls, and the Tuba-tree shields the faithful from the heat of the sun,
as they rest beneath it and gaze up at its golden flowers and silver
leaves, and refresh themselves with the milk, wine, and honey which flow
abundantly from its sweet and glorious stem. There, too, are the
dwellings of Mohammed and the Prophets his predecessors, in all their
indescribable beauty, and over the roof of every true believer bend the
branches of the sacred tree, whose fruits never fail, nor wither, nor
rot, and there we shall all live together in the splendour of Paradise
where every true believer shall have a palace of his own. And in every
palace two-and-seventy lovely houris will smile upon him--young virgins
of an immortal loveliness--whose faces will never grow old or wrinkled,
and who are a hundred times more affectionate than the women of this
world."

Halil listened with the utmost composure till greybeard Vuodi had
delivered his discourse concerning the joys of Paradise.

"All that you say is very pretty and very true no doubt, but let your
mind also dwell upon what the Prophet has revealed to us concerning the
distribution of rewards and punishments. When the angel Azrael has
gently separated our souls from our bodies, and we have been buried with
the double tombstone at our heads, on which is written: 'Dame Allah huti
ale Remaeti,'[10] then will come to us the two Angels of Judgment,
Monker and Nakir. And they will ask us if we have fulfilled the precepts
of the Prophet. What shall our trembling lips reply to them? And when
they ask us whether we have defended the true faith, whether we have
defended our Fatherland against the Infidels, what shall we then reply
to them? Blessed, indeed, will be those who can answer: 'I have done all
which it was commanded me to do,' their spirits will await the final
judgment in the cool abodes of the Well of Ishmael. But as for those who
shall answer: 'I saw the danger which threatened the Osmanli nation, it
was in my power to help and I did it not,' their bodies will be scourged
by the angels with iron rods and their souls will be thrust into the
abyss of Morhut there to await the judgment-day. And when the trump of
the angel Israfil shall sound and the Marvel from the Mountain of Safa
doth appear to write 'Mumen'[11] or 'Giaour'[12] on the foreheads of
mankind; and when Al-Dallaja[13] comes to root out the nation of the
