
Anxiety, deep anxiety was on the heart of King Robert, becoming more
painful with each glance he fixed on Agnes, who was sitting apart with
Nigel, her aching head resting on his shoulder, but he strove to return
the caresses of his daughter, to repay with fond smiles the exertions of
his wife. Sir Niel Campbell (who, after many painful trials, had
rejoined the king) and others strove to disperse the silently gathering
gloom by jest and song, till the cavern walls re-echoed with their
soldier mirth. Harshly and mournfully it fell on the ear and heart of
the maiden of Buchan, but she would not have it stilled.

"No, no; do thou speak to me, Nigel, and I shall only list to thee. Why
should the noble efforts of these brave men--for I know even to them
mirth is now an effort--be chilled and checked, because my sick heart
beats not in unison? Oh, when will Lord James return?"

Nigel sought to soothe, to speak hope, but though his words fell like
balm on the bleeding heart he held to his, it was the rich melody of
their voice, not the matter of their meaning.

The hour of rest was fast approaching, when the well-known signal was
heard without, and the young Lord Douglas, with his two companions, were
hastily and eagerly admitted within the cave. Their looks denoted great
fatigue, and the eager eyes which scanned their countenances read little
to hope, yet much, much, alas! to fear.

"Thou hast so far succeeded as to obtain the intelligence we need," was
the king's instant greeting, as he released his favorite young follower
from his embrace; "that I can read, but further, I fear me, thou hast
little to communicate which we shall love to hear."

"My tidings are ill indeed, your highness; aggravated and most
undreamed-of ill. But, perchance," and the young man hesitated, for his
eye caught the pallid face of Agnes, who had irresistibly drawn closer
to the circle about the king, and fixed her eyes on him with an
expression almost wild in its agony, "perchance they had better first
meet your grace's private ear."

"No, no!" reiterated Agnes, springing forward, and clinging convulsively
to his arm. "It is only me thou fearest, I know; I know thou wouldst
spare me, but do not, do not. I can bear all, every thing, save this
horrible suspense; speak out, let me but know all, and then I can teach
my soul to bear it. Oh, do not hesitate, do not pause; in mercy, tell
me--oh, tell me all!"

Thus adjured, but feeling most painfully the suffering his tale would
produce, Douglas struggled with his own emotion, and repeated all the
information he had obtained. Guardedly as he spoke, evidently as he
endeavored to prepare the mind of Agnes, and thus soften its woe, his
tale was yet such as to harrow up the hearts of all his hearers, how
much more the frail and gentle being to whom it more immediately
related; yet she stood calm, pale, indeed, and quivering, but with a
desperate effort conquering the weakness of her nature, and bearing that
deep woe as the daughter of her mother, the betrothed of Nigel Bruce.

The young lord's information was simply this. On nearing the
hunting-lodge, which was his first object, he found it very nearly
deserted, but a few stragglers, amounting perhaps to fifty in number of
the followers of Buchan, remaining behind, with orders to follow their
master to Dunkeld without delay. Mingling with these as a countryman of
the more northern counties, eager to obtain every species of
intelligence respecting the movements of the English and the hunted
Bruce, whom he pretended to condemn and vilify after the fashion of the
Anglo-Scots, and feeling perfectly secure not only in the disguise he
had assumed, but in the peculiar accent and intonation of the
north-country peasant, which he could assume at pleasure, he made
himself a welcome guest, and with scarcely any trouble received much of
the information he desired. He was told of the first capture and rescue
of the Countess of Buchan; that it was through one of the men left for
dead on the scene of the skirmish the earl had received such exact
information concerning the movements and intended destination of the
Bruce; that immediately on receiving this intelligence he had gathered
all his force, amounting to five hundred men, and dividing them into
different bands, sent skilful guides with each, and was thus enabled to
surround the lodge, and command five different avenues of the forest,
without interruption or discovery. He learned, too, that a stormy
interview had taken place between the earl, his wife, and son, the
particulars of which, however, had not transpired; that the earl's rage
had been terrific when he found the night passed, and the Bruce had not
fallen into the snare laid for him; and he had sworn a fearful oath,
that if the countess would not betray him into his power, her son should
die; that both mother and son had stood this awful trial without
shrinking; that no word either to betray their king or implore life and
mercy had been wrung from them. Incensed beyond all measure, Buchan had
sent on the countess with a numerous guard, his men believed, either to
Dunkeld or Perth, in both of which towns there was a strong garrison of
English, and lingered yet another day and night in the hope of dragging
some intelligence from the lips of Alan, or persuading him into acting
the spy upon the actions and movements of the Bruce. He succeeded in
neither; and the men continued to state, with shuddering horror, which
even their rude natures could not suppress, that they believed the son
had actually fallen a victim to his father's rage--that he had actually
been murdered. Numerous reports to that effect had been circulated on
all sides, and though they had watched narrowly, they had seen nothing
to contradict it. The body of the unfortunate boy had been cast into a
deep well, heaps of rubbish flung over it, and the well built up. This
they knew as a positive certainty, for they had seen it.

Douglas heard this tale with an intensity of horror, of loathing, which
at first deprived him almost of every other feeling; but when he could
withdraw himself from the horrible idea, a species of disbelief took
possession of him. It was impossible such utter depravity, such fearful
insensibility to the claims of nature could exist in the breast of any
man; it was a tale forged to inflict fresh agony on the mother's heart,
and he determined on discovering, if possible, the truth. He pretended
entirely to disbelieve it; declared it was not possible; that the earl
had practised on their credulity, and would laugh at them afterwards;
and contrived so well, that three or four declared he should be
convinced with his own eyes, and set about pulling down the slight
brickwork which covered the well. This was what Douglas wanted, and he
eagerly lent them a helping hand.

A body there was indeed, in form and in clothing so exactly that of the
unhappy Alan, that, even though the face was so marred it could not be
recognized, the young earl could doubt no longer; the young, the brave,
the beautiful, and true, had fallen a victim to his own patriot loyalty,
and by a father's hand. The deep suffering this certainly occasioned was
regarded by his companions as sulkiness for having been proved wrong in
his judgment; they jeered and laughed at him accordingly, and harshly as
these sounds reverberated in his heart, they were welcome, as enabling
him still more easily to continue his disguise.

He accompanied them to Dunkeld, and found the earl had proceeded with
his wife as prisoner to the castle of Stirling, there to deliver her
over to the Earl of Hereford, through whom to be sent on to Edward.
Determined on seeing her, if possible, Douglas resolved on daring the
danger, and venturing even to the very stronghold of his foes. The
horror which this unnatural act of the earl had excited in the minds of
his men, he found had extended even over those in Dunkeld, and through
them he learned that, directly on reaching the town, the earl had sought
the countess, brutally communicated the death of her son, and placed in
her hands the raven curls as all which remained of him, some of which
were dabbled in blood; that she had remained apparently unmoved while in
his presence, but the moment he left her had sunk into a succession of
the most fearful fainting fits, in one of which she had been removed to
Stirling.

Withdrawing himself from his companions, under pretence of returning to
his home in the north, having, he said, loitered too long, Douglas
concealed himself for some days in the abbey of Scone, the holy inmates
of which still retained their loyalty and patriotism, notwithstanding
their revered abbot, unable to remain longer inactive, had donned the
warrior's dress, and departed to join and fight with his king. Assuming
the cowl and robes of one of the lay brothers, and removing the red wig
and beard he had adopted with his former costume, the young lord took
the staff in his hand, and with difficulty bringing his hasty pace to a
level with the sober step and grave demeanor of a reverend monk, reached
Stirling just as the cavalcade, with the litter intended for the captive
countess, had assembled before the castle gate. Agitated almost beyond
the power of control, Douglas made his way through the gathering crowds,
and stood unquestioned close beside the litter. He did not wait long.
Respectfully supported by the Earl of Hereford himself, the Countess of
Buchan, with a firm, unfaltering step, approached the litter. The hood
was thrown back, and Douglas could read the effects of withering agony
on the marble stillness of those beautiful features, though to all else
they spoke but firm and calm resolve; there was not a vestige of color
on cheek or lip or brow; and though her figure was as commanding, as
majestic as heretofore, there was a fearful attenuation about it,
speaking volumes to Lord James's heart. Hereford placed her in the
litter, and with a respectful salutation turned away to give some
necessary orders to his men. Bold in his disguise, Douglas bent over the
countess, and spoke in a low, feigned voice those words of comfort and
of peace suited to his assumed character; but feigned as it was, the
countess recognized him on that instant; a convulsive shudder passed
through her every limb, contracting her features with very agony.

"My child--my Alan!" she whispered, harrowing his very soul beneath that
voice's thrilling woe. "Douglas, hast thou heard?--yes, yes; I can read
it in thine awe-struck face. This, this is all I have left of him," and
she partly drew from her bosom the clustering ringlets he recognized at
once; "yet, wherefore should I mourn him: he is happy. Bid his memory be
honored among ye; and oh, tell the sovereign for whom he fell, better a
death like this than treachery and shame."

She had paused as fearing observation, but perceiving the attention of
all more fixed on the glittering cavalcade than on herself, she placed
one of those glossy curls in the young earl's hand, and continued--

"Give this to my poor Agnes, with her mother's blessing, and bid her
take comfort, bid her not weep and mourn for me. A prison, even death is
preferable now to life, for she is cared for. I trust her to Sir Nigel's
love; I know that he will tend her as a brother till a happier hour
makes her all his own. Commend me to my sovereign, and tell him, might I
choose my path again, despite its anguish, 'twould be that which I have
trod. And now farewell, young lord, I bless thee for this meeting."

"Dominus vobiscum mea filia, et vale," responded the supposed monk, in a
loud voice, for he had only time to assure the countess by a look of
deep sympathy of his willingness to execute her simplest wish, and hide
the ringlet in his bosom, ere Hereford turned towards him, with a gaze
of stern inquiry. Ably concealing alike his emotion and the expression
of his countenance, Douglas evaded discovery, and even obtained
permission to follow the litter to the environs of the town. He did so,
but the countess addressed him not again; and it was with a
heart-sinking despondency he had turned to the mountains, when the
cavalcade disappeared from his view. He retained his monkish garb till
he entered the mountain district, where he fell in with his two
companions, and they proceeded, as we have seen, to the quarters of
their king.

A pause of horror followed his narrative, told more forcibly and briefly
by the lips of Douglas than through the cooler medium of the historian's
pen. Stunned, overwhelmed, as if incapable of movement or speech, though
sense remained, Agnes stood insensible, even to the voice of Nigel,
whose soothing accents strove to whisper peace; but when Douglas placed
in her cold hand the raven curls she knew so well, when tenderly yet
earnestly he repeated her mother's words, the poor girl repeatedly
pressed the hair to her parched lips, and laid it in her bosom; and then
perceiving the sad and anxious face of her beloved, she passed her hand
hurriedly over her brow, and burying her head on his breast, sense was
preserved by an agony of tears.

It was long, long ere this aggravated wretchedness was calmed, though
the love of many, the devotion of one were ever round her to strengthen
and console. Sympathy, the most heartfelt, reigned in every bosom. Of
the many misfortunes which had befallen this patriot band, this seemed,
if not really the severest, more fraught with horror than any which had
come before; the youth, the gallant bearing, the endearing qualities of
the heir of Buchan stood forth with vivid clearness in the memories of
all, and there were times when they felt it could not be, it was too
fearful; and then again, the too certain evidence of the fact, witnessed
as it had been by one of such tried truth as James of Douglas, brought
conviction too clearly home, and the sternest warrior, who would have
faced his own captivity and death unmoved, felt no shame in the dimness
which gathered in his eye for the fearful fate of the murdered boy.

In King Robert's breast these emotions obtained yet more powerful
dominion; again did remorse distract him, and there were moments of
darkness, when his spirit questioned the justice of the Creator. Why was
not his crime visited on his own head? Why did the guiltless and
unstained fall thus around him, and he remain unharmed? and it needed
all the eloquence of Nigel, the pious reasonings of the Abbot of Scone,
to convince him that, dark and inscrutable as the decrees of Omnipotence
sometimes seemed, in his case they were as clear as the wisdom from
which they sprung. By chastisement he was purified; he was not yet fit
to receive the reward of the righteous waiting on death. Destined to be
the savior of his unhappy country, the remorse which bowed down his
naturally haughty spirit was more acceptable in the sight of his God,
more beneficial to his own soul, than the one act of devotedness
included in a brave man's death. Robert struggled with his despondency,
with his soul's deep grief, known as it was but to himself, his
confessor, and his young brother; he felt its encouragement would
unnerve him for his destined task. Other imperative matters now pressed
round him, and by presenting fresh and increased danger, roused his
energies once more to their wonted action.

The winter had set in with unexampled severity, overwhelming snow-storms
filled up the rude paths of the mountains, till egress and ingress
appeared impossible. The Earl of Athol himself, who had been the
inseparable companion of the Bruce in all his wanderings, now spoke of
retiring, and passing the winter within stone walls, urging his
sovereign with earnest eloquence to take refuge in Ireland till the
spring, when they would reassemble under arms, and perhaps take the
tyrant Edward once more by surprise.

Bruce knew the veteran nobleman too well to attribute this advice to any
motive save deep interest in his safety. He saw, too, that it was
utterly impossible for them to remain as they then were, without serious
evils alike to his female and male companions; the common soldiers,
steady and firm as they still continued in loyalty, yet were continually
dispersing, promising to reassemble in the spring, but declaring that it
was useless to think of struggling against the English, when the very
elements were at war against them. With a sad foreboding, Robert saw,
and communicated to his devoted wife the necessity of their separation.
He felt that it was right and best, and therefore he resisted all her
tearful entreaties still to linger by his side; her child was suffering,
for her tender years could not bear up against the cold and the want of
proper nourishment, and yet even that claim seemed less to the mother's
heart than the vision of her husband enduring increase of hardship
alone. Her acquiescence was indeed at length obtained, but dimmed by
many very bitter tears.

A hasty consultation with his few remaining friends speedily decided the
Bruce's plans. The castle of Kildrummie, a strong fortress situated at
the head of the Don, in Aberdeenshire, yet remained to him, and thither,
under the escort of his brother Nigel and three hundred men, the king
determined to send his wife and child, and the other ladies of his
court. Himself, his three brothers, Edward, Alexander, and Thomas,
Douglas, Sir Niel Campbell, and his remaining two hundred followers,
resolved on cautiously making their way southward across Loch Lomond,
and proceed thence to the coast of Ireland, there to await the spring.
In pursuance of this plan, Sir Niel Campbell was dispatched without
delay to conciliate Angus, Lord of the Isles, to whom Cantire then
belonged. Knowing he was unfriendly to his near neighbors, the Lords of
Lorn, the king trusted he should find in him a powerful ally. To appeal
yet more strongly to the chivalric hospitality which characterized the
chieftain, Sir Niel consented that his wife and daughter Isoline should
accompany him. Lady Campbell had too lately undergone the grief and
anxiety attendant on the supposed loss of her husband to consent to
another parting. Even the king, her brother, sought not to dissuade her;
but all persuasions to induce Agnes to accompany them were vain; bitter
as the pang of separation was to her already aching heart--for Lady
Campbell and Isoline were both most dear to her--she steadily resolved
to remain with the queen and her attendants, and thus share the fate of
her betrothed.

"Did not my mother commend me to thy care? Did she not bid thee tend me
as a brother until happier hours, and shall I seek other guardianship
than thine, my Nigel?" were her whispered words, and Nigel could not
answer them. So pure, so unselfish was her love, that though he felt his
happiness would have departed with her presence, could he have commanded
words he would have implored her to seek the hospitality of the Lord of
the Isles as a securer home than Kildrummie. Those forebodings already
alluded to had returned with darker weight from the hour his separation
from his brother was resolved on. He evinced no sign of his inward
thoughts, he uttered no word of dissent, for the trust reposed in him by
his sovereign was indeed as precious as it was honorable; but there was
a mournful expression on his beautiful countenance--when unobserved, it
would rest upon his brother--that Agnes could not define, although it
filled her spirit with incomprehensible alarm, and urged her yet more to
abide by his side.

The dreaded day arrived at length, and agonized was indeed that parting.
Cheerfully the king looked, and hopefully he spoke, but it had no power
to calm the whelming tide of sorrow in which his wife clung to his
embrace. Again and again she returned to that faithful heart which bore
so fondly, so forbearingly, with all her faults and weaknesses; and
Margory, although she could not comprehend the extent of sorrow
experienced by her mother, wept bitterly at her side. Nor were they the
only sufferers. Some indeed were fortunate enough to have relatives amid
the band which accompanied them to Kildrummie, but by far the greater
number clung to the necks of brothers, fathers, husbands, whose faithful
and loving companions they had been so long--clung to them and wept, as
if a long dim vista of sorrow and separation stretched before them.
Danger, indeed, was around them, and the very fact of their being thus
compelled to divide, appeared to heighten the perils, and tacitly
acknowledge them as too great to be endured.

With pain and difficulty the iron-souled warriors at length tore
themselves from the embrace of those they held most dear. The knights
and their followers had closed round the litters, and commenced their
march. No clarion sent its shrill blast on the mountain echoes, no
inspiring drum reverberated through the glens--all was mournfully still;
as the rudest soldier revered the grief he beheld, and shrunk from
disturbing it by a sound.

King Robert stood alone, on the spot where Sir Christopher Seaton had
borne from him his wife and child. His eyes still watched their litter;
his thoughts still lingered with them alone; full of affection, anxiety,
sadness, they were engrossed, but not defined. He was aroused by the
sudden appearance of his younger brother, who, bareheaded, threw himself
at his feet, and, in a voice strangely husky, murmured--

"My sovereign, my brother, bless me, oh, bless me, ere we part!"

"My blessing--the blessing of one they deem accursed; and to thee, good,
noble, stainless as thou art! Nigel, Nigel, do not mock me thus,"
answered the king, bitterness struggling with the deepest melancholy, as
he laid his hand, which strangely trembled, on the young man's lowered
head. "Alas! bring I not evil and misery and death on all who love me?
What, what may my blessing bring to thee?"

"Joy, bright joy in the hour of mirth and comfort; oh, untold-of comfort
in the time of sorrow, imprisonment, death! My brother, my brother, oh,
refuse it not; thou knowest not, thou canst not know how Nigel loves
thee!"

Robert gazed at him till every thought, every feeling was lost in the
sudden sensation of dread lest ill should come to him; it had overtaken
one as fair in promise, as beloved, and yet younger; and oh, if death
selected the best, the loveliest, the dearest, would it next fall on
him? The thought was such absolute agony, that the previous suffering
of that hour was lost before it.

"Bless thee--oh, may God in heaven bless thee, my brave, my noble
Nigel!" he exclaimed, with a burst of emotion, perfectly appalling in
one generally so controlled, and raising him, he strained him
convulsively to his heart. "Yet why should we part?" he added, after a
long pause; "why did I fix on thee for this office--are there not
others? Nigel, Nigel, say but the word, and thou shalt rest with me:
danger, privation, exile we have borne, and may still share together.
Why should I send thee from me, dearest, most beloved of all who call me
brother?"

"Why?" answered Nigel, raising his glistening eyes from his brother's
shoulder, "why, dear Robert? because thine eye could read my heart and
trust it; because thou knewest I would watch over those who bear thy
name, who are dear to thee, even as thy noble self. Oh, do not repent
thee of thy choice; 'tis hard to bear alone danger, so long encountered
hand in hand, yet as thou hast decided let it be. Thy words have soothed
my yearning heart, which craved to list thy voice once more; and now
then, my noble liege and brother, farewell. Think on thy Nigel's words;
even when misery is round thee thou shalt, thou shalt be blessed. Think
on them, my Robert, and then when joy and liberty and conquest crown
thee, oh, forget not Nigel."

He threw his arms around him, imprinted a fervent kiss on his cheek, and
was out of sight ere the king by sign or word could arrest his progress.
One hasty bound forward Robert indeed made, but a dimness stole over his
sight, and for one brief minute he sunk down on the grass, and when he
lifted his head again, there were burning tears upon his cheek.




CHAPTER XVI.


The hardships and dangers attendant on King Robert's progress southward,
mingled as they were with the very spirit of romance, are so well known
to every reader of Scottish history that they must be excluded from our
pages, although a tale of chivalry would seem the very place for their
insertion.

The life of no hero, no sovereign, no general, presents us with a
parallel to the lone and dreary passage of Loch Lomond. We hear of an
ancient and a modern Hannibal crossing the snowy Alps, but it was at the
head of triumphant armies; it was carrying war and victory into an
enemy's land, and there was glory in the danger--the glory and pride of
successful ambition. But there was greater and truer heroism in the
spirit which struggled on when the broad, deep waters of Loch Lomond lay
between them and comparative safety; when 'mid falling snow and howling
winds he cheered his drooping and exhausted followers by reading aloud a
spirit-stirring romance, to which they listened enwrapt and charmed,
little imagining their own situation was one of far greater peril, of
more exciting romance than any which the volume so vividly described. A
leaky boat, which scarcely allowed three men to cross in safety, was
their only means of conveyance, and a day and night passed ere the two
hundred followers of the Bruce assembled on the opposite side. The
cheerful blast of his bugle, which sounded to form them in bands before
him on the beach, was answered by one whose unexpected appearance
occasioned such joy to the heart of the king, that the exertions both of
body and mind of the last few hours were forgotten. It was the Earl of
Lennox, who since the fatal battle of Methven had been numbered amongst
the dead, and lamented by his royal master with grief as deep as the joy
was exceeding which greeted him again. Mutual was the tale of suffering
each had to relate, few and faint the hopes and prospects to
communicate, but so many were the friends the patriots had lost, that
the reappearance of the venerable nobleman infused a new and brighter
spirit amid the almost despairing men.

That the Earl of Lennox had found a kind and hospitable home in the
dominions of the Lord of the Isles, and received welcome and favor from
the chieftain himself, was justly a subject of rejoicing to the fugitive
king. Guided by him, the intricacies of their path were smoothed, and
they reached their destination in a much shorter time than would
otherwise have been the case. Sir Niel Campbell had performed his
mission well, and kindness and truth so long unknown, now eagerly
opened their hearths and hearts to the patriot king. Scorning alike the
Scottish and English authority, Angus, Lord of the Isles, had formed an
independent sovereignty, and now felt pride in receiving in his
territories the only sovereign he had felt inclination to revere. The
daring heroism, the unshaken spirit of the Bruce, were akin to his own
wild, and reckless courage, and had there been no actual claim and right
in Robert's pretensions to the crown, Angus would still have declared
that he, and he alone, was the sovereign worthy to assume it. All, then,
of state and dignity which he could assemble round him were proffered to
the king, and had there been less generosity, less chivalric honor in
his character King Robert might have passed the winter months in
comparative security and comfort.

Angus indeed spoke daringly and slightly of the English force, and had
his inmost soul been read, would have joyed had they ventured to attack
him, that he might show his skill and bravery in resisting and defending
against their united force the sovereign who had confided in his
gallantry and honor; but Robert knew better than the rude chieftain the
devastating warfare which characterized Edward's efforts at subjection,
and his whole soul shrunk from exposing Angus and his true-hearted
followers to the utter ruin which, if he were once known to be amongst
them, would inevitably ensue. At once to secure his personal
concealment, and yet to withdraw from Cantire without in any way
offending the high spirit of the island chieftain, Bruce resolved on
making the little island of Rathlin the winter refuge of himself and his
two hundred followers.

Inhabited by the MacDonalds, who were of course subject to their general
chief, though divided from him by the channel, Bruce was still under the
generous protection of his friend, and therefore Angus could bring
forward no objection to the proposal, save the miserable poverty, the
many discomforts of the barren islet, and entreat with all his natural
eloquence that King Robert would still remain in the peninsula. The
arguments of the king, however, prevailed. A small fleet, better manned
than built, was instantly made ready for his service, and Angus himself
conveyed the king in his own galley to his destined residence. The
aspect of the island, the savage appearance and manner of its
inhabitants were indeed such as to strike despondingly and painfully on
the hearts of any less inured to suffering than King Robert and his
devoted adherents. To them it was welcome, for they justly felt the eye
of Edward could scarcely reach them there. It was a painful alternative
to warrior spirits such as theirs that the safety of their country
depended on their inaction and concealment; yet as their king, their
patriot king, was still amongst them, there was much, much to hope and
cherish still. That their gentler friends and relatives were, they hoped
and believed, in a place of safety, was a matter of rejoicing, though
neither entreaty nor command could persuade the Lady Campbell and her
daughter Isoline to accept the proffered hospitality of the island
