Villa, and the Admiral promised to pay his travelling expenses. Another
pilgrimage was agreed upon, to watch for one night in Santa Clara at
Moguer,[239-3] and have a mass said, for which they again used the
chick-peas, including the one with a cross. The lot again fell on the
Admiral. After this the Admiral and all the crew made a vow that, on
arriving at the first land, they would all go in procession, in their
shirts, to say their prayers in a church dedicated to Our Lady.

Besides these general vows made in common, each sailor made a special
vow; for no one expected to escape, holding themselves for lost, owing to
the fearful weather from which they were suffering. The want of ballast
increased the danger of the ship, which had become light, owing to the
consumption of the provisions and water. On account of the favorable
weather enjoyed among the islands, the Admiral had omitted to make
provision for this need, thinking that ballast might be taken on board at
the island inhabited by women, which he had intended to visit. The only
thing to do was to fill the barrels that had contained wine or fresh
water with water from the sea, and this supplied a remedy.

Here the Admiral writes of the causes which made him fear that he would
perish, and of others that gave him hope that God would work his
salvation, in order that such news as he was bringing to the Sovereigns
might not be lost. It seemed to him that the strong desire he felt to
bring such great news, and to show that all he had said and offered to
discover had turned out true, suggested the fear that he would not be
able to do so, and that each stinging insect would be able to thwart and
impede the work. He attributes this fear to his little faith, and to his
want of confidence in Divine Providence.

He was comforted, on the other hand, by the mercies of God in having
vouchsafed him such a victory, in the discoveries he had made, and in
that God had complied with all his desires in Castile, after much
adversity and many misfortunes. As he had before put all his trust in
God, who had heard him and granted all he sought, he ought now to believe
that God would permit the completion of what had been begun, and ordain
that he should be saved. Especially as he had freed him on the voyage
out, when he had still greater reason to fear, from the trouble caused by
the sailors and people of his company, who all with one voice declared
their intention to return, and protested that they would rise against
him.[240-1] But the eternal God gave him force and valor to withstand
them all, and in many other marvellous ways had God shown his will in
this voyage besides those known to their Highnesses. Thus he ought not to
fear the present tempest, though his weakness and anxiety prevent him
from giving tranquillity to his mind. He says further that it gave him
great sorrow to think of the two sons he left at their studies in
Cordova, who would be left orphans, without father or mother,[241-1] in
a strange land; while the Sovereigns would not know of the services he
had performed in this voyage, nor would they receive the prosperous news
which would move them to help the orphans. To remedy this, and that their
Highnesses might know how our Lord had granted a victory in all that
could be desired respecting the Indies,[241-2] and that they might
understand that there were no storms in those parts, which may be known
by the herbs and trees which grow even within the sea;[241-3] also that
the Sovereigns might still have information, even if he perished in the
storm, he took a parchment and wrote on it as good an account as he could
of all he had discovered, entreating any one who might pick it up to
deliver it to the Sovereigns. He rolled this parchment up in waxed cloth,
fastened it very securely, ordered a large wooden barrel to be brought,
and put it inside, so that no one else knew what it was. They thought
that it was some act of devotion, and so he ordered the barrel to be
thrown into the sea. Afterwards, in the showers and squalls, the wind
veered to the west, and they went before it, only with the foresail, in a
very confused sea, for five hours. They made 2-1/2 leagues N.E. They had
taken in the reefed mainsail, for fear some wave of the sea should carry
all away.[241-4]


_Friday, 15th of February_

Last night, after sunset, the sky began to clear toward the west, showing
that the wind was inclined to come from that quarter. The admiral added
the bonnet[243-1] to the mainsail. The sea was still very high, although
it had gone down slightly. They steered E.N.E., and went four miles an
hour, which made 13 leagues during the eleven hours of the night. After
sunrise they sighted land. It appeared from the bows to bear E.N.E. Some
said it was the island of Madeira, others that it was the rock of Cintra,
in Portugal, near Lisbon. Presently the wind headed to E.N.E., and a
heavy sea came from the west, the caravel being 5 leagues from the land.
The Admiral found by his reckoning that he was close to the Azores, and
believed that this was one of them. The pilots and sailors thought it was
the land of Castile.[243-2]


_Saturday, 16th of February_

All that night the Admiral was standing off and on to keep clear of the
land, which they now knew to be an island, sometimes standing N.E., at
others N.N.E., until sunrise, when they tacked to the south to reach the
island, which was now concealed by a great mist. Another island was in
sight from the poop, at a distance of eight leagues. Afterwards, from
sunrise until dark, they were tacking to reach the land against a strong
wind and head-sea. At the time of repeating the _Salve_, which is just
before dark, some of the men saw a light to leeward, and it seemed that
it must be on the island they first saw yesterday. All night they were
beating to windward, and going as near as they could, so as to see some
way to the island at sunrise. That night the Admiral got a little rest,
for he had not slept nor been able to sleep since Wednesday, and he had
lost the use of his legs from long exposure to the wet and cold. At
sunrise[244-1] he steered S.S.W., and reached the island at night, but
could not make out what island it was, owing to the thick weather.


_Monday, 18th of February_

Yesterday, after sunset, the Admiral was sailing round the island, to see
where he could anchor and open communications. He let go one anchor, which
he presently lost, and then stood off and on all night. After sunrise he
again reached the north side of the island, where he anchored, and sent
the boat on shore. They had speech with the people, and found that it was
the island of Santa Maria, one of the Azores. They pointed out the
port[244-2] to which the caravel should go. They said that they had never
seen such stormy weather as there had been for the last fifteen days, and
they wondered how the caravel could have escaped. They gave many thanks
to God, and showed great joy at the news that the Admiral had discovered
the Indies. The Admiral says that his navigation had been very certain,
and that he had laid his route down on the chart. Many thanks were due to
our Lord, although there had been some delay. But he was sure that he was
in the region of the Azores, and that this was one of them. He pretended
to have gone over more ground, to mislead the pilots and mariners who
pricked off the charts, in order that he might remain master of that
route to the Indies, as, in fact, he did. For none of the others kept an
accurate reckoning, so that no one but himself could be sure of the route
to the Indies.


_Tuesday, 19th of February_

After sunset three natives of the island came to the beach and hailed.
The Admiral sent the boat, which returned with fowls and fresh bread. It
was carnival time, and they brought other things which were sent by the
captain of the island, named Juan de Castaneda, saying that he knew the
Admiral very well, and that he did not come to see him because it was
night but that at dawn he would come with more refreshments, bringing
with him three men of the boat's crew, whom he did not send back owing to
the great pleasure he derived from hearing their account of the voyage.
The Admiral ordered much respect to be shown to the messengers, and that
they should be given beds to sleep in that night, because it was late,
and the town was far off. As on the previous Thursday, when they were in
the midst of the storm, they had made a vow to go in procession to a
church of Our Lady as soon as they came to land, the Admiral arranged
that half the crew should go to comply with their obligation to a small
chapel, like a hermitage, near the shore; and that he would himself go
afterwards with the rest. Believing that it was a peaceful land, and
confiding in the offers of the captain of the island, and in the peace
that existed between Spain and Portugal, he asked the three men to go to
the town and arrange for a priest to come and say mass. The half of the
crew then went in their shirts, in compliance with their vow. While they
were at their prayers, all the people of the town, horse and foot, with
the captain at their head, came and took them all prisoners. The Admiral,
suspecting nothing, was waiting for the boat to take him and the rest to
accomplish the vow. At 11 o'clock, seeing that they did not come back, he
feared that they had been detained, or that the boat had been swamped,
all the island being surrounded by high rocks. He could not see what had
taken place, because the hermitage was round a point. He got up the
anchor, and made sail until he was in full view of the hermitage, and he
saw many of the horsemen dismount and get into the boat with arms. They
came to the caravel to seize the Admiral. The captain stood up in the
boat, and asked for an assurance of safety from the Admiral, who replied
that he granted it; but, what outrage was this, that he saw none of his
people in the boat? The Admiral added that they might come on board, and
that he would do all that might be proper. The Admiral tried, with fair
words, to get hold of this captain, that he might recover his own people,
not considering that he broke faith by giving him security, because he
had offered peace and security, and had then broken his word. The
captain, as he came with an evil intention, would not come on board.
Seeing that he did not come alongside, the Admiral asked that he might be
told the reason for the detention of his men, an act which would
displease the King of Portugal, because the Portuguese received much
honor in the territories of the King of Castile, and were as safe as if
they were in Lisbon. He further said that the Sovereigns had given him
letters of recommendation to all the Lords and Princes of the world,
which he would show the captain if he would come on board; that he was
the Admiral of the Ocean Sea, and Viceroy of the Indies, which belonged
to their Highnesses,[246-1] and that he would show the commissions signed
with their signatures, and attested by their seals, which he held up from
a distance. He added that his Sovereigns were in friendship and amity
with the King of Portugal, and had ordered that all honor should be shown
to ships that came from Portugal. Further, that if the captain did not
surrender his people, he would still go on to Castile, as he had quite
sufficient to navigate as far as Seville, in which case the captain and
his followers would be severely punished for their offence. Then the
captain and those with him replied that they did not know the King and
Queen of Castile there, nor their letters, nor were they afraid of them,
and they would give the Admiral to understand that this was Portugal,
almost menacing him. On hearing this the Admiral was much moved, thinking
that some cause of disagreement might have arisen between the two
kingdoms during his absence, yet he could not endure that they should not
be answered reasonably. Afterwards he turned to the captain, and said
that he should go to the port with the caravel, and that all that had
been done would be reported to the King his Lord. The Admiral made those
who were in the caravel bear witness to what he said, calling to the
captain and all the others, and promising that he would not leave the
caravel until a hundred Portuguese had been taken to Castile, and all
that island had been laid waste. He then returned to anchor in the port
where he was first, the wind being very unfavorable for doing anything
else.


_Wednesday, 20th of February_

The Admiral ordered the ship to be repaired, and the casks to be filled
alongside for ballast. This was a very bad port, and he feared he might
have to cut the cables. This was so, and he made sail for the island of
San Miguel; but there is no good port in any of the Azores for the
weather they then experienced, and there was no other remedy but to go to
sea.


_Thursday, 21st of February_

Yesterday the Admiral left that island of Santa Maria for that of San
Miguel, to see if a port could be found to shelter his vessel from the
bad weather. There was much wind and a high sea, and he was sailing until
night without being able to see either one land or the other, owing to
the thick weather caused by wind and sea. The Admiral says he was in much
anxiety, because he only had three sailors who knew their business, the
rest knowing nothing of seamanship.[247-1] He was lying-to all that
night, in great danger and trouble. Our Lord showed him mercy in that the
waves came in one direction, for if there had been a cross sea they would
have suffered much more. After sunrise the island of San Miguel was not
in sight, so the Admiral determined to return to Santa Maria, to see if
he could recover his people and boat, and the anchors and cables he had
left there.

The Admiral says that he was astonished at the bad weather he encountered
in the region of these islands. In the Indies he had navigated throughout
the winter without the necessity for anchoring, and always had fine
weather, never having seen the sea for a single hour in such a state that
it could not be navigated easily. But among these islands he had suffered
from such terrible storms. The same had happened in going out as far as
the Canary Islands, but as soon as they were passed there was always fine
weather, both in sea and air. In concluding these remarks, he observes
that the sacred theologians and wise men[248-1] said well when they
placed the terrestrial paradise in the Far East, because it is a most
temperate region. Hence these lands that he had now discovered must, he
says, be in the extreme East.


_Friday, 22nd of February_

Yesterday the Admiral anchored off Santa Maria, in the place or port
where he had first anchored. Presently a man came down to some rocks at
the edge of the beach, signalling that they were not to go away. Soon
afterwards the boat came with five sailors, two priests, and a scrivener.
They asked for safety, and when it was granted by the Admiral, they came
on board, and as it was night they slept on board, the Admiral showing
them all the civility he could. In the morning they asked to be shown the
authority of the Sovereigns of Castile, by which the voyage had been
made. The Admiral felt that they did this to give some color of right to
what they had done, and to show that they had right on their side. As
they were unable to secure the person of the Admiral, whom they intended
to get into their power when they came with the boat armed, they now
feared that their game might not turn out so well, thinking, with some
fear, of what the Admiral had threatened, and which he proposed to put
into execution. In order to get his people released, the Admiral
displayed the general letter of the Sovereigns to all Princes and Lords,
and other documents, and having given them of what he had, the Portuguese
went on shore satisfied, and presently released all the crew and the
boat. The Admiral heard from them that if he had been captured also, they
never would have been released, for the captain said that those were the
orders of the King his Lord.


_Saturday, 23rd of February_

Yesterday the weather began to improve, and the Admiral got under way to
seek a better anchorage, where he could take in wood and stones for
ballast; but he did not find one until the hour of compline.[249-1]


_Sunday, 24th of February_

He anchored yesterday in the afternoon, to take in wood and stones, but
the sea was so rough that they could not land from the boat, and during
the first watch it came on to blow from the west and S.W. He ordered sail
to be made, owing to the great danger there is off these islands in being
at anchor with a southerly gale, and as the wind was S.W. it would go
round to south. As it was a good wind for Castile, he gave up his
intention of taking in wood and stones, and shaped an easterly course
until sunset, going seven miles an hour for six hours and a half, equal
to 45-1/2 miles. After sunset he made six miles an hour, or 66 miles in
eleven hours, altogether 111 miles, equal to 28 leagues.


_Monday, 25th of February_

Yesterday, after sunset, the caravel went at the rate of five miles an
hour on an easterly course, and in the eleven hours of the night she
made 65 miles, equal to 16-1/4 leagues. From sunrise to sunset they made
another 16-1/2 leagues with a smooth sea, thanks be to God. A very large
bird, like an eagle, came to the caravel.


_Tuesday, 26th of February_

Yesterday night the caravel steered her course in a smooth sea, thanks be
to God. Most of the time she was going eight miles an hour, and made a
hundred miles, equal to 25 leagues. After sunrise there was little wind
and some rain-showers. They made about 8 leagues E.N.E.


_Wednesday, 27th of February_

During the night and day she was off her course, owing to contrary winds
and a heavy sea. She was found to be 125 leagues from Cape St. Vincent,
and 80 from the island of Madeira, 106 from Santa Maria. It was very
troublesome to have such bad weather just when they were at the very door
of their home.


_Thursday, 28th of February_

The same weather during the night, with the wind from south and S.E.,
sometimes shifting to N.E. and E.N.E., and it was the same all day.


_Friday, 1st of March_

To-night the course was E.N.E., and they made twelve leagues. During the
day, 23-1/2 leagues on the same course.


_Saturday, 2nd of March_

The course was E.N.E., and distance made good 28 leagues during the
night, and 20 in the day.


_Sunday, 3rd of March_

After sunset the course was east; but a squall came down, split all the
sails, and the vessel was in great danger; but God was pleased to deliver
them. They drew lots for sending a pilgrim in a shirt to Santa Maria de
la Cinta at Huelva, and the lot fell on the Admiral. The whole crew also
made a vow to fast on bread and water during the first Saturday after
their arrival in port. They had made 60 miles before the sails were
split. Afterwards they ran under bare poles, owing to the force of the
gale and the heavy sea. They saw signs of the neighborhood of land,
finding themselves near Lisbon.


_Monday, 4th of March_

During the night they were exposed to a terrible storm, expecting to be
overwhelmed by the cross-seas, while the wind seemed to raise the caravel
into the air, and there was rain and lightning in several directions. The
Admiral prayed to our Lord to preserve them, and in the first watch it
pleased our Lord to show land, which was reported by the sailors. As it
was advisable not to reach it before it was known whether there was any
port to which he could run for shelter, the Admiral set the mainsail, as
there was no other course but to proceed, though in great danger. Thus
God preserved them until daylight, though all the time they were in
infinite fear and trouble. When it was light, the Admiral knew the land,
which was the rock of Cintra, near the river of Lisbon, and he resolved
to run in because there was nothing else to be done. So terrible was the
storm, that in the village of Cascaes, at the mouth of the river, the
people were praying for the little vessel all that morning. After they
were inside, the people came off, looking upon their escape as a miracle.
At the third hour they passed Rastelo, within the river of Lisbon, where
they were told that such a winter, with so many storms, had never before
been known, and that 25 ships had been lost in Flanders, while others
had been wind-bound in the river for four months. Presently the Admiral
wrote to the king of Portugal, who was then at a distance of nine
leagues, to state that the Sovereigns of Castile had ordered him to enter
the ports of his Highness, and ask for what he required for payment, and
requesting that the king would give permission for the caravel to come to
Lisbon, because some ruffians hearing that he had much gold on board,
might attempt a robbery in an unfrequented port, knowing that they did
not come from Guinea, but from the Indies.[252-1]


_Tuesday, 5th of March_

To-day the great ship of the King of Portugal was also at anchor off
Rastelo, with the best provision of artillery and arms that the Admiral
had ever seen. The master of her, named Bartolome Diaz, of Lisbon, came
in an armed boat to the caravel, and ordered the Admiral to get into the
boat, to go and give an account of himself to the agents of the king and
to the captain of that ship. The Admiral replied that he was the Admiral
of the Sovereigns of Castile, and that he would not give an account to
any such persons, nor would he leave the ship except by force, as he had
not the power to resist. The master replied that he must then send the
master of the caravel. The Admiral answered that neither the master nor
any other person should go except by force, for if he allowed anyone to
go, it would be as if he went himself; and that such was the custom of
the Admirals of the Sovereigns of Castile, rather to die than to submit,
or to let any of their people submit. The master then moderated his tone,
and told the Admiral that if that was his determination he might do as he
pleased. He, however, requested that he might be shown the letters of the
Kings of Castile, if they were on board. The Admiral readily showed them,
and the master returned to the ship and reported what had happened to
the captain, named Alvaro Dama. That officer, making great festival with
trumpets and drums, came to the caravel to visit the Admiral, and offered
to do all that he might require.[253-1]


_Wednesday, 6th of March_

As soon as it was known that the Admiral came from the Indies, it was
wonderful how many people came from Lisbon to see him and the Indians,
giving thanks to our Lord, and saying that the heavenly Majesty had given
all this to the Sovereigns of Castile as a reward for their faith and
their great desire to serve God.


_Thursday, 7th of March_

To-day an immense number of people came to the caravel, including many
knights, and amongst them the agents of the king, and all gave infinite
thanks to our Lord for so wide an increase of Christianity granted by our
Lord to the Sovereigns of Castile; and they said that they received it
because their Highnesses had worked and labored for the increase of the
religion of Christ.


_Friday, 8th of March_

To-day the Admiral received a letter from the king of Portugal,[253-2]
brought by Don Martin de Norona, asking him to visit him where he was,
as the weather was not suitable for the departure of the caravel. He
complied, to prevent suspicion, although he did not wish to go, and went
to pass the night at Sacanben. The king had given orders to his officers
that all that the Admiral, his crew, and the caravel were in need of
should be given without payment, and that all the Admiral wanted should
be complied with.


_Saturday, 9th of March_

To-day the Admiral left Sacanben, to go where the king was residing,
which was at Valparaiso, nine leagues from Lisbon. Owing to the rain, he
did not arrive until night. The king caused him to be received very
honorably by the principal officers of his household; and the king
himself received the Admiral with great favor, making him sit down, and
talking very pleasantly. He offered to give orders that everything should
be done for the service of the Sovereigns of Castile, and said that the
successful termination of the voyage had given him great pleasure. He
said further that he understood that, in the capitulation between the
Sovereigns and himself, that conquest belonged to him.[254-1] The Admiral
replied that he had not seen the capitulation, nor knew more than that
the Sovereigns had ordered him not to go either to La Mina[254-2] or to
any other port of Guinea, and that this had been ordered to be proclaimed
in all the ports of Andalusia before he sailed. The king graciously
replied that he held it for certain that there would be no necessity for
any arbitrators. The Admiral was assigned as a guest to the Prior of
Clato, who was the principal person in that place, and from whom he
received many favors and civilities.


_Sunday, 10th of March_

To-day, after mass, the king repeated that if the Admiral wanted anything
he should have it. He conversed much with the Admiral respecting his
voyage, always ordering him to sit down, and treating him with great
favor.


_Monday, 11th of March_

To-day the Admiral took leave of the king, who entrusted him with some
messages to the Sovereigns, and always treating him with much
friendliness.[255-1] He departed after dinner, Don Martin de Norona
being sent with him, and all the knights set out with him, and went with
him some distance, to do him honor. Afterwards he came to a monastery of
San Antonio, near a place called Villafranca, where the Queen was
residing. The Admiral went to do her reverence and to kiss her hand,
because she had sent to say that he was not to go without seeing her. The
Duke[256-1] and the Marquis were with her, and the Admiral was received
with much honor. He departed at night, and went to sleep at Llandra.


_Tuesday, 12th of March_

To-day, as he was leaving Llandra to return to the caravel, an esquire of
the king arrived, with an offer that if he desired to go to Castile by
land, that he should be supplied with lodgings, and beasts, and all that
was necessary. When the Admiral took leave of him, he ordered a mule to
be supplied to him, and another for his pilot, who was with him, and he
says that the pilot received a present of twenty _espadines_.[256-2] He
said this that the Sovereigns might know all that was done. He arrived on
board the caravel that night.


_Wednesday, 13th of March_

To-day, at 8 o'clock, with the flood tide, and the wind N.N.W., the
Admiral got under way and made sail for Seville.


_Thursday, 14th of March_

Yesterday, after sunset, a southerly course was steered, and before
sunrise they were off Cape St. Vincent, which is in Portugal. Afterwards
he shaped a course to the east for Saltes, and went on all day with
little wind, "until now that the ship is off Furon."


_Friday, 15th of March_

Yesterday, after sunset, she went on her course with little wind, and at
sunrise she was off Saltes. At noon, with the tide rising, they crossed
the bar of Saltes, and reached the port which they had left on the 3rd of
August of the year before.[257-1] The Admiral says that so ends this
journal, unless it becomes necessary to go to Barcelona by sea, having
received news that their Highnesses are in that city, to give an account
of all his voyage which our Lord had permitted him to make, and saw fit
to set forth in him. For, assuredly, he held with a firm and strong
knowledge that His High Majesty made all things good, and that all is
good except sin. Nor can he value or think of anything being done without
His consent. "I know respecting this voyage," says the Admiral, "that he
has miraculously shown his will, as may be seen from this journal,
setting forth the numerous miracles that have been displayed in the
voyage, and in me who was so long at the court of your Highnesses,
working in opposition to and against the opinions of so many chief
persons of your household, who were all against me, looking upon this
enterprise as folly. But I hope in our Lord, that it will be a great
benefit to Christianity, for so it has ever appeared." These are the
final words of the Admiral Don Cristoval Colon respecting his first
voyage to the Indies and their discovery.

FOOTNOTES:

[89-1] The Alhambra.

[89-2] This information Columbus is ordinarily supposed to have derived
from Toscanelli's letter which may be found in Fiske, _Discovery of
America_, I. 356 ff. and II. App. The original source of the information,
however, is Marco Polo, and Columbus summarized the passage on the margin
in his copy of Marco Polo, Lib. I., ch. IV., as follows: "Magnus Kam
misit legatos ad pontificem:" _Raccolta Colombiana_, Part I, Tomo 2, p.
446. That he read and annotated these passages before 1492 seems most
probable. See Bourne, _Spain in America_, pp. 10-15, and Vignaud,
_Toscanelli and Columbus_, p. 284.

[90-1] It is interesting to notice the emphasis of the missionary motive
in this preamble. Nothing is said in regard to the search for a new route
to the Indies for commercial reasons. Nor is reference made to the
expectation of new discoveries which is prominent in the royal patent
granted to Columbus, see above p. 78.

[90-2] The edict of expulsion bears the date of March 30.

[91-1] Columbus reckoned in Italian miles, four of which make a league.
(Navarrete.)

[93-1] On June 30, 1484, King John II. of Portugal granted to Fernam
Domimguez do Arco, "resident in the island of Madeyra, if he finds it, an
island which he is now going in search of." _Alguns Documentos do Archivo
Nacional da Torre do Tombo_, p. 56.

[94-1] _Tres horas de noche_ means three hours after sunset.

[94-2] "On this day [Sunday, Sept. 9] they lost sight of land; and many,
fearful of not being able to return for a long time to see it, sighed and
shed tears. But the admiral, after he had comforted all with big offers
of much land and wealth to keep them in hope and to lessen their fear
which they had of the long way, when that day the sailors reckoned the
distance 18 leagues, said he had counted only 15, having decided to
lessen the record so that the crew would not think they were as far from
Spain as in fact they were." _Historie del Signor Don Fernando Colombo_
(London ed., 1867), pp. 61-62.

[95-1] Las Casas in his _Historia_, I. 267, says "on that day at
nightfall the needles northwested that is to say the fleur de lis which
marks the north was not pointing directly at it but verged somewhat to
the left of north and in the morning northeasted that is to say the fleur
de lis pointed to right of the north until sunset."

The _Historie_ agrees with the text of the Journal that the needle
declined more to the west, instead of shifting to an eastern declination.

The author of the _Historie_ remarks: "This variation no one had ever
observed up to this time," p. 62. "Columbus had crossed the point of no
variation, which was then near the meridian of Flores, in the Azores, and
found the variation no longer easterly, but more than a point westerly.
His explanation that the pole-star, by means of which the change was
detected, was not itself stationary, is very plausible. For the pole-star
really does describe a circle round the pole of the earth, equal in
diameter to about six times that of the sun; but this is not equal to the
change observed in the direction of the needle." (Markham.)

[96-1] _Garjao._ This word is not in the Spanish dictionaries that I have
consulted. The translator has followed the French translators MM.
Chalumeau de Verneuil and de la Roquette who accepted the opinion of the
naturalist Cuvier that the _Garjao_ was the _hirondelle de mer_, the
_Sterna maxima_ or royal tern.

[96-2] _Rabo de junco_, literally, reedtail, is the tropic bird or
Phaethon. The name "boatswain-bird" is applied to some other kinds of
birds, besides the tropic bird. _Cf._ Alfred Newton, _Dictionary of
Birds_ (London, 1896). Ferdinand Columbus says: _rabo di giunco_, "a bird
so called because it has a long feather in its tail," p. 63.

[96-3] This remark is, of course, not true of the tropic bird or _rabo de
junco_, as was abundantly proved on this voyage.

