fort; (2) that they should not betray themselves by discharging cannon;
(3) that they shoot any Hudson's Bay Company people who tried to enter
the New England fort.  To young Gillam these terms seemed designed for
his own protection.  What they really accomplished was the complete
protection of the French from united attack.  Father and son would have
put themselves in Radisson's power.  A word of betrayal to Bridgar, the
Hudson's Bay governor, and both the Gillams would be arrested for
illegal trade.  Ben Gillam's visit to his father was fraught with all
the danger that Radisson's daring could have desired.  A seaman half
suspected the identity of the bush-ranger, and Governor Bridgar wanted
to know how Radisson had returned so soon when the French fort was far
away.  "I told him, smiling," writes Radisson, "that I could fly when
there was need to serve my friends."

Young Gillam had begun to suspect the weakness of the French.  When the
two were safely out of the Hudson's Bay Company fort, he offered to go
home part of the way with Radisson.  This was to learn where the French
fort lay.  Radisson declined the kindly service and deliberately set
out from the New Englanders' island in the wrong direction, coming down
the Nelson past young Gillam's fort at night.  The delay of the trick
nearly cost Radisson his life.  Fall rains had set in, and the river
was running a mill-race.  Great floes of ice from the North were
tossing on the bay at the mouth of the Nelson River in a maelstrom of
tide and wind.  In the dark Radisson did not see how swiftly his canoe
had been carried down-stream.  Before he knew it his boat shot out of
the river among the tossing ice-floes of the bay.  Surrounded by ice in
a wild sea, he could not get back to land.  The spray drove over the
canoe till the Frenchman's clothes were stiff with ice.  For four hours
they lay jammed in the ice-drift till a sudden upheaval crushed the
canoe to kindling wood and left the men stranded on the ice.  Running
from floe to floe, they gained the shore and beat their way for three
days through a raging hurricane of sleet and snow toward the French
habitation.  They were on the side of the Hayes opposite the French
fort.  Four _voyageurs_ crossed for them, and the little company at
last gained the shelter of a roof.

Radisson now knew that young Gillam intended to spy upon the French; so
he sent scouts to watch the New Englanders' fort.  The scouts reported
that the young captain had sent messengers to obtain additional men
from his father; but the New England soldiers, remembering Radisson's
orders to shoot any one approaching, had levelled muskets to fire at
the reenforcements.  The rebuffed men had gone back to Governor Bridgar
with word of a fort and ship only nine miles up Nelson River.  Bridgar
thought this was the French establishment, and old Captain Gillam could
not undeceive him.  The Hudson's Bay Company governor had sent the two
men back to spy on what he thought was a French fort.  At once Radisson
sent out men to capture Bridgar's scouts, who were found half dead with
cold and hunger.  The captives reported to Radisson that the English
ship had been totally wrecked in the ice jam.  Bridgar's people were
starving.  Many traders would have left their rivals to perish.
Radisson supplied them with food for the winter.  They were no longer
to be feared; but there was still danger from young Gillam.  He had
wished to visit the French fort.  Radisson decided to give him an
opportunity.  Ben Gillam was escorted down to Hayes River.  A month
passed quietly.  The young captain had learned that the boasted forces
of the French consisted of less than thirty men.  His insolence knew no
bounds.  He struck a French servant, called Radisson a pirate, and
gathering up his belongings prepared to go home.  Radisson quietly
barred the young man's way.

"You pitiful dog!" said the Frenchman, coolly.  "You poor young fool!
Why do you suppose you were brought to this fort?  We brought you here
because it suited us!  We keep you here as long as it suits us!  We
take you back when it suits us!"

Ben Gillam was dumfounded to find that he had been trapped, when he had
all the while thought that he was acting the part of a clever spy.  He
broke out in a storm of abuse.  Radisson remanded the foolish young man
to a French guard.  At the mess-room table Radisson addressed his
prisoner:--

"Gillam, to-day I set out to capture your fort."

At the table sat less than thirty men.  Young Gillam gave one scornful
glance at the French faces and laughed.

"If you had a hundred men instead of twenty," he jeered.

"How many have you, Ben?"

"Nine; and they'll kill you before you reach the palisades."

Radisson was not talking of killing.

"Gillam," he returned imperturbably, "pick out nine of my men, and I
have your fort within forty-eight hours."

Gillam chose the company, and Radisson took one of the Hudson Bay
captives as a witness.  The thing was done as easily as a piece of
farcical comedy.  French hostages had been left among the New
Englanders as guarantee of Gillam's safety in Radisson's fort.  These
hostages had been instructed to drop, as if by chance, blocks of wood
across the doors of the guard-room and powder house and barracks.  Even
these precautions proved unnecessary.  Two of Radisson's advance guard,
who were met by the lieutenant of the New England fort, reported that
"Gillam had remained behind."  The lieutenant led the two Frenchmen
into the fort.  These two kept the gates open for Radisson, who marched
in with his band, unopposed.  The keys were delivered and Radisson was
in possession.  At midnight the watch-dogs raised an alarm, and the
French sallied out to find that a New Englander had run to the Hudson's
Bay Company for aid, and Governor Bridgar's men were attacking the
ships.  All of the assailants fled but four, whom Radisson caught
ransacking the ship's cabin.  Radisson now had more captives than he
could guard, so he loaded the Hudson's Bay Company men with provisions
and sent them back to their own starving fort.

Radisson left the New England fort in charge of his Frenchmen and
returned to the French quarters.  Strange news was carried to him
there.  Bridgar had forgotten all benefits, waited until Radisson's
back was turned, and, with one last desperate cast of the die to
retrieve all by capturing the New England fort and ship for the fur
company, had marched against young Gillam's island.  The French threw
open the gates for the Hudson's Bay governor to enter.  Then they
turned the key and told Governor Bridgar that he was a prisoner.  Their
_coup_ was a complete triumph for Radisson.  Both of his rivals were
prisoners, and the French flag flew undisputed over Port Nelson.

Spring brought the Indians down to the bay with the winter's hunt.  The
sight of threescore Englishmen captured by twenty Frenchmen roused the
war spirit of the young braves.  They offered Radisson two hundred
beaver skins to be allowed to massacre the English.  Radisson thanked
the savages for their good will, but declined their offer.  Floods had
damaged the water-rotted timbers of the two old hulls in which the
explorers voyaged north.  It was agreed to return to Quebec in Ben
Gillam's boat.  A vessel was constructed on one of the hulls to send
the English prisoners to the Hudson's Bay Company forts at the south
end of the bay.[11]  Young Jean Groseillers was left, with seven men,
to hold the French post till boats came in the following year.  On the
27th of July the ships weighed anchor for the homeward voyage.  Young
Gillam was given a free passage by way of Quebec.  Bridgar was to have
gone with his men to the Hudson's Bay Company forts at the south of the
bay, but at the last moment a friendly Englishman warned Radisson that
the governor's design was to wait till the large ship had left, head
the bark back for Hayes River, capture the fort, and put the Frenchmen
to the sword.  To prevent this Bridgar, too, was carried to Quebec.
Twenty miles out the ship was caught in ice-floes that held her for a
month, and Bridgar again conspired to cut the throats of the Frenchmen.
Henceforth young Gillam and Bridgar were out on parole during the day
and kept under lock at night.

The same jealousy as of old awaited Radisson at Quebec.  The Company of
the North was furious that La Chesnaye had sent ships to Hudson Bay,
which the shareholders considered to be their territory by license.[12]
Farmers of the Revenue beset the ship to seize the cargo, because the
explorers had gone North without a permit.  La Chesnaye saved some of
the furs by transshipping them for France before the vessel reached
Quebec.  Then followed an interminable lawsuit, that exhausted the
profits of the voyage.  La Barre had succeeded Frontenac as governor.
The best friends of La Barre would scarcely deny that his sole ambition
as governor was to amass a fortune from the fur trade of Canada.
Inspired by the jealous Company of the North, he refused to grant
Radisson prize money for the capture of the contraband ship, restored
the vessel to Gillam, and gave him clearance to sail for Boston.[13]
For this La Barre was sharply reprimanded from France; but the
reprimand did not mend the broken fortunes of the two explorers, who
had given their lives for the extension of the French domain.[14]  M.
Colbert summoned Radisson and Groseillers to return to France and give
an account of all they had done; but when they arrived in Paris, on
January 15, 1684, they learned that the great statesman had died.  Lord
Preston, the English envoy, had lodged such complaints against them for
the defeat of the Englishmen in Hudson Bay, that France hesitated to
extend public recognition of their services.


[1] Within ten years so many different regulations were promulgated on
the fur trade that it is almost impossible to keep track of them.  In
1673 orders came from Paris forbidding French settlers of New France
from wandering in the woods for longer than twenty-four hours.  In 1672
M. Frontenac forbade the selling of merchandise to _coureurs du bois_,
or the purchase of furs from them.  In 1675 a decree of the Council of
State awarded to M. Jean Oudiette one-fourth of all beaver, with the
exclusive right of buying and selling in Canada.  In 1676 Frontenac
withdrew from the _Cie Indes Occidentales_ all the rights it had over
Canada and other places.  An ordinance of October 1, 1682, forbade all
trade except under license.  An ordinance in 1684 ordered all fur
traders trading in Hudson Bay to pay one-fourth to Farmers of the
Revenue.

[2] It is hard to tell who this Godefroy was.  Of all the famous
Godefroys of Three Rivers (according to Abbe Tanguay) there was only
one, Jean Batiste, born 1658, who might have gone with Radisson; but I
hardly think so.  The Godefroys descended from the French nobility and
themselves bore titles from the king, but in spite of this, were the
best canoemen of New France, as ready--according to Mr. Sulte--to
_faire la cuisine_ as to command a fort.  Radisson's Godefroy evidently
went in the capacity of a servant, for his name is not mentioned in the
official list of promoters.  On the other hand, parish records do not
give the date of Jean Batiste Godefroy's death; so that he may have
gone as a servant and died in the North.

[3] State Papers, 1683, state that Dame Sorel, La Chesnaye, Chaujon,
Gitton, Foret, and others advanced money for the goods.

[4] In 1898, when up the coast of Labrador, I was told by the
superintendent of a northern whaling station--a man who has received
royal decorations for his scientific research of ocean phenomena--that
he has frequently seen icebergs off Labrador that were nine miles long.

[5] Jean was born in 1654 and was, therefore, twenty-eight.

[6] I have written both addresses as the Indians would chant them.  To
be sure, they will not scan according to the elephantine grace of the
pedant's iambics; but then, neither will the Indian songs scan, though
I know of nothing more subtly rhythmical.  Rhythm is so much a part of
the Indian that it is in his walk, in the intonation of his words, in
the gesture of his hands.  I think most Westerners will bear me out in
saying that it is the exquisitely musical intonation of words that
betrays Indian blood to the third and fourth generation.

[7] See Robson's map.

[8] State Papers: "The Governor of New England is ordered to seize all
vessels trading in Hudson Bay contrary to charter--"

[9] _Radisson's Journal_, p. 277.

[10] Robson gives the commission to this governor.

[11] Later in Hudson Bay history, when another commander captured the
forts, the prisoners were sold into slavery.  Radisson's treatment of
his rivals hardly substantiates all the accusations of rascality
trumped up against him.  Just how many prisoners he took in this
_coup_, no two records agree.

[12] Archives, September 24, 1683: Ordinance of M. de Meulles regarding
the claims of persons interested in the expedition to Hudson Bay,
organized by M. de la Chesnaye, Gitton, Bruneau, Mme. Sorel. . . .  In
order to avoid difficulties with the Company of the North, they had
placed a vessel at Isle Percee to receive the furs brought back . . .
and convey them to Holland and Spain. . . .  Joachims de Chalons, agent
of the Company of the North, sent a _bateau_ to Percee to defeat the
project.  De la Chesnaye, summoned to appear before the intendant,
maintained that the company had no right to this trade, . . . that the
enterprise involved so many risks that he could not consent to divide
the profits, if he had any.  The partners having been heard, M. de
Meulles orders that the boats from Hudson Bay be anchored at Quebec.

[13] Archives, October 25, 1683: M. de la Barre grants Benjamin Gillam
of Boston clearance for the ship _Le Garcon_, now in port at Quebec,
although he had no license from his Britannic Majesty permitting him to
enter Hudson Bay.

[14] Such foundationless accusations have been written against Radisson
by historians who ought to have known better, about these furs, that I
quote the final orders of the government on the subject: November 5,
1683, M. de la Barre forbids Chalons, agent of La Ferme du Canada,
confiscating the furs brought from Hudson Bay; November 8 M. de la
Chesnaye is to be paid for the furs seized.




CHAPTER VII

1684-1710

THE LAST VOYAGE OF RADISSON TO HUDSON BAY

France refuses to restore the Confiscated Furs and Radisson tries to
redeem his Fortune--Reengaged by England, he captures back Fort Nelson,
but comes to Want in his Old Age--his Character


Radisson was now near his fiftieth year.  He had spent his entire life
exploring the wilds.  He had saved New France from bankruptcy with
cargoes of furs that in four years amounted to half a million of modern
money.  In ten years he had brought half a million dollars worth of
furs to the English company.[1]  Yet he was a poor man, threatened with
the sponging-house by clamorous creditors and in the power of
avaricious statesmen, who used him as a tool for their own schemes.  La
Chesnaye had saved his furs; but the half of the cargo that was the
share of Radisson and Groseillers had been seized at Quebec.[2] On
arriving in France, Groseillers presented a memorial of their wrong to
the court.[3]  Probably because England and France were allied by
treaty at that time, the petition for redress was ignored.  Groseillers
was now an old man.  He left the struggle to Radisson and retired to
spend his days in quietness.[4]  Radisson did not cease to press his
claim for the return of confiscated furs.  He had a wife and four
children to support; but, in spite of all his services to England and
France, he did not own a shilling's worth of property in the whole
world.  From January to May he waited for the tardy justice of the
French court.  When his suit became too urgent, he was told that he had
offended the Most Christian King by attacking the fur posts under the
protection of a friendly monarch, King Charles.  The hollowness of that
excuse became apparent when the French government sanctioned the
fitting out of two vessels for Radisson to go to Hudson Bay in the
spring.  Lord Preston, the English ambassador, was also playing a
double game.  He never ceased to reproach the French for the
destruction of the fur posts on Hudson Bay.  At the same time he
besieged Radisson with offers to return to the service of the Hudson's
Bay Company.

Radisson was deadly tired of the farce.  From first to last France had
treated him with the blackest injustice.  If he had wished to be rich,
he could long ago have accumulated wealth by casting in his lot with
the dishonest rulers of Quebec.  In England a strong clique, headed by
Bridgar, Gillam, and Bering opposed him; but King Charles and the Duke
of York, Prince Rupert, when he was alive, Sir William Young, Sir James
Hayes, and Sir John Kirke were in his favor.  His heart yearned for his
wife and children.  Just then letters came from England urging him to
return to the Hudson's Bay Company.  Lord Preston plied the explorer
with fair promises.  Under threat of punishment for molesting the
English of Hudson Bay, the French government tried to force him into a
contract to sail on a second voyage to the North on the same terms as
in 1682-1683--not to share the profits.  England and France were both
playing double.  Radisson smiled a grim smile and took his resolution.
Daily he conferred with the French Marine on details of the voyage.  He
permitted the date of sailing to be set for April 24.  Sailors were
enlisted, stores put on board, everything was in readiness.  At the
last moment, Radisson asked leave of absence to say good-by to his
family.  The request was granted.  Without losing a moment, he sailed
for England, where he arrived on the 10th of May and was at once taken
in hand by Sir William Young and Sir James Hayes.  He was honored as
his explorations entitled him to be.  King Charles and the Duke of York
received him.  Both royal brothers gave him gifts in token of
appreciation.  He took the oath of fealty and cast in his lot with the
English for good.  It was characteristic of the enthusiast that he was,
when Radisson did not sign a strictly business contract with the
Hudson's Bay Company.  "I accepted their commission with the greatest
pleasure in the world," he writes; ". . . without any precautions on my
part for my own interests . . . since they had confidence in me, I
wished to be generous towards them . . . in the hope they would render
me all the justice due from gentlemen of honor and probity."

But to the troubles of the future Radisson always paid small heed.
Glad to be off once more to the adventurous freedom of the wilds, he
set sail from England on May 17, 1684, in the _Happy Return_,
accompanied by two other vessels.  No incident marked the voyage till
the ships had passed through the straits and were driven apart by the
ice-drift of the bay.  About sixty miles out from Port Nelson, the
_Happy Return_ was held back by ice.  Fearing trouble between young
Jean Groseillers' men and the English of the other ships, Radisson
embarked in a shallop with seven men in order to arrive at Hayes River
before the other boats came.  Rowing with might and main for
forty-eight hours, they came to the site of the French fort.

The fort had been removed.  Jean Groseillers had his own troubles
during Radisson's absence.  A few days after Radisson's departure in
July, 1683, cannon announced the arrival of the annual English ships on
Nelson River.  Jean at once sent out scouts, who found a tribe of
Indians on the way home from trading with the ships that had fired the
cannon.  The scouts brought the Indians back to the French fort.  Young
Groseillers admitted the savages only one at a time; but the cunning
braves pretended to run back for things they had forgotten in the
French house.  Suspecting nothing, Jean had permitted his own men to
leave the fort.  On different pretexts, a dozen warriors had surrounded
the young trader.  Suddenly the mask was thrown off.  Springing up,
