"What?  The Earl of Marlborough?"

"Yes."

"So this is how he trusts our word!" muttered Captain Runacles.
"But, excuse me," he added aloud, "our business is with his Majesty."

"I am truly sorry, gentlemen."

"You decline to let us pass?"

"I hope you will not insist."

"Well, but I have an idea.  You can march us into Harwich as your
prisoners.  Take us into his Majesty's presence--that's all I ask,
and I don't care how it's done.  You shall have our _parole_ if you
please."

The sergeant shook his head.  "It's against my orders."

"Then we must try to pass you."

"Suffer me to point out that we are seven to two."

"Thank you.  But this is an affair of conscience."

"Nevertheless--"

"Confound it, sir!" broke in the little hunchback.  "You are here, it
seems, to frustrate our intentions; but I'm hanged if you shall
criticise them too.  Guard, sirs, if you please!"

And whipping out their swords, these indomitable old gentlemen fell
with fury on their seven adversaries and engaged them.

The struggle, however, lasted but a minute.  Six bayonets are not to
be charged with a couple of small-swords; and just as Captain Barker
was on the point of spitting himself like an over-hasty game chicken,
the sergeant raised his side-arm and dealt him a cut over the head.
Hat and wig broke the blow somewhat; but the little man dropped with
a moan and lay quite still in the road.

Hearing the sound, Captain Jemmy turned, dropped his sword, and ran
to lift his friend.  The stroke had stunned him, and a trickle of
blood ran from a slight scalp-wound and mingled with the dust.

"Jack, Jack!" sobbed his friend, kneeling and peering eagerly into
his face.  The hunchback opened his eyes a little and stared up
vacantly.

As he did so the dull roar of heavy guns broke out in the direction
of Harwich, shaking the earth under Captain Jemmy's feet.  It was the
town's parting salute to his Majesty King William the Third.  And at
the same moment the leading ship of the royal squadron swung out of
harbour on the ebb-tide and, rounding the Guard Sandbank, stood
majestically towards the open sea, her colours streaming and white
canvas bellying over the blue waters.



CHAPTER VIII.


FATHER AND SON.

Tristram, meanwhile, was lying in darkness on board the _Good
Intent_, a frigate of twenty-six guns, converted for the nonce into a
transport-ship to accommodate three companies of his Majesty's Second
Household Regiment, the Coldstreams.  To this regiment the Earl had
thought fit to attach him at first, not only on account of his fine
inches, but also to keep him out of his father's way, being unwilling
that the two should meet until he had visited the Blue Pavilions and
endeavoured to bring Captain Barker and Captain Runacles to terms.

It cannot be said that his first acquaintance with military life had
lifted Tristram's spirits.  The frigate--to which he had been
conveyed without further resistance--struck him as smelling extremely
ill below decks; and he was somewhat dashed by the small amount of
room at his service.  Moreover, the new suit into which he was
promptly clapped, though brilliant in colour, had been made for a
smaller man, and obstructed his breathing, which would have been
difficult enough in any case.  On the gun-deck, where he found
himself, it was impossible to stand upright and equally impossible to
lie at length, every foot of room between the tiers of nine-pounders
being occupied by kits, knapsacks, chests and mattresses littered
about in all conceivable disorder, and the intervals between these
bridged by the legs of his brothers-in-arms.  As the Coldstreams were
an exceedingly well-grown regiment, and for the most part deeply
absorbed just then in dicing, quarrelling, chuck-penny and lively
discussions on the forthcoming campaign, Tristram had found the
utmost difficulty in avoiding the sheaves of legs between him and the
empty mattress assigned for his use.  In his dejection of spirits it
was a comfort to find that none of his future comrades turned a head
to observe him.  He cast himself down on the mattress and gave vent
to a profound sigh.

"Alas, Sophia!" he ingeminated, "how liable to misconception--though
doubtless wise on the whole--are the rulings of Providence, which in
one short hour has torn me from your soft embrace to follow a calling
which I foresee I shall detest!"

Unluckily this emotion, though warranted by his circumstances, proved
too great for the ready-made suit which he wore.  At the first sigh
two buttons burst from his jacket, one of which flew a full twelve
inches and gently struck the cheek of a Dutch sergeant who was taking
forty winks upon the adjacent mattress.

"Vat the devil for?" exclaimed Sergeant Klomp, opening his eyes and
glaring upon the recruit.

"I beg your pardon," said Tristram.

"Zat was in fon, hey?"

"On the contrary--"

"Vat for, if not?"

"It was accidental, I assure you.  I was unbosoming myself--"

"So; I will deach you to onbosom yourself of his Majesty's buttons.
Agsidental!  You shall not be agsidental to me!"  Sergeant Klomp
rolled his eyes, and, picking up his cane, which lay beside him, rose
to his feet and advanced with menace on his face.

Tristram hastily applied his syllogism.  "It is right," he said to
himself, "to resist when molested in a peaceful occupation.
Sighing is a peaceful occupation.  Therefore I must resist this man."
In obedience to this valid conclusion he hit Sergeant Klomp in the
stomach as he advanced, caught the cane out of his hand and
belaboured him the entire length of the gun-deck.  It was impossible
to do this without discommoding the legs of the company and annoying
them beyond measure.  And consequently, at the end of ten minutes,
Tristram found himself in irons in the lazarette, condemned to pass
the night with two drunken men, whose snores were almost comforting
in the pitchy darkness; for, as he told himself, human propinquity,
if not exactly sympathy, is the first step towards it.  He had been
listening to this snoring for four hours, when a hatchway above him
was lifted, and a lantern shone down into the lazarette.  It was
carried by a corporal, who came cautiously down the ladder, lighting
the footsteps of an officer who followed and held a handkerchief to
his nose, for the smell of the bilge was overpowering.

"Pah!" exclaimed this officer, as he arrived at the ladder's foot,
and peered around.  "Set the light down on the floor and leave us.
What a hole!"

He waited whilst the corporal re-ascended the ladder and disappeared;
then, picking up the lantern, held it aloft and let its rays shine
full on Tristram's face.

"Ah," he said, after regarding our hero in silence for a few seconds,
"it is unmistakable!"  And with that he sighed heavily.

"Pardon me, sir," said Tristram, "but the sight of me appears to
cause you sorrow."

"On the contrary, it fills me with joy."

"I am glad to hear you say so, because, as I am fastened here in
these irons, it would have been out of my power to relieve you of my
presence.  Since you are glad, however--"

"Unspeakably."

"--You would do me a great favour by saying why."

"Because--look at me, dear lad--because you are my only son!"

"In that I really think you must be mistaken.  There are two
gentlemen yonder in the corner who at present are asleep.  Are you
quite sure one of these is not the object of your search?"

"Quite sure, my dear lad.  It is unmistakable, as I said.  You are
Tristram?"

"I am; though I don't see why it should be unmistakable."

"Those eyes--that voice!  It is impossible you should not be
Margaret's son!"

"My mother's name was Margaret," Tristram answered; "that's true
enough.  She died when I was born."

"Tristram," said his visitor, lowering the lantern and bowing his
head, "I was her unworthy husband, and am your father, Roderick
Salt."

"That would certainly be plausible, but for one difficulty."

"What is it?"

"My father was drowned some months before I was born."

"You are mistaken.  He was partially drowned, but not quite."

"I admit that alters the case."

"Shall I tell you how it happened?"

"By all means, sir; for I think the story must be interesting.
At the same time I ought to warn you that I already possess a father,
on whom you can scarcely improve."

"To whom do you refer?"

"He is called Captain Barker by those who love him less than I."

"Is it he, then, that has brought you up?  Curse him!"

Tristram opened his eyes.  "Why should you curse him?" he asked.

"Because he has stolen your love from me."

"But--excuse me--it is only this moment that I have heard you were
competing for it."

"He has told you evil concerning me."

"On the contrary, he has never uttered your name.  It was my nurse
who told me one day that you were drowned; and even this turns out to
be a mistake, as you were about to prove."

"My son, your words and bearing cut me to the heart.  It is no less
than I have deserved, perhaps; though, could you know all, I am sure
you would judge me leniently.  But at least I can give you some small
proof of my love.  Let me first release you from those irons."

He set the lantern on the floor, drew a small key from his pocket and
unlocked his son's fetters.

"Thank you.  That is decidedly more agreeable," said Tristram,
stretching his stiffened limbs.

"You were suffering before I came?"

"Why, truly," Tristram replied, shrugging his shoulders as he glanced
around; "I find military life duller than I expected.  And since this
is the first night I have spent from home--"

"My poor boy!  Doubtless, too, you were brooding on what would happen
to-morrow morning."

"Say rather on what happened this morning," corrected Tristram, his
thoughts reverting to Sophia.

"But surely the prospect of to-morrow's punishment--"

"Oh, will there be a punishment to-morrow?"

"Why, you kicked a sergeant from one end of his Majesty's ship to the
other! Did you imagine you could do that with impunity?"

"I assure you he deserved it."

"Nevertheless, you would have been flogged on deck to-morrow had I
not come with a pardon."

"You astonish me: and really you have been very kind to me.
Still, it would have been quite unjust."

Captain Salt regarded his son quietly for a moment or two.  In truth
he was somewhat staggered by this simplicity.

"You wish to escape from this service?" he asked.

"I dislike it more and more.  Besides--"

"Tell me your desires; for, believe me, my son, I have no dearer wish
than to further them."

Tristram held out a hand and took his father's.

"Forgive me, sir, for my coldness just now.  Remember that I had
never seen, had scarcely heard of, you before.  You are very good to
me.  I believe, by looking in your eyes, that you love me; and I
believe--I know--that in time I should love you greatly in return.
But you must pardon that which I am going to say.  Sir, I cannot help
loving best those who have dealt lovingly with me all my life.  I was
homesick--" he broke off, as a lump rose in this throat.

"You shall go home," said Captain Salt.

Still holding his hand, Tristram stared at him incredulously.

"Why should you doubt me, my son?  Do you think I despise those
feelings, or can neglect them?  No; I honour them, though bitterly
regretting that, as fate has willed it, they can never be entertained
for me."

"Don't say that, my father."

"Why should I blink the truth?"  Captain Salt turned and brushed away
a fictitious tear.  "No, Tristram; you shall go back to those you
love better.  I only ask you to be patient for a few days; for,
indeed, I have but a certain amount of influence with those who
enlisted you to-day against your will.  Listen.  Early to-morrow the
squadron sets sail.  If the wind holds we shall be within the Maese
by Sunday morning.  As soon as your regiment disembarks you shall be
a free man: for not till then shall I have an opportunity of speaking
with his Majesty.  The squadron will be returning at once to this
port, and I trust you may return with it.  In the meantime you must
give me your word to remain where you are; for though the punishment
