which is called self-sufficiency must be most concerned with
contemplative happiness; for both the wise man and the just, and all
others, need the necessaries of life; but supposing them to be
sufficiently supplied with such goods, the just man requires persons
toward whom and with whom he may act justly; and in like manner the
temperate man, and the brave man, and so on with all the rest. But the
wise man, if even by himself, is able to contemplate; and the more so
the wiser he is; perhaps he will energize better, if he has
cooperators, but nevertheless he is most self-sufficient. This would
seem also to be the only energy which is loved for its own sake; for
it has no result beyond the act of contemplation; but from the active
energies, we gain more or less beyond the performance of the action.

Happiness seems also to consist in leisure; for we are busy in order
that we may have leisure; and we go to war in order that we may be at
peace. Now the energies of the active virtues are exerted in political
or military affairs; and the actions with respect to these are thought
to allow of no leisure. Certainly military actions altogether exclude
it; for no one chooses war, nor makes preparations for war for the
sake of war; for a man would be thought perfectly defiled with blood,
if he made his friends enemies in order that there might be battles
and massacres. The energy of the statesman is also without leisure;
and besides the actual administration of the state, the statesman
seeks to gain power and honors, or at least happiness for himself and
his fellow citizens, different from the happiness of the state, which
we are in search of, clearly as being different.

If, then, of all courses of action which are according to the virtues,
those which have to do with politics and war excel in beauty and
greatness; and these have no leisure, and aim at some end, and are not
chosen for their own sakes; but the energy of the intellect is thought
to be superior in intensity, because it is contemplative; and to aim
at no end beyond itself, and to have a pleasure properly belonging to
it; and if this increases the energy; and if self-sufficiency, and
leisure, and freedom from cares (as far as anything human can be
free), and everything which is attributed to the happy man, evidently
exist in this energy; then this must be the perfect happiness of man,
when it attains the end of life complete; for nothing is incomplete of
those things which belong to happiness.

But such a life would be better than man could attain to; for he would
live thus, not so far forth as he is man, but as there is in him
something divine. But so far as this divine part surpasses the whole
compound nature, so far does its energy surpass the energy which is
according to all other virtue. If, then, the intellect be divine when
compared with man, the life also, which is in obedience to that, will
be divine when compared with human life. But a man ought not to
entertain human thoughts, as some would advise, because he is human,
nor mortal thoughts, because he is mortal: but as far as it is
possible he should make himself immortal, and do everything with a
view to living in accordance with the best principle in him; altho it
be small in size, yet in power and value it is far more excellent than
all. Besides, this would seem to be each man's "self," if it really is
the ruling and the better part. It would be absurd, therefore, if a
man were to choose not his own life, but the life of some other thing.
And what was said before will apply now; for that which peculiarly
belongs to each by nature is best and most pleasant to every one; and
consequently to man, the life according to intellect is most pleasant,
if intellect especially constitutes Man. This life, therefore, is the
most happy.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 78: From Book X of the "Nicomachean Ethics." Translated by
R. W. Browne.]




POLYBIUS

     Born in Megalopolis in Greece, in 204 B.C.; died about 125;
     celebrated as an historian; entered the service of the
     Achaean League; taken to Rome about 169 as a political
     prisoner, becoming a friend of Scipio the younger; later
     engaged in settling the affairs of Achaia; went to Egypt in
     181 as an ambassador of the Achaean League; of his history of
     Rome in forty books, five only have been preserved
     entire.[79]

I

THE BATTLE OF CANNAE[80]

(216 B.C.)


When the news arrived at Rome that the two armies were face to face,
and that skirmishes between advanced parties of both sides were daily
taking place, the city was in a state of high excitement and
uneasiness; the people dreading the result, owing to the disasters
which had now befallen them on more than one occasion; and foreseeing
and anticipating in their imaginations what would happen if they were
utterly defeated. All the oracles preserved at Rome were in
everybody's mouth; and every temple and house was full of prodigies
and miracles: in consequence of which the city was one scene of vows,
sacrifices, supplicatory processions, and prayers. For the Romans in
times of danger take extraordinary pains to appease gods and men, and
look upon no ceremony of that kind in such times as unbecoming or
beneath their dignity.

When he took over the command on the following day, as soon as the sun
was above the horizon, Gaius Terentius[81] got the army in motion from
both the camps. Those from the larger camp he drew up in order of
battle, as soon as he had got them across the river, and bringing up
those of the smaller camp he placed them all in the same line,
selecting the south as the aspect of the whole. The Roman horse he
stationed on the right wing along the river, and their foot next them
in the same line, placing the maniples, however, closer together than
usual, and making the depth of each maniple several times greater than
its front. The cavalry of the allies he stationed on the left wing,
and the light-armed troops he placed slightly in advance of the whole
army, which amounted with its allies to eighty thousand infantry and a
little more than six thousand horse. At the same time Hannibal brought
his Balearic slingers and spearmen across the river, and stationed
them in advance of his main body; which he led out of their camp,
and, getting them across the river at two spots, drew them up opposite
the enemy. On his left wing, close to the river, he stationed the
Iberian and Celtic horse opposite the Roman cavalry; and next to them
half the Libyan heavy-armed foot; and next to them the Iberian and
Celtic foot; next, the other half of the Libyans, and, on the right
wing, the Numidian horse. Having now got them all into line, he
advanced with the central companies of the Iberians and Celts; and so
arranged the other companies next these in regular gradations that the
whole line became crescent-shaped, diminishing in depth toward its
extremities: his object being to have his Libyans as a reserve in the
battle, and to commence the action with his Iberians and Celts.

The armor of the Libyans was Roman, for Hannibal had armed them with a
selection of the spoils taken in previous battles. The shield of the
Iberians and Celts was about the same size, but their swords were
quite different. For that of the Roman can thrust with as deadly
effects as it can cut, while the Gallic sword can only cut, and that
requires some room. And the companies coming alternately--the naked
Celts, and the Iberians with their short linen tunics bordered with
purple stripes, the whole appearance of the line was strange and
terrifying. The whole strength of the Carthaginian cavalry was ten
thousand, but that of their foot was not more than forty thousand,
including the Celts. AEmilius[82] commanded on the Roman right, Gaius
Terentius on the left, Marcus Atilius and Gnaeus Servilius, the Consuls
of the previous year, on the center. The left of the Carthaginians
was commanded by Hasdrubal,[83] the right by Hanno,[84] the center by
Hannibal in person, attended by his brother Mago. And as the Roman
line faced the south, as I said before, and the Carthaginian the
north, the rays of the rising sun did not inconvenience either of
them.

The battle was begun by an engagement between the advanced guard of
the two armies; and at first the affair between these light-armed
troops was indecisive. But as soon as the Iberian and Celtic cavalry
got at the Romans, the battle began in earnest, and in the true
barbaric fashion: for there was none of the usual formal advance and
retreat; but when they once got to close quarters, they grappled man
to man, and, dismounting from their horses, fought on foot. But when
the Carthaginians had got the upper hand in this encounter and killed
most of their opponents on the ground--because the Romans all
maintained the fight with spirit and determination--and began chasing
the remainder along the river, slaying as they went and giving no
quarter; then the legionaries took the place of the light-armed and
closed with the enemy. For a short time the Iberian and Celtic lines
stood their ground and fought gallantly; but, presently overpowered by
the weight of the heavy-armed lines, they gave way and retired to the
rear, thus breaking up the crescent. The Roman maniples followed with
spirit, and easily cut their way through the enemy's line; since the
Celts had been drawn up in a thin line, while the Romans had closed up
from the wings toward the center and the point of danger. For the two
wings did not come into action at the same time as the center: but the
center was first engaged because the Gauls, having been stationed on
the arc of the crescent, had come into contact with the enemy long
before the wings, the convex of the crescent being toward the enemy.
The Romans, however, going in pursuit of these troops, and hastily
closing in toward the center and the part of the enemy which was
giving ground, advanced so far that the Libyan heavy-armed troops on
either wing got on their flanks. Those on the right, facing to the
left, charged from the right upon the Roman flank; while those who
were on the left wing faced to the right, and, dressing by the left,
charged their right flank, the exigency of the moment suggesting to
them what they ought to do. Thus it came about, as Hannibal had
planned, that the Romans were caught between two hostile lines of
Libyans--thanks to their impetuous pursuit of the Celts. Still they
fought, tho no longer in line, yet singly or in maniples, which faced
about to meet those who charged them on the flanks.

Tho he had been from the first on the right wing, and had taken part
in the cavalry engagement, Lucius AEmilius still survived. Determined
to act up to his own exhortatory speech, and seeing that the decision
of the battle rested mainly on the legionaries, riding up to the
center of the line he led the charge himself, and personally grappled
with the enemy, at the same time cheering on and exhorting his
soldiers to the charge. Hannibal, on the other side, did the same, for
he too had taken his place on the center from the commencement. The
Numidian horse on the Carthaginian right were meanwhile charging the
cavalry on the Roman left; and tho, from the peculiar nature of their
mode of fighting, they neither inflicted nor received much harm, they
yet rendered the enemy's horse useless by keeping them occupied, and
charging them first on one side and then on another. But when
Hasdrubal, after all but annihilating the cavalry by the river, came
from the left to the support of the Numidians, the Roman allied
cavalry, seeing his charge approaching, broke and fled.

At that point Hasdrubal appears to have acted with great skill and
discretion. Seeing the Numidians to be strong in numbers, and more
effective and formidable to troops that had once been forced from
their ground, he left the pursuit to them; while he himself hastened
to the part of the field where the infantry were engaged, and brought
his men up to support the Libyans. Then, by charging the Roman legions
on the rear, and harassing them by hurling squadron after squadron
upon them at many points at once, he raised the spirits of the
Libyans, and dismayed and deprest those of the Romans. It was at this
point that Lucius AEmilius fell, in the thick of the fight, covered
with wounds: a man who did his duty to his country at the last hour of
his life, as he had throughout its previous years, if any man ever
did. As long as the Romans could keep an unbroken front, to turn first
in one direction and then in another to meet the assaults of the
enemy, they held out; but the outer files of the circle continually
falling, and the circle becoming more and more contracted, they at
last were all killed on the field; and among them Marcus Atilius and
Gnaeus Servilius, the Consuls of the previous year, who had shown
themselves brave men and worthy of Rome in the battle. While this
struggle and carnage were going on, the Numidian horse were pursuing
the fugitives, most of whom they cut down or hurled from their horses;
but some few escaped into Venusia, among whom was Gaius Terentius, the
Consul, who thus sought a flight, as disgraceful to himself, as his
conduct in office had been disastrous to his country.

Such was the end of the battle of Cannae,[85] in which both sides
fought with the most conspicuous gallantry, the conquered no less than
the conquerors. This is proved by the fact that, out of six thousand
horse, only seventy escaped with Gaius Terentius to Venusia, and about
three hundred of the allied cavalry to various towns in the
neighborhood. Of the infantry ten thousand were taken prisoners in
fair fight, but were not actually engaged in the battle: of those who
were actually engaged only about three thousand perhaps escaped to the
towns of the surrounding district; all the rest died nobly, to the
number of seventy thousand, the Carthaginians being on this occasion,
as on previous ones, mainly indebted for their victory to their
superiority in cavalry: a lesson to posterity that in actual war it is
better to have half the number of infantry, and the superiority in
cavalry, than to engage your enemy with an equality in both. On the
side of Hannibal there fell four thousand Celts, fifteen hundred
Iberians and Libyans, and about two hundred horse....

The result of this battle, such as I have described it, had the
consequences which both sides expected. For the Carthaginians by their
victory were thenceforth masters of nearly the whole of the Italian
coast which is called _Magna Graecia_. Thus the Tarentines immediately
submitted; and the Arpani and some of the Campanian states invited
Hannibal to come to them; and the rest were with one consent turning
their eyes to the Carthaginians: who, accordingly, began now to have
high hopes of being able to carry even Rome itself by assault.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 79: Polybius, who, as will be noted, belongs to a period two and
a half centuries later than the greatest Greek historians--Herodotus,
Thucydides and Xenophon--is classed by Mahaffy as "the soberest and most
valuable" of those who wrote with masters as their models. While he has
suffered from the fate of all imitators, his work is "of the highest value
to the historian, as a long series of approving critics has amply shown."
He has never been read as a stylist, "nor could he be said to form a part
of the classical literature of Greece."]

[Footnote 80: From Book IV of the "Histories." Translated by Evelyn S.
Shuckburgh. In this battle Hannibal had about 50,000 men, and the
Romans about 80,000.]

[Footnote 81: Gaius Terentius Varro, who was then Consul and died
later than 200 B.C.]

[Footnote 82: Lucius AEmilius Paulus was then Consul.]

[Footnote 83: Hannibal's brother, who, nine years later, crossed the
Alps and was killed in battle by the Romans. It was a tradition in
Rome that Hasdrubal's head, severed from his body, was sent to
Hannibal.]

[Footnote 84: The younger brother of Hannibal, who in 200 B.C. was
defeated by Scipio at Silpia.]

[Footnote 85: The site of Cannae in Apulia, southern Italy, near the
Adriatic shore, lies on the bank of the river Aufidus, now called the
Ofanto.]




II

HANNIBAL'S ADVANCE ON ROME[86] (211 B.C.)


When the news had arrived at Rome that Hannibal had encamped over
against their lines, and was actually besieging their forces, there
was a universal excitement and terror, from a feeling that the result
of the impending battle would decide the whole war. Consequently, with
one heart and soul, the citizens had all devoted themselves to
sending out reenforcements and making preparations for this struggle.
On their part, the Capuans were encouraged by the receipt of
Hannibal's letter, and by thus learning the object of the Carthaginian
movement, to stand by their determination, and to await the issue of
this new hope. At the end of the fifth day, therefore, after his
arrival on the ground, Hannibal ordered his men to take their supper
as usual, and leave their watch-fires burning; and started with such
secrecy that none of the enemy knew what was happening. He took the
road through Samnium, and marched at a great pace and without
stopping, his skirmishers always keeping before him to reconnoiter and
occupy all the posts along the route: and while those in Rome had
their thoughts still wholly occupied with Capua,[87] and the campaign
there, he crossed the Anio without being observed; and having arrived
at a distance of not more than forty stades from Rome, there pitched
his camp.

On this being known at Rome, the utmost confusion and terror prevailed
among the inhabitants--this movement of Hannibal's being as unexpected
as it was sudden; for he had never been so close to the city before.
At the same time their alarm was increased by the idea at once
occurring to them that he would not have ventured so near if it were
not that the armies at Capua were destroyed. Accordingly, the men at
once went to line the walls, and the points of vantage in the defenses
of the town; while the women went round to the temples of the gods and
implored their protection, sweeping the pavements of the temples with
their hair: for this is their customary way of behaving when any
serious danger comes upon their country. But just as Hannibal had
encamped, and was intending to attempt the city itself next day, an
extraordinary coincidence occurred which proved fortunate for the
preservation of Rome.

For Gnaeus Fulvius and Publius Sulpicius, having already enrolled one
consular army, had bound the men with the usual oath to appear at Rome
armed on that very day; and were also engaged on that day in drawing
out the lists and testing the men for the other army: whereby it so
happened that a large number of men had been collected in Rome
spontaneously in the very nick of time. These troops the Consuls
boldly led outside the walls, and, entrenching themselves there,
checked Hannibal's intended movement. For the Carthaginians were at
first eager to advance, and were not altogether without hope that they
would be able to take Rome itself by assault. But when they saw the
enemy drawn up in order, and learned before long from a prisoner what
had happened, they abandoned the idea of attacking the city, and began
devastating the country-side instead, and setting fire to the houses.
In these first raids they collected an innumerable amount of booty,
for the field of plunder upon which they were entered was one into
which no one had ever expected an enemy to set foot.

But presently, when the Consuls ventured to encamp within ten stades
of him, Hannibal broke up his quarters before daylight. He did so for
three reasons: first, because he had collected an enormous booty;
secondly, because he had given up all hope of taking Rome; and
lastly, because he reckoned that the time had now come at which he
expected, according to his original idea, that Appius would have
learned the danger threatening Rome, and would have raised the siege
of Capua, and come with his whole force to the relief of the city; or
at any rate would hurry up with the greater part, leaving a detachment
to carry on the siege. Publius had caused the bridges over the Anio to
be broken down, and thus compelled Hannibal to get his army across by
a ford; and he now attacked the Carthaginians as they were engaged in
making the passage of the stream and caused them great distress. They
were not able however to strike an important blow, owing to the number
of Hannibal's cavalry, and the activity of the Numidians in every part
of the field. But before retiring to their camp they wrested the
greater part of the booty from them, and killed about three hundred
men; and then, being convinced that the Carthaginians were beating a
hasty retreat in a panic, they followed in their rear, keeping along
the line of hills. At first Hannibal continued to march at a rapid
pace, being anxious to meet the force which he expected; but at the
end of the fifth day, being informed that Appius had not left the
siege of Capua, he halted; and waiting for the enemy to come up, made
an attack upon his camp before daylight, killed a large number of
them, and drove the rest out of their camp. But when day broke, and he
saw the Romans in a strong position upon a steep hill, to which they
had retired, he decided not to continue his attack upon them; but
marching through Daunia and Bruttium he appeared at Rhegium so
unexpectedly that he was within an ace of capturing the city, and did
cut off all who were out in the country; and during this excursion
captured a very large number of the Rhegini....

Who could refrain from speaking in terms of admiration of this great
man's strategic skill courage and ability when one looks to the length
of time during which he displayed those qualities; and realizes to
oneself the pitched battles, the skirmishes and sieges, the
revolutions and counter-revolutions of states, the vicissitudes of
fortune, and in fact the course of his design and its execution in its
entirety? For sixteen continuous years Hannibal maintained the war
with Rome in Italy without once releasing his army from service in the
field, but keeping those vast numbers under control, like a good
pilot, without any sign of disaffection toward himself or toward each
other, tho he had troops in his service who, so far from being of the
same tribe, were not even of the same race. He had Libyans, Iberians,
Ligurians, Celts, Phoenicians, Italians, Greeks, who had naturally
nothing in common with each other, neither laws, nor customs, nor
language. Yet the skill of the commander was such that these
differences, so manifold and so wide, did not disturb the obedience to
one word of command and to a single will. And yet circumstances were
not by any means unvarying: for tho the breeze of fortune often set
strongly in his favor, it as often also blew in exactly the opposite
direction. There is therefore good ground for admiring Hannibal's
display of ability in campaign; and there can be no fear in saying
that, if he had reserved his attack upon the Romans until he had
first subdued other parts of the world, there is not one of his
projects which would have eluded his grasp. As it was, he began with
those whom he should have attacked last, and accordingly began and
ended his career with them.[88]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 86: From Book IX of the "Histories." Translated by Evelyn S.
Shuckburgh.]

[Footnote 87: Capua lies seventeen miles north of Naples.]




