to which he submitted with the noblest fortitude. But even should the
height of virtue have been wanting to these eminent men, I shall reply
to those who ask me whether they were orators as the Stoics reply when
they are asked whether Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus were wise men;
they say that they were great and deserving of veneration, but that
they did not attain the highest excellence of which human nature is
susceptible.

Pythagoras desired to be called, not wise, like those who preceded
him, but a lover of wisdom. I, however, in speaking of Cicero, have
often said, according to the common mode of speech, and shall continue
to say, that he was a perfect orator, as we term our friends, in
ordinary discourse, good and prudent men, tho such epithets can be
justly given only to the perfectly wise. But when I have to speak
precisely, and in conformity with the exactness of truth, I shall
express myself as longing to see such an orator as he himself also
longed to see; for tho I acknowledge that Cicero stood at the head of
eloquence, and that I can scarcely find a passage in his speeches to
which anything can be added, however many I might find which I may
imagine that he would have pruned (for the learned have in general
been of opinion that he had numerous excellences and some faults, and
he himself says that he had cut off most of his juvenile exuberance),
yet, since he did not claim to himself, tho he had no mean opinion of
his merits, the praise of perfection, and since he might certainly
have spoken better if a longer life had been granted him, and a more
tranquil season for composition, I may not unreasonably believe that
the summit of excellence was not attained by him, to which,
notwithstanding, no man made nearer approaches. If I had thought
otherwise, I might have maintained my opinion with still greater
determination and freedom. Did Marcus Antonius declare that he had
seen no man truly eloquent, tho to be eloquent is much less than to be
a perfect orator; does Cicero himself say that he is still seeking for
an orator, and merely conceives and imagines one; and shall I fear to
say that in that portion of eternity which is yet to come something
may arise still more excellent than what has yet been seen? I take no
advantage of the opinion of those who refuse to allow great merit to
Cicero and Demosthenes even in eloquence; tho Demosthenes, indeed,
does not appear sufficiently near perfection even to Cicero himself,
who says that he sometimes nods; nor does Cicero appear so to Brutus
and Calvus, who certainly find fault with his language.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 99: Quintilian is notable as a writer who was not influenced
by his great contemporary Seneca, whom he disliked and harshly
criticized for literary defects. Quintilian modeled his own style on
that of Cicero, altho at times he dropt back unconsciously into that
of Seneca.]

[Footnote 100: From Book XII, Chapter I, of the "Institutes of
Oratory." Translated by J. S. Watson.]




TACITUS

     Born about 55 A.D.; died about 117; celebrated as historian
     and orator; praetor in 88; Consul in 97; a friend of the
     younger Pliny; son-in-law of Agricola; his extant works
     include a dialog of oratory, a biography of Agricola,
     "Germania," a history of Rome from Galba to Domitian, and
     his "Annals," which are a history of the Julian
     dynasty.[101]


I

FROM REPUBLICAN TO IMPERIAL ROME[102]


Kings held dominion in the city of Rome from its foundation: Lucius
Brutus instituted liberty and the consulate. Dictatorships were
resorted to in temporary emergencies: neither the power of the
decemvirs continued in force beyond two years, nor the consular
authority of the military tribunes for any length of time. The
domination of Cinna did not continue long, nor that of Sulla: the
influence of Pompey and Crassus quickly merged in Caesar: the arms of
Lepidus and Antony in Augustus, who, with the title of prince, took
under his command the commonwealth, exhausted with civil dissensions.
But the affairs of the ancient Roman people, whether prosperous or
adverse, have been recorded by writers of renown. Nor were there
wanting authors of distinguished genius to have composed the history
of the times of Augustus, till by the spirit of flattery, which became
prevalent, they were deterred. As to Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and
Nero, whilst they yet reigned the histories of their times were
falsified through fear; and after they had fallen, they were written
under the influence of recent detestation. Thence my own design of
recounting a few incidents respecting Augustus, and those toward the
latter part of his life; and, after that, of giving a history of the
reign of Tiberius and the rest; uninfluenced by resentment and
partiality, as I stand aloof from the causes of them.

When, after the fall of Brutus and Cassius, there remained none to
fight for the commonwealth; when Sextus Pompeius was utterly defeated
at Sicily; and Lepidus being deprived of his command, and Mark Antony
slain, there remained no leader even to the Julian party but Octavius;
having put off the name of triumvir, styling himself Consul, and
pretending that all he aimed at was the jurisdiction attached to the
tribuneship for the protection of the commons; when he had cajoled the
soldiery by donations, the people by distribution of corn, and men in
general by the charms of peace, he (Octavius) began by gradations to
exalt himself over them; to draw to himself the functions of the
senate and of the magistrate, and the framing of the laws; in which
he was thwarted by no man: the boldest spirits having fallen in some
or other of the regular battles, or by proscription; and the surviving
nobility being distinguished by wealth and public honors, according to
the measure of their promptness to bondage; and as these innovations
had been the cause of aggrandizement to them, preferring the present
state of things with safety to the revival of ancient liberty with
personal peril. Neither were the provinces averse to that condition of
affairs; since they mistrusted the government of the senate and
people, on account of the contentions among the great and the avarice
of the magistrates: while the protection of the laws was enfeebled and
borne down by violence, intrigue, and bribery.

Moreover, Augustus, as supports to his domination, raised his sister's
son, Claudius Marcellus,[103] a mere youth, to the dignity of pontiff
and curule aedile; aggrandized by two successive consulships Marcus
Agrippa,[104] a man meanly born, but an accomplished soldier, and the
companion of his victories; and soon, on the death of Marcellus, chose
him for his son-in-law. The sons of his wife, Tiberius Nero and
Claudius Drusus, he dignified with the title of Imperator, tho there
had been no diminution in the members of his house. For into the
family of the Caesars he had already adopted Lucius and Caius, the sons
of Agrippa; and tho they had not yet laid aside the puerile garment,
vehement had been his ambition to see them declared princes of the
Roman youth, and even designed to the consulship; while he affected to
decline the honors for them. Upon the decease of Agrippa, they were
cut off, either by a death premature but natural, or by the arts of
their stepmother Livia; Lucius on his journey to the armies in Spain,
Caius on his return from Armenia, ill of a wound: and as Drusus had
been long since dead, Tiberius Nero was the only survivor of his
stepsons. On him every honor was accumulated (to that quarter all
things inclined); he was by Augustus adopted for his son, assumed
colleague in the empire, partner in the tribunitian authority, and
presented to the several armies; not from the secret machinations of
his mother, as heretofore, but at her open suit For over Augustus, now
very aged, she had obtained such absolute sway, that he banished into
the isle of Planasia his only surviving grandson, Agrippa Posthumus; a
person destitute indeed of liberal accomplishments, and a man of
clownish brutality with great bodily strength, but convicted of no
heinous offense. The emperor, strange to say, set Germanicus, the son
of Drusus, over eight legions quartered upon the Rhine, and ordered
that he should be engrafted into his family by Tiberius by adoption,
tho Tiberius had then a son of his own on the verge of manhood; but
the object was that he might stand firm by having many to support and
protect him. War at that time there remained none, except that in
Germany, kept on foot rather to blot out the disgrace sustained by the
loss of Quintilius Varus, with his army, than from any ambition to
enlarge the empire, or for any advantage worth contending for. In
profound tranquillity were affairs at Rome. The magistrates retained
their wonted names; of the Romans, the younger sort had been born
since the battle of Actium, and even most of the old during the civil
wars: how few were then living who had seen the ancient free state!

The character of the government thus totally changed; no traces were
to be found of the spirit of ancient institutions. The system by which
every citizen shared in the government being thrown aside, all men
regarded the orders of the prince as the only rule of conduct and
obedience; nor felt they any anxiety for the present, while Augustus,
yet in the vigor of life, maintained the credit of himself and house,
and the peace of the state. But when old age had crept over him, and
he was sinking under bodily infirmities--when his end was at hand, and
thence a new source of hopes and views was presented--some few there
were who began to talk idly about the blessings of liberty: many
dreaded a civil war--others longed for one; while far the greatest
part were occupied in circulating various surmises reflecting upon
those who seemed likely to be their masters: "That Agrippa was
naturally stern and savage, and exasperated by contumely; and neither
in age nor experience equal to a task of such magnitude. Tiberius,
indeed, had arrived at fulness of years, and was a distinguished
captain, but possest the inveterate and inherent pride of the
Claudian family; and many indications of cruel nature escaped him, in
spite of all his arts to disguise it; that even from his early infancy
he had been trained up in an imperial house; that consulships and
triumphs had been accumulated upon him while but a youth. Not even
during the years of his abode at Rhodes, where under the plausible
name of retirement, he was in fact an exile, did he employ himself
otherwise than in meditating future vengeance, studying the arts of
simulation, and practising secret and abominable sensualities. That to
these considerations was added that of his mother, a woman with the
ungovernable spirit peculiar to her sex; that the Romans must be under
bondage to a woman, and moreover to two youths, who would meanwhile
oppress the state, and, at one time or other, rend it piecemeal."

While the public mind was agitated by these and similar discussions,
the illness of Augustus grew daily more serious, and some suspected
nefarious practises on the part of his wife. For some months before, a
rumor had gone abroad that Augustus, having singled out a few to whom
he communicated his purpose, had taken Fabius Maximus for his only
companion, had sailed over to the island of Planasia, to visit
Agrippa; that many tears were shed on both sides, many tokens of
mutual tenderness shown, and hopes from thence conceived that the
youth would be restored to the household gods of his grandfather. That
Maximus had disclosed this to Martia, his wife--she to Livia; and that
the emperor was informed of it: and that Maximus, not long after,
dying (it is doubtful whether naturally or by means sought for the
purpose), Martia was observed, in her lamentations at his funeral, to
upbraid herself as the cause of her husband's destruction. Howsoever
that matter might have been, Tiberius was scarce entered Illyrium when
he was summoned by a letter from his mother, forwarded with speed, nor
is it fully known whether, at his return to Nola,[105] he found
Augustus yet breathing, or already lifeless. For Livia had carefully
beset the palace, and all the avenues to it, with vigilant guards; and
favorable bulletins were from time to time given out, until, the
provisions which the conjuncture required being completed, in one and
the same moment were published the departure of Augustus, and the
accession of Tiberius.




II

THE FUNERAL OF GERMANICUS[106]

(19 A.D.)


Agrippina,[107] continuing her course without the least intermission
through all the perils and rigors of a sea-voyage in the winter,
arrived at the island Corcyra, situated over against the shores of
Calabria. Unable to moderate her grief, and impatient from
inexperience of affliction, she spent a few days there to tranquillize
her troubled spirit; when, on hearing of her arrival, all the intimate
friends of her family, and most of the officers who had served under
Germanicus, with a number of strangers from the neighboring municipal
towns, some thinking it due as a mark of respect to the prince, but
the greater part carried along with the current, rushed to the city of
Brundusium, the readiest port in her way, and the safest landing. As
soon as the fleet appeared in the deep, instantly were filled, not the
port alone and adjacent parts of the sea, but the walls and roofs, and
wherever the most distant prospect could be obtained, with a sorrowing
multitude, earnestly asking each other "whether they should receive
her on landing in silence, or with some expression of feeling?" Nor
was it clearly determined what course would be most suitable to the
occasion, when the fleet came slowly in, not as usual in sprightly
trim, but all wearing the impress of sadness. When she descended from
the ship, accompanied by her two infants,[108] and bearing in her hand
the funeral urn, her eyes fixt stedfastly upon the earth, one
simultaneous groan burst from the whole assemblage; nor could you
distinguish relations from strangers, nor the wailings of men from
those of women; nor could any difference be discerned, except that
those who came to meet her, in the vehemence of recent grief,
surpassed the attendants of Agrippina, who were exhausted with
continued mourning.

Tiberius had dispatched two praetorian cohorts, with directions that
the magistrates of Calabria, with Apulians and Campanians, should pay
their last offices of respect to the memory of his son; upon the
shoulders, therefore, of the tribunes and centurions his ashes were
borne; before them were carried the ensigns unadorned, and the fasces
reversed. As they passed through the colonies, the populace in black,
the knights in their purple robes, burned precious raiment, perfumes,
and whatever else is used in funeral solemnities, according to the
ability of the place; even they whose cities lay remote from the
route, came forth, offered victims, and erected altars to the gods of
the departed, and with tears and ejaculations testified their sorrow.
Drusus came as far as Terracina, with Claudius the brother of
Germanicus, and those of his children who had been left at Rome.[109]
The Consuls, Marcus Valerius and Marcus Aurelius[110] (for they had
now entered upon their office), the senate, and great part of the
people, filled the road--a scattered procession, each walking and
expressing his grief as inclination led him; in sooth, flattery was an
utter stranger here, for all knew how real was the joy, how hollow the
grief, of Tiberius for the death of Germanicus.

Tiberius and Livia[111] avoided appearing abroad--public lamentation
they thought below their dignity--or perhaps they apprehended that if
their countenances were examined by all eyes their hypocrisy would be
detected. That Antonia, mother to the deceased, bore any part in the
funeral, I do not find either in the historians or in the journals,
tho, besides Agrippina and Drusus, and Claudius, his other relations
are likewise there recorded by name; whether by sickness she was
prevented, or whether her soul, vanquished by sorrow, could not bear
to go through the representation of such an over-powering calamity. I
would rather believe her constrained by Tiberius and Livia, who left
not the palace, that they might seem to grieve alike and that the
grandmother and uncle might appear to have followed her example in
staying at home.

The day on which his remains were deposited in the tomb of Augustus,
at one time exhibited the silence of perfect desolation; at another,
the uproar of vociferous lamentation; the streets of the city were
crowded, one general blaze of torches glared throughout the Campus
Martius; there the soldiers under arms, the magistrates without the
insignia of office, and the people ranged according to their tribes,
passionately exclaimed, "that the commonwealth was utterly lost, that
henceforth there remained no hope," so openly and so boldly that you
would have believed they had forgotten those who ruled over them. But
nothing pierced Tiberius more deeply than the warm interest excited
in favor of Agrippina, while they gave her such titles as "the
ornament of her country, the only blood of Augustus, an unparalleled
example of primitive virtue"; and, looking up to heaven and the gods,
they implored "the preservation of her issue, and that they might
outlive their oppressors."

There were those who missed the pomp of a public funeral, and compared
with this the superior honors and magnificence displayed by Augustus
in that of Drusus, the father of Germanicus; observing, "that he
himself had traveled, in the depth of winter, as far as Ticinus, and,
continuing by the corpse, had with it entered the city; around his
bier were crowded the images of the Claudii and Julii; he was mourned
in the forum; his encomium pronounced on the rostra; all the honors
invented by our ancestors, or added by their posterity, were heaped
upon him. But to Germanicus were denied the ordinary solemnities, and
such as were due to every distinguished Roman. Certainly his corpse
was burned in a foreign country because of the long journey, in such a
manner as it was, but afterward it was but just to have compensated
the scantiness of the first ceremony by the increased solemnity of the
last; his brother met him but one day's journey, his uncle not, even
at the gate. Where were those observances of the ancients, the
effigies of the dead laid in state on a bed, hymns composed in memory
of departed virtue, with encomiums and tears? Where at least the
ceremonial of sorrow?"

All this was known to Tiberius, and to suppress the reflections of the
populace, he admonished them in an edict, "that many illustrious
Romans had died for the commonwealth, but none so universally and
vehemently regretted; and that it was to the honor of himself and all
others, if bounds were observed. The same things which became private
families and small states, became not princes and an imperial people;
that it was not unseemly to lament in the first transport of sorrow,
nay, relief was afforded by weeping, but it was now time to recover
and compose their minds. Thus the deified Julius, upon the loss of an
only daughter;[112] thus the deified Augustus, upon the premature
death of his grandsons, had both concealed their sorrow. More ancient
examples were unnecessary; how often had the Roman people sustained
with equanimity the slaughter of their armies, the death of their
generals, and entire destruction of illustrious families--princes were
mortal, the commonwealth was eternal--they should therefore resume
their customary vocations." And because the spectacle of the
Megalesian games was at hand, he added, "that they should even lay
aside their grief for amusements."

The vacation ended, public affairs were resumed; Drusus departed for
the army in Illyricum, the minds of all men impatiently looking for
vengeance upon Piso; and amidst many complaints, that while he was
roaming at large through the delightful regions of Asia and Greece, he
was undermining by contemptuous and artful delay the evidences of his
crimes; for it was generally known that Martina, that notorious
trafficker in sorceries, and sent, as I have above related, by Cneius
Sentius to Rome, had died suddenly at Brundusium; that poison lay
concealed in a knot of her hair.




III

THE DEATH OF SENECA[113]

(65 A.D.)


The next death added by Nero was that of Plautius Lateranus, consul
elect; and with such precipitation, that he would not allow him to
embrace his children, nor the usual brief interval to choose his mode
of death. He was dragged to the place allotted for the execution of
slaves, and there, by the hand of Statius the tribune, slaughtered. In
his death he maintained the most invincible silence, not charging his
executioner with participation in the design for which he suffered.
The destruction of Seneca followed, to the infinite joy of the prince;
not because he had ascertained that he was a party to the conspiracy,
but that he might assail him with the sword, since poison had failed:
for Natalis only had named him; and his disclosure amounted but to
this, "that he had been sent by Piso[114] to visit Seneca, then
indisposed, to complain that he was refused admittance; and to
represent, that it would be better if they maintained their friendship
by intercourse: that to this Seneca replied, that talking to each
other and frequent interviews were to the service of neither; but upon
the safety of Piso his own security rested." Granius Silvanus, tribune
of a pretorian cohort, was ordered to represent this to Seneca, and to
demand of him, "whether he admitted the words of Natalis, and his own
answers." Seneca had that very day, either from chance or design,
returned from Campania, and rested at a villa of his, four miles from
