purses, and whose duty it was to help all the poor they met. As Cimon
knew that many of the most deserving poor would have been ashamed to
receive alms, these men found out their wants, and supplied them
secretly.

Now, although Cimon was so good and thoughtful, you must not imagine
that it was always very easy for him to be so. It seems that when he was
a young man he was very idle and lazy, and never thought of anything but
his own pleasure.

Aristides the Just noticed how lazy and selfish the young man was, and
one day went to see him. After a little talk, Aristides told him
seriously that he ought to be ashamed of the life he was living, as it
was quite unworthy of a good citizen or of a noble man.

This reproof was so just, that Cimon promised to do better, and tried so
hard that he soon became one of the most industrious and unselfish men
of his day.

Cimon was not the only rich man in Athens, however; for Per'i-cles,
another citizen, was even wealthier than he. As Pericles was shrewd,
learned, and very eloquent, he soon gained much influence over his
fellow-citizens.

While Cimon was generally seen in the company of men of his own class,
and was hence considered the leader of the nobles or aristocrats,
Pericles liked to talk with the poorer class, whom he could easily sway
by his eloquent speeches, and who soon made him their idol.

Day by day the two parties became more distinct, and soon the Athenians
sided either with Pericles or with Cimon in all important matters. The
two leaders were at first very good friends, but little by little they
drifted apart, and finally they became rivals.

About this time an earthquake brought great misfortunes upon Greece. The
whole country shook and swayed, and the effects of the earthquake were
so disastrous at Sparta that all the houses and temples were destroyed.

Many of the inhabitants were crushed under the falling stones and
timbers, and there were only five houses left standing. The Spartans
were in despair; and the Helots, or slaves, who had long been waiting
for an opportunity to free themselves, fancied that the right time had
come.

They quickly assembled, and decided to kill the Spartans while they were
groping about among the ruined dwellings for the remains of their
relatives and friends.

The plan would have succeeded had not the king, Ar-chi-da'mus, found it
out. Without a moment's delay, he rallied all the able-bodied men, and
sent a swift messenger to Athens for aid.

True to their military training, the Spartans dropped everything when
the summons reached them; and the Helots came marching along, only to
find their former masters drawn up in battle array, and as calm as if no
misfortune had happened.

This unexpected resistance so frightened the Helots, that they hastily
withdrew into Messenia. Here they easily persuaded the Messenians to
join forces with them and declare war against the Spartans.

In the mean while the swift runner sent by Archidamus had reached
Athens, and told about the destruction of the town and the perilous
situation of the people. He ended by imploring the Athenians to send
immediate aid, lest all the Spartans should perish.

Cimon, who was generous and kind-hearted, immediately cried out that the
Athenians could not refuse to help their unhappy neighbors; but
Pericles, who, like most of his fellow-citizens, hated the Spartans,
advised all his friends to stay quietly at home.

Much discussion took place over this advice. At last, however, Cimon
prevailed, and an army was sent to help the Spartans. Owing to the
hesitation of the Athenians, this army came late, and they fought with
so little spirit that the Lacedaemonians indignantly said that they might
just as well have remained at home.

This insult so enraged the Athenians that they went home; and when it
became publicly known how the Spartans had treated their army, the
people began to murmur against Cimon. In their anger, they forgot all
the good he had done them, and, assembling in the market place, they
ostracized him.




LVIII. THE AGE OF PERICLES.


As soon as Cimon had been banished, Pericles became sole leader of the
Athenians; and as he governed them during a long and prosperous time,
this period is generally known as the Age of Pericles.

The Spartans who had so rudely sent away their Athenian allies manfully
resolved to help themselves, and set about it so vigorously that they
soon brought the Helots back to order, and rebuilt their city. When they
had settled themselves comfortably, however, they remembered the
lukewarm help which had been given them, and determined to punish the
Athenians.

The Persian general was just then planning a new invasion of Greece, so
the Athenians found themselves threatened with a twofold danger. In
their distress they recalled Cimon, who was an excellent general, and
implored him to take command of their forces.

Cimon fully justified their confidence, and not only won several
victories over the Spartans, but compelled them at last to agree to a
truce of five years. This matter settled, he next attacked the Persians,
whom he soon defeated by land and by sea.

He then forced Artaxerxes, the Persian king, to swear a solemn oath that
he would never again wage war against the Athenians, and forbade the
Persian vessels ever to enter the AEgean Sea.

[Illustration: Pericles.]

These triumphs won, Cimon died from the wounds he had received during
the war. His death, however, was kept secret for a whole month, so that
the people would have time to get used to a new leader, and not be
afraid to fight without their former general.

While Cimon was thus successfully battling with the enemy abroad,
Pericles had managed affairs at home. He urged the Athenians to finish
their walls; and by his advice they built also the Long Walls, which
joined the city to the Pi-rae'us, a seaport five miles away.

Pericles also increased the Athenian navy, so that, by the time the
five-years' truce was over, he had a fine fleet to use in fighting
against the Spartans.

As every victory won by the Athenians had only made Sparta more jealous,
the war was renewed, and carried on with great fury on both sides. The
Spartans gained the first victories; but, owing to their better navy,
the Athenians soon won over all the neighboring cities, and got the
upper hand of their foes.

[Illustration: The Acropolis.]

They were about to end the war by a last victory at Cor-o-ne'a, when
fortune suddenly deserted them, and they were so sorely beaten that they
were very glad to agree to a truce and return home.

By the treaty then signed, the Athenians bound themselves to keep the
peace during a term of thirty years. In exchange, the Spartans allowed
them to retain the cities which they had conquered, and the leadership
of one of the confederacies formed by the Greek states, reserving the
head of the other for themselves.

During these thirty years of peace, Pericles was very busy, and his
efforts were directed for the most part toward the improvement of
Athens. By his advice a magnificent temple, the Par'the-non, was built
on top of the Acropolis, in honor of Athene.

This temple, one of the wonders of the world, was decorated with
beautiful carvings by Phidias, and all the rich Athenians went to see
them as soon as they were finished. This sculptor also made a
magnificent gold and ivory statue of the goddess, to stand in the midst
of the Parthenon. But in spite of all his talent, Phidias had many
enemies. After a while they wrongfully accused him of stealing part of
the gold intrusted to him. Phidias vainly tried to defend himself; but
they would not listen to him, and put him in prison, where he died.

Between the temple of Athene and the city there was a series of steps
and beautiful porticoes, decorated with paintings and sculptures, which
have never been surpassed.

Many other beautiful buildings were erected under the rule of Pericles;
and the beauty and art loving Athenians could soon boast that their city
was the finest in the world. Artists from all parts of the country
thronged thither in search of work, and all were well received by
Pericles.

[Illustration: Phidias.]




LIX. THE TEACHINGS OF ANAXAGORAS.


As Pericles was a very cultivated man, he liked to meet and talk with
the philosophers, and to befriend the artists. He was greatly attached
to the sculptor Phidias, and he therefore did all in his power to save
him from the envy of his fellow-citizens.

An-ax-ag'o-ras, a philosopher of great renown, was the friend and
teacher of Pericles. He, too, won the dislike of the people; and, as
they could not accuse him also of stealing, they charged him with
publicly teaching that the gods they worshiped were not true gods, and
proposed to put him to death for this crime.

Now, Anaxagoras had never heard of the true God, the God whom we
worship. He had heard only of Zeus, Athene, and the other gods honored
by his people; but he was so wise and so thoughtful that he believed the
world could never have been created by such divinities as those.

He observed all he saw very attentively, and shocked the people greatly
by saying that the sun was not a god driving in a golden chariot, but a
great glowing rock, which, in spite of its seemingly small size, he
thought must be about as large as the Peloponnesus.

Of course, this seems very strange to you. But Anaxagoras lived more
than two thousand years ago, and since then people have constantly been
finding out new things and writing them in books, so it is no wonder
that in this matter you are already, perhaps, wiser than he. When you
come to study about the sun, you will find that Anaxagoras was partly
right, but that, instead of being only as large as the Peloponnesus, the
sun is more than a million times larger than the whole earth!

Anaxagoras also tried to explain that the moon was probably very much
like the earth, with mountains, plains, and seas. These things, which
they could not understand, made the Athenians so angry that they exiled
the philosopher, in spite of all Pericles could say.

Anaxagoras went away without making any fuss, and withdrew to a distant
city, where he continued his studies as before. Many people regretted
his absence, and missed his wise conversation, but none so much as
Pericles, who never forgot him, and who gave him money enough to keep
him in comfort.

Another great friend of Pericles was a woman called As-pa'sia. She was
so bright that the wisest men of Athens used to go to her house merely
for the pleasure of talking to her. All the best-informed people in town
used to assemble there; and Cimon and Pericles, Phidias, Anaxagoras, and
Soc'ra-tes were among her chosen friends.




LX. BEGINNING OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


The end of Pericles' long and useful life was troubled by a new war
between Athens and Sparta; for, as soon as the thirty-years' truce was
ended, both cities flew to arms. The war which then began, and which in
history is known as the Peloponnesian War, lasted almost as long as the
truce; that is to say, for nearly thirty years.

Pericles knew very well that the Athenians, not being so well trained,
were no match for the Spartans on land. He therefore advised all the
people to come into the city, and take refuge behind the mighty walls,
while the fleet carried on the war by sea.

This advice was followed. All the farmers left their fields, and crowded
into Athens. When the Spartans came into Attica, they found the farms
and villages deserted; but from the top of the Acropolis the people
could see the enemy burn down their empty dwellings and destroy the
harvests in their fields.

In the mean while the Athenian fleet had sailed out of the Piraeus, and
had gone down into the Peloponnesus, where the troops landed from time
to time, striking terror into the hearts of the inhabitants, and causing
much damage.

The Spartans also had a fleet; but it was so much smaller than that of
the Athenians, that it could not offer any very great resistance. Still
the time came when a battle was to take place between the vessels of the
two cities.

It happened on a day when there was to be an eclipse of the sun. Now,
you know that this is a very simple and natural thing. An eclipse of the
sun is a darkening of its surface, which occurs whenever the moon passes
between it and the earth.

As the moon is a very large and solid body, we cannot see either through
or around it, and for a few minutes while it is directly between us and
the sun it entirely hides the latter from our sight. Pericles, who had
so often talked with Anaxagoras and the other learned men of his day,
knew what an eclipse was, and had even been told that one would soon
take place. He was therefore quite ready for it, warned his soldiers
that it was coming, and illustrated his meaning by flinging his cloak
over the head of his pilot.

"Can you see the sun now?" he asked.--"Why, no! master, of course not!"
replied the man. "Your thick cloak is between me and the sun; how could
I see through it?"--"Well, neither can you see through the moon, then,"
replied Pericles.

His men, thus warned, showed no fear of the eclipse; but the Spartans,
who did not trouble themselves greatly with learning, were terrified.
They imagined that the darkening of the sun at midday was the sign of
some coming misfortune, and hardly dared to fight against the Athenians.

Thanks to this superstitious fear, Pericles laid waste the fields of the
Peloponnesus, and came back to Athens in triumph; for, although much
damage had been done to the enemy, the Athenians had lost only a few
men. These were buried with great honors. Pericles himself pronounced
their funeral oration; and we are told that he was so eloquent that all
his hearers were melted to tears.




LXI. DEATH OF PERICLES.


Although the Athenian fleet had caused much damage, and had come home
victorious, the Spartan army was still in Attica. The Spartans had been
awed and frightened by the eclipse, but they did not give up their
purpose, and continued the war.

The Athenians remained within the city walls, not daring to venture out
lest they should meet with a defeat, and they soon began to suffer
greatly. As there were not enough water and food for the crowded
multitude, a terrible disease called the plague soon attacked the
people. This sickness was contagious, and it spread rapidly. On all
sides one could see the dead and dying. The sufferers were tormented by
