waiting-woman," cries my lady. "What do you suppose that a sentimental
widow, who will live down in that dingy dungeon of a Castlewood, where
she spoils her boy, kills the poor with her drugs, has prayers twice a
day and sees nobody but the chaplain--what do you suppose she can do,
mon Cousin, but let the horrid parson, with his great square toes and
hideous little green eyes, make love to her? Cela c'est vu, mon Cousin.
When I was a girl at Castlewood, all the chaplains fell in love with
me--they've nothing else to do."

My lady went on with more talk of this kind, though, in truth, Esmond
had no idea of what she said further, so entirely did her first words
occupy his thought. Were they true? Not all, nor half, nor a tenth part
of what the garrulous old woman said, was true. Could this be so? No
ear had Esmond for anything else, though his patroness chatted on for an
hour.

Some young gentlemen of the town, with whom Esmond had made
acquaintance, had promised to present him to that most charming of
actresses, and lively and agreeable of women, Mrs. Bracegirdle, about
whom Harry's old adversary Mohun had drawn swords, a few years before my
poor lord and he fell out. The famous Mr. Congreve had stamped with his
high approval, to the which there was no gainsaying, this delightful
person: and she was acting in Dick Steele's comedies, and finally, and
for twenty-four hours after beholding her, Mr. Esmond felt himself, or
thought himself, to be as violently enamored of this lovely brunette,
as were a thousand other young fellows about the city. To have once seen
her was to long to behold her again; and to be offered the delightful
privilege of her acquaintance, was a pleasure the very idea of which set
the young lieutenant's heart on fire. A man cannot live with comrades
under the tents without finding out that he too is five-and-twenty. A
young fellow cannot be cast down by grief and misfortune ever so severe
but some night he begins to sleep sound, and some day when dinner-time
comes to feel hungry for a beefsteak. Time, youth and good health, new
scenes and the excitement of action and a campaign, had pretty well
brought Esmond's mourning to an end; and his comrades said that Don
Dismal, as they called him, was Don Dismal no more. So when a party was
made to dine at the "Rose," and go to the playhouse afterward, Esmond
was as pleased as another to take his share of the bottle and the play.

How was it that the old aunt's news, or it might be scandal, about
Tom Tusher, caused such a strange and sudden excitement in Tom's old
playfellow? Hadn't he sworn a thousand times in his own mind that the
Lady of Castlewood, who had treated him with such kindness once,
and then had left him so cruelly, was, and was to remain henceforth,
indifferent to him for ever? Had his pride and his sense of justice not
long since helped him to cure the pain of that desertion--was it even a
pain to him now? Why, but last night as he walked across the fields
and meadows to Chelsey from Pall Mall, had he not composed two or three
stanzas of a song, celebrating Bracegirdle's brown eyes, and declaring
them a thousand times more beautiful than the brightest blue ones that
ever languished under the lashes of an insipid fair beauty! But Tom
Tusher! Tom Tusher, the waiting-woman's son, raising up his little eyes
to his mistress! Tom Tusher presuming to think of Castlewood's widow!
Rage and contempt filled Mr. Harry's heart at the very notion; the honor
of the family, of which he was the chief, made it his duty to prevent
so monstrous an alliance, and to chastise the upstart who could dare
to think of such an insult to their house. 'Tis true Mr. Esmond often
boasted of republican principles, and could remember many fine speeches
he had made at college and elsewhere, with WORTH and not BIRTH for a
text: but Tom Tusher to take the place of the noble Castlewood--faugh!
'twas as monstrous as King Hamlet's widow taking off her weeds for
Claudius. Esmond laughed at all widows, all wives, all women; and were
the banns about to be published, as no doubt they were, that very next
Sunday at Walcote Church, Esmond swore that he would be present to shout
No! in the face of the congregation, and to take a private revenge upon
the ears of the bridegroom.

Instead of going to dinner then at the "Rose" that night, Mr. Esmond
bade his servant pack a portmanteau and get horses, and was at Farnham,
half-way on the road to Walcote, thirty miles off, before his comrades
had got to their supper after the play. He bade his man give no hint to
my Lady Dowager's household of the expedition on which he was going;
and as Chelsey was distant from London, the roads bad, and infested
by footpads, and Esmond often in the habit, when engaged in a party of
pleasure, of lying at a friend's lodging in town, there was no need that
his old aunt should be disturbed at his absence--indeed, nothing more
delighted the old lady than to fancy that mon cousin, the incorrigible
young sinner, was abroad boxing the watch, or scouring St. Giles's. When
she was not at her books of devotion, she thought Etheridge and Sedley
very good reading. She had a hundred pretty stories about Rochester,
Harry Jermyn, and Hamilton; and if Esmond would but have run away with
the wife even of a citizen, 'tis my belief she would have pawned her
diamonds (the best of them went to our Lady of Chaillot) to pay his
damages.

My lord's little house of Walcote--which he inhabited before he took
his title and occupied the house of Castlewood--lies about a mile from
Winchester, and his widow had returned to Walcote after my lord's death
as a place always dear to her, and where her earliest and happiest days
had been spent, cheerfuller than Castlewood, which was too large for her
straitened means, and giving her, too, the protection of the ex-dean,
her father. The young Viscount had a year's schooling at the famous
college there, with Mr. Tusher as his governor. So much news of them Mr.
Esmond had had during the past year from the old Viscountess, his own
father's widow; from the young one there had never been a word.

Twice or thrice in his benefactor's lifetime, Esmond had been to
Walcote; and now, taking but a couple of hours' rest only at the inn on
the road, he was up again long before daybreak, and made such good speed
that he was at Walcote by two o'clock of the day. He rid to the end of
the village, where he alighted and sent a man thence to Mr. Tusher, with
a message that a gentleman from London would speak with him on urgent
business. The messenger came back to say the Doctor was in town, most
likely at prayers in the Cathedral. My Lady Viscountess was there, too;
she always went to Cathedral prayers every day.

The horses belonged to the post-house at Winchester. Esmond mounted
again and rode on to the "George;" whence he walked, leaving his
grumbling domestic at last happy with a dinner, straight to the
Cathedral. The organ was playing: the winter's day was already growing
gray: as he passed under the street-arch into the Cathedral yard, and
made his way into the ancient solemn edifice.




CHAPTER VI.

THE 29TH DECEMBER.


There was scarce a score of persons in the Cathedral beside the Dean and
some of his clergy, and the choristers, young and old, that performed
the beautiful evening prayer. But Mr. Tusher was one of the officiants,
and read from the eagle in an authoritative voice, and a great black
periwig; and in the stalls, still in her black widow's hood, sat
Esmond's dear mistress, her son by her side, very much grown, and indeed
a noble-looking youth, with his mother's eyes, and his father's curling
brown hair, that fell over his point de Venise--a pretty picture such
as Van Dyck might have painted. Mons. Rigaud's portrait of my Lord
Viscount, done at Paris afterwards, gives but a French version of his
manly, frank, English face. When he looked up there were two sapphire
beams out of his eyes such as no painter's palette has the color to
match, I think. On this day there was not much chance of seeing that
particular beauty of my young lord's countenance; for the truth is, he
kept his eyes shut for the most part, and, the anthem being rather long,
was asleep.

But the music ceasing, my lord woke up, looking about him, and his eyes
lighting on Mr. Esmond, who was sitting opposite him, gazing with no
small tenderness and melancholy upon two persons who had so much of his
heart for so many years, Lord Castlewood, with a start, pulled at his
mother's sleeve (her face had scarce been lifted from her book), and
said, "Look, mother!" so loud, that Esmond could hear on the other side
of the church, and the old Dean on his throned stall. Lady Castlewood
looked for an instant as her son bade her, and held up a warning finger
to Frank; Esmond felt his whole face flush, and his heart throbbing,
as that dear lady beheld him once more. The rest of the prayers were
speedily over; Mr. Esmond did not hear them; nor did his mistress, very
likely, whose hood went more closely over her face, and who never lifted
her head again until the service was over, the blessing given, and Mr.
Dean, and his procession of ecclesiastics, out of the inner chapel.

Young Castlewood came clambering over the stalls before the clergy were
fairly gone, and running up to Esmond, eagerly embraced him. "My dear,
dearest old Harry!" he said, "are you come back? Have you been to the
wars? You'll take me with you when you go again? Why didn't you write to
us? Come to mother."

Mr. Esmond could hardly say more than a "God bless you, my boy," for
his heart was very full and grateful at all this tenderness on the lad's
part; and he was as much moved at seeing Frank as he was fearful about
that other interview which was now to take place: for he knew not if the
widow would reject him as she had done so cruelly a year ago.

"It was kind of you to come back to us, Henry," Lady Esmond said. "I
thought you might come."

"We read of the fleet coming to Portsmouth. Why did you not come from
Portsmouth?" Frank asked, or my Lord Viscount, as he now must be called.

Esmond had thought of that too. He would have given one of his eyes so
that he might see his dear friends again once more; but believing
that his mistress had forbidden him her house, he had obeyed her, and
remained at a distance.

"You had but to ask, and you know I would be here," he said.

She gave him her hand, her little fair hand; there was only her marriage
ring on it. The quarrel was all over. The year of grief and estrangement
was passed. They never had been separated. His mistress had never been
out of his mind all that time. No, not once. No, not in the prison; nor
in the camp; nor on shore before the enemy; nor at sea under the stars
of solemn midnight; nor as he watched the glorious rising of the dawn:
not even at the table, where he sat carousing with friends, or at the
theatre yonder, where he tried to fancy that other eyes were brighter
than hers. Brighter eyes there might be, and faces more beautiful, but
none so dear--no voice so sweet as that of his beloved mistress, who
had been sister, mother, goddess to him during his youth--goddess now no
more, for he knew of her weaknesses; and by thought, by suffering,
and that experience it brings, was older now than she; but more fondly
cherished as woman perhaps than ever she had been adored as divinity.
What is it? Where lies it? the secret which makes one little hand the
dearest of all? Whoever can unriddle that mystery? Here she was, her son
by his side, his dear boy. Here she was, weeping and happy. She took
his hand in both hers; he felt her tears. It was a rapture of
reconciliation.

"Here comes Squaretoes," says Frank. "Here's Tusher."

Tusher, indeed, now appeared, creaking on his great heels. Mr. Tom had
divested himself of his alb or surplice, and came forward habited in his
cassock and great black periwig. How had Esmond ever been for a moment
jealous of this fellow?

"Give us thy hand, Tom Tusher," he said. The chaplain made him a very
low and stately bow. "I am charmed to see Captain Esmond," says he. "My
lord and I have read the Reddas incolumem precor, and applied it, I am
sure, to you. You come back with Gaditanian laurels; when I heard you
were bound thither, I wished, I am sure, I was another Septimius. My
Lord Viscount, your lordship remembers Septimi, Gades aditure mecum?"

"There's an angle of earth that I love better than Gades, Tusher," says
Mr. Esmond. "'Tis that one where your reverence hath a parsonage, and
where our youth was brought up."

"A house that has so many sacred recollections to me," says Mr. Tusher
(and Harry remembered how Tom's father used to flog him there)--"a house
near to that of my respected patron, my most honored patroness, must
ever be a dear abode to me. But, madam, the verger waits to close the
gates on your ladyship."

"And Harry's coming home to supper. Huzzay! huzzay!" cries my lord.
"Mother, I shall run home and bid Beatrix put her ribbons on. Beatrix is
a maid of honor, Harry. Such a fine set-up minx!"

"Your heart was never in the Church, Harry," the widow said, in her
sweet low tone, as they walked away together. (Now, it seemed they never
had been parted, and again, as if they had been ages asunder.) "I always
thought you had no vocation that way; and that 'twas a pity to shut you
out from the world. You would but have pined and chafed at Castlewood:
and 'tis better you should make a name for yourself. I often said so to
my dear lord. How he loved you! 'Twas my lord that made you stay with
us."

"I asked no better than to stay near you always," said Mr. Esmond.

"But to go was best, Harry. When the world cannot give peace, you will
know where to find it; but one of your strong imagination and eager
desires must try the world first before he tires of it. 'Twas not to be
thought of, or if it once was, it was only by my selfishness, that you
should remain as chaplain to a country gentleman and tutor to a little
boy. You are of the blood of the Esmonds, kinsman; and that was always
wild in youth. Look at Francis. He is but fifteen, and I scarce can keep
him in my nest. His talk is all of war and pleasure, and he longs to
serve in the next campaign. Perhaps he and the young Lord Churchill
shall go the next. Lord Marlborough has been good to us. You know how
kind they were in my misfortune. And so was your--your father's widow.
No one knows how good the world is, till grief comes to try us. 'Tis
through my Lady Marlborough's goodness that Beatrix hath her place at
Court; and Frank is under my Lord Chamberlain. And the dowager lady,
your father's widow, has promised to provide for you--has she not?"

Esmond said, "Yes. As far as present favor went, Lady Castlewood was
very good to him. And should her mind change," he added gayly, "as
ladies' minds will, I am strong enough to bear my own burden, and make
my way somehow. Not by the sword very likely. Thousands have a better
genius for that than I, but there are many ways in which a young man of
good parts and education can get on in the world; and I am pretty sure,
one way or other, of promotion!" Indeed, he had found patrons already in
the army, and amongst persons very able to serve him, too; and told his
mistress of the flattering aspect of fortune. They walked as though
they had never been parted, slowly, with the gray twilight closing round
them.

"And now we are drawing near to home," she continued, "I knew you would
come, Harry, if--if it was but to forgive me for having spoken unjustly
to you after that horrid--horrid misfortune. I was half frantic with
grief then when I saw you. And I know now--they have told me. That
wretch, whose name I can never mention, even has said it: how you tried
to avert the quarrel, and would have taken it on yourself, my poor
child: but it was God's will that I should be punished, and that my dear
lord should fall."

"He gave me his blessing on his death-bed," Esmond said. "Thank God for
that legacy!"

"Amen, amen! dear Henry," said the lady, pressing his arm. "I knew it.
Mr. Atterbury, of St. Bride's, who was called to him, told me so. And I
thanked God, too, and in my prayers ever since remembered it."

"You had spared me many a bitter night, had you told me sooner," Mr.
Esmond said.

"I know it, I know it," she answered, in a tone of such sweet humility,
as made Esmond repent that he should ever have dared to reproach her. "I
know how wicked my heart has been; and I have suffered too, my dear. I
confessed to Mr. Atterbury--I must not tell any more. He--I said I
would not write to you or go to you--and it was better even that having
parted, we should part. But I knew you would come back--I own that. That
is no one's fault. And to-day, Henry, in the anthem, when they sang
it, 'When the Lord turned the captivity of Zion, we were like them that
dream,' I thought, yes, like them that dream--them that dream. And then
it went, 'They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; and he that goeth
forth and weepeth, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing
his sheaves with him;' I looked up from the book, and saw you. I was not
surprised when I saw you. I knew you would come, my dear, and saw the
gold sunshine round your head."

She smiled an almost wild smile as she looked up at him. The moon was up
by this time, glittering keen in the frosty sky. He could see, for the
first time now clearly, her sweet careworn face.

"Do you know what day it is?" she continued. "It is the 29th of
December--it is your birthday! But last year we did not drink it--no,
no. My lord was cold, and my Harry was likely to die: and my brain
was in a fever; and we had no wine. But now--now you are come again,
bringing your sheaves with you, my dear." She burst into a wild flood of
weeping as she spoke; she laughed and sobbed on the young man's heart,
crying out wildly, "bringing your sheaves with you--your sheaves with
you!"

As he had sometimes felt, gazing up from the deck at midnight into the
boundless starlit depths overhead, in a rapture of devout wonder at that
endless brightness and beauty--in some such a way now, the depth of this
pure devotion (which was, for the first time, revealed to him) quite
smote upon him, and filled his heart with thanksgiving. Gracious God,
who was he, weak and friendless creature, that such a love should be
poured out upon him? Not in vain--not in vain has he lived--hard and
thankless should he be to think so--that has such a treasure given him.
What is ambition compared to that, but selfish vanity? To be rich, to be
famous? What do these profit a year hence, when other names sound louder
than yours, when you lie hidden away under the ground, along with
idle titles engraven on your coffin? But only true love lives after
you--follows your memory with secret blessing--or precedes you, and
intercedes for you. Non omnis moriar--if dying, I yet live in a tender
heart or two; nor am lost and hopeless living, if a sainted departed
soul still loves and prays for me.

"If--if 'tis so, dear lady," Mr. Esmond said, "why should I ever leave
you? If God hath given me this great boon--and near or far from me, as I
know now, the heart of my dearest mistress follows me, let me have that
blessing near me, nor ever part with it till death separate us. Come
away--leave this Europe, this place which has so many sad recollections
for you. Begin a new life in a new world. My good lord often talked
of visiting that land in Virginia which King Charles gave us--gave his
ancestor. Frank will give us that. No man there will ask if there is a
blot on my name, or inquire in the woods what my title is."

"And my children--and my duty--and my good father, Henry?" she broke
out. "He has none but me now! for soon my sister will leave him, and the
old man will be alone. He has conformed since the new Queen's reign; and
here in Winchester, where they love him, they have found a church for
him. When the children leave me, I will stay with him. I cannot follow
them into the great world, where their way lies--it scares me. They will
come and visit me; and you will, sometimes, Henry--yes, sometimes, as
now, in the Holy Advent season, when I have seen and blessed you once
more."

"I would leave all to follow you," said Mr. Esmond; "and can you not be
as generous for me, dear lady?"

"Hush, boy!" she said, and it was with a mother's sweet plaintive tone
and look that she spoke. "The world is beginning for you. For me, I have
been so weak and sinful that I must leave it, and pray out an expiation,
dear Henry. Had we houses of religion as there were once, and many
divines of our Church would have them again, I often think I would
retire to one and pass my life in penance. But I would love you
still--yes, there is no sin in such a love as mine now; and my dear lord
in heaven may see my heart; and knows the tears that have washed my sin
away--and now--now my duty is here, by my children whilst they need me,
and by my poor old father, and--"

"And not by me?" Henry said.

"Hush!" she said again, and raised her hand up to his lip. "I have been
your nurse. You could not see me, Harry, when you were in the small-pox,
and I came and sat by you. Ah! I prayed that I might die, but it would
have been in sin, Henry. Oh, it is horrid to look back to that time.
It is over now and past, and it has been forgiven me. When you need me
again, I will come ever so far. When your heart is wounded, then come
to me, my dear. Be silent! let me say all. You never loved me, dear
Henry--no, you do not now, and I thank heaven for it. I used to watch
you, and knew by a thousand signs that it was so. Do you remember how
glad you were to go away to college? 'Twas I sent you. I told my papa
that, and Mr. Atterbury too, when I spoke to him in London. And they
both gave me absolution--both--and they are godly men, having authority
to bind and to loose. And they forgave me, as my dear lord forgave me
before he went to heaven."

"I think the angels are not all in heaven," Mr. Esmond said. And as
a brother folds a sister to his heart; and as a mother cleaves to her
son's breast--so for a few moments Esmond's beloved mistress came to him
and blessed him.




CHAPTER VII.

I AM MADE WELCOME AT WALCOTE.


As they came up to the house at Walcote, the windows from within were
lighted up with friendly welcome; the supper-table was spread in the
oak-parlor; it seemed as if forgiveness and love were awaiting the
returning prodigal. Two or three familiar faces of domestics were on the
look-out at the porch--the old housekeeper was there, and young Lockwood
from Castlewood in my lord's livery of tawny and blue. His dear mistress
pressed his arm as they passed into the hall. Her eyes beamed out on him
with affection indescribable. "Welcome," was all she said, as she looked
up, putting back her fair curls and black hood. A sweet rosy smile
blushed on her face; Harry thought he had never seen her look so
charming. Her face was lighted with a joy that was brighter than
beauty--she took a hand of her son who was in the hall waiting his
mother--she did not quit Esmond's arm.

"Welcome, Harry!" my young lord echoed after her. "Here, we are all come
to say so. Here's old Pincot, hasn't she grown handsome?" and Pincot,
who was older, and no handsomer than usual, made a curtsy to the
Captain, as she called Esmond, and told my lord to "Have done, now."

"And here's Jack Lockwood. He'll make a famous grenadier, Jack; and so
shall I; we'll both 'list under you, Cousin. As soon as I'm seventeen,
I go to the army--every gentleman goes to the army. Look! who comes
here--ho, ho!" he burst into a laugh. "'Tis Mistress Trix, with a new
ribbon; I knew she would put one on as soon as she heard a captain was
coming to supper."

This laughing colloquy took place in the hall of Walcote House: in the
midst of which is a staircase that leads from an open gallery, where are
the doors of the sleeping chambers: and from one of these, a wax candle
in her hand, and illuminating her, came Mistress Beatrix--the light
falling indeed upon the scarlet ribbon which she wore, and upon the most
brilliant white neck in the world.

Esmond had left a child and found a woman, grown beyond the common
height; and arrived at such a dazzling completeness of beauty, that
his eyes might well show surprise and delight at beholding her. In hers
there was a brightness so lustrous and melting, that I have seen a whole
assembly follow her as if by an attraction irresistible: and that night
the great Duke was at the playhouse after Ramillies, every soul turned
and looked (she chanced to enter at the opposite side of the theatre at
the same moment) at her, and not at him. She was a brown beauty: that
is, her eyes, hair, and eyebrows and eyelashes were dark: her hair
curling with rich undulations, and waving over her shoulders; but her
complexion was as dazzling white as snow in sunshine; except her cheeks,
which were a bright red, and her lips, which were of a still deeper
crimson. Her mouth and chin, they said, were too large and full, and so
they might be for a goddess in marble, but not for a woman whose eyes
were fire, whose look was love, whose voice was the sweetest low song,
whose shape was perfect symmetry, health, decision, activity, whose
foot as it planted itself on the ground was firm but flexible, and whose
motion, whether rapid or slow, was always perfect grace--agile as
a nymph, lofty as a queen,--now melting, now imperious, now
sarcastic--there was no single movement of hers but was beautiful. As he
thinks of her, he who writes feels young again, and remembers a paragon.

So she came holding her dress with one fair rounded arm, and her taper
before her, tripping down the stair to greet Esmond.

"She hath put on her scarlet stockings and white shoes," says my lord,
still laughing. "Oh, my fine mistress! is this the way you set your cap
at the Captain?" She approached, shining smiles upon Esmond, who could
look at nothing but her eyes. She advanced holding forward her head, as
if she would have him kiss her as he used to do when she was a child.

"Stop," she said, "I am grown too big! Welcome, cousin Harry," and she
made him an arch curtsy, sweeping down to the ground almost, with the
most gracious bend, looking up the while with the brightest eyes and
sweetest smile. Love seemed to radiate from her. Harry eyed her with
such a rapture as the first lover is described as having by Milton.

"N'est-ce pas?" says my lady, in a low, sweet voice, still hanging on
his arm.

Esmond turned round with a start and a blush, as he met his mistress's
clear eyes. He had forgotten her, rapt in admiration of the filia
pulcrior.

"Right foot forward, toe turned out, so: now drop the curtsy, and show
the red stockings, Trix. They've silver clocks, Harry. The Dowager sent
'em. She went to put 'em on," cries my lord.

"Hush, you stupid child!" says Miss, smothering her brother with kisses;
and then she must come and kiss her mamma, looking all the while at
Harry, over his mistress's shoulder. And if she did not kiss him, she
gave him both her hands, and then took one of his in both hands, and
said, "Oh, Harry, we're so, SO glad you're come!"

"There are woodcocks for supper," says my lord. "Huzzay! It was such a
hungry sermon."

"And it is the 29th of December; and our Harry has come home."

"Huzzay, old Pincot!" again says my lord; and my dear lady's lips looked
as if they were trembling with a prayer. She would have Harry lead in
Beatrix to the supper-room, going herself with my young Lord Viscount;
and to this party came Tom Tusher directly, whom four at least out of
the company of five wished away. Away he went, however, as soon as the
sweetmeats were put down, and then, by the great crackling fire, his
mistress or Beatrix, with her blushing graces, filling his glass
for him, Harry told the story of his campaign, and passed the most
delightful night his life had ever known. The sun was up long ere he
was, so deep, sweet, and refreshing was his slumber. He woke as if
angels had been watching at his bed all night. I dare say one that was
as pure and loving as an angel had blessed his sleep with her prayers.

Next morning the chaplain read prayers to the little household at
Walcote, as the custom was; Esmond thought Mistress Beatrix did not
listen to Tusher's exhortation much: her eyes were wandering everywhere
during the service, at least whenever he looked up he met them. Perhaps
he also was not very attentive to his Reverence the Chaplain. "This
might have been my life," he was thinking; "this might have been my duty
from now till old age. Well, were it not a pleasant one to be with these
dear friends and part from 'em no more? Until--until the destined lover
comes and takes away pretty Beatrix"--and the best part of Tom Tusher's
exposition, which may have been very learned and eloquent, was quite
lost to poor Harry by this vision of the destined lover, who put the
preacher out.

All the while of the prayers, Beatrix knelt a little way before Harry
Esmond. The red stockings were changed for a pair of gray, and black
shoes, in which her feet looked to the full as pretty. All the roses
of spring could not vie with the brightness of her complexion; Esmond
thought he had never seen anything like the sunny lustre of her eyes. My
Lady Viscountess looked fatigued, as if with watching, and her face was
pale.

Miss Beatrix remarked these signs of indisposition in her mother and
deplored them. "I am an old woman," says my lady, with a kind smile; "I
cannot hope to look as young as you do, my dear."

"She'll never look as good as you do if she lives till she's a hundred,"
says my lord, taking his mother by the waist, and kissing her hand.

"Do I look very wicked, cousin?" says Beatrix, turning full round on
Esmond, with her pretty face so close under his chin, that the soft
perfumed hair touched it. She laid her finger-tips on his sleeve as she
spoke; and he put his other hand over hers.

"I'm like your looking-glass," says he, "and that can't flatter you."

"He means that you are always looking at him, my dear," says her mother,
archly. Beatrix ran away from Esmond at this, and flew to her mamma,
whom she kissed, stopping my lady's mouth with her pretty hand.

"And Harry is very good to look at," says my lady, with her fond eyes
regarding the young man.

"If 'tis good to see a happy face," says he, "you see that." My lady
said, "Amen," with a sigh; and Harry thought the memory of her dear lord
rose up and rebuked her back again into sadness; for her face lost the
smile, and resumed its look of melancholy.

"Why, Harry, how fine we look in our scarlet and silver, and our black
periwig," cries my lord. "Mother, I am tired of my own hair. When shall
I have a peruke? Where did you get your steenkirk, Harry?"

"It's some of my Lady Dowager's lace," says Harry; "she gave me this and
a number of other fine things."

"My Lady Dowager isn't such a bad woman," my lord continued.

"She's not so--so red as she's painted," says Miss Beatrix.

Her brother broke into a laugh. "I'll tell her you said so; by the Lord,
Trix, I will," he cries out.

"She'll know that you hadn't the wit to say it, my lord," says Miss
Beatrix.

"We won't quarrel the first day Harry's here, will we, mother?" said the
young lord. "We'll see if we can get on to the new year without a fight.
Have some of this Christmas pie. And here comes the tankard; no, it's
Pincot with the tea."

"Will the Captain choose a dish?" asked Mistress Beatrix.

"I say, Harry," my lord goes on, "I'll show thee my horses after
breakfast; and we'll go a bird-netting to-night, and on Monday there's a
cock-match at Winchester--do you love cock-fighting, Harry?--between
the gentlemen of Sussex and the gentlemen of Hampshire, at ten pound the
battle, and fifty pound the odd battle to show one-and-twenty cocks."

"And what will you do, Beatrix, to amuse our kinsman?" asks my lady.

"I'll listen to him," says Beatrix. "I am sure he has a hundred things
to tell us. And I'm jealous already of the Spanish ladies. Was that
a beautiful nun at Cadiz that you rescued from the soldiers? Your man
talked of it last night in the kitchen, and Mrs. Betty told me this
morning as she combed my hair. And he says you must be in love, for you
sat on deck all night, and scribbled verses all day in your tablebook."
Harry thought if he had wanted a subject for verses yesterday, to-day he
had found one: and not all the Lindamiras and Ardelias of the poets were
half so beautiful as this young creature; but he did not say so, though
some one did for him.

This was his dear lady, who, after the meal was over, and the young
people were gone, began talking of her children with Mr. Esmond, and of
the characters of one and the other, and of her hopes and fears for
both of them. "'Tis not while they are at home," she said, "and in their
mother's nest, I fear for them--'tis when they are gone into the world,
whither I shall not be able to follow them. Beatrix will begin her
service next year. You may have heard a rumor about--about my Lord
Blandford. They were both children; and it is but idle talk. I know my
kinswoman would never let him make such a poor marriage as our Beatrix
would be. There's scarce a princess in Europe that she thinks is good
enough for him or for her ambition."

"There's not a princess in Europe to compare with her," says Esmond.

"In beauty? No, perhaps not," answered my lady. "She is most beautiful,
isn't she? 'Tis not a mother's partiality that deceives me. I marked
you yesterday when she came down the stair: and read it in your face.
We look when you don't fancy us looking, and see better than you think,
dear Harry: and just now when they spoke about your poems--you writ
pretty lines when you were but a boy--you thought Beatrix was a pretty
subject for verse, did not you, Harry?" (The gentleman could only blush
for a reply.) "And so she is--nor are you the first her pretty face has
captivated. 'Tis quickly done. Such a pair of bright eyes as hers learn
their power very soon, and use it very early." And, looking at him
keenly with hers, the fair widow left him.
