question was asked by one of the judges:

"You have said to my lord the Bishop that you would answer him as you
would answer before our Holy Father the Pope, and yet there are several
questions which you continually refuse to answer. Would you not answer
the Pope more fully than you have answered before my lord of Beauvais?
Would you not feel obliged to answer the Pope, who is the Vicar of God,
more fully?"

Now a thunder-clap fell out of a clear sky:

"Take me to the Pope. I will answer to everything that I ought to."

It made the Bishop's purple face fairly blanch with consternation. If
Joan had only known, if she had only know! She had lodged a mine under
this black conspiracy able to blow the Bishop's schemes to the four
winds of heaven, and she didn't know it. She had made that speech by
mere instinct, not suspecting what tremendous forces were hidden in it,
and there was none to tell her what she had done. I knew, and Manchon
knew; and if she had known how to read writing we could have hoped to
get the knowledge to her somehow; but speech was the only way, and none
was allowed to approach her near enough for that. So there she sat,
once more Joan of Arc the Victorious, but all unconscious of it. She was
miserably worn and tired, by the long day's struggle and by illness, or
she must have noticed the effect of that speech and divined the reason
of it.

She had made many master-strokes, but this was the master-stroke. It was
an appeal to Rome. It was her clear right; and if she had persisted
in it Cauchon's plot would have tumbled about his ears like a house of
cards, and he would have gone from that place the worst-beaten man of
the century. He was daring, but he was not daring enough to stand up
against that demand if Joan had urged it. But no, she was ignorant, poor
thing, and did not know what a blow she had struck for life and liberty.

France was not the Church. Rome had no interest in the destruction of
this messenger of God.

Rome would have given her a fair trial, and that was all that her cause
needed. From that trial she would have gone forth free, and honored, and
blessed.

But it was not so fated. Cauchon at once diverted the questions to other
matters and hurried the trial quickly to an end.

As Joan moved feebly away, dragging her chains, I felt stunned and
dazed, and kept saying to myself, "Such a little while ago she said the
saving word and could have gone free; and now, there she goes to her
death; yes, it is to her death, I know it, I feel it. They will double
the guards; they will never let any come near her now between this and
her condemnation, lest she get a hint and speak that word again. This is
the bitterest day that has come to me in all this miserable time."




13 The Third Trial Fails

SO THE SECOND trial in the prison was over. Over, and no definite
result. The character of it I have described to you. It was baser in one
particular than the previous one; for this time the charges had not been
communicated to Joan, therefore she had been obliged to fight in the
dark.

There was no opportunity to do any thinking beforehand; there was no
foreseeing what traps might be set, and no way to prepare for them.
Truly it was a shabby advantage to take of a girl situated as this
one was. One day, during the course of it, an able lawyer of Normandy,
Maetre Lohier, happened to be in Rouen, and I will give you his opinion
of that trial, so that you may see that I have been honest with you, and
that my partisanship has not made me deceive you as to its unfair
and illegal character. Cauchon showed Lohier the proces and asked his
opinion about the trial. Now this was the opinion which he gave to
Cauchon. He said that the whole thing was null and void; for these
reasons: 1, because the trial was secret, and full freedom of speech and
action on the part of those present not possible; 2, because the trial
touched the honor of the King of France, yet he was not summoned to
defend himself, nor any one appointed to represent him; 3, because the
charges against the prisoner were not communicated to her; 4, because
the accused, although young and simple, had been forced to defend her
cause without help of counsel, notwithstanding she had so much at stake.

Did that please Bishop Cauchon? It did not. He burst out upon Lohier
with the most savage cursings, and swore he would have him drowned.
Lohier escaped from Rouen and got out of France with all speed, and so
saved his life.

Well, as I have said, the second trial was over, without definite
result. But Cauchon did not give up. He could trump up another. And
still another and another, if necessary. He had the half-promise of
an enormous prize--the Archbishopric of Rouen--if he should succeed in
burning the body and damning to hell the soul of this young girl who
had never done him any harm; and such a prize as that, to a man like the
Bishop of Beauvais, was worth the burning and damning of fifty harmless
girls, let alone one.

So he set to work again straight off next day; and with high confidence,
too, intimating with brutal cheerfulness that he should succeed this
time. It took him and the other scavengers nine days to dig matter
enough out of Joan's testimony and their own inventions to build up
the new mass of charges. And it was a formidable mass indeed, for it
numbered sixty-six articles.

This huge document was carried to the castle the next day, March 27th;
and there, before a dozen carefully selected judges, the new trial was
begun.

Opinions were taken, and the tribunal decided that Joan should hear the
articles read this time.

Maybe that was on account of Lohier's remark upon that head; or maybe it
was hoped that the reading would kill the prisoner with fatigue--for, as
it turned out, this reading occupied several days. It was also decided
that Joan should be required to answer squarely to every article, and
that if she refused she should be considered convicted. You see, Cauchon
was managing to narrow her chances more and more all the time; he was
drawing the toils closer and closer.

Joan was brought in, and the Bishop of Beauvais opened with a speech to
her which ought to have made even himself blush, so laden it was with
hypocrisy and lies. He said that this court was composed of holy and
pious churchmen whose hearts were full of benevolence and compassion
toward her, and that they had no wish to hurt her body, but only a
desire to instruct her and lead her into the way of truth and salvation.

Why, this man was born a devil; now think of his describing himself and
those hardened slaves of his in such language as that.

And yet, worse was to come. For now having in mind another of Lovier's
hints, he had the cold effrontery to make to Joan a proposition which,
I think, will surprise you when you hear it. He said that this court,
recognizing her untaught estate and her inability to deal with the
complex and difficult matters which were about to be considered, had
determined, out of their pity and their mercifulness, to allow her to
choose one or more persons out of their own number to help her with
counsel and advice!

Think of that--a court made up of Loyseleur and his breed of reptiles.
It was granting leave to a lamb to ask help of a wolf. Joan looked up to
see if he was serious, and perceiving that he was at least pretending to
be, she declined, of course.

The Bishop was not expecting any other reply. He had made a show of
fairness and could have it entered on the minutes, therefore he was
satisfied.

Then he commanded Joan to answer straitly to every accusation; and
threatened to cut her off from the Church if she failed to do that or
delayed her answers beyond a given length of time.

Yes, he was narrowing her chances down, step by step.

Thomas de Courcelles began the reading of that interminable document,
article by article. Joan answered to each article in its turn; sometimes
merely denying its truth, sometimes by saying her answer would be found
in the records of the previous trials.

What a strange document that was, and what an exhibition and exposure of
the heart of man, the one creature authorized to boast that he is made
in the image of God. To know Joan of Arc was to know one who was wholly
noble, pure, truthful, brave, compassionate, generous, pious, unselfish,
modest, blameless as the very flowers in the fields--a nature fine and
beautiful, a character supremely great. To know her from that document
would be to know her as the exact reverse of all that. Nothing that she
was appears in it, everything that she was not appears there in detail.

Consider some of the things it charges against her, and remember who
it is it is speaking of. It calls her a sorceress, a false prophet,
an invoker and companion of evil spirits, a dealer in magic, a person
ignorant of the Catholic faith, a schismatic; she is sacrilegious, an
idolater, an apostate, a blasphemer of God and His saints, scandalous,
seditious, a disturber of the peace; she incites men to war, and to the
spilling of human blood; she discards the decencies and proprieties of
her sex, irreverently assuming the dress of a man and the vocation of a
soldier; she beguiles both princes and people; she usurps divine honors,
and has caused herself to be adored and venerated, offering her hands
and her vestments to be kissed.

There it is--every fact of her life distorted, perverted, reversed. As a
child she had loved the fairies, she had spoken a pitying word for them
when they were banished from their home, she had played under their tree
and around their fountain--hence she was a comrade of evil spirits.

She had lifted France out of the mud and moved her to strike for
freedom, and led her to victory after victory--hence she was a disturber
of the peace--as indeed she was, and a provoker of war--as indeed she
was again! and France will be proud of it and grateful for it for many
a century to come. And she had been adored--as if she could help that,
poor thing, or was in any way to blame for it. The cowed veteran and the
wavering recruit had drunk the spirit of war from her eyes and touched
her sword with theirs and moved forward invincible--hence she was a
sorceress.

And so the document went on, detail by detail, turning these waters
of life to poison, this gold to dross, these proofs of a noble and
beautiful life to evidences of a foul and odious one.

Of course, the sixty-six articles were just a rehash of the things which
had come up in the course of the previous trials, so I will touch upon
this new trial but lightly. In fact, Joan went but little into detail
herself, usually merely saying, "That is not true--passez outre"; or,
"I have answered that before--let the clerk read it in his record," or
saying some other brief thing.

She refused to have her mission examined and tried by the earthly
Church. The refusal was taken note of.

She denied the accusation of idolatry and that she had sought men's
homage. She said:

"If any kissed my hands and my vestments it was not by my desire, and I
did what I could to prevent it."

She had the pluck to say to that deadly tribunal that she did not know
the fairies to be evil beings. She knew it was a perilous thing to say,
but it was not in her nature to speak anything but the truth when she
spoke at all. Danger had no weight with her in such things. Note was
taken of her remark.

She refused, as always before, when asked if she would put off the male
attire if she were given permission to commune. And she added this:

"When one receives the sacrament, the manner of his dress is a small
thing and of no value in the eyes of Our Lord."

She was charge with being so stubborn in clinging to her male dress that
she would not lay it off even to get the blessed privilege of hearing
mass. She spoke out with spirit and said:

"I would rather die than be untrue to my oath to God."

She was reproached with doing man's work in the wars and thus deserting
the industries proper to her sex. She answered, with some little touch
of soldierly disdain:

"As to the matter of women's work, there's plenty to do it."

It was always a comfort to me to see the soldier spirit crop up in her.
While that remained in her she would be Joan of Arc, and able to look
trouble and fate in the face.

"It appears that this mission of yours which you claim you had from God,
was to make war and pour out human blood."

Joan replied quite simply, contenting herself with explaining that war
was not her first move, but her second:

"To begin with, I demanded that peace should be made. If it was refused,
then I would fight."

The judge mixed the Burgundians and English together in speaking of the
enemy which Joan had come to make war upon. But she showed that she
made a distinction between them by act and word, the Burgundians being
Frenchmen and therefore entitled to less brusque treatment than the
English. She said:

"As to the Duke of Burgundy, I required of him, both by letters and by
his ambassadors, that he make peace with the King. As to the English,
the only peace for them was that they leave the country and go home."

Then she said that even with the English she had shown a pacific
disposition, since she had warned them away by proclamation before
attacking them.

"If they had listened to me," said she, "they would have done wisely."
At this point she uttered her prophecy again, saying with emphasis,
"Before seven years they will see it themselves."

Then they presently began to pester her again about her male costume,
and tried to persuade her to voluntarily promise to discard it. I
was never deep, so I think it no wonder that I was puzzled by their
persistency in what seemed a thing of no consequence, and could not make
out what their reason could be. But we all know now. We all know now
that it was another of their treacherous projects. Yes, if they could
but succeed in getting her to formally discard it they could play a game
upon her which would quickly destroy her. So they kept at their evil
work until at last she broke out and said:

"Peace! Without the permission of God I will not lay it off though you
cut off my head!"

At one point she corrected the proces verbal, saying:

"It makes me say that everything which I have done was done by the
counsel of Our Lord. I did not say that, I said 'all which I have well
done.'"

Doubt was cast upon the authenticity of her mission because of the
ignorance and simplicity of the messenger chosen. Joan smiled at that.
She could have reminded these people that Our Lord, who is no respecter
of persons, had chosen the lowly for his high purposes even oftener
than he had chosen bishops and cardinals; but she phrased her rebuke in
simpler terms:

"It is the prerogative of Our Lord to choose His instruments where He
will."

She was asked what form of prayer she used in invoking counsel from on
high. She said the form was brief and simple; then she lifted her pallid
face and repeated it, clasping her chained hands:

"Most dear God, in honor of your holy passion I beseech you, if you love
me, that you will reveal to me what I am to answer to these churchmen.
As concerns my dress, I know by what command I have put it on, but I
know not in what manner I am to lay it off. I pray you tell me what to
do."

She was charged with having dared, against the precepts of God and His
saints, to assume empire over men and make herself Commander-in-Chief.
That touched the soldier in her. She had a deep reverence for priests,
but the soldier in her had but small reverence for a priest's opinions
about war; so, in her answer to this charge she did not condescend to
go into any explanations or excuses, but delivered herself with bland
indifference and military brevity.

"If I was Commander-in-Chief, it was to thrash the English."

Death was staring her in the face here all the time, but no matter;
she dearly loved to make these English-hearted Frenchmen squirm, and
whenever they gave her an opening she was prompt to jab her sting into
it. She got great refreshment out of these little episodes. Her days
were a desert; these were the oases in it.

Her being in the wars with men was charged against her as an indelicacy.
She said:

"I had a woman with me when I could--in towns and lodgings. In the field
I always slept in my armor."

That she and her family had been ennobled by the King was charged
against her as evidence that the source of her deeds were sordid
self-seeking. She answered that she had not asked this grace of the
King; it was his own act.

This third trial was ended at last. And once again there was no definite
result.

Possibly a fourth trial might succeed in defeating this apparently
unconquerable girl. So the malignant Bishop set himself to work to plan
it.

He appointed a commission to reduce the substance of the sixty-six
articles to twelve compact lies, as a basis for the new attempt. This
was done. It took several days.

Meantime Cauchon went to Joan's cell one day, with Manchon and two of
the judges, Isambard de la Pierre and Martin Ladvenue, to see if he
could not manage somehow to beguile Joan into submitting her mission to
the examination and decision of the Church Militant--that is to say, to
that part of the Church Militant which was represented by himself and
his creatures.

Joan once more positively refused. Isambard de la Pierre had a heart in
his body, and he so pitied this persecuted poor girl that he ventured to
do a very daring thing; for he asked her if she would be willing to have
her case go before the Council of Basel, and said it contained as many
priests of her party as of the English party.

Joan cried out that she would gladly go before so fairly constructed
a tribunal as that; but before Isambard could say another word Cauchon
turned savagely upon him and exclaimed:

"Shut up, in the devil's name!"

Then Manchon ventured to do a brave thing, too, though he did it in
great fear for his life. He asked Cauchon if he should enter Joan's
submission to the Council of Basel upon the minutes.

"No! It is not necessary."

"Ah," said poor Joan, reproachfully, "you set down everything that is
against me, but you will not set down what is for me."

It was piteous. It would have touched the heart of a brute. But Cauchon
was more than that.




14 Joan Struggles with Her Twelve Lies

WE WERE now in the first days of April. Joan was ill. She had fallen ill
the 29th of March, the day after the close of the third trial, and was
growing worse when the scene which I have just described occurred in her
cell. It was just like Cauchon to go there and try to get some advantage
out of her weakened state.

Let us note some of the particulars in the new indictment--the Twelve
Lies.

Part of the first one says Joan asserts that she has found her
salvation. She never said anything of the kind. It also says she refuses
to submit herself to the Church. Not true. She was willing to submit all
her acts to this Rouen tribunal except those done by the command of God
in fulfilment of her mission. Those she reserved for the judgment of
God. She refused to recognize Cauchon and his serfs as the Church, but
was willing to go before the Pope or the Council of Basel.

A clause of another of the Twelve says she admits having threatened with
death those who would not obey her. Distinctly false. Another clause
says she declares that all she has done has been done by command of God.
What she really said was, all that she had done well--a correction made
by herself as you have already seen.

Another of the Twelve says she claims that she has never committed any
sin. She never made any such claim.

Another makes the wearing of the male dress a sin. If it was, she had
high Catholic authority for committing it--that of the Archbishop of
Rheims and the tribunal of Poitiers.

The Tenth Article was resentful against her for "pretending" that St.
Catherine and St.

