Upon the following day the governor, seeing that the Swedes had erected
several strong batteries, and that the Green Brigade, whose name was a
terror to the Imperialists, was preparing to storm, capitulated, and
his soldiers were allowed to march out with all their baggage, flying
colours, and two pieces of cannon. Eighty pieces of cannon fell into the
hands of the Swedes. The citizens paid 220,000 dollars as the ransom
of their city from pillage, and the Jews 180,000 for the protection
of their quarters and of their gorgeous synagogue, whose wealth and
magnificence were celebrated; and on the 14th of December, 1631, on
which day Gustavus completed his thirty-seventh year, he entered the
city as conqueror.

Here he kept Christmas with great festivity, and his court was attended
by princes and nobles from all parts of Germany. Among them were six
of the chief princes of the empire and twelve ambassadors from foreign
powers. Among the nobles was the Count of Mansfeld, who brought with him
his wife and daughter. Three days before Christmas Hepburn's brigade
had been moved in from their bivouac in the snow covered trenches,
and assigned quarters in the town, and the count, who arrived on the
following day, at once repaired to the mansion inhabited by the colonel
and officers of Munro's regiment, and inquired for Malcolm Graheme.

"You will find Captain Graheme within," the Scottish soldier on sentry
said.

"It is not Captain Graheme I wish to see," the count said, "but Malcolm
Graheme, a very young officer."

"I reckon that it is the captain," the soldier said; "he is but a boy;
but in all the regiment there is not a braver soldier; not even the
colonel himself. Donald," he said, turning to a comrade, "tell Captain
Graheme that he is wanted here."

In a short time Malcolm appeared at the door.

"Ah! it is you, my young friend!" the count exclaimed; "and you have won
the rank of captain already by your brave deeds! Right glad am I to see
you again. I have come with my wife, to attend the court of this noble
king of yours. Can you come with me at once? The countess is longing to
see you, and will be delighted to hear that you have passed unscathed
through all the terrible contests in which you have been engaged. My
daughter is here too; she is never tired of talking about her young
Scottish soldier; but now that you are a captain she will have to be
grave and respectful."

Malcolm at once accompanied the count to his house, and was most kindly
received by the countess.

"It is difficult to believe," she said, "that 'tis but four months since
we met, so many have been the events which have been crowded into that
time. Scarce a day has passed but we have received news of some success
gained, of some town or castle captured, and your Green Brigade has
always been in the van. We have been constantly in fear for you, and
after that terrible battle before Leipzig Thekla scarcely slept a wink
until we obtained a copy of the Gazette with the names of the officers
killed."

"You are kind indeed to bear me so in remembrance," Malcolm said, "and
I am indeed grateful for it. I have often wondered whether any fresh
danger threatened you; but I hoped that the advance of the Marquis of
Hamilton's force would have given the Imperialists too much to do for
them to disturb you."

"Yes, we have had no more trouble," the countess replied. "The villages
which the Imperialists destroyed are rising again; and as after the
flight of the enemy the cattle and booty they had captured were all left
behind, the people are recovering from their visit. What terrible havoc
has the war caused! Our way here led through ruined towns and villages,
the country is infested by marauders, and all law and order is at an end
save where there are strong bodies of troops. We rode with an escort of
twenty men; but even then we did not feel very safe until we were fairly
through Franconia. And so you have passed unwounded through the strife?"

"Yes, countess," Malcolm replied. "I had indeed a ball through my leg
at Wurtzburg; but as it missed the bone, a trifle like that is scarcely
worth counting. I have been most fortunate indeed."

"He is a captain now," the count said, "and to obtain such promotion he
must have greatly distinguished himself. I do not suppose that he will
himself tell us his exploits; but I shall soon learn all about them from
others. I am to meet his colonel this evening at a dinner at the palace,
and shall be able to give you the whole history tomorrow."

"But I want the history now," Thekla said. "It is much nicer to hear a
thing straight from some one who has done it, than from any one else."

"There is no story to tell," Malcolm said. "I had been promised my
lieutenancy at the first vacancy before I was at Mansfeld, and on my
return found that the vacancy had already occurred, and I was appointed.
I got my company the other day for a very simple matter, namely, for
swimming across the Rhine with a barrel fixed on each side of me to
prevent my sinking. Nothing very heroic about that, you see, young
lady."

"For swimming across the Rhine!" the count said. "Then you must have
been the Scottish officer who with a sergeant swam and fetched the boat
across which enabled the Swedes to pass a body of troops over, and so
open the way into the Palatinate. I heard it spoken of as a most gallant
action."

"I can assure you," Malcolm said earnestly, "that there was no gallantry
about it. It was exceedingly cold, I grant, but that was all."

"Then why should the king have made you a captain for it? You can't get
over that."

"That was a reward for my luck," Malcolm laughed. "'Tis better to be
lucky than to be rich, it is said, and I had the good luck to discover
a boat concealed among the bushes just at the time when a boat was worth
its weight in gold."

For an hour Malcolm sat chatting, and then took his leave, as he was
going on duty, promising to return the next day, and to spend as much of
his time as possible with them while they remained in the city.



CHAPTER XII THE PASSAGE OF THE LECH


For the next two months the Green Brigade remained quietly at Maintz,
a welcome rest after their arduous labours. The town was very gay, and
every house was occupied either by troops or by the nobles and visitors
from all parts of Northern Europe. Banquets and balls were of nightly
occurrence; and a stranger who arrived in the gay city would not have
dreamt that a terrible campaign had just been concluded, and that
another to the full as arduous was about to commence.

During this interval of rest the damages which the campaign had effected
in the armour and accoutrements of men and officers were repaired, the
deep dents effected by sword, pike, and bullet were hammered out, the
rust removed, and the stains of blood and bivouac obliterated; fresh
doublets and jerkins were served out from the ample stores captured from
the enemy, and the army looked as gay and brilliant as when it first
landed in North Germany.

Malcolm spent much of his spare time with the Count and Countess of
Mansfeld, who, irrespective of their gratitude for the assistance he had
rendered them in time of need, had taken a strong liking to the young
Scotchman.

"You are becoming quite a court gallant, Graheme," one of his comrades
said at a court ball where Malcolm had been enjoying himself greatly,
having, thanks to the Countess of Mansfeld, no lack of partners, while
many of the officers were forced to look on without taking part in the
dancing, the number of ladies being altogether insufficient to furnish
partners to the throng of officers, Swedish, German, and Scottish.
Beyond the scarf and feathers which showed the brigade to which officers
belonged, there was, even when in arms, but slight attempt at uniformity
in their attire, still less so when off duty. The scene at these balls
was therefore gay in the extreme, the gallants being all attired in
silk, satin, or velvet of brilliant colours slashed with white or some
contrasting hue. The tailors at Maintz had had a busy time of it, for in
so rapid a campaign much baggage had been necessarily lost, and many of
the officers required an entirely new outfit before they could take part
in the court festivities.

There was, however, no lack of money, for the booty and treasure
captured had been immense, and each officer having received a fixed
share, they were well able to renew their wardrobes. Some fresh
reinforcements arrived during their stay here, and the vacancies which
battle and disease had made in the ranks were filled up.

But although the Green Brigade did not march from Maintz till the 5th
of March, 1632, the whole army did not enjoy so long a rest. In February
Gustavus despatched three hundred of Ramsay's regiment under Lieutenant
Colonel George Douglas against the town of Creutzenach, together with a
small party of English volunteers under Lord Craven. Forty-seven of
the men were killed while opening the trenches, but the next day they
stormed one of the gates and drove the garrison, which was composed of
six hundred Walloons and Burgundians, out of the town into the castle of
Kausemberg, which commanded it. Its position was extremely strong, its
walls and bastions rising one behind another, and their aspect was so
formidable that they were popularly known as the "Devil's Works." From
these the garrison opened a very heavy fire into the town, killing
many of the Scots. Douglas, however, gave them but short respite, for
gathering his men he attacked the castle and carried bastion after
bastion by storm until the whole were taken.

About the same time the important town of Ulm on the Danube opened its
gates to the Swedes, and Sir Patrick Ruthven was appointed commandant
with 1200 Swedes as garrison, Colonel Munro with two companies of
musketeers marched to Coblentz and aided Otto Louis the Rhinegrave, who
with a brigade of twenty troops of horse was expecting to be attacked
by 10,000 Spaniards and Walloons from Spires. Four regiments of Spanish
horse attacked the Rhinegrave's quarters, but were charged so furiously
by four troops of Swedish dragoons under Captain Hume that 300 of them
were killed and the Elector of Nassau taken prisoner; after this the
Spaniards retired beyond the Moselle.

In other parts of Germany the generals of Gustavus were equally
successful. General Horn defeated the Imperialists at Heidelberg and
Heilbronn. General Lowenhausen scoured all the shores of the Baltic, and
compelled Colonel Graham, a Scotch soldier in the Imperial service,
to surrender the Hanse town of Wismar. Graham marched out with his
garrison, 3000 strong, with the honours of war en route for Silesia, but
having, contrary to terms, spiked the cannon, plundered the shipping,
and slain a Swedish lieutenant, Lowenhausen pursued him, and in the
battle which ensued 500 of Graham's men were slain and the colonel
himself with 2000 taken prisoner.

General Ottentodt was moving up the Elbe carrying all before him with a
force of 14,000 men, among whom were five battalions of Scots and one
of English. This force cleared the whole duchy of Mecklenburg, capturing
all the towns and fortresses in rapid succession. Sir Patrick Ruthven
advanced along the shores of Lake Constance, driving the Imperialists
before him into the Tyrol. Magdeburg was captured by General Banner, the
Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel reduced all Fulda-Paderborn and the adjacent
districts, the Elector of Saxony overran Bohemia, and Sir Alexander
Leslie threatened the Imperialists in Lower Saxony.

Thus the campaign of 1632 opened under the most favourable auspices. The
Green Brigade marched on the 5th of March to Aschaffenburg, a distance
of more than thirty miles, a fact which speaks volumes for the physique
and endurance of the troops, for this would in the present day be
considered an extremely long march for troops, and the weight of the
helmet and armour, musket and accoutrements, of the troops of those days
was fully double that now carried by European soldiers. Here they were
reviewed by the king.

By the 10th the whole army, 23,000 strong, were collected at Weinsheim
and advanced towards Bavaria, driving before them the Imperialists under
the Count de Bucquio. The Chancellor Oxenstiern had been left by the
king with a strong force to guard his conquests on the Rhine.

No sooner had the king marched than the Spaniards again crossed the
Moselle. The chancellor and the Duke of Weimar advanced against them.
The Dutch troops, who formed the first line of the chancellor's army,
were unable to stand the charge of the Spanish and fled in utter
confusion; but the Scottish regiment of Sir Roderick Leslie, who had
succeeded Sir John Hamilton on his resignation, and the battalion of
Sir John Ruthven, charged the Spaniards with levelled pikes so furiously
that these in turn were broken and driven off the field.

On the 26th of March Gustavus arrived before the important town and
fortress of Donauworth, being joined on the same day by the Laird of
Foulis with his two regiments of horse and foot. Donauworth is the key
to Swabia; it stands on the Danube, and was a strongly fortified place,
its defences being further covered by fortifications upon a lofty
eminence close by, named the Schellemberg. It was held by the Duke of
Saxe-Lauenburg with two thousand five hundred men. The country round
Donauworth is fertile and hilly, and Gustavus at once seized a height
which commanded the place. The Bavarians were at work upon entrenchments
here as the Swedes advanced, but were forced to fall back into the town.
From the foot of the hill a suburb extended to the gates of the city.
This was at once occupied by five hundred musketeers, who took up their
post in the houses along the main road in readiness to repel a sortie
should the garrison attempt one; while the force on the hillside worked
all night, and by daybreak on the 27th had completed and armed a twenty
gun battery.

In this was placed a strong body of infantry under Captain Semple, a
Scotchman. As this battery commanded the walls of the town, and flanked
the bridge across the Danube, the position of the defenders was now
seriously menaced, but the Duke of Saxe-Lauenburg refused the demand of
Gustavus to surrender. The battery now opened fire, first demolishing a
large stone building by the river occupied by a force of Imperialists,
and then directing its fire upon the city gates.

The cannonade continued after nightfall, but in the darkness a body of
Imperialist horsemen under Colonel Cronenberg dashed out at full speed
through the gate, cut a passage through the musketeers in the suburb,
galloped up the hill, and fell upon the infantry and artillery in
the battery. So furious was their charge that the greater part of the
defenders of the battery were cut down. The guns were spiked, and the
cavalry, having accomplished their purpose, charged down the hill, cut
their way through the suburb, and regained the town.

This gallant exploit deranged the plans of the Swedes. Gustavus
reconnoitred the town accompanied by Sir John Hepburn, and by the advice
of that officer decided upon a fresh plan of operations. Hepburn
pointed out to him that by taking possession of the angle formed by the
confluence of the Wermitz and Danube to the west of the town the bridge
crossing from Donauworth into Bavaria would be completely commanded, and
the garrison would be cut off from all hope of escape and of receiving
relief from Bavaria.

The plan being approved, Hepburn drew off his brigade with its
artillery, and marching five miles up the Danube crossed the river at
the bridge of Hassfurt, and descended the opposite bank until he faced
Donauworth. He reached his position at midnight, and placed his cannon
so as to command the whole length of the bridge, and then posted his
musketeers in the gardens and houses of a suburb on the river, so that
their crossfire also swept it.

The pikemen were drawn up close to the artillery at the head of the
bridge. Quietly as these movements were performed the garrison took the
alarm, and towards morning the duke, finding his retreat intercepted,
sallied out at the head of eight hundred musketeers to cut his way
through; but as the column advanced upon the bridge the Green Brigade
opened fire, the leaden hail of their musketeers smote the column on
both sides, while the cannon ploughed lanes through it from end to end.
So great was the destruction that the Bavarians retreated in confusion
back into the town again, leaving the bridge strewn with their dead.

Alone the gallant Duke of Saxe-Lauenburg charged through the hail of
fire across the bridge, fell upon the pikemen sword in hand, and cutting
his way through them rode away, leaving his garrison to their fate.
The roar of artillery informed Gustavus what was going on, and he
immediately opened fire against the other side of the town and led his
men to the assault of the gate.

The instant the Scotch had recovered from their surprise at the
desperate feat performed by the duke, Hepburn, calling them together,
placed himself at their head and led them across the bridge. The panic
stricken fugitives had omitted to close the gate, and the Scotch at once
entered the town. Here the garrison resisted desperately; their pikemen
barred the streets, and from every window and roof their musketeers
poured their fire upon the advancing column.

The day was breaking now, and the roar of battle in the city mingled
with that at the gates, where the Swedes were in vain striving to effect
an entrance. Gradually the Scotch won their way forward; 500 of the
Bavarians were killed, in addition to 400 who had fallen on the bridge.
The rest now attempted to fly. Great numbers were drowned in the Danube,
and the remainder were taken prisoners. The streets were encumbered by
the heavily laden baggage wagons, and a vast amount of booty fell into
the hands of the Scotch, who thus became masters of the town before
Gustavus and his Swedes had succeeded in carrying the gate.

The king now entered the town, and as soon as order was restored
Hepburn's brigade recrossed the Danube and threw up a strong work on
the other side of the bridge; for Tilly was on the Lech, but seven miles
distant, and might at any moment return. He had just struck a severe
blow at Marshal Horn, who had recently taken Bamberg. His force, 9000
strong, had been scattered to put down a rising of the country people,
when Tilly with 16,000 fell upon them.

A column under Bauditzen was attacked and defeated, and Tilly's horsemen
pursued them hotly to the bridge leading to the town. Marshal Horn threw
a barricade across this and defended it until nightfall. Tilly had then
fallen back before the advance of Gustavus to a very strong position
on the Lech. This was an extremely rapid river, difficult to cross and
easily defensible. Tilly had broken down the bridges, and was prepared
to dispute till the last the further advance of the Swedes. He placed
his army between Rain, where the Lech falls into the Danube, and
Augsburg, a distance of sixteen miles--all the assailable points being
strongly occupied, with small bodies of cavalry in the intervals to give
warning of the approach of the enemy. He had been joined by Maximilian
of Bavaria, and his force amounted to 40,000 men.

Gustavus gave his army four days' rest at Donauworth, and then advanced
with 32,000 men against the Lech. His dragoons, who had been pushed
forward, had found the bridges destroyed. He first attempted to repair
that at Rain, but the fire of the artillery and musketry was so
heavy that he was forced to abandon the idea. He then made a careful
reconnaissance of the river, whose course was winding and erratic.

Finding that at every point at which a crossing could be easily effected
Tilly's batteries and troops commanded the position, he determined to
make his attack at a point where the river made a sharp bend in the form
of a semicircle, of which he occupied the outer edge. He encamped the
bulk of his army at the village of Nordheim, a short distance in the
rear, and erected three powerful batteries mounting seventy-two guns.
One of these faced the centre of the loop, the others were placed
opposite the sides.

The ground on the Swedish bank of the river was higher than that facing
it; and when the Swedish batteries opened they so completely swept the
ground inclosed by the curve of the river that the Imperialists could
not advance across it, and were compelled to remain behind a rivulet
called the Ach, a short distance in the rear of the Lech. They brought
up their artillery, however, and replied to the cannonade of the Swedes.

For four days the artillery duel continued, and while it was going on a
considerable number of troops were at work in the village of Oberndorf,
which lay in a declivity near the river, hidden from the sight of the
Imperialists, constructing a bridge. For that purpose a number of strong
wooden trestles of various heights and with feet of unequal length for
standing in the bed of the river were prepared, together with a quantity
