"And I think that a Spaniard has found us," said Foy, drawing his knife.

Then a hoarse voice spoke, saying, "Who are you that signal for a pilot
on my waters?"

"The question is--who are you?" answered Foy, "and be so good as to tell
us quickly."

"I am the pilot," said the voice, "and this boat by the rig of her and
her signals should be the _Swallow_ of The Hague, but why must I crawl
aboard of her across the corpse of a dead man?"

"Come into the cabin, pilot, and we will tell you," said Foy.

"Very well, Mynheer." So Foy led the way to the cabin, but Martin
stopped behind a while.

"We have found our guide, so what is the use of the lamps?" he said to
himself as he extinguished them all, except one which he brought with
him into the cabin. Foy was waiting for him by the door and they entered
the place together. At the end of it the light of the lamp showed them
a strange figure clad in skins so shapeless and sack-like that it was
impossible to say whether the form beneath were male or female. The
figure was bareheaded, and about the brow locks of grizzled hair hung
in tufts. The face, in which were set a pair of wandering grey eyes,
was deep cut, tanned brown by exposure, scarred, and very ugly, with
withered lips and projecting teeth.

"Good even to you, Dirk van Goorl's son, and to you, Red Martin. I am
Mother Martha, she whom the Spaniards call the Mare and the Lake-witch."

"Little need to tell us that, mother," said Foy, "although it is true
that many years have gone by since I set eyes on you."

Martha smiled grimly as she answered, "Yes, many years. Well, what
have you fat Leyden burghers to do with a poor old night-hag, except
of course in times of trouble? Not that I blame you, for it is not well
that you, or your parents either, should be known to traffic with such
as I. Now, what is your business with me, for the signals show that you
have business, and why does the corpse of Hendrik Brant's foster-brother
lie there in the stern?"

"Because, to be plain, we have Hendrik Brant's treasure on board,
mother, and for the rest look yonder--" and he pointed to what his eye
had just caught sight of two or three miles away, a faint light, too low
and too red for a star, that could only come from a lantern hung at the
masthead of a ship.

Martha nodded. "Spaniards after you, poling through the gut against the
wind. Come on, there is no time to lose. Bring your boat round, and we
will tow the _Swallow_ to where she will lie safe to-night."

Five minutes later they were all three of them rowing the oar boat in
which they had escaped from The Hague towards some unknown point in the
darkness, slowly dragging after them the little ship _Swallow_. As they
went, Foy told Martha all the story of their mission and escape.

"I have heard of this treasure before," she said, "all the Netherlands
has heard of Brant's hoard. Also dead Hans there let me know that
perhaps it might come this way, for in such matters he thought that I
could be trusted," and she smiled grimly. "And now what would you do?"

"Fulfil our orders," said Foy. "Hide it if we can; if not, destroy it."

"Better the first than the last," interrupted Martin. "Hide the
treasure, say I, and destroy the Spaniards, if Mother Martha here can
think of a plan."

"We might sink the ship," suggested Foy.

"And leave her mast for a beacon," added Martin sarcastically.

"Or put the stuff into the boat and sink that."

"And never find it again in this great sea," objected Martin.

All this while Martha steered the boat as calmly as though it were
daylight. They had left the open water, and were passing slowly in and
out among islets, yet she never seemed to be doubtful or to hesitate. At
length they felt the _Swallow_ behind them take the mud gently, whereon
Martha led the way aboard of her and threw out the anchor, saying that
here was her berth for the night.

"Now," she said, "bring up this gold and lay it in the boat, for if you
would save it there is much to do before dawn."

So Foy and Martin went down while Martha, hanging over the hatchway,
held the lighted lamp above them, since they dared not take it near the
powder. Moving the bags of salt, soon they came to the five barrels of
treasure marked B, and, strong though they were, it was no easy task for
the pair of them by the help of a pulley to sling them over the ship's
side into the boat. At last it was done, and the place of the barrels
having been filled with salt bags, they took two iron spades which
were provided for such a task as this, and started, Martha steering as
before. For an hour or more they rowed in and out among endless islands,
at the dim shores of which Martha stared as they passed, till at length
she motioned to them to ship their oars, and they touched ground.

Leaping from the boat she made it fast and vanished among the reeds
to reconnoitre. Presently she returned again, saying that this was the
place. Then began the heavy labour of rolling the casks of treasure for
thirty yards or more along otter paths that pierced the dense growth of
reeds.

Now, having first carefully cut out reed sods in a place chosen by
Martha, Foy and Martin set to their task of digging a great hole by the
light of the stars. Hard indeed they toiled at it, yet had it not been
for the softness of the marshy soil, they could not have got done while
the night lasted, for the grave that would contain those barrels must
be both wide and deep. After three feet of earth had been removed, they
came to the level of the lake, and for the rest of the time worked in
water, throwing up shovelfuls of mud. Still at last it was done, and
the five barrels standing side by side in the water were covered up with
soil and roughly planted over with the reed turf.

"Let us be going," said Martha. "There is no time to lose." So they
straightened their backs and wiped the sweat from their brows.

"There is earth lying about, which may tell its story," said Martin.

"Yes," she replied, "if any see it within the next ten days, after which
in this damp place the mosses will have hidden it."

"Well, we have done our best," said Foy, as he washed his mud-stained
boots in the water, "and now the stuff must take its chance."

Then once more they entered the boat and rowed away somewhat wearily,
Martha steering them.

On they went and on, till Foy, tired out, nearly fell asleep at his oar.
Suddenly Martha tapped him on the shoulder. He looked up and there, not
two hundred yards away, its tapering mast showing dimly against the sky,
was the vessel that had pursued them from The Hague, a single lantern
burning on its stern. Martha looked and grunted; then she leant forward
and whispered to them imperiously.

"It is madness," gasped Martin.

"Do as I bid you," she hissed, and they let the boat drift with the
wind till it came to a little island within thirty yards of the anchored
vessel, an island with a willow tree growing upon its shore. "Hold to
the twigs of the tree," she muttered, "and wait till I come again." Not
knowing what else to do, they obeyed.

Then Martha rose and they saw that she had slipped off her garment of
skins, and stood before them, a gaunt white figure armed with a gleaming
knife. Next she put the knife to her mouth, and, nipping it between her
teeth, slid into the water silently as a diving bird. A minute passed,
not more, and they saw that something was climbing up the cable of the
ship.

"What is she going to do?" whispered Foy.

"God in Heaven knows," answered Martin, "but if she does not come back
good-bye to Heer Brant's treasure, for she alone can find it again."

They waited, holding their breaths, till presently a curious choking
sound floated to them, and the lantern on the ship vanished. Two minutes
later a hand with a knife in it appeared over the gunwale of the boat,
followed by a grey head. Martin put out his great arm and lifted, and,
lo! the white form slid down between them like a big salmon turned out
of a net.

"Put about and row," it gasped, and they obeyed while the Mare clothed
herself again in her skin garment.

"What have you done?" asked Foy.

"Something," she replied with a fierce chuckle. "I have stabbed the
watchman--he thought I was a ghost, and was too frightened to call out.
I have cut the cable, and I think that I have fired the ship. Ah! look!
but row--row round the corner of the island."

They gave way, and as they turned the bank of reeds glanced behind them,
to see a tall tongue of fire shooting up the cordage of the ship, and to
hear a babel of frightened and angry voices.

Ten minutes later they were on board the _Swallow_, and from her deck
watching the fierce flare of the burning Spanish vessel nearly a mile
away. Here they ate and drank, for they needed food badly.

"What shall we do now?" asked Foy when they had finished.

"Nothing at present," answered Martha, "but give me pen and paper."

They found them, and having shrouded the little window of the cabin,
she sat at the table and very slowly but with much skill drew a plan, or
rather a picture, of this portion of the Haarlem Mere. In that plan were
marked many islands according to their natural shapes, twenty of them
perhaps, and upon one of these she set a cross.

"Take it and hide it," said Martha, when it was finished, "so that if I
die you may know where to dig for Brant's gold. With this in your hand
you cannot fail to find it, for I draw well. Remember that it lies
thirty paces due south of the only spot where it is easy to land upon
that island."

"What shall I do with this picture which is worth so much?" said Foy
helplessly, "for in truth I fear to keep the thing."

"Give it to me, master," said Martin; "the secret of the treasure may
as well lie with the legacy that is charged on it." Then once more he
unscrewed the handle of the sword Silence, and having folded up the
paper and wrapped it round with a piece of linen, he thrust it away into
the hollow hilt.

"Now that sword is worth more than some people might think," Martin said
as he restored it to the scabbard, "but I hope that those who come to
seek its secret may have to travel up its blade. Well, when shall we be
moving?"

"Listen," said Martha. "Would you two men dare a great deed upon those
Spaniards? Their ship is burnt, but there are a score or over of them,
and they have two large boats. Now at the dawn they will see the mast
of this vessel and attack it in the boats thinking to find the treasure.
Well, if as they win aboard we can manage to fire the matches----"

"There may be fewer Spaniards left to plague us," suggested Foy.

"And believing it to be blown up no one will trouble about that money
further," added Martin. "Oh! the plan is good, but dangerous. Come, let
us talk it over."



The dawn broke in a flood of yellow light on the surface of the Haarlem
Mere. Presently from the direction of the Spanish vessel, which was
still burning sullenly, came a sound of beating oars. Now the three
watchers in the _Swallow_ saw two boatloads of armed men, one of them
with a small sail set, swooping down towards them. When they were within
a hundred yards Martha muttered, "It is time," and Foy ran hither and
thither with a candle firing the slow-matches; also to make sure he cast
the candle among a few handfuls of oil-soaked shreds of canvas that lay
ready at the bottom of the hatchway. Then with the others, without the
Spaniards being able to see them, he slipped over the side of the little
vessel into the shallow water that was clothed with tall reeds, and
waded through it to the island.

Once on firm land, they ran a hundred yards or so till they reached a
clump of swamp willows, and took shelter behind them. Indeed, Foy did
more, for he climbed the trunk of one of the willows high enough to see
over the reeds to the ship _Swallow_ and the lake beyond. By this time
the Spaniards were alongside the _Swallow_, for he could hear their
captain hailing him who leant over the taffrail, and commanding all on
board to surrender under pain of being put to death. But from the man in
the stern came no answer, which was scarcely strange, seeing that it was
the dead pilot, Hans, to whom they talked in the misty dawn, whose body
Martin had lashed thus to deceive them. So they fired at the pilot, who
took no notice, and then began to clamber on board the ship. Presently
all the men were out of the first boat--that with the sail set on
it--except two, the steersman and the captain, whom, from his dress and
demeanour, Foy took to be the one-eyed Spaniard, Ramiro, although of
this he was too far off to make sure. It was certain, however, that this
man did not mean to board the _Swallow_, for of a sudden he put his boat
about, and the wind catching the sail soon drew him clear of her.

"That fellow is cunning," said Foy to Martin and Martha below, "and I
was a fool to light the tarred canvas, for he has seen the smoke drawing
up the hatchway."

"And having had enough fire for one night, thinks that he will leave his
mates to quench it," added Martin.

"The second boat is coming alongside," went on Foy, "and surely the mine
should spring."

"Scarcely time yet," answered Martin, "the matches were set for six
minutes."

Then followed a silence in which the three of them watched and listened
with beating hearts. In it they heard a voice call out that the
steersman was dead, and the answering voice of the officer in the boat,
whom Foy had been right in supposing to be Ramiro, warning them to
beware of treachery. Now suddenly arose a shout of "A mine! a mine!" for
they had found one of the lighted fuses.

"They are running for their boat," said Foy, "and the captain is sailing
farther off. Heavens! how they scream."

As the words passed his lips a tongue of flame shot to the very skies.
The island seemed to rock, a fierce rush of air struck Foy and shook him
from the tree. Then came a dreadful, thunderous sound, and lo! the sky
was darkened with fragments of wreck, limbs of men, a grey cloud of
salt and torn shreds of sail and cargo, which fell here, there, and
everywhere about and beyond them.

In five seconds it was over, and the three of them, shaken but unhurt,
were clinging to each other on the ground. Then as the dark pall of
smoke drifted southward Foy scrambled up his tree again. But now there
was little to be seen, for the _Swallow_ had vanished utterly, and for
many yards round where she lay the wreckage-strewn water was black as
ink with the stirred mud. The Spaniards had gone also, nothing of them
was left, save the two men and the boat which rode unhurt at a distance.
Foy stared at them. The steersman was seated and wringing his hands,
while the captain, on whose armour the rays of the rising sun now shone
brightly, held to the mast like one stunned, and gazed at the place
where, a minute before, had been a ship and a troop of living men.
Presently he seemed to recover himself, for he issued an order, whereon
the boat's head went about, and she began to glide away.

"Now we had best try to catch him," said Martha, who, by standing up,
could see this also.

"Nay, let him be," answered Foy, "we have sent enough men to their
account," and he shuddered.

"As you will, master," grumbled Martin, "but I tell you it is not
wise. That man is too clever to be allowed to live, else he would have
accompanied the others on board and perished with them."

"Oh! I am sick," replied Foy. "The wind from that powder has shaken me.
Settle it as you will with Mother Martha and leave me in peace."

So Martin turned to speak with Martha, but she was not there. Chuckling
to herself in the madness of her hate and the glory of this great
revenge, she had slipped away, knife in hand, to discover whether
perchance any of the powder-blasted Spaniards still lived. Fortunately
for them they did not, the shock had killed them all, even those who at
the first alarm had thrown themselves into the water. At length
Martin found her clapping her hands and crooning above a dead body, so
shattered that no one could tell to what manner of man it had belonged,
and led her away.

But although she was keen enough for the chase, by now it was too
late, for, travelling before the strong wind, Ramiro and his boat had
vanished.



CHAPTER XV

SENOR RAMIRO

If Foy van Goorl, by some magic, could have seen what was passing in
the mind of that fugitive in the boat as he sailed swiftly away from the
scene of death and ruin, bitterly indeed would he have cursed his folly
and inexperience which led him to disregard the advice of Red Martin.

Let us look at this man as he goes gnawing his hand in rage and
disappointment. There is something familiar about his face and bearing,
still gallant enough in a fashion, yet the most observant would find
it difficult to recognise in the Senor Ramiro the handsome and courtly
Count Juan de Montalvo of over twenty years before. A long spell of the
galleys changes the hardiest man, and by ill luck Montalvo, or Ramiro,
to call him by his new name, had been forced to serve nearly his full
time. He would have escaped earlier indeed, had he not been foolish
enough to join in a mutiny, which was discovered and suppressed. It was
in the course of this savage struggle for freedom that he lost his eye,
knocked out with a belaying pin by an officer whom he had just stabbed.
The innocent officer died and the rascal Ramiro died, but without his
good looks.

To a person of gentle birth, however great a scoundrel he might be, the
galleys, which represented penal servitude in the sixteenth century,
were a very rough school. Indeed for the most part the man who went into
them blameless became bad, and the man who went into them bad became
worse, for, as the proverb says, those who have dwelt in hell always
smell of brimstone. Who can imagine the awfulness of it--the chains,
the arduous and continual labour, the whip of the quarter-masters, the
company of thieves and outcast ruffians, all dreadful in its squalid
sameness?

Well, his strength and constitution, coupled with a sort of grim
philosophy, brought him through, and at length Ramiro found himself
a free man, middle-aged indeed, but intelligent and still strong, the
world once more before him. Yet what a world! His wife, believing him
dead, or perhaps wishing to believe it, had remarried and gone with her
husband to New Spain, taking his children with her, and his friends,
such of them as lived, turned their backs upon him. But although he had
been an unlucky man, for with him wickedness had not prospered, he still
had resource and courage.

The Count Montalvo was a penniless outlaw, a byword and a scorn, and so
the Count Montalvo--died, and was buried publicly in the church of his
native village. Strangely enough, however, about the same time the
Senor Ramiro appeared in another part of Spain, where with success he
practised as a notary and man of affairs. Some years went by thus, till
at length, having realised a considerable sum of money by the help of
an ingenious fraud, of which the details are superfluous, an inspiration
took him and he sailed for the Netherlands.

In those dreadful days, in order to further the ends of religious
persecution and of legalised theft, informers were rewarded with a
portion of the goods of heretics. Ramiro's idea--a great one in its
way--was to organise this informing business, and, by interesting a
number of confederates who practically were shareholders in the venture,
to sweep into his net more fortunes, or shares of fortunes, than a
single individual, however industrious, could hope to secure. As he had
expected, soon he found plenty of worthy companions, and the company was
floated. For a while, with the help of local agencies and spies, such as
Black Meg and the Butcher, with whom, forgetting past injuries, he had
secretly renewed his acquaintance, it did very well, the dividends being
large and regular. In such times handsome sums were realised, without
risk, out of the properties of unfortunates who were brought to the
stake, and still more was secured by a splendid system of blackmail
extracted from those who wished to avoid execution, and who, when they
had been sucked dry, could either be burnt or let go, as might prove
most convenient.

Also there were other methods of making money--by an intelligent method
of robbery, by contracts to collect fines and taxes and so forth. Thus
things went well, and, at length, after many years of suffering and
poverty, the Senor Ramiro, that experienced man of affairs, began
to grow rich, until, indeed, driven forward by a natural but unwise
ambition, a fault inherent to daring minds, he entered upon a dangerous
path.

The wealth of Hendrik Brant, the goldsmith, was a matter of common
report, and glorious would be the fortune of him who could secure its
reversion. This Ramiro wished to win; indeed, there was no ostensible
reason why he should not do so, since Brant was undoubtedly a heretic,
and, therefore, legitimate game for any honourable servant of the Church
and King. Yet there were lions in the path, two large and formidable
lions, or rather a lion and the ghost of a lion, for one was material
and the other spiritual. The material lion was that the Government,
or in other words, his august kingship Philip, desired the goldsmith's
thousands for himself, and was therefore likely to be irritated by an
interloper. The spiritual lion was that Brant was connected with Lysbeth
van Goorl, once known as Lysbeth de Montalvo, a lady who had brought
her reputed husband no luck. Often and often during dreary hours of
reflection beneath tropic suns, for which the profession of galley-slave
gave great leisure, the Senor Ramiro remembered that very energetic
curse which his new affianced wife had bestowed upon him, a curse in
which she prayed that through her he might live in heavy labour, that
through her and hers he might be haunted by fears and misfortunes, and
at the last die in misery. Looking back upon the past it would certainly
seem that there had been virtue in this curse, for already through
Lysbeth and his dealings with her, he had suffered the last degradation
and the toil, which could not be called light, of nearly fourteen years
of daily occupation in the galleys.

Well, he was clear of them, and thenceforward, the curse having
exhausted itself for the time being, he had prospered--at any rate to a
moderate extent. But if once more he began to interfere with Lysbeth van
Goorl and her relatives, might it not re-assert its power? That was one
question. Was it worth while to take his risk on the chance of securing
Brant's fortune? That was another. Brant, it was true, was only a cousin
of Lysbeth's husband, but when once you meddled with a member of the
family, it was impossible to know how soon other members would become
mixed up in the affair.

The end may be guessed. The treasure was at hand and enormous, whereas
the wrath of a Heavenly or an earthly king was problematical and far
away. So greed, outstripping caution and superstitious fear, won the
race, and Ramiro threw himself into the adventure with a resource and
energy which in their way were splendid.

Now, as always, he was a man who hated violence for its own sake. It was
no wish of his that the worthy Heer Brant should be unnecessarily burnt
or tortured. Therefore through his intermediaries, as Brant had narrated
in his letter, he approached him with a proposal which, under the
circumstances, was liberal enough--that Brant should hand over
two-thirds of his fortune to him and his confederates, on condition
that he was assisted to escape with the remaining third. To his disgust,
however, this obstinate Dutchman refused to buy his safety at the price
of a single stiver. Indeed, he answered with rude energy that now as
always he was in the hands of God, and if it pleased God that his life
should be sacrificed and his great wealth divided amongst thieves, well,
it must be so, but he, at least, would be no party to the arrangement.

The details of the plots and counter-plots, the attack of the Ramiro
company, the defences of Brant, the internecine struggles between the
members of the company and the agents of the Government, if set out
at length, would fill a considerable book. Of these we already know
something, and the rest may be divined.

In the course of the affair Ramiro had made but one mistake, and that
sprang from what he was wont to consider the weakness of his nature.
Needless to say, it was that he had winked at the escape of Brant's
daughter, Elsa. It may have been superstition that prompted him, or it
may have been pity, or perhaps it was a certain oath of mercy which he
had taken in an hour of need; at any rate, he was content that the girl
should not share the doom which overshadowed her father. He did not
think it at all likely that she would take with her any documents of
importance, and the treasure, of course, she could not take; still, to
provide against accidents he arranged for her to be searched upon the
road.

As we know this search was a failure, and when on the morrow Black Meg
arrived to make report and to warn him that Dirk van Goorl's son and his
great serving-man, whose strength was known throughout the Netherlands,
were on their road to The Hague, he was sure that after all the girl had
carried with her some paper or message.

By this time the whereabouts of Brant's treasure had been practically
solved. It was believed to lie in the string of vessels, although it was
not known that one of these was laden with powder as well as gold. The
plan of the Government agents was to search the vessels as they passed
out to sea and seize the treasure as contraband, which would save much
legal trouble, since under the law or the edicts wealth might not be
shipped abroad by heretics. The plan of Ramiro and his friends was
to facilitate the escape of the treasure to the open sea, where they
proposed to swoop down upon it and convey it to more peaceful shores.

When Foy and his party started down the canal in the boat Ramiro knew
that his opportunity had come, and at once unmoored the big ship and
followed. The attempted stabbing of Foy was not done by his orders, as
he wished the party to go unmolested and to be kept in sight. That was a
piece of private malice on the part of Black Meg, for it was she who was
dressed as a man. On various occasions in Leyden Foy had made remarks
upon Meg's character which she resented, and about her personal
appearance, which she resented much more, and this was an attempt to pay
off old scores that in the issue cost her a finger, a good knife, and a
gold ring which had associations connected with her youth.

At first everything had gone well. By one of the most daring and
masterly manoeuvres that Ramiro had ever seen in his long and varied
experience upon the seas, the little _Swallow_, with her crew of three
men, had run the gauntlet of the fort which was warned and waiting for
her; had sunk and sailed through the big Government boat and her crew of
lubberly soldiers, many of whom, he was glad to reflect, were drowned;
had crushed the officer, against whom he had a personal grudge, like an
egg-shell, and won through to the open sea. There he thought he was sure
of her, for he took it for granted that she would run for the Norfolk
coast, and knew that in the gale of wind which was blowing his larger
and well-manned vessel could pull her down. But then the ill-luck--that
ancient ill-luck which always dogged him when he began to interfere with
the affairs of Lysbeth and her relatives--declared itself.

Instead of attempting to cross the North Sea the little _Swallow_ hugged
the coast, where, for various nautical reasons connected with the wind,
the water, and the build of their respective ships, she had the legs of
him. Next he lost her in the gut, and after that we know what happened.
There was no disguising it; it was a most dreadful fiasco. To have one's
vessel boarded, the expensive vessel in which so large a proportion of
the gains of his honourable company had been invested, not only boarded,
but fired, and the watchman stabbed by a single naked devil of unknown
sex or character was bad enough. And then the end of it!

To have found the gold-laden ship, to have been gulled into attacking
her, and--and--oh! he could scarcely bear to think of it! There was but
one consolation. Although too late to save the others, even through the
mist he had seen that wisp of smoke rising from the hold; yes, he, the
experienced, had smelt a rat, and, warned by some half-divine intuition,
had kept his distance with the result that he was still alive.

But the others! Those gallant comrades in adventure, where were they?
Well, to be frank, he did not greatly care. There was another question
of more moment. Where was the treasure? Now that his brain had cleared
after the shock and turmoil it was evident to him that Foy van Goorl,
Red Martin, and the white devil who had boarded his ship, would not have
destroyed so much wealth if they could help it, and still less would
they have destroyed themselves. Therefore, to pursue the matter to a
logical conclusion, it seemed probable that they had spent the night in
sinking or burying the money, and preparing the pretty trap into which
he had walked. So the secret was in their hands, and as they were still
alive very possibly means could be found to induce them to reveal its
hiding-place. There was still hope; indeed, now that he came to weigh
things, they were not so bad.

To begin with, almost all the shareholders in the affair had perished
by the stern decree of Providence, and he was the natural heir of
their interests. In other words, the treasure, if it was recovered, was
henceforth his property. Further, when they came to hear the story, the
Government would set down Brant's fortune as hopelessly lost, so that
the galling competition from which he had suffered so much was at an
end.

Under these circumstances what was to be done? Very soon, as he sailed
away over the lake in the sweet air of the morning, the Senor Ramiro
found an answer to the question.

The treasure had left The Hague, he must leave The Hague. The secret of
its disposal was at Leyden, henceforth he must live at Leyden. Why not?
He knew Leyden well. It was a pleasant place, but, of course, he might
be recognised there; though, after so long, this was scarcely probable,
for was not the Count de Montalvo notoriously dead and buried? Time and
accident had changed him; moreover, he could bring art to the assistance
of nature. In Leyden, too, he had confederates--Black Meg to wit, for
one; also he had funds, for was he not the treasurer of the company
that this very morning had achieved so remarkable and unsought-for an
ascension?

There was only one thing against the scheme. In Leyden lived Lysbeth van
Goorl and her husband, and with them a certain young man whose parentage
he could guess. More, her son Foy knew the hiding-place of Brant's
