cried Kirkpatrick, with a good-humored smile.  "Have it as you will, my
general, only you must new christen me to wash the war-stain from my
hand.  The rite of my infancy was performed as became a soldier's son;
my fount was my father's helmet and the first pap I sucked lay on the
point of his sword."

"You have not shamed your nurse!" cried Murray.

"Nor will I," answered Kirkpatrick, "while the arm that slew
Cressingham remains unwithered."

While he spoke, Ker entered to ask permission to introduce a messenger
from Earl de Warenne.  Wallace gave consent.  It was Sir Hugh le de
Spencer, a near kinsman of the Earl of Hereford, the tumultory
constable of England.  He was the envoy who had brought the Prince of
Wales' dispatches to Stirling.  Wallace was standing when he entered,
and so were the chieftains, but at his appearance they sat down.
Wallace retained his position.

"I come," cried the Southron knight, "from the lord warden of Scotland,
who, like my prince, too greatly condescends to do otherwise than
command, where now he treats; I come to the leader of this rebellion,
William Wallace, to receive an answer to the terms granted by the
clemency of my master, the son of his liege lord, to this misled
kingdom."

"Sir Knight," replied Sir William Wallace, "when the Southron lords
delegate a messenger to me, who knows how to respect the representative
of the nation to which he is sent, and the agents of his own country, I
shall give them my reply.  You may withdraw."

The Southron stood, resolute to remain where he was; "Do you know,
proud Scot," cried he, "to whom you dare address this imperious
language?  I am the nephew of the lord high constable of England."

"It is a pity," cried Murray, looking coolly up from the table, "that
he is not here to take his kinsman into custody."

Le de Spencer fiercely half drew his sword; "Sir, this insult-"

"Must be put up with," cried Wallace, interrupting him, and motioning
Edwin to lay his hand on the sword; "you have insulted the nation to
which you were sent on a peaceful errand; and having thus invited the
resentment of every chief here present, you cannot justly complain
against their indignation.  But in consideration of your youth, and
probable ignorance of what becomes the character of an embassador, I
grant you the protection your behavior has forfeited.  Sir Alexander
Scrymgeour," said he, turning to him, "you will guard Sir Hugh le de
Spencer to the Earl de Warenne, and tell that nobleman I am ready to
answer any proper messenger."

The young Southron, frowning, followed Scrymgeour from the hall, and
Wallace, turning to Murray, "My friend," said he, "it is not well to
stimulate insolence by repartee.  This young man's speech, though an
insult to the nation, was directed to me, and by me only it ought to
have been answered, and that seriously.  The haughty spirit of this man
should have been quelled, not incensed; and, had you proceeded one word
further, you would have given him an apparently just cause of complaint
against you, and of that, my friend, I am most sensibly jealous.  It is
not policy nor virtue to be rigorous to the extent of justice."

"I know," returned Murray, blushing, "that my wits are too many for me;
ever throwing me, like Phaeton's horses, into the midst of some fiery
mischief.  But pardon me now, and I promise to rein them close, when
next I see this prancing knight."

"Bravo, my Lord Andrew!" cried Kirkpatrick, in an affected whisper, "I
am not always to be bird alone, under the whip of our regent; you have
had a few stripes, and now look a little of my feather!"

"Like as a swan to a vulture, good Roger," answered Murray.

Wallace attended not to this tilting of humor between the chieftains,
but engaged himself in close discourse with the elder nobles at the
higher end of the hall.  In half an hour Scrymgeour returned, and with
him Baron Hilton.  He brought an apology from De Warenne, for the
behavior of his embassador; and added his persuasions to the demands of
England, that the regent would surrender Berwick, not only as a pledge
for the Scots keeping the truce on the borders, but as a proof of his
confidence in Prince Edward.

Wallace answered, that he had no reason to show extraordinary
confidence in one who manifested, by such a requisition, that he had no
faith in Scotland; and therefore, neither as a proof of confidence, nor
as a gauge of her word, should Scotland, a victorious power, surrender
the eastern door of her kingdom in the vanquished.  Wallace declared
himself ready to dismiss the English prisoners to the frontiers, and to
maintain the armistice till they had reached the south side of the
Cheviots.  "But," added he, "my word must be my bond, for by the honor
of Scotland I will give no other."

"Then," answered Baron Hilton, with an honest flush passing over his
cheek, as if ashamed of what he had next to say, "I am constrained to
lay before you the last instructions of the Prince of Wales to Earl de
Warenne."

He took a royally sealed roll of vellum from his breast, and read aloud:


"Thus saith Edward, Prince of Wales, to Earl de Warenne, Lord Warden of
Scotland.  If that arch-rebel, William Wallace, who now assumeth to
himself the rule of all our royal father's hereditary dominions north
of the Cheviots, refuseth to give unto us the whole possession of the
town and citadel of Berwick-upon-Tweed, as a pledge of his faith, to
keep the armistice on the borders from sea to sea: we command you to
tell him, that we shall detain under the ward of our good lieutenant of
the Tower in London, the person of William the Lord Douglas, as a close
captive, until our prisoners, now in Scotland, arrive safely at
Newcastle-upon-Tyne.  This mark of supremacy over a rebellious people
we owe as a pledge of their homage to our royal father; and as a
tribute of our gratitude to him for having allowed us to treat at all
with so undutiful a part of his dominions.

"(Signed)

Edward, P.W."

"Baron," cried Wallace, "it would be beneath the dignity of Scotland,
to retaliate this act with the like conduct.  The exchange of prisoners
shall yet be made, and the armistice held sacred on the borders.  But,
as I hold the door of war open in the interior of the country, before
the Earl de Warenne leaves this citadel (and it shall be on the day
assigned), please the Almighty Lord of Justice, the Southron usurpers
of all our castles on the eastern shore shall be our hostages for the
safety of Lord Douglas."

"And this is my answer, noble Wallace?"

"It is; and you see no more of me till that which I have said is done."

Baron Hilton withdrew.  And Wallace, turning to his peers, rapidly made
dispositions for a sweeping march from frith to frith; and having sent
those who were to accompany him to prepare for departure next day at
dawn, he retired with the Lords Mar and Bothwell to arrange affairs
relative to the prisoners.




Chapter XL.

The Governor's Apartments.


The sun rose on Wallace and his brave legions as they traversed the
once romantic glades of Strathmore; but now the scene was changed.  The
villages were abandoned, and the land lay around in uncultivated
wastes.  Sheep, without a shepherd, fled wild from the approach of man;
and wolves issued, howling, from the cloisters of depopulated
monasteries.  The army approached Dumblane; but it was without
inhabitant; grass grew in the streets; and the birds which roosted in
the desert dwellings flew scared from the windows as the trumpet of
Wallace sounded through the town.  Loud echoes repeated the summons
from its hollow walls; but no other voice was heard, no human face
appeared; for the ravening hand of Cressingham had been there!  Wallace
sighed as he looked around him.  "Rather smile," cried Graham, "that
Heaven hath given you the power to say to the tyrants who have done
this, 'Here shall your proud waves be stayed!'"

They proceeded over many a hill and plain, and found that the same
withering touch of desolation had burned up and overwhelmed the
country.  Wallace saw that his troops were faint for want of food;
cheering them, he promised that Ormsby should provide them a feast in
Perth; and, with reawakened spirits, they took the River Tay at its
fords, and were soon before the walls of that well-armed city.  But it
was governed by a coward, and Ormsby fled to Dundee at the first sight
of the Scottish army.  His flight might have warranted the garrison to
surrender without a blow, but a braver man being his lieutenant, sharp
was the conflict before Wallace could compel that officer to abandon
the ramparts and to sue for the very terms he had at first rejected.

After the fall of Perth, the young regent made a rapid progress through
that part of the country; driving the southron garrisons out of Scone,
and all the embattled towns; expelling them from the castles of
Kincain, Elcho, Kinfauns, and Doune; and then proceeding to the marine
fortresses (those avenues by which the ships of England had poured its
legions on the eastern coast), he compelled Dundee, Cupar, Glamis,
Montrose, and Aberdeen, all to acknowledge the power of his arms.  He
seized most of the English ships in those ports, and manning them with
Scots, soon cleared the seas of the vessels which had escaped, taking
some, and putting others to flight; and one of the latter was the
fugitive Ormsby.

This enterprise achieved, Wallace, with a host of prisoners, turned his
steps toward the Forth; but ere he left the banks of the Tay and Dee,
he detached three thousand men under the command of Lord Ruthven,
giving him a commission to range the country from the Carse of Gowrie
to remotest Sutherland, and in all that tract reduce every town and
castle which had admitted a Southron garrison.  Wallace took leave of
Lord Ruthven at Huntingtower, and that worthy nobleman, when he
assumed, with the government of Perth, this extensive command, said, as
he grasped the regent's hand, "I say not, bravest of Scots, what is my
gratitude for thus making me an arm of my country, but deeds will show!"

He then bade a father's adieu to his son, counseling him to regard
Wallace as the light in his path; and, embracing him, they parted.

A rapid march, round by Fifeshire (through which victory followed their
steps), brought the conqueror and his troops again within sight of the
towers of Stirling.  It was on the eve of the day on which he had
promised Earl de Warenne should see the English prisoners depart for
the borders.  No doubt of his arriving at the appointed time was
entertained by the Scots or by the Southrons in the castle; the one
knew the sacredness of his word, and the other having felt his prowess,
would not so far disparage their own as to suppose that any could
withstand him by whom they were beaten.

De Warenne, as he stood on the battlements of the keep, beheld from
afar the long line of Scottish soldiers as they descended the Ochil
Hills.  When he pointed it out to De Valence, that nobleman (who, in
proportion as he wished to check the arms of Wallace, had flattered
himself that it might happen), against the evidence of his eyesight,
contradicted the observation of the veteran earl.

"Your sight deceives you," said he, "it is only the sunbeams playing on
the cliffs."

"Then those cliffs are moving ones," cried De Warenne, "which, I fear,
have ground our countrymen on the coast to powder!  We shall find
Wallace here by sunset, to show us how he has resented the affront our
ill-advised prince cast on his jealous honor."

"His honor," returned De Valence, "is like that of his countrymen's--an
enemy alike to his own interest and to that of others.  Had it allowed
him to accept the crown of Scotland, and so have fought Edward with the
concentrating arm of a king; or would he even now offer peace to our
sovereign, granting his prerogative as liege lord of the country, all
might go well; but as the honor you speak of prevents his using these
means of ending the contest, destruction must close his career."

"And what quarrel," demanded De Warenne, "can you, my Lord de Valence,
have against this nice honor of Sir William Wallace, since you allow it
secures the final success of our cause?"

"His honor and himself are hateful to me!" impatiently answered De
Valence; "he crosses me in my wishes, public and private; and for the
sake of my king and myself, I might almost be tempted-"  He turned pale
as he spoke, and met the penetrating glance of De Warenne.  He paused.

"Tempted to what?" asked De Warenne.

"To a Brutus mode of ridding the state of an enemy."

"That might be noble in a Roman citizen," returned De Warenne, "which
would be villainous in an English lord, treated as you have been by a
generous victor, not the usurper of any country's liberties, but rather
a Brutus in defense of his own.  Which man of us all, from the general
to the meanest follower in our camps, has he injured?"

Lord Aymer frowned.  "Did he not expose me, threaten me with an
ignominious death, on the walls of Stirling?"

"But was it before he saw the Earl of Mar, with his hapless family,
brought, with halters on their necks, to be suspended from this very
tower?  Ah! what a tale has the lovely countess told me of that direful
scene!  What he then did was to check the sanguinary Cressingham from
imbruiting his hands in the blood of female and infant innocence."

"I care not," cried De Valence, "what are or are not the offenses of
this domineering Wallace, but I hate him; and my respect for his
advocates cannot but correspond with that feeling."  As he spoke, that
he might not be further molested by the arguments of De Warenne, he
abruptly turned away, and left the battlements.

Pride would not allow the enraged earl to confess his private reasons
for this vehement enmity against the Scottish chief.  A conference
which he had held the preceding evening with Lord Mar, was the cause of
this augmented hatred; and, from that moment, the haughty Southron
vowed the destruction of Wallace, by open attack, or secret treachery.
Ambition, and the base counterfeit of love, those two master passions
in untempered minds, were the springs of this antipathy.  The instant
in which he knew that the young creature whom at a distance he
discerned clinging around the Earl of Mar's neck in the streets of
Stirling, was the same Lady Helen on whose account Lord Soulis had
poured on him such undeserved invectives in Bothwell Castle; curious to
have a nearer view of one whose transcendent beauty he had often heard
celebrated by others, he ordered her to be immediately conveyed to his
apartments in the citadel.

On their first interview he was more struck by her personal charms than
he had ever been with any woman's, although few were so noted for
gallantry in the English court as himself.  He could hardly understand
the nature of his feelings while discoursing with her.  To all others
of her sex he had declared his enamored wishes with as much ease as
vivacity, but when he looked on Helen the admiration her loveliness
inspired was checked by an indescribable awe.  No word of passion
escaped his lips; he sought to win her by a deportment consonant with
her own dignity of manner, and obeyed all her wishes, excepting when
they pointed to any communication with her parents.  He feared the wary
eyes of the Earl of Mar.  But nothing of this reverence of Helen was
grounded on any principle within the heart of De Valence.  His idea of
virtue was so erroneous that he believed, by the short assumption of
its semblance, he might so steal on the confidence of his victim as to
induce her to forget all the world--nay, heaven itself--in his sophistry
and blandishments.  To facilitate this end he at first designed to
precipitate the condemnation of the earl, that he might be rid of a
father's existence, holding, in dread of his censure, the perhaps
otherwise yielding heart of his lovely intended mistress.

The unprincipled and impure can have no idea what virtue or delicacy
are other than vestments of disguise or of ornament, to be thrown off
at will; and therefore, to reason with such minds is to talk to the
winds--to tell a man who is born blind to decide between two colors.  In
short, a libertine heart is the same in all ages of the world.  De
Valence, therefore, seeing the anguish of her fears for her father, and
hearing the fervor with which she implored for his life, adopted the
plan of granting the earl reprieves from day to day; and in spite of
the remonstrances of Cressingham, he intended (after having worked upon
the terrors of Helen), to grant to her her father's release, on
condition of her yielding herself to be his.  He had even meditated
that the accomplishment of this device should have taken place the very
night in which Wallace's first appearance before Stirling had called
its garrison to arms.

Impelled by vengeance against the man who had driven him from Dumbarton
and from Ayr, and irritated at being delayed in the moment when his
passion was to seize its object, De Valence thought to end all by a
coup de main--and rushing out of the gates, was taken prisoner.  Such
was the situation of things, when Wallace first became master of the
place.

Now when the whole of the English army were in the same captivity with
himself, when he saw the lately proscribed Lord Mar, Governor of
Stirling, and that the Scottish cause seemed triumphant on every side,
De Valence changed his former illicit views on Helen, and bethought him
of making her his wife.  Ambition, as well as love, impelled him to
this resolution; and he foresaw that the vast influence which his
marriage with the daughter of Mar must give him in the country, would
be a decisive argument with the King of England.

To this purpose, not doubting the Scottish's earl acceptance of such a
son-in-law, on the very day that Wallace marched toward the coast, De
Valence sent to request an hour's private audience of Lord Mar.  He
could not then grant it; but at noon, next day, they met in the
governor's apartments.

The Southron, without much preface, opened his wishes, and proffered
his hand for the Lady Helen.  "I'll make her the proudest lady in Great
Britain," continued he; "for she shall have a court in my Welsh
province, little inferior to that of Edward's queen."

"Pomp would have no sway with my daughter," replied the earl; "it is
the princely mind she values, not its pagentry.  Whomsoever she prefers
the tribute will be paid to the merit of the object, not to his rank;
and therefore, earl, should it be you, the greater will be your pledge
of happiness.  I shall repeat to her what you have said; and to-morrow
deliver her answer."

Not deeming it possible that it should be otherwise than favorable, De
Valence allowed his imagination to roam over every anticipated delight.
He exulted in the pride with which he would show this perfection of
northern beauty to the fair of England; how would the simple graces of
her seraphic form, which looked more like a being of air than of earth,
put to shame the labored beauties of the court?  And then it was not
only the artless charms of a wood-nymph he would present to the
wondering throng, but a being whose majesty of soul proclaimed her high
descent and peerless virtues.  How did he congratulate himself, in
contemplating this unsullied temple of virgin innocence, that he had
never, by even the vapor of one impassioned sigh, contaminated her pure
ear, or broken the magic spell, which seemed fated to crown him with
happiness unknown, with honor unexampled!  To be so blessed, so
distinguished, so envied, was to him a dream of triumph, that wafted
away all remembrance of his late defeat; and he believed, in taking
Helen from Scotland, he should bear away a richer prize than any he
could leave behind.

Full of these anticipations, he attended the Governor of Stirling the
next day, to hear his daughter's answer.  But unwilling to give the
earl that advantage over him which a knowledge of his views in the
matter might occasion, he affected a composure he did not feel; and
with a lofty air entered the room as if he were come rather to confer
than to beg a favor.  This deportment did not lessen the satisfaction
with which the brave Scot opened his mission.

"My lord, I have just seen my daughter.  She duly appreciates the honor
you would confer on her; she is grateful for all your courtesies whilst
she was your prisoner, but beyond that sentiment, her heart, attached
to her native land, cannot sympathize with your wishes."

De Valence started.  He did not expect anything in the shape of a
denial; but supposing that perhaps a little of his own art was tried by
the father to enhance the value of his daughter's yielding, he threw
himself into a chair, and affecting chagrin at a disappointment (which
he did not believe was seriously intended), exclaimed with vehemence,
"Surely, Lord Mar, this is not meant as a refusal?  I cannot receive it
as such, for I know Lady Helen's gentleness, I know the sweet
tenderness of her nature would plead for me, were she to see me at her
feet, and hear me pour forth the most ardent passion that ever burned
in a human breast.  Oh, my gracious lord, if it be her attachment to
Scotland which alone militates against me, I will promise that her time
shall be passed between the two countries.  Her marriage with me may
facilitate that peace with England which must be the wish of us all;
and perhaps the lord wardenship which De Warenne now holds may be
transferred to me.  I have reasons for expecting that it will be so;
and then she, as a queen in Scotland, and you as her father, may claim
every distinction from her fond husband, every indulgence for the
Scots, which your patriot heart can dictate.  This would be a certain
benefit to Scotland; while the ignis fatuus you are now following,
however brilliant may be its career during Edward's absence, must on
his return be extinguished in disaster and infamy."

The silence of the Earl of Mar, who, willing to hear all that was in
the mind of De Valence, had let him proceed uninterrupted, encouraged
the Southron lord to say more than he had at first intended to reveal;
but when he made a pause, and seemed to expect an answer, the earl
spoke:

"I am fully sensible of the honor you would bestow upon my daughter and
myself by your alliance; but, as I have said before, her heart is too
devoted to Scotland to marry any man whose birth does not make it his
duty to prefer the liberty of her native land, even before his love for
her.  That hope to see our country freed from a yoke unjustly laid upon
her--that hope which you, not considering our rights, or weighing the
power that lies in a just cause, denominate an ignis fatuus, is the
only passion I believe that lives in the gentle bosom of my Helen; and
therefore, noble earl, not even your offers can equal the measure of
her wishes."

At this speech De Valence bit his lip with real disappointment; and
starting from his chair now in unaffected disorder, "I am not to be
deceived, Lord Mar," cried he; "I am not to be cajoled by the pretended
patriotism of your daughter; I know the sex too well to be cheated with
these excuses.  The ignis fatuus that leads your daughter from my arms,
is not the freedom of Scotland, but the handsome rebel who conquers in
its name!  He is now fortune's minion, but he will fall, Lord Mar, and
then what will be the fate of his mad adherents?"

"Earl de Valence," replied the veteran, "sixty winters have checked the
tides of passion in my veins; but the indignation of my soul against
any insult offered to my daughter's delicacy, or to the name of the
lord regent of Scotland is not less powerful in my breast.  You are my
prisoner, and I pardon what I could so easily avenge.  I will even
answer you, and say that I do not know of any exclusive affection
subsisting between my daughter and Sir William Wallace; but this I am
assured of, that were it the case, she would be more ennobled in being
the wife of so true a patriot and so virtuous a man, than were she
advanced to the bosom of an emperor.  And for myself, were he to-morrow
hurled by a mysterious Providence from his present nobly-won elevation,
I should glory in my son were he such, and would think him as great on
a scaffold as on a throne."

"It is well that is your opinion," replied De Valence, stopping in his
wrathful strides, and turning on Mar with vengeful irony; "cherish
these heroics, for you will assuredly see him so exalted.  Then where
will be his triumphs over Edward's arms and Pembroke's heart?  Where
your daughter's patriot husband; you glorious son?  Start not, old man,
for by all the powers of hell I swear that some eyes which now look
proudly on the Southron host, shall close in blood!  I announce a fact!"

"If you do," replied Mar, shuddering at the demoniac fire that
lightened from the countenance of De Valence, "it must be by the agency
of devils; and their minister, vindictive earl, will meet the vengeance
of the Eternal arm."

"These dreams," cried De Valence, "cannot terrify me.  You are neither
a seer, nor I a fool, to be taken by such prophecies.  But were you
wise enough to embrace the advantage I offer, you might be a prophet of
good, greater than he of Ercildown, to your nation; for all that you
could promise, I would take care should be fulfilled.  But you cast
from you your peace and safety; my vengeance shall therefore take its
course.  I rely not on oracles of heaven or hell; but I have pronounced
the doom of my enemies; and though you now see me a prisoner, tremble,
haughty Scot, at the resentment which lies in this head and heart.
This arm perhaps needs not the armies of Edward to pierce you in your
boast!"

He left the room as he spoke; and Lord Mar, shaking his venerable head
as he disappeared, said to himself: "Impotent rage of passion and of
youth, I pity and forgive you."

It was not, therefore, so extraordinary that De Valence, when he saw
Wallace descending the Ochil hills with the flying banners of new
victories, should break into curses of his fortune, and swear inwardly
the most determined revenge.

Fuel was added to this fire at sunset, when the almost measureless
defiles of prisoners, marshaled before the ramparts of Stirling, and
taking the usual oath to Wallace, met his view.

"To-morrow we quit these dishonoring wall," cried he to himself: "but
ere I leave them, if there be power in gold, or strength in my arm, he
shall die!"




Chapter XLI.

The State Prison.


The regent's re-entrance into the citadel of Stirling, being on the
evening preceding the day he had promised should see the English lords
depart for their country, De Warenne, as a mark of respect to a man
whom he could not but regard with admiration, went to the barbican-gate
to bid him welcome.

Wallace appeared; and as the cavalcade of noble Southrons who had
lately commanded beyond the Tay, followed him, Murray glanced his eye
around, and said with a smile to De Warenne, "You see, sir earl, how we
Scots keep our word!" and then he added, "you leave Stirling to-morrow,
but these remain till Lord Douglas opens their prison-doors."

"I cannot but acquiesce in the justice of your commander's
determination," returned De Warenne, "and to comfort these gentlemen
under their captivity, I can only tell them that if anything can
reconcile them to the loss of liberty, it is being the prisoners of Sir
William Wallace."

After having transferred his captives to the charge of Lord Mar,
Wallace went alone to the chamber of Montgomery, to see whether the
state of his wounds would allow him to march on the morrow.  While he
was yet there, an invitation arrived from the Countess of Mar,
requesting his presence at an entertainment which, by her husband's
consent, she meant to give that night at Snawdoun, to the Southron
lords before their departure for England.

"I fear you dare not expend your strength on this party?" inquired
Wallace, turning to Montgomery.

"Certainly not," returned he; "but I shall see you amidst your noble
friends, at some future period.  When the peace your arms must win, is
established between the two nations, I shall then revisit Scotland; and
openly declare my friendship for Sir William Wallace."

"As these are your sentiments," replied Wallace, "I shall hope that you
will unite your influence with that of the brave Earl of Gloucester, to
persuade your king to stop this bloodshed; for it is no vain boast to
declare, that he may bury Scotland beneath her slaughtered sons, but
they never will again consent to acknowledge any right in an usurper."

"Sanguinary have been the instruments of my sovereign's rule in
Scotland," replied Montgomery; "but such cruelty is foreign to his
gallant heart; and without offending that high-souled patriotism, which
would make me revere its possessor, were he the lowliest man in your
legions, allow me, noblest of Scots, to plead one word in vindication
of him to whom my allegiance is pledged.  Had he come hither, conducted
by war alone, what would Edward have been worse than any other
conqueror?  But on the reverse, was not his right to the supremacy of
Scotland acknowledged by the princes who contended for the crown?  And
besides, did not all the great lords swear fealty to England, on the
day he nominated their king?"

"Had you not been under these impressions, brave Montgomery, I believe
I never should have seen you in arms against Scotland; but I will
remove them by a simple answer.  All the princes whom you speak of,
excepting Bruce of Annandale, did assent to the newly offered claim of
Edward on Scotland; but who, amongst them, had any probable chance for
the throne, but Bruce or Baliol?  Such ready acquiescence was meant to
create them one.  Bruce, conscious of his inherent rights, rejected the
iniquitous demand of Edward; Baliol accorded with it, and was made
king.  All our chiefs who were base enough to worship the rising sun,
and, I may say, condemn the God of truth, swore to the falsehood.
Others remained gloomily silent; and the bravest of them retired to the
Highlands, where they dwell amongst their mountains, till the cries of
Scotland called them again to fight her battles.

"Thus did Edward establish himself as the liege lord of this kingdom;
and whether the oppresion which followed were his or his agents'
immediate acts, it matters not, for he made them his own by his
after-conduct.  When remonstrances were sent to London, he neither
punished nor reprimanded the delinquents, but marched an armed force
into our country, to compel us to be trampled on.  It was not an
Alexander nor a Charlemagne, coming in his strength to subdue ancient
enemies, or to aggrandize his name, by vanquishing nations far remote,
with whom he could have no affinity!  Terrible as such ambition was, it
is innocence to what Edward has done.  He came, in the first instance,
to Scotland as a friend; the nation committed its dearest interests to
his virtue; they put their hands into his and he bound them in
shackles.  Was this honor?  Was this the right of conquest?  The cheek
of Alexander would have blushed deep as his Tyrian robe; and the face
of Charlemagne turned pale as the lilies, at the bare suspicion of
being capable of such a deed.

"No, Lord Montgomery, it is not our conqueror we are opposing; it is a
traitor, who, under the mask of friendship, has attempted to usurp our
rights, destroy our liberties, and make a desert of our once happy
country.  This is the true statement of the case, and though I wish not
to make a subject outrage his sovereign, yet truth demands of you to
say to Edward, that to withdraw his pretensions from this exhausted
country, is the restitution we may justly claim--is all that we wish.
Let him leave us in peace, and we shall no longer make war upon him.
But if he persist (which the ambassadors from the Prince of Wales
announce), even as Samson drew the temple upon himself, to destroy his
enemies, Scotland will discharge itself upon the valleys of England;
and there compel them to share the fate in which we may be doomed to
perish."

"I will think of this discourse," returned Montgomery, "when I am far
distant; and rely on it, noble Wallace that I will assert the privilege
of my birth, and counsel my king as becomes an honest man."

"Highly would he estimate such counsel," cried Wallace, "had he virtue
to feel that he who will be just to his sovereign's enemies must be of
an honor that will bind him with double fidelity to his king.  Such
proof give your sovereign; and, if he have one spark of that greatness
of mind which you say he possesses, though he may not adopt your
advice, he must respect the adviser."

As Wallace pressed the hand of his new friend, to leave him to repose,
a messenger entered from Lord Mar, to request the regent's presence in
his closet.  He found him with Lord de Warenne.  The latter presented
him with another dispatch from the Prince of Wales.  It was to say,
that news had reached him of Wallace's design to attack the castles
garrisoned by England, on the eastern coast.  Should this information
prove true, he (the prince) declared that, as a punishment for such
increasing audacity, he would put Lord Douglas into closer confinement;
and while the Southron fleets would inevitably baffle Wallace's
attempts, the moment the exchange of prisoners was completed on the
borders, an army from England should enter Scotland, and ravage it with
fire and sword.

When Wallace had heard this dispatch, he smile and said, "The deed is
done, my Lord de Warenne.  Both the castles and the fleets are taken;
and what punishment must we now expect from this terrible threatener?"

"Little from him, or his headlong counselors," replied De Warenne; "but
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, the king's nephew, is come from abroad with a
numerous army.  He is to conduct the Scottish prisoners to the borders,
and then to fall upon Scotland with all his strength, unless you
previously surrender, not only Berwick, but Stirling, and the whole of
the district between the Forth and the Tweed, into his hands."

"My Lord de Warenne," replied Wallace, "you can expect but one return
to these absurd demands.  I shall accompany you myself to the Scottish
borders, and there made my reply."

De Warenne, who did indeed look for this answer, replied, "I
anticipated that such would be your determination, and I have to regret
that the wild counsels which surround my prince, precipitate him into
conduct which must draw much blood on both sides, before his royal
father's presence can regain what he has lost."

"Ah, my lord," replied Wallace, "is it to be nothing but war?  Have you
now a stronghold of any force in all the Highlands?  Is not the greater
part of the Lowlands free?  And before this day month, not a rood of
land in Scotland is likely to hold a Southron soldier.  We conquer, but
it is for our own.  Why then this unreceding determination to invade
us?  Not a blade of grass would I disturb on the other side of the
Cheviot, if we might have peace.  Let Edward yield to that, and though
he has pierced us with many wounds, we will yet forgive him."

De Warenne shook his head; "I know my king too well to expect pacific
measures.  He may die with the sword in his hand; but he will never
grant an hour's repose to this country till it submits to his scepter."

"Then," replied Wallace, "the sword must be the portion of him and his!
Ruthless tyrant!  If the blood of Abel called for vengeance on his
murderer, what must be the vials of wrath which are reserved for thee?"

A flush overspread the face of De Warenne at this apostrophe; and
forcing a smile, "The strict notion of right," said he, "is very well
in declamation, but how would it crop the wings of conquerors, and
shorten the warrior's arm, did they measure by this rule!"

"How would it, indeed!" replied Wallace; "and that they should is most
devoutly to be wished.  All warfare that is not defensive is criminal;
and he who draws his sword to oppress, or merely to aggrandize, is a
murderer and a robber.  This is the plain truth, Lord de Warenne."

"I have never considered it in that light," returned the earl, "nor
shall I turn philosopher now.  I revere your principle, Sir William
Wallace; but it is too sublime to be mine.  Nay, nor would it be
politic for one who holds his possessions in England by the right of
conquest to question the virtue of the deed.  By the sword my ancestors
gained their estates; and with the sword I have no objection to extend
my territories."

Wallace now saw that De Warenne, though a man of honor, was not one of
virtue.  Though his amiable nature made him gracious in the midst of
hostility, and his good dispositions would not allow him to act
disgracefull in any concern, yet duty to God seemed a poet's flight to
him.  Educated in the forms of religion, without knowing its spirit, he
despised them; and believing the Deity too wise to be affected by mere
virtuous shows of any kind, his ignorance of the sublime benevolence,
which disdains not to provide food even for the "sparrow ere it falls,"
made him think the Creator of all too great to care about the actions
of men; hence, being without the true principles of good-virtue, as
virtue, was nonsense to Earl de Warenne.

Wallace did not answer his remark, and the conference soon closed.




Chapter XLII.

Chapel in Snawdoun.


Though burning with stifled passions, Earl de Valence accepted the
invitation of Lady Mar.  He hoped to see Helen, to gain her ear for a
few minutes; and, above all, to find some opportunity during the
entertainment of taking his meditated revenge on Wallace.  The dagger
seemed the surest way; for could he render the blow effectual, he
should not only destroy the rival of his wishes, but, by ridding his
monarch of a powerful foe, deserve every honor at the royal hands.
Love and ambition again swelled his breast; and with recovered spirits,
and a glow on his countenance, which reawakened hope had planted there,
he accompanied De Warenne to the palace.

The hall for the feast was arrayed with feudal grandeur.  The seats at
the table, spread for the knights of both countries, were covered with
highly-wrought stuffs; while the emblazoned banners and other armorial
trophies of the nobles being hung aloft according to the degree of the
owner, each knight saw his precedence, and where to take his place.
The most costly means, with the royally attired peacock served up in
silver and gold dishes, and wine of the rarest quality, sparkled on the
board.  During the repast, two choice minstrels were seated in the
gallery above, to sing the friendship of King Alfred of England with
Gregory the Great of Caledonia.  The squires and other military
attendants of the nobles present, were placed at tables in the lower
part of the hall, and served with courteous hospitality.

Resentful, alike at his captivity and thwarted passion, De Valence had
hitherto refused to show himself beyond the ramparts of the citadel; he
was therefore surprised, on entering the hall of Snawdoun with De
Warenne, to see such regal pomp; and at the command of the woman who
had so lately been his prisoner at Dumbarton, and whom (because she
resembled an English lady who had rejected him) he had treated with the
most rigorous contempt.   Forgetting these indignities, in the pride of
displaying her present consequence, Lady Mar came forward to receive
her illustrious guests.  Her dress corresponded with the magnificence
of the banquet, a robe of cloth of Baudkins enriched, while it
displayed, the beauties of her person; her wimple blazed with jewels,
and a superb carkanet emitted its various rays from her bosom.**

**Cloth of Baudkins was one of the richest stuffs worn in the
thirteenth century.  It is said to have been composed of silk
interwoven with gold.   The carkanet was a large broad necklace of
precious stones of all colors, set in various shapes, and fastened by
gold links into each other.

De Warenne followed her with his eyes as she moved from him.  With an
unconscious sigh, he whispered to De Valence, "What a land is this,
where all the women are fair, and the men all brave!"

"I wish that it, and all its men and women, were in perdition!"
returned De valence, in a fierce tone.  Lady Ruthven, entering with the
wives and daughters of the neighboring chieftains, checked the further
expression of his wrath, and his eyes sought amongst them, but in vain,
for Helen.

The chieftains of the Scottish army, with the Lords Buchan and March,
were assembled around the countess at the moment a shout from the
populace without announced the arrival of the regent.  His noble figure
was now disencumbered of armor; and with no more sumptuous garb than
the simple plaid of his country, he appeared effulgent in manly beauty
and the glory of his recent deeds.  De Valence frowned heavily as he
looked on him, and thanked his fortunate stars that Helen was absent
from sharing the admiration which seemed to animate every breast.  The
eyes of Lady Mar at once told the impassioned De Valence, too well read
in the like expressions, what were her sentiments toward the young
regent; and the blushes and eager civilities of the ladies around
displayed how much they were struck with the now fully discerned and
unequaled graces of his person.  Lady mar forgot all in him.  And,
indeed, so much did he seem the idol of every heart, that, from the two
venerable lords of Loch-awe and Bothwell to the youngest man in
company, all ears hung on his words, all eyes upon his countenance.

The entertainment was conducted with every regard to that chivalric
courtesy which a noble conqueror always pays to the vanquished.
Indeed, from the wit and pleasantry which passed from the opposite
sides of the tables, and in which the ever-gay Murray was the leader,
it rather appeared a convivial meeting of friends than an assemblage of
mortal foes.  During the banquet the bards sung legends of the Scottish
worthies who had brought honor to their nation in days of old; and as
the board was cleared, they struck at once into a full chorus.  Wallace
caught the sound of his own name, accompanied with epithets of
extravagant praise; he rose hastily from his chair, and with his hand
motioned them to cease.  They obeyed; but Lady mar remonstrating with
him, he smilingly said, it was an ill omen to sing a warrior's actions
till he were incapable of performing more; and therefore he begged she
would excuse him from hearkening to his.

"Then let us change their strains to a dance," replied the countess.

"A hall! a hall!" cried Murray, springing from his seat, delighted with
the proposal.

"I have no objection," answered Wallace; and putting the hand she
presented to him into that of Lord de Warenne, he added, "I am not of a
sufficiently gay temperament to grace the change; but this earl may not
have the same reason for declining so fair a challenge!"

Lady Mar colored with mortification, for she had thought that Wallace
would not venture to refuse before so many; but following the impulse
of De Warenne's arm, she proceeded to the other end of the hall, where,
by Murray's quick arrangement, the younger lords of both countries had
already singled out ladies, and were marshaled for the dance.

As the hours moved on, the spirits of Wallace subsided from their usual
cheering tone into a sadness which he thought might be noticed; and
wishing to escape observation (for he could not explain to those gay
ones why scenes like these ever made him sorrowful), and whispering to
Mar that he would go for an hour to visit Montgomery, he withdrew,
unnoticed by all but his watchful enemy.

De Valence, who hovered about his steps, had heard him inquire of Lady
Ruthven why Helen was not present!  He was within hearing of this
whisper also, and, with a Satanic joy, the dagger shook in his hand.
He knew that Wallace had many a solitary place to pass between Snawdoun
and the citadel; and the company being too pleasantly absorbed to mark
who entered or disappeared, he took an opportunity, and stole out after
him.

But for once the impetuous fury of hatred met a temporary
disappointment.  While De Valence was cowering like a thief under the
eaves of the houses, and prowling along the lonely paths to the
citadel; while he started at every noise, as if it came to apprehend
him for his meditated deed, or rushed forward at the sight of any
solitary passenger, whom his eager vengeance almost mistook for
Wallace--Wallace himself had taken a different track.

As he walked through the illuminated archways, which led from the hall,
he perceived a darkened passage.  Hoping by that avenue to quit the
palace, unobserved, he immediately struck into it; for he was aware,
that should he go the usual way, the crowd at the gate would recognize
him, and he could not escape their acclamations.  He followed the
passage for a considerable time, and at last was stopped by a door.  It
yielded to his hand, and he found himself at the entrance of a large
building.  He advanced, and passing a high screen of carved oak, by a
dim light, which gleamed from waxen tapers on the altar, he perceived
it to be the chapel.

"A happy transition," said he to himself, "from the jubilant scene I
have now left; from the grievous scenes I have lately shared!  Here,
gracious God," thought he, "may I, unseen by any other eye, pour out my
heart to thee.  And here, before thy footstool, will I declare
thanksgiving for thy mercies; and with my tears wash from my soul the
blood I have been compelled to shed!"

While advancing toward the altar, he was startled by a voice proceeding
from the quarter whither he was going, and with low and gently-breathed
fervor, uttering these words: "Defend him, Heavenly Father!  Defend him
day and night, from the devices of this wicked man; and, above all,
during these hours of revelry and confidence, guard his unshielded
breast from treachery and death."  The voice faltered, and added with
greater agitation, "Ah, unhappy me, that I should pluck peril on the
head of William Wallace!"  A figure, which had been hidden by the rails
of the altar, with these words rose, and stretching forth her clasped
hands, exclaimed, "But Thou, who knowest I had no blame in this, wilt
not afflict me by his danger!  Thou wilt deliver him, O God, out of the
hand of this cruel foe!"

Wallace was not more astonished at hearing that some one in whom he
trusted, was his secret enemy, than at seeing Lady Helen in that place
at that hour, and addressing Heaven for him.  There was something so
celestial in the maid, as she stood in her white robes, true emblems of
her own innocence, before the divine footstool, that, although her
prayers were delivered with a pathos which told they sprung from a
heart more than commonly interested in their object, yet every word and
look breathed so eloquently the virgin purity of her soul, the hallowed
purpose of her petitions, that Wallace, drawn by the sympathy with
which kindred virtues ever attract spirit to spirit, did not hesitate
to discover himself.  He stepped from the shadow which involved him.
The pale light of the tapers shone upon his advancing figure.  Helen's
eyes fell upon him as she turned round.  She was transfixed and silent.
He moved forward.  "Lady Helen," said he, in a respectful and even
tender voice.  At the sound, a fearful rushing of shame seemed to
overwhelm her faculties; for she knew not how long he might have been
in the church, and that he had not heard her beseech Heaven to make him
less the object of her thoughts.  She sunk on her knees beside the
altar, and covered her face with her hands.

The action, the confusion might have betrayed her secret to Wallace.
But he only thought of her pious invocations for his safety; he only
remembered that it was she who had given a holy grave to the only woman
he could ever love; and, full of gratitude, as a pilgrim would approach
a saint, he drew near to her.  "Holiest of earthly maids," said he,
kneeling down beside her, "in this lonely hour, in the sacred presence
of Almighty Purity, receive my soul's thanks for the prayers I have
this moment heard you breathe for me.  They are more precious to me,
Lady Helen, than the generous plaudits of my country; they are a
greater reward to me than would have been the crown with which Scotland
sought to endow me, for do they not give me what all the world
cannot--the protection of Heaven?"

"I would pray for it," softly answered Helen, but not venturing to look
up.

"The prayer of meek goodness, we know, 'availeth much.'  Continue,
then, to offer up that incense for me," added he, "and I shall march
forth to-morrow with redoubled strength; for I shall think, holy maid,
that I have yet a Marion to pray for me on earth as well as one in
heaven."

Lady Helen's heart beat at these words, but it was with no unhallowed
emotion.  She withdrew her hands from her face and, clasping them,
looked up.  "Marion will indeed echo all my prayers, and He who reads
my heart will, I trust, grant them.  They are for your life, Sir
William Wallace," added she, turning to him with agitation, "for it is
menaced."

"I will inquire by whom," answered he, "when I have first paid my duty
at this altar for guarding it so long.  And dare I, daughter of
goodness, to ask you to unite the voice of your daughter of goodness,
to ask you to unite the voice of your gentle spirit with the secret one
of mine?  I would beseech Heaven for pardon on my own transgressions; I
would ask of its mercy to establish the liberty of Scotland.  Pray with
me, Lady Helen, and the invocations our souls utter will meet the
promise of Him who said: 'Where two or three are joined together in
prayer, there am I in the midst of them.'"

Helen looked on him with a holy smile; and pressing the crucifix which
she held to her lips, bowed her head on it in mute assent.  Wallace
threw himself prostrate on the steps of the altar; and the fervor of
his sighs alone breathed to his companion the deep devotion of his
soul.  How the time passed he knew not, so was he absorbed in the
communion which his spirit held in heaven  with the most gracious of
beings.  But the bell of the palace striking the matin hour, reminded
him he was yet on earth; and looking up his eyes met those of Helen.
His devotional rosary hung on his arm; he kissed it.  "Wear this, holy
maid," said he, "in remembrance of this hour!"  She bowed her fair
neck, and he put the consecrated chain over it.  "Let it bear witness
to a friendship," added he, clasping her hands in his, "which will be
cemented by eternal ties in heaven."

Helen bent her face upon his hands; he felt the sacred tears of so pure
a compact upon them; and while he looked up, as if he thought the
spirit of his Marion hovered near, to bless a communion so remote from
all infringement of the sentiment he had dedicated forever to her,
Helen raised her head--and, with a terrible shriek, throwing her arms
around the body of Wallace, he, that moment, felt an assassin's steel
in his back, and she fell senseless on his breast.  He started on his
feet; a dagger fell from his wound to the ground, but the hand which
had struck the blow he could nowhere see.  To search further was then
impossible, for Helen lay on his bosom like dead.  Not doubting that
she had seen his assailant, and fainted from alarm, he was laying her
on the steps of the altar, that he might bring some water from the
basin of the chapel to recover her, when he saw that her arm was not
only stained with his blood, but streaming with her own.  The dagger
had gashed it in reaching him.

"Execrable villain!" cried he, turning cold at the sight, and instantly
comprehending that it was to defend him she had thrown her arms around
him, he exclaimed, in a voice of agony,  "Are two of the most matchless
women the earth ever saw to die for me!"  Trembling with alarm, and
with renewed grief--for the terrible scene of Ellerslie was now brought
in all its horrors before him--he tore off her veil to staunch the
blood; but the cut was too wide for his surgery; and, losing every
other consideration in fears for her life, he again took her in his
arms, and bore her out of the chapel.  He hastened through the dark
passage, and almost flying along the lighted galleries, entered the
hall.  The noisy fright of the servants, as he broke through their
ranks at the door, alarmed the revelers; and turning round, what was
their astonishment to behold the regent, pale and streaming with blood,
bearing in his arms a lady apparently lifeless, and covered with the
same dreadful hue!

Mar instantly recognized his daughter, and rushed toward her with a cry
of horror.  Wallace sunk, with his breathless load, upon the nearest
bench; and, while her head rested on his bosom, ordered surgery to be
brought.  Lady Mar gazed on the spectacle with a benumbed dismay.  None
present durst ask a question, till a priest drawing near, unwrapped the
arm of Helen, and discovered its deep wound.

"Who has done this?" cried her father, to Wallace, with all the anguish
of a parent in his countenance.

"I know not," replied he; "but I believe, some villain who aimed at my
life."

"Where is Lord de Valence?" exclaimed Mar, suddenly recollecting his
menaces against Wallace.

"I am here," replied he, in a composed voice; "would you have me seek
the assassin?"

"No, no," cried the earl, ashamed of his suspicion; "but here has been
some foul work--and my daughter is slain."

"Oh, not so!" cried Murray, who had hurried toward the dreadful group,
and knelt at her side.  "She will not die--so much excellence cannot
die."  A stifled groan from Wallace, accompanied by a look, told Murray
that he had known the death of similar excellence.  With this
unanswerable appeal, the young chieftain dropped his head on the other
hand of Helen; and, could any one have seen his face buried as it was
in her robes, they would have beheld tears of agony drawn from that
every-gay heart.

The wound was closed by the aid of another surgical priest, who had
followed the former into the hall, and Helen sighed convulsively.  At
this intimation of recovery, the priest made all, excepting those who
supported her, stand back.  But, as Lady Mar lingered near Wallace, she
saw the paleness of his countenance turn to a deadly hue, and his eyes
closing, he sunk back on the bench.  Her shrieks now resounded through
the hall, and, falling into hysterics, she was taken into the gallery;
while the more collected Lady Ruthven remained to attend the victims
before her.

At the instant Wallace fell, De Valence, losing all self-command,
caught hold of De Warenne's arm, and whispering, "I thought it was
sure--long live King Edward!" rushed out of the hall.  These words
