
"Surely," he thought, as, having finished his communication, he was
about to leave the apartment, "surely the demons of Ambition and Avarice
will unclose the talons which they have fixed upon this man, at a charm
like this."

And indeed Richard's heart had been formed of the nether millstone, had
he not been duly affected by these first and last tokens of his
mother's affection. He leant his head upon a table, and his tears flowed
plentifully. Hartley left him undisturbed for more than an hour, and on
his return found him in nearly the same attitude in which he had left
him.

"I regret to disturb you at this moment," he said, "but I have still
a part of my duty to discharge. I must place in your possession the
deposit which your mother made in my hands--and I must also remind
you that time flies fast, and that you have scarce an hour or two to
determine whether you will prosecute your Indian voyage, under the new
view of circumstances which I have opened to you."

Middlemas took the bills which his mother had bequeathed him. As he
raised his head, Hartley could observe that his face was stained with
tears. Yet he counted over the money with mercantile accuracy; and
though he assumed the pen for the purpose of writing a discharge with an
air of inconsolable dejection, yet he drew it up in good set terms, like
one who had his senses much at his command.

"And now," he said, in a mournful voice, "give me my mother's
narrative."

Hartley almost started, and answered hastily, "You have the poor lady's
letter, which was addressed to yourself--the narrative is addressed to
me. It is my warrant for disposing of a large sum of money--it concerns
the rights of third parties, and I cannot part with it."

"Surely, surely it were better to deliver it into my hands, were it but
to weep over it," answered Middlemas. "My fortune, Hartley, has been
very cruel. You see that my parents purposed to have made me their
undoubted heir; yet their purpose was disappointed by accident. And
now my mother comes with well-intended fondness, and while she means
to advance my fortune, furnishes evidence to destroy it.--Come, come,
Hartley--you must be conscious that my mother wrote those details
entirely for my information. I am the rightful owner, and insist on
having them."

"I am sorry I must insist on refusing your demand," answered Hartley,
putting the papers in his pocket. "You ought to consider, that if this
communication has destroyed the idle and groundless hopes which you have
indulged in, it has, at the same time, more than trebled your capital;
and that if there are some hundreds or thousands in the world richer
than yourself, there are many millions not half so well provided. Set a
brave spirit, then, against your fortune, and do not doubt your success
in life."

His words seemed to sink into the gloomy mind of Middlemas. He stood
silent for a moment, and then answered with a reluctant and insinuating
voice,--

"My dear Hartley, we have long been companions--you can have neither
pleasure nor interest in ruining my hopes--you may find some in
forwarding them. Moncada's fortune will enable me to allow five thousand
pounds to the friend who should aid me in my difficulties."

"Good morning to you, Mr. Middlemas," said Hartley, endeavouring to
withdraw.

"One moment--one moment," said Middlemas, holding his friend by the
button at the same time, "I meant to say ten thousand--and--and--marry
whomsoever you like--I will not be your hindrance."

"You are a villain!" said Hartley, breaking from him, "and I always
thought you so."

"And you," answered Middlemas, "are a fool, and I never thought yon
better. Off he goes--Let him--the game has been played and lost--I must
hedge my bets: India must be my back-play."

All was in readiness for his departure. A small vessel and a favouring
gale conveyed him and several other military gentlemen to the Downs,
where the Indiaman, which was to transport them from Europe, lay ready
for their reception.

His first feelings were sufficiently disconsolate. But accustomed from
his infancy to conceal his internal thoughts, he appeared in the course
of a week the gayest and best bred passenger who ever dared the long and
weary space betwixt Old England and her Indian possessions. At Madras,
where the sociable feelings of the resident inhabitants give ready
way to enthusiasm in behalf of any stranger of agreeable qualities,
he experienced that warm hospitality which distinguishes the British
character in the East.

Middlemas was well received in company, and in the way of becoming
an indispensable guest at every entertainment in the place, when the
vessel, on board of which Hartley acted as surgeon's mate, arrived at
the same settlement. The latter would not, from his situation, have been
entitled to expect much civility and attention; but this disadvantage
was made up by his possessing the most powerful introductions from
General Witherington, and from other persons of weight in Leadenhall
Street, the General's friends, to the principal inhabitants in the
settlement. He found himself once more, therefore, moving in the same
sphere with Middlemas, and under the alternative of living with him on
decent and distant terms, or of breaking off with him altogether.

The first of these courses might perhaps have been the wisest; but the
other was most congenial to the blunt and plain character of Hartley,
who saw neither propriety nor comfort in maintaining a show of friendly
intercourse, to conceal hate, contempt, and mutual dislike.

The circle at Fort St. George was much more restricted at that time than
it has been since. The coldness of the young men did not escape notice;
it transpired that they had been once intimates and fellow-students;
yet it was now found that they hesitated at accepting invitations to the
same parties. Rumour assigned many different and incompatible reasons
for this deadly breach, to which Hartley gave no attention whatever,
while Lieutenant Middlemas took care to countenance those which
represented the cause of the quarrel most favourably to himself.

"A little bit of rivalry had taken place," he said, when pressed by
gentlemen for an explanation; "he had only had the good luck to get
further in the good graces of a fair lady than his friend Hartley, who
had made a quarrel of it, as they saw. He thought it very silly to keep
up spleen, at such a distance of time and space. He was sorry, more
for the sake of the strangeness of the appearance of the thing than any
thing else, although his friend had really some very good points about
him."

While these whispers were working their effect in society, they did
not prevent Hartley from receiving the most flattering assurances of
encouragement and official promotion from the Madras government as
opportunity should arise. Soon after, it was intimated to him that a
medical appointment of a lucrative nature in a remote settlement was
conferred on him, which removed him for some time from Madras and its
neighbourhood.

Hartley accordingly sailed on his distant expedition; and it was
observed, that after his departure, the character of Middlemas, as if
some check had been removed, began to display itself in disagreeable
colours. It was noticed that this young man, whose manners were so
agreeable and so courteous during the first months after his arrival in
India, began now to show symptoms of a haughty and overbearing spirit.
He had adopted, for reasons which the reader may conjecture, but which
appeared to be mere whim, at Fort St. George, the name of Tresham, in
addition to that by which he had hitherto been distinguished, and in
this he presisted with an obstinacy, which belonged more to the pride
than the craft of his character. The Lieutenant-Colonel of the regiment,
an old cross-tempered martinet, did not choose to indulge the Captain
(such was now the rank of Middlemas) in this humour.

"He knew no officer," he said, "by any name save that which he bore in
his commission," and he Middlemass'd the Captain on all occasions.

One fatal evening, the Captain was so much provoked, as to intimate
peremptorily, "that he knew his own name best."

"Why, Captain Middlemas," replied the Colonel, "it is not every child
that knows its own father, so how can every man be so sure of his own
name?"

The bow was drawn at a venture, but the shaft found the rent in the
armour, and stung deeply. In spite of all the interposition which could
be attempted, Middlemas insisted on challenging the Colonel, who could
be persuaded to no apology.

"If Captain Middlemas," he said, "thought the cap fitted, he was welcome
to wear it."

The result was a meeting, in which, after the parties had exchanged
shots, the seconds tendered their mediation. It was rejected by
Middlemas, who, at the second fire, had the misfortune to kill his
commanding officer. In consequence, he was obliged to fly from the
British settlements; for, being universally blamed for having pushed the
quarrel to extremity, there was little doubt that the whole severity of
military discipline would be exercised upon the delinquent. Middlemas,
therefore, vanished from Fort St. George, and, though the affair had
made much noise at the time, was soon no longer talked of. It was
understood, in general, that he had gone to seek that fortune at the
court of some native prince, which he could no longer hope for in the
British settlements.




CHAPTER THE TENTH.


Three years passed away after the fatal encounter mentioned in the last
Chapter, and Doctor Hartley returning from his appointed mission, which
was only temporary, received encouragement to settle in Madras in a
medical capacity; and upon having done so, soon had reason to think he
had chosen a line in which he might rise to wealth and reputation. His
practice was not confined to his countrymen, but much sought after among
the natives, who, whatever may be their prejudices against the Europeans
in other respects, universally esteem their superior powers in the
medical profession. This lucrative branch of practice rendered it
necessary that Hartley should make the Oriental languages his study, in
order to hold communication with his patients without the intervention
of an interpreter. He had enough of opportunities to practise as a
linguist, for, in acknowledgment, as he used jocularly to say, of the
large fees of the wealthy Moslemah and Hindoos, he attended the poor of
all nations gratis, whenever he was called upon.

It so chanced, that one evening he was hastily summoned by a
message from the Secretary of the Government, to attend a patient of
consequence. "Yet he is, after all, only a Fakir," said the message.
"You will find him at the tomb of Cara Razi, the Mahomedan saint and
doctor, about one coss from the fort. Enquire for him by the name of
Barak el Hadgi. Such a patient promises no fees; but we know how
little you care about the pagodas; and, besides, the Government is your
paymaster on this occasion."

"That is the last matter to be thought on," said Hartley, and instantly
repaired in his palanquin to the place pointed out to him.

The tomb of the Owliah, or Mahomedan Saint, Cara Razi, was a place held
in much reverence by every good Mussulman. It was situated in the centre
of a grove of mangos and tamarind-trees, and was built of red stone,
having three domes, and minarets at every corner. There was a court
in front, as usual, around which were cells constructed for the
accommodation of the Fakirs who visited the tomb from motives of
devotion, and made a longer or shorter residence there as they thought
proper, subsisting upon the alms which the Faithful never fail to bestow
on them in exchange for the benefit of their prayers. These devotees
were engaged day and night in reading verses of the Koran before the
tomb, which was constructed of white marble, inscribed with sentences
from the book of the Prophet, and with the various titles conferred by
the Koran upon the Supreme Being. Such a sepulchre, of which there are
many, is, with its appendages and attendants, respected during wars and
revolutions, and no less by Feringis, (Franks, that is,) and Hindoos,
than by Mahomedans themselves. The Fakirs, in return, act as spies for
all parties, and are often employed in secret missions of importance.

Complying with the Mahomedan custom, our friend Hartley laid aside his
shoes at the gates of the holy precincts, and avoiding to give offence
by approaching near to the tomb, he went up to the principal Moullah, or
priest who was distinguishable by the length of his beard, and the
size of the large wooden beads, with which the Mahomedans, like the
Catholics, keep register of their prayers. Such a person, venerable by
his age, sanctity of character, and his real or supposed contempt
of worldly pursuits and enjoyments, is regarded as the head of an
establishment of this kind.

The Moullah is permitted by his situation to be more communicative
with strangers than his younger brethren, who in the present instance
remained with their eyes fixed on the Koran, muttering their recitations
without noticing the European, or attending to what he said, as he
enquired at their superior for Barak el Hadgi.

The Moullah was seated on the earth, from which he did not arise, or
show any mark of reverence; nor did he interrupt the tale of his beads,
which he continued to count assiduously while Hartley was speaking. When
he finished, the old man raised his eyes, and looked at him with an air
of distraction, as if he was endeavouring to recollect what he had
been saying; he at length pointed to one of the cells, and resumed his
devotions like one who felt impatient of whatever withdrew his attention
from his sacred duties, were it but for an instant.

Hartley entered the cell indicated, with the usual salutation of Salam
Alaikum. His patient lay on a little carpet in a corner of the small
white-washed cell. He was a man of about forty, dressed in the black
robe of his order, very much torn and patched. He wore a high conical
cap of Tartarian felt, and had round his neck the string of black beads
belonging to his order. His eyes and posture indicated suffering, which
he was enduring with stoical patience.

"Salam Alaikum," said Hartley; "you are in pain, my father?"--a title
which he gave rather to the profession than to the years of the person
he addressed.

"_Salam Alaikum bema sebastem_," answered the Fakir; "Well is it for
you that you have suffered patiently. The book saith, such shall be the
greeting of the angels to those who enter paradise."

The conversation being thus opened, the physician proceeded to enquire
into the complaints of the patient, and to prescribe what he thought
advisable. Having done this, he was about to retire, when, to his great
surprise, the Fakir tendered him a ring of some value.

"The wise," said Hartley, declining the present, and at the same time
paying a suitable compliment to the Fakir's cap and robe,--"the wise of
every country are brethren. My left hand takes no guerdon of my right."

"A Feringi can then refuse gold?" said the Fakir. "I thought they took
it from every hand, whether pure as that of an Houri, or leprous like
Gehazi's--even as the hungry dog recketh not whether the flesh he eateth
be of the camel of the prophet Saleth, or of the ass of Degial--on whose
head be curses!"

"The book says," replied Hartley, "that it is Allah who closes and who
enlarges the heart. Frank and Mussulman are all alike moulded by his
pleasure."

"My brother hath spoken wisely," answered the patient. "Welcome the
disease, if it bring thee acquainted with a wise physician. For what
saith the poet--'It is well to have fallen to the earth, if while
grovelling there thou shalt discover a diamond.'"

The physician made repeated visits to his patient, and continued to do
so even after the health of El Hadgi was entirely restored. He had no
difficulty in discerning in him one of those secret agents frequently
employed by Asiatic Sovereigns. His intelligence, his learning, above
all, his versatility and freedom from prejudices of every kind, left no
doubt of Barak's possessing the necessary qualifications for conducting
such delicate negotiations; while his gravity of habit and profession
could not prevent his features from expressing occasionally a perception
of humour, not usually seen in devotees of his class.

Barak el Hadgi talked often, amidst their private conversations, of the
power and dignity of the Nawaub of Mysore; and Hartley had little
doubt that he came from the Court of Hyder Ali, on some secret mission,
perhaps for achieving a more solid peace betwixt that able and sagacious
Prince and the East India Company's Government,--that which existed for
the time being regarded on both parts as little more than a hollow and
insincere truce. He told many stories to the advantage of this Prince,
who certainly was one of the wisest that Hindostan could boast; and
amidst great crimes, perpetrated to gratify his ambition, displayed
many instances of princely generosity, and, what was a little more
surprising, of even-handed justice.

On one occasion, shortly before Barak el Hadgi left Madras, he visited
the Doctor, and partook of his sherbet, which he preferred to his own,
perhaps because a few glasses of rum or brandy were usually added to
enrich the compound. It might be owing to repeated applications to the
jar which contained this generous fluid, that the Pilgrim became
more than usually frank in his communications, and not contented with
praising his Nawaub with the most hyperbolic eloquence, he began to
insinuate the influence which he himself enjoyed with the Invincible,
the Lord and Shield of the Faith of the Prophet.

"Brother of my soul," he said, "do but think if thou needest aught that
the all-powerful Hyder Ali Khan Bohander can give; and then use not the
intercession of those who dwell in palaces, and wear jewels in their
turbans, but seek the cell of thy brother at the Great City, which
is Seringapatam. And the poor Fakir, in his torn cloak, shall better
advance thy suit with the Nawaub [for Hyder did not assume the title of
Sultann] than they who sit upon seats of honour in the Divan."

With these and sundry other expressions of regard, he exhorted Hartley
to come into the Mysore, and look upon the face of the Great Prince,
whose glance inspired wisdom, and whose nod conferred wealth, so that
Folly or Poverty could not appear before him. He offered at the same
time to requite the kindness which Hartley had evinced to him, by
showing him whatever was worthy the attention of a sage in the land of
Mysore.

Hartley was not reluctant to promise to undertake the proposed journey,
if the continuance of good understanding betwixt their governments
should render it practicable, and in reality looked forward to the
possibility of such an event with a good deal of interest. The friends
parted with mutual good wishes, after exchanging in the Oriental
fashion, such gifts as became sages, to whom knowledge was to be
supposed dearer than wealth. Barak el Hadgi presented Hartley with a
small quantity of the balsam of Mecca, very hard to be procured in
an unadulterated form, and gave him at the same time a passport in a
peculiar character, which he assured him would be respected by every
officer of the Nawaub, should his friend be disposed to accomplish
his visit to the Mysore. "The head of him who should disrespect this
safe-conduct," he said, "shall not be more safe than that of the
barley-stalk which the reaper has grasped in his hand."

Hartley requited these civilities by the present of a few medicines
little used in the East, but such as he thought might, with suitable
directions, be safely intrusted to a man so intelligent as his Moslem
friend.

It was several months after Barak had returned to the interior of India,
that Hartley was astonished by an unexpected rencounter.

The ships from Europe had but lately arrived, and had brought over their
usual cargo of boys longing to be commanders, and young women without
any purpose of being married, but whom a pious duty to some brother,
