
"No."

"Did he remain on the Titanic after the collision?"

"I do not know."

Questions of this kind were showered at the few survivors who stood at
the railing, but they seemed too confused to answer them intelligibly,
and after replying evasively to some they would disappear.


RUSHES ON TO DOCK

"Are you going to anchor for the night?" Captain Rostron was asked by
megaphone as his boat approached Ambrose Light. It was then raining
heavily.

"No," came the reply. "I am going into port. There are sick people on
board."

"We tried to learn when she would dock," said Dr. Walter Kennedy, head
of the big ambulance corps on the mist-shrouded pier, "and we were told
it would not be before midnight and that most probably it would not be
before dawn to-morrow. The childish deception that has been practiced
for days by the people who are responsible for the Titanic has been
carried up to the very moment of the landing of the survivors."

She proceeded past the Cunard pier, where 2000 persons were waiting
her, and steamed to a spot opposite the White Star piers at Twenty-first
Street.

The ports in the big inclosed pier of the Cunard Line were opened, and
through them the waiting hundreds, almost frantic with anxiety over what
the Carpathia might reveal, watched her as with nerve-destroying leisure
she swung about in the river, dropping over the life-boats of the
Titanic that they might be taken to the piers of the White Star Line.

THE TITANIC LIFE-BOATS

It was dark in the river, but the lowering away of the life-boats
could be seen from the Carpathia's pier, and a deep sigh arose from the
multitude there as they caught this first glance of anything associated
with the Titanic.

Then the Carpathia started for her own pier. As she approached it the
ports on the north side of pier 54 were closed that the Carpathia might
land there, but through the two left open to accommodate the forward
and after gangplanks of the big liner the watchers could see her
looming larger and larger in the darkness till finally she was directly
alongside the pier.

As the boats were towed away the picture taking and shouting of
questions began again. John Badenoch, a buyer for Macy & Co., called
down to a representative of the firm that neither Mr. nor Mrs. Isidor
Straus were among the rescued on board the Carpathia. An officer of
the Carpathia called down that 710 of the Titanic's passengers were on
board, but refused to reply to other questions.

The heavy hawsers were made fast without the customary shouting of
ship's officers and pier hands. From the crowd on the pier came a long,
shuddering murmur. In it were blended sighs and hundreds of whispers.
The burden of it all was: "Here they come."


ANXIOUS MEN AND WOMEN

About each gangplank a portable fence had been put in place, marking
off some fifty feet of the pier, within which stood one hundred or more
customs officials. Next to the fence, crowded close against it, were
anxious men and women, their gaze strained for a glance of the first
from the ship, their mouths opened to draw their breaths in spasmodic,
quivering gasps, their very bodies shaking with suppressed excitement,
excitement which only the suspense itself was keeping in subjection.

These were the husbands and wives, children, parents, sweethearts and
friends of those who had sailed upon the Titanic on its maiden voyage.

They pressed to the head of the pier, marking the boats of the wrecked
ship as they dangled at the side of the Carpathia and were revealed in
the sudden flashes of the photographers upon the tugs. They spoke
in whispers, each group intent upon its own sad business. Newspaper
writers, with pier passes showing in their hat bands, were everywhere.

A sailor hurried outside the fence and disappeared, apparently on a
mission for his company. There was a deep-drawn sigh as he walked away,
shaking his head toward those who peered eagerly at him. Then came a
man and woman of the Carpathia's own passengers, as their orderly dress
showed them to be.

Again a sigh like a sob swept over the crowd, and again they turned back
to the canopied gangplank.


THE FIRST SURVIVORS

Several minutes passed and then out of the first cabin gangway; tunneled
by a somber awning, streamed the first survivors. A young woman,
hatless, her light brown hair disordered and the leaden weight of
crushing sorrow heavy upon eyes and sensitive mouth, was in the van. She
stopped, perplexed, almost ready to drop with terror and exhaustion, and
was caught by a customs official.

"A survivor?" he questioned rapidly, and a nod of the head answering
him, he demanded:

"Your name."

The answer given, he started to lead her toward that section of the pier
where her friends would be waiting.

When she stepped from the gangplank there was quiet on the pier. The
answers of the woman could almost be heard by those fifty feet away, but
as she staggered, rather than walked, toward the waiting throng outside
the fence, a low wailing sound arose from the crowd.

"Dorothy, Dorothy!" cried a man from the number. He broke through the
double line of customs inspectors as though it was composed of
wooden toys and caught the woman to his breast. She opened her lips
inarticulately, weakly raised her arms and would have pitched forward
upon her face had she not been supported. Her fair head fell weakly to
one side as the man picked her up in his arms, and, with tears streaming
down his face, stalked down the long avenue of the pier and down the
long stairway to a waiting taxicab.

The wailing of the crowd--its cadences, wild and weird--grew steadily
louder and louder till they culminated in a mighty shriek, which swept
the whole big pier as though at the direction of some master hand.

RUMORS AFLOAT

The arrival of the Carpathia was the signal for the most sensational
rumors to circulate through the crowd on the pier.

First, Mrs. John Jacob Astor was reported to have died at 8.06 o'clock,
when the Carpathia was on her way up the harbor.

Captain Smith and the first engineer were reported to have shot
themselves when they found that the Titanic was doomed to sink.
Afterward it was learned that Captain Smith and the engineer went down
with their ship in perfect courage and coolness.

Major Archibald Butt, President Taft's military aide, was said to have
entered into an agreement with George D. Widener, Colonel John Jacob
Astor and Isidor Straus to kill them first and then shoot himself before
the boat sank. It was said that this agreement had been carried out.
Later it was shown that, like many other men on the ship, they had gone
down without the exhibition of a sign of fear.


MRS. CORNELL SAFE

Magistrate Cornell's wife and her two sisters were among the first
to leave the ship. They were met at the first cabin pier entrance by
Magistrate Cornell and a party of friends. None of the three women had
hats. One of those who met them was Magistrate Cornell's son. One of
Mrs. Cornell's sisters was overheard to remark that "it would be a
dreadful thing when the ship began really to unload."

The three women appeared to be in a very nervous state. Their hair was
more or less dishevelled. They were apparently fully dressed save for
their hats. Clothing had been supplied them in their need and everything
had been done to make them comfortable. One of the party said that the
collision occurred at 9.45.

Following closely the Cornell party was H. J. Allison of Montreal, who
came to meet his family. One of the party, who was weeping bitterly as
he left the pier, explained that the only one of the family that was
rescued was the young brother.


MRS. ASTOR APPEARED

In a few minutes young Mrs. Astor with her maid appeared. She came down
the gangplank unassisted. She was wearing a white sweater. Vincent Astor
and William Dobbyn, Colonel Astor's secretary, greeted her and
hurried her to a waiting limousine which contained clothing and other
necessaries of which it was thought she might be in need. The young
woman was white-faced and silent. Nobody cared to intrude upon
her thoughts. Her stepson said little to her. He did not feel like
questioning her at such a time, he said.


LAST SEEN OF COLONEL ASTOR

Walter M. Clark, a nephew of the senator, said that he had seen Colonel
Astor put his wife in a boat, after assuring her that he would soon
follow her in another. Mr. Clark and others said that Colonel and Mrs.
Astor were in their suite when the crash came, and that they appeared
quietly on deck a few minutes afterward.

Here and there among the passengers of the Carpathia and from the
survivors of the Titanic the story was gleaned of the rescue. Nothing in
life will ever approach the joy felt by the hundreds who were waiting in
little boats on the spot where the Titanic foundered when the lights of
the Carpathia were first distinguished. That was at 4 o'clock on Monday
morning.


DR. FRAUENTHAL WELCOMED

Efforts were made to learn from Dr. Henry Franenthal{sic} something
about the details of how he was rescued. Just then, or as he was leaving
the pier, beaming with evident delight, he was surrounded by a big crowd
of his friends.

"There's Harry! There he is!" they yelled and made a rush for him.

All the doctor's face that wasn't covered with red beard was aglow
with smiles as his friends hugged him and slapped him on the back. They
rushed him off bodily through the crowd and he too was whirled home.


A SAD STORY

How others followed--how heartrending stories of partings and of
thrilling rescues were poured out in an amazing stream--this has all
been told over and over again in the news that for days amazed, saddened
and angered the entire world. It is the story of a disaster that
nations, it is hoped, will make impossible in the years to come.

In the stream of survivors were a peer of the realm, Sir Cosmo Duff
Gordon, and his secretary, side by side with plain Jack Jones, of
Birmingham, able seaman, millionaires and paupers, women with bags of
jewels and others with nightgowns their only property.


MORE THAN SEVENTY WIDOWS

More than seventy widows were in the weeping company. The only large
family that was saved in its entirety was that of the Carters, of
Philadelphia. Contrasting with this remarkable salvage of wealthy
Pennsylvanians was the sleeping eleven-months-old baby of the Allisons,
whose father, mother and sister went down to death after it and its
nurse had been placed in a life-boat.

Millionaire and pauper, titled grandee and weeping immigrant, Ismay, the
head of the White Star Company, and Jack Jones from the stoke hole were
surrounded instantly. Some would gladly have escaped observation. Every
man among the survivors acted as though it were first necessary to
explain how he came to be in a life-boat. Some of the stories smacked of
Munchausen. Others were as plain and unvarnished as a pike staff. Those
that were most sincere and trustworthy had to be fairly pulled from
those who gave their sad testimony.

Far into the night the recitals were made. They were told in the rooms
of hotels, in the wards of hospitals and upon trains that sped toward
saddened homes. It was a symposium of horror and heroism, the like of
which has not been known in the civilized world since man established
his dominion over the sea.


STEERAGE PASSENGERS

The two hundred and more steerage passengers did not leave the ship
until 11 o'clock. They were in a sad condition. The women were without
wraps and the few men there were wore very little clothing. A poor
Syrian woman who said she was Mrs. Habush, bound for Youngstown, Ohio,
carried in her arms a six-year-old baby girl. This woman had lost her
husband and three brothers. "I lost four of my men folks," she cried.


TWO LITTLE BOYS

Among the survivors who elicited a large measure of sympathy were two
little French boys who were dropped, almost naked, from the deck of the
sinking Titanic into a life-boat. From what place in France did they
come and to what place in the New World were they bound? There was not
one iota of information to be had as to the identity of the waifs of the
deep, the orphans of the Titanic.

The two baby boys, two and four years old, respectively, were in charge
of Miss Margaret Hays, who is a fluent speaker of French, and she had
tried vainly to get from the lisping lips of the two little ones some
information that would lead to the finding of their relatives.

Miss Hays, also a survivor of the Titanic, took charge of the almost
naked waifs on the Carpathia. She became warmly attached to the two
boys, who unconcernedly played about, not understanding the great
tragedy that had come into their lives.

The two little curly-heads did not understand it all. Had not their
pretty nineteen-year-old foster mother provided them with pretty suits
and little white shoes and playthings a-plenty? Then, too, Miss Hays had
a Pom dog that she brought with her from Paris and which she carried
in her arms when she left the Titanic and held to her bosom through the
long night in the life-boat, and to which the children became warmly
attached. All three became aliens on an alien shore.

Miss Hays, unable to learn the names of the little fellows, had dubbed
the older Louis and the younger "Lump." "Lump" was all that his name
implies, for he weighed almost as much as his brother. They were
dark-eyed and brown curly-haired children, who knew how to smile as only
French children can.

On the fateful night of the Titanic disaster and just as the last boats
were pulling away with their human freight, a man rushed to the rail
holding the babes under his arms. He cried to the passengers in one
of the boats and held the children aloft. Three or four sailors and
passengers held up their arms. The father dropped the older boy. He was
safely caught. Then he dropped the little fellow and saw him folded in
the arms of a sailor. Then the boat pulled away.

The last seen of the father, whose last living act was to save his
babes, he was waving his hand in a final parting. Then the Titanic
plunged to the ocean's bed.


BABY TRAVERS

Still more pitiable in one way was the lot of the baby survivor,
eleven-months-old Travers Allison, the only member of a family of
four to survive the wreck. His father, H. J. Allison, and mother and
Lorraine, a child of three, were victims of the catastrophe. Baby
Travers, in the excitement following the crash, was separated from the
rest of the family just before the Titanic went down. With the party
were two nurses and a maid.

Major Arthur Peuchen, of Montreal, one of the survivors, standing near
the little fellow, who, swathed in blankets, lay blinking at his nurse,
described the death of Mrs. Allison. She had gone to the deck without
her husband, and, frantically seeking him, was directed by an officer to
the other side of the ship.

She failed to find Mr. Allison and was quickly hustled into one of the
collapsible life-boats, and when last seen by Major Peuchen she was
toppling out of the half-swamped boat. J. W. Allison, a cousin of H. J.
Allison, was at the pier to care for Baby Travers and his nurse. They
were taken to the Manhattan Hotel.

Describing the details of the perishing of the Allison family, the
rescued nurse said they were all in bed when the Titanic hit the berg.
