


CHAPTER XIX.

HOW HEREWARD CLEARED BOURNE OF FRENCHMEN.


It may have been well, a week after, that Hereward rode from the
direction of Boston, with Martin running at his heels.

As Hereward rode along the summer wold the summer sun sank low, till
just before it went down he came to an island of small enclosed fields,
high banks, elm-trees, and a farm inside; one of those most ancient
holdings of the South and East Counts, still to be distinguished, by
their huge banks and dikes full of hedgerow timber, from the more
modern corn-lands outside, which were in Hereward's time mostly common
pasture-lands.

"This should be Azerdun," said he; "and there inside, as I live, stands
Azer getting in his crops. But who has he with him?"

With the old man were some half-dozen men of his own rank; some helping
the serfs with might and main; one or two standing on the top of the
banks, as if on the lookout; but all armed _cap-a-pie_.

"His friends are helping him to get them in," quoth Martin, "for fear of
the rascally Normans. A pleasant and peaceable country we have come back
to."

"And a very strong fortress are they holding," said Hereward, "against
either Norman horsemen or Norman arrows. How to dislodge those six
fellows without six times their number, I do not see. It is well to
recollect that."

And so he did; and turned to use again and again, in after years, the
strategetic capabilities of an old-fashioned English farm.

Hereward spurred his horse up to the nearest gate, and was instantly
confronted by a little fair-haired man, as broad as he was tall, who
heaved up a long "twybill," or double axe, and bade him, across the
gate, go to a certain place.

"Little Winter, little Winter, my chuck, my darling, my mad fellow,
my brother-in-arms, my brother in robbery and murder, are you grown so
honest in your old age that you will not know Hereward the wolf's-head?"

"Hereward!" shrieked the doughty little man. "I took you for an accursed
Norman in those outlandish clothes;" and lifting up no little voice, he
shouted,--

"Hereward is back, and Martin Lightfoot at his heels!"

The gate was thrown open, and Hereward all but pulled off his horse. He
was clapped on the back, turned round and round, admired from head
to foot, shouted at by old companions of his boyhood, naughty young
housecarles of his old troop, now settled down into honest thriving
yeomen, hard working and hard fighting, who had heard again and again,
with pride, of his doughty doings over sea. There was Winter, and
Gwenoch, and Gery, Hereward's cousin,--ancestor, it may be, of the
ancient and honorable house of that name, and of those parts; and Duti
and Outi, the two valiant twins; and Ulfard the White, and others, some
of whose names, and those of their sons, still stand in Domesday-book.

"And what," asked Hereward, after the first congratulations were over,
"of my mother? What of the folk at Bourne?"

All looked each at the other, and were silent.

"You are too late, young lord," said Azer.

"Too late?"

"The Norman"--Azer called him what most men called him then--"has given
it to a man of Gilbert of Ghent's,--his butler, groom, cook, for aught I
know."

"To Gilbert's man? And my mother?"

"God help your mother, and your young brother, too. We only know that
three days ago some five-and-twenty French marched into the place."

"And you did not stop them?"

"Young sir, who are we to stop an army? We have enough to keep our own.
Gilbert, let alone the villain Ivo of Spalding, can send a hundred men
down on us in four-and-twenty hours."

"Then I," said Hereward in a voice of thunder, "will find the way to
send two hundred down on him"; and turning his horse from the gate, he
rode away furiously towards Bourne.

He turned back as suddenly, and galloped into the field.

"Lads! old comrades! will you stand by me if I need you? Will you follow
Hereward, as hundreds have followed him already, if he will only go
before?"

"We will, we will."

"I shall be back ere morning. What you have to do, I will tell you
then."

"Stop and eat, but for a quarter of an hour."

Then Hereward swore a great oath, by oak and ash and thorn, that he
would neither eat bread nor drink water while there was a Norman left in
Bourne.

"A little ale, then, if no water," said Azer.

Hereward laughed, and rode away,

"You will not go single-handed against all those ruffians," shouted the
old man after him. "Saddle, lads, and go with him, some of you, for very
shame's sake."

But when they galloped after Hereward, he sent them back. He did not
know yet, he said, what he would do. Better that they should gather
their forces, and see what men they could afford him, in case of open
battle. And he rode swiftly on.

When he came within the lands of Bourne it was dark.

"So much the better," thought Hereward. "I have no wish to see the old
place till I have somewhat cleaned it out."

He rode slowly into the long street between the overhanging gables. At
the upper end he could see the high garden walls of his mother's house,
and rising over them the great hall, its narrow windows all ablaze with
light. With a bitter growl he rode on, trying to recollect a house where
he could safely lodge. Martin pointed one out.

"Old Viking Surturbrand, the housecarle, did live there, and maybe lives
there still."

"We will try." And Martin knocked at the door.

The wicket was opened, but not the door; and through the wicket window a
surly voice asked who was there.

"Who lives here?"

"Perry, son of Surturbrand. Who art thou who askest?"

"An honest gentleman and his servant, looking for a night's lodging."

"This is no place for honest folk."

"As for that, we don't wish to be more honest than you would have us;
but lodging we will pay for, freely and well."

"We want none of your money"; and the wicket was shut.

Martin pulled out his axe, and drove the panel in.

"What are you doing? We shall rouse the town," said Hereward.

"Let be; these are no French, but honest English, and like one all the
better for a little horse-play."

"What didst do that for?" asked the surly voice again. "Were it not for
those rascal Frenchmen up above, I would come out and split thy skull
for thee."

"If there be Frenchmen up above," said Martin, in a voice of feigned
terror, "take us in for the love of the Virgin and all the saints, or
murdered we shall be ere morning light."

"You have no call to stay in the town, man, unless you like."

Hereward rode close to the wicket, and said in a low voice, "I am a
nobleman of Flanders, good sir, and a sworn foe to all French. My horse
is weary, and cannot make a step forward; and if you be a Christian man,
you will take me in and let me go off safe ere morning light."

"From Flanders?" And the man turned and seemed to consult those within.
At length the door was slowly opened, and Perry appeared, his double axe
over his shoulder.

"If you be from Flanders, come in for mercy; but be quick, ere those
Frenchmen get wind of you."

Hereward went in. Five or six men were standing round the long table,
upon which they had just laid down their double axes and javelins. More
than one countenance Hereward recognized at once. Over the peat-fire in
the chimney-corner sat a very old man, his hands upon his knees, as
he warmed his bare feet at the embers. He started up at the noise, and
Hereward saw at once that it was old Surturbrand, and that he was blind.

"Who is it? Is Hereward come?" asked he, with the dull, dreamy voice of
age.

"Not Hereward, father," said some one, "but a knight from Flanders."

The old man dropped his head upon his breast again with a querulous
whine, while Hereward's heart beat high at hearing his own name. At all
events he was among friends; and approaching the table he unbuckled his
sword and laid it down among the other weapons. "At least," said he, "I
shall have no need of thee as long as I am here among honest men."

"What shall I do with my master's horse?" asked Martin. "He can't stand
in the street to be stolen by drunken French horseboys."

"Bring him in at the front door, and out at the back," said Perry. "Fine
times these, when a man dare not open his own yard-gate."

"You seem to be all besieged here," said Hereward. "How is this?"

"Besieged we are," said the man; and then, partly to turn the subject
off, "Will it please you to eat, noble sir?"

Hereward ate and drank: while his hosts eyed him, not without some
lingering suspicion, but still with admiration and some respect. His
splendid armor and weapons, as well as the golden locks which fell far
below his shoulders, and conveniently hid a face which he did not wish
yet to have recognized, showed him to be a man of the highest rank;
while the palm of his small hand, as hard and bony as any woodman's,
proclaimed him to be no novice of a fighting man. The strong Flemish
accent which both he and Martin Lightfoot had assumed prevented the
honest Englishmen from piercing his disguise. They watched him, while he
in turn watched them, struck by their uneasy looks and sullen silence.

"We are a dull company," said he after a while, courteously enough. "We
used to be told in Flanders that there were none such stout drinkers and
none such jolly singers as you gallant men of the Danelagh here."

"Dull times make dull company," said one, "and no offence to you, Sir
Knight."

"Are you such a stranger," asked Perry, "that you do not know what has
happened in this town during the last three days?"

"No good, I will warrant, if you have Frenchmen in it."

"Why was not Hereward here?" wailed the old man in the corner. "It never
would have happened if he had been in the town."

"What?" asked Hereward, trying to command himself.

"What has happened," said Perry, "makes a free Englishman's blood boil
to tell of. Here, Sir Knight, three days ago, comes in this Frenchman
with some twenty ruffians of his own, and more of one Taillebois's, too,
to see him safe; says that this new king, this base-born Frenchman, has
given away all Earl Morcar's lands, and that Bourne is his; kills a man
or two; upsets the women; gets drunk, ruffles, and roisters; breaks into
my lady's bower, calling her to give up her keys, and when she gives
them, will have all her jewels too. She faces them like a brave
Princess, and two of the hounds lay hold of her, and say that she shall
ride through Bourne as she rode through Coventry. The boy Godwin--he
that was the great Earl's godson, our last hope, the last of our
house--draws sword on them; and he, a boy of sixteen summers, kills them
both out of hand. The rest set on him, cut his head off, and there it
sticks on the gable spike of the hall to this hour. And do you ask,
after that, why free Englishmen are dull company?"

"And our turn will come next," growled somebody. "The turn will go all
round; no man's life or land, wife or daughters, will be safe soon for
these accursed Frenchmen, unless, as the old man says, Hereward comes
back."

Once again the old man wailed out of the chimney-corner: "Why did they
ever send Hereward away? I warned the good Earl, I warned my good lady,
many a time, to let him sow his wild oats and be done with them; or they
might need him some day when they could not find him! He was a lad! He
was a lad!" and again he whined, and sank into silence.

Hereward heard all this dry-eyed, hardening his heart into a great
resolve. "This is a dark story," said he calmly, "and it would behoove
me as a gentleman to succor this distressed lady, did I but know how.
Tell me what I can do now, and I will do it."

"Your health!" cried one. "You speak like a true knight."

"And he looks the man to keep his word, I'll warrant him," spoke
another.

"He does," said Perry, shaking his head; "but if anything could have
been done, sir, be sure we would have done it: but all our armed men are
scattered up and down the country, each taking care, as is natural,
of his own cattle and his own women. There are not ten men-at-arms in
Bourne this night; and, what is worse, sir, as you know, who seem to
have known war as well as me, there is no man to lead them."

Here Hereward was on the point of saying, "And what if I led you?"--On
the point too of discovering himself: but he stopped short.

Was it fair to involve this little knot of gallant fellows in what might
be a hopeless struggle, and have all Bourne burned over their heads ere
morning by the ruffian Frenchmen? No; his mother's quarrel was his own
private quarrel. He would go alone and see the strength of the enemy;
and after that, may be, he would raise the country on them: or--and
half a dozen plans suggested themselves to his crafty brain as he sat
brooding and scheming: then, as always, utterly self-confident.

He was startled by a burst of noise outside,--music, laughter, and
shouts.

"There," said Perry, bitterly, "are those Frenchmen, dancing and singing
in the hall with my Lord Godwin's head above them!" And curses bitter
and deep went round the room. They sat sullen and silent it may be for
an hour or more; only moving when, at some fresh outbreak of revelry,
the old man started from his doze and asked if that was Hereward coming.

"And who is this Hereward of whom you speak?" said Hereward at last.

"We thought you might know him, Sir Knight, if you come from Flanders,
as you say you do," said three or four voices in a surprised and surly
tone.

"Certainly I know such a man, if he be Hereward the wolf's-head,
Hereward the outlaw, as they call him. And a good soldier he is, though
he be not yet made a knight; and married, too, to a rich and fair lady.
I served under this Hereward a few months ago in the Friesland War, and
know no man whom I would sooner follow."

"Nor I neither," chimed in Martin Lightfoot from the other end of the
table.

"Nor we," cried all the men-at-arms at once, each vying with the other
in extravagant stories of their hero's prowess, and in asking the knight
of Flanders whether they were true or not.

To avoid offending them, Hereward was forced to confess to a great many
deeds which he had never done: but he was right glad to find that his
fame had reached his native place, and that he could count on the men if
he needed them.

"But who is this Hereward," said he, "that he should have to do with
your town here?"

Half a dozen voices at once told him his own story.

"I always heard," said he, dryly, "that that gentleman was of some very
noble kin; and I will surely tell him all that has befallen here as soon
as I return to Flanders."

At last they grew sleepy, and the men went out and brought in bundles of
sweet rush, and spread them against the wall, and prepared to lie down,
each his weapon by his side. And when they were lain down, Hereward
beckoned to him Perry and Martin Lightfoot, and went out into the back
yard, under the pretence of seeing to his horse.

"Perry Surturbrandsson," said he, "you seem to be an honest man, as we
in foreign parts hold all the Danelagh to be. Now it is fixed in my
mind to go up, and my servant, to your hall, and see what those French
upstarts are about. Will you trust me to go, without my fleeing back
here if I am found out, or in any way bringing you to harm by mixing you
up in my private matters? And will you, if I do not come back, keep for
your own the horse which is in your stable, and give moreover this purse
and this ring to your lady, if you can find means to see her face to
face; and say thus to her,--that he that sent that purse and ring may be
found, if he be alive, at St. Omer, or with Baldwin, Count of Flanders;
and that if he be dead, as he is like enough to be, his trade being
naught but war, she will still find at St. Omer a home and wealth and
friends, till these evil times be overpast?"

As Hereward had spoken with some slight emotion, he had dropped unawares
his assumed Flemish accent, and had spoken in broad burly Lincolnshire;
and therefore it was that Perry, who had been staring at him by the
moonlight all the while, said, when he was done, tremblingly,--

"Either you are Hereward, or you are his fetch. You speak like Hereward,
you look like Hereward. Just what Hereward would be now, you are. You
are my lord, and you cannot deny it."

"Perry, if you know me, speak of me to no living soul, save to your lady
my mother; and let me and my serving-man go free out of your yard-gate.
If I ask you before morning to open it again to me, you will know that
there is not a Frenchman left in the Hall of Bourne."

Perry threw his arms around him, and embraced him silently.

"Get me only," said Hereward, "some long woman's gear and black mantle,
if you can, to cover this bright armor of mine."

Perry went off in silence as one stunned,--brought the mantle, and let
them out of the yard-gate. In ten minutes more, the two slipping in by
well-known paths, stood under the gable of the great hall. Not a soul
was stirring outside. The serfs were all cowering in their huts like so
many rabbits in their burrows, listening in fear to the revelry of their
new tyrants. The night was dark: but not so dark but that Hereward could
see between him and the sky his brother's long locks floating in the
breeze.

"That I must have done, at least," said he, in a low voice.

"Then here is wherewithal," said Martin Lightfoot, as he stumbled over
something. "The drunken villains have left the ladder in the yard."

Hereward got up the ladder, took down the head and wrapped it in the
cloak, and ere he did so kissed the cold forehead. How he had hated that
boy! Well, at least he had never wilfully harmed him,--or the boy him
either, for that matter. And now he had died like a man, killing his
foe. He was of the true old blood after all. And Hereward felt that he
would have given all that he had, save his wife or his sword-hand, to
have that boy alive again, to pet him, and train him, and teach him to
fight at his side.

Then he slipped round to one of the narrow unshuttered windows and
looked in. The hall was in a wasteful blaze of light,--a whole month's
candles burning in one night. The table was covered with all his
father's choicest plate; the wine was running waste upon the floor; the
men were lolling at the table in every stage of drunkenness; the loose
women, camp-followers, and such like, almost as drunk as their masters;
and at the table head, most drunk of all, sat, in Earl Leofric's seat,
the new Lord of Bourne.

Hereward could scarce believe his eyes. He was none other than Gilbert
of Ghent's stout Flemish cook, whom he had seen many a time in Scotland.
Hereward turned from the window in disgust; but looked again as he heard
words which roused his anger still more.

For in the open space nearest the door stood a gleeman, a dancing,
harping, foul-mouthed fellow, who was showing off ape's tricks, jesting
against the English, and shuffling about in mockeries of English
dancing. At some particularly coarse jest of his, the new Lord of Bourne
burst into a roar of admiration.

"Ask what thou wilt, fellow, and thou shalt have it. Thou wilt find me a
better master to thee than ever was Morcar, the English barbarian."

The scoundrel, say the old chroniclers, made a request concerning
Hereward's family which cannot be printed here.

Hereward ground his teeth. "If thou livest till morning light," said he,
"I will not."

The last brutality awoke some better feeling in one of the girls,--a
large coarse Fleming, who sat by the new lord's side. "Fine words,"
said she, scornfully enough, "for the sweepings of Norman and Flemish
kennels. You forget that you left one of this very Leofric's sons behind
in Flanders, who would besom all out if he was here before the morning's
dawn."

"Hereward?" cried the cook, striking her down with a drunken blow; "the
scoundrel who stole the money which the Frisians sent to Count Baldwin,
and gave it to his own troops? We are safe enough from him at all
events; he dare not show his face on this side the Alps, for fear of the
gallows."

Hereward had heard enough. He slipped down from the window to Martin,
and led him round the house.

"Now then, down with the ladder quick, and dash in the door. I go in;
stay thou outside. If any man passes me, see that he pass not thee."

Martin chuckled a ghostly laugh as he helped the ladder down. In another
moment the door was burst in, and Hereward stood upon the threshold. He
gave one war-shout,--his own terrible name,--and then rushed forward.
As he passed the gleeman, he gave him one stroke across the loins; the
wretch fell shrieking.

And then began a murder, grim and great. They fought with ale-cups, with
knives, with benches: but, drunken and unarmed, they were hewn down
like sheep. Fourteen Normans, says the chronicler, were in the hall when
Hereward burst in. When the sun rose there were fourteen heads upon the
gable. Escape had been impossible. Martin had laid the ladder across the
door; and the few who escaped the master's terrible sword, stumbled over
it, to be brained by the man's not less terrible axe.

Then Hereward took up his brother's head, and went in to his mother.

The women in the bower opened to him. They had seen all that passed from
the gallery above, which, as usual, hidden by a curtain, enabled the
women to watch unseen what passed in the hall below.

The Lady Godiva sat crouched together, all but alone,--for her
bower-maidens had fled or been carried off long since,--upon a low stool
beside a long dark thing covered with a pall. So utterly crushed was
she, that she did not even lift up her head as Hereward entered.

He placed his ghastly burden reverently beneath the pall, and then went
and knelt before his mother.

For a while neither spoke a word. Then the Lady Godiva suddenly
drew back her hood, and dropping on her knees, threw her arms round
Hereward's neck, and wept till she could weep no more.

"Blessed strong arms," sobbed she at last, "around me! To feel something
left in the world to protect me; something left in the world which loves
me."

"You forgive me, mother?"

"You forgive me? It was I, I who was in fault,--I, who should have
cherished you, my strongest, my bravest, my noblest,--now my all."

"No, it was all my fault; and on my head is all this misery. If I had
been here, as I ought to have been, all this might have never happened."

"You would only have been murdered too. No: thank God you were away; or
God would have taken you with the rest. His arm is bared against me, and
His face turned away from me. All in vain, in vain! Vain to have washed
my hands in innocency, and worshipped Him night and day. Vain to have
builded minsters in his honor, and heaped the shrines of his saints with
gold. Vain to have fed the hungry, and clothed the naked, and washed the
feet of His poor, that I might atone for my own sins, and the sins of my
house. This is His answer. He has taken me up, and dashed me down: and
naught is left but, like Job, to abhor myself and repent in dust and
ashes--of I know not what."

"God has not deserted you. See, He has sent you me!" said Hereward,
wondering to find himself, of all men on earth, preaching consolation.

"Yes, I have you! Hold me. Love me. Let me feel that one thing loves me
upon earth. I want love; I must have it: and if God, and His mother, and
all the saints, refuse their love, I must turn to the creature, and ask
it to love me, but for a day."

"For ever, mother."

"You will not leave me?"

"If I do, I come back, to finish what I have begun."

"More blood? O God! Hereward, not that! Let us return good for evil. Let
us take up our crosses. Let us humble ourselves under God's hand, and
flee into some convent, and there die praying for our country and our
kin."

"Men must work, while women pray. I will take you to a minster,--to
Peterborough."

"No, not to Peterborough!"

"But my Uncle Brand is abbot there, they tell me, now this four years;
and that rogue Herluin, prior in his place."

"He is dying,--dying of a broken heart, like me. And the Frenchman has
given his abbey to one Thorold, the tyrant of Malmesbury,--a Frenchman
like himself. No, take me where I shall never see a French face. Take
me to Crowland--and him with me--where I shall see naught but English
faces, and hear English chants, and die a free Englishwoman under St.
Guthlac's wings."

"Ah!" said Hereward, bitterly, "St. Guthlac is a right Englishman,
and will have some sort of fellow-feeling for us; while St. Peter,
of course, is somewhat too fond of Rome and those Italian monks.
Well,--blood is thicker than water; so I hardly blame the blessed
Apostle."

"Do not talk so, Hereward."

"Much the saints have done for us, mother, that we are to be so very
respectful to their high mightinesses. I fear, if this Frenchman goes on
with his plan of thrusting his monks into our abbeys, I shall have to
do more even for St. Guthlac than ever he did for me. Do not say more,
mother. This night has made Hereward a new man. Now, prepare"--and she
knew what he meant--"and gather all your treasures; and we will start
for Crowland to-morrow afternoon."




CHAPTER XX.

HOW HEREWARD WAS MADE A KNIGHT AFTER THE FASHION OF THE ENGLISH.


A wild night was that in Bourne. All the folk, free and unfree, man and
woman, out on the streets, asking the meaning of those terrible shrieks,
followed by a more terrible silence.

At last Hereward strode down from the hall, his drawn sword in his hand.

"Silence, good folks, and hearken to me, once for all. There is not a
Frenchman left alive in Bourne. If you be the men I take you for, there
shall not be one left alive between Wash and Humber. Silence, again!" as
a fierce cry of rage and joy arose, and men rushed forward to take him
by the hand, women to embrace him. "This is no time for compliments,
good folks, but for quick wit and quick blows. For the law we fight,
if we do fight; and by the law we must work, fight or not. Where is the
lawman of the town?"

"I was lawman last night, to see such law done as there is left," said
Perry. "But you are lawman now. Do as you will. We will obey you."

"You shall be our lawman," shouted many voices.

"I! Who am I? Out-of-law, and a wolf's-head."

"We will put you back into your law,--we will give you your lands in
full husting."

"Never mind a husting on my behalf. Let us have a husting, if we have
one, for a better end than that. Now, men of Bourne, I have put the coal
in the bush. Dare you blow the fire till the forest is aflame from south
to north? I have fought a dozen of Frenchmen. Dare you fight Taillebois
and Gilbert of Ghent, with William, Duke of Normandy, at their back? Or
will you take me, here as I stand, and give me up to them as an outlaw
and a robber, to feed the crows outside the gates of Lincoln? Do it, if
you will. It will be the wiser plan, my friends. Give me up to be judged
and hanged, and so purge yourselves of the villanous murder of Gilbert's
cook,--your late lord and master."

"Lord and master! We are free men!" shouted the holders, or yeomen
gentlemen. "We hold our lands from God and the sun."

"You are our lord!" shouted the socmen, or tenants. "Who but you? We
will follow, If you will lead!"

"Hereward is come home!" cried a feeble voice behind. "Let me come to
him. Let me feel him."

And through the crowd, supported by two ladies, tottered the mighty form
of Surturbrand, the blind Viking.

"Hereward is come!" cried he, as he folded his master's son in his arms.
"Hoi! he is wet with blood! Hoi! he smells of blood! Hoi! the ravens
will grow fat now, for Hereward is come home!"

Some would have led the old man away; but he thrust them off fiercely.

"Hoi! come wolf! Hoi! come kite! Hoi! come erne from off the fen! You
followed us, and we fed you well, when Swend Forkbeard brought us over
the sea. Follow us now, and we will feed you better still, with the
mongrel Frenchers who scoff at the tongue of their forefathers, and
would rob their nearest kinsman of land and lass. Hoi! Swend's men!
Hoi! Canute's men! Vikings' sons, sea-cocks' sons, Berserkers' sons
all! Split up the war-arrow, and send it round, and the curse of Odin on
every man that will not pass it on! A war-king to-morrow, and Hildur's
game next day, that the old Surturbrand may fall like a freeholder, axe
in hand, and not die like a cow, in the straw which the Frenchman has
spared him."

All men were silent, as the old Viking's voice, cracked and feeble when
he began, gathered strength from rage, till it rang through the still
night-air like a trumpet-blast.

The silence was broken by a long wild cry from the forest, which made
the women start, and catch their children closer to them. It was the
howl of a wolf.

"Hark to the witch's horse! Hark to the son of Fenris, how he calls for
meat! Are ye your fathers' sons, ye men of Bourne? They never let the
gray beast call in vain."

Hereward saw his opportunity and seized it. There were those in the
crowd, he well knew, as there must needs be in all crowds, who wished
themselves well out of the business; who shrank from the thought of
facing the Norman barons, much more the Norman king; who were ready
enough, had the tide of feeling begun to ebb, of blaming Hereward for
rashness, even though they might not have gone so far as to give him
up to the Normans; who would have advised some sort of compromise,
pacifying half-measure, or other weak plan for escaping present danger,
by delivering themselves over to future destruction. But three out of
four there were good men and true. The savage chant of the old barbarian
might have startled them somewhat, for they were tolerably orthodox
Christian folk. But there was sense as well as spirit in its savageness;
and they growled applause, as he ceased. But Hereward heard, and
cried,--

"The Viking is right! So speaks the spirit of our fathers, and we must
show ourselves their true sons. Send round the war-arrow, and death to
the man who does not pass it on! Better die bravely together than falter
and part company, to be hunted down one by one by men who will never
forgive us as long as we have an acre of land for them to seize. Perry,
son of Surturbrand, you are the lawman. Put it to the vote!"

"Send round the war-arrow!" shouted Perry himself; and if there was a
man or two who shrank from the proposal they found it prudent to shout
as loudly as did the rest.
