into a very heaven with its lightning. It seemed to me that in her I
should find one who would truly sympathize with me, one who looked on
the art not as a connoisseur, but a votary.

I took the speediest opportunity of being introduced to her at her own
house by a common friend.

But what a difference! At home I scarcely knew her. Still she was
beautiful; but the sweetness, the elevated expression, which the
satisfaction of an hour had given her, were entirely fled. Her eye was
restless, her cheek pale and thin, her whole expression perturbed and
sorrowful. Every gesture spoke the sickliness of a spirit long an
outcast from its natural home, bereft of happiness, and hopeless of
good.

I perceived, at first sight of her every-day face, that it was not
unknown to me. Three or four years earlier, staying in the
country-house of one of her friends, I had seen her picture. The house
was very dull,--as dull as placid content with the mere material
enjoyments of life, and an inert gentleness of nature, could make its
inhabitants. They were people to be loved, but loved without a
thought. Their wings had never grown, nor their eyes coveted a wider
prospect than could be seen from the parent nest. The friendly
visitant could not discompose them by a remark indicating any
expansion of mind or life. Much as I enjoyed the beauty of the country
around, when out in the free air, my hours within the house would have
been dull enough but for the contemplation of this picture. While the
round of common-place songs was going on, and the whist-players were
at their work, I used to sit and wonder how this being, so sovereign
in the fire of her nature, so proud in her untamed loveliness, could
ever have come of their blood. Her eye, from the canvas, even, seemed
to annihilate all things low or little, and able to command all
creation in search of the object of its desires. She had not found it,
though; I felt this on seeing her now. She, the queenly woman, the
Boadicea of a forlorn hope, as she seemed born to be, the only woman
whose face, to my eye, had ever given promise of a prodigality of
nature sufficient for the entertainment of a poet's soul, was--I saw
it at a glance--a captive in her life, and a beggar in her affections.

_Laurie._ A dangerous object to the traveller's eye, methinks!

_Aglauron._ Not to mine! The picture had been so; but, seeing her
now, I felt that the glorious promise of her youthful prime had
failed. She had missed her course; and the beauty, whose charm to the
imagination had been that it seemed invincible, was now subdued and
mixed with earth.

_Laurie._ I can never comprehend the cruelty in your way of
viewing human beings, Aglauron. To err, to suffer, is their lot; all
who have feeling and energy of character must share it; and I could
not endure a woman who at six-and-twenty bore no trace of the past.

_Aglauron._ Such women and such men are the companions of
everyday life. But the angels of our thoughts are those moulds of pure
beauty which must break with a fall. The common air must not touch
them, for they make their own atmosphere. I admit that such are not
for the tenderness of daily life; their influence must be high,
distant, starlike, to be pure.

Such was this woman to me before I knew her; one whose splendid beauty
drew on my thoughts to their future home. In knowing her, I lost the
happiness I had enjoyed in knowing what she should have been. At first
the disappointment was severe, but I have learnt to pardon her, as
others who get mutilated or worn in life, and show the royal impress
only in their virgin courage. But this subject would detain me too
long. Let me rather tell you of Mrs. V----'s sad history.

A friend of mine has said that beautiful persons seem rarely born to
their proper family, but amidst persons so rough and uncongenial that
_their_ presence commands like that of a reproving angel, or
pains like that of some poor prince changed at nurse, and bound for
life to the society of churls.

So it was with Emily. Her father was sordid, her mother weak; persons
of great wealth and greater selfishness. She was the youngest by many
years, and left alone in her father's house. Notwithstanding the want
of intelligent sympathy while she was growing up, and the want of all
intelligent culture, she was not an unhappy child. The unbounded and
foolish indulgence with which she was treated did not have an
obviously bad effect upon her then; it did not make her selfish,
sensual, or vain. Her character was too powerful to dwell upon such
boons as those nearest her could bestow. She negligently received them
all as her due. It was later that the pernicious effects of the
absence of all discipline showed themselves; but in early years she
was happy in her lavish feelings, and in beautiful nature, on which
she could pour them, and in her own pursuits. Music was her passion;
in it she found food, and an answer for feelings destined to become so
fatal to her peace, but which then glowed so sweetly in her youthful
form as to enchant the most ordinary observer.

When she was not more than fifteen, and expanding like a flower in
each sunny day, it was her misfortune that her first husband saw and
loved her. Emily, though pleased by his handsome person and gay
manners, never bestowed a serious thought on him. If she had, it would
have been the first ever disengaged from her life of pleasurable
sensation. But when he did plead his cause with all the ardor of
youth, and the flourishes which have been by usage set apart for such
occasions, she listened with delight; for all his talk of boundless
love, undying faith, etc., seemed her native tongue. It was like the
most glowing sunset sky. It swelled upon the ear like music. It was
the only way she ever wished to be addressed, and she now saw plainly
why all talk of everyday people had fallen unheeded on her ear. She
could have listened all day. But when, emboldened by the beaming eye
and ready smile with which she heard, he pressed his suit more
seriously, and talked of marriage, she drew back astonished. Marry
yet?--impossible! She had never thought of it; and as she thought now
of marriages, such as she had seen them, there was nothing in marriage
to attract. But L---- was not so easily repelled; he made her every
promise of pleasure, as one would to a child. He would take her away
to journey through scenes more beautiful than she had ever dreamed of;
he would take her to a city where, in the fairest home, she should
hear the finest music, and he himself, in every scene, would be her
devoted slave, too happy if for every now pleasure he received one of
those smiles which had become his life.

He saw her yielding, and hastened to secure her. Her father was
delighted, as fathers are strangely wont to be, that he was likely to
be deprived of his child, his pet, his pride. The mother was threefold
delighted that she would have a daughter married so _young_,--at
least three years younger than any of her elder sisters were married.
Both lent their influence; and Emily, accustomed to rely on them
against all peril, and annoyance, till she scarcely knew there was
pain or evil in the world, gave her consent, as she would have given
it to a pleasure-party for a day or a week.

The marriage was hurried on; L---- intent on gaining his object, as
men of strong will and no sentiment are wont to be, the parents
thinking of the eclat of the match. Emily was amused by the
preparations for the festivity, and full of excitement about the new
chapter which was to be opened in her life. Yet so little idea had she
of the true business of life, and the importance of its ties, that
perhaps there was no figure in the future that occupied her less than
that of her bridegroom, a handsome man, with a sweet voice, her
captive, her adorer. She neither thought nor saw further, lulled by
the pictures of bliss and adventure which were floating before her
fancy, the more enchanting because so vague.

It was at this time that the picture that so charmed me was taken. The
exquisite rose had not yet opened its leaves so as to show its heart;
but its fragrance and blushful pride were there in perfection.

Poor Emily! She had the promised journeys, the splendid home. Amid the
former her mind, opened by new scenes, already learned that something
she seemed to possess was wanting in the too constant companion of her
days. In the splendid home she received not only musicians, but other
visitants, who taught her strange things.

Four little months after her leaving home, her parents were astonished
by receiving a letter in which she told them they had parted with her
too soon; that she was not happy with Mr. L----, as he had promised
she should be, and that she wished to have her marriage broken. She
urged her father to make haste about it, as she had particular reasons
for impatience. You may easily conceive of the astonishment of the
good folks at home. Her mother wondered and cried. Her father
immediately ordered his horses, and went to her.

He was received with rapturous delight, and almost at the first moment
thanked for his speedy compliance with her request. But when she found
that he opposed her desire of having her marriage broken, and when she
urged him with vehemence and those marks of caressing fondness she had
been used to find all-powerful, and he told her at last it could not
be done, she gave way to a paroxysm of passion; she declared that she
could not and would not live with Mr. L----; that, so soon as she saw
anything of the world, she saw many men that she infinitely preferred
to him; and that, since her father and mother, instead of guarding
her, so mere a child as she was, so entirely inexperienced, against a
hasty choice, had persuaded and urged her to it, it was their duty to
break the match when they found it did not make her happy.

"My child, you are entirely unreasonable."

"It is not a time to be patient; and I was too yielding before. I am
not seventeen. Is the happiness of my whole life to be sacrificed?"

"Emily, you terrify me! Do you love anybody else?"

"Not yet; but I am sure shall find some one to love, now I know what
it is. I have seen already many whom I prefer to Mr. L----."

"Is he not kind to you?"

"Kind! yes; but he is perfectly uninteresting. I hate to be with him.
I do not wish his kindness, nor to remain in his house."

In vain her father argued; she insisted that she could never be happy
as she was; that it was impossible the law could be so cruel as to
bind her to a vow she had taken when so mere a child; that she would
go home with her father now, and they would see what could be done.
She added that she had already told her husband her resolution.

"And how did he bear it?"

"He was very angry; but it is better for him to be angry once than
unhappy always, as I should certainly make him did I remain here."

After long and fruitless attempts to reason her into a different state
of mind, the father went in search of the husband. He found him
irritated and mortified. He loved his wife, in his way, for her
personal beauty. He was very proud of her; he was piqued to the last
degree by her frankness. He could not but acknowledge the truth of
what she said, that she had been persuaded into the match when but a
child; for she seemed a very infant now, in wilfulness and ignorance
of the world. But I believe neither he nor her father had one
compunctious misgiving as to their having profaned the holiness of
marriage by such an union. Their minds had never been opened to the
true meaning of life, and, though they thought themselves so much
wiser, they were in truth much less so than the poor, passionate
Emily,--for her heart, at least, spoke clearly, if her mind lay in
darkness.

They could do nothing with her, and her father was at length compelled
to take her home, hoping that her mother might be able to induce her
to see things in a different light. But father, mother, uncles,
brothers, all reasoned with her in vain. Totally unused to
disappointment, she could not for a long time believe that she was
forever bound by a bond that sat uneasily on her untamed spirit. When
at last convinced of the truth, her despair was terrible.

"Am I his? his forever? Must I never then love? Never marry one whom I
could really love? Mother! it is too cruel. I cannot, will not believe
it. You always wished me to belong to him. You do not now wish to aid
me, or you are afraid! O, you would not be so, could you but know what
I feel!"

At last convinced, she then declared that if she could not be legally
separated from L----, but must consent to bear his name, and never
give herself to another, she would at least live with him no more. She
would not again leave her father's house. Here she was deaf to all
argument, and only force could have driven her away. Her indifference
to L---- had become hatred, in the course of these thoughts and
conversations. She regarded herself as his victim, and him as her
betrayer, since, she said, he was old enough to know the importance of
the step to which he led her. Her mind, naturally noble, though now in
this wild state, refused to admit his love as an excuse. "Had he loved
me," she said, "he would have wished to teach me to love him, before
securing me as his property. He is as selfish as he is dull and
uninteresting. No! I will drag on my miserable years here alone, but I
will not pretend to love him nor gratify him by the sight of his
slave!"

A year and more passed, and found the unhappy Emily inflexible. Her
husband at last sought employment abroad, to hide his mortification.

After his departure, Emily relaxed once from the severe coldness she
had shown since her return home. She had passed her time there with
her music, in reading poetry, in solitary walks. But as the person who
had been, however unintentionally, the means of making her so
miserable, was further removed from her, she showed willingness to
mingle again with the family, and see one or two young friends.

One of these, Almeria, effected what all the armament of praying and
threatening friends had been unable to do. She devoted herself to
Emily. She shared her employments and her walks; she sympathized with
all her feelings, even the morbid ones which she saw to be sincerity,
tenderness and delicacy gone astray,--perverted and soured by the
foolish indulgence of her education, and the severity of her destiny
made known suddenly to a mind quite unprepared. At last, having won
the confidence and esteem of Emily, by the wise and gentle cheek her
justice and clear perceptions gave to all extravagance, Almeria
ventured on representing to Emily her conduct as the world saw it.

To this she found her quite insensible. "What is the world to me?" she
said. "I am forbidden to seek there all it can offer of value to
Woman--sympathy and a home."

"It is full of beauty still," said Almeria, looking out into the
golden and perfumed glories of a June day.

"Not to the prisoner and the slave," said Emily.

"All are such, whom God hath not made free;" and Almeria gently
ventured to explain the hopes of larger span which enable the soul
that can soar upon their wings to disregard the limitations of seventy
years.

Emily listened with profound attention. The words were familiar to
her, but the tone was not; it was that which rises from the depths of
a purified spirit,--purified by pain, softened into peace.

"Have you made any use of these thoughts in your life, Almeria?"

The lovely preacher hesitated not to reveal a tale before unknown
except to her own heart, of woe, renunciation, and repeated blows from
a hostile fate.

Emily heard it in silence, but she understood. The great illusions of
youth vanished. She did not suffer alone; her lot was not peculiar.
Another, perhaps many, were forbidden the bliss of sympathy and a
congenial environment. And what had Almeria done? Revenged herself?
Tormented all around her? Clung with wild passion to a selfish
resolve? Not at all. She had made the best of a wreck of life, and
deserved a blessing on a new voyage. She had sought consolation in
disinterested tenderness for her fellow-sufferers, and she deserved to
cease to suffer.

The lesson was taken home, and gradually leavened the whole being of
this spoiled but naturally noble child.

A few weeks afterwards, she asked her father when Mr. L---- was
expected to return.

"In about three months," he replied, much surprised.

"I should like to have you write to him for me."

"What now absurdity?" said the father, who, long mortified and
harassed, had ceased to be a fond father to his once adored Emily.

"Say that my views are unchanged as to his soliciting a marriage with
me when too childish to know my own mind on that or any other subject;
but I have now seen enough of the world to know that he meant no ill,
if no good, and was no more heedless in this great matter than many
others are. He is not born to know what one constituted like me must
feel, in a home where I found no rest for my heart. I have now read,
seen and thought, what has made me a woman. I can be what you call
reasonable, though not perhaps in your way. I see that my misfortune
is irreparable. I heed not the world's opinion, and would, for myself,
rather remain here, and keep up no semblance of a connection which my
matured mind disclaims. But that scandalizes you and my mother, and
makes your house a scene of pain and mortification in your old age. I
know you, too, did not neglect the charge of me, in your own eyes. I
owe you gratitude for your affectionate intentions at least.

"L---- too is as miserable as mortification can make one like him.
Write, and ask him if he wishes my presence in his house on my own
terms. He must not expect from me the affection, or marks of
affection, of a wife. I should never have been his wife had I waited
till I understood life or myself. But I will be his attentive and
friendly companion, the mistress of his house, if he pleases. To the
world it will seem enough,--he will be more comfortable there,--and
what he wished of me was, in a great measure, to show me to the world.
I saw that, as soon as we were in it, I could not give him happiness
if I would, for we have not a thought nor employment in common. But if
we can agree on the way, we may live together without any one being
very miserable except myself, and I have made up my mind."

The astonishment of the father may be conceived, and his cavils;
L----'s also.

To cut the story short, it was settled in Emily's way, for she was one
of the sultana kind, dread and dangerous. L---- hardly wished her to
love him now, for he half hated her for all she had done; yet he was
glad to have her back, as she had judged, for the sake of appearances.
All was smoothed over by a plausible story. People, indeed, knew the
truth as to the fair one's outrageous conduct perfectly, but Mr. L----
was rich, his wife beautiful, and gave good parties; so society, as
such, bowed and smiled, while individuals scandalized the pair.

They had been living on this footing for several years, when I saw
Emily at the opera. She was a much altered being. Debarred of
happiness in her affections, she had turned for solace to the
intellectual life, and her naturally powerful and brilliant mind had
matured into a splendor which had never been dreamed of by those who
had seen her amid the freaks end day-dreams of her early youth.

Yet, as I said before, she was not captivating to me, as her picture
had been. She was, in a different way, as beautiful in feature and
coloring as in her spring-time. Her beauty, all moulded and mellowed
by feeling, was far more eloquent; but it had none of the virgin
magnificence, the untouched tropical luxuriance, which had fired my
fancy. The false position in which she lived had shaded her expression
with a painful restlessness; and her eye proclaimed that the conflicts
of her mind had strengthened, had deepened, but had not yet hallowed,
her character.

She was, however, interesting, deeply so; one of those rare beings who
fill your eye in every mood. Her passion for music, and the great
excellence she had attained as a performer, drew us together. I was
her daily visitor; but, if my admiration ever softened into
tenderness, it was the tenderness of pity for her unsatisfied heart,
and cold, false life.

But there was one who saw with very different eyes. V---- had been
intimate with Emily some time before my arrival, and every day saw him
more deeply enamored.

_Laurie._ And pray where was the husband all this time?

_Aglauron._ L---- had sought consolation in ambition. He was a
man of much practical dexterity, but of little thought, and less
heart. He had at first been jealous of Emily for his honor's
sake,--not for any reality,--for she treated him with great attention
as to the comforts of daily life; but otherwise, with polite, steady
coldness. Finding that she received the court, which many were
disposed to pay her, with grace and affability, but at heart with
imperial indifference, he ceased to disturb himself; for, as she
rightly thought, he was incapable of understanding her. A coquette he
could have interpreted; but a romantic character like hers, born for a
grand passion, or no love at all, he could not. Nor did he see that
V---- was likely to be more to her than any of her admirers.

_Laurie._ I am afraid I should have shamed his obtuseness. V----
has nothing to recommend him that I know of, except his beauty, and
that is the beauty of a _petit-maitre_--effeminate, without
character, and very unlikely, I should judge, to attract such a woman
as you give me the idea of.

_Aglauron._ You speak like a man, Laurie; but have you never
heard tales of youthful minstrels and pages being preferred by
princesses, in the land of chivalry, to stalwart knights, who were
riding all over the land, doing their devoirs maugre scars and
starvation? And why? One want of a woman's heart is to admire and be
protected; but another is to be understood in all her delicate
feelings, and have an object who shall know how to receive all the
marks of her inventive and bounteous affection. V---- is such an one;
a being of infinite grace and tenderness, and an equal capacity for
prizing the same in another.

Effeminate, say you? Lovely, rather, and lovable. He was not, indeed,
made to grow old; but I never saw a fairer spring-time than shone in
his eye when life, and thought, and love, opened on him all together.

He was to Emily like the soft breathing of a flute in some solitary
valley; indeed, the delicacy of his nature made a solitude around him
in the world. So delicate was he, and Emily for a long time so
