
'My orders are,' said Saxon, riding up to us as we sat our horses reside
our companions, 'that I and my captains should fall in with the King's
escort as he passes, and so accompany him to the market-place. Your men
shall present arms, and shall then stand their ground until we return.'

We all three drew our swords and saluted.

'If ye will come with me, gentlemen, and take position to the right of
the gate here,' said he, 'I may be able to tell ye something of these
folk as they pass. Thirty years of war in many climes should give me the
master craftsman's right to expound to his apprentices.'

We all very gladly followed his advice, and passed out through the gate,
which was now nothing more than a broad gap amongst the mounds which
marked the lines of the old walls. 'There is no sign of them yet,' I
remarked, as we pulled up upon a convenient hillock. 'I suppose that
they must come by this road which winds through the valley before us.'

'There are two sorts of bad general,' quoth Saxon, 'the man who is too
fast and the man who is too slow. His Majesty's advisers will never be
accused of the former failing, whatever other mistakes they may fall
into. There was old Marshal Grunberg, with whom I did twenty-six months'
soldiering in Bohemia. He would fly through the country pell-mell,
horse, foot, and artillery, as if the devil were at his heels. He might
make fifty blunders, but the enemy had never time to take advantage. I
call to mind a raid which we made into Silesia, when, after two days or
so of mountain roads, his Oberhauptmann of the staff told him that it
was impossible for the artillery to keep up. "Lass es hinter!" says he.
So the guns were left, and by the evening of the next day the foot were
dead-beat. "They cannot walk another mile!" says the Oberhauptmann.
"Lassen Sie hinter!" says he. So on we went with the horse--I was in his
Pandour regiment, worse luck! But after a skirmish or two, what with the
roads and what with the enemy, our horses were foundered and useless.
"The horses are used up!" says the Oberhauptmann. "Lassen Sie hinter!"
he cries; and I warrant that he would have pushed on to Prague with his
staff, had they allowed him. "General Hinterlassen" we called him after
that.'

'A dashing commander, too,' cried Sir Gervas. 'I would fain have served
under him.'

'Aye, and he had a way of knocking his recruits into shape which would
scarce be relished by our good friends here in the west country,' said
Saxon. 'I remember that after the leaguer of Salzburg, when we had taken
the castle or fortalice of that name, we were joined by some thousand
untrained foot, which had been raised in Dalmatia in the Emperor's
employ. As they approached our lines with waving of hands and blowing of
bugles, old Marshal Hinterlassen discharged a volley of all the cannon
upon the walls at them, killing three score and striking great panic
into the others. "The rogues must get used to standing fire sooner
or later," said he, "so they may as well commence their education at
once."'

'He was a rough schoolmaster,' I remarked. 'He might have left that part
of the drill to the enemy.'

'Yet his soldiers loved him,' said Saxon. 'He was not a man, when a city
had been forced, to inquire into every squawk of a woman, or give ear to
every burgess who chanced to find his strong-box a trifle the lighter.
But as to the slow commanders, I have known none to equal Brigadier
Baumgarten, also of the Imperial service. He would break up his
winter-quarters and sit down before some place of strength, where he
would raise a sconce here, and sink a sap there, until his soldiers were
sick of the very sight of the place. So he would play with it, as a cat
with a mouse, until at last it was about to open its gates, when,
as like as not, he would raise the leaguer and march back into his
winter-quarters. I served two campaigns under him without honour, sack,
plunder, or emolument, save a beggarly stipend of three gulden a day,
paid in clipped money, six months in arrear. But mark ye the folk upon
yonder tower! They are waving their kerchiefs as though something were
visible to them.'

'I can see nothing,' I answered, shading my eyes and gazing down the
tree-sprinkled valley which rose slowly in green uplands to the grassy
Blackdown hills.

'Those on the housetops are waving and pointing,' said Reuben. 'Methinks
I can myself see the flash of steel among yonder woods.'

'There it is,' cried Saxon, extending his gauntleted hand, 'on the
western bank of the Tone, hard by the wooden bridge. Follow my finger,
Clarke, and see if you cannot distinguish it.'

'Yes, truly,' I exclaimed, 'I see a bright shimmer coming and going. And
there to the left, where the road curves over the hill, mark you that
dense mass of men! Ha! the head of the column begins to emerge from the
trees.'

There was not a cloud in the sky, but the great heat had caused a haze
to overlie the valley, gathering thickly along the winding course of
the river, and hanging in little sprays and feathers over the woodlands
which clothe its banks. Through this filmy vapour there broke from time
to time fierce sparkles of brilliant light as the sun's rays fell upon
breastplate or headpiece. Now and again the gentle summer breeze
wafted up sudden pulses of martial music to our ears, with the blare of
trumpets and the long deep snarl of the drums. As we gazed, the van of
the army began to roll out from the cover of the trees and to darken the
white dusty roads. The long line slowly extended itself, writhing out of
the forest land like a dark snake with sparkling scales, until the whole
rebel army--horse, foot, and ordnance--were visible beneath us. The
gleam of the weapons, the waving of numerous banners, the plumes of the
leaders, and the deep columns of marching men, made up a picture which
stirred the very hearts of the citizens, who, from the housetops and
from the ruinous summit of the dismantled walls, were enabled to gaze
down upon the champions of their faith. If the mere sight of a passing
regiment will cause a thrill in your bosoms, you can fancy how it is
when the soldiers upon whom you look are in actual arms for your own
dearest and most cherished interests, and have just come out victorious
from a bloody struggle. If every other man's hand was against us, these
at least were on our side, and our hearts went out to them as to friends
and brothers. Of all the ties that unite men in this world, that of a
common danger is the strongest.

It all appeared to be most warlike and most imposing to my inexperienced
eyes, and I thought as I looked at the long array that our cause was as
good as won. To my surprise, however, Saxon pished and pshawed under his
breath, until at last, unable to contain his impatience, he broke out in
hot discontent.

'Do but look at that vanguard as they breast the slope,' he cried.
'Where is the advance party, or Vorreiter, as the Germans call them?
Where, too, is the space which should be left between the fore-guard and
the main battle? By the sword of Scanderbeg, they remind me more of a
drove of pilgrims, as I have seen them approaching the shrine of St.
Sebaldus of Nurnberg with their banners and streamers. There in
the centre, amid that cavalcade of cavaliers, rides our new monarch
doubtless. Pity he hath not a man by him who can put this swarm of
peasants into something like campaign order. Now do but look at those
four pieces of ordnance trailing along like lame sheep behind the flock.
Caracco, I would that I were a young King's officer with a troop of
light horse on the ridge yonder! My faith, how I should sweep down yon
cross road like a kestrel on a brood of young plover! Then heh for cut
and thrust, down with the skulking cannoniers, a carbine fire to cover
us, round with the horses, and away go the rebel guns in a cloud of
dust! How's that, Sir Gervas?'

'Good sport, Colonel,' said the baronet, with a touch of colour in his
white cheeks. 'I warrant that you did keep your Pandours on the trot.'

'Aye, the rogues had to work or hang--one or t'other. But methinks our
friends here are scarce as numerous as reported. I reckon them to be a
thousand horse, and mayhap five thousand two hundred foot. I have been
thought a good tally-man on such occasions. With fifteen hundred in the
town that would bring us to close on eight thousand men, which is no
great force to invade a kingdom and dispute a crown.'

'If the West can give eight thousand, how many can all the counties of
England afford?' I asked. 'Is not that the fairer way to look at it?'

'Monmouth's popularity lies mostly in the West,' Saxon answered. 'It
was the memory of that which prompted him to raise his standard in these
counties.'

'His standards, rather,' quoth Reuben. 'Why, it looks as though they had
hung their linen up to dry all down the line.'

'True! They have more ensigns than ever I saw with so small a force,'
Saxon answered, rising in his stirrups. 'One or two are blue, and the
rest, as far as I can see for the sun shining upon them, are white, with
some motto or device.'

Whilst we had been conversing, the body of horse which formed the
vanguard of the Protestant army had approached within a quarter of a
mile or less of the town, when a loud, clear bugle-call brought them to
a halt. In each successive regiment or squadron the signal was repeated,
so that the sound passed swiftly down the long array until it died away
in the distance. As the coil of men formed up upon the white road, with
just a tremulous shifting motion along the curved and undulating line,
its likeness to a giant serpent occurred again to my mind.

'I could fancy it a great boa,' I remarked, 'which was drawing its coils
round the town.'

'A rattlesnake, rather,' said Reuben, pointing to the guns in the rear.
'It keeps all its noise in its tail.'

'Here comes its head, if I mistake not,' quoth Saxon. 'It were best
perhaps that we stand at the side of the gate.'

As he spoke a group of gaily dressed cavaliers broke away from the main
body and rode straight for the town. Their leader was a tall, slim,
elegant young man, who sat his horse with the grace of a skilled rider,
and who was remarkable amongst those around him for the gallantry of his
bearing and the richness of his trappings. As he galloped towards the
gate a roar of welcome burst from the assembled multitude, which was
taken up and prolonged by the crowds behind, who, though unable to see
what was going forward, gathered from the shouting that the King was
approaching.



Chapter XX. Of the Muster of the Men of the West

Monmouth was at that time in his thirty-sixth year, and was remarkable
for those superficial graces which please the multitude and fit a man to
lead in a popular cause. He was young, well-spoken, witty, and skilled
in all martial and manly exercises. On his progress in the West he had
not thought it beneath him to kiss the village maidens, to offer prizes
at the rural sports, and to run races in his boots against the fleetest
of the barefooted countrymen. (Note G., Appendix) His nature was vain
and prodigal, but he excelled in that showy magnificence and careless
generosity which wins the hearts of the people. Both on the Continent
and at Bothwell Bridge, in Scotland, he had led armies with success, and
his kindness and mercy to the Covenanters after his victory had caused
him to be as much esteemed amongst the Whigs as Dalzell and Claverhouse
were hated. As he reined up his beautiful black horse at the gate of the
city, and raised his plumed montero cap to the shouting crowd, the grace
and dignity of his bearing were such as might befit the knight-errant
in a Romance who is fighting at long odds for a crown which a tyrant has
filched from him.

He was reckoned well-favoured, but I cannot say that I found him so. His
face was, I thought, too long and white for comeliness, yet his features
were high and noble, with well-marked nose and clear, searching eyes. In
his mouth might perchance be noticed some trace of that weakness which
marred his character, though the expression was sweet and amiable. He
wore a dark purple roquelaure riding-jacket, faced and lapelled with
gold lace, through the open front of which shone a silver breastplate.
A velvet suit of a lighter shade than the jacket, a pair of high yellow
Cordovan boots, with a gold-hilted rapier on one side, and a poniard
of Parma on the other, each hung from the morocco-leather sword-belt,
completed his attire. A broad collar of Mechlin lace flowed over his
shoulders, while wristbands of the same costly material dangled from his
sleeves. Again and again he raised his cap and bent to the saddle-bow in
response to the storm of cheering. 'A Monmouth! A Monmouth!' cried
the people; 'Hail to the Protestant chief!' 'Long live the noble King
Monmouth!' while from every window, and roof, and balcony fluttering
kerchief or waving hat brightened the joyous scene. The rebel van caught
fire at the sight and raised a great deep-chested shout, which was taken
up again and again by the rest of the army, until the whole countryside
was sonorous.

In the meanwhile the city elders, headed by our friend the Mayor,
advanced from the gate in all the dignity of silk and fur to pay homage
to the King. Sinking upon one knee by Monmouth's stirrup, he kissed the
hand which was graciously extended to him.

'Nay, good Master Mayor,' said the King, in a clear, strong voice, 'it
is for my enemies to sink before me, and not for my friends. Prythee,
what is this scroll which you do unroll?'

'It is an address of welcome and of allegiance, your Majesty, from your
loyal town of Taunton.'

'I need no such address,' said King Monmouth, looking round. 'It is
written all around me in fairer characters than ever found themselves
upon parchment. My good friends have made me feel that I was welcome
without the aid of clerk or scrivener. Your name, good Master Mayor, is
Stephen Timewell, as I understand?'

'The same, your Majesty.'

'Too curt a name for so trusty a man,' said the King, drawing his sword
and touching him upon the shoulder with it. 'I shall make it longer by
three letters. Rise up, Sir Stephen, and may I find that there are many
other knights in my dominions as loyal and as stout.'

Amidst the huzzahs which broke out afresh at this honour done to the
town, the Mayor withdrew with the councilmen to the left side of the
gate, whilst Monmouth with his staff gathered upon the right. At a
signal a trumpeter blew a fanfare, the drums struck up a point of war,
and the insurgent army, with serried ranks and waving banners, resumed
its advance upon the town. As it approached, Saxon pointed out to us the
various leaders and men of note who surrounded the King, giving us their
names and some few words as to their characters.

'That is Lord Grey of Wark,' said he; 'the little middle-aged lean man
at the King's bridle arm. He hath been in the Tower once for treason.
'Twas he who fled with the Lady Henrietta Berkeley, his wife's sister. A
fine leader truly for a godly cause! The man upon his left, with the
red swollen face and the white feather in his cap, is Colonel Holmes.
I trust that he will never show the white feather save on his head. The
other upon the high chestnut horse is a lawyer, though, by my soul, he
is a better man at ordering a battalion than at drawing a bill of costs.
He is the republican Wade who led the foot at the skirmish at Bridport,
and brought them off with safety. The tall heavy-faced soldier in the
steel bonnet is Anthony Buyse, the Brandenburger, a soldado of fortune,
and a man of high heart, as are most of his countrymen. I have fought
both with him and against him ere now.'

'Mark ye the long thin man behind him?' cried Reuben. 'He hath drawn his
sword, and waves it over his head. 'Tis a strange time and place for the
broadsword exercise. He is surely mad.'

'Perhaps you are not far amiss,' said Saxon. 'Yet, by my hilt, were it
not for that man there would be no Protestant army advancing upon us
down yonder road. 'Tis he who by dangling the crown before Monmouth's
eyes beguiled him away from his snug retreat in Brabant. There is not
one of these men whom he hath not tempted into this affair by some bait
or other. With Grey it was a dukedom, with Wade the woolsack, with Buyse
the plunder of Cheapside. Every one hath his own motive, but the clues
to them all are in the hands of yonder crazy fanatic, who makes the
puppets dance as he will. He hath plotted more, lied more, and suffered
less than any Whig in the party.'

'It must be that Dr. Robert Ferguson of whom I have heard my father
speak,' said I.

'You are right. 'Tis he. I have but seen him once in Amsterdam, and yet
I know him by his shock wig and crooked shoulders. It is whispered
that of late his overweening conceit hath unseated his reason. See, the
German places his hand upon his shoulder and persuades him to sheathe
his weapon. King Monmouth glances round too, and smiles as though he
were the Court buffoon with a Geneva cloak instead of the motley. But
the van is upon us. To your companies, and mind that ye raise your
swords to the salute while the colours of each troop go by.'

Whilst our companion had been talking, the whole Protestant army had
been streaming towards the town, and the head of the fore-guard was
abreast with the gateway. Four troops of horse led the way, badly
equipped and mounted, with ropes instead of bridles, and in some cases
squares of sacking in place of saddles. The men were armed for the most
part with sword and pistol, while a few had the buff-coats, plates, and
headpieces taken at Axminster, still stained sometimes with the blood of
the last wearer. In the midst of them rode a banner-bearer, who carried
a great square ensign hung upon a pole, which was supported upon a
socket let into the side of the girth. Upon it was printed in golden
letters the legend, 'Pro libertate et religione nostra.' These
horse-soldiers were made up of yeomen's and farmers' sons, unused to
discipline, and having a high regard for themselves as volunteers, which
caused them to cavil and argue over every order. For this cause, though
not wanting in natural courage, they did little service during the war,
and were a hindrance rather than a help to the army.

Behind the horse came the foot, walking six abreast, divided into
companies of varying size, each company bearing a banner which gave the
name of the town or village from which it had been raised. This manner
of arranging the troops had been chosen because it had been found to be
impossible to separate men who were akin and neighbours to each other.
They would fight, they said, side by side, or they would not fight at
all. For my own part, I think that it is no bad plan, for when it comes
to push of pike, a man stands all the faster when he knows that he
hath old and tried friends on either side of him. Many of these country
places I came to know afterwards from the talk of the men, and many
others I have travelled through, so that the names upon the banners have
come to have a real meaning with me. Homer hath, I remember, a chapter
or book wherein he records the names of all the Grecian chiefs and
whence they came, and how many men they brought to the common muster. It
is pity that there is not some Western Homer who could record the names
of these brave peasants and artisans, and recount what each did or
suffered in upholding a noble though disastrous cause. Their places of
birth at least shall not be lost as far as mine own feeble memory can
carry me.

The first foot regiment, if so rudely formed a band could be so called,
consisted of men of the sea, fishers and coastmen, clad in the
heavy blue jerkins and rude garb of their class. They were bronzed,
weather-beaten tarpaulins, with hard mahogany faces, variously armed
with birding pieces, cutlasses, or pistols. I have a notion that it
was not the first time that those weapons had been turned against
King James's servants, for the Somerset and Devon coasts were famous
breeding-places for smugglers, and many a saucy lugger was doubtless
lying up in creek or in bay whilst her crew had gone a-soldiering to
Taunton. As to discipline, they had no notion of it, but rolled along in
true blue-water style, with many a shout and halloo to each other or to
the crowd. From Star Point to Portland Roads there would be few nets
for many weeks to come, and fish would swim the narrow seas which should
have been heaped on Lyme Cobb or exposed for sale in Plymouth market.
Each group, or band, of these men of the sea bore with it its own
banner, that of Lyme in the front, followed by Topsham, Colyford,
Bridport, Sidmouth, Otterton, Abbotsbury, and Charmouth, all southern
towns, which are on or near the coast. So they trooped past us, rough
and careless, with caps cocked, and the reek of their tobacco rising
up from them like the steam from a tired horse. In number they may have
been four hundred or thereabouts.

The peasants of Rockbere, with flail and scythe, led the next column,
followed by the banner of Honiton, which was supported by two hundred
stout lacemakers from the banks of the Otter. These men showed by the
colour of their faces that their work kept them within four walls, yet
they excelled their peasant companions in their alert and soldierly
bearing. Indeed, with all the troops, we observed that, though the
countrymen were the stouter and heartier, the craftsmen were the most
ready to catch the air and spirit of the camp. Behind the men of Honiton
came the Puritan clothworkers of Wellington, with their mayor upon
a white horse beside their standard-bearer, and a band of twenty
instruments before him. Grim-visaged, thoughtful, sober men, they were
for the most part clad in grey suits and wearing broad-brimmed hats.
'For God and faith' was the motto of a streamer which floated from
amongst them. The clothworkers formed three strong companies, and the
whole regiment may have numbered close on six hundred men.

The third regiment was headed by five hundred foot from Taunton, men
of peaceful and industrious life, but deeply imbued with those great
principles of civil and religious liberty which were three years later
to carry all before them in England. As they passed the gates they were
greeted by a thunderous welcome from their townsmen upon the walls and
at the windows. Their steady, solid ranks, and broad, honest burgher
faces, seemed to me to smack of discipline and of work well done. Behind
them came the musters of Winterbourne, Ilminster, Chard, Yeovil, and
Collumpton, a hundred or more pikesmen to each, bringing the tally of
the regiment to a thousand men.

A squadron of horse trotted by, closely followed by the fourth regiment,
bearing in its van the standards of Beaminster, Crewkerne, Langport,
and Chidiock, all quiet Somersetshire villages, which had sent out their
manhood to strike a blow for the old cause. Puritan ministers, with
their steeple hats and Geneva gowns, once black, but now white with
dust, marched sturdily along beside their flocks. Then came a strong
company of wild half-armed shepherds from the great plains which extend
from the Blackdowns on the south to the Mendips on the north--very
different fellows, I promise you, from the Corydons and Strephons of
Master Waller or Master Dryden, who have depicted the shepherd as ever
shedding tears of love, and tootling upon a plaintive pipe. I fear that
Chloe or Phyllis would have met with rough wooing at the hands of these
Western savages. Behind them were musqueteers from Dorchester, pikemen
from Newton Poppleford, and a body of stout infantry from among the
serge workers of Ottery St. Mary. This fourth regiment numbered rather
better than eight hundred, but was inferior in arms and in discipline to
that which preceded it.

The fifth regiment was headed by a column of fen men from the dreary
marches which stretch round Athelney. These men, in their sad and sordid
dwellings, had retained the same free and bold spirit which had made
them in past days the last resource of the good King Alfred and the
protectors of the Western shires from the inroads of the Danes, who
were never able to force their way into their watery strongholds. Two
companies of them, towsy-headed and bare-legged, but loud in hymn and
prayer, had come out from their fastnesses to help the Protestant cause.
At their heels came the woodmen and lumberers of Bishop's Lidiard, big,
sturdy men in green jerkins, and the white-smocked villagers of Huish
Champflower. The rear of the regiment was formed by four hundred men in
scarlet coats, with white cross-belts and well-burnished muskets.
These were deserters from the Devonshire Militia, who had marched with
Albemarle from Exeter, and who had come over to Monmouth on the field
at Axminster. These kept together in a body, but there were many other
militiamen, both in red and in yellow coats, amongst the various bodies
which I have set forth. This regiment may have numbered seven hundred
men.

The sixth and last column of foot was headed by a body of peasants
bearing 'Minehead' upon their banner, and the ensign of the three
wool-bales and the sailing ship, which is the sign of that ancient
borough. They had come for the most part from the wild country which
lies to the north of Dunster Castle and skirts the shores of the Bristol
Channel. Behind them were the poachers and huntsmen of Porlock Quay, who
had left the red deer of Exmoor to graze in peace whilst they followed
a nobler quarry. They were followed by men from Dulverton, men from
Milverton, men from Wiveliscombe and the sunny slopes of the Quantocks,
swart, fierce men from the bleak moors of Dunkerry Beacon, and tall,
stalwart pony rearers and graziers from Bampton. The banners of
Bridgewater, of Shepton Mallet, and of Nether Stowey swept past us, with
that of the fishers of Clovelly and the quarrymen of the Blackdowns. In
the rear were three companies of strange men, giants in stature, though
somewhat bowed with labour, with long tangled beards, and unkempt hair
hanging over their eyes. These were the miners from the Mendip hills and
from the Oare and Bagworthy valleys, rough, half-savage men, whose eyes
rolled up at the velvets and brocades of the shouting citizens, or fixed
themselves upon their smiling dames with a fierce intensity which scared
the peaceful burghers. So the long line rolled in until three squadrons
of horse and four small cannon, with the blue-coated Dutch cannoniers as
stiff as their own ramrods, brought up the rear. A long train of carts
and of waggons which had followed the army were led into the fields
outside the walls and there quartered.

When the last soldier had passed through the Shuttern Gate, Monmouth and
his leaders rode slowly in, the Mayor walking by the King's charger.
As we saluted they all faced round to us, and I saw a quick flush of
surprise and pleasure come over Monmouth's pale face as he noted our
close lines and soldierly bearing.

'By my faith, gentlemen,' he said, glancing round at his staff, 'our
worthy friend the Mayor must have inherited Cadmus's dragon teeth. Where
raised ye this pretty crop, Sir Stephen? How came ye to bring them
to such perfection too, even, I declare, to the hair powder of the
grenadiers?'

'I have fifteen hundred in the town,' the old wool-worker answered
proudly; 'though some are scarce as disciplined.

These men come from Wiltshire, and the officers from Hampshire. As to
their order, the credit is due not to me, but to the old soldier Colonel
Decimus Saxon, whom they have chosen as their commander, as well as to
the captains who serve under him.'

'My thanks are due to you, Colonel,' said the King, turning to Saxon,
who bowed and sank the point of his sword to the earth, 'and to you
also, gentlemen. I shall not forget the warm loyalty which brought you
from Hampshire in so short a time. Would that I could find the same
virtue in higher places! But, Colonel Saxon, you have, I gather, seen
much service abroad. What think you of the army which hath just passed
before you?'

'If it please your Majesty,' Saxon answered, 'it is like so much
uncarded wool, which is rough enough in itself, and yet may in time come
to be woven into a noble garment.'

'Hem! There is not much leisure for the weaving,' said Monmouth. 'But
they fight well. You should have seen them fall on at Axminster! We hope
to see you and to hear your views at the council table. But how is this?
Have I not seen this gentleman's face before?'

'It is the Honourable Sir Gervas Jerome of the county of Surrey,' quoth
Saxon.

'Your Majesty may have seen me at St. James's,' said the baronet,
raising his hat, 'or in the balcony at Whitehall. I was much at Court
during the latter years of the late king.'

'Yes, yes. I remember the name as well as the face,' cried Monmouth.
'You see, gentlemen,' he continued, turning to his staff, 'the courtiers
begin to come in at last. Were you not the man who did fight Sir Thomas
Killigrew behind Dunkirk House? I thought as much. Will you not attach
yourself to my personal attendants?'

'If it please your Majesty,' Sir Gervas answered, 'I am of opinion
that I could do your royal cause better service at the head of my
musqueteers.'

'So be it! So be it!' said King Monmouth. Setting spurs to his horse, he
raised his hat in response to the cheers of the troops and cantered down
the High Street under a rain of flowers, which showered from roof and
window upon him, his staff, and his escort. We had joined in his train,
as commanded, so that we came in for our share of this merry crossfire.
One rose as it fluttered down was caught by Reuben, who, I observed,
pressed it to his lips, and then pushed it inside his breastplate.
Glancing up, I caught sight, of the smiling face of our host's daughter
peeping down at us from a casement.

'Well caught, Reuben!' I whispered. 'At trick-track or trap and ball you
were ever our best player.'

'Ah, Micah,' said he, 'I bless the day that ever I followed you to the
wars. I would not change places with Monmouth this day.'

'Has it gone so far then!' I exclaimed. 'Why, lad, I thought that you
were but opening your trenches, and you speak as though you had carried
the city.'

'Perhaps I am over-hopeful,' he cried, turning from hot to cold, as a
man doth when he is in love, or hath the tertian ague, or other bodily
trouble. 'God knows that I am little worthy of her, and yet--'

'Set not your heart too firmly upon that which may prove to be beyond
your reach,' said I. 'The old man is rich, and will look higher.'

'I would he were poor!' sighed Reuben, with all the selfishness of a
lover. 'If this war last I may win myself some honour or title. Who
knows? Others have done it, and why not I!'

'Of our three from Havant,' I remarked, 'one is spurred onwards by
ambition, and one by love. Now, what am I to do who care neither for
high office nor for the face of a maid? What is to carry me into the
fight?'

'Our motives come and go, but yours is ever with you,' said Reuben.
'Honour and duty are the two stars, Micah, by which you have ever
steered your course.'

'Faith, Mistress Ruth has taught you to make pretty speeches,' said I,
'but methinks she ought to be here amid the beauty of Taunton.'

As I spoke we were riding into the market-place, which was now crowded
with our troops. Round the cross were grouped a score of maidens clad in
white muslin dresses with blue scarfs around their waists. As the King
approached, these little maids, with much pretty nervousness, advanced
to meet him, and handed him a banner which they had worked for him, and
also a dainty gold-clasped Bible. Monmouth handed the flag to one of his
captains, but he raised the book above his head, exclaiming that he
had come there to defend the truths contained within it, at which the
cheerings and acclamations broke forth with redoubled vigour. It had
been expected that he might address the people from the cross, but he
contented himself with waiting while the heralds proclaimed his titles
to the Crown, when he gave the word to disperse, and the troops marched
off to the different centres where food had been provided for them. The
King and his chief officers took up their quarters in the Castle, while
the Mayor and richer burgesses found bed and board for the rest. As to
the common soldiers, many were billeted among the townsfolk, many others
encamped in the streets and Castle grounds, while the remainder took up
their dwelling among the waggons in the fields outside the city, where
they lit up great fires, and had sheep roasting and beer flowing as
merrily as though a march on London were but a holiday outing.



Chapter XXI. Of my Hand-grips with the Brandenburger

King Monmouth had called a council meeting for the evening, and summoned
Colonel Decimus Saxon to attend it, with whom I went, bearing with me
the small package which Sir Jacob Clancing had given over to my keeping.
On arriving at the Castle we found that the King had not yet come out
from his chamber, but we were shown into the great hall to await him, a
fine room with lofty windows and a noble ceiling of carved woodwork. At
the further end the royal arms had been erected without the bar sinister
which Monmouth had formerly worn. Here were assembled the principal
chiefs of the army, with many of the inferior commanders, town officers,
and others who had petitions to offer. Lord Grey of Wark stood silently
by the window, looking out over the countryside with a gloomy face. Wade
and Holmes shook their heads and whispered in a corner. Ferguson strode
about with his wig awry, shouting out exhortations and prayers in a
broad Scottish accent. A few of the more gaily dressed gathered round
the empty fireplace, and listened to a tale from one of their number
which appeared to be shrouded in many oaths, and which was greeted with
shouts of laughter. In another corner a numerous group of zealots, clad
in black or russet gowns, with broad white bands and hanging mantles,
