already imbibed, unless he would empower him to disable his fingers, he
should endeavour, with God's help, to prevent his future improvement.
And, indeed, he punctually performed what he had undertaken; for, on
pretence that I had written impertinent letters to my grandfather, he
caused a board to be made with five holes in it, through which he thrust
the fingers and thumb of my right hand, and fastened it by whipcord to
my wrist, in such a manner as effectually debarred me the use of my pen.
But this restraint I was freed from in a few days, by an accident which
happened in a quarrel between me and another boy; who, taking upon him
to insult my poverty, I was so incensed at his ungenerous reproach that
with one stroke with my machine I cut him to the skull, to the great
terror of myself and schoolfellows, who left him bleeding on the ground,
and ran to inform the master of what had happened. I was so severely
punished for this trespass that, were I to live to the age of
Methusalem, the impression it made on me would not be effaced; the more
than the antipathy and horror I conceived for the merciless tyrant who
inflicted it. The contempt which my appearance naturally produced in
all who saw me, the continual wants to which I was exposed, and my own
haughty disposition, impatient of affronts, involved me in a thousand
troublesome adventures, by which I was at length inured in adversity,
and emboldened to undertakings far above my years. I was often inhumanly
scourged for crimes I did not commit, because, having the character of
a vagabond in the village, every piece of mischief, whose author lay
unknown, was charged upon me. I have been found guilty of robbing
orchards I never entered, of killing cats I never hunted, of stealing
gingerbread I never touched, and of abusing old women I never saw. Nay,
a stammering carpenter had eloquence enough to persuade my master that
I fired a pistol loaded with small shot into his window; though my
landlady and the whole family bore witness that I was abed fast asleep
at the time when this outrage was committed, I was once flogged for
having narrowly escaped drowning, by the sinking of a ferry boat in
which I was passenger. Another time, for having recovered of a bruise
occasioned by a horse and cart running over me. A third time, for being
bitten by a baker's dog. In short, whether I was guilty or unfortunate,
the correction and sympathy of this arbitrary pedagogue were the same.

Far from being subdued by this informal usage, my indignation triumphed
over that slavish awe which had hitherto enforced my obedience; and
the more my years and knowledge increased, the more I perceived the
injustice and barbarity of his behaviour. By the help of an uncommon
genius, and the advice and direction of our usher, who had served my
father in his travels, I made a surprising progress in the classics,
writing, and arithmetic; so that, before I was twelve years old, I
was allowed by everybody to be the best scholar in the school. This
qualification, together with the boldness of temper and strength of make
which had subjected almost all my contemporaries, gave me such influence
over them that I began to form cabals against my persecutor; and was in
hope of, being able to bid him defiance in a very short time. Being at
the head of a faction, consisting of thirty boys, most of them of my own
age, I was determined to put their mettle to trial, that I might know
how far they were to be depended upon, before I put my grand scheme in
execution: with this view, we attacked a body of stout apprentices,
who had taken possession of a part of the ground allotted to us for the
scheme of our diversions, and who were then playing at ninepins on
the spot; but I had the mortification to see my adherents routed in an
instant, and a leg of one of them broke in his flight by the bowl, which
one of our adversaries had detached in pursuit of us. This discomfiture
did not hinder us from engaging them afterwards in frequent skirmishes,
which we maintained by throwing stones at a distance, wherein I received
many wounds, the scars of which still remain. Our enemies were so
harassed and interrupted by these alarms that they at last abandoned
their conquest, and left us to the peaceable enjoyment of our own
territories.

It would be endless to enumerate the exploits we performed in the course
of this confederacy, which became the terror of the whole village;
insomuch that, when different interests divided it, one of the parties
commonly courted the assistance of Roderick Random (by which name I
was known) to cast the balance, and keep the opposite faction in awe.
Meanwhile, I took the advantage of every play-day to present myself
before my grandfather, to whom I seldom found access, by reason of his
being closely besieged by a numerous family of his female grandchildren,
who, though they perpetually quarrelled among themselves, never failed
to join against me, as the common enemy of all. His heir, who was about
the age of eighteen, minded nothing but fox-hunting, and indeed was
qualified for nothing else, notwithstanding his grandfather's indulgence
in entertaining a tutor for him at home; who at the same time performed
the office of parish clerk. This young Actaeon, who inherited his
grandfather's antipathy to everything in distress, never sat eyes on
me without uncoupling his beagles, and hunting me into some cottage or
other, whither I generally fled for shelter. In this Christian
amusement he was encouraged by his preceptor, who, no doubt, took such
opportunities to ingratiate himself with the rising sun, observing, that
the old gentleman, according to the course of nature, had not long to
live, for he was already on the verge of fourscore.

The behaviour of this rascally sycophant incensed me so much, that one
day, when I was beleaguered by him and his hounds in a farmer's house,
where I had found protection, I took aim at him (being an excellent
marksman) with a large pebble, which struck out four of his foreteeth,
and effectually incapacitated him from doing the office of a clerk.






CHAPTER III

My Mother's Brother arrives--relieves me--a Description of him--he goes
along with me to the House of my Grandfather--is encountered by his
Dogs--defeats them, after a bloody Engagement--is admitted to the old
Gentleman--a Dialogue between them

About this time my mother's only brother, who had been long abroad,
lieutenant of a man-of-war, arrived in his own country; where being
informed of my condition, he came to see me, and out of his slender
finances not only supplied me with what necessaries I wanted for the
present, but resolved not to leave the country until he had prevailed on
my grandfather to settle something handsome for the future. This was
a task to which he was by no means equal, being entirely ignorant, not
only of the judge's disposition, but also of the ways of men in general,
to which his education on board had kept him an utter stranger.

He was a strong built man, somewhat bandy legged, with a neck like that
of a bull, and a face which (you might easily perceive) had withstood
the most obstinate assaults of the weather. His dress consisted of a
soldier's coat altered for him by the ship's tailor, a striped flannel
jacket, a pair of red breeches spanned with pitch, clean gray worsted
stockings, large silver buckles that covered three-fourths of his shoes,
a silver-laced hat, whose crown overlooked the brims about an inch and
a half, black bobwig in buckle, a check shirt, a silk handkerchief, a
hanger, with a brass handle, girded to his thigh by a furnished lace
belt, and a good oak plant under his arm. Thus equipped, he set out
with me (who by his bounty made a very decent appearance) for my
grandfather's house, where we were saluted by Jowler and Caesar, whom
my cousin, young master, had let loose at our approach. Being well
acquainted with the inveteracy of these curs, I was about to betake
myself to my heels, when my uncle seized me with one hand, brandished
his cudgel with the other, and at one blow laid Caesar sprawling on the
ground; but, finding himself attacked at the same time in the rear by
Jowler, and fearing Caesar might recover, he drew his hanger, wheeled
about, and by a lucky stroke severed Jowler's head from his body. By
this time, the young foxhunter and three servants, armed with pitchforks
and flails, were come to the assistance of the dogs, whom they found
breathless upon the field; and my cousin was so provoked at the death
of his favourites, that he ordered his attendants to advance, and take
vengeance on their executioner, whom he loaded with all the curses and
reproaches his anger could suggest. Upon which my uncle stepped
forwards with an undaunted air, at the sight of whose bloody weapons his
antagonists fell back with precipitation, when he accosted their leader
thus:

"Lookee, brother, your dogs having boarded me without provocation, what
I did was in my own defence. So you had best be civil, and let us shoot
a head, clear of you."

Whether the young squire misinterpreted my uncle's desire of peace,
or was enraged at the fate of his hounds beyond his usual pitch
of resolution, I know not; but he snatched a flail from one of his
followers, and came up with a show of assaulting the lieutenant, who,
putting himself in a posture of defence, proceeded thus: "Lookee, you
lubberly son of a w--e, if you come athwart me, 'ware your gingerbread
work. I'll be foul of your quarter, d--n me."

This declaration, followed by a flourish of his hanger, seemed to check
the progress of the young gentleman's choler, who, looking behind him,
perceived his attendants had slunk into the house, shut the gate, and
left him to decide the contention by himself.

Here a parley ensued, which was introduced by my cousin's asking, "Who
the devil are you? What do you want? Some scoundrel of a seaman, I
suppose, who has deserted and turned thief. But don't think you shall
escape, sirrah--I'll have you hang'd, you dog, I will. Your blood shall
pay for that of my two hounds, you ragamuffin. I would not have parted
with them to save your whole generation from the gallows, you ruffian,
you!" "None of your jaw, you swab--none of your jaw," replied my uncle,
"else I shall trim your laced jacket for you. I shall rub you down with
an oaken towel, my boy, I shall." So saying, he sheathed his hanger, and
grasped his cudgel. Meanwhile the people of the house being alarmed,
one of my female cousins opened a window, and asked what was the matter.
"The matter!" answered the lieutenant; "no great matter, young woman;
I have business with the old gentleman, and this spark, belike, won't
allow me to come alongside of him," that's all. After a few minutes
pause we were admitted, and conducted to my grandfather's chamber
through a lane of my relations, who honoured me with very significant
looks as I passed along. When we came into the judge's presence my
uncle, after two or three sea-bows, expressed himself in this manner;
"Your servant, your servant. What cheer, father? what cheer? I suppose
you don't know me--mayhap you don't. My name is Tom Bowling, and this
here boy, you look as if you did not know him neither; 'tis like you
mayn't. He's new rigged, i'faith; his cloth don't shake in the wind so
much as it wont to do. 'Tis my nephew, d'y see, Roderick Random--your
own flesh and blood, old gentleman. Don't lay a-stern, you dog," pulling
me forward. My grandfather (who was laid up with the gout) received this
relation, after his long absence, with that coldness of civility which
was peculiar to him; told him he was glad to see him, and desired him to
sit down. "Thank ye, thank ye, sir, I had as lief stand," said my
uncle; "for my own part, I desire nothing of you; but, if you have any
conscience at all, do something for this poor boy, who has been used at
a very unchristian rate. Unchristian do I call it? I am sure the Moors
in Barbary have more humanity than to leave their little ones to want.
I would fain know why my sister's son is more neglected than that there
fair-weather Jack" (pointing to the young squire, who with the rest of
my cousins had followed us into the room). "Is not he as near akin to
you as the other? Is he not much handsomer and better built than that
great chucklehead? Come, come, consider, old gentleman, you are going
in a short time to give an account of your evil actions. Remember the
wrongs you did his father, and make all the satisfaction in your power
before it be too late. The least thing you can do is to settle his
father's portion on him" The young ladies, who thought themselves too
much concerned to contain themselves any longer, set up their
throats all together against my protector--"Scurvy companion--saucy
tarpaulin--rude, impertinent fellow, did he think to prescribe to
grandpapa? His sister's brat had been too well taken care of. Grandpapa
was too just not make a difference between an unnatural, rebellious son
and his dutiful, loving children, who took his advice in all things;"
and such expressions were vented against him with great violence; until
the judge at length commanded silence. He calmly rebuked my uncle for
his unmannerly behaviour, which he said he would excuse on account of
his education: he told him he had been very kind to the boy, whom he had
kept at school seven or eight years, although he was informed he made no
progress in his learning but was addicted to all manner of vice, which
he rather believed, because he himself was witness to a barbarous piece
of mischief he had committed on the jaws of his chaplain. But, however,
he would see what the lad was fit for, and bind him apprentice to some
honest tradesman or other, provided he would mend his manners, and
behave for the future as became him. The honest tar (whose pride and
indignation boiled within him) answered my grandfather, that it was true
he had sent him to school, but it had cost him nothing, for he had never
been at one shilling expense to furnish him with food, raiment, books,
or other necessaries; so that it was not much to be wondered at, if
the boy made small progress; and yet whoever told him so was a lying,
lubberly rascal, and deserved to be keel-haul'd; for thof he (the
lieutenant) did not understand those matters himself, he was well
informed as how Rory was the best scholar of his age in all the country;
the truth of which he would maintain, by laying a wager of his whole
half-year's pay on the boy's head--with these words he pulled out his
purse, and challenged the company: "Neither is he predicted to vice, as
you affirm, but rather, left like a wreck, d'ye see, at the mercy of the
wind and weather, by your neglect, old gentleman. As for what happened
to your chaplain, I am only sorry that he did not knock out the
scoundrel's brains instead of his teeth. By the Lord, if ever I come up
with him, he had better be in Greenland, that's all. Thank you for your
courteous offer of binding the lad apprentice to a tradesman. I suppose
you would make a tailor of him--would you? I had rather see him hang'd,
d'ye see. Come along, Rory, I perceive how the land lies, my boy--let's
tack about, i'faith--while I have a shilling you shan't want a tester.
B'we, old gentleman; you're bound for the other world, but I believe
damnably ill-provided for the voyage." Thus ended our visit; and we
returned to the village, my uncle muttering curses all the way against
the old shark and the young fry that surrounded him.






CHAPTER IV

My Grandfather makes his Will--our second Visit--he Dies--his Will is
read in Presence of all his living Descendants--the Disappointment of my
female Cousins--my Uncle's Behaviour

A few weeks after our first visit, we were informed that the old judge,
at the end of a fit of thoughtfulness, which lasted three days, had sent
for a notary and made his will; that the distemper had mounted from his
legs to his stomach, and, being conscious of his approaching end, he had
desired to see all his descendants without exception. In obedience to
this summons, my uncle set out with me a second time, to receive the
last benediction of my grandfather: often repeating by the road, "Ey,
ey, we have brought up the old hulk at last. You shall see--you shall
see the effect of my admonition," When we entered his chamber, which was
crowded with his relations, we advanced to the bedside, where we found
him in his last agonies, supported by two of his granddaughters, who sat
on each side of him, sobbing most piteously, and wiping away the froth
and slaver as it gathered on his lips, which they frequently kissed
with a show of great anguish and affection. My uncle approached him
with these words, "What! he's not a-weigh. How fare ye? how fare ye, old
gentleman? Lord have mercy upon your poor sinful soul!" Upon which,
the dying man turned his languid eyes towards us, and Mr. Bowling went
on--"Here's poor Roy come to see you before you die, and to receive your
blessing. What, man! don't despair, you have been a great sinner, 'tis
true,--what then? There's a righteous judge above, an't there? He minds
me no more than a porpoise. Yes, yes, he's a-going; the land crabs
will have him, I see that! his anchor's a-peak, i'faith." This homely
consolation scandalised the company so much, and especially the parson,
who probably thought his province invaded, that we were obliged to
retire into another room, where, in a few minutes, we were convinced of
my grandfather's decease, by a dismal yell uttered by the young ladies
in his apartment; whither we immediately hastened, and found his heir,
who had retired a little before into a closet, under pretence of giving
vent to his sorrow, asking, with a countenance beslubbered with tears,
if his grandpapa was certainly dead? "Dead!" (says my uncle, looking,
at the body) "ay, ay, I'll warrant him as dead as a herring. Odd's
fish! now my dream is out for all the world. I thought I stood upon the
forecastle, and saw a parcel of carrion crows foul of a dead shark: that
floated alongside, and the devil perching upon our spritsail yard, in
the likeness of a blue bear--who, d'ye see jumped overboard upon the
carcass and carried it to the bottom in his claws." "Out upon thee,
reprobate" cries the parson "out upon thee, blasphemous wretch! Dost
thou think his honour's soul is in the possession of Satan?" The clamour
immediately arose, and my poor uncle, being, shouldered from one corner
of the room to the other, was obliged to lug out in his own defence, and
swear he would turn out for no man, till such time as he knew who had
the title to send him adrift. "None of your tricks upon travellers,"
said he; "mayhap old Bluff has left my kinsman here his heir: if he has,
it will be the better for his miserable soul. Odds bob! I'd desire no
better news. I'd soon make him a clear shin, I warrant you." To avoid
any further disturbance, one of my grandfather's executors, who was
present, assured Mr. Bowling, that his nephew should have all manner of
justice; that a day should be appointed after the funeral for examining
the papers of the deceased, in presence of all his relations; till which
time every desk and cabinet in the house should remain close sealed;
and that he was very welcome to be witness to this ceremony, which was
immediately performed to his satisfaction. In the meantime, orders were
given to provide mourning for all the relations, in which number I was
included; but my uncle would not suffer me to accept of it, until I
should be assured whether or no I had reason to honour his memory so
far. During this interval, the conjectures of people, with regard to
the old gentleman's will, were various: as it was well known, he had,
besides his landed estate, which was worth L700 per annum, six or seven
thousand pounds at interest, some imagined that the whole real estate
(which he had greatly improved) would go to the young man whom he always
entertained as his heir; and that the money would be equally divided
between my female cousins (five in number) and me. Others were of
opinion, that, as the rest of the children had been already provided
for, he would only bequeath two or three hundred pounds to each of his
granddaughters, and leave the bulk of the sum to me, to atone for his
unnatural usage of my father. At length the important hour arrived, and
the will was produced in the midst of the expectants, whose looks and
gestures formed a group that would have been very entertaining to
an unconcerned spectator. But, the reader can scarce conceive the
astonishment and mortification that appeared, when an attorney
pronounced aloud, the young squire sole heir of all his grandfather's
estate, personal and real. My uncle, who had listened with great
attention, sucking the head of his cudgel all the while, accompanied
these words of the attorney with a stare, and whew, that alarmed the
whole assembly. The eldest and pertest of my female competitors, who had
been always very officious about my grandfather's person, inquired, with
a faltering accent and visage as yellow as an orange, "if there were no
legacies?" and was answered, "None at all." Upon which she fainted away.
The rest, whose expectations, perhaps, were not so sanguine, supported
their disappointment with more resolution, though not without giving
evident marks of indignation, and grief at least as genuine as that
which appeared in them at the old gentleman's death. My conductor, after
having kicked with his heel for some time against the wainscot,
began: "So there's no legacy, friend, ha!--here's an old succubus; but
somebody's soul howls for it, d--n me!" The parson of the parish, who
was one of the executors, and had acted as ghostly director to the
old man, no sooner heard this exclamation than he cried out, "Avaunt,
unchristian reviler! avaunt! wilt thou not allow the soul of his honour
to rest in peace?" But this zealous pastor did not find himself so
warmly seconded, as formerly, by the young ladies, who now joined
my uncle against him, and accused him of having acted the part of a
busybody with their grandpapa whose ears he had certainly abused by
false stories to their prejudice, or else he would not have neglected
them in such an unnatural manner. The young squire was much diverted
with this scene, and whispered to my uncle, that if he had not murdered
his dogs, he would have shown him glorious fun, by hunting a black
badger (so he termed the clergyman). The surly lieutenant, who was not
in a humour to relish this amusement, replied, "You and your dogs may be
damn'd. I suppose you'll find them with your old dad, in the latitude of
hell. Come, Rory,--about ship, my lad, we must steer another course, I
think." And away we went.






CHAPTER V

The Schoolmaster uses me barbarously--I form a Project of Revenge, in
which I am assisted by my Uncle--I leave the Village--am settled at a
University by his Generosity

On our way back to the village, my uncle spoke not a word during the
space of a whole hour, but whistled with great vehemence the tune of
"Why should we quarrel for riches," etc. his visage being contracted all
the while into a most formidable frown. At length his pace increased to
such a degree that I was left behind a considerable way: then he waited
for me; and when I was almost up with him, called out in a surly tone,
"Bear a hand, damme! must I bring to every minute for you, you lazy
dog." Then, laying hold of me by the arm, hauled me along, until his
good nature (of which he had a great share) and reflection getting
the better of his he said, "Come, my boy, don't be cast down,--the old
rascal is in hell, that's some satisfaction; you shall go to sea with
me, my lad. A light heart and a thin pair of breeches goes through the
world, brave boys, as the song goes--eh!" Though this proposal did not
at all suit my inclination, I was afraid of discovering my aversion to
it, lest I should disoblige the only friend I had in the world; and he
was so much a seaman that he never dreamt I could have had any objection
to his design; consequently gave himself no trouble in consulting my
approbation. But this resolution was soon dropped, by the device of our
usher, who assured Mr. Bowling, it would be a thousand pities to balk my
genius, which would certainly one day make my fortune on shore, provided
it received due cultivation. Upon which, this generous tar determined
(though he could ill afford it) to give me university education; and
accordingly settled my board and other expenses, at a town not many
miles distant, famous for its colleges, whither we repaired in a short
time. But, before the day of our departure, the schoolmaster, who no
longer had the fear of my grandfather before his eyes, laid aside all
decency and restraint, and not only abused me in the grossest language
his rancour could suggest, as a wicked, proffigate, dull, beggarly
miscreant, whom he had taught out of charity; but also inveighed in the
most bitter manner against the memory of the judge (who by the by had
procured that settlement for him), hinting, in pretty plain terms, that
the old gentleman's soul was damned to all eternity for his injustice in
neglecting to pay for my learning. This brutal behaviour, added to the
sufferings I had formerly undergone made me think it high time to be
revenged on this insolent pedagogue. Having consulted my adherents, I
found them all staunch in their promises to stand by me; and our scheme
was this:--In the afternoon preceding to the day of our departure for
the University, I resolved to take the advantage of the usher's going
out to make water (which he regularly did at four o'clock), and shut the
great door, that he might not come to the assistance of his superior.
This being done, the assault was to be begun by my advancing to my
master and spitting in his face. I was to be seconded by two of the
strongest boys in the school, who were devoted to me; their business was
to join me in dragging the tyrant to a bench, over which he was to be
laid, and his bare posteriors heartily flogged, with his own birch,
which we proposed to wrest from him in his struggle; but if we should
find him too many for us all three, we were to demand the assistance of
our competitors, who should be ready to enforce us, or oppose anything
that might be undertaken for the master's relief. One of my principal
assistants was called Jeremy Gawky, son and heir of a wealthy gentleman
in the neighbourhood; and the name of the other, Hugh Strap, the cadet
of a family which had given shoemakers to the village time out of mind.
I had once saved Gawky's life, by plunging into a river and dragging him
on shore, when he was on the point of being drowned. I had often rescued
him from the clutches of those whom his insufferable arrogance had
provoked to a resentment he was not able to sustain; and many times
saved his reputation and posteriors, by performing his exercises at
school; so that it is not to be wondered at, if he had a particular
regard for me and my interests. The attachment of Strap flowed from a
voluntary, disinterested inclination, which had manifested itself on
many occasions in my behalf, he having once rendered me the same service
that I had rendered Gawky, by saving my life at the risk of his own;
and often fathered offences that I had committed, for which he suffered
severely, rather than I should feel the weight of the punishment.
These two champions were the more willing to engage in this enterprise,
because they intended to leave the school next day, as well as I; the
first being ordered by his father to return into the country, and the
other being bound apprentice to his barber, at a market town not far
off.

In the meantime, my uncle, being informed of my master's behaviour to
me, was enraged at his insolence, and vowed revenge so heartily that I
could not refrain from telling him the scheme I had concerted, while
he heard with great satisfaction, at every sentence squirting out a
mouthful of spittle, tinctured with tobacco, of which he constantly
chewed a large quid. At last, pulling up his breeches, he cried, "No,
no, z--ds! that won't do neither; howsoever, 'tis a bold undertaking, my
lad, that I must say, i'faith; but lookee, lookee, how do you propose
to get clear off--won't the enemy give chase, my boy?--ay, ay, that he
will, I warrant, and alarm the whole coast; ah! God help thee, more sail
than ballast, Rory. Let me alone for that--leave the whole to me. I'll
show him the foretopsail, I will. If so be your shipmates are jolly
boys, and won't flinch, you shall see, you shall see; egad, I'll play
him such a salt-water trick I'll bring him to the gangway and anoint him
with a cat-and-nine-tails; he shall have a round dozen doubled, my lad,
he shall--and be left lashed to his meditations." We were very proud of
our associate, who immediately went to work, and prepared the instrument
of his revenge with great skill and expedition; after which, he ordered
our baggage to be packed up and sent off, a day before our attempt, and
got horses ready to be mounted, as soon as the affair should be over. At
length the hour arrived, when our auxiliary, seizing the opportunity of
the usher's absence, bolted in, secured the door, and immediately laid
hold of the pedant by his collar who bawled out, "Murder, Thieves," with
the voice of a Stentor. Though I trembled all over like an aspen leaf, I
knew there was no time to be lost, and accordingly got up, and summoned
our associates to our assistance. Strap, without any hesitation, obeyed
the signal, and seeing me leap upon the master's back, ran immediately
to one of his legs, which pulling with all his force, this dreadful
adversary was humbled to the ground; upon which Gawky, who had hitherto
remained in his place, under the influence of a universal trepidation,
hastened to the scene of action, and insulted the fallen tyrant with
a loud huzza, in which the whole school joined. The noise alarmed the
usher, who, finding himself shut out, endeavoured, partly by threats
and partly by entreaties, to procure admission. My uncle bade him have a
little patience, and he would let him in presently; but if he pretended
to stir from that place, it should fare the worse with the son of
a bitch his superior, on whom he intended only to bestow a little
wholesome chastisement, for his barbarous usage of Rory, "to which,"
said he, "you are no stranger." By this time we had dragged the criminal
to a post, to which Bowling tied him with a rope he had provided on
purpose; after having secured his hands and stripped his back. In this
ludicrous posture he stood (to the no small entertainment of the boys,
who crowded about him, and shouted with great exultation at the novelty
of the sight), venting bitter imprecations against the lieutenant, and
reproaching his scholars with treachery and rebellion; when the usher
was admitted, whom my uncle accosted in this manner: "Harkee, Mr.
Syntax, I believe you are an honest man, d'ye see--and I have a respect
for you--but for all that, we must, for our own security, d'ye see,
belay you for a short time." With these words, he pulled out some
fathoms of cord, which the honest man no sooner saw than he protested
with great earnestness he would allow no violence to be offered to him,
at the same time accusing me of perfidy and ingratitude. But Bowling
representing that it was in vain to resist, and that he did not mean to
use him with violence and indecency, but only to hinder him from raising
the hue and cry against us before we should be out of their power, he
allowed himself to be bound to his own desk, where he sat a spectator
of the punishment inflicted on his principal. My uncle, having upbraided
this arbitrary wretch with his inhumanity to me, told him, that he
proposed to give him a little discipline for the good of his soul, which
he immediately put in practice, with great vigour and dexterity. This
smart application to the pedant's withered posteriors gave him such
exquisite pain that he roared like a mad bull, danced, cursed, and
blasphemed, like a frantic bedlamite. When the lieutenant thought
himself sufficiently revenged, he took his leave of him in these words:
"Now, friend, you'll remember me the longest day you have to live; I
have given you a lesson that will let you know what flogging is, and
teach you to have more sympathy for the future. Shout, boys, shout!"

This ceremony was no sooner over than my uncle proposed they should quit
the school, and convey their old comrade Rory to the public-house, about
a mile from the village, where he would treat them all. His offer being
joyfully embraced, he addressed himself to Mr. Syntax, and begged him to
accompany us; but this invitation he refused with great disdain, telling
my benefactor he was not the man he took him to be. "Well, well, old
surly," replied my uncle, shaking his hand, "thou art an honest fellow
notwithstanding; and if ever I have the command of a ship, thou shalt be
our schoolmaster, i'faith." So saying he dismissed the boys, and locking
the door, left the two preceptors to console one another; while we moved
forwards on our journey, attended by a numerous retinue, whom he treated
according to his promise.

We parted with many tears, and lay that night at an inn on the road,
about ten miles short of the town where I was to remain, at which
we arrived next day, and I found I had no cause to complain of the
accommodations provided for me, in being boarded at the house of an
apothecary, who had married a distant relation of my mother. In a few
days after, my uncle set out for his ship, having settled the necessary
funds for my maintenance and education.






CHAPTER VI

I make great progress in my Studies--am caressed by Everybody--my female
Cousins take notice of me--I reject their Invitation--they are incensed,
and conspire against me--am left destitute by a Misfortune that befalls
my Uncle-Gawky's Treachery--my Revenge

As I was now capable of reflection, I began to consider my precarious
situation; that I was utterly abandoned by those whose duty it was to
protect me: and that my sole dependence was on the generosity of one
man, who was not only exposed by his profession to continual dangers,
which might one day deprive me of him for ever; but also (no doubt)
subject to those vicissitudes of disposition which a change of fortune
usually creates, or which a better acquaintance with the world might
produce; for I always ascribed his benevolence to the dictates of a
heart as yet undebauched by a commerce with mankind. Alarmed at these
considerations, I resolved to apply myself with great care to my
studies, and enjoy the opportunity in my power: this I did with such
success that, in the space of three years, I understood Greek very well,
was pretty far advanced in the mathematics, and no stranger to moral and
natural philosophy: logic I made no account of; but, above all things,
I valued myself on my taste in the belles lettres, and a talent for
poetry, which had already produced some pieces that had met with a
favourable reception. These qualifications, added to a good face and
shape, acquired the esteem and acquaintance of the most considerable
people in town, and I had the satisfaction to find myself in some degree
of favour with the ladies; an intoxicating piece of good fortune to one
of my amorous complexion! which I obtained, or at least preserved, by
gratifying their propensity to scandal, in lampooning their rivals.

Two of my female cousins lived in this place, with their mother, since
the death of their father, who left his whole fortune equally divided
between them; so that, if they were not the most beautiful, they were
at least the richest toasts in town; and received daily the addresses of
all the beaux and cavaliers of the country. Although I had hitherto been
looked upon by them with the most supercilious contempt, my character
now attracted their notice so much that I was given to understand I
might be honoured with their acquaintance, if I pleased.

The reader will easily perceive that this condescension either flowed
from the hope of making my poetical capacity subservient to their
malice, or at least of screening themselves from the lash of my
resentment, which they had effectually provoked. I enjoyed this triumph
with great satisfaction, and not only rejected their offer with disdain,
but in all my performances, whether satire or panegyric, industriously
avoided mentioning their names, even while I celebrated those of their
intimates: this neglect mortified their pride exceedingly and incensed
them to such a degree that they were resolved to make me repent of
my indifference. The first stroke of their revenge consisted in their
