positively in a few hours. At present, I think, with care and attention,
there _is_ a chance of his recovery."

Much comforted by this assurance, Leonard departed, and afraid to put
Bell to the ground lest she should run back to her master, he continued
to carry her, and endeavoured to attach her to him by caresses and
endearments. The little animal showed her sense of his kindness by
licking his hands, but she still remained inconsolable, and ever and
anon struggled to get free. Making the best of his way to Wood-street,
he entered the hutch, and placing a little straw in one corner for Bell,
threw himself on a bench and dropped asleep. At six o'clock he was
awakened by the barking of the dog, and opening the door beheld
Dallison. The grocer was at the window above, and about to let down a
basket of provisions to them. To Leonard's eager inquiries after Amabel,
Mr. Bloundel replied by a melancholy shake of the head, and soon
afterwards withdrew. With a sad heart, the apprentice then broke his
fast,--not forgetting at the same time the wants of his little
companion,--and finding he was not required by his master, he proceeded
to Doctor Hodges' residence. He was fortunate enough to find the
friendly physician at home, and, after relating to him what had
occurred, committed the packet to his custody.

"It will be safer in your keeping than mine," he said; "and if anything
should happen to me, you will, I am sure, observe the wishes of the poor
piper."

"Rely upon it, I will," replied Hodges. "I am sorry to tell you I have
been misled as to the clue I fancied I had obtained to Nizza's retreat.
We are as far from the mark as ever."

"Might not the real name of the villain who has assumed the name of Sir
Paul Parravicin be ascertained from the Earl of Rochester?" rejoined
Leonard.

"So I thought," replied Hodges; "and I made the attempt yesterday, but
it failed. I was at Whitehall, and finding the earl in the king's
presence, suddenly asked him where I could find his friend Sir Paul
Parravicin. He looked surprised at the question, glanced significantly
at the monarch, and then carelessly answered that he knew no such
person."

"A strange idea crosses me," cried Leonard. "Can it be the king who has
assumed this disguise?"

"At one time I suspected as much," rejoined Hodges; "but setting aside
your description of the person, which does not tally with that of
Charles, I am satisfied from other circumstances it is not so. After
all, I should not wonder if poor Bell," smoothing her long silky ears as
she lay in the apprentice's arms, "should help us to discover her
mistress. And now," he added, "I shall go to Wood-street to inquire
after Amabel, and will then accompany you to the pest-house. From what
you tell me the young chirurgeon said of the piper, I do not despair of
his recovery."

"Poor as his chance may appear, it is better, I fear, than Amabel's,"
sighed the apprentice.

"Ah!" exclaimed Hodges, in a sorrowful tone, "hers is slight indeed."

And perceiving that the apprentice was greatly moved, he waited for a
moment till he had recovered himself, and then, motioning him to follow
him, they quitted the house together.

On reaching Mr. Bloundel's habitation, Leonard pulled the cord in the
hutch, and the grocer appeared at the window.

"My daughter has not left her bed this morning," he said, in answer to
the doctor's inquiries, "and I fear she is much worse. My wife is with
her. It would be a great satisfaction to me if you would see her again."

After some little hesitation, Hodges assented, and was drawn up as
before. He returned in about half an hour, and his grave countenance
convinced Leonard that his worst anticipations were correct. He
therefore forbore to question him, and they walked towards Cripplegate
in silence.

On emerging into the fields, Hodges observed to his companion, "It is
strange that I who daily witness such dreadful suffering should be
pained by the gradual and easy decline of Amabel. But so it is. Her case
touches me more than the worst I have seen of the plague."

"I can easily account for the feeling," groaned Leonard.

"I am happy to say I have prevailed on her, if she does not improve in a
short time,--and there is not the slightest chance of it,--to try the
effect of a removal to the country. Her father also consents to the
plan."

"I am glad to hear it," replied Leonard. "But whither will she go, and
who will watch over her?"

"That is not yet settled," rejoined Hodges.

"Oh! that I might be permitted to undertake the office!" cried Leonard,
passionately.

"Restrain yourself," said Hodges, in a tone of slight rebuke. "Fitting
attendance will be found, if needed."

The conversation then dropped, and they walked briskly forward. They
were now within a short distance of the pest-house, and Leonard, hearing
footsteps behind him, turned and beheld a closed litter, borne by two
stout porters, and evidently containing a plague-patient. He stepped
aside to let it pass, when Bell, suddenly pricking her ears, uttered a
singular cry, and bursting from him, flew after the litter, leaping
against it and barking joyfully. The porters, who were proceeding at a
quick pace, tried to drive her away, but without effect, and she
continued her cries until they reached the gates of the pest-house. In
vain Leonard whistled to her, and called her back. She paid no attention
whatever to him.

"I almost begin to fear," said Hodges, unable to repress a shudder,
"that the poor animal will, indeed, be the means of discovering for us
the object of our search."

"I understand what you mean," rejoined Leonard, "and am of the same
opinion as yourself. Heaven grant we may be mistaken!"

And as he spoke, he ran forward, and, followed by Hodges, reached the
pest-house just as the litter was taken into it.

"Silence that accursed dog," cried one of the porters, "and bid a nurse
attend us. We have a patient for the women's ward."

"Let me see her," cried Hodges. "I am a physician."

"Readily, sir," replied the porter. "It is almost over with her, poor
soul! It would have saved time and trouble to take her to the plague-pit
at once. She cannot last many hours. Curse the dog! Will it never cease
howling?"

Leonard here seized Bell, fearing she might do some mischief, and with a
sad foreboding beheld the man draw back the curtains of the litter. His
fears proved well founded. There, stretched upon the couch, with her
dark hair unbound, and flowing in wild disorder over her neck, lay Nizza
Macascree. The ghastly paleness of her face could not, however, entirely
rob it of its beauty, and her dark eyes were glazed and lustreless. At
the sight of her mistress, poor Bell uttered so piteous a cry, that
Leonard, moved by compassion, placed her on the pillow beside her, and
the sagacious animal did not attempt to approach nearer, but merely
licked her cheek. Roused by the touch, Nizza turned to see what was near
her, and recognising the animal, made a movement to strain her to her
bosom, but the pain she endured was so intense that she sank back with a
deep groan.

"From whom did you receive this young woman?" demanded Hodges, of one of
the porters.

"She was brought to us by two richly-attired lacqueys," replied the man,
"in this very litter. They paid us to carry her here without loss of
time."

"You have an idea whose servants they were?" pursued Hodges.

"Not the least," replied the fellow; "but I should judge, from the
richness of their dress, that they belonged to some nobleman."

"Did they belong to the royal household?" inquired Leonard.

"No, no," rejoined the man. "I am certain as to that."

"The poor girl shall not remain here," observed Hodges, to the
apprentice. "You must convey her to my residence in Great
Knightrider-street," he added, to the porters.

"We will convey her wherever you please," replied the men, "if we are
paid for our trouble."

And they were about to close the curtains, when Nizza, having caught
sight of the apprentice, slightly raised herself, and cried, in a voice
of the utmost anxiety, "Is that you, Leonard?"

"It is," he replied, approaching her.

"Then I shall die happy, since I have seen you once more," she said.
"Oh, do not stay near me. You may catch the infection."

"Nizza," said Leonard, disregarding the caution, and breathing the words
in her ear; "allay my fears by a word. You have not fallen a victim to
the villain who carried you away?"

"I have not, Leonard," she replied, solemnly, "I resisted his
importunities, his threats, his violence, and would have slain myself
rather than have yielded to him. The plague, at length, came to my
rescue, and I have reason to be grateful to it; for it has not only
delivered me from him, but has brought me to you."

"I must now impose silence upon you," interposed Hodges, laying his
finger on his lips; "further conversation will be hurtful."

"One question more, and I have done," replied Nizza. "How came Bell with
you--and where is my father? Nothing has happened to him?" she
continued, observing Leonard's countenance change. "Speak! do not keep
me in suspense. Your silence fills me with apprehension. Speak, I
implore you. He is dead?"

"No," replied Leonard, "he is not dead--but he is an inmate of this
place."

"Ah!" exclaimed Nizza, falling back senseless upon the pillow.

And in this state she was conveyed with the greatest expedition to the
doctor's residence.

Leonard only tarried to visit the piper, whom he found slightly
delirious, and unable to hold any conversation with him, and promising
to return in the evening, he set out after the litter. Nizza was placed
in the best apartment of the doctor's house, and attended by an
experienced and trustworthy nurse. But Hodges positively refused to let
Leonard see her again, affirming that the excitement was too much for
her, and might militate against the chance of her recovery.

"I am not without hopes of bringing her through," he said, "and though
it will be a severe struggle, yet, as she has youth and a good
constitution on her side, I do not despair. If she herself would second
me, I should be yet more confident."

"How mean you?" inquired Leonard.

"I think if she thought life worth a struggle--if, in short, she
believed you would return her attachment, she would rally," answered
Hodges.

"I cannot consent to deceive her thus," rejoined Leonard, sadly. "My
heart is fixed elsewhere."

"Your heart is fixed upon one who will soon be in her grave," replied
the doctor.

"And with her my affections will be buried," rejoined Leonard, turning
away to hide his tears.

So well was the doctor's solicitude rewarded, that three days after
Nizza had come under his care, he pronounced her out of danger. But the
violence of the attack left her so weak and exhausted, that he still
would not allow an interview to take place between her and Leonard.
During all this time Bell never left her side, and her presence was an
inexpressible comfort to her. The piper, too, was slowly recovering, and
Leonard, who daily visited him, was glad to learn from the young
chirurgeon that he would be able to leave the pest-house shortly. Having
ascertained from Leonard that his daughter was under the care of Doctor
Hodges, and likely to do well, the piper begged so earnestly that the
packet might not be delivered to her, that, after some consultation with
Hodges, Leonard restored it to him. He was delighted to get it back,
felt it carefully over to ascertain that the seals were unbroken, and
satisfied that all was safe, had it again sewn up in his gown, which he
placed under his pillow.

"I would rather disclose the secret to her by word of mouth than in any
other way," he said.

Leonard felt doubtful whether the secret would now be disclosed at all,
but he made no remark.

Night was drawing on as he quitted the pest-house, and he determined to
take this opportunity of visiting the great plague-pit, which lay about
a quarter of a mile distant, in a line with the church of
All-Hallows-in-the-Wall, and he accordingly proceeded in that direction.
The pit which he was about to visit was about forty feet long, twenty
wide, and the like number deep. Into this tremendous chasm the dead were
promiscuously thrown, without regard to sex or condition, generally
stripped of their clothing, and covered with a slight layer of earth and
quick lime.

The sun was setting as Leonard walked towards this dismal place, and he
thought he had never witnessed so magnificent a sight. Indeed, it was
remarked that at this fatal season the sunsets were unusually splendid.
The glorious orb sank slowly behind Saint Paul's, which formed a
prominent object in the view from the fields, and threw out its central
tower, its massive roof, and the two lesser towers flanking the portico,
into strong relief. Leonard gazed at the mighty fabric, which seemed
dilated to twice its size by this light, and wondered whether it was
possible that it could ever be destroyed, as predicted by Solomon Eagle.

Long after the sun had set, the sky was stained with crimson, and the
grey walls of the city were tinged with rosy radiance. The heat was
intense, and Leonard, to cool himself, sat down in the thick grass--for,
though the crops were ready for the scythe, no mowers could be
found--and, gazing upwards, strove to mount in spirit from the tainted
earth towards heaven. After a while he arose, and proceeded towards the
plague-pit. The grass was trampled down near it, and there were marks of
frequent cart-wheels upon the sod. Great heaps of soil, thrown out of
the excavation, lay on either side. Holding a handkerchief steeped in
vinegar to his face, Leonard ventured to the brink of the pit. But even
this precaution could not counteract the horrible effluvia arising from
it. It was more than half filled with dead bodies; and through the
putrid and heaving mass many disjointed limbs and ghastly faces could be
discerned, the long hair of women and the tiny arms of children
appearing on the surface. It was a horrible sight--so horrible, that it
possessed a fascination peculiar to itself, and, in spite of his
loathing, Leonard lingered to gaze at it. Strange and fantastic thoughts
possessed him. He fancied that the legs and arms moved--that the eyes of
some of the corpses opened and glared at him--and that the whole rotting
mass was endowed with animation. So appalled was he by this idea that he
turned away, and at that moment beheld a vehicle approaching. It was the
dead-cart, charged with a heavy load to increase the already redundant
heap.

The same inexplicable and irresistible feelings of curiosity that
induced Leonard to continue gazing upon the loathly objects in the pit,
now prompted him to stay and see what would ensue. Two persons were with
the cart, and one of them, to Leonard's infinite surprise and disgust,
proved to be Chowles. He had no time, however, for the expression of any
sentiment, for the cart halted at a little distance from him, when its
conductors, turning it round, backed it towards the edge of the pit. The
horse was then taken out, and Chowles calling to Leonard, the latter
involuntarily knelt down to guide its descent, while the other
assistant, who had proceeded to the further side of the chasm, threw the
light of a lantern full upon the grisly load, which was thus shot into
the gulf below.

Shovelling a sufficient quantity of earth and lime into the pit to cover
the bodies, Chowles and his companion departed, leaving Leonard alone.
He continued there a few moments longer, and was about to follow them,
when a prolonged and piercing cry smote his ear; and, looking in the
direction of the sound, he perceived a figure running with great
swiftness towards the pit. As no pursuers appeared, Leonard could
scarcely doubt that this was one of the distracted persons he had heard
of, who, in the frenzy produced by the intolerable anguish of their
sores, would often rush to the plague-pit and bury themselves, and he
therefore resolved, if possible, to prevent the fatal attempt.
Accordingly, he placed himself in the way of the runner, and
endeavoured, with outstretched arms, to stop him. But the latter dashed
him aside with great violence, and hurrying to the brink of the pit,
uttered a fearful cry, and exclaiming, "She is here! she is here!--I
shall find her amongst them!"--flung himself into the abyss.

As soon as he could shake off the horror inspired by this dreadful
action, Leonard ran to the pit, and, gazing into it, beheld him by the
imperfect light struggling in the horrible mass in which he was
partially immersed. The frenzied man had now, however, begun to repent
his rashness, and cried out for aid. But this Leonard found it
impossible to afford him; and, seeing he must speedily perish if left to
himself, he ran after the dead-cart, and overtaking it just as it
reached Moor-gate, informed Chowles what had happened, and begged him to
return.

"There will be no use in helping him out," rejoined Chowles, in a tone
of indifference. "We shall have to take him back in a couple of hours.
No, no--let him remain where he is. There is scarcely a night that some
crazy being does not destroy himself in the same way. We never concern
ourselves about such persons except to strip them of their apparel."

"Unfeeling wretch!" cried Leonard, unable to restrain his indignation.
"Give me your fork, and I will pull him out myself."

Instead of surrendering the implement, Chowles flourished it over his
head with the intention of striking the apprentice, but the latter
nimbly avoided the blow, and snatching it from his grasp, ran back to
the plague-pit. He was followed by Chowles and the burier, who
threatened him with loud oaths. Regardless of their menaces, Leonard
fixed the hook in the dress of the struggling man, and exerting all his
strength, drew him out of the abyss. He had just lodged him in safety on
the brink when Chowles and his companion came up.

"Keep off!" cried Leonard, brandishing his fork as he spoke; "you shall
neither commit robbery nor murder here. If you will assist this
unfortunate gentleman, I have no doubt you will be well rewarded. If
not, get hence, or advance at your peril."

"Well," returned Chowles, who began to fancy something might be made of
the matter, "if you think we should be rewarded, we would convey the
gentleman back to his own home provided we can ascertain where it is.
But I am afraid he may die on the way."

"In that case you can apply to his friends," rejoined Leonard. "He must
not be abandoned thus."

"First, let us know who he is," returned Chowles. "Is he able to speak?"

"I know not," answered Leonard. "Bring the lantern this way, and let us
examine his countenance."

Chowles complied, and held the light over the unfortunate person. His
attire was rich, but in great disorder, and sullied by the loathsome
mass in which he had been plunged. He was in the flower of youth, and
his features must have been remarkable for their grace and beauty, but
they were now of a livid hue, and swollen and distorted by pain. Still
Leonard recognised them.

"Gracious Heaven!" he exclaimed. "It is Sir Paul Parravicin."

"Sir Paul Parravicin!" echoed Chowles. "By all that's wonderful, so it
is! Here is a lucky chance! Bring the dead-cart hither, Jonas--quick,
quick! I shall put him under the care of Judith Malmayns."

And the burier hurried off as fast as his legs could carry him.

"Had I known who it was," exclaimed Leonard, gazing with abhorrence at
the miserable object before him, "I would have left him to die the death
he so richly merits!"

A deep groan broke from the sufferer.

"Have no fear, Sir Paul," said Chowles. "You are in good hands. Every
care shall be taken of you, and you shall be cured by Judith Malmayns."

"She shall not come near me," rejoined Parravicin, faintly. "You will
take care of me?" he added in an imploring tone, to Leonard.

"You appeal in vain to me," rejoined the apprentice, sternly. "You are
justly punished for your treatment of Nizza Macascree."

"I am--I am," groaned Parravicin, "but she will be speedily avenged. I
shall soon join her in that pit."

"She is not there," replied Leonard, bitterly, "She is fast recovering
from the plague."

"Is she not dead?" demanded Parravicin, with frightful eagerness. "I was
told she was thrown into that horrible chasm."

"You were deceived," replied Leonard. "She was taken to the pest-house
by your orders, and would have perished if she had not found a friend to
aid her. She is now out of danger."

"Then I no longer desire to die," cried Parravicin, desperately. "I will
live--live."

"Do not delude yourself," replied Leonard, coldly; "you have little
chance of recovery, and should employ the short time left you in praying
to Heaven for forgiveness of your sins."

"Tush!" exclaimed Parravicin, fiercely, "I shall not weary Heaven with
ineffectual supplications. I well know I am past all forgiveness. No,"
he added, with a fearful imprecation, "since Nizza is alive, I will not
die."

"Right, Sir Paul, right," rejoined Chowles; "put a bold face on it, and
I will answer for it you will get over the attack. Have no fear of
Judith Malmayns," he added, in a significant tone. "However she may
treat others, she will cure _you_."

"I will make it worth her while to do so," rejoined Parravicin.

"Here is the cart," cried Chowles, seeing the vehicle approach. "I will
take you in the first place to Saint Paul's. Judith must see you as soon
as possible."

"Take me where you please," rejoined Parravicin, faintly; "and remember
what I have said. If I die, the nurse will get nothing--if I am cured,
she shall be proportionately rewarded."

"I will not forget it," replied Chowles. And with the help of Jonas he
placed the knight carefully in the cart. "You need not trouble yourself
further about him," he added to Leonard.

"Before be quits this place I must know who he is," rejoined the latter,
placing himself at the horse's head.

"You know his name as well as I do," replied Chowles.

"Parravicin is not his real name," rejoined Leonard.

"Indeed!" exclaimed Chowles, "this is news to me. But no matter who he
is, he is rich enough to pay well. So stand aside, and let us go. We
have no time to waste in further parleying."

"I will not move till my question is answered," replied Leonard.

"We will see to that," said Jonas, approaching him behind, and dealing
him so severe a blow on the head that he stretched him senseless on the
ground? "Shall we throw him into the pit?" he added to Chowles.

The latter hesitated for a moment, and then said, "No, no, it is not
worth while. It may bring us into trouble. We have no time to lose." And
they then put the cart in motion, and took the way to Saint Paul's.

On coming to himself, Leonard had some difficulty in recalling what had
happened; and when the whole train of circumstances rushed upon his
mind, he congratulated himself that he had escaped further injury. "When
I think of the hands I have been placed in," he murmured, "I cannot but
be grateful that they did not throw me into the pit, where no discovery
could have been made as to how I came to an end. But I will not rest
till I have ascertained the name and rank of Nizza's persecutor. I have
no doubt they have taken him to Saint Paul's, and will proceed thither
at once."

With this view, he hastened towards the nearest city gate, and passing
towards it, shaped his course towards the cathedral. It was a fine
starlight night, and though there was no moon, the myriad lustres
glowing in the deep and cloudless vault rendered every object plainly
distinguishable. At this hour, little restraint was placed upon the
sick, and they wandered about the streets uttering dismal cries. Some
would fling themselves upon bulks or steps, where they were not
unfrequently found the next morning bereft of life. Most of those not
attacked by the distemper kept close house; but there were some few
reckless beings who passed the night in the wildest revelry, braving the
fate awaiting them. As Leonard passed Saint Michael's church, in
Basinghall-street, he perceived, to his great surprise, that it was
lighted up, and at first supposed some service was going on within it,
but on approaching he heard strains of lively and most irreverent music
issuing from within. Pushing open the door, he entered the sacred
edifice, and found it occupied by a party of twenty young men,
accompanied by a like number of females, some of whom were playing at
dice and cards, some drinking, others singing Bacchanalian melodies,
others dancing along the aisles to the notes of a theorbo and spinet.
Leonard was so inexpressibly shocked by what he beheld, that unable to
contain himself he mounted the steps of the pulpit, and called to them
in a loud voice to desist from their scandalous conduct, and no longer
profane the house of God. But they treated his remonstrances with
laughter and derision, and some of the party forming themselves into a
group round the pulpit, entreated him to preach to them.

"We want a little variety," said one of the group, a good-looking young
man, upon whom the wine had evidently made some impression--"we are
tired of drinking and play, and may as well listen to a sermon,
especially an original one. Hold forth to us, I say."

"I would, hold forth till daybreak, if I thought it would produce any
impression," returned Leonard. "But I perceive you are too hardened to
be aroused to repentance."

"Repentance!" cried another of the assemblage. "Do you know whom you
address? These gentlemen are the Brotherhood of Saint Michael, and I am
the principal. We are determined to enjoy the few days or hours we may
have left--that is all. We are not afraid of the future, and are
resolved to make the most of the present."

"Ay, ay," cried the others, with a great shout of laughter, which,
however, was interrupted by a cry of anguish from one of the party.

"There is another person seized," said the principal; "take him away,
brothers. This is owing to listening to a sermon. Let us return to our
wine."

"Will you not accept this awful warning?" cried Leonard. "You will all
share your companion's fate."

"We anticipate nothing else," returned the principal; "and are therefore
resolved to banish reflection. A week ago, the Brotherhood of Saint
Michael consisted of forty persons. We are already diminished to half
the number, but are not the less merry on that account. On the contrary,
we are more jovial than ever. We have agreed that whoever shall be
seized with the distemper, shall be instantly conveyed to the
pest-house, so that the hilarity of the others shall not be interrupted.
The poor fellow who has just been attacked has left behind him a
beautiful mistress. She is yours if you choose to join us."

"Ay, stop with us," cried a young and very pretty woman, taking his hand
and drawing him towards the company who were dancing beneath the aisles.

But Leonard disengaged himself, and hurried away amid the laughter and
hootings of the assemblage. The streets, despite their desolate
appearance, were preferable to the spot he had just quitted, and he
seemed to breathe more freely when he got to a little distance from the
polluted fane. He had now entered Wood-street, but all was as still as
death, and he paused to gaze up at his master's window, but there was no
one at it. Many a lover, unable to behold the object of his affections,
has in some measure satisfied the yearning of his heart by gazing at her
dwelling, and feeling he was near her. Many a sad heart has been cheered
by beholding a light at a window, or a shadow on its closed curtains,
and such would have been Leonard's feelings if he had not been depressed
by the thought of Amabel's precarious state of health.

While thus wrapt in mournful thought, he observed three figures slowly
approaching from the further end of the street, and he instinctively
withdrew into a doorway. He had reason to congratulate himself upon the
precaution, as, when the party drew nearer, he recognised, with a pang
that shot to his heart, the voice of Rochester. A moment's observation
from his place of concealment showed him that the earl was accompanied
by Sir George Etherege and Pillichody. They paused within a short
distance of him, and he could distinctly hear their conversation.

"You have not yet told us why you brought us here my lord," said
Etherege to Rochester, after the latter had gazed for a few moments in
silence at the house. "Are you resolved to make another attempt to carry
off the girl--and failing in it, to give her up for ever!"

"You have guessed my purpose precisely," returned Rochester. "Doctor
Hodges has informed a friend of mine that the pretty Amabel has fallen
into a decline. The poor soul is, doubtless, pining for me; and it would
be the height of inhumanity to let her perish."

Leonard ground his teeth-with suppressed rage.

"Then you mean to make her Countess of Rochester, after all," laughed
Etherege. "I thought you had determined to carry off Mistress Mallett."

"Old Bowley declares he will send me to the Tower if I do," replied
Rochester; "and though his threats would scarcely deter me from acting
as I think proper, I have no inclination for marriage at present. What a
pity, Etherege, that one cannot in these affairs have the money oneself,
and give the wife to one's friend."

"That is easily accomplished," replied Etherege, laughingly; "especially
where you have a friend so devoted as myself. But do you mean to carry
off Amabel to-night?"

"Ay, now we come to business," interposed Pillichody. "Bolts and
barricadoes! your lordship has only to say the word, and I will break
into the house, and bear her off for you."

"Your former conduct is a good guarantee for your present success,
truly," returned Rochester, with a sneer. "No, no; I shall postpone my
design for the present. I have ascertained, from the source whence I
obtained information of Amabel's illness, that she is to be removed into
the country. This will exactly suit my purpose, and put her completely
in my power."

"Then nothing is to be done to-night?" said Pillichody, secretly
congratulating himself on his escape. "By my sword! I feel equal to the
most desperate attempt."

"Your courage and dexterity must be reserved for some more favourable
occasion," replied Rochester.

"If not to carry off the girl, I must again inquire why your lordship
has come hither?" demanded Etherege.

"To be frank with you, my sole motive was to gaze at the house that
contains her," replied Rochester, in a voice that bespoke his sincerity.
"I have before told you that she has a strong hold upon my heart. I have
not seen her for some weeks, and during that time have endeavoured to
obliterate her image by making love to a dozen others. But it will not
do. She still continues absolute mistress of my affections. I sometimes
think, if I can obtain her in no other way, I shall be rash enough to
marry her."

"Pshaw! this must never be," said Etherege.

"Were I to lose her altogether, I should be inconsolable," cried
Rochester.

"As inconsolable as I am for the rich widow of Watling-street, who died
a fortnight ago of the plague, and left her wealth to her footman,"
replied Pillichody, drawing forth his handkerchief and applying it to
his eyes--"oh! oh!"

"Silence, fool!" cried Rochester: "I am in no mood for buffoonery. If
you shed tears for any one, it should be for your master."

"Truly, I am grieved for him," replied Pillichody; "but I object to the
term 'master.' Sir Paul Parravicin, as he chooses to be called, is my
patron, not my master. He permits me a very close familiarity, not to
say friendship."

"Well, then, your patron," rejoined Rochester, scornfully. "How is he
going on to-night?"

"I feared to tell your lordship," replied Pillichody, "lest it should
spoil your mirth; but he broke out of his chamber a few hours ago, and
has not been discovered since. Most likely, he will be found in the
plague-pit or the Thames in the morning, for he was in such an
infuriated state, that it is the opinion of his attendants he would
certainly destroy himself. You know he was attacked two days after Nizza
Macascree was seized by the pestilence, and his brain has been running
upon the poor girl ever since."

"Alas!" exclaimed Rochester, "it is a sad end. I am wearied of this
infected city, and shall be heartily glad to quit it. A few months in
the country with Amabel will be enchanting."

"_Apropos_ of melancholy subjects," said Etherege, "your masque of the
Dance of Death has caused great consternation at court. Mistress Stewart
declares she cannot get that strange fellow who performed such fantastic
tricks in the skeleton-dance out of her head."

"You mean Chowles," replied the earl. "He is a singular being,
certainly--once a coffin-maker, and now, I believe, a burier of the
dead. He takes up his abode in a crypt of Saint Faith's and leads an
incomprehensible life. As we return we shall pass the cathedral, and can
see whether he is astir."

"Readily," replied Etherege. "Do you desire to tarry here longer, or
shall we proceed before you, while you indulge your tender meditations
undisturbed?"

"Leave me," replied Rochester; "I shall be glad to be alone for a few
moments."

Etherege and Pillichody then proceeded slowly towards Cheapside, while
the earl remained with his arms folded upon his breast, and his gaze
fixed upon the house. Leonard watched him with intense curiosity, and
had great difficulty in controlling himself. Though the earl was armed,
while he had only his staff, he could have easily mastered him by
assailing him unawares. But Leonard's generous nature revolted at the
unworthy suggestion, and he resolved, if he attacked him at all, to give
him time to stand upon his guard. A moment's reflection, however,
satisfied him that his wisest course would be to remain concealed. He
was now in possession of the earl's plan, and, with the help of Doctor
Hodges, could easily defeat it; whereas if he appeared, it would be
evident that he had overheard what had passed, and some other scheme, to
which he could not be privy, would be necessarily adopted. Influenced by
this consideration, he suffered the earl to depart unmolested, and when
he had got to some distance followed him. Rochester's companions were
waiting for him in Cheapside, and, joining them, they all three
proceeded towards the cathedral. They entered the great northern door;
and Leonard, who was now well acquainted with all the approaches, passed
through the door at the north side of the choir, to which he had been
directed on a former occasion by Solomon Eagle. He found the party
guided by the old verger--the only one of its former keepers who still
lingered about the place--and preparing to descend to Saint Faith's.
Leonard followed as near as he could without exposing himself, and, on
gaining the subterranean church, easily contrived to screen himself
behind the ponderous ranks of pillars.

By this time they had reached the door of the charnel It was closed; but
Rochester knocked against it, and Chowles presently appeared. He seemed
greatly surprised at seeing the earl, nor was the latter less astonished
when he learnt that Parravicin was within the vault. He desired to be
shown to his friend, and Chowles ushered him into the crypt. Leonard
would have followed them; but as Etherege and the others declined
entering the charnel, and remained at the door, he could not do so.

Shortly after this the sick man was brought out, stretched upon a
pallet, borne by Chowles and Judith; and the party proceeded slowly, and
occasionally relieving each other, to the great western entrance, where
a coach being procured by Pillichody, Parravicin was placed within it,
with Judith and Chowles; and orders being given in an under-tone to the
driver, he departed. The others then proceeded towards Ludgate, while
Leonard, again disappointed, retraced his steps to Wood-street.

       *       *       *       *       *


V.

HOW SAINT PATHOS WAS USED AS A PEST-HOUSE.

The distemper had by this time increased to such a frightful extent,
that the pest-houses being found wholly inadequate to contain the number
of sick persons sent to them, it was resolved by the civic authorities,
who had obtained the sanction of the Dean and Chapter of Saint Paul's
for that purpose, to convert the cathedral into a receptacle for the
infected. Accordingly, a meeting was held in the Convocation House to
make final arrangements. It was attended by Sir John Lawrence, the Lord
Mayor; by Sir George Waterman, and Sir Charles Doe, sheriffs; by Doctor
Sheldon, Archbishop of Canterbury; by the Duke of Albemarle, the Earl of
Craven, and, a few other zealous and humane persons. Several members of
the College of Physicians were likewise present, and, amongst others,
Doctor Hodges; and the expediency of the measure being fully agreed
upon, it was determined to carry it into immediate execution.

The cloisters surrounding the Convocation House were crowded with sick
persons, drawn thither by the rumour of what was going forward; and when
the meeting adjourned to the cathedral, these unfortunate beings
followed them, and were with some difficulty kept aloof from the
uninfected by the attendants. A very earnest and touching address was
next pronounced by the archbishop. Calling upon his hearers to look upon
themselves as already dead to the world,--to regard the present
visitation as a just punishment of their sins, and to rejoice that their
sufferings would be so soon terminated, when, if they sincerely and
heartily repented, they would at once be transported from the depths of
wretchedness and misery to regions of unfading bliss; he concluded by
stating that he, and all those around him, were prepared to devote
themselves, without regard to their own safety, to the preservation of
