be maintained--than the other which they lay at our door. We may deny
all their assertions; may intimidate or give the lie to the witnesses
they may produce against us; may stamp as forgeries your letters which
have unluckily fallen into their hands; but if this charge of witchcraft
be once brought against you, it will not fall to the ground. The King
will listen to it, because it flatters his prejudices; and even my voice
would fail to save you from condemnation--from the stake."

"Horrible!" exclaimed Lady Exeter spreading her hands before her eyes,
as if to exclude some dreadful object. "O to live in an age when such
enormities can be perpetrated! when such frightful weapons can be used
against the innocent--for I _am_ innocent, at least of this offence. All
seems against me; all doors of escape--save _one_--closed. And whither
does that door lead? To the Bottomless Pit, if there be truth in aught
we are told by Heaven."

Lord Roos seemed unable or unwilling to reply; and a deep pause ensued
for a few moments, during which the guilty pair shunned each other's
regards. It was broken at length by Lady Exeter, who said,
reproachfully, "You should have burnt my letters, William. Without them,
they would have had no evidence against me. Imprudent that you were, you
have destroyed me!"

"Reproach me not, Prances," he rejoined. "I admit my imprudence, and
blame myself severely for it. But I could not part with a line I had
received from you. I inclosed the letters in a little coffer, which I
deposited in a secret drawer of that cabinet, as in a place of perfect
safety. The coffer and its contents mysteriously disappeared. How it was
purloined I cannot inform you."

"Do your suspicions alight on no one?" she inquired.

"They have fallen on several; but I have no certainty that I have been
right in any instance," he replied. "That I have some spy near me, I am
well aware; and if I detect him, he shall pay for his perfidy with his
life."

"Hist!" cried Lady Exeter. "Did you not hear a noise?"

"No," he rejoined. "Where?"

She pointed to the little passage leading to the ante-chamber. He
instantly went thither, and examined the place, but without discovering
any listener.

"There is no one," he said, as he returned. "No one, in fact, could have
obtained admittance without my knowledge, for my Spanish servant, Diego,
in whom I can place full confidence, is stationed without."

"I distrust that man, William," she observed. "When I asked whom you
thought had removed the letters, my own suspicions had attached to him."

"I do not think he would have done it," Lord Roos replied. "He has ever
served me faithfully; and, besides, I have a guarantee for his fidelity
in the possession of a secret on which his own life hangs. I can dispose
of him as I please."

"Again that sound!" exclaimed the Countess. "I am sure some one is
there."

"Your ears have deceived you," said the young nobleman, after examining
the spot once more, and likewise the secret entrance by which the
Countess had approached the chamber. "I heard nothing, and can find
nothing. Your nerves are shaken, and make you fanciful."

"It may be so," she rejoined. But it was evident she was not convinced,
for she lowered her tones almost to a whisper as she continued. It might
be that the question she designed to put was one she dared not ask
aloud. "What means do you purpose to employ in the execution of your
design?"

"The same as those employed by Somerset and his Countess in the removal
of Sir Thomas Overbury; but more expeditious and more certain," he
replied under his breath.

"Dreadful!" she exclaimed, with a shudder. "But the same judgment that
overtook the Somersets may overtake us. Such crimes are never hidden."

"Crimes fouler than theirs have never been brought to light, and never
will. There was one in which Somerset himself was concerned, involving
the destruction of a far higher personage than Overbury; and this dare
not even be hinted at."

"Because the greatest person in the land was connected with it,"
returned the Countess, "I conclude you refer to the death of Prince
Henry?"

"I do," answered Lord Roos. "Somerset would never have been questioned
about Overbury, if his fall had not been resolved upon by the King."

"One other question, and I ask no more," said the Countess, scarcely
able to syllable her words. "Who is to administer the deadly draught?"

"Luke Hatton, Lady Lake's apothecary. He is a creature of mine, and
entirely devoted to me."

"Our lives will be in his hands ever afterwards," said the Countess, in
a deep whisper.

"They will be in safe keeping," he rejoined, endeavouring to reassure
her.

"O, William! I would I could prevail upon you to defer this project."

"To what end? The sooner it is done the better. It cannot, indeed, be
deferred. I shall send for Luke Hatton to-night."

At this announcement, the Countess, who had gradually been growing
fainter and becoming paler, lost all power of supporting herself, and,
uttering a cry, fell into his outstretched arms in a state of complete
insensibility.

While Lord Roos, half distracted, was considering what means he could
adopt for her restoration, a man, with an almost tawny complexion, hair
and eyes to match, and habited in the young nobleman's livery of crimson
and white, suddenly entered from the ante-chamber.

"How dare you come in unsummoned, Diego?" cried Lord Roos, furiously.
"Begone instantly, sirrah!".

"I crave your lordship's pardon," replied the Spanish servant; "but I
was obliged to apprise you that your wife, the Baroness Roos, and Lady
Lake are without, and will not be denied admission."

"Damnation!" exclaimed Lord Roos. "What brings them here at such an
hour? But you must on no account admit them, Diego--at least, till I
have had time to remove the Countess to her own chamber. What a cursed
mischance!"

Diego instantly withdrew, apparently to obey his lord's command; but he
had scarcely entered the little passage when two ladies pushed past him,
and made their way into the room. They arrived just in time to intercept
Lord Roos, who was conveying his insensible burthen towards the secret
staircase.

The young nobleman was as much confounded by their appearance as if two
spectres had risen before him. Both ladies were very richly attired, and
the younger of the two was by no means destitute of beauty, though of a
pale and pensive character. The elder had a full, noble figure, haughty
features, now lighted up with a smile of triumph as she gazed on Lord
Roos. Very different was the expression of the other, who seemed so much
grieved and agitated by what she beheld, as to be almost ready to lapse
into the same condition as the Countess.

If Lord Roos could have seen the grin upon Diego's swarthy visage, as he
stood at the entrance of the passage leading to the ante-chamber, he
would have had little doubt to whom he was indebted for this surprise.

It is needless to say that the ladies who had thus broken upon Lord
Roos's privacy, and obtained full confirmation of their suspicions (if
they had any doubts remaining) were his wife and mother-in-law.




CHAPTER XXIII.

The Tress of Hair.


How to extricate himself from the dilemma in which he was placed, Lord
Roos scarcely knew. But he had a good deal of self-possession, and it
did not desert him on the present trying occasion. After such
consideration as circumstances permitted, he could discern only one
chance of escape, and though well-nigh hopeless, he resolved to adopt
it. If consummate audacity could carry him through--and it was required
in the present emergency--he had no lack of it.

Hitherto, not a word had passed between him and the intruders on his
privacy. Lady Lake seemed to enjoy his confusion too much to do anything
to relieve it, and his wife was obliged to regulate her movements by
those of her mother. Without breaking the silence, which by this time
had become painfully oppressive, he proceeded to deposit the still
inanimate person of the Countess of Exeter upon a couch, and, casting a
handkerchief, as if undesignedly, over her face, he marched quickly up
to the spot where Diego was standing, and said to him, in a deep,
determined tone, but so low as not to be overheard by the others:

"You have betrayed me, villain; and unless you obey me unhesitatingly,
and corroborate all my assertions, however startling they may appear,
you shall pay for your treachery with your life."

This done, he turned towards the two ladies, and with more calmness than
might have been expected, addressed himself to Lady Lake:

"You imagine you have made an important discovery, Madam," he said; "a
discovery which will place me and a noble lady, whose reputation you and
your daughter seek to injure, in great perplexity. And you conclude
that, being completely (as you fancy) in your power, I shall consent to
any terms you and Lady Roos may propose, rather than suffer you to go
forth from this chamber and reveal what you have seen in it. Is it not
so, Madam?"

"Ay, my lord," Lady Lake replied, bitterly. "You have stated the matter
correctly enough, except in one particular. We do not _imagine_ we have
made a discovery; because we are quite sure of it. We do not _fancy_ you
will agree to our terms; because we are certain you will only too gladly
screen yourself and the partner of your guilt from exposure and
disgrace, at any sacrifice. And allow me to observe, that the tone
adopted by your lordship is neither befitting the circumstances in which
you are placed, nor the presence in which you stand. Some sense of shame
must at least be left you--some show of respect (if nothing more) ought
to be observed towards your injured wife. Were I acting alone in this
matter, I would show you and my lady of Exeter no consideration
whatever; but I cannot resist the pleadings of my daughter; and for her
sake--and _hers_ alone--I am content to suspend the blow, unless forced
to strike; in which case, nothing shall stay my hands."

"I thank your ladyship for your clemency," said Lord Roos, with mock
humility.

"O, my dear lord! do not for ever close the door between us!" cried Lady
Roos. "Return to me, and all shall be forgiven."

"Peace, Elizabeth!" exclaimed Lady Lake, impatiently. "Know you not,
from sad experience, that your husband is inaccessible to all gentle
entreaty? His heart is steeled to pity. Solicit not that which is your
right, and which must be conceded, whether he like or not. Let him bend
the knee to you. Let him promise amendment, and implore pardon, and it
will then be for you to consider whether you will extend forgiveness to
him."

Lady Roos looked as if she would fain interrupt her mother, but she was
too much under her subjection to offer a remark.

"It is time to undeceive you, Madam," said Lord Roos, wholly unmoved by
what was said. "I am not in the strait you suppose; and have not the
slightest intention of soliciting Lady Roos's pardon, or making any
promise to her."

"O mother! you see that even _you_ fail to move him," said Lady Roos,
tearfully. "What is to happen to me?"

"You will make me chide you, daughter, if you exhibit this weakness,"
cried Lady Lake, angrily. "Let me deal with him. In spite of your
affected confidence, my lord, you cannot be blind to the position in
which you stand. And though you yourself personally may be careless of
the consequences of a refusal of our demands, you cannot, I conceive, be
equally indifferent to the fate of the Countess of Exeter, which that
refusal will decide."

"I am so little indifferent to the safety of the Countess, Madam, that I
cannot sufficiently rejoice that she is out of the reach of your
malice."

"How, my lord!" exclaimed Lady Lake, astounded at his assurance. "Out of
reach, when she is here! You cannot mean," she added, with an
undefinable expression of satisfaction, "that she is dead?"

"Dead!" ejaculated Lady Roos; "the Countess dead! I thought she was only
in a swoon."

"What riddle is it you would have us read, my lord?" demanded Lady Lake.

"No riddle whatever, Madam," replied Lord Roos. "I only mean to assert
that the person you behold upon that couch is not the Countess of
Exeter."

"Not the Countess!" exclaimed Lady Roos. "Oh, if this were possible!
But no, no! I cannot be deceived."

"I now see the reason why her face has been covered with a 'kerchief,"
cried Lady Lake. "But it shall not save her from our scrutiny."

So saying, she advanced towards the couch, with the intention of
removing the covering, when Lord Roos barred her approach.

"Not a step nearer, Madam," he cried, in a peremptory tone. "I will not
allow you to gratify your curiosity further. You and Lady Roos may make
the most of what you have seen; and proclaim abroad any tale your
imaginations may devise forth. You will only render yourselves
ridiculous, and encounter derision in lieu of sympathy. No one will
credit your assertions, because I shall be able to prove that, at this
moment, Lady Exeter is in a different part of the palace."

"This bold falsehood will not serve your turn, my lord. Whoever she may
be, the person on that couch shall be seized, and we shall then
ascertain the truth."

And she would have moved towards the door, if Lord Roos had not caught
hold of her arm, while at the same time he drew his sword. Thinking from
his fierce looks and menacing gestures that her mother might be
sacrificed to his fury, Lady Roos fell on her knees before him,
imploring pity; and she continued in this supplicating posture till Lady
Lake angrily bade her rise.

"You have come here without my permission, Madam," Lord Roos cried
furiously to his mother-in-law, "and you shall not depart until I
choose. Secure the door, Diego, and bring me the key. It is well," he
continued, as the injunction was obeyed.

Lady Lake submitted without resistance to the constraint imposed upon
her. She could not well do otherwise; for though her screams would have
brought aid, it might have arrived too late. And, after all, she did not
intend to settle matters in this way. But she betrayed no symptoms of
fear, and, as we have stated, ordered her daughter to discontinue her
supplications.

"And now, Madam," said Lord Roos, releasing Lady Lake, as he took the
key from Diego, "I will tell you who that person is," pointing to the
couch.

"Add not to the number of falsehoods you have already told, my lord,"
rejoined Lady Lake, contemptuously. "I am perfectly aware who she is."

"But I would fain hear his explanation, mother," said Lady Roos.

"What explanation can be offered?" cried Lady Lake. "Do you doubt the
evidence of your senses?"

"I know not what I doubt, or what I believe," exclaimed Lady Roos
distractedly.

"Then believe what I tell you, Bess," said her husband. "This is the
countess's handmaiden, Gillian Greenford."

"An impudent lie!" cried Lady Lake.

"A truth, my lady," interposed Diego. "A truth to which I am ready to
swear."

"No doubt of it, thou false knave, and double traitor! thou art worthy
of thy lord. There is no lie, however absurd and improbable, which he
can invent, that thou wilt not support. Thou art ready now to perjure
thyself for him; but let him place little reliance on thee, for thou
wilt do the same thing for us to-morrow."

"I scarcely think it probable, my lady," Diego replied, bowing.

Lady Lake turned from him in supreme disgust.

"Admitting for a moment the possibility of your lordship's assertion
being correct," said Lady Roos, "how comes Gillian Greenford (for so
methinks you name her) in her mistress's attire?"

"'T is easily explained, chuck," Lord Roos rejoined. "Anxious, no doubt,
to set herself off to advantage, she hath made free with the countess's
wardrobe. Your own favourite attendant, Sarah Swarton, hath often
arranged herself in your finest fardingales, kirtlets, and busk-points,
as Diego will tell you. Is it not so, rascal?"

"'T is precisely as my lord hath stated, my lady," said the Spaniard to
Lady Roos. "When Sarah Swarton hath been so habited, I have more than
once mistaken her for your ladyship."

"Yet Sarah is very unlike me," said Lady Roos.

"That only shows how deceptive appearances are, chuck, and how little we
ought to trust to them," observed Lord Roos.

"How can you suffer yourself to be thus duped, Elizabeth?" said Lady
Lake.

"Because her ladyship would rather believe me than you, Madam," rejoined
Lord Roos. "But she is _not_ duped."

"Heaven forgive him!" exclaimed Diego, aside.

"And supposing it were Gillian, how would the case be mended, as far as
you are concerned, Elizabeth?" said Lady Lake. "Are you not as much
injured by one as by the other?"

"It may be," replied her daughter, "but I am jealous only of the
Countess. I would kneel to any other woman, and thank her, who would
tear my husband from her embraces!"

"Weak fool! I disown you," exclaimed Lady Lake, angrily.

"What a wife!" cried Diego, apart. "His lordship is quite unworthy of
her. Now I should appreciate such devotion."

At this juncture there was a slight movement on the part of Lady
Exeter, and something like a sigh escaped her.

"She revives!" whispered Lady Lake to her daughter. "We shall soon learn
the truth. I will find a means to make her speak. Well, my lord," she
added aloud, and speaking in a sarcastic tone, "if you will have it so,
it is idle to dispute it. But what will the Countess say, when she
discovers your infidelity?"

On this a brisker movement took place on the couch, and a hand was
raised as if to snatch away the 'kerchief.

"We have her," whispered Lady Lake triumphantly to her daughter.
"Surely," she proceeded aloud, "the Countess will deeply resent the
transfer of your affections to her handmaiden."

Lord Roos saw the peril in which he stood. A moment more and Lady Lake
had gained her point, and the Countess betrayed herself.

"Lady Exeter will place little reliance on any representations you may
make, Madam," he said, giving particular significance to his words,
"except so far as they concern herself, and then she will take care to
refute them. As to the circumstance of Gillian Greenford visiting me,
fainting in my arms (from excess of timidity, poor girl!) and being
discovered by you and Lady Roos in that position, the Countess will
laugh at it when it comes to her knowledge--as why should she do
otherwise? But she will feel very differently when she finds that you
and your daughter insist that it was she herself, and not her
handmaiden, whom you beheld. Rely on it, Madam, Lady Exeter will
contradict that assertion, and disprove it."

"Let it be disproved now. Let the person on that couch disclose her
features, and we shall then see whether she be the Countess or Gillian."

"Ay, let her do that, my lord,--let her speak to us," urged Lady Roos.

"Diablo! how is this request to be complied with, I marvel?" said Diego
