irregular rocks, nearly one hundred yards, and did not stop till he fell
into the creek. We all expected he was killed, but to our astonishment,
on taking off his load he rose, seemed but little injured, and in twenty
minutes proceeded with his load. Having no other provision, we took some
portable soup, our only refreshment during the day. This abstinence,
joined with fatigue, has a visible effect on our health. The men are
growing weak and losing their flesh very fast; several are afflicted
with dysentery, and eruptions of the skin are very common."

Next day, the party descended the last of the Bitter Root range and
reached level country. They were at last over the Great Divide. Three
Indian boys were discovered hiding in the grass, in great alarm. Captain
Clark at once dismounted from his horse, and, making signs of amity,
went after the boys. He calmed their terrors, and, giving them some bits
of ribbon, sent them home.

"Soon after the boys reached home, a man came out to meet the party,
with great caution; but he conducted them to a large tent in the
village, and all the inhabitants gathered round to view with a mixture
of fear and pleasure these wonderful strangers. The conductor now
informed Captain Clark, by signs, that the spacious tent was the
residence of the great chief, who had set out three days ago with all
the warriors to attack some of their enemies toward the southwest; that
he would not return before fifteen or eighteen days, and that in
the mean time there were only a few men left to guard the women and
children. They now set before them a small piece of buffalo-meat, some
dried salmon, berries, and several kinds of roots. Among these last is
one which is round, much like an onion in appearance, and sweet to the
taste. It is called quamash, and is eaten either in its natural state,
or boiled into a kind of soup, or made into a cake, which is then called
pasheco. After the long abstinence this was a sumptuous treat. They
returned the kindness of the people by a few small presents, and then
went on in company with one of the chiefs to a second village in the
same plain, at the distance of two miles. Here the party were treated
with great kindness, and passed the night. The hunters were sent out,
but, though they saw some tracks of deer, were not able to procure
anything."

The root which the Indians used in so many ways is now known as camas;
it is still much sought for by the Nez Perces and other wandering tribes
in the Northwest, and Camas Prairie, in that region, derives its name
from the much-sought-for vegetable.

Captain Clark and his men stayed with these hospitable Indians several
days. The free use of wholesome food, to which he had not lately been
accustomed, made Clark very ill, and he contented himself with staying
in the Indian villages, of which there were two. These Indians called
themselves Chopunnish, or Pierced Noses; this latter name is now more
commonly rendered _Nez Perces_, the French voyageurs having given it that
translation into their own tongue. But these people, so far as known,
did not pierce their noses. After sending a man back on the trail to
notify Captain Lewis of his progress, Captain Clark went on to the
village of Chief Twisted-hair. Most of the women and children,
though notified of the coming of the white man, were so scared by
the appearance of the strangers that they fled to the woods. The men,
however, received them without fear and gave them a plentiful supply
of food. They were now on one of the upper branches of the Kooskooskee
River, near what is the site of Pierce City, county seat of Shoshonee
County, Idaho. The Indians endeavored, by means of signs, to explain to
their visitors the geography of the country beyond.

"Among others, Twisted-hair drew a chart of the river on a white
elk-skin. According to this, the Kooskooskee forks (confluence of its
North fork) a few miles from this place; two days toward the south
is another and larger fork (confluence of Snake River), on which the
Shoshonee or Snake Indians fish; five days' journey further is a large
river from the northwest (that is, the Columbia itself) into which
Clark's River empties; from the mouth of that river (that is, confluence
of the Snake with the Columbia) to the falls is five days' journey
further; on all the forks as well as on the main river great numbers of
Indians reside."

On the twenty-third of September, Captain Lewis and his party having
come up, the white men assembled the Indians and explained to them
where they came from and what was their errand across the continent. The
Indians appeared to be entirely satisfied, and they sold their visitors
as much provisions as their half-famished horses could carry. The
journal here says:--

"All around the village the women are busily employed in gathering and
dressing the pasheco-root, of which large quantities are heaped in piles
over the plain. We now felt severely the consequence of eating heartily
after our late privations. Captain Lewis and two of the men were taken
very ill last evening; to-day he could hardly sit on his horse, while
others were obliged to be put on horseback, and some, from extreme
weakness and pain, were forced to lie down alongside of the road for
some time. At sunset we reached the island where the hunters had been
left on the 22d. They had been unsuccessful, having killed only two deer
since that time, and two of them were very sick. A little below this
island is a larger one on which we camped, and administered Rush's pills
to the sick."

The illness of the party continued for several days, and not much
progress was made down-stream. Having camped, on the twenty-seventh of
September, in the Kooskooskee River, at a place where plenty of good
timber was found, preparations for building five canoes were begun. From
this time to the fifth of October, all the men capable of labor were
employed in preparing the canoes. The health of the party gradually
recruited, though they still suffered severely from want of food; and,
as the hunters had but little success in procuring game, they were
obliged on the second to kill one of their horses. Indians from
different quarters frequently visited them, but all that could be
obtained from them was a little fish and some dried roots. This diet was
not only unnutritious, but in many cases it caused dysentery and nausea.




Chapter XV -- Down the Pacific Slope

The early days of October were spent in making preparations for the
descent of the river,--the Kooskooskee. Here they made their canoes, and
they called their stopping-place Canoe Camp. This was at the junction
of the north fork of the river with the main stream; and all below that
point is called the Lower Kooskooskee, while that above is known as the
upper river. The latitude of the camp, according to the journal of the
explorers, was 46'0 34' 56" north. Here they buried in a cache their
saddles, horse-gear, and a small supply of powder and musket balls for
possible emergencies. The Kooskooskee, it should be borne in mind, is
now better known as the Clearwater; it empties into the Snake River, and
that into the Columbia. As far as the explorers knew the water-course
down which they were to navigate, they called it Clark's River, in honor
of Captain Clark. But modern geographers have displaced the name of that
eminent explorer and map-maker and have divided the stream, or streams,
with other nomenclature.

On the eighth of October the party set out on their long water journey
in five canoes, one of which was a small craft intended to go on ahead
and pilot the way (which, of course, was unknown) for the four larger
ones, in which travelled the main party with their luggage. They met
with disaster very soon after their start, one of the canoes having
struck a rock, which made a hole in its side and caused the sinking
of the craft. Fortunately, no lives were lost, but the voyage was
interrupted. The party went ashore and did not resume their journey
until their luggage was dried and the canoe repaired. On the ninth, says
the journal:--

"The morning was as usual cool; but as the weather both yesterday and
to-day was cloudy, our merchandise dried but slowly. The boat, though
much injured, was repaired by ten o'clock so as to be perfectly fit for
service; but we were obliged to remain during the day till the articles
were sufficiently dry to be reloaded. The interval we employed in
purchasing fish for the voyage, and conversing with the Indians. In the
afternoon we were surprised at hearing that our old Shoshonee guide and
his son had left us and had been seen running up the river several miles
above. As he had never given any notice of his intention, nor had even
received his pay for guiding us, we could not imagine the cause of his
desertion; nor did he ever return to explain his conduct. We requested
the chief to send a horseman after him to request that he would return
and receive what we owed him. From this, however, he dissuaded us, and
said very frankly that his nation, the Chopunnish, would take from
the old man any presents that he might have on passing their camp. The
Indians came about our camp at night, and were very gay and good-humored
with the men. Among other exhibitions was that of a squaw who appeared
to be crazy. She sang in a wild, incoherent manner, and offered to the
spectators all the little articles she possessed, scarifying herself
in a horrid manner if anyone refused her present. She seemed to be an
object of pity among the Indians, who suffered her to do as she pleased
without interruption."

The river was full of rapids and very dangerous rocks and reefs, and
the voyagers were able to make only twenty miles a day for some distance
along the stream. At the confluence of the Kooskooskee and the Snake
River they camped for the night, near the present site of Lewiston,
Idaho. This city, first settled in May, 1861, and incorporated in 1863,
was named for Captain Lewis of our expedition. From this point the party
crossed over into the present State of Washington. Of their experience
at their camp here the journal says:--

"Our arrival soon attracted the attention of the Indians, who flocked in
all directions to see us. In the evening the Indian from the falls, whom
we had seen at Rugged rapid, joined us with his son in a small canoe,
and insisted on accompanying us to the falls. Being again reduced to
fish and roots, we made an experiment to vary our food by purchasing
a few dogs, and after having been accustomed to horse-flesh, felt no
disrelish for this new dish. The Chopunnish have great numbers of dogs,
which they employ for domestic purposes, but never eat; and our using
the flesh of that animal soon brought us into ridicule as dog-eaters."

When Fremont and his men crossed the continent to California, in 1842,
they ate the flesh of that species of marmot which we know as the
prairie-dog. Long afterwards, when Fremont was a candidate for the
office of President of the United States, this fact was recalled to the
minds of men, and the famous explorer was denounced as "a dog-eater."

The journal of the explorers gives this interesting account of the
Indians among whom they now found themselves:--

"The Chopunnish or Pierced-nose nation, who reside on the Kooskooskee
and Lewis' (Snake) rivers, are in person stout, portly, well-looking
men; the women are small, with good features and generally handsome,
though the complexion of both sexes is darker than that of the
Tushepaws. In dress they resemble that nation, being fond of displaying
their ornaments. The buffalo or elk-skin robe decorated with beads;
sea-shells, chiefly mother-of-pearl, attached to an otter-skin collar
and hung in the hair, which falls in front in two cues; feathers, paints
of different kinds, principally white, green, and light blue, all of
which they find in their own country; these are the chief ornaments
they use. In the winter they wear a short skirt of dressed skins, long
painted leggings and moccasins, and a plait of twisted grass round the
neck. The dress of the women is more simple, consisting of a long shirt
of argalia (argali) or ibex (bighorn) skin, reaching down to the ankles,
without a girdle; to this are tied little pieces of brass, shells, and
other small articles; but the head is not at all ornamented.

"The Chopunnish have very few amusements, for their life is painful
and laborious; all their exertions are necessary to earn even their
precarious subsistence. During the summer and autumn they are busily
occupied in fishing for salmon and collecting their winter store of
roots. In winter they hunt the deer on snow-shoes over the plains, and
toward spring cross the mountains to the Missouri for the purpose of
rafficking for buffalo-robe. The inconveniences of their comfortless
life are increased by frequent encounters with their enemies from the
west, who drive them over the mountains with the loss of their horses,
and sometimes the lives of many of the nation."

After making a short stage on their journey, October 11, the party
stopped to trade with the Indians, their stock of provisions being low.
They were able to purchase a quantity of salmon and seven dogs. They
saw here a novel kind of vapor bath which is thus described in the
journal:--

"While this traffic was going on we observed a vapor bath or
sweating-house, in a different form from that used on the frontier of
the United States or in the Rocky Mountains. It was a hollow square six
or eight feet deep, formed in the river bank by damming up with mud the
other three sides and covering the whole completely, except an aperture
about two feet wide at the top. The bathers descend by this hole, taking
with them a number of heated stones and jugs of water; after being
seated round the room they throw the water on the stones till the steam
becomes of a temperature sufficiently high for their purposes. The baths
of the Indians in the Rocky Mountains are of different sizes, the
most common being made of mud and sticks like an oven, but the mode of
raising the steam is exactly the same. Among both these nations it is
very uncommon for a man to bathe alone; he is generally accompanied
by one or sometimes several of his acquaintances; indeed, it is so
essentially a social amusement, that to decline going in to bathe when
invited by a friend is one of the highest indignities which can be
offered to him. The Indians on the frontier generally use a bath which
will accommodate only one person, formed of a wicker-work of willows
about four feet high, arched at the top, and covered with skins. In this
the patient sits, till by means of the heated stones and water he
has perspired sufficiently. Almost universally these baths are in the
neighborhood of running water, into which the Indians plunge immediately
on coming out of the vapor bath, and sometimes return again and subject
themselves to a second perspiration. This practice is, however, less
frequent among our neighboring nations than those to the westward.
This bath is employed either for pleasure or for health, and is used
indiscriminately for all kinds of diseases."

The expedition was now on the Snake River, making all possible speed
toward the Columbia, commonly known to the Indians as "The Great River."
The stream was crowded with dangerous rapids, and sundry disasters were
met with by the way; thus, on the fourteenth of October, a high wind
blowing, one of the canoes was driven upon a rock sidewise and filled
with water. The men on board got out and dragged the canoe upon the
rock, where they held her above water. Another canoe, having been
unloaded, was sent to the relief of the shipwrecked men, who, after
being left on the rock for some time, were taken off without any other
loss than the bedding of two of them. But accidents like this delayed
the party, as they were forced to land and remain long enough to dry
the goods that had been exposed to the water. Several such incidents are
told in the journal of the explorers. Few Indians were to be seen along
the banks of the river, but occasionally the party came to a pile of
planks and timbers which were the materials from which were built the
houses of such Indians as came here in the fishing season to catch
a supply for the winter and for trading purposes. Occasionally, the
complete scarcity of fuel compelled the explorers to depart from their
general rule to avoid taking any Indian property without leave; and they
used some of these house materials for firewood, with the intent to pay
the rightful owners, if they should ever be found. On the sixteenth of
October, they met with a party of Indians, of whom the journal gives
this account:--

"After crossing by land we halted for dinner, and whilst we were eating
were visited by five Indians, who came up the river on foot in great
haste. We received them kindly, smoked with them, and gave them a piece
of tobacco to smoke with their tribe. On receiving the present they set
out to return, and continued running as fast as they could while they
remained in sight. Their curiosity had been excited by the accounts of
our two chiefs, who had gone on in order to apprise the tribes of our
approach and of our friendly disposition toward them. After dinner we
reloaded the canoes and proceeded. We soon passed a rapid opposite the
upper point of a sandy island on the left, which has a smaller island
near it. At three miles is a gravelly bar in the river; four miles
beyond this the Kimooenim (Snake) empties into the Columbia, and at its
mouth has an island just below a small rapid.

"We halted above the point of junction, on the Kimooenim, to confer
with the Indians, who had collected in great numbers to receive us. On
landing we were met by our two chiefs, to whose good offices we were
indebted for this reception, and also the two Indians who had passed
us a few days since on horseback; one of whom appeared to be a man of
influence, and harangued the Indians on our arrival. After smoking with
the Indians, we formed a camp at the point where the two rivers unite,
near to which we found some driftwood, and were supplied by our two old
chiefs with the stalks of willows and some small bushes for fuel.

"We had scarcely fixed the camp and got the fires prepared, when a chief
came from the Indian camp about a quarter of a mile up the Columbia, at
the head of nearly two hundred men. They formed a regular procession,
keeping time to the music, or, rather, noise of their drums, which
they accompanied with their voices; and as they advanced, they ranged
themselves in a semicircle around us, and continued singing for some
time. We then smoked with them all, and communicated, as well as we
could by signs, our friendly intentions towards every nation, and our
joy at finding ourselves surrounded by our children. After this we
proceeded to distribute presents among them, giving the principal chief
a large medal, a shirt, and a handkerchief; to the second chief, a medal
of a smaller size; and to a third, who had come down from some of the
upper villages, a small medal and a handkerchief. This ceremony being
concluded, they left us; but in the course of the afternoon several of
them returned, and remained with us till a late hour. After they had
dispersed, we proceeded to purchase provisions, and were enabled to
collect seven dogs, to which some of the Indians added small presents of
fish, and one of them gave us twenty pounds of fat dried horse-flesh."

The explorers were still in the country which is now the State of
Washington, at a point where the counties of Franklin, Yakima, and Walla
Walla come together, at the junction of the Snake and the Columbia. We
quote now from the journal:--

"From the point of junction the country is a continued plain, low near
the water, from which it rises gradually, and the only elevation to be
seen is a range of high country running from northeast to southwest,
where it joins a range of mountains from the southwest, and is on the
opposite side about two miles from the Columbia. There is on this plain
no tree, and scarcely any shrubs, except a few willow-bushes; even of
smaller plants there is not much more than the prickly-pear, which is
in great abundance, and is even more thorny and troublesome than any
we have yet seen. During this time the principal chief came down with
several of his warriors, and smoked with us. We were also visited by
several men and women, who offered dogs and fish for sale; but as
the fish was out of season, and at present abundant in the river, we
contented ourselves with purchasing all the dogs we could obtain.

"The nation among which we now are call themselves Sokulks; with them
are united a few of another nation, who reside on a western branch which
empties into the Columbia a few miles above the mouth of the latter
river, and whose name is Chimnapum. The languages of these two nations,
of each of which we obtained a vocabulary, differ but little from each
other, or from that of the Chopunnish who inhabit the Kooskooskee and
Lewis' rivers. In their dress and general appearance they also much
resemble those nations; the men wearing a robe of deer- antelope-skin,
under which a few of them have a short leathern shirt. The most striking
difference is among the females, the Sokulk women being more inclined to
corpulency than any we have yet seen. Their stature is low, their faces
are broad, and their heads flattened in such a manner that the forehead
is in a straight line from the nose to the crown of the head. Their
eyes are of a dirty sable, their hair is coarse and black, and braided
without ornament of any kind. Instead of wearing, as do the Chopunnish,
long leathern shirts highly decorated with beads and shells, the Sokulk
women have no other covering but a truss or piece of leather tied round
the hips, and drawn tight between the legs. The ornaments usually worn
