of Mord the chamberlain, and so went to Berthun and asked for him. He
said that if I had any special business with Mord I might see him; and I
said, truly enough, that my errand was special, having to do with
friends of his; so it was not long before they took me to him. He was in
a long room that was built on the side of the great hall, as it were,
and I could hear the murmur of the voices of those who spoke at the
Witan while I waited.

Now Mord was not so much changed as I, and at first he did not know me
at all.

"Well, master housecarl, what may your message be, and from whom is it?"
he said, without more than a glance at me.

"Why, there are some old friends of yours who are anxious to know if you
have forgotten the feeling of a halter round your neck," I said in good
Danish.

Then, after one look, he knew me at once, and ran to me, and took my
hand, and almost kissed me in his pleasure, for since I could handle an
oar he had known me, and had taught me how to do that, moreover.

Then he called for wine and food; and we sat down together and had a
long talk of the old days, and of how we had fared after he left, and of
all else that came uppermost. And sorely he grieved at my father's
death, and at the trouble that was on us. The famine had not been so
sore in the south, and pestilence had not been at all.

As for himself, he had been courtman, as we call the housecarls, at
first, and so had risen to be chamberlain to the king, and now to the
princess, and had been with her everywhere that Alsi had sent her since
her father died.

"It was a good day for me, and wise was Grim when he bade me go to
Ethelwald to seek service," he said; "yet I would that I had seen him
once more. I have never been to this place before, else I should have
sought him."

Now I was going to ask him about Havelok, but hardly knew how to begin.
He saved me the trouble however, by speaking first.

"Who were the lady and the boy we had on board when we came to England?"
he said. "I never heard, and maybe it was as well that I did not."

"My father never told me. But why do you think that it was well not to
know?"

"Because I am sure that Grim had good reason for not telling. Before I
had been a year at Norwich there came a ship from Denmark into the
river, and soon men told me that her master was asking for news of one
Grim, a merchant, who was lost. So I saw him, not saying who I was or
that I had anything to do with Grim; and then I found that it was not so
much of the master that he wanted news as of the boy we had with us. He
did not ask of the lady at all, and I was sure that this was the man who
came and spoke to Grim just as we were sailing, if you remember. So then
it came to me that we knew nothing of the coming on board of these two,
only learning of their presence when we were far at sea. And now, if
Hodulf troubled himself so much about this boy, there must be something
that he was not meant to know about his flight, for he must be of some
note. Did I not know that the king's son was in his hands at that time,
I should have thought that our passenger was he. However, I told him of
the shipwreck as of a thing that I had seen, saying that Grim and his
family and a few men only had been saved; and I told him also that I had
heard that he had lost some folk in an attack by Vikings. With that he
seemed well satisfied, and I heard no more of him. I have wondered ever
since who the boy was, and if he was yet alive. I mind that he was like
to die when he came ashore."

Then I laughed, and said that he would hear of him soon enough, for all
the town was talking of him; and he guessed whom I meant, for he had
heard of the cook's mighty man.

Now I said no more but this:

"My father kept this matter secret all these years, and with reason, as
we have seen; and so, while he is here, we call this foster-brother of
mine Curan, until the time comes when his name may he known. Maybe it
will be best for you not to say much of your knowledge of him. What does
Earl Ragnar know of our wreck? For he told me that you knew me."

"I told him all about it at one time or another," Mord answered. "He
always wanted to hear of Denmark."

So that was all that the chamberlain knew; but it was plain to me that
the earl had put two and two together when he heard Havelok's name, and
had remembered that this was also the name of Gunnar's son. Afterwards I
found that Mord had heard from Denmark that Hodulf was said to have made
away with Havelok, but he never remembered that at this time. Ragnar
knew this, and did remember it.

Pleasant it was to talk of old days with an old friend thus, and the
time went quickly. Then Mord must go to his mistress and I to my place,
and so we parted for the time. But my last doubt of who Havelok my
brother might be was gone. I was sure that he was the son of Gunnar the
king.


    CHAPTER XIII. THE WITAN'S FEASTING.

Now I have to tell of a strange thing that happened in the night that
was just past, the first that the Lady Goldberga had spent here in
Lincoln for many a year, for on that happening hangs a great deal, and
it will make clear what I myself saw presently at the breaking-up feast
of the Witan. That puzzled me mightily at the time, as it did many at
the feast, but I see no reason why it should not be told at once.

Now I have said that Goldberga left the hall early overnight, being
wearied with the journey, and having the remembrance of the attack on
her party so near to Lincoln to trouble her also. Not much cause to love
her uncle Alsi had she; though perhaps, also, not much to make her hate
him, except that he had kept her so far away from her own people of
late, in a sort of honourable captivity. Now it was plain to her that
had it not been for the presence of Ragnar and his men, her guard would
not have been able to drive off the attackers; and the strange way in
which Griffin had held back had been too plain for her not to notice.
Already she feared him, and it seemed that he might have plotted her
carrying off thus. That Alsi might have had a hand in the matter did not
come into her mind, as it did into the minds of others, for she knew
little of him, thinking him honest if not very pleasant in his ways,
else had not her father made him her guardian.

I will say now that in the attack he did have a hand. Many a long year
afterward it all came out in some way. He dared not give his niece to
Griffin openly, but he wished to do so, as then he would have an
under-king in East Anglia of his own choosing. Sorely against the grain
with him was it that he should have to give up those fair lands to this
girl, who would hold the throne by her own right, and not at all under
him. So he and Griffin had plotted thus, and only Ragnar's presence had
spoilt the plan, though Griffin had tried to save it by holding back.
But I must say also that up to this time none had had aught to say
against Alsi as a ruler, though he was over close, and not at all hearty
in his ways at home. But now, for the sake of the kingdom, he had begun
to plot; and this plan having come to naught, he must make others, as
will be seen. I do not think that this planning to keep Ethelwald's
kingdom from his daughter was anything fresh to Alsi, but the time for
action had come now.

He had made ready by keeping the fair princess far away, and there were
none who could speak of her goodness, or, indeed, had heard much of her
since she was a child. Therefore, as men were content enough with him,
none would trouble much if the princess came not to the throne, given
good reason why she should not do so. And the very best reason would be
that which Alsi had given at the Witan--if her husband was not fit to
be king.

It is possible that Goldberga knew that her marriage would be talked of
at this Witan: but I do not think that she troubled herself much about
it, not by any means intending to be married against her will. I have
heard that so ran the will of Ethelwald, that she was to have choice to
some extent. However that may be, with so many thoughts to trouble her
she went to rest, and her sleep was not easy until the morning was near,
and then came quiet.

But presently, in the grey of the dawn, she woke, and called her old
nurse, who was in the chamber with her; and when she came she told her
that she had had a strange vision or dream, so real that she did not
know which it was. And what it portended she could not say, for it was
wonderful altogether, and surely was good.

"I thought that a voice wakened me, calling me to look on somewhat; and
so I rose as I was bidden, and saw before me the most mighty and
comeliest man that could be thought of. Kinglike he was, though he had
no crown and was meanly clad, without brooch or bracelet that a king
should wear. But the wonder was that from his mouth came a bright shaft
of flame, as it were of a sunbeam, that lighted all the place, and on
his shoulder shone a cross of burning light as of red-hot gold, and I
knew that it was the mark of a mighty king.

"Then I heard the voice again, and I turned, and saw that it was an
angel who spoke to me, and his face was bright and kind.

"'Fear not, Goldberga,' he said, 'for this is your husband that shall
be. King's son and heir is he, as that token of the fiery cross shows.
More, also, it will betoken--that he shall reign in England and in
Denmark, a great king and mighty. And this you shall see, and with him
shall you reign as queen and well-loved lady.'

"So the voice ceased, and the angel was gone, and when I looked up there
was naught but the growing dawn across yon window, and the voice of the
thrush that sings outside."

Now the old nurse pondered over the dream for a while without speaking,
for she could not see what it might mean at first.

But at last she said, "It is a good dream surely, because of the angel
that spoke; but there seems only one way in which it can come to pass. A
prince must come for you from Denmark, for there he would reign by his
own right, and here he would do so by yours. Yet I have heard that the
Danish kings are most terrible heathen, worse than the Saxon kin, of
whom we know the worst now. Maybe that is why the angel told you to have
no fear. I mind Gunnar Kirkeban, and what he wrought on the churches and
Christian folk in Wales--in Gower on the Severn Sea, and on the holy
Dee--when I was young."

For both Goldberga and this old nurse of hers were Christian, as had
been Orwenna, Ethelwald's wife, her mother. It had been a great day for
them when the King of Kent had brought over his fair wife, Bertha, from
France, for she, too, was Christian, and had restored the ancient church
in the very castle where Goldberga was kept.

Now the princess went to sleep again, and woke refreshed; but all day
long the memory of the dream and of him whom she saw in it bided with
her, until it was time for her to go to the great hall for the feast of
the Witan.

Now it happened that on this night I must be one of the two housecarls
who should stand, torch in hand, behind the king. It was a place that
none of the men cared for much, since they saw their comrades feasting
at the end of the room, while they must bide hungry till the end, and
mind that no sparks from the flaring pine fell on the guests, moreover.
Eglaf would have excused me this had I wished; but I would take my turn
with the rest, and maybe did not mind losing the best of the feast so
much as the others. There were some three hundred guests at that feast,
and it was a wondrous fair sight to me as I stood on the high place and
saw them gather. The long table behind which I was ran right across the
dais, rich with gold and silver and glass work: and below this, all down
the hall, ran long tables again, set lengthwise, that none might have
their backs to the king. And at the end of the hall, crosswise, were the
tables for the housecarls, and the men of the house, and of the thanes
who were guests. And as the housecarls came in they hung their shields
and weapons on the walls in order, so that they flashed bright from
above the hangings that Berthun and his men had set up afresh and more
gaily than I had seen yet in this place.

There was a fire on the great hearth in the midst of the hall; but as it
was high summer, only a little one, and over it were no cauldrons, as
there would have been in the winter. Berthun was doing his cookery
elsewhere. But between the tables were spaces where his thralls and the
women could pass as they bore round the food and drink. And backwards
and forwards among them went Berthun until the very last, anxious and
important, seeing that all was right, and showing one guest after
another to their places. No light matter was that either, for to set a
thane in too low a place for his rank was likely to be a cause of strife
and complaint. Also he must know if there were old feuds still
remembered, lest he should set deadly enemies side by side. I did not
envy him, by any means.

When it seemed that there were few more guests to come, and only half a
dozen seats were vacant on the high place, Berthun passed into the room
beyond the hall, and at once a hush fell on the noisy folk, who had been
talking to one another as though they had never met before. The gleemen
tuned their harps, and I and my comrade lit our torches from those
already burning on the wall, and stood ready, for the king was coming.

Out of the door backed Berthun with many bows, and loud sang the
gleemen, while all in the hall stood up at once; and then came Alsi,
leading the princess, first; and then Ragnar, with the wife of some
great noble; and after him that noble and another lady; but Griffin was
not there. Bright looked Goldberga in her blue dress, with wondrous
jewels on arm and neck, and maybe the brighter for the absence of the
Welsh thane, as I thought.

So they sat as last night, save that the noble who had come next to
Ragnar was in Griffin's place; and therefore I stood behind the king and
the princess, with the light of my torch falling between the two.

Now they were set, and at once Berthun bore a great beaker of wine to
the king, and all down the hall ran his men with the pitchers of wine
and mead and ale, and with them the women of the household and the wives
of the courtmen, filling every drinking horn for the welcome cup.

Then the gleemen hushed their song, and Alsi stood up with the
gold-rimmed horn of the king in his hand, and high he raised it, and
cried, "Waeshael!"

And all the guests rose up, cup in hand, with a wonderful flashing of
the glorious English jewels, and cried with one voice, "Drinc hael, Cyning!"

Then all sat them down, and at once came Berthun's men with the laden
spits and the cauldrons, and first they served the high table, kneeling
on the dais steps while each noble helped himself and the lady next him
with what he would. And then down the hall the feast began, and for a
time befell a silence--the silence of hungry folk who have before them
a good reason for not saying much for a little while.

I looked for Havelok among Berthun's men, but he was not there. Nor was
he at the lower cross tables with the other people of the palace. But
Withelm was there, for Eglaf had seen him with me not an hour ago, and
had bidden him come, as a stranger from far off. There were a few other
strangers there also, as one might suppose, for the king's hall must be
open at these times.

Now I looked on all this, and it pleased me; and then I began to hear
the talk of those at the high table, and that was pleasant also. First I
heard that Griffin had fallen off his horse, and had put his arm out.
Whereon one said that he only needed one hand to feed with, and
marvelled that so small a hurt kept him away from so pleasant a place as
was his.

"It seems that he fell on his face," answered a thane who had seen him.
"He is not as handsome as he was last night. That is what keeps him
away. Some passerby put his arm in straightway."

At that I almost laughed, but kept a face wooden as that of our old
statue of Thor, for Eglaf had warned me that I was but a torch, as it
were, unless by any chance I was spoken to. But Ragnar glanced my way
with a half smile. Presently they began to talk of the stone putting,
and of the mighty man who had come with Berthun, and I saw several
looking idly down the hall to see if they could spy him. One of the
thanes on the high seat, at the end, was he who had held the prizes at
these sports.

Now it seemed that Alsi had not heard of this before; and when he had
been told all about it, he said that he did not know that he had any man
who was strong enough to make such a cast as they spoke of, though Eglaf
had picked up a big man somewhere lately, whom he had noticed at the
hall end once or twice.

Then he ran his eyes over the tables, for now the women folk had sat
down among the men, and one could see everywhere. But he did not see the
man he meant, and so turned sharply on us two housecarls behind him.

"Here he is," he said, laughing and looking at me. "Were you the mighty
stone putter they make such a talk of?"

"I am not, lord," I said, somewhat out of countenance, because every one
looked at me together. It had never seemed to me that I was so big
before; perhaps because I was used to Havelok, and to Raven, who was
nigh as tall as myself, and maybe a bit broader.

"Why, then, who was he?" said the king. "We must ask Berthun, unless
anyone can see him in the hall."

Then the thane of the prizes said, "He is not here, lord; for little
trouble would there be in seeing him, if he were, seeing that he is a
full head and shoulders over even this housecarl of yours."

Now the princess had turned to look at me, and she saw that I was
abashed, and so she smiled at me pleasantly, as much as to say that she
was a little sorry for me, and turned away. Then thought I that if ever
the princess needed one to fight for her, even to death, I would do so
for the sake of that smile and the thought for a rough housecarl that
was behind it.

Now came Berthun with more wine, before the matter of the stone was
forgotten in other talk, and the king said, "It seems that you have
found a new man, steward, for all are talking of him. I mean the man who
is said to have thrown a big stone certain miles, or somewhat like it,
from all accounts. Where is he?"

"He is my new porter," answered Berthun, with much pride; "but he is not
in the hail, for he does not like to hear much of himself, being quiet
in his ways, although so strong."

"Here is a marvel," laughed Alsi, "and by-and-by we must see him. I
