been removed to another lodging. He climbed on the sill of the lower
window; by the side of that window a stone pillar ran up the side of the
house to the windows on the first floor. Wogan had taken note of that
pillar months back when he was hawking chattels in Innspruck. He set his
hands about it and got a grip with his foot against the sash of the
lower window. He was just raising himself when he heard a noise above
him. He dropped back to the ground and stood in the fixed attitude of a
sentinel.

A head appeared at the window, a woman's head. The light was behind,
within the room, so that Wogan could not see the face. But the shape of
the head, its gracious poise upon the young shoulders, the curve of the
neck, the bright hair drawn backwards from the brows,--here were marks
Wogan could not mistake. They had been present before his eyes these
many months. The head at the open window was the head of the Princess.
Wogan felt a thrill run through his blood. To a lover the sight of his
mistress is always unexpected, though he foreknows the very moment of
her coming. To Wogan the sight of his Queen had the like effect. He had
not seen her since he had left Ohlau two years before with her promise
to marry the Chevalier. It seemed to him, though for this he had lived
and worked up early and down late for so long, a miraculous thing that
he should see her now.

She leaned forward and peered downwards into the lane. The light
streamed out, bathing her head and shoulders. Wogan could see the snow
fall upon her dark hair and whiten it; it fell, too, upon her neck, but
that it could not whiten. She leaned out into the darkness, and Wogan
set foot again upon the lower window-sill. At the same moment another
head appeared beside Clementina's, and a sharp cry rang out, a cry of
terror. Then both heads disappeared, and a heavy curtain swung across
the window, shutting the light in.

Wogan remained motionless, his heart sinking with alarm. Had that cry
been heard? Had the wind carried it to the sentry at the door? He
waited, but no sound of running footsteps came to his ears; the cry had
been lost in the storm. He was now so near to success that dangers which
a month ago would have seemed of small account showed most menacing and
fatal.

"It was the Princess-mother who cried out," he thought, and was reminded
that the need of persuasions was not ended for the night with the
conquest of Jenny. He had to convince the Princess-mother of his
authority without a line of Prince Sobieski's writing to support him; he
had to overcome her timidity. But he was prepared for the encounter; he
had foreseen it, and had an argument ready for the Princess-mother,
though he would have preferred to wring the old lady's neck. Her cry
might spoil everything. However, it had not been heard, and since it had
not been heard, Wogan was disposed to forgive it.

For the window was still open, and now that the curtain was drawn no ray
of light escaped from the room to betray the man who climbed into it.




CHAPTER XIII


Meanwhile within the room the Princess-mother clung to Clementina. The
terror which her sharp cry had expressed was visible in her strained and
startled face. Her eyes, bright with terror, stared at the drawn
curtain; she could not avert them; she still must gaze, fascinated by
her fears; and her dry, whispering lips were tremulous.

"Heaven have mercy!" she whispered; "shut the window! Shut it fast!" and
as Clementina moved in surprise, she clung the closer to her daughter.
"No, do not leave me! Come away! Jesu! here are we alone,--two women!"

"Mother," said Clementina, soothing her and gently stroking her hair, as
though she in truth was the mother and the mother her daughter, "there's
no cause for fear."

"No cause for fear! I saw him--the sentry--he is climbing up. Ah!" and
again her voice rose to a cry as Wogan's foot grated on the
window-ledge.

"Hush, mother! A cry will ruin us. It's not the sentinel," said
Clementina.

Clementina was laughing, and by her laughter the Princess-mother was in
some measure reassured.

"Who is it, then?" she asked.

"Can you not guess?" said Clementina, incredulously. "It is so evident.
Yet I would not have you guess. It is my secret, my discovery. I'll tell
you." She heard a man behind the curtain spring lightly from the window
to the floor. She raised her voice that he might know she had divined
him. "Your sentinel is the one man who has the right to rescue me. Your
sentinel's the King."

At that moment Wogan pushed aside the curtain.

"No, your Highness," said he, "but the King's servant."

The Princess-mother dropped into a chair and looked at her visitor with
despair. It was not the sentinel, to be sure, but, on the other hand, it
was Mr. Wogan, whom she knew for a very insistent man with a great
liking for his own way. She drew little comfort from Mr. Wogan's coming.

It seemed, too, that he was not very welcome to Clementina; for she drew
back a step and in a voice which dropped and had a tremble of
disappointment, "Mr. Wogan," she said, "the King is well served;" and
she stood there without so much as offering him her hand. Wogan had not
counted on so cold a greeting, but he understood the reason, and was not
sure but what he approved of it. After all, she had encountered perils
on the King's account; she had some sort of a justification to believe
the King would do the like for her. It had not occurred to him or
indeed to anyone before; but now that he saw the chosen woman so plainly
wounded, he felt a trifle hot against his King for having disappointed
her. He set his wits to work to dispel the disappointment.

"Your Highness, the truth is there are great matters brewing in Spain.
His Majesty was needed there most urgently. He had to decide between
Innspruck and Cadiz, and it seemed that he would honour your great
confidence in him and at the same time serve you best--"

Clementina would not allow him to complete the sentence. Her cheek
flushed, and she said quickly,--

"You are right, Mr. Wogan. The King is right. Mine was a girl's thought.
I am ashamed of it;" and she frankly gave him her hand. Wogan was fairly
well pleased with his apology for his King. It was not quite the truth,
no doubt, but it had spared Clementina a trifle of humiliation, and had
re-established the King in her thoughts. He bent over her hand and would
have kissed it, but she stopped him.

"No," said she, "an honest handclasp, if you please; for no woman can
have ever lived who had a truer friend," and Wogan, looking into her
frank eyes, was not, after all, nearly so well pleased with the untruth
he had told her. She was an uncomfortable woman to go about with shifts
and contrivances. Her open face, with its broad forehead and the clear,
steady eyes of darkest blue, claimed truth as a prerogative. The blush
which had faded from her cheeks appeared on his, and he began to babble
some foolish word about his unworthiness when the Princess-mother
interrupted him in a grudging voice,--

"Mr. Wogan, you were to bring a written authority from the Prince my
husband."

Wogan drew himself up straight.

"Your Highness," said he, with a bow of the utmost respect, "I was given
such an authority."

The Princess-mother held out her hand. "Will you give it me?"

"I said that I was given such an authority. But I have it no longer. I
was attacked on my way from Ohlau. There were five men against me, all
of whom desired that letter. The room was small; I could not run away;
neither had I much space wherein to resist five men. I knew that were I
killed and that letter found on me, your Highness would thereafter be
too surely guarded to make escape possible, and his Highness Prince
Sobieski would himself incur the Emperor's hostility. So when I had made
sure that those five men were joined against me, I twisted that letter
into a taper and before their faces lit my pipe with it."

Clementina's eyes were fixed steadily and intently upon Wogan's face.
When he ended she drew a deep breath, but otherwise she did not move.
The Princess-mother, however, was unmistakably relieved. She spoke with
a kindliness she had never shown before to Wogan; she even smiled at
him in a friendly way.

"We do not doubt you, Mr. Wogan, but that written letter, giving my
daughter leave to go, I needs must have before I let her go. A father's
authority! I cannot take that upon myself."

Clementina took a quick step across to her mother's side.

"You did not hear," she said.

"I heard indeed that Mr. Wogan had burnt the letter."

"But under what stress, and to spare my father and to leave me still a
grain of hope. Mother, this gentleman has run great risks for me,--how
great I did not know; even now in this one instance we can only guess
and still fall short of the mark."

The Princess-mother visibly stiffened with maternal authority.

"My child, without some sure sign the Prince consents, you must not go."

Clementina looked towards Wogan for assistance. Wogan put his hand into
his pocket.

"That sure sign I have," said he. "It is a surer sign than any written
letter; for handwriting may always be counterfeit. This could never be,"
and he held out on the palm of his hand the turquoise snuff-box which
the Prince had given him on New Year's day. "It is a jewel unique in all
the world, and the Prince gave it me. It is a jewel he treasured not
only for its value, but its history. Yet he gave it me. It was won by
the great King John of Poland, and remains as a memorial of the most
glorious day in all that warrior's glorious life; yet his son gave it
me. With his own hands he put it into mine to prove to me with what
confidence he trusted your Highness's daughter to my care. That
confidence was written large in the letter I burnt, but I am thinking it
is engraved for ever upon this stone."

The Princess-mother took the snuff-box reluctantly and turned it over
and over. She was silent. Clementina answered for her.

"I am ready," she said, and she pointed to a tiny bundle on a chair in
which a few clothes were wrapped. "My jewels are packed in the bundle,
but I can leave them behind me if needs be."

Wogan lifted up the bundle and laughed.

"Your Highness teaches a lesson to soldiers; for there is never a
knapsack but can hold this and still have half its space to spare. The
front door is unlatched?"

"M. Chateaudoux is watching in the hall."

"And the hall's unlighted?"

"Yes."

"Jenny should be here in a minute, and before she comes I must tell you
she does not know the importance of our undertaking. She is the servant
to Mrs. Misset, who attends your Highness into Italy. We did not let her
into the secret. We made up a comedy in which you have your parts to
play. Your Highness," and he turned to Clementina, "is a rich Austrian
heiress, deeply enamoured of Captain Lucius O'Toole."

"Captain Lucius O'Toole!" exclaimed the mother, in horror. "My daughter
enamoured of a Captain Lucius O'Toole!"

"He is one of my three companions," said Wogan, imperturbably.
"Moreover, he is six foot four, the most creditable lover in the world."

"Well," said Clementina, with a laugh, "I am deeply enamoured of the
engaging Captain Lucius O'Toole. Go on, sir."

"Your parents are of a most unexampled cruelty. They will not smile upon
the fascinating O'Toole, but have locked you up on bread and water until
you shall agree to marry a wealthy but decrepit gentleman of
eighty-three."

"I will not," cried Clementina; "I will starve myself to death first. I
will marry my six feet four or no other man in Christendom."

"Clementina!" cried her mother, deprecatingly.

"But at this moment," continued Wogan, "there very properly appears the
fairy godmother in the person of a romantical maiden aunt."

"Oh!" said Clementina, "I have a romantical maiden aunt."

"Yes," said Wogan, and turning with a bow to the Princess-mother; "your
Highness."

"I?" she exclaimed, starting up in her chair.

"Your Highness has written an encouraging letter to Captain O'Toole,"
resumed Wogan. The Princess-mother gasped, "A letter to Captain
O'Toole," and she flung up her hands and fell back in her chair.

"On the receipt of the letter Captain O'Toole gathers his friends,
borrows a horse here, a carriage there, and a hundred guineas from
Heaven knows whom, comes to the rescue like a knight-errant, and retells
the old story of how love laughs at locksmiths."

As Wogan ended, the mother rose from her chair. It may have been that
she revolted at the part she was to play; it may have been because a
fiercer gust shook the curtain and bellied it inwards. At all events she
flung the curtain aside; the snow drifted through the open window onto
the floor; outside the open window it was falling like a cascade, and
the air was icy.

"Mr. Wogan," she said, stubbornly working herself into a heat to make
more sure of her resolution, "my daughter cannot go to-night. To-morrow,
if the sky clears, yes, but to-night, no. You do not know, sir, being a
man. But my daughter has fasted through this Lent, and that leaves a
woman weak. I do forbid her going, as her father would. The very dogs
running the streets for food keep kennel on such a night. She must not
go."

Wogan did not give way, though he felt a qualm of despair, knowing all
the stubbornness of which the weak are capable, knowing how impervious
to facts or arguments.

"Your Highness," he said quickly, "we are not birds of passage to rule
our flight by seasons. We must take the moment when it comes, and it
comes now. To-night your daughter can escape; for here's a night made
for an escape."

"And for my part," cried Clementina, "I would the snow fell faster." She
crossed to the open window and held out her hands to catch the flakes.
"Would they did not melt! I believe Heaven sends the snow to shelter me.
It's the white canopy spread above my head, that I may go in state to
meet my King." She stood eager and exultant, her eyes shining, her cheek
on fire, her voice thrilling with pride. She seemed not to feel the
cold. She welcomed the hardships of wind and falling snow as her
opportunity. She desired not only for escape, but also to endure.

Wogan looked her over from head to foot, filled with pride and
admiration. He had made no mistake; he had plucked this rose of the
world to give to his King. His eyes said it; and the girl, reading them,
drew a breath and rippled out a laugh of gladness that his trusted
servant was so well content with her. But the Princess-mother stood
unmoved.

"My daughter cannot go to-night," she repeated resentfully. "I do forbid
it."

Wogan had his one argument. This one argument was his last resource. He
had chosen it carefully with an eye to the woman whom it was to
persuade. It was not couched as an inducement; it did not claim the
discharge of an obligation; it was not a reply to any definite
objection. Such arguments would only have confirmed her in her
stubbornness. He made accordingly an appeal to sentiment.

"Your Highness's daughter," said he, "spoke a minute since of the
hazards my friends and I have run to compass her escape. As regards four
of us, the words reached beyond our deserts. For we are men. Such
hazards are our portion; they are seldom lightened by so high an aim.
But the fifth! The words, however kind, were still below that fifth
one's merits; for the fifth is a woman."

"I know. With all my heart I thank her. With all my heart I pity her."

"But there is one thing your Highness does not know. She runs our
risks,--the risk of capture, the risk of the night, the storm, the snow,
she a woman by nature timid and frail,--yet with never in all her life
so great a reason for timidity, or so much frailty of health as now. We
venture our lives, but she ventures more."

The mother bowed her head; Clementina looked fixedly at Wogan.

"Speak plainly, my friend," she said. "There are no children here."

"Madam, I need but quote to you the words her husband used. For my part,
I think that nobler words were never spoken, and with her whole heart
she repeats them. They are these: 'The boy would only live to serve his
King; why should he not serve his King before he lives?'"

The mother was still silent, but Wogan could see that the tears
overbrimmed her eyes and rolled down her cheeks. Clementina was silent
for a while too, and stood with her eyes fixed thoughtfully on Wogan.
Then she said gently,--

"Her name."

Wogan told her it, and she said no more; but it was plain that she would
never forget it, that she had written it upon her heart.

Wogan waited, looking to the Princess, who drying her tears rose from
her chair and said with great and unexpected dignity,--

