without moving, though the great blade seemed about to fall, and
the fierce Dane's eyes glared on mine.

"It were easy for me to have lied; I would that I did lie, for then
Lodbrok would be living, and I beside him, waiting for Halfden my
friend even yet."

"Odin!" shouted Ingvar; "you speak truth. Woe is me for my father,
and woe to the land that has given him a grave thus foully."

With that he let his sword fall, and his passion having gone, he
sat down and put his face in his hands, and wept tears of grief and
rage. And I, as I watched him, was fain to weep also, for my
thoughts were akin to his.

Now Hubba had sat very still, watching all this, and he kept his
feelings better than did his fierce brother, though I might well
see that he was moved as deeply. But now he spurned Beorn with his
foot, bidding him get up and speak also. But Beorn only grovelled
the more, and Hubba spurned him again, turning to me.

"I believe you speak truth," he said quietly, "and you are a brave
man. There was no need for you to tell the accusation against
yourself; and many are the lies you might have told us about the
boat that would have been enough for us. We never thought to hear
that our father had outlived the storm."

"I speak truth, Jarl," I said, sadly enough, "and Halfden will come
to our haven, seeking us both, and will find neither--only this ill
news instead of all we had planned of pleasure."

Then Hubba asked me plainly of Beorn, saying:

"What of this cur?"

"No more than I have told you, Jarl," I said.

"How came he into the forest?" asked Hubba, for he saw that there
was more than he knew yet under Beorn's utter terror.

"Let me tell you that story from end to end," I answered.

And he nodded, so that I did so, from the time when I left the jarl
until Ulfkytel sentenced us, giving all the words of the witnesses
as nearly as I could. Then I said that I would leave them to judge,
for I could not.

Now Ingvar, who had sat biting his nails and listening without a
word, broke in, questioning me of Halfden's ship for long. At last
he said:

"This man tells truth, and I will not harm him. He shall bide here
till Halfden comes home, for he tells a plain story, and wears
those rings. And he has spoken the ill of himself and little of
this craven, who maybe knows more than he will say. I have a mind
to find out what he does know," and he looked savagely at Beorn,
who was sitting up and rocking himself to and fro, with his eyes
looking far away.

"Do what you will with him he will lie," said Hubba.

"I can make him speak truth," said Ingvar grimly.

"What shall be done with this Wulfric?" asked Hubba.

"Let him go with Raud until I have spoken with Beorn," answered
Ingvar, "then we shall be sure if he is friend or not."

Hubba nodded, and he and I rose up and went out to the porch, where
Raud and Rolf waited with the two guards. We passed them and stood
in the courtyard.

"I believe you, Wulfric," said Hubba, "for I know a true man when I
see him."

"I thank you, Jarl," I answered him, taking the hand that he
offered me.

I looked out over the sea, for the frank kindness moved me, and I
would not show it. There was a heavy bank of clouds working up, and
the wind came from the north, with a smell of snow in it. Then I
saw a great hawk flying inland, and wondered to see it come over
sea at this time of year. It flew so that it would pass over the
house, and as it came it wheeled a little and called; and then it
swept down and came straight towards me, so that I held out my hand
and it perched on my wrist.

And lo! it was Lodbrok's gerfalcon; and pleased she was to see me
once more, fluttering her wings and glancing at me while I smoothed
and spoke to her.

But Hubba cried out in wonder, and the men and Ingvar came out to
see what his call meant. Then they, too, were amazed, for they knew
the bird and her ways well.

I had spoken of the falcon once or twice, telling the jarls how she
had taken to me, and I think they had doubted it a little. Now the
bird had got free in some way, and finding neither of her masters,
had fled home, even as Lodbrok said she would.

"Now is your story proved to be true," said Hubba, smiling gravely
at me, but speaking for Ingvar's ear.

"Aye, over true," answered his brother; "serve this man well, Raud
and Rolf, for he has been a close friend of Jarl Lodbrok."

"Then should he be in Lodbrok's house as a guest," said Raud
stoutly, and free of speech as Danes will ever be.

"Maybe he shall be so soon," said Ingvar.

"I will bide with my first hosts," I said, not being willing to
speak much of this just now.

"That is well said," was Hubba's reply, and so we went to have the
falcon--who would not leave me--hooded and confined; and then I
went with the two men back to their hut, and there they vied with
each other in kindness to me until night fell, and I gladly went to
rest; for since that night within Caistor walls I had had no sleep
that was worth considering. So my sleep was a long sleep, and
nothing broke it until I woke of myself, and found only the great
dog Vig in the hut, and breakfast ready set out for me, while
outside the ground was white with snow.

I was glad to find that no watch was kept on me, for it seemed as
if Hubba's words were indeed true, and that the jarls believed my
story. And my dagger was left me also, hanging still on the wall at
my head where I had slept. Then I thought that the great dog was
maybe bidden to guard me, but he paid no heed when I went outside
the hut to try if it were so.

Ere an hour had passed Raud came back, and he had news for me.

"Now, friend Wulfric, I am to part with my guest, and not in the
way that was yesterday's. The jarls bid me say that Wulfric of
Reedham, Lodbrok's preserver, is a welcome guest in their hall, and
they would see him there at once."

"Nevertheless," I answered, "Raud the forester was the first to
shelter me, and I do not forget."

Whereat Raud was pleased, and together we went to the great house,
and entered, unchallenged. Hubba came forward and held out his
strong hand to me frankly, smiling a little, but gravely, and I
took it.

"Beorn has told the truth," he said; "forgive me for doubt of you
at any time."

"Aye, let that be forgotten," said Ingvar, coming from beyond the
great fire, and I answered that I thought it not strange that they
had doubted me.

"Now, therefore," said Hubba, "you yourself shall question Beorn,
for there are things you want to know from him. And he will answer
you truly enough."

"After that you shall slay him, if you will," said Ingvar, in his
stern voice, "I wonder you did not do so in the boat. Better for
him if you had."

"I wonder not," said Hubba. "The man is fit for naught; I could not
lay hand on such a cur."

I had no answer to make after that, for the warrior spoke my own
thoughts, and I held my peace as they took me to the further side
of the hearth, past the fire, beyond which I had not yet been able
to see.

Then I knew how Beorn had been made to speak the truth. They had
tortured him, and there was no strength left in him at all, so that
I almost started back from the cruel marks that he bore. Yet I had
things to hear from him, now that he had no need to speak falsely,
and I went to his side. The two jarls stood and looked at him
unmoved.

"The justice of Ulfkytel is on you, Beorn," I said slowly; "there
is no need to hide aught. Tell me how you slew Lodbrok, and why."

Then came a voice, so hollow that I should not have known it for
the lusty falconer's of past days:

"Aye; justice is on me, and I am glad. I will tell you, but first
say that you forgive me."

Then I could not but tell this poor creature that for all the harm
he had done me I would surely forgive him; but that the deed of
murder was not for me to forgive.

"Pray, therefore, that for it I may be forgiven hereafter," he
said, and that I promised him.

Then he spoke faintly, so that Hubba bade Raud give him strong
drink, and that brought his strength back a little.

"I took your arrows at Thetford, and I followed you to Reedham.
There I dogged you, day by day, in the woods--five days I went
through the woods as you hunted, and then you twain were far apart,
and my chance had come. Lodbrok reined up to listen, and I marked
where he would pass when he went back, hearing your horn. Then I
shot, and the arrow went true; but I drew sword, being mad, and
made more sure. That is all. Surely I thought I should escape, for
I told no man what I would do, and all men thought me far away,
with the king."

Then he stopped, and recovered his strength before he could go on.

"I hated Lodbrok because he had taken my place beside the king, and
because his woodcraft was greater than mine, though I was first in
that in all our land. And I feared that he would take the land the
king offered him, for I longed for it."

Then Beorn closed his eyes, and I was turning away, for I need ask
no more; but again he spoke:

"Blind was yon dotard Ulfkytel not to see all this; would that you
had slain me in the woods at first--or that he had hanged me at
Caistor--or that I had been drowned. But justice is done, and my
life is ended."

Those were the last words that I heard Beorn, the falconer, speak,
for I left him, and Raud gave him to drink again.

"Have you no more to ask?" said Ingvar gloomily, and frowning on
Beorn, as he lay helpless beyond the hearth.

"Nothing, Jarl."

"What was the last word he said. I heard not."

"He said that justice was done," I answered.

"When I have done with him, it shall be so," growled Ingvar, and
his hand clutched his sword hilt, so that I thought to see him slay
the man on the spot.

"Has he told you all?" I asked of Hubba.

"All, and more than you have told of yourself," he answered; "for
he told us that it was your hand saved my father, and for that we
thank you. But one thing more he said at first, and that was that
Eadmund the King set him on to slay the jarl."

On that I cried out that the good king loved Lodbrok too well, and
in any case would suffer no such cowardly dealings.

"So ran his after words; but that was his first story,
nevertheless."

"Then he lied, for you have just now heard him say that his own
evil thoughts bade him do the deed."

"Aye--maybe he lied at first; but we shall see," said Ingvar.

Now I understood not that saying, but if a man lies once, who shall
know where the lie's doings will stop? What came from this lie I
must tell, but now it seemed to have passed for naught.

"Now shall you slay the man in what way you will, as I have said.
There are weapons," and Ingvar pointed to the store on the walls.

"I will not touch him," I said, "and I think that he dies."

"Then shall you see the vengeance of Ingvar on his father's
murderer," the jarl said savagely. "Call the men together into the
courtyard, Raud, and let them bring the man there."

"Let him die, Jarl," I said boldly; "he has suffered already."

"I think that if you knew, Wulfric of Reedham, how near you have
been to this yourself, through his doings, you would not hold your
hand," answered Ingvar, scowling at Beorn again.

"Maybe, Jarl," I answered, "but though you may make a liar speak
truth thus, you cannot make an honest man say more than he has to
speak."

"One cannot well mistake an honest saying," said Ingvar. "And that
is well for you, friend."

And so he turned and watched his courtmen, as the Danes called the
housecarles, carry Beorn out. Then he went to the walls and began
to handle axe after axe, taking down one by one, setting some on
the great table, and putting others back, as if taking delight in
choosing one fittest for some purpose.

Even as we watched him--Hubba sitting on the table's edge, and I
standing by him--a leathern curtain that went across a door at the
upper end of the hall was pulled aside, and a lady came into the
place. Stately and tall, with wondrous black hair, was this maiden,
and I knew that this must be that Osritha of whom the jarl was wont
to speak to Eadgyth and my mother, and who wrought the raven banner
that hung above the high place where she stood now. She was like
Halfden and Hubba, though with Ingvar's hair, and if those three
were handsome men among a thousand, this sister of theirs was more
than worthy of them. She stood in the door, doubting, when she saw
me. Sad she looked, and she wore no gold on arm or neck, doubtless
because of the certainty of the great jarl's death; and when she
saw that Hubba beckoned to her, she came towards us, and Ingvar set
down the great axe whose edge he was feeling.

"Go back to your bower, sister," he said; "we have work on hand."

And he spoke sternly, but not harshly, to her. She shrank away a
little, as if frightened at the jarl's dark face and stern words,
but Hubba called her by name.

"Stay, Osritha; here is that friend of our father's from over seas,
of whom you have heard."

Then she looked pityingly at me, as I thought, saying very kindly:

"You are welcome. Yet I fear you have suffered for your friendship
to my father."

"I have suffered for not being near to help him, lady," I said.

"There is a thing that you know not yet," said Hubba. "This Wulfric
was the man who took Father from the breakers."

Then the maiden smiled at me, though her eyes were full of tears,
and she asked me:

"How will they bury him in your land? In honour?"

"I have a brother-in-law who will see to that," I said. "And,
moreover, Eadmund the King, and Elfric, my father, will do him all
honour."

"I will see to that," growled Ingvar, turning sharply from where he
sought another weapon on the wall.

Not knowing all he meant, this pleased me, for I thought that we
should sail together to Reedham for this, before very long. But
Osritha, knowing his ways, looked long at him, till he turned away
again, and would not meet her eyes.
