station near pitied their pain; and lo! first of all they caused grass
to spring from the earth; and above the grass rose up tall shoots; and
then flourishing saplings grew standing upright far above the earth.
Hespere became a poplar and Eretheis an elm, and Aegle a willow's sacred
trunk. And forth from these trees their forms looked out, as clear as
they were before, a marvel exceeding great, and Aegle spake with gentle
words answering their longing looks:

"Surely there has come hither a mighty succour to your toils, that most
accursed man, who robbed our guardian serpent of life and plucked the
golden apples of the goddesses and is gone; and has left bitter grief
for us. For yesterday came a man most fell in wanton violence, most grim
in form; and his eyes flashed beneath his scowling brow; a ruthless
wretch; and he was clad in the skin of a monstrous lion of raw hide,
untanned; and he bare a sturdy bow of olive, and a bow, wherewith he
shot and killed this monster here. So he too came, as one traversing the
land on foot, parched with thirst; and he rushed wildly through this
spot, searching for water, but nowhere was he like to see it. Now here
stood a rock near the Tritonian lake; and of his own device, or by the
prompting of some god, he smote it below with his foot; and the water
gushed out in full flow. And he, leaning both his hands and chest upon
the ground, drank a huge draught from the rifted rock, until, stooping
like a beast of the field, he had satisfied his mighty maw."

Thus she spake; and they gladly with joyful steps ran to the spot where
Aegle had pointed out to them the spring, until they reached it. And as
when earth-burrowing ants gather in swarms round a narrow cleft, or when
flies lighting upon a tiny drop of sweet honey cluster round with
insatiate eagerness; so at that time, huddled together, the Minyae
thronged about the spring from the rock. And thus with wet lips one
cried to another in his delight:

"Strange! In very truth Heracles, though far away, has saved his
comrades, fordone with thirst. Would that we might find him on his way
as we pass through the mainland!"

So they spake, and those who were ready for this work answered, and they
separated this way and that, each starting to search. For by the night
winds the footsteps had been effaced where the sand was stirred. The two
sons of Boreas started up, trusting in their wings; and Euphemus,
relying on his swift feet, and Lynceus to cast far his piercing eyes;
and with them darted off Canthus, the fifth. He was urged on by the doom
of the gods and his own courage, that he might learn for certain from
Heracles where he had left Polyphemus, son of Eilatus; for he was minded
to question him on every point concerning his comrade. But that hero had
founded a glorious city among the Mysians, and, yearning for his
home-return, had passed far over the mainland in search of Argo; and in
time he reached the land of the Chalybes, who dwell near the sea; there
it was that his fete subdued him. And to him a monument stands under a
tall poplar, just facing the sea. But that day Lynceus thought he saw
Heracles all alone, far off, over measureless land, as a man at the
month's beginning sees, or thinks he sees, the moon through a bank of
cloud. And he returned and told his comrades that no other searcher
would find Heracles on his way, and they also came back, and
swift-footed Euphemus and the twin sons of Thracian Boreas, after a vain
toil.

But thee, Canthus, the fates of death seized in Libya. On pasturing
flocks didst thou light; and there followed a shepherd who, in defence
of his own sheep, while thou wert leading them off[1] to thy comrades in
their need, slew thee by the cast of a stone; for he was no weakling,
Caphaurus, the grandson of Lycoreian Phoebus and the chaste maiden
Acacallis, whom once Minos drove from home to dwell in Libya, his own
daughter, when she was bearing the gods' heavy load; and she bare to
Phoebus a glorious son, whom they call Amphithemis and Garamas. And
Amphithemis wedded a Tritonian nymph; and she bare to him Nasamon and
strong Caphaurus, who on that day in defending his sheep slew Canthus.
But he escaped not the chieftains' avenging hands, when they learned the
deed he had done. And the Minyae, when they knew it, afterwards took up
the corpse and buried it in the earth, mourning; and the sheep they took
with them.

[Footnote 1: This seems to be the only possible translation, but the
optative is quite anomalous. We should expect [Greek: ekomizes].]

Thereupon on the same day a pitiless fate seized Mopsus too, son of
Ampycus; and he escaped not a bitter doom by his prophesying; for there
is no averting of death. Now there lay in the sand, avoiding the midday
heat, a dread serpent, too sluggish of his own will to strike at an
unwilling foe, nor yet would he dart full face at one that would shrink
back. But into whatever of all living beings that life-giving earth
sustains that serpent once injects his black venom, his path to Hades
becomes not so much as a cubit's length, not even if Paeeon, if it is
right for me to say this openly, should tend him, when its teeth have
only grazed the skin. For when over Libya flew godlike Perseus
Eurymedon--for by that name his mother called him--bearing to the king
the Gorgon's head newly severed, all the drops of dark blood that fell
to the earth, produced a brood of those serpents. Now Mopsus stepped on
the end of its spine, setting thereon the sole of his left foot; and it
writhed round in pain and bit and tore the flesh between the shin and
the muscles. And Medea and her handmaids fled in terror; but Canthus
bravely felt the bleeding wound; for no excessive pain harassed him.
Poor wretch! Already a numbness that loosed his limbs was stealing
beneath his skin, and a thick mist was spreading over his eyes.
Straightway his heavy limbs sank helplessly to the ground and he grew
cold; and his comrades and the hero, Aeson's son, gathered round,
marvelling at the close-coming doom. Nor yet though dead might he lie
beneath the sun even for a little space. For at once the poison began to
rot his flesh within, and the hair decayed and fell from the skin. And
quickly and in haste they dug a deep grave with mattocks of bronze; and
they tore their hair, the heroes and the maidens, bewailing the dead
man's piteous suffering; and when he had received due burial rites,
thrice they marched round the tomb in full armour, and heaped above him
a mound of earth.

But when they had gone aboard, as the south wind blew over the sea, and
they were searching for a passage to go forth from the Tritonian lake,
for long they had no device, but all the day were borne on aimlessly.
And as a serpent goes writhing along his crooked path when the sun's
fiercest rays scorch him; and with a hiss he turns his head to this side
and that, and in his fury his eyes glow like sparks of fire, until he
creeps to his lair through a cleft in the rock; so Argo seeking an
outlet from the lake, a fairway for ships, wandered for a long time.
Then straightway Orpheus bade them bring forth from the ship Apollo's
massy tripod and offer it to the gods of the land as propitiation for
their return. So they went forth and set Apollo's gift on the shore;
then before them stood, in the form of a youth, far-swaying Triton, and
he lifted a clod from the earth and offered it as a stranger's gift, and
thus spake:

"Take it, friends, for no stranger's gift of great worth have I here by
me now to place in the hands of those who beseech me. But if ye are
searching for a passage through this sea, as often is the need of men
passing through a strange land, I will declare it. For my sire Poseidon
has made me to be well versed in this sea. And I rule the shore--if
haply in your distant land you have ever heard of Eurypylus, born in
Libya, the home of wild beasts."

Thus he spake, and readily Euphemus held out his hands towards the clod,
and thus addressed him in reply:

"If haply, hero, thou knowest aught of Apis[1] and the sea of Minos,
tell us truly, who ask it of you. For not of our will have we come
hither, but by the stress of heavy storms have we touched the borders of
this land, and have borne our ship aloft on our shoulders to the waters
of this lake over the mainland, grievously burdened; and we know not
where a passage shows itself for our course to the land of Pelops."

[Footnote 1: An old name of the Peloponnesus.]

So he spake; and Triton stretched out his hand and showed afar the sea
and the lake's deep mouth, and then addressed them: "That is the outlet
to the sea, where the deep water lies unmoved and dark; on each side
roll white breakers with shining crests; and the way between for your
passage out is narrow. And that sea stretches away in mist to the divine
land of Pelops beyond Crete; but hold to the right, when ye have entered
the swell of the sea from the lake, and steer your course hugging the
land, as long as it trends to the north; but when the coast bends,
falling away in the other direction, then your course is safely laid for
you if ye go straight forward from the projecting cape. But go in joy,
and as for labour let there be no grieving that limbs in youthful vigour
should still toil."

He spake with kindly counsel; and they at once went aboard, intent to
come forth from the lake by the use of oars. And eagerly they sped on;
meanwhile Triton took up the mighty tripod, and they saw him enter the
lake; but thereafter did no one mark how he vanished so near them along
with the tripod. But their hearts were cheered, for that one of the
blessed had met them in friendly guise. And they bade Aeson's son offer
to him the choicest of the sheep and when he had slain it chant the hymn
of praise. And straightway he chose in haste and raising the victim slew
it over the stern, and prayed with these words:

"Thou god, who hast manifested thyself on the borders of this land,
whether the daughters born of the sea call thee Triton, the great
sea-marvel, or Phorcys, or Nereus, be gracious, and grant the return
home dear to our hearts."

He spake, and cut the victim's throat over the water and cast it from
the stern. And the god rose up from the depths in form such as he really
was. And as when a man trains a swift steed for the broad race-course,
and runs along, grasping the bushy mane, while the steed follows obeying
his master, and rears his neck aloft in his pride, and the gleaming bit
rings loud as he champs it in his jaws from side to side; so the god,
seizing hollow Argo's keel, guided her onward to the sea. And his body,
from the crown of his head, round his back and waist as far as the
belly, was wondrously like that of the blessed ones in form; but below
his sides the tail of a sea monster lengthened far, forking to this side
and that; and he smote the surface of the waves with the spines, which
below parted into curving fins, like the horns of the new moon. And he
guided Argo on until he sped her into the sea on her course; and quickly
he plunged into the vast abyss; and the heroes shouted when they gazed
with their eyes on that dread portent. There is the harbour of Argo and
there are the signs of her stay, and altars to Poseidon and Triton; for
during that day they tarried. But at dawn with sails outspread they sped
on before the breath of the west wind, keeping the desert land on their
right. And on the next morn they saw the headland and the recess of the
sea, bending inward beyond the jutting headland. And straightway the
west wind ceased, and there came the breeze of the clear south wind: and
their hearts rejoiced at the sound it made. But when the sun sank and
the star returned that bids the shepherd fold, which brings rest to
wearied ploughmen, at that time the wind died down in the dark night; so
they furled the sails and lowered the tall mast and vigorously plied
their polished oars all night and through the day, and again when the
next night came on. And rugged Carpathus far away welcomed them; and
thence they were to cross to Crete, which rises in the sea above other
islands.

And Talos, the man of bronze, as he broke off rocks from the hard cliff,
stayed them from fastening hawsers to the shore, when they came to the
road-stead of Dicte's haven. He was of the stock of bronze, of the men
sprung from ash-trees, the last left among the sons of the gods; and the
son of Cronos gave him to Europa to be the warder of Crete and to stride
round the island thrice a day with his feet of bronze. Now in all the
rest of his body and limbs was he fashioned of bronze and invulnerable;
but beneath the sinew by his ankle was a blood-red vein; and this, with
its issues of life and death, was covered by a thin skin. So the heroes,
though outworn with toil, quickly backed their ship from the land in
sore dismay. And now far from Crete would they have been borne in
wretched plight, distressed both by thirst and pain, had not Medea
addressed them as they turned away:

"Hearken to me. For I deem that I alone can subdue for you that man,
whoever he be, even though his frame be of bronze throughout, unless his
life too is everlasting. But be ready to keep your ship here beyond the
cast of his stones, till he yield the victory to me."

Thus she spake; and they drew the ship out of range, resting on their
oars, waiting to see what plan unlooked for she would bring to pass; and
she, holding the fold of her purple robe over her cheeks on each side,
mounted on the deck; and Aeson's son took her hand in his and guided her
way along the thwarts. And with songs did she propitiate and invoke the
Death-spirits, devourers of life, the swift hounds of Hades, who,
hovering through all the air, swoop down on the living. Kneeling in
supplication, thrice she called on them with songs, and thrice with
prayers; and, shaping her soul to mischief, with her hostile glance she
bewitched the eyes of Talos, the man of bronze; and her teeth gnashed
bitter wrath against him, and she sent forth baneful phantoms in the
frenzy of her rage.

Father Zeus, surely great wonder rises in my mind, seeing that dire
destruction meets us not from disease and wounds alone, but lo! even
from afar, may be, it tortures us! So Talos, for all his frame of
bronze, yielded the victory to the might of Medea the sorceress. And as
he was heaving massy rocks to stay them from reaching the haven, he
grazed his ankle on a pointed crag; and the ichor gushed forth like
melted lead; and not long thereafter did he stand towering on the
jutting cliff. But even as some huge pine, high up on the mountains,
which woodmen have left half hewn through by their sharp axes when they
returned from the forest--at first it shivers in the wind by night, then
at last snaps at the stump and crashes down; so Talos for a while stood
on his tireless feet, swaying to and fro, then at last, all
strengthless, fell with a mighty thud. For that night there in Crete the
heroes lay; then, just as dawn was growing bright, they built a shrine
to Minoan Athena, and drew water and went aboard, so that first of all
they might by rowing pass beyond Salmone's height.

But straightway as they sped over the wide Cretan sea night scared them,
that night which they name the Pall of Darkness; the stars pierced not
that fatal night nor the beams of the moon, but black chaos descended
from heaven, or haply some other darkness came, rising from the
nethermost depths. And the heroes, whether they drifted in Hades or on
the waters, knew not one whit; but they committed their return to the
sea in helpless doubt whither it was bearing them. But Jason raised his
hands and cried to Phoebus with mighty voice, calling on him to save
them; and the tears ran down in his distress; and often did he promise
to bring countless offerings to Pytho, to Amyclae, and to Ortygia. And
quickly, O son of Leto, swift to hear, didst thou come down from heaven
to the Melantian rocks, which lie there in the sea. Then darting upon
one of the twin peaks, thou raisedst aloft in thy right hand thy golden
bow; and the bow flashed a dazzling gleam all round. And to their sight
appeared a small island of the Sporades, over against the tiny isle
Hippuris, and there they cast anchor and stayed; and straightway dawn
arose and gave them light; and they made for Apollo a glorious abode in
a shady wood, and a shady altar, calling on Phoebus the "Gleamer,"
because of the gleam far-seen; and that bare island they called
Anaphe,[1] for that Phoebus had revealed it to men sore bewildered. And
they sacrificed all that men could provide for sacrifice on a desolate
strand; wherefore when Medea's Phaeacian handmaids saw them pouring
water for libations on the burning brands, they could no longer restrain
laughter within their bosoms, for that ever they had seen oxen in plenty
slain in the halls of Alcinous. And the heroes delighted in the jest and
attacked them with taunting words; and merry railing and contention
flung to and fro were kindled among them. And from that sport of the
heroes such scoffs do the women fling at the men in that island whenever
they propitiate with sacrifices Apollo the gleaming god, the warder of
Anaphe.

[Footnote 1: i.e. the isle of Revealing.]

But when they had loosed the hawsers thence in fair weather, then
Euphemus bethought him of a dream of the night, reverencing the glorious
son of Maia. For it seemed to him that the god-given clod of earth held
in his palm close to his breast was being suckled by white streams of
milk, and that from it, little though it was, grew a woman like a
virgin; and he, overcome by strong desire, lay with her in love's
embrace; and united with her he pitied her, as though she were a maiden
whom he was feeding with his own milk; but she comforted him with gentle
words:

"Daughter of Triton am I, dear friend, and nurse of thy children, no
maiden; Triton and Libya are my parents. But restore me to the daughters
of Nereus to dwell in the sea near Anaphe; I shall return again to the
light of the sun, to prepare a home for thy descendants."

Of this he stored in his heart the memory, and declared it to Aeson's
son; and Jason pondered a prophecy of the Far-Darter and lifted up his
voice and said:

"My friend, great and glorious renown has fallen to thy lot. For of this
clod when thou hast cast it into the sea, the gods will make an island,
where thy children's children shall dwell; for Triton gave this to thee
as a stranger's gift from the Libyan mainland. None other of the
immortals it was than he that gave thee this when he met thee."

Thus he spake; and Euphemus made not vain the answer of Aeson's son;
but, cheered by the prophecy, he cast the clod into the depths.
Therefrom rose up an island, Calliste, sacred nurse of the sons of
Euphemus, who in former days dwelt in Sintian Lemnos, and from Lemnos
were driven forth by Tyrrhenians and came to Sparta as suppliants; and
when they left Sparta, Theras, the goodly son of Autesion, brought them
to the island Calliste, and from himself he gave it the name of Thera.
But this befell after the days of Euphemus.

And thence they steadily left behind long leagues of sea and stayed on
the beach of Aegina; and at once they contended in innocent strife about
the fetching of water, who first should draw it and reach the ship. For
both their need and the ceaseless breeze urged them on. There even to
this day do the youths of the Myrmidons take up on their shoulders
full-brimming jars, and with swift feet strive for victory in the race.

Be gracious, race of blessed chieftains! And may these songs year after
year be sweeter to sing among men. For now have I come to the glorious
end of your toils; for no adventure befell you as ye came home from
Aegina, and no tempest of winds opposed you; but quietly did ye skirt
the Cecropian land and Aulis inside of Euboea and the Opuntian cities of
the Locrians, and gladly did ye step forth upon the beach of Pagasae.




STEMMA MEDEAE


              Oceanus               ==           Tethys
                 |                                  |
         Helios == Perse                            |
           -----+----------------------------       |
           |         |                      |       |
Minos == Pasiphae  Circe  (1)Asterodeia = Aeetes = Eidyia (2)
      |                                         |
    Ariadne                    -----------------+-----------
                               |        |                  |
                          Apsyrtus  Chalciope = Phrixus  Medea =Jason
                          (Phaethon)           |
                                 --------------+-------------
                                 |         |        |       |
                               Argus  Cytissorus  Melas  Phrontis




INDEX


References to the following names are not given in full on account of
their large number: Aeetes, Aesonides, Colchians, Hellas, Jason, Medea,
Zeus.

Abantes, a people of Epirus, iv, 1214

Abantiades, son of Abas,
  (1) Canethus, I, 78:
  (2) Idmon, II, 815, 824, 857

Abantian, epithet of the island Euboea, IV, 1135

Abarnis, a city of the Troad, I, 932

Abas, reputed father of Idmon, I, 142

Abydos, a city of the Troad, I, 931

Acacallis, a daughter of Minos, IV, 1491

Acastus, son of Pelias, an Argonaut, I, 224, 321, 1041, 1082

Achaean, I, 177:
  put for Greek in general, I, 284; III, 601, 639, 775, 1081; IV, 195,
    1226, 1329, 1419

Acheloides, daughters of Achelous, the Sirens, IV, 893

Achelous, a river of Aetolia, IV, 293, 895
