II. 6, 7 ([Greek: koine philanthropia]), etc., doubtless the
humanitarianism of the Stoics readily united with the [Greek: physei
anthropos politikon zoon] theory of Aristotle. For Cic. cf. _D.F._ III. 66,
_De Leg._ I. 23, for the Stoics, Zeller 293--296. The repetitions
_hominem_, _humani_, _hominibus_, _humana_ are striking. For the last,
Bentley (i.e. Davies' anonymous friend) proposed _mundana_ from _T.D._ V.
108, Varro, however, has _humana societas_ in Aug. XIX. 3. _Cetera autem_:
what are these _cetera?_ They form portion of the [Greek: ektos agatha],
and although not strictly contained within the _summum bonum_ are necessary
to enrich it and preserve it. Of the things enumerated in Stob. II. 6, 8,
13, [Greek: philia, philoi] would belong to the _quaedam_ of Cicero, while
[Greek: ploutos arche eutychia eugeneia dynasteia] would be included in
_cetera_. The same distinction is drawn in Aug. VIII. 8. _Tuendum_: most
MSS. _tenendum_, but _tuendum_ corresponds best with the division of
[Greek: agatha] into [Greek: poietika] and [Greek: phylaktika], Stob. II.
6, 13. For the word _pertinere_ see _M.D.F._ III. 54.

Sec.22. _Plerique_: Antiochus believes it also Academic. _Qui tum
appellarentur_: MSS. _dum_, the subj. is strange, and was felt to be so by
the writer of Halm's G, which has _appellantur_. _Videbatur_: Goer. and
Orelli stumble over this, not perceiving that it has the strong meaning of
the Gr. [Greek: edokei], "it was their dogma," so often. _Adipisci_: cf.
_adeptum esse_, 19. _Quae essent prima natura_: MSS. have _in natura_. For
the various modes of denoting the [Greek: prota kata physin] in Latin see
Madvig's _Fourth Excursus to the D.F._, which the student of Cic.'s
philosophy ought to know by heart. The phrase _prima natura_ (abl.) could
not stand alone, for [Greek: ta prota te physei] is one of Goerenz's
numerous forgeries. The ablative is always conditioned by some verb, see
Madv. A comparison of this statement of the ethical _finis_ with that in 19
and the passages quoted in my note there, will show that Cic. drew little
distinction between the Stoic [Greek: ta prota kata physin] and the
Peripatetic [Greek: trilogia]. That this is historically absurd Madvig
shows in his _Excursus_, but he does not sufficiently recognise the fact
that Cicero has perfectly correctly reported Antiochus. At all events,
Varro's report (Aug. _De Civ. Dei_ XIX. 3) coincides with Cic.'s in every
particular. Even the _inexplicabilis perversitas_ of which Madv. complains
(p. 821) is traceable to Antiochus, who, as will be seen from Augustine
XIX. 1, 3, included even _virtus_ among the _prima naturae_. A little
reflection will show that in no other way could Antiochus have maintained
the practical identity of the Stoic and Peripatetic views of the _finis_. I
regret that my space does not allow me to pursue this difficult subject
farther. For the Stoic [Greek: prota kata physin] see Zeller, chap XI.
_Ipsa per sese expetenda_: Gk. [Greek: haireta], which is applied to all
things contained within the _summum bonum_. As the Stoic _finis_ was
[Greek: arete] only, that alone to them was [Greek: haireton], their
[Greek: prota kata physin] were not [Greek: haireta], (cf. _D.F._ III. 21).
Antiochus' _prima naturae_ were [Greek: haireta] to him, cf. Aug. XIX. 3,
_prima illa naturae propter se ipsa existimat expetenda_ so Stob., II. 6,
7, demonstrates each branch of the [Greek: trilogia] to be [Greek: kath'
hauto haireton]. _Aut omnia aut maxima_: so frequently in Cic., e.g. _D.F._
IV. 27, so Stob. II. 6, 8, [Greek: ta pleista kai kyriotata]. _Ea sunt
maxima_: so Stob., Varro in Aug. _passim_. _Sensit_: much misunderstood by
edd., here = _iudicavit_ not _animadvertit_ cf. _M.D.F._ II. 6.
_Reperiebatur_: for change of constr. cf. _D.F._ IV. 26 _Nec tamen
beatissimam_: the question whether [Greek: arete] was [Greek: autarkes pros
eudaimonian] was one of the most important to the late Greek philosophy. As
to Antiochus, consult _M.D.F._ V. 67.

Sec.23. _Agendi aliquid_: Gk. [Greek: praxeos], the usual translation, cf. II.
24, 37. _Officii ipsius initium_: [Greek: tou kathekontos archen], Stob.
II. 6, 7. This sentence is covertly aimed at the New Academics, whose
scepticism, according to the dogmatists, cut away the ground from action
and duty, see II. 24. _Recti honestique_: these words are redolent of the
Stoa. _Earum rerum_: Halm thinks something like _appetitio_ has fallen out,
_susceptio_ however, above, is quite enough for both clauses; a similar use
of it is found in _D.F._ III. 32. _Descriptione naturae_: Halm with one MS.
(G) gives _praescriptione_, which is in II. 140, cf. also _praescriberet_
above. The phrase is Antiochean; cf. _prima constitutio naturae_ in _D.F._
IV. 15. _Aequitas_: not in the Roman legal sense, but as a translation of
[Greek: epieikeia]. _Eaeque_: so Halm for MSS. _haeque_, _haecque_. Of
course _haecque_, like _hicque_, _sicque_, would be un-Ciceronian.
_Voluptatibus_: a side blow at the Epicureans. _Forma_ see n. on 33.

    Sec.Sec.24--29. Part III of Varro's Exposition. Antiochus' _Physics_.
    Summary. All that is consists of force and matter, which are never
    actually found apart, though they are thought of as separate. When
    force impresses form on the formless matter, it becomes a formed entity
    ([Greek: poion ti] or _quale_)--(24). These formed entities are either
    _primary_ or _secondary_. Air, fire, water, earth are primary, the two
    first having an active, the two last a passive function. Aristotle
    added a fifth (26). Underlying all formed entities is the formless
    matter, matter and space are infinitely subdivisible (27). Force or
    form acts on the formless matter and so produces the ordered universe,
    outside which no matter exists. Reason permeates the universe and makes
    it eternal. This Reason has various names--Soul of the Universe, Mind,
    Wisdom, Providence, Fate, Fortune are only different titles for the
    same thing (28, 29).

Sec.24. _Natura_: this word, it is important to observe, has to serve as a
translation both of [Greek: physis] and [Greek: ousia]. Here it is [Greek:
ousia] in the broadest sense, all that exists. _In res duas_: the
distinction between Force and Matter, the active and passive agencies in
the universe, is of course Aristotelian and Platonic. Antiochus however
probably apprehended the distinction as modified by the Stoics, for this
read carefully Zeller, 135 sq., with the footnotes. The clearest view of
Aristotle's doctrine is to be got from Schwegler, _Handbook_, pp 99--105.
R. and P. 273 sq. should be consulted for the important coincidence of
Force with logical _genus_ ([Greek: eidos]), and of Matter ([Greek: hyle])
with logical _differentia_ ([Greek: diaphora]). For the _duae res_, cf.
_D.F._ I. 18. _Efficiens ... huic se praebens_: an attempt to translate
[Greek: to poioun] and [Greek: to paschon] of the _Theaetetus_, [Greek: to
othen] and [Greek: to dechomenon] of the _Timaeus_ (50 D). Cic. in _Tim._
has _efficere_ and _pati_, Lucretius I. 440 _facere_ and _fungi_. _Ea
quae_: so Gruter, Halm for MSS. _eaque._ The meaning is this; passive
matter when worked upon by an active generative form results in an
_aliquid_, a [Greek: tode ti] as Aristotle calls it. Passive matter [Greek:
hyle] is only potentially [Greek: tode ti], passing into actual [Greek:
tode ti], when affected by the form. (Cf. [Greek: tode, touto], Plato
_Tim._ 49 E, 50 A, also Arist. _Metaph_ H, 1, R. and P. 270--274). A
figurative description of the process is given in _Timaeus_, 50 D. _In eo
quod efficeret ... materiam quandam_: Cic. is hampered by the _patrii
sermonis egestas_, which compels him to render simple Greek terms by
laboured periphrases. _Id quod efficit_ is not distinct from, but
_equivalent_ to _vis_, _id quod efficitur_ to _materia_. _Materiam
quandam_: it is extraordinary how edd. (esp Goer.) could have so stumbled
over _quandam_ and _quasi_ used in this fashion. Both words (which are
joined below) simply mark the unfamiliarity of the Latin word in its
philosophical use, in the Greek [Greek: hyle] the strangeness had had time
to wear off. _In utroque_: for _in eo quod ex utroque_ (sc. _vi et
materia_) _fit_, the meaning is clearly given by the next clause, viz. that
Force and Matter cannot actually exist apart, but only in the compound of
the two, the formed entity, which doctrine is quite Aristotelian. See the
reff. given above. _Nihil enim est quod non alicubi esse cogatur_: the
meaning of this is clear, that nothing can _exist_ except in space
_(alicubi)_, it is more difficult to see why it should be introduced here.
Unless _est_ be taken of merely phenomenal existence (the only existence
the Stoics and Antiochus would allow), the sentence does not represent the
belief of Aristotle and Plato. The [Greek: ideai] for instance, though to
Plato in the highest sense existent, do not exist in space. (Aristotle
explicitly says this, _Phys._ III. 4). Aristotle also recognised much as
existent which did not exist in space, as in _Phys._ IV. 5 (qu. R. and P.
289). Cic. perhaps translates here from _Tim._ 52 B, [Greek: phamen
anankaion einai pou to hon hapan en tini topo]. For ancient theories about
space the student must be referred to the histories of philosophy. A fair
summary is given by Stob. _Phys._ [Greek: peri kenou kai topou kai choras],
ch. XVIII. 1. _Corpus et quasi qualitatem_: note that _corpus_ is _formed_,
as contrasted with _materia_, _unformed_ matter. _Qualitas_ is here wrongly
used for _quale_; it ought to be used of Force only, not of the product of
Force and Matter, cf. 28. The Greeks themselves sometimes confuse [Greek:
poiotes] and [Greek: poion], the confusion is aided by the ambiguity of the
phrase [Greek: to poion] in Greek, which may either denote the [Greek: tode
ti] as [Greek: poion], or the Force which makes it [Greek: poion], hence
Arist. calls one of his categories [Greek: to poion] and [Greek: poiotes]
indifferently For the Stoic view of [Greek: poiotes], see Zeller, 96--103,
with footnotes.

Sec.25. _Bene facis_: _passim_ in comedy, whence Cic. takes it; cf. _D.F._
III. 16, a passage in other respects exceedingly like this. _Rhetoricam_:
Huelsemann conj. _ethicam_, which however is _not_ Latin. The words have no
philosophical significance here, but are simply specimens of words once
foreign, now naturalised. _D.F._ III. 5 is very similar. Cic.'s words make
it clear that these nouns ought to be treated as Latin first declension
nouns; the MSS. often give, however, a Gk. accus. in _en_. _Non est vulgi
verbum_: it first appears in _Theaet._ 182 A, where it is called [Greek:
allokoton onoma]. _Nova ... facienda_: = _imponenda_ in _D.F._ III. 5.
_Suis utuntur_: so _D.F._ III. 4. _Transferenda_: _transferre_ = [Greek:
metapherein], which is technically used as early as Isocrates. See Cic. on
metaphor, _De Or._ III. 153 sq., where _necessitas_ is assigned as one
cause of it (159) just as here; cf. also _De Or._ III. 149. _Saecula_: the
spelling _secula_ is wrong; Corss. I. 325, 377. The diphthong bars the old
derivations from _secare_, and _sequi_. _Quanto id magis_: Cic. is
exceedingly fond of separating _tam quam ita tantus quantus_, etc., from
the words with which they are syntactically connected, by just one small
word, e.g. _Lael._ 53 _quam id recte_, _Acad._ II. 125 _tam sit mirabilis_,
II. 68 _tam in praecipitem_; also _D.F._ III. 5 _quanto id nobis magis est
concedendum qui ea nunc primum audemus attingere_.

Sec.26. _Non modo rerum sed verborum_: cf. 9. _Igitur_ picks up the broken
thread of the exposition; so 35, and frequently. _Principes ... ex his
ortae_: the Greek terms are [Greek: hapla] and [Greek: syntheta], see
Arist. _De Coelo_, I. 2 (R. and P. 294). The distinction puzzled Plutarch
(quoted in R. and P. 382). It was both Aristotelian and Stoic. The Stoics
(Zeller, 187 sq.) followed partly Heraclitus, and cast aside many
refinements of Aristotle which will be found in R. and P. 297. _Quasi
multiformes_: evidently a trans. of [Greek: polyeideis], which is opposed
to [Greek: haplous] in Plat. _Phaedr._ 238 A, and often. Plato uses also
[Greek: monoeides] for _unius modi_; cf. Cic. _Tim._ ch. VII., a transl. of
Plat. _Tim._ 35 A. _Prima sunt_: _primae_ (sc. _qualitates_) is the
needless em. of Walker, followed by Halm. _Formae_ = _genera_, [Greek:
eide]. The word is applied to the four elements themselves, _N.D._ I. 19;
cf. also _quintum genus_ below, and _Topica_, 11--13. A good view of the
history of the doctrine of the four elements may be gained from the section
of Stob. _Phys._, entitled [Greek: peri archon kai stoicheion kai tou
pantos]. It will be there seen that Cic. is wrong in making _initia_ and
_elementa_ here and in 39 ([Greek: archai] and [Greek: stoicheia])
convertible terms. The Greeks would call the four elements [Greek:
stoicheia] but _not_ [Greek: archai], which term would be reserved for the
primary Matter and Force. _Aer et ignis_: this is Stoic but _not_
Aristotelian. Aristot., starting with the four necessary properties of
matter, viz. heat, cold, dryness, moisture, marks the two former as active,
the two latter as passive. He then assigns _two_ of these properties, _one_
active and _one_ passive, to each of the four elements; each therefore is
to him _both_ active and passive. The Stoics assign only _one_ property to
each element; heat to fire, cold to air (cf. _N.D._ II. 26), moisture to
water, dryness to earth. The doctrine of the text follows at once. Cf.
Zeller, pp. 155, 187 sq., with footnotes, R. and P. 297 sq. _Accipiendi ...
patiendi_: [Greek: dechesthai] often comes in Plat. _Tim._ _Quintum genus_:
the note on this, referred to in Introd. p. 16, is postponed to 39.
_Dissimile ... quoddam_: so MSS.; one would expect _quiddam_, which Orelli
gives. _Rebatur_: an old poetical word revived by Cic. _De Or._ III. 153;
cf. Quintil. _Inst. Or._ VIII. 3, 26.

Sec.27. _Subiectam ... materiam_: the [Greek: hypokeimene hyle] of Aristotle,
from which our word subject-matter is descended. _Sine ulla specie_:
_species_ here = _forma_ above, the [Greek: eidos] or [Greek: morphe] of
Arist. _Omnibus_ without _rebus_ is rare. The ambiguity is sometimes
avoided by the immediate succession of a neuter relative pronoun, as in 21
in _quibusdam_, _quae_. _Expressa_: chiselled as by a sculptor (cf.
_expressa effigies_ _De Off_. III. 69); _efficta_, moulded as by a potter
(see II. 77); the word was given by Turnebus for MSS. _effecta_. So Matter
is called an [Greek: ekmageion] in Plat. _Tim._ _Quae tota omnia_: these
words have given rise to needless doubts; Bentl., Dav., Halm suspect them.
_Tota_ is feminine sing.; cf. _materiam totam ipsam_ in 28; "which matter
throughout its whole extent can suffer all changes." For the word _omnia_
cf. II. 118, and Plat. _Tim._ 50 B ([Greek: dechetai gar ei ta panta]), 51
A ([Greek: eidos pandeches]). The word [Greek: pandeches] is also quoted
from Okellus in Stob. I. 20, 3. Binder is certainly wrong in taking _tota_
and _omnia_ both as neut.--"_alles und jedes_." Cic. knew the _Tim._ well
and imitated it here. The student should read Grote's comments on the
passages referred to. I cannot here point out the difference between
Plato's [Greek: hyle] and that of Aristotle. _Eoque interire_: so MSS.;
Halm after Dav. _eaque_. Faber was right in supposing that Cic. has said
loosely of the _materia_ what he ought to have said of the _qualia_. Of
course the [Greek: prote hyle], whether Platonic or Aristotelian, is
imperishable (cf. _Tim._ 52 A. [Greek: phthoran ou prosdechomenon]). _Non
in nihilum_: this is aimed at the Atomists, who maintained that infinite
subdivision logically led to the passing of things into nothing and their
reparation out of nothing again. See Lucr. I. 215--264, and elsewhere.
_Infinite secari_: through the authority of Aristotle, the doctrine of the
infinite subdivisibility of matter had become so thoroughly the orthodox
one that the Atom was scouted as a silly absurdity. Cf. _D.F._ I. 20 _ne
illud quidem physici credere esse minimum_, Arist. _Physica_, I. 1 [Greek:
ouk estin elachiston megethos]. The history of ancient opinion on this
subject is important, but does not lie close enough to our author for
comment. The student should at least learn Plato's opinions from _Tim._ 35
A sq. It is notable that Xenocrates, tripping over the old [Greek:
antiphasis] of the One and the Many, denied [Greek: pan megethos diaireton
einai kai meros echein] (R. and P. 245). Chrysippus followed Aristotle very
closely (R. and P. 377, 378). _Intervallis moveri_: this is the theory of
motion without void which Lucr. I. 370 sq. disproves, where see Munro. Cf.
also Sext. Emp. _Adv. Math._ VII. 214. Aristotle denied the existence of
void either within or without the universe, Strato allowed its possibility
within, while denying its existence without (Stob. I. 18, 1), the Stoics
did the exact opposite affirming its existence without, and denying it
within the universe (Zeller 186, with footnotes). _Quae intervalla ...
possint_: there is no ultimate space atom, just as there is no matter atom.
As regards space, the Stoics and Antiochus closely followed Aristotle,
whose ideas may be gathered from R. and P. 288, 9, and especially from M.
Saint Hilaire's explanation of the _Physica_.

Sec.28. _Ultro citroque_: this is the common reading, but I doubt its
correctness. MSS. have _ultro introque_, whence _ed. Rom._ (1471) has
_ultro in utroque_. I think that _in utroque_, simply, was the reading, and
that _ultro_ is a dittographia from _utro_. The meaning would be "since
force plays this part in the compound," _utroque_ being as in 24 for _eo
quod ex utroque fit_. If the vulg. is kept, translate "since force has this
motion and is ever thus on the move." _Ultro citroque_ is an odd expression
to apply to universal Force, Cic. would have qualified it with a _quasi_.
Indeed if it is kept I suggest _quasi_ for _cum sic_. The use of _versetur_
is also strange. _E quibus in omni natura_: most edd. since Dav. (Halm
included) eject _in_. It is perfectly sound if _natura_ be taken as [Greek:
ousia] = existence substance. The meaning is "out of which _qualia_,
themselves existing in (being co-extensive with) universal substance (cf.
_totam commutari_ above), which is coherent and continuous, the world was
formed." For the _in_ cf. _N.D._ II. 35, _in omni natura necesse est
absolvi aliquid_, also a similar use _ib._ II. 80, and _Ac._ II. 42. If _in
utroque_ be read above, _in omni natura_ will form an exact contrast,
substance as a whole being opposed to the individual _quale_. _Cohaerente
et continuata_: the Stoics made the universe much more of a unity than any
other school, the expressions here and the striking parallels in _N.D._ II.
19, 84, 119, _De Div._ II. 33, _De Leg._ fragm. 1. (at the end of Bait. and
Halm's ed.) all come ultimately from Stoic sources, even if they be got at
second hand through Antiochus. Cf. Zeller 137, Stob. I. 22, 3. The _partes
mundi_ are spoken of in most of the passages just quoted, also in _N.D._
II. 22, 28, 30, 32, 75, 86, 115, 116, all from Stoic sources. _Effectum
esse mundum_: Halm adds _unum_ from his favourite MS. (G). _Natura
sentiente_: a clumsy trans. of [Greek: aisthete ousia] = substance which
can affect the senses. The same expression is in _N.D._ II. 75. It should
not be forgotten, however, that to the Stoics the universe was itself
sentient, cf. _N.D._ II. 22, 47, 87. _Teneantur_: for _contineantur_; cf.
_N.D._ II. 29 with II. 31 _In qua ratio perfecta insit_: this is thorough
going Stoicism. Reason, God, Matter, Universe, are interchangeable terms
with the Stoics. See Zeller 145--150 By an inevitable inconsistency, while
believing that Reason _is_ the Universe, they sometimes speak of it as
being _in_ the Universe, as here (cf. Diog. Laert. VII. 138, _N.D._ II. 34)
In a curious passage (_N.D._ I. 33), Cic. charges Aristotle with the same
inconsistency. For the Pantheistic idea cf. Pope "lives through all life,
extends through all extent". _Sempiterna_: Aristotle held this: see II. 119
and _N.D._ II. 118, Stob. I. 21, 6. The Stoics while believing that our
world would be destroyed by fire (Diog. Laert. VII. 141, R. and P. 378,
Stob. I. 20, 1) regarded the destruction as merely an absorption into the
Universal World God, who will recreate the world out of himself, since he
is beyond the reach of harm (Diog. Laert. VII. 147, R. and P. 386, Zeller
159) Some Stoics however denied the [Greek: ekpyrosis]. _Nihil enim
valentius_: this is an argument often urged, as in _N.D._ II. 31 (_quid
potest esse mundo valentius?_), Boethus quoted in Zeller 159. _A quo
intereat_: _interire_ here replaces the passive of _perdere_ cf. [Greek:
anastenai, ekpiptein hypo tinos].

Sec.29. _Quam vim animum_: there is no need to read _animam_, as some edd. do.
The Stoics give their World God, according to his different attributes, the
names God, Soul, Reason, Providence, Fate, Fortune, Universal Substance,
Fire, Ether, All pervading Air-Current, etc. See Zeller, ch. VI. _passim_.
Nearly all these names occur in _N.D._ II. The whole of this section is
undilutedly Stoic, one can only marvel how Antiochus contrived to fit it
all in with the known opinions of old Academics and Peripatetics.
_Sapientiam_: cf. _N.D._ II. 36 with III. 23, in which latter passage the
Stoic opinion is severely criticised. _Deum_: Cic. in _N.D._ I. 30 remarks
that Plato in his _Timaeus_ had already made the _mundus_ a God. _Quasi
prudentium quandam_: the Greek [Greek: pronoia] is translated both by
_prudentia_ and _providentia_ in the same passage, _N.D._ II. 58, also in
_N.D._ II. 77--80. _Procurantem ... quae pertinent ad homines_: the World
God is perfectly beneficent, see _Ac._ II. 120, _N.D._ I. 23, II. 160
(where there is a quaint jest on the subject), Zeller 167 sq.
_Necessitatem_: [Greek: ananken], which is [Greek: eirmos aition],
_causarum series sempiterna_ (_De Fato_ 20, cf. _N.D._ I. 55, _De Div._ I.
125, 127, Diog. VII. 149, and Zeller as before). This is merely the World
God apprehended as regulating the orderly sequence of cause upon cause.
When the World God is called Fortune, all that is expressed is human
inability to see this orderly sequence. [Greek: Tuche] therefore is defined
as [Greek: aitia adelos anthropinoi logismoi] (Stob. I. 7, 9, where the
same definition is ascribed to Anaxagoras--see also _Topica_, 58--66). This
identification of Fate with Fortune (which sadly puzzles Faber and excites
his wrath) seems to have first been brought prominently forward by
Heraclitus, if we may trust Stob. I. 5, 15. _Nihil aliter possit_: on
_posse_ for _posse fieri_ see _M.D.F._ IV. 48, also _Ac._ II. 121. For the
sense of Cleanthes' hymn to Zeus (i.e. the Stoic World-God), [Greek: oude
ti gignetai ergon epi chthoni sou dicha daimon]. _Inter quasi fatalem_: a
trans. of the Gk. [Greek: katenankasmenon]. I see no reason for suspecting
_inter_, as Halm does. _Ignorationemque causarum_: the same words in _De
Div._ II. 49; cf. also August. _Contra Academicos_ I. 1. In addition to
studying the reff. given above, the student might with advantage read
Aristotle's _Physica_ II. ch. 4--6, with M. Saint Hilaire's explanation,
for the views of Aristotle about [Greek: tyche] and [Greek: to automaton],
