friends, and repelled rather than attracted by a studiously impressive
demeanor, a painful decorousness, and an unbending dignity, which was,
of course, no true dignity at all, but merely a bad imitation of it. In
a word, he lacked the saving sense of humor--the quality which endeared
Abraham Lincoln to the whole nation.

Another Ohioan who loomed large in the history of the time was John
Sherman, a lawyer like all the rest, a member of Congress since 1855,
not at first a great opponent of slavery, but drawn into the battle by
his allegiance to the Republican party, forming an alliance with
Thaddeus Stevens, and collaborating with him in the production of the
reconstruction act. He was appointed secretary of the treasury by
President Hayes, in 1876, and his great work for the country was done in
that office, in re-establishing the credit which the Civil War had
shaken. He, also, was bitten by the presidential bacillus, and was a
candidate for the nomination at three conventions, but each time fell
short of the goal--once when he had it seemingly within his grasp. A
stern, forceful, capable man, he left his impress upon the times.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of the men who guided the fortunes of the Confederacy, only two need be
mentioned here--Jefferson Davis and Alexander H. Stephens; for, rich as
the Confederacy was in generals, it was undeniably poor in statesmen.
The golden age of the South had departed; with John C. Calhoun passed
away the last really commanding figure among Dixie's statesmen, and from
him to Jefferson Davis is a long step downward.

Davis's early life was romantic enough. Born in 1808 in Kentucky, of a
father who had served in the Revolution, appointed to the National
Military Academy by President Monroe; graduating there in 1828 and
serving through the Black Hawk war; then abruptly resigning from the
army to elope with the daughter of Colonel Zachary Taylor, and settling
near Vicksburg, Mississippi, to embark in cotton planting; drawn
irresistibly into politics and sent to Congress, but resigning to accept
command of the First Mississippi Rifles and serving with great
distinction through the war with Mexico; and, finally, in 1847, sent to
the Senate--such was Davis's history up to the time he became involved
in the maelstrom of the slavery question.

From the first, he was an ardent advocate of the state-rights theory of
government, and the right of secession, and for thirteen years he
defended these theories in the Senate, gradually emerging as the most
capable advocate the South possessed. That fiery and impulsive people,
looking always for a hero to worship, found one in Jefferson Davis, and
he soon gained an immense prestige among them. On January 9, 1861, his
state seceded from the Union, and he withdrew from the Senate. Before he
reached home, he was elected commander-in-chief of the Army of the
Mississippi, and a few days later, he was chosen President of the
Confederate States.

From the first, his task was a difficult one, and it grew increasingly
so as the war went on. That he performed it well, there can be no
question. He was the government, was practically dictator, for he
dominated the Confederate Congress absolutely, and its principal
business was to pass the laws which he prepared. Only toward the close
of the war did it, in a measure, free itself from this control, and,
finally, in 1865, it passed a resolution attributing Confederate
disaster to Davis's incompetency as commander-in-chief, a position which
he had insisted on occupying; removing him from that position and
conferring it upon General Lee, giving the latter, at the same time,
unlimited powers in disposing of the army.

But it was too late. Even Lee himself could not ward off the inevitable.
On the morning of Sunday, April 2, 1865, Jefferson Davis sat in his pew
at church in the city of Richmond, when an officer handed him a
telegram. It was from Lee, and read, "Richmond must be evacuated this
evening," Lee had fought and lost the battle of Petersburg, and was in
full retreat. Davis left the church quietly, called his cabinet
together, packed up the government archives, and boarded a train for the
South. For over a month, he moved from place to place endeavoring to
escape capture, his party melting away until it comprised only his
family and a few servants; and finally, on May 9th, he was surprised and
taken by a company of Union cavalry near Irwinsville, in southern
Georgia. Davis was imprisoned at Fortress Monroe for two years--a
thoroughly senseless procedure which only served to keep open a painful
wound--and on Christmas Day, 1868, was pardoned by President Johnson.

Davis's imprisonment had added immensely to his prestige. The South
forgot his blunders and short-comings, seeing in him only the martyr who
had suffered for his people, and welcomed him with a kind of hysterical
adoration, which lasted until his death. The last years of his life were
passed quietly on his estate in Mississippi.

When Davis was chosen President of the Confederacy, Alexander H.
Stephens was chosen Vice-President. Stephens had also had a picturesque
career. Left an orphan, without means, at the age of fifteen he had
nevertheless secured an education, and, in 1834, after two months'
study, was admitted to the Georgia bar. He at once began to win a more
than local reputation, for he was a man of unusual ability, and in 1836,
he was elected to the Legislature, though an avowed opponent of
nullification.

Seven years later, he was sent to Congress, and continued to oppose the
secession movement; but he saw whither things were trending, and in 1859
he resigned from Congress, remarking that he knew there was going to be
a smash-up and thought he would better get off while there was time. In
1860 he made a great Union speech; and it is a remarkable proof of the
hold he had upon the people of the South, that, in spite of this, and of
his well-known convictions, he was chosen Vice-President of the
Confederacy a year later. He accepted, but within a year he had
quarrelled with Jefferson Davis on the question of state rights, and in
1864, organized the Georgia Peace party. From that time on to the close
of the war, he labored to bring about a treaty of peace, but in vain.

He was imprisoned for a few months after the downfall of the
Confederacy, but was soon released and was prominent in the political
life of Georgia for fifteen years thereafter, being governor of the
state at the time of his death in 1883. A more contradictory, obstinate,
prickly-conscienced man never appeared in American politics.

       *       *       *       *       *

So passed the era of the Civil War. Have we had any great statesmen
since? Some near-great ones, perhaps, but none of the very first rank.
Great men are moulded by great events, or, at least, require great
events to prove their greatness. Let us pause a moment, however, to pay
tribute to one of the most accomplished party leaders in American
history--a man almost to rank with Henry Clay--James G. Blaine.

As a young editor from Maine, he had entered Congress in 1863. There he
had encountered another fiery youngster in Roscoe Conkling, and an
intense rivalry sprang up between them. They were very different in
temperament, Blaine being the more popular, Conkling the more brilliant.
Blaine had a genius for making friends and keeping them; Conkling's
quick temper and hasty tongue frequently cost him his most powerful
adherents. Three years later, this rivalry came to an open clash, in
which each denounced the other on the floor of the House in words as
stinging as parliamentary law permitted. Blaine's tirade was so bitter
that Conkling became an implacable enemy and never again spoke to him.
It was almost the story of Hamilton and Burr over again, except that the
age of duelling had passed.

That quarrel on the floor of the House was to have momentous
consequences. Blaine became speaker of the House and the most popular
and powerful man in his party, so that it seemed that nothing could
stand between him and the desire for the presidency which gnawed at his
heart, just as it had at Henry Clay's. But always in the way stood
Conkling.

In 1876, at Cincinnati, Blaine was nominated by Robert G. Ingersoll in
one of the most eloquent addresses ever delivered on the floor of a
national convention, and on the first ballot fell only a few votes short
of a majority. But his enemies were at work, and on the seventh ballot,
succeeded in stampeding the convention to Rutherford B. Hayes. Hayes,
however, was pledged to a single term, and Blaine was hailed as the
nominee in 1880; but when the convention assembled, there was Conkling
with a solid phalanx of over three hundred delegates for Grant. The
result was that neither Blaine nor Grant could get a majority of the
votes, and the nomination fell to Garfield. Finally, by tireless work,
Blaine laid his plans so well that he secured the nomination four years
later, only to have New York State thrown against him by Conkling and to
go down to defeat. Conkling had his revenge, and Blaine's career was
practically at an end, for he was an old and broken man.

Let us add frankly that there were many within his own party who
mistrusted him--who believed him insincere, if not actually dishonest,
and refused to support him. For a fourth time, in 1892, he attempted to
get the nomination, but his name had lost its wizardry, and he was
defeated by Benjamin Harrison. There are few more pitiful stories in
American politics than that of this brilliant and able man, consumed by
the desire for a great prize which seemed always within his grasp and
yet which always eluded him. For a quarter of a century, he chased this
will-o'-the-wisp, only to be led by it into a bog and left to perish
there.

There are a few names on the later pages of American statesmanship which
stand for notable achievement, more especially in the line of diplomacy,
the two greatest of which are those of John Hay and Elihu Root. Both of
these men, as secretary of state, did memorable work; not the sort of
work which appeals to popular imagination, for there was nothing
spectacular about it; but quiet and effective work in the forming of
informal alliances and treaties with foreign nations, maintaining
America's position as a world power, and making her the friend of all
the world. That is the position she should occupy, since she has no
quarrel with any one; and it is with its maintenance that the
statesmanship of the present day is principally concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

So we close this chapter on American Statesmen. It is a tragic
chapter--tragic because of thwarted ambitions, and unfulfilled desires.
Of them all, Benjamin Franklin was the only one whose life was from
first to last happy and contented, who realized his ideals and who died
in peace; and this, I think, because he asked nothing for himself,
hungered for no preferment, was consumed by no ambition, sacrificed
nothing to expediency, but accepted life with large philosophy and
never-failing humor, realizing that in serving others he was best
serving himself, and whose inward peace was manifest in his placid and
smiling countenance. Upon the rocks of ambition the greatest of those
who followed him dashed themselves to pieces.




SUMMARY


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN. Born at Boston, January 17, 1706; established the
_Pennsylvania Gazette_, 1729; founded Philadelphia library, 1731; began
publication of "Poor Richard's Almanac," 1732; postmaster of
Philadelphia, 1737; founded American Philosophical Society and
University of Pennsylvania, 1743; demonstrated by means of a kite that
lightning is a discharge of electricity, 1752; deputy postmaster-general
for British colonies in America, 1753-74; colonial agent for
Pennsylvania in England, 1757-75; elected to second Continental
Congress, 1775; ambassador to France, 1776-85; negotiated treaty with
France, February 6, 1778; concluded treaty of peace with England, in
conjunction with Jay and Adams, September 3, 1783; returned to America,
1785; President of Pennsylvania, 1785-88; delegate to Constitutional
Convention, 1787; died at Philadelphia, April 17, 1790.

ADAMS, SAMUEL. Born at Boston, September 27, 1722; delegate to first and
second Continental Congress, 1775-76; lieutenant-governor of
Massachusetts, 1789-94; governor of Massachusetts, 1794-97; died at
Boston, October 2, 1803.

HANCOCK, JOHN. Born at Quincy, Massachusetts, January 12, 1837;
President of the Provincial Congress, 1774-75; President of Continental
Congress, 1775-77; governor of Massachusetts, 1780-85 and 1787-93; died
at Quincy, October 8, 1793.

HENRY, PATRICK. Born at Studley, Hanover County, Virginia, May 20, 1736;
admitted to the bar, 1760; entered Virginia House of Burgesses, 1765;
member of Continental Congress, 1774; of Virginia Convention, 1775;
governor of Virginia, 1776-79 and 1784-86; died at Red Hill, Charlotte
County, Virginia, June 6, 1799.

HAMILTON, ALEXANDER. Born in the island of Nevis, West Indies, January
11, 1757; settled in New York, 1772; entered Continental service as
captain of artillery, 1776; on Washington's staff, 1777-81; member of
Continental Congress, 1782-83; of the Constitutional Convention, 1787;
secretary of the treasury, 1789-95; appointed commander-in-chief of the
army, 1799; mortally wounded in a duel with Aaron Burr, July 11, 1804,
and died the following day.

BURR, AARON. Born at Newark, New Jersey, February 6, 1756; served with
distinction in the Canada expedition in 1775 and at Monmouth in 1778;
began practice of law in New York, 1783; United States senator, 1791-97;
Vice-President, 1801-05; killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel, July 11,
1804; in 1805, conceived plan of conquering Texas and perhaps Mexico and
establishing a great empire in the South-west; arrested in Mississippi
Territory, January 14, 1807; indicted for treason at Richmond,
Virginia, May 22, and acquitted, September 1, 1807; died at Port
Richmond, Staten Island, September 14, 1836.

MARSHALL, JOHN. Born in Fauquier County, Virginia, September 24, 1755;
served in the Revolution; United States envoy to France, 1797-98; member
of Congress, 1799-1800; secretary of state, 1800-01; chief justice of
the United States Supreme Court, 1801-35; died at Philadelphia, July 6,
1835.

CLAY, HENRY. Born in Hanover County, near Richmond, Virginia, April 12,
1777; United States senator from Kentucky, 1806-07 and 1809-11; member
of Congress, 1811-21 and 1823-25; peace commissioner at Ghent, 1814;
candidate for President, 1824; secretary of state, 1825-29; senator,
1832-42 and 1849-52; Whig candidate for President, 1832 and 1844; chief
designer of the "Missouri Compromise" of 1820, of the compromise of
1850, and of the compromise tariff of 1832-33; died at Washington, June
29, 1852.

WEBSTER, DANIEL. Born at Salisbury, now Franklin, New Hampshire, January
18, 1782; graduated at Dartmouth College, 1801; admitted to the bar at
Boston, 1805; Federalist member of Congress from New Hampshire, 1813-17;
removed to Boston, 1816; member of Congress from Massachusetts, 1823-27;
Whig United States senator, 1827-41; received several electoral votes
for President, 1836, and unsuccessful candidate for Whig nomination
until death; secretary of state, 1841-43; senator, 1845-50; secretary of
state, 1850-52; died at Marshfield, Massachusetts, October 24, 1852.

CALHOUN, JOHN CALDWELL. Born in Abbeville District, South Carolina,
March 18, 1782; graduated at Yale, 1804; admitted to the bar, 1807;
member of the South Carolina general assembly, 1808-09; member of
Congress, 1811-17; secretary of war in Monroe's cabinet, 1817-24;
Vice-President, 1825-32; United States senator, 1832-43; secretary of
state under Tyler, 1844-45; re-elected to the Senate of which he
remained a member until his death, at Washington, March 31, 1850.

BENTON, THOMAS HART. Born at Hillsborough, North Carolina, March 14,
1782; United States senator from Missouri, 1821-51; member of Congress,
1853-55; died at Washington, April 10, 1858.

CASS, LEWIS. Born at Exeter, New Hampshire, October 9, 1782; served in
the second war with England; governor of Michigan Territory, 1813-31;
secretary of war, 1831-36; minister to France, 1836-42; United States
senator, 1845-48; Democratic candidate for President, 1848; senator,
1849-57; secretary of state, 1857-60; died at Detroit, Michigan, June
17, 1866.

DOUGLAS, STEPHEN ARNOLD. Born at Brandon, Vermont, April 23, 1813; judge
of the Supreme Court of Illinois, 1841; member of Congress, 1843-47;
United States senator, 1847-61; Democratic candidate for President,
1860; died at Chicago, June 3, 1861.

EVERETT, EDWARD. Born at Dorchester, Massachusetts, April 11, 1794;
professor of Greek at Harvard, 1819-25; editor the _North American
Review_, 1819-24; member of Congress, 1825-35; governor of
Massachusetts, 1836-40; minister to England, 1841-45; president of
Harvard College, 1846-49; secretary of state, 1852-53; senator, 1853-54;
candidate of Constitutional Union party for Vice-President, 1860; died
at Boston, January 15, 1865.

STEVENS, THADDEUS. Born in Caledonia County, Vermont, April 4, 1792;
graduated at Dartmouth College, 1814; removed to Gettysburg,
Pennsylvania, and admitted to the bar, 1816; Whig member of Congress,
1849-53; Republican member of Congress, 1859-68; proposed impeachment of
President Johnson, 1868; died at Washington, April 11, 1868.

SUMNER, CHARLES. Born at Boston, January 6, 1811; graduated at Harvard,
1830; admitted to the bar, 1834; United States senator, 1851-74;
assaulted in Senate chamber by Preston Brooks, May 22, 1856; chairman of
committee on foreign affairs, 1861-71; died at Washington, March 11,
1874.

SEWARD, WILLIAM HENRY. Born at Florida, Orange County, New York, May 16,
1801; graduated at Union College, 1820; admitted to the bar, 1822;
member State Senate, 1830-34; Whig governor of New York, 1838-43; United
States senator, 1849-61; candidate for Republican nomination for
President, 1860; secretary of state, 1861-69; died at Auburn, New York,
October 10, 1872.

CHASE, SALMON PORTLAND. Born at Cornish, New Hampshire, January 13,
1808; United States senator from Ohio, 1849-55; governor of Ohio,
1856-60; secretary of the treasury, 1861-64; chief justice of the
Supreme Court, 1864-73; died at New York City, May 7, 1873.

SHERMAN, JOHN. Born at Lancaster, Ohio, May 10, 1823; admitted to the
bar, 1844; Republican member of Congress from Ohio, 1855-61; senator,
1861-77; secretary of the treasury, 1877-81; senator, 1881-97;
secretary of state, 1897-98; candidate for presidential nomination in
1884 and 1888; died at Washington, October 22, 1900.

DAVIS, JEFFERSON. Born in Christian County, Kentucky, June 3, 1808;
graduated at West Point, 1828; Democratic member of Congress from
Mississippi, 1845-46; served in Mexican war, 1846-47; United States
senator, 1847-51; secretary of war, 1853-57; senator, 1857-61; resigned
his seat, January 21, 1861; inaugurated President of the Confederacy,
February 22, 1862; arrested near Irwinsville, Georgia, May 10, 1865;
imprisoned at Fortress Monroe, Virginia, 1865-67; amnestied, 1868; died
at New Orleans, December 6, 1889.

STEPHENS, ALEXANDER HAMILTON. Born near Crawfordville, Georgia, February
11, 1812; graduated at University of Georgia, 1832; member of State
legislature, 1836; member of Congress, 1843-59; Vice-President of the
Confederacy, 1861-65; imprisoned in Fort Warren, Boston harbor,
May-October, 1865; member of Congress, 1873-82; governor of Georgia,
1883; died at Atlanta, Georgia, March 4, 1883.

BLAINE, JAMES GILLESPIE. Born at West Brownsville, Pennsylvania, January
31, 1830; member of Congress from Maine, 1862-76; senator, 1876-81;
secretary of state, 1881 and 1889-92; unsuccessful candidate of
