several parties of horsemen and footmen also about, in pursuit of three
companies of men armed, as they said, with muskets, who were broke out
from London and had the plague upon them, and that were not only
spreading the distemper among the people, but plundering the country.

As they saw now the consequence of their case, they soon saw the danger
they were in: so they resolved, by the advice also of the old soldier,
to divide themselves again. John and his two comrades, with the horse,
went away as if towards Waltham,[200]--the other in two companies, but
all a little asunder,--and went towards Epping.[200]

The first night they encamped all in the forest, and not far off from
one another, but not setting up the tent for fear that should discover
them. On the other hand, Richard went to work with his ax and his
hatchet, and, cutting down branches of trees, he built three tents or
hovels, in which they all encamped with as much convenience as they
could expect.

The provisions they had at Walthamstow served them very plentifully this
night; and as for the next, they left it to Providence. They had fared
so well with the old soldier's conduct, that they now willingly made him
their leader, and the first of his conduct appeared to be very good. He
told them that they were now at a proper distance enough from London;
that, as they need not be immediately beholden to the country for
relief, they ought to be as careful the country did not infect them as
that they did not infect the country; that what little money they had
they must be as frugal of as they could; that as he would not have them
think of offering the country any violence, so they must endeavor to
make the sense of their condition go as far with the country as it
could. They all referred themselves to his direction: so they left their
three houses standing, and the next day went away towards Epping; the
captain also (for so they now called him), and his two fellow travelers,
laid aside their design of going to Waltham, and all went together.

When they came near Epping, they halted, choosing out a proper place in
the open forest, not very near the highway, but not far out of it, on
the north side, under a little cluster of low pollard trees.[201] Here
they pitched their little camp, which consisted of three large tents or
huts made of poles, which their carpenter, and such as were his
assistants, cut down, and fixed in the ground in a circle, binding all
the small ends together at the top, and thickening the sides with boughs
of trees and bushes, so that they were completely close and warm. They
had besides this a little tent where the women lay by themselves, and a
hut to put the horse in.

It happened that the next day, or the next but one, was market day at
Epping, when Captain John and one of the other men went to market and
bought some provisions, that is to say, bread, and some mutton and beef;
and two of the women went separately, as if they had not belonged to the
rest, and bought more. John took the horse to bring it home, and the
sack which the carpenter carried his tools in, to put it in. The
carpenter went to work and made them benches and stools to sit on, such
as the wood he could get would afford, and a kind of a table to dine on.

They were taken no notice of for two or three days; but after that,
abundance of people ran out of the town to look at them, and all the
country was alarmed about them. The people at first seemed afraid to
come near them; and, on the other hand, they desired the people to keep
off, for there was a rumor that the plague was at Waltham, and that it
had been in Epping two or three days. So John called out to them not to
come to them. "For," says he, "we are all whole and sound people here,
and we would not have you bring the plague among us, nor pretend we
brought it among you."

After this, the parish officers came up to them, and parleyed with them
at a distance, and desired to know who they were, and by what authority
they pretended to fix their stand at that place. John answered very
frankly, they were poor distressed people from London, who, foreseeing
the misery they should be reduced to if the plague spread into the city,
had fled out in time for their lives, and, having no acquaintance or
relations to fly to, had first taken up at Islington, but, the plague
being come into that town, were fled farther; and, as they supposed that
the people of Epping might have refused them coming into their town,
they had pitched their tents thus in the open field and in the forest,
being willing to bear all the hardships of such a disconsolate lodging
rather than have any one think, or be afraid, that they should receive
injury by them.

At first the Epping people talked roughly to them, and told them they
must remove; that this was no place for them; and that they pretended to
be sound and well, but that they might be infected with the plague, for
aught they knew, and might infect the whole country, and they could not
suffer them there.

John argued very calmly with them a great while, and told them that
London was the place by which they, that is, the townsmen of Epping, and
all the country round them, subsisted; to whom they sold the produce of
their lands, and out of whom they made the rents of their farms; and to
be so cruel to the inhabitants of London, or to any of those by whom
they gained so much, was very hard; and they would be loath to have it
remembered hereafter, and have it told, how barbarous, how inhospitable,
and how unkind they were to the people of London when they fled from the
face of the most terrible enemy in the world; that it would be enough to
make the name of an Epping man hateful throughout all the city, and to
have the rabble stone them in the very streets whenever they came so
much as to market; that they were not yet secure from being visited
themselves, and that, as he heard, Waltham was already; that they would
think it very hard, that, when any of them fled for fear before they
were touched, they should be denied the liberty of lying so much as in
the open fields.

The Epping men told them again that they, indeed, said they were sound,
and free from the infection, but that they had no assurance of it; and
that it was reported that there had been a great rabble of people at
Walthamstow, who made such pretenses of being sound as they did, but
that they threatened to plunder the town, and force their way, whether
the parish officers would or no; that there were near two hundred of
them, and had arms and tents like Low Country soldiers; that they
extorted provisions from the town by threatening them with living upon
them at free quarter,[202] showing their arms, and talking in the
language of soldiers; and that several of them having gone away towards
Rumford and Brentwood, the country had been infected by them, and the
plague spread into both those large towns, so that the people durst not
go to market there, as usual; that it was very likely they were some of
that party, and, if so, they deserved to be sent to the county jail, and
be secured till they had made satisfaction for the damage they had done,
and for the terror and fright they had put the country into.

John answered, that what other people had done was nothing to them; that
they assured them they were all of one company; that they had never been
more in number than they saw them at that time (which, by the way, was
very true); that they came out in two separate companies, but joined by
the way, their cases being the same; that they were ready to give what
account of themselves anybody desired of them, and to give in their
names and places of abode, that so they might be called to an account
for any disorder that they might be guilty of; that the townsmen might
see they were content to live hardly, and only desired a little room to
breathe in on the forest, where it was wholesome (for where it was not,
they could not stay, and would decamp if they found it otherwise there).

"But," said the townsmen, "we have a great charge of poor upon our hands
already, and we must take care not to increase it. We suppose you can
give us no security against your being chargeable to our parish and to
the inhabitants, any more than you can of being dangerous to us as to
the infection."

"Why, look you," says John, "as to being chargeable to you, we hope we
shall not. If you will relieve us with provisions for our present
necessity, we will be very thankful. As we all lived without charity
when we were at home, so we will oblige ourselves fully to repay you, if
God please to bring us back to our own families and houses in safety,
and to restore health to the people of London.

"As to our dying here, we assure you, if any of us die, we that survive
will bury them, and put you to no expense, except it should be that we
should all die, and then, indeed, the last man, not being able to bury
himself, would put you to that single expense; which I am persuaded,"
says John, "he would leave enough behind him to pay you for the expense
of.

"On the other hand," says John, "if you will shut up all bowels of
compassion, and not relieve us at all, we shall not extort anything by
violence, or steal from any one; but when that little we have is spent,
if we perish for want, God's will be done!"

John wrought so upon the townsmen by talking thus rationally and
smoothly to them, that they went away; and though they did not give any
consent to their staying there, yet they did not molest them, and the
poor people continued there three or four days longer without any
disturbance. In this time they had got some remote acquaintance with a
victualing house on the outskirts of the town, to whom they called at a
distance to bring some little things that they wanted, and which they
caused to be set down at some distance, and always paid for very
honestly.

During this time the younger people of the town came frequently pretty
near them, and would stand and look at them, and would sometimes talk
with them at some space between; and particularly it was observed that
the first sabbath day the poor people kept retired, worshiped God
together, and were heard to sing psalms.

These things, and a quiet, inoffensive behavior, began to get them the
good opinion of the country, and the people began to pity them and speak
very well of them; the consequence of which was, that upon the occasion
of a very wet, rainy night, a certain gentleman who lived in the
neighborhood sent them a little cart with twelve trusses or bundles of
straw, as well for them to lodge upon as to cover and thatch their huts,
and to keep them dry. The minister of a parish not far off, not knowing
of the other, sent them also about two bushels of wheat and half a
bushel of white pease.

They were very thankful, to be sure, for this relief, and particularly
the straw was a very great comfort to them; for though the ingenious
carpenter had made them frames to lie in, like troughs, and filled them
with leaves of trees and such things as they could get, and had cut all
their tent cloth out to make coverlids, yet they lay damp and hard and
unwholesome till this straw came, which was to them like feather beds,
and, as John said, more welcome than feather beds would have been at
another time.

This gentleman and the minister having thus begun, and given an example
of charity to these wanderers, others quickly followed; and they
received every day some benevolence or other from the people, but
chiefly from the gentlemen who dwelt in the country round about. Some
sent them chairs, stools, tables, and such household things as they gave
notice they wanted. Some sent them blankets, rugs, and coverlids; some,
earthenware; and some, kitchen ware for ordering[203] their food.

Encouraged by this good usage, their carpenter, in a few days, built
them a large shed or house with rafters, and a roof in form, and an
upper floor, in which they lodged warm, for the weather began to be damp
and cold in the beginning of September; but this house being very well
thatched, and the sides and roof very thick, kept out the cold well
enough. He made also an earthen wall at one end, with a chimney in it;
and another of the company, with a vast deal of trouble and pains, made
a funnel to the chimney to carry out the smoke.

Here they lived comfortably, though coarsely, till the beginning of
September, when they had the bad news to hear, whether true or not, that
the plague, which was very hot at Waltham Abbey on the one side, and
Rumford and Brentwood on the other side, was also come to Epping, to
Woodford, and to most of the towns upon the forest; and which, as they
said, was brought down among them chiefly by the higglers,[204] and such
people as went to and from London with provisions.

If this was true, it was an evident contradiction to the report which
was afterwards spread all over England, but which, as I have said, I
cannot confirm of my own knowledge, namely, that the market people
carrying provisions to the city never got the infection or carried it
back into the country; both which, I have been assured, has been[205]
false.

It might be that they were preserved even beyond expectation, though not
to a miracle;[206] that abundance went and came and were not touched;
and that was much encouragement for the poor people of London, who had
been completely miserable if the people that brought provisions to the
markets had not been many times wonderfully preserved, or at least more
preserved than could be reasonably expected.

But these new inmates began to be disturbed more effectually, for the
towns about them were really infected. And they began to be afraid to
trust one another so much as to go abroad for such things as they
wanted; and this pinched them very hard, for now they had little or
nothing but what the charitable gentlemen of the country supplied them
with. But, for their encouragement, it happened that other gentlemen of
the country, who had not sent them anything before, began to hear of
them and supply them. And one sent them a large pig, that is to say, a
porker; another, two sheep; and another sent them a calf: in short, they
had meat enough, and sometimes had cheese and milk, and such things.
They were chiefly put to it[207] for bread; for when the gentlemen sent
them corn, they had nowhere to bake it or to grind it. This made them
eat the first two bushels of wheat that was sent them, in parched corn,
as the Israelites of old did, without grinding or making bread of
it.[208]

At last they found means to carry their corn to a windmill near
Woodford, where they had it ground; and afterwards the biscuit baker
made a hearth so hollow and dry, that he could bake biscuit cakes
tolerably well, and thus they came into a condition to live without any
assistance or supplies from the towns. And it was well they did; for the
country was soon after fully infected, and about a hundred and twenty
were said to have died of the distemper in the villages near them, which
was a terrible thing to them.

On this they called a new council, and now the towns had no need to be
afraid they should settle near them; but, on the contrary, several
families of the poorer sort of the inhabitants quitted their houses, and
built huts in the forest, after the same manner as they had done. But it
was observed that several of these poor people that had so removed had
the sickness even in their huts or booths, the reason of which was
plain: namely, not because they removed into the air, but[209] because
they did not remove time[210] enough, that is to say, not till, by
openly conversing with other people, their neighbors, they had the
distemper upon them (or, as may be said, among them), and so carried it
about with them whither they went; or (2) because they were not careful
enough, after they were safely removed out of the towns, not to come in
again and mingle with the diseased people.

But be it which of these it will, when our travelers began to perceive
that the plague was not only in the towns, but even in the tents and
huts on the forest near them, they began then not only to be afraid, but
to think of decamping and removing; for, had they staid, they would have
been in manifest danger of their lives.

It is not to be wondered that they were greatly afflicted at being
obliged to quit the place where they had been so kindly received, and
where they had been treated with so much humanity and charity; but
necessity, and the hazard of life which they came out so far to
preserve, prevailed with them, and they saw no remedy. John, however,
thought of a remedy for their present misfortune; namely, that he would
first acquaint that gentleman who was their principal benefactor with
the distress they were in, and to[211] crave his assistance and advice.

This good charitable gentleman encouraged them to quit the place, for
fear they should be cut off from any retreat at all by the violence of
the distemper; but whither they should go, that he found very hard to
direct them to. At last John asked of him, whether he, being a justice
of the peace, would give them certificates of health to other justices
who[212] they might come before, that so, whatever might be their lot,
they might not be repulsed, now they had been also so long from London.
This his worship immediately granted, and gave them proper letters of
health; and from thence they were at liberty to travel whither they
pleased.

Accordingly they had a full certificate of health, intimating that they
had resided in a village in the county of Essex so long; that, being
examined and scrutinized sufficiently, and having been retired from all
conversation[213] for above forty days, without any appearance of
sickness, they were therefore certainly concluded to be sound men, and
might be safely entertained anywhere, having at last removed rather for
fear of the plague, which was come into such a town, rather[214] than
for having any signal of infection upon them, or upon any belonging to
them.

With this certificate they removed, though with great reluctance; and,
John inclining not to go far from home, they removed towards the marshes
on the side of Waltham. But here they found a man who, it seems, kept a
weir or stop upon the river, made to raise water for the barges which go
up and down the river; and he terrified them with dismal stories of the
sickness having been spread into all the towns on the river and near the
river, on the side of Middlesex and Hertfordshire (that is to say, into
Waltham, Waltham Cross, Enfield, and Ware, and all the towns on the
road), that they were afraid to go that way; though it seems the man
imposed upon them, for that[215] the thing was not really true.

However, it terrified them, and they resolved to move across the forest
towards Rumford and Brentwood; but they heard that there were numbers of
people fled out of London that way, who lay up and down in the forest,
reaching near Rumford, and who, having no subsistence or habitation, not
only lived oddly,[216] and suffered great extremities in the woods and
fields for want of relief, but were said to be made so desperate by
those extremities, as that they offered many violences to the country,
robbed and plundered, and killed cattle, and the like; and others,
building huts and hovels by the roadside, begged, and that with an
importunity next door to demanding relief: so that the country was very
uneasy, and had been obliged to take some of them up.
