John Hawkins became wealthy through the slave trade,--kidnaping
negroes on the coast of Guinea, and selling them to the Spanish West
India colonies.  The domestic trade of England was still carried on
largely by great annual fairs.  Trade, however, was much deranged by
the quantities of debased money issued under Henry VIII and Edward VI.

Elizabeth reformed the currency, and ordered the mint to send out coin
which no longer had a lie stamped on its face, thereby setting an
example to all future governments, whether monarchical or republican.

VI. Mode of Life, Manners, and Customs

414. Life in the Country and the City.

In the cities this was an age of luxury; but on the farms the laborer
was glad to get a bundle of straw for a bed, and a wooden trencher to
eat from.  Vegetables were scarcely known, and fresh meat was eaten
only by the well to do.  The cottages were built of sticks and mud,
without chimneys, and were nearly as bare of furniture as the wigwam
of an American Indian.

The rich kept several mansions and country houses, but paid little
attention to cleanliness; and when the filth and vermin in one became
unendurable, they left it "to sweeten," as they said, and went to
another of their estates.  The dress of the nobles continued to be of
the most costly materials and the gayest colors.

At table a great variety of dishes were served on silver plate, but
fingers were still used in place of forks.  Tea and coffee were
unknown, and beer was the usual drink at breakfast and supper.

Carriages were seldom used, except by Queen Elizabeth, and most
journeys were performed on horseback.  Merchandise was also generally
transported on pack horses, the roads rarely being good enough for the
passage of wagons.  The principal amusements were the theater,
dancing, masquerading, bull and bear baiting (worrying a bull or bear
with dogs), cockfighting, and gambling.

Ninth Period[1]

"It is the nature of the devil of tyranny to tear and rend the body
which he leaves."--Macaulay

Beginning with the Divine Right of Kings and Ending with the Divine
Right of the People

King or Parliament?

House of Stuart (1603-1649, 1660-1714)

James I, 1603-1625
Charles I, 1625-1649
"The Commonwealth and Protectorate," 1649-1660
Charles II, 1660-1685
James II, 1685-1689
William and Mary,[2] 1689-1702
Anne, 1702-1714

[1] Reference Books on this Period will be found in the Classified
List of Books in the Appendix.  The pronunciation of names will be
found in the Index.  The Leading Dates stand unenclosed; all others
are in parentheses.
[2] House of Orange-Stuart.

415. Accession of James I.

Elizabeth was the last of the Tudor family (S376).  By birth, James
Stuart, only son of Mary STuart, Queen of Scots, and great-grandson of
Margaret, sister of Henry VIII, was the nearest heir to the crown.[3]
He was already King of Scotland under the title of James VI.  He now,
by act of Parliament, became James I of England.  By his accession the
two countries were united under one sovereign, but each retained its
own Parliament, its own National Church, and its own laws.[4]  The new
monarch found himself ruler over three kingdoms, each professing a
different religion.  Puritanism prevailed in Scotland, Catholicism in
Ireland, Anglicanism or Episcopacy in England.

[3] See Genealogical Table, p.207.
[4] On his coins and in his proclamations James styled himself King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland.  But the term "Great Britain" did
not properly come into use until somewhat more than a hundred years
later, when, by an act of Parliament under Anne, Scotland and England
were legally united.
The English Parliament refused to grant free trade to Scotland and
denied to the people of that counttry, even if born after James I came
to the English throne (or "Post Nati," as they were called), the
rights and privileges possessed by natives of England.

416. The King's Appearances and Character.

James was unfortunate in his birth.  Neither his father, Lord Darnley,
nor his mother had high qualities of character.  The murder of Mary's
Italian secretary in her own palace, and almost in her own presence
(S395), gave the Queen a shock which left a fatal inheritance of
cowardice to her son.  Throughout his life he could not endure the
sight of a drawn sword.  If we can trust common report, his personal
appearance was by no means impressive.  He had a feeble, rickety body,
he could not walk straight, his tongue was too large for his mouth,
and he had goggle eyes.  Through fear of assassination he habitually
wore thickly padded and quilted clothes, usually green in color.  He
was a man of considerable shrewdness, but of a small mind, and of
unbounded conceit.  His Scotch tutor had crammed him with much
ill-digested learning, so that he gave the impression of a man
educated beyond his intellect.  His favorites used to flatter him by
telling him that he was the "British Solomon"; but the French
ambassador came nearer to the mark when he called him "the wisest fool
in Christendom."

The King wrote on witchcraft, kingcraft, and theology, and composed
numerous commonplace verses.  He also wrote a sweeping denunciation of
the new plant called tobacco, which Raleigh (S392) had brought from
America, and whose smoke now began to perfume, or, according to James,
to poison, the air of England.  His Majesty had all the superstitions
of the age, and one of his earliest acts was the passage of a statute
punishing witchcraft with death.  Under that law many a wretched woman
perished on the scaffold, whose only crime was that she was old, ugly,
and friendless.

417. The Great Puritan Petition (1603).

During the latter part of Elizabeth's reign, the Puritans (S378) in
England had increased so rapidly that Archbishop Whitgift told James
he was amazed to find how "the vipers" had multiplied.  The Puritans
felt that the Reformation had not been sufficiently thorough.

They complained that many of the forms and ceremonies of the Church of
Engalnd were by no means in harmony with the Scriptures.  Many of them
wished also to change the Episcopal form of Church government, and
instead of having bishops appointed by the King, to adopt the more
democratic method of having presbyters or elders chosen by the
congregation.

While James was on the way from Scotland to London to receive the
crown, the Puritans presented the "Millenary Petition" to him.  It was
so called because it purported to have a thousand signers.  The
ministers presenting it asked that they might be permitted to preach
without wearing the white gown called a surplice, to baptize without
making the sign of the cross on the child's forehead, and to perform
the marriage ceremony without using the ring.  Bishop Hooker and Lord
Bacon had pleaded for a certain degree of toleration for the Puritans.
They even quoted the words of Christ: "He that is not against us is
for us."  But the King had no patience with such a plea.

418. Hampton Court Conference (1604).

The King convened a conference at Hampton Court, near London, to
consider the Petition, or rather to make a pedantic display of his
own learning.  The probability that he would grant the petitioners'
request was small.  James had come to England disgusted with the
violence of the Scotch Presbyterians or Puritans (S378), especially
since Andrew Melville, one of their leading ministers in Edinburgh,
had seized his sleeve at a public meeting and addressed him, with a
somewhat brutal excess of truth, as "God's silly vassal."[1]

[1] Gardiner in the "Dictionary of National (British) Biography,"
"James I," thinks that by "silly" Melville meant "weak."  But that is
not much improvement.

But the new sovereign had a still deeper reason for his antipathy to
the Puritans.  He saw that their doctrine of equality in the Church
naturally led to that equality in the State.  If they objected to
Episcopal government in the one, might they not presently object to
royal government in the other? Hence to all their arguments he
answered with his favorite maxim, "No bishop, no king," meaning that
the two must stand or fall together.

At the Hampton Court Conference all real freedom of discussion was
practically prohibited.  The Conference, however, had one good result,
for the King ordered a new and revised translation of the Bible to be
made (SS254, 357).  It was published a few years later (1611).  This
translation of the Scriptures excels all others in simplicity,
dignity, and beauty of language.  After more than three hundred years
it still remains the version used in the great majority of Protestant
churches and Protestant homes wherever English is spoken.

James regarded the Conference as a success.  He had refuted the
Puritans, as he believed, with much Latin and some Greek.  He ended by
declaiming against them with such unction that one enthusiastic bishop
declared that his Majesty must be specially inspired by the Holy
Ghost!

He closed the meeting by imprisoning the ten persons who had presented
the petition, on the ground that it tended to sedition and rebellion.
Henceforth, the King's attitude toward the Puritans (S378) was
unmistakable.  "I will make them conform," said he, "or I will harry
them out of the land" (S422).

Accordingly, a law was enacted which required every curate to accept
the Thirty-Nine Articles (S381) and the Prayer Book of the Church of
England (S381) without reservation.  This act drove several hundred
clergymen from the Established Church.

419. The Divine Right of Kings, 1604; the Protest of the Commons;
"Favorites."

As if with the desire of further alienating his people, James now
constantly proclaimed the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings.  This
theory, which was unknown to the English constitution, declared that
the King derived his power and right to rule directly from God, and in
no way from the people.[1]  "It is atheism and blasphemy," he said,
"to dispute what God can do, ... so it is presumption and high
contempt in a subject to dispute what a king can do."

[1] James's favorite saying was, "A Deo rex, a rege lex" (God makes
the king, the king makes the law).  He boasted that kings might, as he
declared, "make what liked them law and gospel."

In making these utterances James seems to have entirely forgotten that
he owed his throne to that act of the English Parliament which
accepted him as Elizabeth's successor (S415).  In his exalted position
as head of the nation, he boasted of his power much like the dwarf in
the story, who, perched on the giant's shoulders, cries out, "See how
big I am!"

Acting on this assumption, James levied customs duties on goods
without asking the consent of Parliament; violated the privileges of
the House of Commons; rejected members who had been legally elected;
and imprisoned those who dared to criticize his course.  The contest
was kept up with bitterness during the whole reign.

Toward its close James truckled meanly to the power of Spain, hoping
thereby to marry his son Charles to a Spanish princess.  Later, he
made a feeble and futile effort to help the Protestant party in the
great Thirty Years' War (1618-1648), which had begun between the
Catholics and Protestants in Germany.  The House of Commons implored
the King not to humiliate himself and the nation at the feet of
Spain.  The King replied by warning the House not to meddle with
matters which did not concern them, and denied their right to freedom
of speech.  The Commons solemnly protested, and James seized their
official journal, and with his own hands tore out the record of the
protest (1621).

Yet, notwithstanding his arbitrary character, James was easily managed
by those who would flatter his vanity.  For this reason he was always
under the control of worthless favorites like Carr, Earl of Somerset,
or Villiers, Duke of Buckingham.  These men were the secret power
behind the throne, and they often dictated the policy of the Crown.

420. The Gunpowder Plot (1605).

The King's arbitrary spirit angered the House of Commons, many of whom
were Puritans (S378).  They believed that the King secretly favored
the Roman Catholics; and for this reason they increased the stringency
of the laws against persons of that religion.  To vindicate himself
from this suspicion, the King proceeded to execute the new statutes
with rigor.  As a rule, the Catholic were loyal subjects.  We have
seen that when Spain threatened to invade the country, they fought as
valiantly in its defense as the Protestants themselves (SS399, 400).
Many of them were now ruined by enormous fines, while the priests were
driven from the realm.

One of the sufferers by these unjust measures was Robert Catesby, a
Catholic gentleman of good position.  He, with the aid of a Yorkshire
man, named Guy Fawkes, and about a dozen more, formed a plot to blow
up the Parliament House on the day the King was to open the session
(November 5, 1605).  Their intention, after they had thus summarily
disposed of the government, was to induce the Catholics to rise and
proclaim a new sovereign.  The plot was discovered, the conspirators
were executed, and the Catholics treated with greater severity than
ever (S382).

421. American Colonies, Virginia, 1607.

A London joint-stock company of merchants and adventurers, or
speculators, established the first permanent English colony in
America, on the coast of Virginia, in 1607, at a place which they
called Jamestown, in honor of the King.  (See map facing p. 222.)  The
colony was wholly under the control of the Crown.

The religion was to be that of the Church of England.  Most of those
who went out were described as "gentlemen," that is, persons not
brought up to manual labor.  Fortunately the eneergy and determined
courage of Captain John Smith, who was the real soul of the
enterprise, saved it from miserable failure.

Negro slavery, which in those days touched no man's conscience, was
introduced, and by its means great quantities of tobacco were raised
for export.  The settlement grew in population and wealth, and at the
end of twelve years (1619) it had secured the privilege of making its
own local laws, thus becoming practically a self-governing community.

422. The Pilgrims; the New Power.

The year after the Virginia legislature was established, another band
of emigrants went out from England, not west, but east; not to seek
prosperity, but greater religious freedom.  James's declaration that
he would make all men conform to the Established Church, or drive them
out of the land, was having its due effect (S418).

Those who continued to refuse to conform were fined, cast into filthy
prisons, beaten, and often half starved, so that the old and feeble
soon died.  Strange to say, this kind of treatment did not win over
the Puritans to the side of the bishops and the King.  On the
contrary, it set many of them to thinking more seriously than ever of
the true relations of the government to religion.

The result was that not a few came to the conclusion that each body of
Christians had the right to form a religious society of its own,
wholly independent of the state.  That branch of the Puritans (S378)
who held this opinion got the name of Independents, or Separatists,
because they were determined to separate from the Established Church
of England and conduct their worship and govern their religious
societies as they deemed best.

In the little village of Scrooby, Nottinghamshire (see map opposite),
Postmaster William Brewster, William Bradford, John Carver, and some
others, mostly farmers and poor men of the neighborhood, had organized
an independent religious society with John Robinson for its minister.
After a time they became convinced that so long as they remained in
England they could never be safe from persecution.  They therefore
resolved to leave their native country.  They could not get a royal
license to go to America, and for this reason they emigrated to
Holland, where all men were free to establish societies for the
worship of God in their own manner.  With much difficulty and danger
they managed to escape to that country.

After remaining in Holland about twelve years, a part of them
succeeded in obtaining from King James the privilege of emigrating to
America.[1] A London trading company, which was sending out an
expedition for fish and furs, agreed to furnish the Pilgrims passage
by the Mayflower, though on terms so hard that the poor exiles said
the "conditions were fitter for thieves and bondslaves than for honest
men."

[1] See "Why did the Pilgrim Fathers come to New England?" by Edwin
D. Mead, in the New Englander, XLI, 711.

These Pilgrims, or wanderers, set forth in 1620 for that New World
beyond the sea, which they hoped would redress the wrongs of the Old.
Landing at Plymouth, in Massachusetts, they established a colony on
the basis of "equal laws for the general good."  Ten years later, John
Winthrop, a Puritan gentleman of wealth from Groton, Suffolk (see map
opposite), followed with a large number of emigrants and settled
Boston (1630).  During the next decade no less than twenty thousand
Englishmen found a home in America.  But to the little band that
embarked under Bradford and Brewster in the Mayflower, the scene of
whose landing at Plymouth is painted on the walls of the Houses of
Parliament, belongs the first credit of the great undertaking.

Of that enterprise one of their brethren in England wrote in the time
of their severest distress, with prophetic foresight, "Let it not be
grievous to you that you have been instruments to break the ice for
others; the honor shall be yours to the world's end."  From this time
forward the American coast south of the Bay of Fundy was settled
mainly by English emigrants, and in the course of a little more than a
century (1620-1733), the total number of colonies had reached
thirteen.  Thus the nation of Great Britain was beginning to expand
into that *greater* Britain which it had discovered and planted beyond
the sea.

Meanwhile a new power had arisen in England.  It was mightier even
than that of kings, because greater for both good and evil.  Its
influence grew up very gradually.  It was part of the fruit of
Caxton's work undertaken nearly two centuries earlier (S306).  This
power appeared in the spring of 1622, under the name of the _Weekly
News_,--the first regular newspaper.

423. The Colonization of Ireland (1611).

While the colonization of America was going on, King James was himself
planning a very different kind of colony in the northeast of Ireland.
The greater part of the province of Ulster, which had been the scene
of the rebellion under Elizabeth (S402), had been seized by the
Crown.  The King now granted these lands to settlers from Scotland and
England.  The city of London founded a colony which they called
Londonderry, and by this means Protestantism was firmly and finally
established in the north of the island.

424. The "Addled Parliament"; the New Stand taken by the House of
Commons (1610-1614).

The House of Commons at this period began to slowly recover the power
it had lost under the Tudors (S350).  James suffered from a chronic
lack of money.  He was obliged to apply to Parliament to supply his
wants (1614), but that body was determined to grant nothing without
reforms.  It laid down the principle, to which it firmly adhered, that
the King should not have the nation's coin unless he would promise to
right the nation's wrongs.

After several weeks of angry discussion the King dissolved what was
nicknamed the "Addled Parliament," because its enemies accused it of
having accomplished nothing.  In reality it had accomplished much for
though it had not passed a single bill, it had shown by its determined
attitude the growing stregnth of the people.  For the next seven years
James ruled without summoning a Parliament.  In order to obtain means
to support his army in Ireland, the King created a new title of rank,
that of baronet,[1] which he granted to any one who would pay
liberally for it.  As a last resort to get funds he compelled all
persons having an income of forty[2] pounds or more a year, derived
from landed property, to accept knighthood (thus incurring feudal
obligations and payments [S150]) or purchase exemption by a heavy
fine.

[1] Baronet: This title (S263, note 1) does not confer the right to a
seat in the House of Lords.  A baronet is designated as "Sir,"
e.g. Sir John Franklin.
[2] This exaction was ridiculed by the wits of the time in these
lines:

        "He that hat forty pounds per annum
         Shall be promoted from the plow;
         His wife shall take the wall of her grannum*--
         Honor's sold so dog-cheap now."

The distraint of knighthood, as it was called, began at least as far
back as Edward I, 1278.
*Take precedence of her grandmother.

425. Impeachment of Lord Bacon (1621).

When James did finally summon a Parliament (1621), it met in a stern
mood.  The House of Commons impeached Lord Bacon (S393) for having
taken bribes in lawsuits tried before him as judge.  The House of
Lords convicted him.  He confessed the crime, but pleaded extenuating
circumstances, adding, "I beseech your lordships to be merciful unto a
broken reed"; but Bacon had been in every respect a servile tool of
James, and no mercy was granted.  Parliament imposed a fine of 40,000
pounds, with imprisonment.  Had the sentence been fully executed, it
would have caused his utter ruin.  The King, however, interposed, and
his favorite escaped with a few days' confinement in the Tower.

426. Execution of Sir Walter Raleigh.

Meanwhile Sir Walter Raleigh (S392) had been executed on a charge of
treason.  He had been a prisoner in the Tower for many years
(1603-1616), accused of having plotted against the King.[3] Influenced
by greed for gain, James released him to go on an expedition in search
of gold to replenish the royal coffers.  Raleigh, contrary to the
King's orders, came into collision with the Spaniards on the coast of
South America.[1]  He failed in his enterprise, and brought back
nothing.  Raleigh was especially hated by Spain, not only on account
of the part he had taken in the defeat of the Armada (S400), but also
for his subsequent attacks on Spanish treasure ships and property.

[3] At the beginning of the reign two plots were discovered: one,
called the "Main Plot," aimed to change the government and perhaps to
place Arabella Stuart, cousin of James, on the throne.  The object of
the second conspiracy, called the "Bye Plot," was to obtain religious
toleration.  Raleigh was accused of having been implicated in the Main
Plot.
[1] It is said that James had treacherously informed the Spanish
ambassador of Raleigh's voyage, so that the collision was inevitable.

The King of that country now demanded vengeance, and James, in order
to get a pretext for his execution, revived the sentence which had
been passed on Raleigh fifteen years before.  He doubtless hoped that,
by sacrificing Raleigh, he might secure the hand of the daughter of
the King of Spain for his son, Prince Charles.  Raleigh died as Sir
Thomas More did (S351), his last words a jest at death.  His deeper
feelings found expression in the lines which he wrote on the fly leaf
of his Bible the night before his judicial murder:

        "Even such is Time, that takes in trust
            Our youth, our joys, our all we have,
         And pays us but with age and dust;
            Who in the dark and silent grave,
         When we have wandered all our ways,
         Shuts up the story of our days.
         Buy from this earth, this grave, this dust,
         My God shall raise me up, I trust!"

427. Death of James.

James died suddenly a few years later, a victim of sloth, drunkenness,
and gluttony.  He had taught his son, Prince Charles, to believe that
the highest power on earth was the royal will.  It was a terrible
inheritance for the young man, for just as he was coming to the
throne, the people were beginning to insist that their will should be
respected.

428. Summary.

Three chief events demand our attention in this reign.  First, the
increased power and determined attitude of the House of Commons.
Secondly, the growth of the Puritan and Independent parties in
religion.  Thirdly, the establishment of permanent, self-governing
colonies in Virginia and New England, destined in time to unite with
others and become a new and independent nation,--the American
Republic.

Charles I--1625-1649

429. Accession of Charles; Result of the Doctrine of the Divine Right
of Kings.

The doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings, which had been so zealously
put forth by James (S419), bore its full and fatal fruit in the career
of his son.  Unlike his father, Charles was by nature a gentleman.  In
his private and personal relations he was conscientious and
irreproachable; in public matters he was exactly the reverse.

This singular contrast--this double character, as it were--arose from
the fact that, as a man, Charles felt himself bound by truth and
honor, but, as a sovereign, he considered himself superior to such
obligations.  In all his dealings with the nation he seems to have
acted on the principle that the people had no rights which kings were
bound to respect.

430. The King's Two Mistakes at the Outset.

Charles I began his reign with two mistakes.  First, he insisted on
retaining the Duke of Buckingham, his father's favorite (S419), as his
chief adviser, though the Duke was, for good reasons, generally
distrusted and disliked.  Next, shortly after his accession, Charles
married Henrietta Maria, a French Catholic princess.  The majority of
the English people hated her religion, and her extravagant habits soon
got the King into trouble.

To meet her incessant demands for money, and to carry on a petty war
with Spain, and later with France, he was obliged to ask Parliament
for funds.  Parliament declined to grant him the supply he demanded
unless he would redress certain grievances of long standing.  Charles
refused and dissolved that body.

431. The Second Parliament (1626); the King extorts Loans.

Necessity, however, compelled the King to call a new Parliament.  when
it met, the Commons, under the lead of Sir John Eliot and other
eminent men, proceeded to draw up articles of impeachment, accusing
the Duke of Buckingham of mismanagement (SS243, 425).  To save his
favorite from being brought to trial, the King dissolved Parliament
(1626), and as no supplies of money had been voted, Charles now
proceeded to levy illegal taxes and to extort illegal loans.  Sir John
Eliot, Sir Edmund Hampden, cousin of the famous John Hampden (S436),
and Thomas Wentworth refused (1627) to lend his Majesty the sum asked
for.  For this refusal they were thrown into prison.  This led to
increased agitation and discontent.  At length the King found himself
again forced to summon Parliament; to the Parliament, Eliot and
Wentworth, with others who sympathized with them, were elected.

432. ThePetition of Right, 1628.

Shortly after assembling, the House of Commons, led by Sir Thomas
Wentworth and John Pym, drew up the Petition of Right, which passed
the Lords and was presented to the King for his signature.  The
Petition was a law reaffirming some of the chief provisions of the
Great Charter, which the nation, more than four centuries earlier, had
extorted from King John (S199).  It stipulated in particular, that no
taxes whatever should be levied without the consent of Parliament, and
that no one should be unlawfully imprisoned for refusing to pay such
taxes.  In the petition there was not an angry word, but as a member
of the Commons declared, "We say no more than what a worm trodden upon
would say if he could speak: I pray thee tread on me no more."

433. Charles signs the Petition of Right, 1628; but he revives
Monopolies.

Charles refused to sign the Petition; but finding that money could be
got on no other terms, he at length gave his signature, 1628.[1] But
for Charles to pledge his royal word to the nation meant its direct
and open violation.  The King now revived the "monopolies," which had
been abolished under Elizabeth (S388).

[1] Petition of Right: See Summary of Constitutional History in the
Appendix, p. xvi, S17, and p. xxix.

By these grants certain persons bought the sole right of dealing in
nearly every article of food, drink, fuel, and clothing.  The Commons
denounced this outrage.  One member said: "The `monopolists' have
seized everything.  They sip in our cup, they sup in our dish, they
sit by our fire."

434. Eliot's Remonstrance (1629).

Sir John Eliot (S431) drew up a remonstrance against these new acts of
royal tyranny, but the Speaker of the House of Commons, acting under
the King's order, refused to put the measure to vote, and endeavored
to adjourn.

Several members sprang forward and held him in his chair until the
resolutions were passed, which declared that whoever levied or paid
any taxes not voted by Parliament, or attempted to make any change in
religion, was an enemy to the kingdom.  In revenge Charles sent Eliot
to close confinement in the Tower.  He died there three years later, a
martyr in the cause of liberty.

435. The King rules without Parliament; "Thorough."

For the next eleven years (1629-1640) the King ruled without a
Parliament.  The obnoxious Buckingham (S431) had led an expedition
against France which resulted in miserable failure.  He was about
setting out on a second expedition to aid the Huguenots, who had
rebelled against the French King, when he was assassinated (1628).
His successor was Sir Thomas Wentworth, who later (1640) became Earl
of Strafford.  Wentworth had signed the Petition of Right (S432), but
he was now a renegade to liberty, and wholly devoted to the King.  By
means of the Court of Star Chamber (S330) and his scheme called
"Thorough," which meant that he would stop at nothing to make Charles
absolute, Strafford labored to establish a complete despotism.

Archbishop Laud worked with Strafford through the High Commission
Court (S382).  Together, the two exercised a crushing and merciless
system of political and religious tyranny; the Star Chamber fining and
imprisoning those who refused the illegal demands for money made upon
them, the High Commission Court showing itself equally zealous in
punishing those who could not conscientiously conform to the
Established Church of England.[1]

[1] To strengthen the hands of Archbishop Laud and to secure absolute
uniformity of faith, Charles issued (1628) a Declaration (still found
in the English editions of the Book of Common Prayer), which forbade
any one to understand or explain the Thirty-Nine Articles (S383) in
any sense except that established by the bishops and the King.

Charles exasperated the Puritans (S378) still further by reissuing
(1633) his father's Declaration of Sunday Sports, which had never
really been enforced.  This Declaration encouraged parishioners to
dance, play games, and practice archery in the churchyards after
divine service.  Laud used it as a test, and turned all clergymen out
of their livings who refused to read it from their pulpits.  When the
Puritans finally got the upper hand (1644) they publicly burned the
Declaration.

436. "Ship Money"; John Hampden refuses to pay it, 1637.

To obtain means with which to equip a standing army, the King forced
the whole country to pay a tax known as "ship money," on the pretext
that it was needed to free the English coast from the depredations of
Algerine pirates.  During previous reigns an impost of this kind on
the coast towns in time of war might have been considered legitimate,
since its original object was to provide ships for the national
defense.

In time of peace, however, such a demand could not be rightfully made,
especially on the inland towns, as the Petition of Right (S432)
expressly provided that no money should be demanded from the country
without the consent of its representatives in Parliament.  John
Hampden, a wealthy farmer in Buckinghamshire, refused to pay the
twenty shillings required from him.  He did not grudge the money, but
he would not tamely submit to have even that trifling sum taken from
him contrary to law.  The case was brought to trial (1637), and the
corrupt judges decided for the King.

437. Hampden and Cromwell endeavor to leave the Country.

Meanwhile John Winthrop with many other Puritans emigrated to America
to escape oppression.  According to tradition John Hampden (S436) and
his cousin, Oliver Cromwell, who was a member of the last Parliament,
embarked on a vessel in the Thames for New England.  But it is said
that they were prevented from sailing by the King's order.  The two
friends remained to teach the despotic sovereign a lesson which
neither he nor England ever forgot.[1]

[1] Macaulay's "Essay on Hampden," Guizot's "English Revolution," and
other well-known authorities, relate the proposed sailing of Hampden
and Cromwell, but several recent writers question its truth.

438. The Difficulty with the Scottish Church (1637).

The King determined to force the use of a prayer book, similar to that
used in the English Church (S381), on the Scotch Puritans.  But no
sooner had the Dean of Edinburgh opened the book than a general cry
arose in the church, "A Pope, a Pope! Antichrist! Stone him!" When the
bishops endeavored to appease the tumult, the enraged congregation
clapped, stamped, and yelled.

Again the dean tried to read a prayer from the hated book, when an old
woman hurled her stool at his head, shouting, "D'ye mean to say
mass[1] at my lug [ear]?" Riots ensued, and eventually the Scotch
solemnly bound themselves by a Covenant to resist all attempts to
change their religion.  The King resolved to force his prayer book on
the Covenanters[2] at the point of the bayonet.

[1] Mass: here used for the Roman Catholic church service.
[2] The first Covenanters were the Scottish leaders, who, in 1557,
bound themselves by a solemn covenant to overthrow all attempts to
reestablish the Catholic religion in Scotland; when Charles I
undertook to force the Scotch to accept Episcopacy the Puritan party
in Scotland drew up a new covenant (1638) to resist it.

But he had no money to pay his army, and the "Short Parliament," which
he summoned in the spring of 1640, refused to grant any unless the
King would redress the nation's grievances.

439. The "Long Parliament," 1640; Impeachment of Strafford and Laud;
the "Grand Remonstrance."

In the autumn Charles summoned that memorable Parliament which met in
November of 1640.  It sat almost continuously for thirteen years, and
so got the name of the "Long Parliament."[3] This new Parliament was
made up of three parties: the Church of England party, the
Presbyterian party, and the Independents (S422).  The spirit of this
body soon showed itself.  John Pym (S432), the leader of the House of
Commons, demanded the impeachment of Strafford (S435) for high treason
and despotic oppression.  He was tried and sentenced to execution.
The King refused to sign the death warrant, but Strafford himself
urged him to do so in order to appease the people.  Charles,
frightened at the tumult that had arisen, and entreated by his wife,
finally put his hand to the paper, and thus sent his most faithful
servant to the block.

Parliament next charged Archbishop Laud (S435) with attempting to
overthrow the Protestant religion.  It condemned him to prison, and
ultimately to death.  Next, it abolished the Star Chamber and the High
Commission Court (S435).  It next passed the Triennial Act,[1] a bill
requiring Parliament to be summoned once in three years, and also a
statute forbidding the collection of "ship money" unless authorized by
Parliament.

[1] The Triennial Act was repealed (in form only) in 1664; it was
reenacted in 1694; in 1716 it was superseded by the Septennial Act
(S535).

Under the leadership of Pym, it followed this by drawing up the "Grand
Remonstrance,"[2] which was printed and circulated throughout the
country.  The "Remonstrance" set forth the faults of the King's
government, while it declared utter distrust of his policy.  Cromwell
did not hesitate to say that if the House of Commons had failed to
adopt and print the "Remonstrance," he would have left England never
to return.  The radicals in the House next made an ineffectual attempt
to pass the "Root and Branch Bill," for the complete destruction--
"root and branch"--of the Established Church of England.  Finally, the
House enacted a law forbidding the dissolution of the present
Parliament except by its own consent.

[2] See Summary of Constitutional History in the Appendix, p. xvii,
S19.

440. The King attempts to arrest Five Members (1642).

The parliamentary leaders had entered into communication with the
Scots and so laid themselves open to a charge of treason.  It was
rumored, too, that they were about to take a still bolder step and
impeach the Queen for having conspired with the Catholics and the
