bank, was held by twenty-six battalions and twelve squadrons, all
native French troops.

Their left was equally protected from attack by a range of hills,
impregnable for guns or cavalry. In the centre of their line,
between their flanks, was the village of Oberglau, in and around
which lay thirty battalions of infantry, among whom was the fine
Irish regiments.

From Blenheim to Oberglau, and thence on to Lutzingen, at the foot
of the hills, the French line occupied somewhat rising ground, in
front of them was the rivulet of the Nebel running through low
swampy ground, very difficult for the passage of troops.

Prince Maximilian commanded the French left, where the Bavarians
were posted, Marshal Marsin the line on to Oberglau and the village
itself, Marshal Tallard the main body thence to the Danube.

The French marshals, strong in the belief of the prowess of their
troops, equal in number, greatly superior in artillery, and
possessing an extremely strong position, scarcely paid sufficient
attention to what would happen in the event of a defeat. The
infantry being posted very strongly in the three villages, which
were very carefully entrenched and barricaded, insufficient
attention was paid to the long line of communications between them,
which was principally held by the numerous cavalry. This was their
weak point, for it was clear that if the allies should get across
the rivulets and swamps and break through the cavalry line, the
infantry would be separated and unable to reunite, and the strong
force in Blenheim would run a risk of being surrounded without a
possibility of retreat, as the Danube was unfordable.

Upon the side of the allies the troops were divided into two
distinct armies. That under Prince Eugene, consisting of eighteen
battalions of infantry and seventy-four squadrons of horse, was to
attack the French left. The main army under the duke, consisting of
forty-eight battalions and eighty-six squadrons, was to attack the
centre and right.

The British contingent of fourteen battalions and fourteen
squadrons formed part of Marlborough's command.

It was arranged that Prince Eugene should commence the attack, and
that when he had crossed the rivulets in front of the French left,
Marlborough should advance and attempt to carry out the plan he had
laid out, namely, to cut the French line between Oberglau and
Blenheim.

Prince Eugene's advance took the French by surprise. So confident
were the marshals in the strength of their position and the belief
of the superiority of their troops over the polyglot army of
Marlborough, that they had made up their minds that he was about to
retreat.

The morning was misty, and Eugene's advance reached the French
pickets before they were perceived.

Their difficulties now began. The rivulets were deep, the ground
treacherous; fascines had to be laid down, and the rivulets filled
up, before guns could get over; and even when across they could but
feebly answer the French artillery, which from the higher ground
commanded their whole line; thus the allies lost 2000 men before
Eugene got the army he commanded across the marshes. Then at half
past twelve he sent word to Marlborough that he was ready.

While the cannon roar had been incessant on their right, the main
army remained motionless, and divine service was performed at the
head of every regiment and squadron.

The moment the aide-de-camp arrived with the news that Prince
Eugene was in readiness, the artillery of Marlborough's army opened
fire, and the infantry, followed closely by their cavalry, advanced
to the attack.

The British division, under Lord Cutts, as the most trustworthy,
had assigned to them a direct attack upon the strong position of
Blenheim, and they advanced unwaveringly under a storm of fire,
crossed the swamps and the Nebel, and advanced towards Blenheim.

General Rowe led the front line, consisting of five English
battalions and four Hessians, and he was supported by Lord Cutts
with eleven battalions and fifteen squadrons.

Advancing through a heavy artillery fire, General Rowe's troops had
arrived within thirty yards of the palisade before the French
infantry opened fire. Then a tremendous volley was poured into the
allies, and a great number of men and officers fell. Still they
moved forward, and Rowe, marching in line with his men, struck the
palisade with his sword before he gave the order to fire. Then
desperately the British strove to knock down the palisade and
attack their enemy with the bayonet, but the structure was too
strong, and the gallant force melted away under the withering fire
kept up by the great force of French infantry which occupied the
village.

Half Rowe's force fell, he himself was badly wounded, most of his
officers down, when some squadrons of French horse fell upon their
flank, threw them into confusion, and took the colours of the
regiment.

The Hessians, who so far had been in reserve, fell upon the French,
and retook the colours.

Fresh squadrons of French cavalry came up, and General Lumley sent
some squadrons of cavalry across to Rowe's assistance. Then, with a
cheer, the dragoons rode at the French, who were twice their
strength. In an instant every one was engaged in a fierce conflict,
cutting, slashing, and using their points.

The French gave way under the onslaught, but fresh squadrons came
up from their side, a heavy musketry fire broke out from the
enclosure round Blenheim, and leaving many of their number behind
them, the British horse and foot fell back to the stream.

Marlborough, seeing that Blenheim could not be taken, now resolved
upon making his great effort to break the French line midway
between Oberglau and Blenheim.

On the stream at this part stood the village of Unterglau, having a
stone bridge across the Nebel. This was but weakly held by the
French, who, upon seeing the allies advancing at full speed, fired
the village to check the advance, and then fell back.

General Churchill's division rushed through the burning village,
crossed the bridge, and began to open out on both sides. Then the
duke gave the order for the whole cavalry to advance. Headed by the
English dragoons, they came down in good order through the
concentrated fire of the enemy's batteries to the edge of the
stream; but the difficulties here were immense. The stream was
divided into several branches, with swampy meadows between them,
and only by throwing down fascines could a footing be obtained for
the horses.

"I don't call this fighting, Master Rupert," Hugh said, as they
floundered and struggled through the deep marshes, while the
enemy's shell burst in and around the ranks; "it's more like
swimming. Here come the French cavalry, and we've not even formed
up."

Had the French charge been pressed home, the dragoons must have
been crushed; but Churchill's infantry on their right opened such a
heavy fire that the French cavalry at that end of the line paused.
On their left, however, near Blenheim, the dragoons, suffering
terribly from the artillery and musketry fire from that village,
were driven back by the French cavalry to the very edge of the
swamp.

Marlborough, however, anxiously watching the struggle, continued to
send fresh bodies of horse across to their assistance, until the
Dutch and Hanoverian squadrons were all across, and the allied
cavalry formed in two long lines.

While this had been going on, a serious fight had been raging in
front of Oberglau; and here, as at Blenheim, the allies suffered
disaster. Here the Hanoverians, led by the Prince of Holstein, had
attacked. The powerful body of French and Irish infantry did not,
however, wait for the assault, but, 9000 strong, charged down the
slope upon the 5000 Hanoverians before they had formed up after
crossing the river, repulsed them with great loss, and took the
prince himself prisoner.

This was a serious disaster, as, by the rout of the Hanoverians the
connexion between Marlborough's army and that of Prince Eugene was
broken.

Marlborough's eye, however, was everywhere; and galloping to the
spot, he put himself at the head of some squadrons of British
cavalry, and, closely followed by three battalions of fresh
infantry, charged the Irish battalions, who, in the impetuosity of
their pursuit, had fallen into disorder. The cavalry charge
completed their confusion, and the infantry opening fire in flank
on the lately victorious column, drove it back with immense
slaughter. Thus the battle was restored at this point.

All this time the fight had raged between Eugene's array and the
Bavarians and French opposed to them. At first the prince had been
successful, and the Danes and Prussians under his orders captured a
battery of six guns. His cavalry, however, while advancing in some
disorder, were charged by the French, driven back across the Nebel,
and the guns were retaken. Twice the prince himself rallied his
cavalry, and brought them back to the charge, but each time the
Bavarian horse, led by the elector, drove them back, defeated and
broken, across the river. The Prussian and Danish infantry stood
their ground nobly, although the enemy charged them over and over
again; but, cheered by the presence of Prince Eugene, who took his
place amongst them, they beat off all attacks.

The Duke of Marlborough, after restoring the battle at Oberglau,
rode back to his centre, and prepared for the grand attack by his
cavalry. Marshal Tallard, in preparation for the attack he saw
impending, brought up six battalions of infantry, and placed them
in the centre of the ridge. Marlborough brought up three battalions
of Hessians to front them, placed the rest of his infantry to cover
the left of the cavalry from the attack of the strong battalions in
Blenheim, and then, drawing his sword, placed himself in front of
his troops, and ordered the trumpets to sound the advance.

This grand and decisive charge is thus described by Allison in his
"Life of Marlborough:"

"Indescribably grand was the spectacle that ensued. In compact
order, and in the finest array, the allied cavalry, mustering 8000
sabres, moved up the gentle slope in two lines--at first slowly, as
on a field day, but gradually more quickly as they drew near, and
the fire of the artillery became more violent. The French horse,
10,000 strong, stood their ground at first firmly. The choicest and
bravest of their chivalry were there; the banderolls of almost all
the nobles of France floated over the squadrons.

"So hot was the fire of musketry and cannon when the assailants
drew near, that their advance was checked. They retired sixty
paces, and the battle was kept up for a few minutes only by a fire
of artillery. Gradually, however, the fire of the artillery
slackened; and Marlborough, taking advantage of the pause, led his
cavalry again to the charge. With irresistible vehemence the line
dashed forward at full speed, and soon the crest of the ridge was
passed. The French horsemen discharged their carbines at a
considerable distance with little effect, and immediately wheeled
about and fled.

"The battle was gained. The allied horse rapidly inundated the open
space between the two villages. The six battalions in the middle
were surrounded, cut to pieces, or taken. They made a noble
resistance; and the men were found lying on their backs in their
ranks as they had stood in the field."

Thus at one blow the whole French line of defence was broken up.
Blenheim was entirely cut off; and the rear of their left beyond
Oberglau threatened.

General Marsin's cavalry, seeing the defeat of their main body,
fell back to avoid being taken in rear; and Prince Eugene, seeing
the Bavarian infantry left unsupported, called up all his reserves,
and advanced at the head of the Danes and Prussians against them.
The Bavarian infantry fought stubbornly, but the battle was lost,
their line of retreat threatened by the allied horse, who were now
masters of the field, and, setting fire to the villages of Oberglau
and Lutzingen, they fell back sullenly.

In the meantime, Marshal Tallard was striving bravely to avert the
defeat. He brought up his last reserves, rallied his cavalry, and
drew them up in line stretching towards Blenheim in hopes of
drawing off his infantry from that village. Marlborough brought up
his whole cavalry force, and again charging them, burst through
their centre, and the French cavalry, divided into two parts, fled
in wild disorder--the one portion towards the Danube, the other
towards Hochstadt. Marlborough at the head of fifty squadrons
pursued the first body. Hanpesch with thirty followed the second.
Marlborough drove the broken mass before him to the Danube, where
great numbers were drowned in attempting to cross; the rest were
made prisoners. Marshal Tallard himself, with a small body of
cavalry who still kept their ranks, threw himself into the village
of Sonderheim, and was there captured by the victorious squadrons.
Hanpesch pursued the flying army as far as Hochstadt, captured
three battalions of infantry on the way, and halted not until the
French were a mere herd of fugitives, without order, riding for
their lives.

There now remained only the garrison of Blenheim to dispose of, and
the infantry were brought up to attack them. So strong were the
defences, however, so desperate the resistance offered by the brave
body of Frenchmen, who were now alone against an army, that the
infantry attack was beaten back. The guns were then brought up, and
opened fire, and the French, whose case was now hopeless,
surrendered.

The battle of Blenheim was over. In this great battle Marlborough's
army lost 5000 men, Eugene's 6000. In all 11,000 men. The French
and Bavarians lost in killed and wounded 12,000, together with 1200
officers and 13,000 privates made prisoners, and 47 cannon. Their
total loss, including desertions in their retreat through the Black
Forest, was estimated by their own historians at 40,000 men--a
defeat as complete and disastrous as that of Waterloo.



Chapter 14: The Riot at Dort.

The Duke of Marlborough lost no time in utilizing the advantages
gained by the victory of Blenheim. He at once raised the siege of
Ingoldstadt, which, when all the country was in his power, must
sooner or later surrender, and detached a portion of the force
which had been there engaged to besiege Ulm, an important fortress
on the Danube. Then with the bulk of his army he marched to the
Rhine, crossed at Philipsburg on the 6th of September, and advanced
towards Landau.

Marshal Villeroi had constructed an entrenched camp to cover the
town; but on the approach of the victor of Blenheim he fell back,
leaving Landau to its fate. Marlborough followed him, and made
every effort to bring the French to a battle; but Villeroi fell
back behind the Lauter, and then behind the Motter, abandoning
without a blow one of the strongest countries in Europe.

On the 11th of September Ulm surrendered, with 250 pieces of
cannon; and upon the following day, Landau was invested. The Prince
of Baden with 20,000 men conducted the siege, and Marlborough and
Eugene with 30,000 covered the operations. Marlborough, however,
determined on ending the campaign, if possible, by driving the
French beyond the Moselle, and leaving Prince Eugene with 18,000
men, marched with 12,000 men on the 14th of October.

After a tremendous march through a wild and desolate country, he
arrived with his exhausted troops at Treves on the 29th, one day
before the arrival of 10,000 French, who were advancing to occupy
it. The garrison of 600 men in the citadel evacuated it at his
approach. He immediately collected and set to work 6000 peasants to
restore the fortifications. Leaving a garrison, he marched against
the strong place of Traesbach. Here he was joined by twelve Dutch
battalions from the Meuse; and having invested the place, he left
the Prince of Hesse to conduct the siege--which speedily ended in
the surrender of the place--and marched back with all haste to
rejoin Prince Eugene.

Leaving Eugene to cover the siege of Landau, Marlborough now
hurried away to Hanover and Berlin, to stimulate the governments of
Hanover and Prussia to renewed exertion; and by his address and
conciliatory manner succeeded in making arrangements for 8000 fresh
Prussian troops to be sent to the imperial armies in Italy, as the
Duke of Savoy had been reduced to the last extremity there by the
French.

The Electress of Bavaria, who had been regent of that country since
her husband left to join the French, had now no resource but
submission, and she accordingly agreed to disband her remaining
troops, and to make peace.

The Hungarian insurrection was suppressed by Austria, now able to
devote all its attention to that point: and Landau surrendered
towards the end of November, when its garrison was reduced from
7000 to 3500, who became prisoners of war.

All these decisive results arose from the victory of Blenheim. Had
the British Government during the winter acceded to Marlborough's
request, and voted men and money, he would have been able to march
to Paris in the next campaign, and could have brought the war to an
end; but the mistaken parsimony then, as often since, crippled the
British general, allowed the French to recover from their disaster,
prolonged the war for years, and cost the country very many times
the money and the men that Marlborough had asked for to bring the
war to a decisive termination.

But while the English and Dutch governments refused to vote more
money or men, and the German governments, freed from their pressing
danger, became supine and lukewarm, the French, upon the contrary,
set to in an admirable manner to retrieve the disasters they had
suffered, and employed the winter in well-conceived efforts to take
the field with a new army, to the full as strong as that which they
had lost; and the fruits of Blenheim were, with the exception of
the acquisition of a few fortresses, entirely thrown away.

At the battle of Blenheim, Rupert Holliday escaped untouched, but
Hugh was struck with a fragment of shell, and severely wounded. He
was sent down the Rhine by water to the great military hospital
which had been established at Bonn; and Rupert, who was greatly
grieved at being separated from his faithful follower, had the
satisfaction of hearing ere long that he was doing well.

Rupert had assigned him as orderly a strong, active young fellow,
named Joe Sedley, who was delighted at his appointment, for the
"little cornet" was, since his defeat of the German champion, the
pride of the regiment. Joe was a Londoner, one of those fellows who
can turn their hand to anything, always full of fun, getting
sometimes into scrapes, but a general favourite with his comrades.

The campaign over, Rupert, who was now a lieutenant, asked and
obtained leave to go home for the winter; he had long since been
reconciled with his mother; and it was two years and a half since
he had left home. Hugh and Joe Sedley had also obtained leave, upon
Rupert's application on their behalf.

On his way down Rupert resolved to pay a visit for a few days to
his kind friends at Dort. They had written begging him to come and
see them; and a postscript which Maria had put in her last letter
to him, to the effect that she had reason to believe that her old
persecutor was in the neighbourhood, and that her father had taken
renewed precautions for her safety, added to his desire to visit
Dort.

"That fellow's obstinacy is really admirable in its way," Rupert
said, on reading this news. "He has made up his mind that there is
a fortune to be obtained by carrying off Maria van Duyk, and he
sticks to it with the same pertinacity which other men display in
the pursuit of commerce or of lawful trade, or that a wild beast
shows in his tireless pursuit of his prey."

Had it not been for the postscript, Rupert would have deferred his
visit to Dort until after his return from England, but the news
caused him serious uneasiness. He knew but too well the
unscrupulous nature of this desperate man, whom he had heard of
since his last attempt upon his life as being a leader of one of
the bands of freebooters who, formed of deserters and other
desperate men, frequented the Black Forest, the Vosges mountains,
the Ardennes, and other forests and hill districts. That he would
dare lead his band down into the plains of Holland, Rupert had no
fear; still he could have no difficulty in finding men of ruined
fortunes even there to join in any wild attempt.

Leaving the army when it went into winter quarters, Rupert
travelled by land to Bonn, and there picked up Hugh, who was now
completely restored to health, and then, taking boat, journeyed
down the Rhine. Then he took horse again, and rode to Dort.

Mynheer van Duyk and Maria were delighted to see him; and Hugh and
Sedley were hospitably received by the servants, with whom Hugh
had, on the occasion of his last visit, made himself a prime
favourite.

For the first day of their arrival Rupert had all the talking to
do, and his adventures to relate from the time he set sail from
