[97-1] See p. 96, note 2.

[98-1] _Alcatraz._ The rendering "booby" follows Cuvier's note to the
French translation. The "booby" is the "booby gannet." The Spanish
dictionaries give pelican as the meaning of _Alcatraz_. The gannets and
the pelicans were formerly classed together. The word _Alcatraz_ was
taken over into English and corrupted to _Albatros_. Alfred Newton,
_Dictionary of Birds_ (London, 1896), art. "Albatros."

[98-2] More exactly, "He sailed this day toward the West a quarter
northwest and half the division [_i.e._, west by north and west by one
eighth northwest] because of the veering winds and calm that prevailed."

[100-1] The abridger of the original journal missed the point here and
his epitome is unintelligible. Las Casas says in his _Historia_, I. 275:
"The Admiral says in this place that the adverseness of the winds and the
high sea were very necessary to him since they freed the crew of their
erroneous idea that there would be no favorable sea and winds for their
return and thereby they received some relief of mind or were not in so
great despair, yet even then some objected, saying that that wind would
not last, up to the Sunday following, when they had nothing to answer
when they saw the sea so high. By which means, Cristobal Colon says here,
God dealt with him and with them as he dealt with Moses and the Jews when
he drew them from Egypt showing signs to favor and aid him and to their
confusion."

[100-2] Las Casas, _Historia_, I. 275-276, here describes with detail the
discontent of the sailors and their plots to put Columbus out of the way.
The passage is translated in Thacher, _Christopher Columbus_, I. 524. The
word rendered "sandpipers" is _pardelas_, petrels. The French translation
has _petrels tachetes_, _i.e._, "pintado petrels," or cape pigeons.

[101-1] More exactly, "On which it seems the Admiral had painted certain
islands." The Spanish reads: "_donde segun parece tenia pintadas el
Almirante ciertas islas_," etc. The question is whether Columbus made the
map or had it made. The rendering of the note is supported by the French
translators and by Harrisse.

[101-2] Las Casas, I. 279, says: "This map is the one which Paul, the
physician, the Florentine, sent, which I have in my possession with other
articles which belonged to the Admiral himself who discovered these
Indies, and writings in his own hand which came into my possession. In it
he depicted many islands and the main land which were the beginning of
India and in that region the realms of the Grand Khan," etc. Las Casas
does not tell us how he knew that the Toscanelli map which he found in
Columbus's papers was the map that the Admiral used on the first voyage.
That is the general assumption of scholars, but there is no positive
evidence of the fact. The Toscanelli map is no longer extant, and all
reconstructions of it are based on the globe of Martin Behaim constructed
in 1492. The reconstruction by H. Wagner which may be seen in S. Ruge,
_Columbus_, 2^te aufl. (Berlin, 1902) is now accepted as the most
successful.

According to the reckoning of the distances in the Journal, Columbus was
now about 550 leagues or 2200 Italian miles west of the Canaries. The
Toscanelli map was divided off into spaces each containing 250 miles.
Columbus was therefore nine spaces west of the Canaries. No
reconstruction of Toscanelli's map puts any islands at nine spaces from
the Canaries except so far as the reconstructors insert the island of
Antilia on the basis of Behaim's globe. The Antilia of Behaim according
to Wagner was eight spaces west of the Canaries. Again Ferdinand
Columbus, in his _Historie_ under date of October 7 (p. 72), says the
sailors "had been frequently told by him that he did not look for land
until they had gone 750 leagues west from the Canaries, at which distance
he had told them he would have found Espanola then called Cipango." 750
leagues or 3000 Italian miles would be 12 spaces on the Toscanelli map.
But according to the Toscanelli letter Cipango was 10 spaces west of
Antilia, and therefore 18 spaces or 4500 miles west of the Canaries.
Columbus then seems to have expected to find Cipango some 1500 miles to
the east of where it was placed on the Toscanelli map. These
considerations justify a very strong doubt whether Columbus was shaping
his course and basing his expectations on the data of the Toscanelli
letter and map, or whether the fact that Las Casas found what he took to
be the Toscanelli map in the Admiral's papers proves that it was that map
which he had on his first voyage.

[102-1] _Dorado_ is defined by Stevens as the dory or gilt head.

[103-1] _Rabiforcado_, Portuguese. The Spanish form is _rabihorcado_. It
means "forked tail." The modern English equivalent is "frigate bird." It
is "the Fregata aquila of most ornithologists, the Fregate of French and
the Rabihorcado of Spanish mariners." Newton, _Dictionary of Birds_, art.
"Frigate-Bird." Newton says that the name "man-of-war bird" has generally
passed out of use in books.

[103-2] Rather, the Guards, the name given to the two brightest stars in
the constellation of the Little Bear. The literal translation is: "the
Guards, when night comes on, are near the arm on the side to the west,
and when dawn breaks they are on the line under the arm to the
northeast," etc. What Columbus meant I cannot explain. Neither Navarrete
nor the French translators offer any suggestions.

[105-1] Las Casas, I. 282, adds to the foregoing under date of October 3:
"He says here that it would not have been good sense to beat about and in
that way to be delayed in search of them [_i.e._, the islands] since he
had favorable weather and his chief intention was to go in search of the
Indies by way of the west, and this was what he proposed to the King and
Queen, and they had sent him for that purpose. Because he would not turn
back to beat up and down to find the islands which the pilots believed to
be there, particularly Martin Alonzo by the chart which, as was said,
Cristobal Colon had sent to his caravel for him to see, and it was their
opinion that he ought to turn, they began to stir up a mutiny, and the
disagreement would have gone farther if God had not stretched out his arm
as he was wont, showing immediately new signs of their being near land
since now neither soft words nor entreaties nor prudent reasoning of
Cristobal Colon availed to quiet them and to persuade them to persevere."
Ferdinand Columbus says simply, "For this reason the crew began to be
mutinous, persevering in their complaints and plots," p. 71. See page
108, note 1.

[106-1] _A la cuarta del Oueste, a la parte del Sudueste_, at the quarter
from the west toward the southwest, _i.e._, west by south.

[106-2] Las Casas, in the _Historia de las Indias_, I. 283, writes, "That
night Martin Alonso said that it would be well to sail west by south for
the island of Cipango which the map that Cristobal Colon showed him
represented." _Cf._ page 101, note 2.

[107-1] Las Casas remarks, I. 285, "If he had kept up the direct westerly
course and the impatience of the Castilians had not hindered him, there
is no doubt that he would have struck the main land of Florida and from
there to New Spain, although the difficulties would have been
unparalleled and the losses unbearable that they would have met with, and
it would have been a divine miracle if he had ever returned to Castile."

[107-2] A remark by the abridger who noted the inconsistency between a
total of 48 miles for a day and night and even an occasional 15 miles per
hour.

[107-3] _Grajaos._ The translator assumed this to be the same as
_garjao_; the French translators, on the other hand, took it to be the
same as _grajos_, crows. In Portuguese dictionaries the word _grajao_ is
found as the name of "an Indian bird."

[108-1] The trouble with the captains and the sailors is told in greatest
detail by Oviedo, _Historia de las Indias_, lib. II., cap. V. He is the
source of the story that the captains finally declared they would go on
three days longer and not another hour. Oviedo does not say that Columbus
acquiesced in this arrangement. Modern critics have been disposed to
reject Oviedo's account, but strictly interpreted, it is not inconsistent
with our other sources. Columbus recalls in his Journal, February 14,
1493, the terror of the situation which was evidently more serious than
the entry of October 10 would imply. Peter Martyr too says that the
sailors plotted to throw Columbus overboard and adds: "After the
thirtieth day roused by madness they declared they were going back," but
that Columbus pacified them. _De Rebus Oceanicis_, Dec. lib. I., fol. 2,
ed. of 1574. Oviedo says that he derived information from Vicente Yanez
Pinzon, "since with him I had a friendship up to the year 1514 when he
died." _Historia de las Indias_, II., cap. XIII.

[108-2] _Escaramojos._ Wild roses.

[109-1] It was full moon on October 5. On the night of the 11th the moon
rose at 11 P.M. and at 2 A.M. on the morning of the 12th it was 39 deg. above
the horizon. It would be shining brightly on the sandy shores of an
island some miles ahead, being in its third quarter, and a little behind
Rodrigo de Triana, when he sighted land at 2 A.M. (Markham.)

[109-2] The high decks fore and aft were called castles. The name
survives in the English forecastle. Stevens gives poop alone as the
English for _Castilla de popa_.

[109-3] Oviedo, lib. II., cap. V., says that, as they were sailing along,
a sailor, a native of Lepe, cried out, "Light," "Land," but was
immediately told that the admiral had already seen it and remarked upon
it.

[109-4] Columbus received this award. His claiming or accepting it under
the circumstances has been considered discreditable and a breach of faith
by many modern writers. Oviedo says the native of Lepe was so indignant
at not getting the reward that "he went over into Africa and denied the
faith," _i.e._, became a Mohammedan. Las Casas seems to have seen no
impropriety in Columbus' accepting the award. He tells us, I. 289, that
this annuity was paid to Columbus throughout his life and was levied from
the butcher shops of Seville. A maravedi was equal to two-thirds of a
cent.

[110-1] Pronounced originally, according to Las Casas, I. 291, with the
accent on the last syllable. Guanahani is now generally accepted to have
been Watling Island. See Markham, _Christopher Columbus_, pp. 89-107, for
a lucid discussion of the landfall.

[110-2] Fernando and Ysabel.

[110-3] The royal inspector.

[110-4] Las Casas adds, I. 293, "To which he gave the name Sant
Salvador."

[110-5] We have here perhaps the original title of what in its abridged
form we now call the Journal.

[113-1] The Portuguese _ceitil_ (pl. _ceitis_) was a small coin deriving
its name from Ceuta, opposite Gibraltar, in Africa, a Portuguese
possession. The _blanca_ was one-half a maravedi, or about one-third of a
cent.

[113-2] Cipango. Marco Polo's name for Japan.

[115-1] Rather, "I had lain to during the night for fear of reaching the
land," etc.

[115-2] These lengths are exaggerated.

[115-3] The word is _cargue_ and means "raised" or "hoisted." The same
word seven lines above was translated "made sail." Las Casas in the
corresponding passage in his _Historia_ uses _alzar_.

[115-4] Identified as Rum Cay.

[116-1] A line is missing in the original. The text may be restored as
follows, beginning with the end of the preceding sentence, "jumped into
the sea and got into the canoe; in the middle of the night before the
other threw [himself into the sea and swam off. The boat was lowered] and
put after the canoe which escaped since there never was a boat which
could have overtaken him, since we were far behind him."

[117-1] Long Island. (Markham.)

[117-2] Possibly a reference to tobacco.

[118-1] It should be "about nine o'clock." The original is _a horas de
tercia_, which means "at the hour of tierce," _i.e._, the period between
nine and twelve.

[119-1] _Panizo_, literally "panic grass." Here Columbus seems to use the
word as descriptive of maize or Indian corn, and later the word came to
have this meaning. On the different species of panic grass, see Candolle,
_Origin of Cultivated Plants_ (index under _panicum_.)

[120-1] Rather, "since it is noon."

[120-2] Port Clarence in Long Island. (Markham.)

[121-1] Rather, "beds and hangings." The original is _paramentos de
cosas_, but in the corresponding passage in his _Historia_, I. 310, Las
Casas has _paramentos de casa_, which is almost certainly the correct
reading.

[121-2] "These are called Hamacas in Espanola." Las Casas, I. 310, where
will be found an elaborate description of them.

[121-3] For ornament. Las Casas calls them caps or crowns, I. 311.

[121-4] Rather: "mastiffs and beagles." Las Casas, I. 311, says the
Admiral called these dogs mastiffs from the report of the sailors. "If he
had seen them, he would not have called them so but that they resembled
hounds. These and the small ones would never bark but merely a grunt in
the throat."

[121-5] The _castellano_ was one-sixth of an ounce. Las Casas, I. 311,
remarks: "They were deceived in believing the marks to be letters since
those people are wont to work it in their fashion, since never anywhere
in all the Indies was there found any trace of money of gold or silver or
other metal."

[123-1] Crooked Island (Markham.)

[123-2] Cape Beautiful.

[125-1] "The Indians of this island of Espanola call it _iguana_." Las
Casas I. 314. He gives a minute description of it.

[126-1] The names in the Spanish text are Colba and Bosio, errors in
transcription for Cuba and Bohio. Las Casas, I. 315, says in regard to
the latter: "To call it Bohio was to misunderstand the interpreters,
since throughout all these islands, where the language is practically the
same, they call the huts in which they live _bohio_ and this great island
Espanola they called Hayti, and they must have said that in Hayti there
were great _bohios_."

[126-2] The name is spelled Quinsay in the Latin text of Marco Polo which
Columbus annotated.

[127-1] One or two words are missing in the original.

[128-1] The translation here should be, "raised the anchors at the island
of Isabella at Cabo del Isleo, which is on the northern side where I
tarried to go to the island of Cuba, which I heard from this people is
very great and has gold," etc.

[128-2] These two lines should read, "I believe that it is the island of
Cipango of which marvellous things are related."

[128-3] The exact translation is, "On the spheres that I saw and on the
paintings of world-maps it is this region." The plural number is used in
both cases. Of the globes of this date, _i.e._, 1492 or earlier, that of
Behaim is the only one that has come down to us. Of the world maps
Toscanelli's, no longer extant, may have been one, but it is to be noted
that Columbus uses the plural.

[129-1] Columbus's conviction that he has reached the Indies is
registered by his use from now on of the word "Indians" for the people.

[130-1] This should be, "The mouth of the river is 12 fathoms deep and it
is wide enough," etc.

[131-1] _Bledos._ The French translators give _cresson sauvage_, wild
cress, as the equivalent.

[131-2] Las Casas, I. 320, says Columbus understood "that from these to
the mainland would be a sail of ten days by reason of the notion he had
derived from the chart or picture which the Florentine sent him."

[131-3] Baracoa (Las Casas); Puerto Naranjo (Markham); Nipe (Navarrete);
Nuevitas (Thacher).

[132-1] Punta de Mulas. (Navarrete.)

[132-2] Punta de Cabanas. (Navarrete.)

[132-3] Puerto de Banes. (Navarrete.)

[132-4] Puerto de las Nuevitas del Principe. (Navarrete.)

[132-5] Las Casas, I. 321, has "many heads well carved from wood."
Possibly these were totems.

[133-1] Las Casas, I. 321, comments, "These must have been skulls of the
manati, a very large fish, like large calves, which has a skin with no
scales like a whale and its head is like that of a cow."

[133-2] "I believe that this port was Baracoa, which name Diego
Velasquez, the first of the Spaniards to settle Cuba, gave to the harbor
of Asumpcion." Las Casas, I. 322.

[133-3] Near Granada in Spain.

[133-4] Nuevitas del Principe. (Navarrete.)

[133-5] "Alto de Juan Danue." (Navarrete.)

[134-1] Rio Maximo. (Navarrete.)

[134-2] See above, p. 91.

[134-3] Rather, "The text here is corrupt." Las Casas, I. 324, gives the
same figures and adds, "yet I think the text is erroneous." Navarrete
says the quadrants of that period measured the altitude double and so we
should take half of forty-two as the real altitude. If so, one wonders
why there was no explanation to this effect in the original journal which
Las Casas saw or why Las Casas was not familiar with this fact and did
not make this explanation. Ruge, _Columbus_, pp. 144, 145, says there
were no such quadrants, and regards these estimates as proofs of
Columbus's ignorance as a scientific navigator.

[134-4] In Toscanelli's letter Cathay is a province in one place and a
city in another.

[134-5] Boca de Carabelas grandes. (Navarrete.)

[135-1] Punta del Maternillo. (Navarrete.)

[135-2] Las Casas says, I. 326. "I think the Christians did not
understand, for the language of all these islands is the same, and in
this island of Espanola gold is called _caona_."

[136-1] The last words should be, "distant from the one and from the
other." Las Casas, I. 327, says: "Zayton and Quisay are certain cities or
provincias of the mainland which were depicted on the map of Paul the
physician as mentioned above." These Chinese cities were known from Marco
Polo's description of them. This passage in the Journal is very
perplexing if it assumes that Columbus was guided by the Toscanelli
letter. Again a few days earlier Columbus was sure that Cuba was Cipango,
and now he is equally certain that it is the mainland of Asia asserted by
Toscanelli to be 26 spaces or 6500 Italian miles west of Lisbon, but the
next day his estimate of his distance from Lisbon is 4568 miles. It would
seem as if Columbus attached no importance to the estimate of distances
on the Toscanelli map which was the only original information in it.

[137-1] _Cf._ p. 134, note 3.

[137-2] The true distance was 1105 leagues. (Navarrete.)

[138-1] _Contramaestre_ is boatswain.

[138-2] "_Bohio_ means in their language 'house,' and therefore it is to
be supposed that they did not understand the Indians, but that it was
Hayti, which is this island of Espanola where they made signs there was
gold." Las Casas, I. 329.

[138-3] Columbus understood the natives to say these things because of
his strong preconceptions as to what he would find in the islands off the
coast of Asia based on his reading of the Book of Sir John Maundeville.
Cf. ch. XVIII. of that work, _e.g._, "a great and fair isle called
Nacumera.... And all the men and women have dogs' heads," and ch. XIX.,
_e.g._, "In one of these isles are people of great stature, like giants,
hideous to look upon; and they have but one eye in the middle of the
forehead."

[139-1] Las Casas, I. 329, identifies the _mames_ as _ajes_ and
_batatas_. The batatas, whence our word "potato," is the sweet potato.
_Mames_ is more commonly written _names_ or _ignames_. This is the Guinea
Negro name of the _Dioscorea sativa_, in English "Yam." _Ajes_ is the
native West Indies name. See Peschel, _Zeitalter der Entdeckungen_, p.
139, and Columbus's journal, Dec. 13 and Dec. 16. _Faxones_ are the
common haricot kidney beans or string beans, _Phaseolus vulgaris_. This
form of the name seems a confusion of the Spanish _fasoles_ and the
Portuguese _feijoes_. That Columbus, an Italian by birth who had lived
and married in Portugal and removed to Spain in middle life, should
occasionally make slips in word-forms is not strange. More varieties of
this bean are indigenous in America than were known in Europe at the time
of the discoveries. Cf. De Candolle, _Origin of Cultivated Plants_, pp.
338 ff.

[139-2] The word is _contramaestre_, boatswain.

[141-1] The last line should read, "but that they did not know whether
there was any in the place where they were."

[141-2] The last line should read, "with a brand in their hand, [and]
herbs to smoke as they are accustomed to do." This is the earliest
reference to smoking tobacco. Las Casas, I. 332, describes the process as
the natives practised it: "These two Christians found on their way many
people, men and women, going to and from their villages and always the
men with a brand in their hands and certain herbs to take their smoke,
which are dry herbs placed in a certain leaf, also dry like the paper
muskets which boys make at Easter time. Having lighted one end of it,
they suck at the other end or draw in with the breath that smoke which
they make themselves drowsy and as if drunk, and in that way, they say,
cease to feel fatigue. These muskets, or whatever we call them, they call
_tabacos_. I knew Spaniards in this island of Espanola who were
accustomed to take them, who, when they were rebuked for it as a vice,
replied they could not give it up. I do not know what pleasant taste or
profit they found in them." Las Casas' last remarks show that smoking was
not yet common in his later life in Spain. The paper muskets of Las Casas
are blow-pipes. Oviedo, lib. V., cap. II., gives a detailed description
of the use of tobacco. He says that the Indians smoked by inserting these
tubes in the nostrils and that after two or three inhalations they lost
consciousness. He knew some Christians who used it as an anesthetic when
in great pain.

[142-1] On this indigenous species of dumb dogs, _cf._ Oviedo, lib. XII.
cap. V. They have long been extinct in the Antilles. Oviedo says there
were none in Espanola when he wrote. He left the island in 1546.

[142-2] This last part of this sentence should read, "and is cultivated
with _mames_, kidney beans, other beans, this same panic [_i.e._, Indian
corn], etc." The corresponding passage in the _Historie_ of Ferdinand
Columbus reads, "and another grain like panic called by them _mahiz_ of
very excellent flavor cooked or roasted or pounded in porridge
(polenta)," p. 87.

[142-3] The _arroba_ was 25 pounds and the _quintal_ one hundred weight.

[143-1] In Las Casas, I. 339, Bohio is mentioned with Babeque, and it is
in Bohio that the people were reported to gather gold on the beach.

[144-1] _I.e._, although the Spaniards may be only fooling with them.

[145-1] An interesting forecast of the future which may be compared with
John Cabot's; see one of the last pages of this volume.

[145-2] _Linaloe._ Lignaloes or agallochum, to be distinguished from the
medicinal aloes. Both were highly prized articles of mediaeval Oriental
trade. Lignaloes is mentioned by Marco Polo as one of the principal
commodities exchanged in the market of Zaitun. It is also frequently
mentioned in the Bible. _Cf._ numbers xxiv, 6, or Psalm xlv. 8. The aloes
of Columbus were probably the Barbadoes aloes of commerce, and the mastic
the produce of the _Bursera gummifera_. The last did not prove to be a
commercial resin like the mastic of Scio. See _Encyclopaedia Britannica_
under Aloes and Mastic, and Heyd, _Histoire du Commerce du Levant au
Moyen Age_, II. 581, 633.

[145-3] The ducat being 9_s._ 2_d._ In the seventeenth century the value
of the mastic exported from Chios (Scio) was 30,000 ducats. Chios
belonged to Genoa from 1346 to 1566. (Markham.)

[146-1] _Las Sierras del Cristal_ and _Las Sierras de Moa_. (Navarrete.)

[147-1] Puerto de Taxamo, in Cuba. (Navarrete.)

[148-1] _Cf._ Fra Mauro's Map (1457-1459), Bourne, _Spain in America_,
14, and Behaim's Globe, Winsor's _Columbus_, p. 186, or Fiske's
_Discovery of America_, I. 422.

[149-1] Las Casas did not know the meaning of this word. In all
probability it is the Italian _tasso_, badger. _Cf._ p. 139, note 1. The
animal, Cuvier suggested was probably the coati.

[149-2] Cuvier conjectured this to be the trunk fish.

[150-1] The agouti.

[152-1] See p. 134, note 3. The words following "Port of Mares" should be
translated "but here he says that he has the quadrant hung up (or not in
use) until he reaches land to repair it. Since it seemed to him that this
distance," etc. Las Casas omitted to insert the number of degrees in his
comment.

[152-2] The sentences omitted are comments of Las Casas on these
reflections of Columbus.

[153-1] See p. 138, note 3.

[153-2] _A la hora de tercia_, about 9 A.M. See p. 118, note 1.

[153-3] Cayo de Moa. (Navarrete.)

[154-1] Rio de Moa. (Navarrete.)

[154-2] Punta del Mangle or del Guarico. (Navarrete.)

[154-3] Sierras de Moa. (Navarrete.)

[154-4] "These must have been _margaseta_ stones which look like gold in
streams and of which there is an abundance in the rivers of these
islands." Las Casas, I. 346.

[155-1] _Madronos._ _Arbutus unedo_ or the Strawberry tree. The
California Madrona is the _Arbutus Menziesii_.

[155-2] Rather, "for making sawmills."

[156-1] Among these were the Bay of Yamanique, and the ports of Jaragua,
Taco, Cayaganueque, Nava, and Maravi. (Navarrete.)

[156-2] See p. 126, note 1.

[157-1] The original of the words Cannibal and Carib and Caribbean. _Cf._
also p. 138, note 3.

[157-2] The port of Baracoa. (Navarrete.)

[157-3] Monte del Yunque. (Navarrete.)

[158-1] Port of Maravi. (Navarrete.)

[158-2] Punta de Maici. (_Id._)

[158-3] Puerto de Baracoa. (_Id._)

[160-1] With these suggestions for a colonial policy _cf._ Columbus's
more detailed programme in his letter to Ferdinand and Isabella, pp.
273-277 below. In the Spanish policy of exclusion of foreigners from the
colonies the religious motive, as here, was quite as influential as the
spirit of trade monopoly. Las Casas, in making the same quotation from
the Journal, remarks, I. 351: "All these are his exact words, although
some of them are not perfect Castilian, since that was not the Admiral's
mother tongue."

[161-1] The _fusta_ was a long, low boat propelled by oars or a sail. It
is represented in earlier English by "foist" and "fuste."

[161-2] Las Casas, I. 353, remarks, "This wax was never made in the
island of Cuba, and this cake that was found came from the kingdom and
provinces of Yucatan, where there is an immense amount of very good
yellow wax." He supposes that it might have come from the wrecks of
canoes engaged in trade along the coast of Yucatan.

[162-1] About 70 feet. Las Casas adds the words, "it was most beautiful,"
and continues, "it is no wonder for there are in that island very thick
and very long and tall fragrant red cedars and commonly all their canoes
are made from these valuable trees."

[162-2] Puerto de Baracoa. (Navarrete.)

[163-1] This reef actually exists on the S.E. side of the entrance to
this port, which is described with great accuracy by Columbus.
(Navarrete.)

[163-2] _Lombarda_ is the same as _bombarda_, bombard, the earliest type
of cannon. The name has nothing to do with Lombardy, but is simply the
form which was used in Castile in the fifteenth century while _bombarda_
was used elsewhere in the peninsula and in Europe. The average-sized
bombard was a twenty-five pounder. _Diccionario Enciclopedico
Hispano-Americano_, art. _lombardo_, based on Arautegui, _Apuntes
Historicos sobre la Artilleria Espanola en los Siglos XIV y XV_.

[164-1] This line should be, "in which he saw five very large _almadias_
[low, light boats] which the Indians call _canoas_, like _fustas_, very
beautiful and so well constructed," etc. "Canoe" is one of the few Arawak
Indian words to have become familiar English.

[164-2] Rather, "He went up a mountain and then he found it all level and
planted with many things of the country and gourds so that it was
glorious to see it." De Candolle believes the calabash or gourd to have
been introduced into America from Africa. _Cf._ his _Origin of Cultivated
Plants_, pp. 245 ff. Oviedo, however, in his _Historia General y Natural
de Indias_, lib. VIII., cap. VIII., says that the _calabacas_ of the
Indies were the same as those in Spain and were cultivated not to eat but
to use the shells as vessels.

[164-3] Rather, "rods."

[166-1] Rio Boma. (Navarrete.)

[166-2] Punta del Fraile. (_Id._)

[166-3] Punta de los Azules. (_Id._)

[167-1] Las Casas, I. 359, says, "This high and beautiful cape whither he
would have liked to go I believe was Point Mayci, which is the extreme
end of Cuba toward the east." According to the modern maps of Cuba it
must have been one of the capes to the southwest of Point Maici.

