
Emerging from the park at Charing Cross, past the old church of
Saint. Martin's in the Fields, and keeping round the walls to
Holborn Bars, they made their way to their lodging, and Godolphin
was carried into their room, which was on the ground floor. Mike
and O'Neil then took the chair away, and left it in a narrow
alley, where it was not likely to attract attention until the
morning.

Not until they returned was anything said to their prisoner. It
had been agreed that O'Neil, as the senior, was to be spokesman of
the party.

"Lord Godolphin," he said, "I regret that circumstances have
obliged us to use force towards you, but our necessities compel us
to leave the country at once, and it has appeared to us that in no
way could we get away so expeditiously as with the aid of your
lordship. We will now set you free. I must tell you, beforehand,
that if you attempt to raise your voice and give the alarm, we
shall be constrained to blow out your brains."

Mike now released him from the bonds, and removed the gag from his
mouth, but for a time the minister was incapable of speech, being
choked by anger at the treatment he had met with.

"You will repent this outrage," he burst out, at last.

"I think not, sir," O'Neil said, quietly. "At any rate, we are
quite ready to take our chance of that. In order that you may feel
at ease with us, I have no hesitation in telling you who we are.
We are the three French officers who, as no doubt you have heard,
yesterday escaped from Newgate, and we are anxious to get out of
the country as soon as possible. It will be also a guarantee to
you that we have no designs on either your pockets or your
person."

Angry as he still was, it was evident, by the expression of the
treasurer's face, that the information was a relief to him, for
indeed he had supposed that he had been carried off by political
enemies, and was very uncertain as to what would befall him.

"What is it that you require, then?" he asked, after a pause.

"Merely this, sir. That you will give us an order, upon an agent
through whom you communicate with France, to take us across the
channel immediately."

"Well, gentlemen," Godolphin said, more calmly, "I must say your
coolness surprises me. Your escape yesterday was, of course,
reported to us; and the manner in which you obtained that rope, by
which you descended, is a mystery that the jail authorities are
wholly unable to solve.

"If you obtain the order you desire, will you give me your word of
honour that it shall be used in a manner in no way hostile to the
interests of this country, but solely, as you say, for the purpose
of conveying you across the channel?"

"That promise we give willingly. We must ask you to pledge your
honour, as a gentleman, that the order you give us will be a
genuine one--a matter that we cannot ascertain until we arrive at
the address given. We are willing to play fairly with you, sir,
but if you do not do the same, we shall certainly return to
London, though in some different guise, and, if so, I warn you
that no guards will save you from our vengeance."

"You need not threaten, sir," Lord Godolphin said calmly. "I will
give you the order, to the person to whom such communications are
addressed, and it shall be couched in the same words as usual."

Desmond placed a sheet of paper, pen, and ink before him. He,
dating it from the Treasury, wrote:

To John Dawkins, Mariner, High Street, Rye. Urgent.

On the receipt of this, you will at once convey the bearer, and
three persons with him, and land them in some convenient spot in
France.

He then added his signature.

"Now, gentlemen, what next?" he said, looking up.

O'Neil looked at his companions, and then they spoke for a moment
together.

"We are about to start at once, my lord," he said, "and it was our
intention to have left you bound and gagged, until the morning,
when the woman of the house would have assuredly found you and
released you. But, as you have acceded to our request at once, we
will, if you give us your word of honour that you will raise no
alarm, and say no word of this business until eight o'clock
tomorrow morning, let you depart at once."

"Thank you for your courtesy, gentlemen, and for your confidence
in my honour. I am, indeed, anxious to return home at once. If I
do not do so, there will be a hue and cry for me, and by the time
I return in the morning all London will know that I am missing. I
naturally should not wish this adventure to become a matter of
common talk: in the first place, because the position in which you
have placed me can scarcely be called a pleasant one; and
secondly, because the success of your enterprise might lead others
to make similar attempts on my person, or that of my colleagues.
Even now, I fear that my servants, when sufficiently recovered,
will go to my house and give the alarm."

"I do not think that that is likely to be the case, my lord,"
O'Neil said, "as we took the precaution of gagging and binding
them, and laid them down some distance from the roadside. If, on
your return home, you find they have not arrived, you have but to
send a couple of your servants out to release them. You can give
them strict orders that no word is to be said of the affair, and
make them to understand you were attacked in error, and that the
ruffians who took part in the outrage at once released you, upon
discovering your identity."

"Very good, sir," Godolphin said, with a grim smile. "I must
really compliment you all on your fertility of resource and
invention. And now, is there anything else that I can do for you?"

"There is one small favour," Desmond said. "Your lordship has
doubtless twenty guineas in your possession. You would greatly
oblige us if you would give us them, for so many louis. These you
will have no difficulty in exchanging, whereas the exhibition of
French money, on our part, might excite suspicion."

Lord Godolphin placed his hand in his pocket, drew out a heavy
purse, and, opening it, counted out twenty guineas. O'Neil took
these up, and handed to him twenty louis pieces.

"One more question, gentlemen. What has become of my sedan chair?"

"It is in an alley, hard by," O'Neil said, "and as we are
ourselves going in your direction we will carry it to your door."

"You are obliging, indeed, sir. If it had been found, the
escutcheon on the panels would have shown that it was mine."

"I fear, my lord, that you will have to have it repainted; for,
before starting with you, we took the precaution to put black
paint over the gilding and panels. Still, the lining and fittings
would show that it belonged to some person of wealth and
importance. As you have been so obliging to us, we will gladly
escort you, with it, to your door."

"I shall be glad, indeed, of that, gentlemen, for I certainly
should not care about travelling alone through these lanes and
alleys, which have by no means a good reputation."

"We are ready to start at once, my lord," O'Neil said. "We have a
long journey to perform, and, although there is now no need for
extraordinary speed, we shall be glad to be off."

They were ready at once, having settled with their landlady before
starting out in the evening, telling her that they had heard of a
job and should start early in the morning. Mike and Desmond
fetched the empty chair, and they then started, Godolphin walking
with the other officers in front.

"This is the most surprising adventure that ever happened to me,"
Lord Godolphin said; "and it is a pity that officers who possess
the wit to plan an escape from Newgate, and to ensure a speedy
flight from the country by carrying me off, are not in the service
of Her Majesty."

"We may yet be in the British service some day, my lord,"
O'Sullivan laughed; "but I may tell you that my friend, and
myself, disclaim any credit in contriving the matter of which you
spoke, that being solely the work of our young comrade, who is at
present the youngest ensign in our regiment."

"Then he must be a shrewd fellow, indeed," Godolphin said, "likely
to do service in any position to which he may attain."

They walked sharply. Several times rough men came and peered at
them, but Godolphin was wrapped in a cloak, and the appearance of
those with him showed that hard knocks, rather than booty, would
be the result of interfering with them. On reaching Lord
Godolphin's house they placed the sedan chair on the steps.

"Goodnight to you, gentlemen, and good fortune!" Lord Godolphin
said. "The lesson has not been lost, and I shall take good care,
in future, to have a strong escort."

They then crossed Westminster Bridge, and made rapidly for the
spot where the cart was waiting for them.

"You are an hour after your time," the man said. "I had begun to
think that something had gone wrong with you."

"That is not the case," O'Neil said; "but we have certainly been
detained longer than we anticipated."

"Where are we going to?"

"To Rye."

"That will suit me very well," the man said. "I have friends along
that road, and shall have no trouble about horses."

They started at once, at a rattling pace, the animals, though but
sorry-looking creatures, being speedy and accustomed to long
journeys. It was evident, from the man's manner, that he believed
his passengers were cracksmen who had just successfully carried
out an enterprise of importance. He expressed surprise that they
had brought no luggage with them.

They did not care to undeceive him. Mike had brought with him a
bottle of good brandy, and a drink of this soon removed the
vexation the man had felt at being kept waiting for them.

Twice during the journey they changed horses, each time at small
wayside inns, where some password, given by the driver, at once
roused the landlord into activity. But a few minutes were spent in
the changes, and the fifty miles to Rye were accomplished in seven
hours--a very unusual rate of speed along the badly kept roads of
the period. When the car drew up in the High Street of Rye, the
four occupants were scarce able to stand, so bruised and shaken
were they by their rapid passage over the rough road.

They handed the twelve pounds agreed upon to the driver, adding
another as a token of their satisfaction at the speed at which he
had driven them, and then enquired for the house of William
Dawkins. It was close by, and upon knocking at the door, it was
opened by the man himself.

"I have a message to deliver to you, in private," O'Neil said.

The man nodded, and led the way indoors, where the letter was
handed to him.

"That is all right," he said. "My craft is always ready to set
sail, at an hour's notice, and if the wind holds fair I will land
you on the French coast before nightfall. I see that your business
is urgent, or you would not have put on disguises before leaving
London. I suppose you have brought other clothes to land in?"

"We have not," O'Neil said. "We came away in such a hurry that we
did not think of it until on the road, and then we thought that we
might procure them here."

"There will be no difficulty about that," the sailor said. "I will
go out, and warn my men that we shall sail in half an hour, and
then I can get any garments that you desire; for, doubtless, you
do not wish to attract comment by the purchase of clothes that
would seem unfitted to your present position."

"That is so," O'Sullivan said, "and we shall gladly embrace your
offer. We should like three suits, such as are worn by persons of
fair position in France, and one proper for a serving man."

"I cannot get you quite French fashion, sir, but they do not
differ much from our own; and with a cloak each, I have no doubt
that you would pass without attracting attention--that is, of
course, if you speak French well."

"As well as English," O'Neil said. "Here are seven pounds in gold,
which will, I should think, be sufficient. If not, we are provided
with French gold, for use after landing there."

"I have no doubt it will suffice, sir. If not, I will pay what is
the excess, and you can settle with me afterwards."

In three-quarters of an hour after their arrival at Rye, they were
dressed in their new disguises and on board the little lugger,
which at once started down the river, which was at that time much
more free from shoals and difficulties than it is at present.

"Your boat seems fast," Desmond remarked, as, having cleared the
mouth of the river, she put out to sea.

"She is fast, sir; the fastest thing that sails out of Rye. She
needs be, for the gentlemen who come to me are always in a hurry."

"I suppose you have no fear of English cruisers?"

"Not at all. I have the order you brought with you, and have only
to show it to any English ship of war that overhauls us, for them
to let us go on at once. I am careful when I get near the French
coast, for although their big craft never venture out far, there
are numbers of chasse-maree patrolling the coast. However, even if
caught by them, it would be but a temporary detention, for I am
well known at Etaples, which is always my port, unless specially
directed to land my passengers elsewhere."

The wind was fresh and favourable, and at six o'clock in the
afternoon they entered the little port. Some gendarmes came down
to the wharf.

"We need have no fear of them," William Dawkins said. "Their
lieutenant is paid handsomely for keeping his eyes shut, and
asking no questions."

"So you are back again," the officer said. "Why, it is not a week
since you were here!"

"No, it is but six days since I sailed."

"And you have four passengers?"

"That's the number, sir. The Irish gentlemen are desirous of
entering the service of France."

The officer nodded.

"Well, gentlemen, you will find plenty of your countrymen in
Paris; and, as everyone knows, there are no better or braver
soldiers in His Majesty's service."

The friends had already enquired, from William Dawkins, whether
there was any passage money to pay, saying that they had forgotten
to ask before starting.

"Not at all. I am well paid by Government. My boat is always
retained at a price that suits me well, and I get so much extra
for every voyage I make. No, sir, thank you; I will take nothing
for myself, but if you like to give half a guinea to the crew, to
drink success to you, I will not say no."

The party made no stay at Etaples, but at once ordered a chaise
and post horses. Then, changing at every post house, and suffering
vastly less discomfort than they experienced in the journey to
Rye--the roads being better kept in France than they were on the
English side of the channel--they arrived in Paris at eleven
o'clock next day.



Chapter 11: On the Frontier.


On entering the barrack yard, they found that the regiment had
marched, ten days before, for the frontier, and that Lord Galmoy's
regiment had taken their place. They went at once to his quarters
and told him that, having effected their escape, they had
travelled with all speed to inform the king of the determination
of the English Government to bring the Irish officers to
execution, and to implore him to intervene in their favour.

"I will go with you to Versailles, at once," Lord Galmoy said;
"but, as you have no uniforms, and the king is very strict on
matters of etiquette, three of my officers will lend you their
suits and swords. While they are being fetched, sit down and share
my meal, for doubtless you have not waited to eat on the road."

He then gave the necessary instructions, and half an hour later
the three officers, now in uniform, started with him on horseback
for Versailles. The king had just returned from hunting, and it
was an hour before Lord Galmoy could obtain an audience with him.
He had, on the road, told the others he felt sure that the king,
who was well served by his agents in London, had already heard of
the intention of the English Government, but as to whether he had
sent off a remonstrance he was of course ignorant.

"I shall press the matter strongly upon him, and point out the
deep feeling that will be excited, throughout his Irish and Scotch
troops, if nothing is done to save the prisoners.

"Louis is a politic monarch," he said, "and, knowing our worth and
that of his Scotch soldiers, I think that he will, on my
representations, bestir himself. Wauchop has many times performed
brilliant services, and deserves well of France. However, we shall
see."

When they were admitted to the audience, Lord Galmoy introduced
the three soldiers of O'Brien's regiment as coming that morning to
Paris, having effected their escape from Newgate. As he repeated
their names, the king looked sharply at Desmond.

"Ah, ah!" he said, "so our young ensign is in the thick of
adventures again. These we will hear presently.

"Well, my lord, why have they come here so hurriedly after their
arrival?"

"They came to inform Your Majesty that the English Government have
determined to execute Colonel Francis Wauchop, and the twelve
officers of their regiment who were on board the Salisbury,
captured on the coast of Scotland."

Desmond, who was watching the king's face closely, saw that this
was no news to him, and that he was annoyed by its being now
brought to his notice; for doubtless the fate of a colonel, and a
dozen young officers, was a matter that affected him little; and
that, had the matter not been forced upon him, he would not have
troubled about it, but, when it was too late, would have professed
entire ignorance of the intentions of the English Government.

He only said, however, "It is incredible that there can be an
intention to execute officers in our service, captured upon a
warlike expedition."

"It is but too true, sir. Against Colonel Wauchop they have no
ground for severity. By the convention of Limerick, he and all
other officers were formally permitted to enter Your Majesty's
service; but the young lieutenants have, of course, joined long
since that time, and therefore cannot benefit by the terms of the
convention; and could, with a show of justice, be executed as
English subjects, traitors serving against their country."

"We are afraid that our remonstrance would have but little effect
with the English Government."

Lord Galmoy smiled slightly, for it was notorious that
negotiations had gone on between King James and his councillors,
and several of the members of the English Ministry, Marlborough
himself being more than suspected of having a secret understanding
with the little court at Saint Germain.

He only said, however, "Your Majesty has in your hands the power
of compelling the English Government to alter their determination
in this matter."

"How so, my lord?" the king asked, in much surprise.

"You have, sire, many prisoners, Frenchmen of the reformed
religion, who had entered the service of the Protestant
princes--your enemies--and who were taken in Dutch and Flemish
towns we have captured. These stand in the same relation towards
Your Majesty as the Irish officers towards England. You have,
then, but to inform the government there that, if they in any way
harm the Irish officers and noncommissioned officers in their
hands, you will at once execute a similar number of these French
Protestant officers, whom you have hitherto treated as prisoners
of war. Then, possibly, an exchange might be effected.

"Your Majesty will, I think, pardon me for saying that, unless
steps are taken to save these officers' lives, the matter is
likely to have a very bad effect on the Irish and Scotch
regiments, whose ardour will not be improved by the knowledge that
in case of a reverse they will, if not killed in the field, be
executed as traitors; for nearly half of the men who are now
serving have joined since the formation of the Brigade, and are
not protected by the terms of the Limerick treaty. They are
devoted to Your Majesty's service, and are ready to lay down their
lives freely for the cause of France; but it would not be fair
that they should also run the risk of execution, if they are by
misfortune made prisoners."

"There is much in what you say, Lord Galmoy, and you certainly
point out a way by which these officers can be saved. A messenger
shall start, in an hour's time, with a letter to the English
Government. It shall be delivered at their headquarters in
Flanders by noon tomorrow, with a request that it shall be
forwarded by special messenger to the British minister; and we
will have a proclamation posted in Paris, and in the various camps
of the army, saying that we have warned the English Government
that, unless the officers and men captured off the coast of
Scotland are treated as prisoners of war, we shall retaliate by
treating all French officers taken in foreign service in the same
way; and that we have furthermore offered to exchange an equal
number of such officers and men, in our hands, for those held by
the British Government."

"I thank Your Majesty, most respectfully and heartily, in the name
of all the foreign officers in your service. Even should,
unfortunately, the English Government refuse to pardon or exchange
their prisoners, it will be seen that Your Majesty has done all in
your power to save them, and there will be a general feeling of
reprobation, throughout Europe, at the conduct of the English
Ministry."

"We beg these officers to wait in the anteroom, while we dictate
our despatch and proclamation to our secretary. We would fain
question them as to how they effected their escape from their
prison, and how they have made so speedy a journey here."

Lord Galmoy bowed, and retired with the others.

"We have done well," he said, "better indeed than I had hoped.
Now, having succeeded in saving our countrymen's lives, which I
doubt not would have been otherwise sacrificed, I shall return at
once to Paris, for there is an inspection of my regiment this
afternoon."

"We have been fortunate, indeed," O'Neil said, when Lord Galmoy
had left. "I have no doubt the king had heard that the English
Government had resolved to execute the prisoners, but I question
whether he would have stirred in the matter, had it not been for
Galmoy's representation."

"I am sure, by his manner, that he had received the news before,"
Desmond said, "and, as you say, had not intended to interfere. It
was the suggestion that he might threaten retaliation, and that
the effect of his not moving in the matter would be very bad among
his Irish troops, that decided him to interfere. He may have felt
that any mere protest made by him would have had little effect,
and it is not his nature to expose himself to a rebuff; but,
directly he saw that he had an effective weapon in his hands, he
took the matter up as warmly as we could wish."
