sides. Hanno, however, would not stand before them when they
approached, but sailed away betimes to the harbor of Carthage and
kept constant guard of the city. Hamilcar, apprised of this, stayed
where he was. The Romans disembarked on land and marched against the
city Aspis, whose inhabitants, seeing them approaching, slipped out
quietly and in good season. The Romans thus occupied it without
striking a blow and made it a base in the war. From it they ravaged
the country and acquired cities, some of their own free will and
others by intimidation. They also kept securing great booty, receiving
vast numbers of deserters, and getting back many of their own men who
had been captured in the previous wars.

VIII, 13.--Winter came on and Manlius sailed back to Rome with the
booty, whereas Regulus remained behind in Libya. The Carthaginians
found themselves in the depths of woe, since their country was being
pillaged and their vassals alienated; but cooped up in their
fortifications they remained inactive. [Sidenote: (FRAG. 43^18?)]
WHILE REGULUS WAS BESIDE THE BAGRADAS RIVER A SERPENT OF HUGE BULK
APPEARED TO HIM, THE LENGTH OF WHICH IS SAID TO HAVE BEEN ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY FEET. ITS SLOUGH WAS CARRIED TO ROME FOR EXHIBITION
PURPOSES. AND THE REST OF ITS BODY CORRESPONDED IN SIZE. It destroyed
many of the soldiers that approached it and some also who were
drinking from the river. Regulus overcame it by a crowd of soldiers
and hurling-engines. After thus destroying it he gave battle by night
to Hamilcar, who was encamped upon a high, woody spot; and he slew
many in their beds as well as many who had just risen. Any who escaped
fell in with Romans guarding the roads, who despatched them. In this
way a large division of Carthaginians was blotted out and numerous
cities went over to the Romans. [Sidenote: FRAG. 43^19] THOSE IN THE
TOWN BEING IN FEAR OF CAPTURE SENT HERALDS TO THE CONSUL TO THE END
THAT HAVING BY SOME SATISFACTORY ARRANGEMENT INDUCED HIM TO GO AWAY
THEY MIGHT AVOID THE DANGER OF THE MOMENT AND SO ESCAPE. BUT WHEN MANY
UNREASONABLE DEMANDS WERE MADE OF THEM, THEY DECIDED THAT THE TRUCE
WOULD MEAN THEIR UTTER SUBJUGATION AND PREPARED RATHER TO FIGHT.

[Sidenote: B.C. 255 (_a.u._ 499)] Regulus, however, who up to that
time was fortunate, became filled with boastfulness and conceit, so
much so that he even wrote to Rome that he had sealed up the gates of
Carthage with fear. His followers and the people of Rome thought the
same way, and this caused their undoing. Allies of various sorts came
to the Carthaginians, among them Xanthippus from Sparta. He assumed
the general superintendence of the Carthaginians, for the populace was
eager to entrust matters to his charge and Hamilcar together with the
other officials stepped aside voluntarily. The new leader, then,
disposed things excellently in every way, and particularly he brought
the Carthaginians down from the heights, where they were staying
through fear, into the level country, where their horses and elephants
were sure to develop greatest power. For some time he remained
inactive until at length he found the Romans encamped in a way that
betokened their contempt. They were very haughty over their victorious
progress and looked down upon Xanthippus as a "Graecus" (this is a name
they give to Hellenes and they use this epithet as a reproach to them
for their mean birth); [Sidenote: B.C. 255 (_a.u._ 499)] consequently
they had constructed their camp in a heedless fashion. While the
Romans were in this situation, Xanthippus assailed them, routed their
cavalry with his elephants, cut down many and captured many alive,
among them Regulus himself. This put the Carthaginians in high
spirits. They saved the lives of the captives in order that their own
citizens previously taken captive by the Romans might not be killed.
All the Roman prisoners were treated with consideration except
Regulus, whom they kept in a state of utter misery; they offered him
only just food enough to maintain existence and they would repeatedly
lead an elephant close up to him to frighten him, so that he might
have peace in neither body nor mind. After afflicting him in this way
for a good while they placed him in prison.

The manner in which the Carthaginians dealt with their allies forms a
chapter of great ruthlessness in this story. They were not supplied
with sufficient wealth to pay them what they had originally promised,
and dismissed them with the understanding that they would pay them
their wages before very long. To the men who escorted the allies,
however, they issued orders to put them ashore on a desert island and
quietly sail away. As to Xanthippus, one story is that they drowned
him, attacking him in boats after his boat had departed: the other is
that they gave him an old ship which was in no wise seaworthy but had
been newly covered over with pitch outside, that it might sink quite
of itself; and that he, aware of the fact, got aboard a different
ship and so was saved. Their reason for doing this was to avoid
seeming to have been preserved by his ability; for they thought that
once he had perished the renown of his deeds would also perish.

VIII, 14.--The people of Rome were grieved at the turn of events and
more especially because they were looking for the Carthaginians to
sail against Rome itself. For this reason they carefully guarded Italy
and hastily sent to the Romans in Sicily and Libya the consuls Marcus
AEmilius and Fulvius Paetinus.[21] They after sailing to Sicily and
garrisoning the positions there started for Libya, but were overtaken
by a storm and carried to Cossura. They ravaged the island and put it
in charge of a garrison, then sailed onward again. Meanwhile a fierce
naval battle with the Carthaginians had taken place. The latter were
struggling to eject the Romans entirely from their native land, and
the Romans to save the remnants of their soldiers who had been left in
hostile territory. In the midst of a close battle the Romans in Aspis
suddenly attacked the Carthaginians in ships from the rear, and by
getting them between two forces overcame them. Later the Romans also
won an infantry engagement and took many prisoners, whose lives they
saved because of Regulus and those captured with him. They made
several raids and then sailed to Sicily. After encountering a storm,
however, and losing many of their number, they sailed for home with
the ships that remained.

[Footnote 21: Zonaras spells _Plaetinus_.]

[Sidenote: B.C. 254 (_a.u._ 500)] The Carthaginians took Cossura and
crossed over to Sicily; and had they not learned that Collatinus[22]
and Gnaeus Cornelius were approaching with a large fleet, they would
have subjugated the whole of it. The Romans had quickly fitted out a
first-class fleet, had made levies of their best men, and had become
so strong that in the third month they returned to Sicily. It was the
five hundredth year from the founding of Rome. The lower city of
Panhormus they took without trouble, but in the siege of the citadel
they fared badly until food failed those in it. Then they came to
terms with the consuls. [Sidenote: FRAG. 43^20] THE CARTHAGINIANS KEPT
WATCH FOR THEIR SHIPS HOMEWARD BOUND AND CAPTURED SEVERAL THAT WERE
FULL OF MONEY.

[Footnote 22: This is A. Atilius Calatinus again.]

[Sidenote: B.C. 253 (_a.u._ 501)] The next event was that Servilius
Caepio and Gaius Sempronius, consuls, made an attempt upon Lilybaeum
(from which they were repulsed) and crossing over to Libya ravaged the
coast districts. As they were returning homeward they encountered a
storm and incurred damage. Hence the people, thinking that the damage
was due to their inexperience in naval affairs, voted that they should
keep away from the sea in general but with a few ships should guard
Italy.

[Sidenote: B.C. 252 (_a.u._ 502)] In the succeeding year Publius
Gaius[23] and Aurelius Servilius[24] came to Sicily and subdued Himera
besides some other places. However, they did not get possession of any
of its inhabitants, for the Carthaginians conveyed them away by night.
After this Aurelius secured some ships from Hiero and adding to his
contingent all the Romans that were there he sailed to Lipara. Here
he left the tribune Quintus Cassius,[25] who was to keep a lookout but
avoid a battle, and set sail for home. Quintus, disregarding orders,
made an attack upon the city and lost many men. Aurelius, however,
subsequently took the place, killed all the inhabitants, and deposed
Cassius from his command.

[Footnote 23: A mistake for Gaius Aurelius and Publius Servilius, as
at the beginning of Chapter 16.]

[Footnote 24: [See previous footnote.]]

[Footnote 25: But Valerius Maximus (II, 7, 4) calls him P. Aurelius
Pecuniola.]

[Sidenote: B.C. 251 (_a.u._ 503)] The Carthaginians learned what the
Romans had determined regarding the fleet and sent an expedition to
Sicily hoping now to bring it entirely under their control. As long as
both consuls, Caecilius Metellus and Gaius Furius, were on the ground,
they remained quiet; but when Furius set out for Rome, they conceived
a contempt for Metellus and proceeded to Panhormus. Metellus
ascertained that spies had come from the enemy, and assembling all the
people of the city he began a talk with them, in the midst of which he
suddenly ordered them to lay hold of one another. He was thus enabled
to investigate who each one was and what was his business and so
detected the enemy.--The Carthaginians now set themselves in battle
array and Metellus pretended to be afraid. As he continued this
pretence for several days the Carthaginians became filled with
presumption and attacked him rather recklessly. Then Metellus raised
the signal for the Romans. Forthwith they made an unexpected rush
through all the gates, easily overcame resistance, and enclosed the
enemy in a narrow place through which they could now no longer
retreat. Being many in number and with many elephants along they were
huddled together and thrown into confusion. Meanwhile the Libyan fleet
approached the coast and became the prime cause of their destruction.
The fugitives seeing the ships rushed toward them and made desperate
exertions to climb aboard; some fell into the sea and perished, other
were killed by the elephants, which got close to one another and to
the human beings, still others were slain by the Romans; many also
were captured alive, men as well as elephants. For since the beasts,
bereft of the men to whom they were used, became furious, Metellus
made a proclamation to the prisoners, offering preservation and
forgiveness to such as would check them: accordingly, some keepers
approached the gentlest of the animals, controlling them by the
influence of their accustomed presence, and then won over the
remainder. These, one hundred and twenty in number, were conveyed to
Rome, and they were ferried across the strait in the following way. A
number of huge jars, separated by pieces of wood, were fastened
together in such a way that they were neither detached nor yet did
they touch; then this framework was spanned by beams and on the top of
all earth and brush were placed and the surface was fenced in round
about so that it resembled a courtyard. The beasts were put on board
this and were ferried across without knowing that they were moving on
the water. Thus did Metellus win a victory: Hasdrubal, the
Carthaginian leader, though he got away safe on this occasion was
later summoned to trial by the Carthaginians at home and suffered
impalement.

[Sidenote: FRAG. 43^21] VIII, 15.--THE CARTHAGINIANS NOW BEGAN
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE ROMANS ON ACCOUNT OF THE GREAT NUMBER OF THE
CAPTIVES (AMONG OTHER CAUSES); AND WITH THE ENVOYS THEY ALSO SENT
REGULUS HIMSELF, THINKING THAT THROUGH HIM THEIR OBJECT HAD
PRACTICALLY BEEN ALREADY GAINED BECAUSE OF THE REPUTATION AND VALOR OF
THE MAIN: AND THEY BOUND HIM BY OATHS TO RETURN WITHOUT FAIL. AND HE
ACTED IN ALL RESPECTS LIKE ONE OF THE CARTHAGINIANS; FOR HE DID NOT
EVEN GRANT HIS WIFE LEAVE TO CONFER WITH HIM NOR DID HE ENTER THE CITY
ALTHOUGH REPEATEDLY INVITED TO DO SO; INSTEAD, WHEN THE SENATE WAS
ASSEMBLED OUTSIDE THE WALLS, AS THEY WERE ACCUSTOMED TO DO IN TREATING
WITH ENVOYS OF THE ENEMY, and he was introduced into the gathering, he
said: "We, Conscript Fathers, have been sent to you by the
Carthaginians. They it was who despatched me on this journey, since by
the law of war I have become their slave. They ask, if possible, to
conclude the war upon terms pleasing to both parties or, if not, to
effect an exchange of prisoners." At the end of these words he
withdrew with the envoys that the Romans might deliberate in private.
When the consuls urged him to take part in their discussion,
[Sidenote: FRAG. 43^22] HE PAID NO HEED UNTIL PERMISSION WAS GRANTED
BY THE CARTHAGINIANS. For a time he was silent. Then, as the senators
bade him state his opinion, he spoke:


_(BOOK 12, BOISSEVAIN.)_

"I am one of you, Conscript Fathers, though I be captured times
without number. My body is a Carthaginian chattel, but my spirit is
yours. The former has been alienated from you, but the latter nobody
has the power to make anything else than Roman. As captive I belong to
the Carthaginians, yet, as I met with misfortune not from cowardice
but from zeal, I am not only a Roman, but my heart is in your cause.
Not in a single respect do I think reconciliation advantageous to
you."

After these words Regulus stated also the reasons for which he favored
rejecting the proposals, and added: "I know, to be sure, that manifest
destruction confronts me, for it is impossible to keep them from
learning the advice I have given; but even so I esteem the public
advantage above my own safety. If any one shall say: 'Why do you not
run away, or stay here?' he shall be told that I have sworn to them to
return and I would not transgress my oaths, not even when they have
been given to enemies. There are various explanations for this, but
the principal one is that if I abide by my oath I alone shall suffer
disaster, but if I break it, the whole city will be involved."

But the senate out of consideration for his safety showed a
disposition to make peace and to restore the captives. When he was
made aware of this, he pretended, in order that he might not be the
cause of their letting slip their advantage, that he had swallowed
deadly poison and was destined certainly to die from its effects.
Hence no agreement and no exchange of prisoners was made. As he was
departing in company with the envoys, his wife and children and others
clung to him, and the consuls declared they would not surrender him,
if he chose to stay, nor yet would they detain him if he was for
departing. Consequently, since he preferred not to transgress the
oaths, he was carried back. He died of outrages, so the legend
reports, perpetrated by his captors. They cut off his eyelids and for
a time shut him in darkness, then they threw him into some kind of
specially constructed receptacle bristling with spikes; and they made
him face the sun; so that through suffering and sleeplessness,--for
the spikes kept him from reclining in any fashion,--he perished. When
the Romans found it out, they delivered the foremost captives that
they held to his children to outrage and put to death in revenge.

[Sidenote: B.C. 250 (_a.u._ 504)] They voted that the consuls, Atilius
Gaius, brother of Regulus, and Lucius Manlius, should make a campaign
into Libya. On coming to Sicily they attacked Lilybaeum and undertook
to fill up a portion of the ditch to facilitate bringing up the
engines. The Carthaginians dug below the mound and undermined it. As
they found this to be a losing game because of the numbers of the
opposing workmen, they built another wall, crescent-shaped, inside.
The Romans ran tunnels under the circle, in order that when the wall
settled they might rush in through the breach thus made. The
Carthaginians then built counter-tunnels and came upon many workers
who were unaware of what the other side was doing. These they killed,
and also destroyed many by hurling blazing firewood into the diggings.
Some of the allies now, burdened by the strain of the siege and
displeased because their superiors did not come down with their full
wages, made propositions to the Romans to betray the place. Hamilcar
discovered their plot but did not disclose it, for fear of driving
them into open hostility. However, he supplied their leaders with
money and in addition promised other supplies of it to the mass of
them. In this way he won their favor, and they did not even deny their
treachery but drove away the last envoys who returned. The latter then
deserted to the consuls and received from them land in Sicily and
other gifts.

The Carthaginians at home, hearing this, sent Adherbal with a very
large number of ships carrying grain and money to Lilybaeum. The leader
waited for a time of storm and sailed in. Thereupon many others
likewise ventured to attempt a landing, and some made it, others were
destroyed.

As long as both the consuls were present, the conflicts were even.
Pestilence and famine, however, came to harass them and these caused
one of them with the soldiers of his division to return home. Hamilcar
then took courage and made sorties in which he would set fire to the
engines and slay the men defending them; his cavalry, starting from
Drepanum, prevented the Romans from getting provisions and overran the
territory of their allies; and Adherbal ravaged the shores now of
Sicily, now of Italy, so that the Romans fell into perplexity.
[Sidenote: B.C. 249 (_a.u._ 505)] Meantime, however, Lucius Junius was
making ready a fleet, and Claudius Pulcher made haste to reach
Lilybaeum, where he manned ships of war. With these he overhauled Hanno
the Carthaginian as he was leaving harbor on a five-banked ship. The
prize craft served the Romans as a model in shipbuilding.

The interests of their fleet were so frequently endangered that the
Romans were disheartened by the constant destruction of their ships.
In these they lost numbers of men and vast sums of money. Yet they
would not give up; nay, they even executed a man who in the senate
opened his mouth about reconciliation with the Carthaginians, and they
voted that a dictator should be named. Collatinus[26] was therefore
named dictator and Metellus became master of the horse, but they
accomplished nothing worthy of remembrance. While Collatinus[27] was
being named dictator, Junius had won over Eryx, and Carthalo had
occupied AEgithallus and taken Junius alive.

[Footnote 26: _A. Atilius Calatinus_ once more.]

[Footnote 27: [See previous footnote.]]

[Sidenote: B.C. 248 (_a.u._ 506)] VIII, 16.--The next year Gaius
Aurelius and Publius Servilius took office and spent their time in
harrying Lilybaeum and Drepanum, in keeping the Carthaginians off the
land, and in devastating the region that was in alliance with them.
Carthalo undertook many different kinds of enterprises against them,
but, as he accomplished nothing, he started for Italy with the object
of thus attracting the consuls to that country or, in any case, of
injuring the district and capturing cities. Yet he made no headway
even there and on learning that the praetor urbanus was approaching
sailed back to Sicily. His mercenaries now rebelled about a question
of pay, whereupon he put numbers ashore on desert islands and left
them there, and sent many more off to Carthage. When the rest heard
this, they became indignant and were on the point of an uprising.
Hamilcar, Carthalo's successor, cut down numbers of them one night and
had numerous others drowned. In the meantime the Romans had concluded
a perpetual friendship with Hiero and they furthermore remitted all
