give me your parole, and I will do all I can for your comfort. Delay,
and you must fall into their hands. There can be no escape.'

'You will take my word?' he said slowly.

'Give it, and you may keep your pistols, M. de Cocheforet.'

'Tell me at least that you are not alone.'

'I am not alone.'

'Then I give it,' he said with a sigh. 'And for Heaven's sake get me
something to eat and a bed. I am tired of this pig-sty. MON DIEU! it is
a fortnight since I slept between sheets.'

'You shall sleep to-night in your own house, if you please,' I answered
hurriedly. 'But here they come. Be good enough to stay where you are for
a moment, and I will meet them.'

I stepped out into the darkness, just as the Lieutenant, after posting
his men round the hollow, slid down with a couple of sergeants to make
the arrest. The place round the open door was pitch-dark. He had not
espied my man, who had lodged himself in the deepest shadow of the hut,
and when he saw me come out across the light he took me for
Cocheforet. In a twinkling he thrust a pistol into my face, and cried
triumphantly,--'You are my prisoner!' while one of the sergeants raised
a lanthorn and threw its light into my eyes.

'What folly is this?' I said savagely.

The Lieutenant's jaw fell, and he stood for a moment paralysed with
astonishment. Less than an hour before he had left me at the Chateau.
Thence he had come hither with the briefest delay; yet he found me here
before him. He swore fearfully, his face black, his moustachios stiff
with rage.

'What is this? What is it?' he cried. 'Where is the man?'

'What man?' I said.

'This Cocheforet!' he roared, carried away by his passion. 'Don't lie to
me! He is here, and I will have him!'

'You are too late,' I said, watching him heedfully. 'M. de Cocheforet is
here, but he has already surrendered to me, and is my prisoner.'

'Your prisoner?'

'Certainly!' I answered, facing the man with all the harshness I could
muster. 'I have arrested him by virtue of the Cardinal's commission
granted to me. And by virtue of the same I shall keep him.'

'You will keep him?'

'I shall!'

He stared at me for a moment, utterly aghast; the picture of defeat.
Then on a sudden I saw his face lighten with, a new idea.

'It is a d--d ruse!' he shouted, brandishing his pistol like a madman.
'It is a cheat and a fraud! By God! you have no commission! I see
through it! I see through it all! You have come here, and you have
hocussed us! You are of their side, and this is your last shift to save
him!'

'What folly is this?' I said contemptuously.

'No folly at all,' he answered, perfect conviction in his tone. 'You
have played upon us. You have fooled us. But I see through it now. An
hour ago I exposed you to that fine Madame at the house there, and I
thought it a marvel that she did not believe me. I thought it a marvel
that she did not see through you, when you stood there before her,
confounded, tongue-tied, a rogue convicted. But I understand now. She
knew you. She was in the plot, and you were in the plot, and I, who
thought that I was opening her eyes, was the only one fooled. But it
is my turn now. You have played a bold part and a clever one,' he
continued, a sinister light in his little eyes,' and I congratulate you.
But it is at an end now, Monsieur. You took us in finely with your talk
of Monseigneur, and his commission and your commission, and the rest.
But I am not to be blinded any longer--or bullied. You have arrested
him, have you? You have arrested him. Well, by G--, I shall arrest him,
and I shall arrest you too.'

'You are mad!' I said staggered as much by this new view of the matter
as by his perfect certainty. 'Mad, Lieutenant.'

'I was,' he snarled. 'But I am sane now. I was mad when you imposed upon
us, when you persuaded me to think that you were fooling the women to
get the secret out of them, while all the time you were sheltering them,
protecting them, aiding them, and hiding him--then I was mad. But not
now. However, I ask your pardon. I thought you the cleverest sneak and
the dirtiest hound Heaven ever made. I find you are cleverer than I
thought, and an honest traitor. Your pardon.'

One of the men, who stood about the rim of the bowl above us, laughed. I
looked at the Lieutenant and could willingly have killed him.

'MON DIEU!' I said--and I was so furious in my turn that I could
scarcely speak. 'Do you say that I am an impostor--that I do not hold
the Cardinal's commission?'

'I do say that,' he answered coolly.

'And that I belong to the rebel party?'

'I do,' he replied in the same tone. 'In fact,' with a grin, 'I say that
you are an honest man on the wrong side, M. de Berault. And you say that
you are a scoundrel on the right. The advantage, however, is with me,
and I shall back my opinion by arresting you.'

A ripple of coarse laughter ran round the hollow. The sergeant who held
the lanthorn grinned, and a trooper at a distance called out of the
darkness 'A BON CHAT BON RAT!' This brought a fresh burst of laughter,
while I stood speechless, confounded by the stubbornness, the crassness,
the insolence of the man. 'You fool!' I cried at last, 'you fool!' And
then M. de Cocheforet, who had come out of the hut and taken his stand
at my elbow, interrupted me.

'Pardon me one moment,' he said, airily, looking at the Lieutenant with
raised eyebrows and pointing to me with his thumb, 'but I am puzzled
between you. This gentleman's name? Is it de Berault or de Barthe?'

'I am M. de Berault,' I said, brusquely, answering for myself.

'Of Paris?'

'Yes, Monsieur, of Paris.'

'You are not, then, the gentleman who has been honouring my poor house
with his presence?'

'Oh, yes!' the Lieutenant struck in, grinning. 'He is that gentleman,
too.'

'But I thought--I understood that that was M. de Barthe!'

'I am M. de Barthe, also,' I retorted impatiently. 'What of that,
Monsieur? It was my mother's name. I took it when I came down here.'

'To--er--to arrest me, may I ask?'

'Yes,' I said, doggedly; 'to arrest you. What of that?'

'Nothing,' he replied slowly and with a steady look at me--a look I
could not meet. 'Except that, had I known this before, M. de Berault I
should have thought longer before I surrendered to you.'

The Lieutenant laughed, and I felt my cheek burn; but I affected to
see nothing, and turned to him again. 'Now, Monsieur,' I said, 'are you
satisfied?'

'No,' he answered? 'I am not! You two may have rehearsed this pretty
scene a dozen times. The word, it seems to me, is--Quick march, back to
quarters.'

At length I found myself driven to play my last card; much against my
will.

'Not so,' I said. 'I have my commission.'

'Produce it!' he replied incredulously.

'Do you think that I carry it with me?' I cried in scorn. 'Do you think
that when I came here, alone, and not with fifty dragoons at my back, I
carried the Cardinal's seal in my pocket for the first lackey to find.
But you shall have it. Where is that knave of mine?'

The words were scarcely out of my mouth before a ready hand thrust a
paper into my fingers. I opened it slowly, glanced at it, and amid a
pause of surprise gave it to the Lieutenant. He looked for a moment
confounded. Then, with a last instinct of suspicion, he bade the
sergeant hold up the lanthorn; and by its light he proceeded to spell
through the document.

'Umph!' he ejaculated with an ugly look when he had come to the end, 'I
see.' And he read it aloud:--

   'BY THESE PRESENTS, I COMMAND AND EMPOWER
    GILLES DE BERAULT, SIER DE BERAULT, TO
    SEEK FOR, HOLD, AND ARREST, AND DELIVER
    TO THE GOVERNOR OF THE BASTILLE THE BODY
    OF HENRI DE COCHEFORET, AND TO DO ALL
    ACTS AND THINGS AS SHALL BE NECESSARY
    TO EFFECT SUCH ARREST AND DELIVERY, FOR
    WHICH THESE SHALL BE HIS WARRANT.
    (Signed) THE CARDINAL DE RICHELIEU.'

When he had done--he read the signature with a peculiar
intonation--someone said softly, 'VIVE LE ROI!' and there was a moment's
silence. The sergeant lowered his lanthorn. 'Is it enough?' I said
hoarsely, glaring from face to face.

The Lieutenant bowed stiffly.

'For me?' he said. 'Quite, Monsieur. I beg your pardon again. I find
that my first impressions were the correct ones. Sergeant! give the
gentleman his papers!' and, turning his shoulder rudely, he tossed the
commission to the sergeant, who gave it to me, grinning.

I knew that the clown would not fight, and he had his men round him; and
I had no choice but to swallow the insult. I put the paper in my breast,
with as much indifference as I could assume; and as I did so, he gave a
sharp order. The troopers began to form on the edge above; the men who
had descended to climb the bank again.

As the group behind him began to open and melt away, I caught sight of
a white robe in the middle of it. The next moment, appearing with a
suddenness which was like a blow on the cheek to me, Mademoiselle de
Cocheforet glided forward towards me. She had a hood on her head, drawn
low; and for a moment I could not see her face, I forgot her brother's
presence at my elbow, I forgot other things, and, from habit and impulse
rather than calculation, I took a step forward to meet her; though my
tongue cleaved to the roof of my mouth, and I was dumb and trembling.

But she recoiled with such a look of white hate, of staring, frozen-eyed
abhorrence, that I stepped back as if she had indeed struck me. It did
not need the words which accompanied the look--the 'DO NOT TOUCH ME!'
which she hissed at me as she drew her skirts together--to drive me to
the farther edge of the hollow; where I stood with clenched teeth, and
nails driven into the flesh, while she hung, sobbing tearless sobs, on
her brother's neck.



CHAPTER XII. THE ROAD TO PARIS

I remember hearing Marshal Bassompierre, who, of all the men within
my knowledge, had the widest experience, say that not dangers but
discomforts prove a man and show what he is; and that the worst sores in
life are caused by crumpled rose-leaves and not by thorns.

I am inclined to think him right, for I remember that when I came from
my room on the morning after the arrest, and found hall and parlour and
passage empty, and all the common rooms of the house deserted, and no
meal laid; and when I divined anew from this discovery the feeling of
the house towards me--however natural and to be expected--I remember
that I felt as sharp a pang as when, the night before, I had had to face
discovery and open rage and scorn. I stood in the silent, empty parlour,
and looked on the familiar things with a sense of desolation, of
something lost and gone, which I could not understand. The morning was
grey and cloudy, the air sharp, a shower was falling. The rose-bushes
outside swayed in the wind, and inside, where I could remember the hot
sunshine lying on floor and table, the rain beat in and stained the
boards. The inner door flapped and creaked on its hinges. I thought of
other days and of meals I had taken there, and of the scent of flowers;
and I fled to the hall in despair.

But here, too, were no signs of life or company, no comfort, no
attendance. The ashes of the logs, by whose blaze Mademoiselle had told
me the secret, lay on the hearth white and cold fit emblem of the change
that had taken place; and now and then a drop of moisture, sliding down
the great chimney, pattered among them. The main door stood open, as if
the house had no longer anything to guard. The only living thing to be
seen was a hound which roamed about restlessly, now gazing at the empty
hearth now lying down with pricked cars and watchful eyes. Some leaves,
which had been blown in by the wind, rustled in a corner.

I went out moodily into the garden and wandered down one path and up
another, looking at the dripping woods, and remembering things, until
I came to the stone seat. On it, against the wall, trickling with
raindrops, and with a dead leaf half filling its narrow neck, stood the
pitcher of food. I thought how much had happened since Mademoiselle took
her hand from it and the sergeant's lanthorn disclosed it to me; and,
sighing grimly, I went in again through the parlour door.

A woman was on her knees, on the hearth kindling the belated fire. She
had her back to me, and I stood a moment looking at her doubtfully,
wondering how she would bear herself and what she would say to me. Then
she turned, and I started back, crying out her name in horror--for it
was Madame! Madame de Cocheforet!

She was plainly dressed, and her childish face was wan and piteous with
weeping; but either the night had worn out her passion and drained her
tears, or some great exigency had given her temporary calmness, for
she was perfectly composed. She shivered as her eyes met mine, and she
blinked as if a bright light had been suddenly thrust before her; but
that was all, and she turned again to her task without speaking.

'Madame! Madame!' I cried in a frenzy of distress. 'What is this?'

'The servants would not do it,' she answered in a low but steady voice.
'You are still our guest, Monsieur.'

'But I cannot suffer it!' I cried. 'Madame de Cocheforet, I will not--'

She raised her hand with a strange patient expression in her face.

'Hush! please,' she said. 'Hush! you trouble me.'

The fire blazed up as she spoke, and she rose slowly from it, and with a
lingering look at it went out, leaving me to stand and stare and listen
in the middle of the floor. Presently I heard her coming back along the
passage, and she entered bearing a tray with wine and meat and bread.
She set it down on the table, and with the same wan face, trembling
always on the verge of tears, she began to lay out the things. The
glasses clinked fitfully against the plates as she handled them; the
knives jarred with one another. And I stood by, trembling myself; and
endured this strange kind of penance.

She signed to me at last to sit down; and she went herself, and stood in
the garden doorway with her back to me. I obeyed. I sat down. But though
I had eaten nothing since the afternoon of the day before, I could not
swallow. I fumbled with my knife, and drank; and grew hot and angry at
this farce; and then looked through the window at the dripping bushes,
and the rain and the distant sundial--and grew cold again.

Suddenly she turned round and came to my side. 'You do not eat,' she
said.

I threw down my knife, and sprang up in a frenzy of passion. 'MON DIEU!
Madame,' I cried, 'do you think that I have NO heart?'

And then in a moment I knew what I had done, what a folly I had
committed. For in a moment she was on her knees on the floor, clasping
my knees, pressing her wet cheeks to my rough clothes, crying to me for
mercy--for life! life! his life! Oh, it was horrible! It was horrible to
hear her gasping voice, to see her fair hair falling over my mud-stained
boots, to mark her slender little form convulsed with sobs, to feel that
it was a woman, a gentlewoman, who thus abased herself at my feet!

'Oh, Madame! Madame!' I cried in my pain, 'I beg you to rise. Rise, or I
must go!'

'His life! only his life!' she moaned passionately. 'What had he done
to you--that you should hunt him down? what have we done to you that you
should slay us? Oh! have mercy! Have mercy! Let him go, and we will pray
for you, I and my sister will pray for you, every morning and night of
our lives.'

I was in terror lest someone should come and see her lying there, and I
stooped and tried to raise her. But she only sank the lower, until her
tender little hands touched the rowels of my spurs. I dared not move, At
last I took a sudden resolution.

'Listen, then, Madame!' I said almost sternly, 'if you will not rise.
You forget everything, both how I stand, and how small my power is! You
forget that if I were to release your husband to-day he would be seized
within the hour by those who are still in the village and who are
watching every road--who have not ceased to suspect my movements and my
intentions. You forget, I say my circumstances--'

She cut me short on that word. She sprang to her feet and faced me. One
moment more and I should have said something to the purpose. But at that
word she stood before me, white, breathless, dishevelled, struggling for
speech.

'Oh, yes, yes!' she panted eagerly. 'I know--I know!' And she thrust her
hand into her bosom and plucked something out and gave it to me--forced
it upon me. 'I know--I know!' she said again. 'Take it, and God
reward you, Monsieur! God reward you! We give it freely--freely and
thankfully!'

I stood and looked at her and it; and slowly I froze. She had given me
the packet--the packet I had restored to Mademoiselle--the parcel of
jewels. I weighed it in my hands, and my heart grew hard again, for
I knew that this was Mademoiselle's doing; that it was she who,
mistrusting the effect of Madame's tears and prayers, had armed her with
this last weapon--this dirty bribe. I flung it down on the table among
the plates.

'Madame!' I cried ruthlessly, all my pity changed to anger, 'you mistake
me altogether! I have heard hard words enough in the last twenty-four
hours, and I know what you think of me! But you have yet to learn that I
have never done one thing. I have never turned traitor to the hand that
employed me, nor sold my own side! When I do so for a treasure ten times
the worth of that, may my hand rot off!'

She sank on a seat with a moan of despair; and precisely at that moment
M. de Cocheforet opened the door and came in. Over his shoulder I had a
glimpse of Mademoiselle's proud face, a little whiter than of yore, with
dark marks under the eyes, but like Satan's for coldness.

'What is this?' he said, frowning, as his eyes lighted on Madame.

