
"I sha'n't want you to wait on me during the voyage, Abdool; the
captain's steward will do that."

After the meal was over, cheroots lighted, and a decanter of port
placed on the table, Fairclough asked Harry for the story he had
promised him; and the latter accordingly gave them a sketch of his
life and adventures.

"I no longer wonder, Lindsay, at your having attained the rank of
captain so young. That old nurse of yours must have been a trump,
indeed; but certainly it is wonderful that you should have lived,
first as a peasant and then at the Peishwa's court, so long without
anyone having had a suspicion that you were an Englishman. Fancy
your meddling in politics, being regarded as a friend of the
Peishwa and this minister of his, and being the means of getting
the latter out of prison, and so perhaps averting a war between the
Mahrattas and Bombay! That was a ticklish business, too, at
Nagpore; and you were lucky in coming so well out of it.

"But after all, I think the most wonderful part is that a boy of
sixteen should have been a shikaree, and killed no end of tigers,
leopards, and bears and, after that, have risen so soon to the rank
of captain in the Company's service. Why, you have seen and done
more than most men double your age!"

"Yes, I have had great luck, and it is all owing to my old nurse
having taken such pains; first to enable me to pass as a Mahratta,
and in the next place to teach me the English language and English
ways.

"Well, the story has been an unconscionably long one. I think I
will go on deck and smoke a last cheroot, and then turn in."

"If you were a new hand from England, I should say that you had
better smoke it here," Fairclough said; "for the mists from the
water and swamps are apt to give fresh hands a touch of fever."

The time passed pleasantly, as they made direct for the mouth of
the straits between the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. There was a
light but steady breeze and, on the morning of the eighth day after
sailing, Harry, on going on deck, saw land on the port side. As the
lieutenant, on the evening before, said that they should next day
sight the Great Andaman, he was not surprised.

On looking at the chart, he said to Fairclough:

"I should have thought that it would have been shorter to go on the
other side of the islands."

"It would have been rather shorter; but there are four or five
islands to the north of the Andaman, and another very small one
halfway between it and Negrais, so I preferred going outside. When
we get south of the Little Andaman Island, we shall pass between it
and the Nicobar Islands. I fancy that they, and perhaps the
Andamans, once formed a part of Sumatra. They are scattered almost
in a line from its northern point. The land has probably sunk; and
these islands were, no doubt, the summits of mountains forming part
of the chain that runs through Sumatra.

"Once through the passage south of Little Andaman, we shall sail
due east for a day or two; and then lay her course nearly
southeast, which will take us right up the straits between Sumatra
and the Malay Peninsula."

"Are there any islands scattered about there?"

"There is one nasty little group, called the Arroa Islands, nearly
in mid-channel. I shall take care to pass them in daylight. Farther
down there are several largish islands near the Sumatra coast but,
as the passage is some sixty miles wide, there is little fear of
our running foul of them."

"Have the Dutch any settlements at Sumatra?"

"Two or three. Palembang is the principal. It is on a river that
runs down into the Banca Straits. I believe that they have trading
stations at Jambi and Siak."

A fortnight later the brig anchored off the coast of Singapore.
During the voyage, Harry had had many conversations with the
Malayan interpreter. The latter told him that the chief who had
written might not be in a position to carry out his offer. Not only
were the small Malay states frequently engaged in wars with each
other, but there were constant internal insurrections and
struggles, the various petty chiefs frequently endeavouring to set
up as independent powers. At the present time the tumangong, or
chief justice, had obtained possession of the island of Singapore,
and the adjacent district of the mainland; while other chiefs had
also thrown off their allegiance to the Rajah of Johore, who
himself had usurped the power from the former reigning family.

"If," he said, "you want only to obtain a place for trade, the
tumangong is no doubt the person from whom you must obtain it; but
if you wanted the whole island, you would have to treat not only
with him but with the rajah as, in case the latter should defeat
and overthrow the tumangong, he certainly would not recognize the
cession of the island to you."

"Is there a good port?"

"No; but it is not needed. They do not have hurricanes, here, as
they do in the Bay of Bengal and in the China Seas, and indeed
among the islands; so vessels can anchor off the coast, in safety,
at all times of the year."

"What is the island like?"

"It is covered with forest and jungle," the Malay replied. "There
are but few inhabitants, a hundred and fifty or so. Most of these
are my people, but there are a few Chinese and Bugis. The Malays
are not cultivators. They live by piracy, attacking small native
vessels passing through the narrow passages between Singapore and
the mainland. The Chinese cultivate patches of land."

"Is it fertile?"

"Very. Rain falls there more than half the days in the year. If the
Chinese had it, they would make a garden of it. It is better, even,
than the land on that part of Sumatra where they produce spices and
grains of all sorts. The Malay Peninsula would be very wealthy,
were it not split up into several kingdoms, that are always at war
with each other.

"Singapore was a great place, once. Seven hundred years ago it was
the capital of the whole Malay kingdom; but it was taken, a hundred
years afterwards, by the King of Java, and Malacca then became the
Malay capital."

"The affair does not seem very promising," Harry said, after
repeating to Fairclough what he had heard from the Malay. "From my
experience of the Indian princes, there is very little trust to be
placed in any agreement made with them. They keep it just as long
as it suits them, and then break it; without the slightest sense of
having done anything dishonourable. It seems to me that the
position here is very much like that in the Deccan. Scindia,
Holkar, and the Rajahs of Berar and Kolapoore are practically
independent of the Peishwa, who maintains only a semblance of
authority. From what the interpreter tells me, there seems to be
only a puppet rajah who, today, possesses no authority whatever;
but who, tomorrow, may excite a quarrel among the other chiefs, and
again become their master.

"I think that, in the first place, I shall have to see this
semi-independent chief, whose possessions Singapore forms part of;
and afterwards the Rajah of Johore, his nominal master.

"The latter may view the matter in one of two ways. In the first
place, he may consider the island of no importance, whatever;
seeing that, even were he again its master, no revenue could be
obtained from the handful of people living there; and would
therefore be glad to ratify the cession to us, for a small sum. On
the other hand, he may consider that the elevation of the island,
into the position of a great European trading port, would add
greatly to the power and importance of the tumangong, and might
enable him to make himself master of the whole of Johore."

"It seems a complicated business, certainly," the sailor replied.
"You see, though this rebel chap, having written to Calcutta, may
be trusted to receive you hospitably; there is no saying what the
rajah may think of it."

"Nor is it clear how I am to get at the rajah," Harry remarked.
"The tumangong would, no doubt, object to my going beyond what he
considers as his territory; as it might seem that, did he let me do
so, he would be recognizing the power of the rajah to interfere in
his business. However, it is certain that I must carry home a clear
report on the situation; and to do that I must, at any rate,
attempt to see the rajah.

"Of course we must endeavour to learn, from the Malays on the
island, whether Johore still holds any territory running down to
the sea, or whether the coast chiefs have also revolted against
him. In the first case, I will send up a native, to say that I have
a mission from the Governor General of India to visit his court;
but if he is cut off from the sea, I must endeavour to make my way
through, somehow. It would never do to return with only half a
story. I do not suppose the Governor General is at all aware of the
state of things here, or that the chief who communicated with him
is not the acknowledged Rajah of Johore.

"There can be no doubt that the possession of this island would be
of great value to us, as it would become a centre of trade, not
only with the East, but with all the islands round; except, of
course, those belonging to Holland. Therefore, the first essential
point is to ascertain whether the old rajah is likely to regain his
former authority; and whether, if so, he will recognize, and on
what terms, the cession of the island to us."

"Well, I am glad, Lindsay, that it is your business and not mine;
for it seems a very difficult affair, and a somewhat dangerous
one."

Three weeks after leaving Calcutta the brig reached the island and,
at Harry's request, sailed round it, taking soundings very
frequently, in order to obtain knowledge of the depth of the water
and the nature of the sea bottom. Finally they anchored in the
straits between it and the mainland. This varied, in width, from
two miles to a quarter of a mile; and the depth of water, at the
eastern extremity of the straits, was found to be insufficient for
vessels of a large tonnage, though navigable for ordinary native
craft.

The island itself was some twenty-five miles long and fifteen miles
wide; being, as Fairclough calculated, about a third larger than
the Isle of Wight. No high hills were seen; but the whole island
was undulating, and everywhere covered with forest and jungle.

Several small Malay canoes had put off to them with fruit; and as,
from what the interpreter had told them of the smallness of the
population, there was clearly no chance of any attack being made on
the brig, they were allowed to come alongside. The supply of fruit
was very welcome, and the interpreter learned something from the
natives as to the state of things on the mainland.

As to this, however, they appeared to take but little interest.
They admitted that the tumangong was their lord but, as they were
too poor for him to levy any contributions from them, his
mastership was merely a nominal one, and they did not trouble
themselves about him. If he should at any time send an officer and
troops, to exact tribute money, they would simply retire into the
interior, where they could defy pursuit. They had heard reports
that there were wars on the mainland but, beyond the fact that the
rajah possessed very little authority, they were unable to give any
information. They had vaguely heard that some of the chiefs
supported the family of the former rajah.

On the day after their anchoring, a large canoe put off from the
mainland. In the stern sat two men, whose gay dresses showed them
to be minor chiefs or officials. Harry, who had throughout the
voyage worn only civilian costume of white drill, now put on his
full uniform; as did the sowars of his escort. The ladder was
lowered for the accommodation of the visitors; and these, on
reaching the deck, were received by Fairclough, his officers, and a
guard of honour. The Malay interpreter stood by the captain's side.

"Why do you come here?" was their first question.

"We bring a high officer of the Governor General at Calcutta, to
confer with the lord of Singapore," Fairclough answered, through
the interpreter.

"Our lord thought that it might be so," one of the officials said,
"and therefore sent us off to enquire."

Fairclough led the Malays to the quarterdeck, where Harry was
standing, with his four troopers as a bodyguard behind him.

"This is the official whom the Governor General has sent to you."

The Malays, struck with Harry's uniform, and still more with that
of his guard--all of which were new to them, and impressed them
deeply--salaamed profoundly to him.

"I have arrived," Harry said, "as the agent of our great governor;
and in answer to a request of your lord, the tumangong, that he
should send an officer of rank here, to treat with him."

"Seeing this vessel of war," the Malay said, when Harry's speech
had been translated to him, "our lord hoped that it might be so;
and directed us, should this prove correct, to inform you that he
will himself come off to see you, in three days' time. He has heard
of the might of your lord in India, that he has conquered great
kingdoms, that the rule is a wise one, and that the people are well
contented. We love not the Dutch, who are hard masters, and make
the people labour for them; and he desires to be on terms of
friendship with the power which, as he understands, has taken their
strong places in India, so that they have no longer any importance
there."

"He has done wisely," Harry said, "and I shall be glad to see your
lord, and to tell him what is in the mind of our governor."

The envoys were then invited to the cabin, where they were offered
refreshments. They ate sparingly, but greatly appreciated the
champagne; and asked, through the interpreter, if they could be
instructed how to make this liquor; and were much disappointed on
learning it could only be made from the juice of the grape, that
grew in a certain land in Europe, and could not be manufactured
elsewhere, though other wines which were equally good could be
made--that as the fruits grown in a hot country like theirs could
not be grown in Europe, where the climate was much colder, so the
grape could not flourish in their hot country.

Three days later the tumangong came off, in a canoe gaily decorated
by flags, attended by several smaller craft. As he set foot on the
deck, a salute was fired. He appeared much disturbed when the first
gun went off; but the interpreter explained to him that it was a
mark of honour, always granted to native princes of importance.
Seeing that no harm was done by the fire, the Malay approached
Harry, whose escort had been rendered more imposing by a line of
blue jackets, with musket and cutlass, drawn up behind them.

Harry advanced to meet him, and friendly greetings were exchanged.
He then invited him down into the cabin, where he was accompanied
by one of his chief officers. Harry, the captain, and the
interpreter went down with them. The Malay commenced the
conversation.

"I hope that you bring a favourable answer to my letter?"

"The Governor bids me say that he willingly accepts your offer of
friendship, and would readily establish a trading station on the
island of Singapore; but that, being now engaged in a serious war
in India, it is not in his power, at present, to engage in an
alliance that might involve him in war here, since he might be
unable to fulfil his obligations. With us, obligations under a
treaty are regarded as sacred, and to be upheld at all sacrifices.
Later on, when affairs are more settled in India, he will gladly
form an alliance with you.

"Here is a despatch, in your language, stating his reasons more
fully but, in order to show his friendship, he has sent me down in
this ship of war to explain matters to you, and to assure you that
he appreciates your offer, and will later on accept it; but that he
cannot enter into such a treaty now as, being engaged in war, he
might not be able to protect you from all enemies, should you call
upon him to do so. I am the bearer of several presents from him,
which he has sent as a proof of his friendship towards you."

He touched a bell and, at the signal, some sailors brought in the
presents; consisting of a handsome double-barrelled gun, a brace of
pistols, some embroidered robes, and some bales of English cloth
and other manufactures; also a dinner service of pottery, an ormulu
clock, and other articles. The rajah, whose face had at first
expressed disappointment, was evidently much pleased with these
presents and, after perusing the letter, expressed himself as well
contented with its terms.

"I value them all the more," he said, "because they are a proof
that the English do not make treaties, unless able to fulfil the
conditions. This is far better than accepting treaties, and then
withdrawing from them. You can assure the great lord of Calcutta,
although I regret much that he cannot at present form an alliance
with me, that I shall be ready to renew the negotiations with him,
whenever he notifies me that he can do so."

The champagne was then produced. The tumangong had evidently heard,
from his officers, how delicious was the strange drink, which
bubbled as if it was boiling and was yet quite cold. Two bottles
were put upon the table; and the Malays, after tasting it
cautiously at first, consumed the greater portion--the two officers
only sipping theirs occasionally, and filling up their glasses, so
as to keep the others in countenance. Accustomed to more fiery
beverages, obtained from traders in the Dutch possessions, the
Malays were in no way affected by their potations; although these
evidently impressed them with the superiority of the English over
their Dutch rivals, for the tumangong remarked:

"Truly the English must be a great people, to make such liquors.
The Dutch sell us fiery drinks, but their flavour is not to be
compared with these. I hope that your lord, when he again sends a
ship down to me, will forward me some of this drink."

"I have, fortunately, a case of it with me," Harry said. "It
contains two dozen bottles. I will give orders for it to be placed
in your boat."

He could see, by the Malay's face, that he was greatly gratified,
and he added:

"I have no doubt, Tumangong, that when I inform the Governor
General that you were pleased with this drink, he will order some
of it to be sent down, when there is an opportunity; so that the
friendship between you and him can be maintained, until the time
comes when he can arrange with you for the concession of a trading
station on the island of Singapore."

"The offer shall be always open to him; there is no occasion for
haste."

The conversation continued for some time longer, and then the Malay
and his officers took their places in their canoe and rowed off,
under a salute similar to that which had greeted their arrival.

"That is quite satisfactory," Harry said to the commander.

"Yes; there is no doubt that he thought more of your present of
champagne, than of the gifts sent him by the Governor; and your
promise to let him have a consignment, occasionally, will keep him
in good temper.

"Now, what is your next move?"

"I think it would be best to finish with the Dutch, first. If there
were any delay in the other matter, they might get news, from
Malacca or some of their trading stations in Sumatra, that the ship
has been here and, in that case, they would guess that we are
thinking of establishing a trading station, and might send and make
their own terms with the tumangong. There can be no doubt that, if
we open a free port here, it will do great damage to them, and
divert a large portion of the eastern trade here; being so much
more handy for all the country craft trading with Siam and China,
besides having the advantage of avoiding the heavy dues demanded by
the Dutch."

"No doubt that will be the best way," Fairclough said. "We will get
up anchor, tomorrow morning."

In the course of the afternoon a large canoe came off, loaded with
presents of fresh meat, fruit, and vegetable; sent by the
tumangong, together with some handsomely-mounted krises for Harry
and the officers of the ship.

They continued their voyage, without incident, to Batavia. Arriving
there, they dropped anchor and saluted the Dutch flag. The salute
was returned from the shore; and, shortly afterwards a large boat,
flying the flag of Holland and carrying several persons, rowed out
to them.

It was apparent, at once, when they ascended to the deck, that the
visit of the British ship of war was not a welcome one. The
jealousy of the Dutch of any attempt, on our part, to obtain a
footing among the islands was intense; and the opinion on shore, on
seeing the brig, would be that she had come to announce that
possession had been taken of some unoccupied island. Their manner,
therefore, was cold when Harry informed them, through his Dutch
interpreter, that he was the bearer of a despatch to the Dutch
Governor from the Governor General.

"I may say that it refers," he said, "to the numerous outrages,
committed by the Malays, upon vessels owned by British subjects
trading among the islands; and that he suggests that the Dutch
authorities should join in an attempt to punish these marauders,
from whom they suffer equally with the British."

"The Governor will receive you, at three o'clock this afternoon.
You will, of course, wish to deliver your despatch personally to
him and, as we shall acquaint him with its import, he will no doubt
be prepared to give you an answer, forthwith."

Without further words, the officials returned to their boats.

"They are a surly set of beggars," Fairclough said, as they rowed
off. "I don't think there is much chance of cooperation in that
quarter. Indeed, I am by no means sure that, at heart, they do not
approve of these Malay attacks. At present, they monopolize the
trade in spice. The native craft from all the islands bring their
productions here; and there can be no doubt that the piracies of
the Malays act as a great deterrent, both to the native traders,
and our own from Calcutta and Madras."

"I think that, very likely, that is so," Harry agreed. "I do not
think that the Governor had any belief that they would cooperate in
the matter, and really only invited them to do so because it would
explain the presence of a ship of war in these waters; so I shall
be in no way concerned, if this part of my business turns out a
failure."

At the appointed time, the captain's gig was lowered, and Harry and
Fairclough took their places in it. Another boat carried the Dutch
interpreter and the four troopers. They were received, on landing,
by an official and a guard of honour; and were conducted to the
Governor's residence. Another guard of honour was drawn up at the
entrance. They were shown into a large room, where the Governor was
seated, surrounded by the members of his council.

He rose and advanced a few paces, shook hands with the two
officers, and begged them to be seated, on two chairs next to him.
Harry handed the despatch to him.

"It is very short, sir," he said, "and perhaps, as you are aware of
its import, you will just glance through it."

The Governor did so and, afterwards, handed it to one of the
members of the council, and it was passed from hand to hand.

"I am quite in accord," the Governor said, "with Lord Mornington,
that the attacks of the Malays which we, as well as yourselves,
suffer from are deplorable; and it is greatly to be wished that
they could be suppressed. But I think that Lord Mornington could
hardly have been informed as to the great number of islands
inhabited by the Malays, and the great naval force that would be
required to overawe and punish these freebooters; who are so bold
that they do not hesitate to attack our traders, even when large
ships, and carrying guns for their protection. Nothing short of a
great fleet of cruisers would suffice.

"In the next place, did we undertake any operations on a large
scale against the Malays throughout the islands, they would unite
against us; and might, in revenge, assail many of our ports, and do
us enormous damage. Even if your fleet performed half the work, it
is we, only, who would be the sufferers. Certainly we have not
sufficient vessels of war to attempt such an operation and, even
were the Governor General of India to send down as many vessels as
we have at our disposal, the force would be altogether inadequate
for such extensive operations. These islands are counted by hundreds
and, on the approach of ships of war, the people would desert their
villages by the seashore and take to the interior--where it would,
in most cases, be impossible to follow them--and all the damage we
could inflict would be to burn their villages, which could be rebuilt
after the ships had sailed away.  To exterminate piracy would be the
work, not of months, but of many years. However, I shall consult my
council, and will draft a reply to the despatch, tomorrow.

"You have had a pleasant voyage down, I hope?"

"Very much so," Harry replied. "We have had fine weather, and light
breezes."

The conversation was continued for a few minutes, and then the
little party returned to their boats.

"There is not much doubt what the reply will be," Fairclough said.

"No; and on the whole, I don't see that the Governor is to be
blamed; though of course, he has not given us the principal reason,
which is his objection to our flag being seen flying beside the
Dutch among the islands. Still, there is a good deal in what he
says."

"I think so, too. You see, they are going to send their answer
tomorrow, which may be taken as a proof that they are anxious to
get rid of us, as soon as possible."



Chapter 11: A Prisoner.
