III

THE DEFENSE OF SYRACUSE BY ARCHIMEDES[89]

(214-212 B.C.)


When Epicydes and Hippocrates had occupied Syracuse, and had alienated
the rest of the citizens with themselves from the friendship of Rome,
the Romans who had already been informed of the murder of Hieronymus,
tyrant of Syracuse, appointed Appius Claudius as Pro-praetor to command
a land force, while Marcus Claudius Marcellus[90] commanded the fleet.
These officers took up a position not far from Syracuse, and
determined to assault the town from the land at Hexapylus, and by sea
at what was called Stoa Scytice in Achradina, where the wall has its
foundation close down to the sea. Having prepared their wicker
pent-houses, and darts, and other siege material, they felt confident
that, with so many hands employed, they would in five days get their
works in such an advanced state as to give them the advantage over the
enemy. But in this they did not take into account the abilities of
Archimedes;[91] nor calculate on the truth that, in certain
circumstances, the genius of one man is more effective that any
numbers whatever. However they now learned it by experience. The city
was strong from the fact of its encircling wall lying along a chain of
hills with overhanging brows, the ascent of which was no easy task,
even with no one to hinder it, except at certain definite points.
Taking advantage of this, Archimedes had constructed such defenses
both in the town, and at the places where an attack might be made by
sea, that the garrison would have everything at hand which they might
require at any moment, and be ready to meet without delay whatever the
enemy might attempt against them.

The attack was begun by Appius bringing his pent-houses, and scaling
ladders, and attempting to fix the latter against that part of the
wall which abuts on Hexapylus toward the east. At the same time Marcus
Claudius Marcellus with sixty quinqueremes was making a descent upon
Achradina. Each of these vessels were full of men armed with bows and
slings and javelins, with which to dislodge those who fought on the
battlements. As well as these vessels he had eight quinqueremes in
pairs. Each pair had had their oars removed, one on the larboard and
the other on the starboard side, and then had been lasht together on
the sides thus left bare. On these double vessels, rowed by the outer
oars of each of the pair, they brought up under the walls some engines
called "Sambucae," the construction of which was as follows: A ladder
was made four feet broad, and of a height to reach the top of the wall
from the place where its foot had to rest; each side of the ladder was
protected by a railing, and a covering or pent-house was added
overhead. It was then placed so that its foot rested across the sides
of the lasht-together vessels, which touched each other with its other
extremity protruding a considerable way beyond the prows.

On the tops of the mast pulleys were fixt with ropes: and when the
engines were about to be used, men standing on the sterns of the
vessels drew the ropes tied to the head of the ladder, while others
standing on the prows assisted the raising of the machine and kept it
steady with long poles. Having then brought the ships close in shore
by using the outer oars of both vessels they tried to let the machine
down upon the wall. At the head of the ladder was fixt a wooden stage
secured on three sides by wicker-shields, upon which stood four men
who fought and struggled with those who tried to prevent the Sambuca
from being made to rest on the battlements. But when they have fixt it
and so got above the level of the top of the wall, the four men
unfasten the wicker-shields from either side of the stage and walk
out upon the battlements or towers as the case may be; they are
followed by their comrades coming up by the Sambuca, since the
ladder's foot is safely secured with ropes and stands upon both the
ships. This construction has got the name of "Sambuca," or "Harp," for
the natural reason, that when it is raised the combination of the ship
and ladder has very much the appearance of such an instrument.

With such contrivances and preparations were the Romans intending to
assault the towers. But Archimedes had constructed catapults to suit
every range; and as the ships sailing up were still at a considerable
distance, he so wounded the enemy with stones and darts, from the
tighter wound and longer engines as to harass and perplex them to the
last degree; and when these began to carry over their heads, he used
smaller engines graduated according to the range required from time to
time, and by this means caused so much confusion among them as to
altogether check their advance and attack; and finally Marcellus was
reduced in despair to bringing up his ships under cover of night. But
when they had come close to land, and so too near to be hit by the
catapults, they found that Archimedes had prepared another contrivance
against the soldiers who fought from the decks. He had pierced the
wall as high as a man's stature with numerous loop-holes, which, on
the outside, were about as big as the palm of the hand. Inside the
wall he stationed archers and cross-bows, or scorpions, and by the
volleys discharged through these he made the marines useless. By these
means he not only baffled the enemy, whether at a distance or close
at hand, but also killed the greater number of them. As often, too, as
they tried to work their Sambucae, he had engines ready all along the
walls, not visible at other times, but which suddenly reared
themselves above the wall from the inside, when the moment for their
use had come, and stretched their beams far over the battlements, some
of them carrying stones weighing as much as ten talents, and others
great masses of lead. So whenever the Sambucae were approaching, these
beams swung round on their pivot the required distance, and by means
of a rope running through a pulley dropt the stone, upon the Sambucae,
with the result that it not only smashed the machine itself to pieces,
but put the ship also and all on board into the most serious danger.

Other machines which he invented were directed against storming
parties, who, advancing under the protection of pent-houses, were
secured by them from being hurt by missiles shot through the walls.
Against these he either shot stones big enough to drive the marines
from the prow; or let down an iron hand swung on a chain, by which the
man who guided the crane, having fastened on some part of the prow
where he could get a hold, prest down the lever of the machine inside
the wall; and when he had thus lifted the prow and made the vessel
rest upright on its stern, he fastened the lever of his machine so
that it could not be moved; and then suddenly slackened the hand and
chain by means of a rope and pulley. The result was that many of the
vessels heeled over and fell on their sides; some completely
capsized; while the greater number, by their prows coming down
suddenly from a height, dipt low in the sea, shipped a great quantity
of water, and became a scene of the utmost confusion. Tho reduced
almost to despair by these baffling inventions of Archimedes, and tho
he saw that all his attempts were repulsed by the garrison with
mockery on their part and loss to himself, Marcellus could not yet
refrain from making a joke at his own expense, saying that "Archimedes
was using his ships to ladle out the sea-water, but that his 'harps'
not having been invited to the party were buffeted and turned out with
disgrace." Such was the end of the attempt at storming Syracuse by
sea.

Nor was Appius Claudius more successful. He, too, was compelled by
similar difficulties to desist from the attempt; for while his men
were still at a considerable distance from the wall, they began
falling by the stones and shots from the engines and catapults. The
volleys of missiles, indeed, were extraordinarily rapid and sharp, for
their construction had been provided for by all the liberality of a
Hiero, and had been planned and engineered by the skill of an
Archimedes. Moreover, when they did at length get near the walls, they
were prevented from making an assault by the unceasing fire through
the loop-holes, which I mentioned before; or if they tried to carry
the place under cover of pent-houses, they were killed by the stones
and beams let down upon their heads. The garrison also did them no
little damage with those hands at the end of their engines; for they
used to lift the men, armor, and all, into the air, and then throw
them down. At last Appius retired into the camp, and summoning the
Tribunes to a council of war, decided to try every possible means of
taking Syracuse except a storm. And this decision they carried out;
for during the eight months of siege which followed, tho there was no
stratagem or measure of daring which they did not attempt, they never
again ventured to attempt a storm. So true it is that one man and one
intellect, properly qualified for the particular undertaking, is a
host in itself and of extraordinary efficacy. In this instance, at any
rate, we find the Romans confident that their forces by land and sea
would enable them to become masters of the town, if only one old man
could be got rid of; while as long as he remained there, they did not
venture even to think of making the attempt, at least by any method
which made it possible for Archimedes to oppose them. They believed,
however, that their best chance of reducing the garrison was by a
failure of provisions sufficient for so large a number as were within
the town; they therefore relied upon this hope, and with their ships
tried to cut off their supplies by sea, and with their army by land.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 88: This paragraph is taken from Book XI.]

[Footnote 89: From Book VIII of the "Histories." Translated by Evelyn
S. Shuckburgh. Syracuse was now an ally of Carthage in the Punic war,
but in the earlier Punic war had been an ally of Rome.]

[Footnote 90: A celebrated statesman and general, born before 268
B.C., died in 208; five times Consul; defeated the Gauls; defended
Nola; captured Syracuse; commanded Apulia against Hannibal; killed in
a skirmish at Venusia.]

[Footnote 91: The celebrated geometrician, who discovered the
principle of the lever, and after detecting an alloy uttered the
famous exclamation "Eureka." He was killed at the siege of Syracuse.]




PLUTARCH

     Born in Chaeronea in Boeotia about 46 A.D.; died in 125;
     celebrated for his forty-six "Lives of Greeks and Romans,"
     and for works on philosophical and moral subjects; settled
     at Athens at the time of Nero's visit in 66, and traveled in
     Greece, Egypt and Italy; being in Rome during the reign of
     Vespasian; lived at Chaeronea in the latter part of his life
     where he was elected archon.[92]

I

DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO COMPARED[93]


Furthermore, leaving the comparison aside of the difference of their
eloquence in their orations: methinks I may say thus much of them.
That Demosthenes did wholly employ all his wit and learning (natural
or artificial) unto the art of rhetoric, and that in force, and vertue
of eloquence, he did excel all the orators in his time: and for
gravity and magnificent style, all those also that only write for shew
or ostentation: and for sharpness and art, all the sophisters and
masters of rhetoric. And that Cicero was a man generally learned in
all sciences, and that had studied divers books, as appeareth plainly
by the sundry books of philosophy of his own making, written after the
manner of the Academic philosophers. Furthermore, they may see in his
orations he wrote in certain causes to serve him when he pleaded: that
he sought occasions in his by-talk to shew men that he was excellently
well learned. Furthermore, by their phrases a man may discern some
spark of their manners and conditions. For Demosthenes' phrase hath no
manner of fineness, jests, nor grace in it, but is altogether grave
and harsh, and not only smelleth of the lamp, as Pytheas said when he
mocked him, but sheweth a great drinker of water, extreme pains, and
therewith also a sharp and sour nature.

But Cicero oftentimes fell from pleasant taunts, unto plain
scurrility: and turning all his pleadings of matters of importance, to
sport and laughter, having a grace in it, many times he did forget the
comeliness that became a man of his calling. As in his oration for
Caelius, where he saith, It is no marvel if in so great abundance of
wealth and fineness he give himself a little to take his pleasure:
and that it was a folly not to use pleasures lawful and tolerable,
sith the famousest philosophers that ever were, did place the chief
felicity of man, to be in pleasure. And it is reported also that
Marcus Cato having accused Murena, Cicero being Consul, defended his
cause, and in his oration pleasantly girded all the sect of the Stoic
philosophers for Cato's sake, for the strange opinions they hold,
which they call paradoxes: insomuch as he made all the people and
judges also fall a-laughing a good. And Cato himself also smiling a
little, said unto them that sat by him: What a laughing and mocking
Consul have we, my lords? but letting that pass, it seemeth that
Cicero was of a pleasant and merry nature: for his face shewed ever
great life and mirth in it. Whereas in Demosthenes' countenance on the
other side, they might discern a marvellous diligence and care, and a
pensive man, never weary with pain: insomuch that his enemies, (as he
reporteth himself) called him a perverse and froward man.

Furthermore, in their writings is discerned, that the one speaketh
modestly in his own praise, so as no man can justly be offended with
him: and yet not always, but when necessity enforceth him for some
matter of great importance, but otherwise very discreet and modest to
speak of himself. Cicero in contrary manner, using too often
repetition of one self thing in all his orations, shewed an extreme
ambition of glory, when incessantly he cried out:

    Let spear and shield give place to gown,
    And give the tongue the laurel crown.

Yea furthermore, he did not only praise his own acts and deeds, but
the orations also which he had written or pleaded, as if he should
have contended against Isocrates, or Anaximenes, a master that taught
rhetoric, and not to go about to reform the people of Rome.

    Which were both fierce and stout in arms,
    And fit to work their enemies harms.

For, as it is requisite for a governor of a commonwealth to seek
authority by his eloquence: so, to cover the praise of his own
glorious tongue, or as it were to beg it, that sheweth a base mind.
And therefore in this point we must confess that Demosthenes is far
graver, and of a nobler mind: who declared himself, That all his
eloquence came only but by practice, the which also required the
favour of his auditory: and further, he thought them fools and madmen
(as indeed they be no less) that therefore would make any boast of
themselves. In this they were both alike, that both of them had great
credit and authority in their orations to the people, and for
obtaining that they would propound: insomuch as captains, and they
that had armies in their hands, stood in need of their eloquence. As
Chares, Diopithes, and Leosthenes, they all were holpen of
Demosthenes: and Pompey, and Octavius Caesar the young man, of Cicero:
as Caesar himself confesseth in his commentaries he wrote unto Agrippa,
and Maecenas. But nothing sheweth a man's nature and condition more,
(as it is reported, and so is it true) that when one is in authority:
for that bewrayeth his humour, and the affections of his mind, and
layeth open all his secret vices in him.

Demosthenes could never deliver any such proof of himself, because he
never bare any office, nor was called forward. For he was not general
of the army, which he himself had prepared against King Philip. Cicero
on the other side being sent Treasurer into Sicily, and Pro-consul
into Cilicia and Cappadocia,[94] in such a time as covetousness
reigned most: (insomuch that the captains and governors whom they sent
to govern their provinces, thinking it villainy and dastardliness to
rob, did violently take things by force, at what time also to take
bribes was reckoned no shame, but to handle it discreetly, he was the
better thought of, and beloved for it) he shewed plainly that he
regarded not money, and gave forth many proofs of his courtesy and
goodness. Furthermore, Cicero being created Consul by name, but
Dictator in deed, having absolute power and authority over all things
to suppress the rebellion and conspirators of Catiline: he proved
Plato's prophecy true, which was: That the cities are safe from
danger, when the chief magistrates and governors (by some good divine
fortune) do govern with wisdom and justice. Demosthenes was reproved
for his corruption, and selling of his eloquence: because secretly he
wrote one oration for Phormio, and another in the self same manner for
Apollodorus, they being both adversaries. Further, he was defamed also
for receiving money of the king of Persia, and therewithal condemned
for the money which he had taken of Harpalus. And though some
peradventure would object, that the reports thereof (which are many)
do lie: yet they cannot possibly deny this, that Demosthenes had no
power to refrain from looking on the presents which divers kings did
offer him, praying him to accept them in good part for their sakes:
neither was that the part of a man that did take usury by traffick on
the sea, the extremest yet of all other.

In contrary manner (as we have said before) it is certain that Cicero
being Treasurer, refused the gifts which the Sicilians offered him,
there: and the presents also which the king of the Cappadocians
offered him whilst he was Pro-consul in Cilicia, and those especially
which his friends pressed upon him to take of them, being a great sum
of money, when he went as a banished man out of Rome. Furthermore, the
banishment of the one was infamous to him, because by judgement he was
banished as a thief. The banishment of the other was for as honourable
an act as ever he did, being banished for ridding his country of
wicked men. And therefore of Demosthenes, there was no speech after he
was gone: but for Cicero, all the Senate changed their apparel into
black, and determined that they would pass no decree by their
authority, before Cicero's banishment was revoked by the people.
Indeed Cicero idly passed his time of banishment, and did nothing all
the while he was in Macedon: and one of the chiefest acts that
Demosthenes did, in all the time that he dealt in the affairs of the
commonwealth, was in his banishment. For he went into every city, and
did assist the ambassadors of the Grecians, and refused the
ambassadors of the Macedonians. In the which he showed himself a
better citizen, than either Themistocles, or Alcibiades, in their like
fortune and exile. So when he was called home, and returned, he fell
again to his old trade which he practiced before, and was ever against
Antipater,[95] and the Macedonians. Where Laelius in open Senate
sharply took up Cicero, for that he sat still and said nothing, when
that Octavius Caesar the young man made petition against the law, that
he might sue for the Consulship, and being so young, that he had never
a hair on his face. And Brutus self also doth reprove Cicero in his
letters, for that he had maintained and nourished a more grievous and
greater tyranny, than that which they had put down. And last of all,
me thinketh the death of Cicero most pitiful, to see an old man
carried up and down, (with tender love of his servants) seeking all
the ways that might be to fly death, which did not long prevent his
natural course: and in the end, old as he was, to see his head so
pitifully cut off. Whereas Demosthenes, though he yielded a little,
entreating him that came to take him: yet for that he had prepared the
poison long before, that he had kept it long, and also used it as he
did, he cannot but be marvellously commended for it. For sith the god
Neptune denied him the benefit of his sanctuary, he betook him to a
greater, and that was death: whereby he saved himself out of the
soldiers' hands of the tyrant, and also scorned the bloody cruelty of
Antipater.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 92: Plutarch is read for his matter, rather than for his
style. In style as well as for the time in which he lived, he does not
belong to the classical writers of Greece. For this reason he may be
read in English almost as satisfactorily as in his own language. He is
described by Mahaffy as a pure and elevating writer, full of precious
information and lofty in his moral tone.]

[Footnote 93: From "The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans,
Compared together by that Grave, Learned Philosopher and
Historiographer Plutarch of Chaeronea." Translated by Sir Thomas North.
North was born about 1535, his translation being first published in
1579. Written throughout in the best prose of the Elizabethan period,
North's version will always have another and very special interest as
the store house from which Shakespeare obtained his knowledge of
antiquity. It has been asserted that to this book we really owe the
existence of "Julius Caesar," "Coriolanus," and "Antony and Cleopatra."
In "Coriolanus" whole speeches have been taken bodily from North,
while in "Antony and Cleopatra" North's diction has been closely
followed. North did not translate from the original Greek, but from an
old French version by James Amyot, Bishop of Auxerre in the times of
Henry II of England. The selections here given are printed with the
original punctuation, etc., preserved as specimens of the style of the
period.]

[Footnote 94: This and the province of Cilicia lay in the eastern part
of Asia Minor.]

[Footnote 95: Antipater was a general of Macedonia under Philip and
Alexander the Great and became Regent in 334.]




II

THE ASSASSINATION OF CAESAR[96]

(44 B.C.)


But Brutus in many other things tasted of the benefit of Caesar's favor
in anything he requested.[97] For if he had listed, he might have been
one of Caesar's chiefest friends, and of greater authority and credit
about him. Howbeit Cassius' friends did dissuade him from it[98] (for
Cassius and he were not yet reconciled together sithence their first
contention and strife for the Praetorship), and prayed him to beware of
Caesar's sweet enticements, and to fly his tyrannical favors: the which
they said Caesar gave him, not to honor his virtue, but to weaken his
constant mind, framing it to the bent of his bow. Now Caesar on the
other side did not trust him overmuch, nor was not without tales
brought unto him against him: howbeit he feared his great mind,
authority, and friends. Yet on the other side also, he trusted his
good-nature, and fair conditions. For, intelligence being brought him
one day, that Mark Antony and Dolabella did conspire against him: he
answered, That these fat long-haired men made him not afraid, but the
lean and whitely-faced fellows, meaning that, by Brutus and Cassius.

At another time also when one accused Brutus unto him, and bade him
beware of him: What, said he again, clapping his hand on his breast:
think ye that Brutus will not tarry till this body die? Meaning that
none but Brutus after him was meet to have such power as he had. And
surely, in my opinion, I am persuaded that Brutus might indeed have
come to have been the chiefest man of Rome, if he could have contented
himself for a time to have been next unto Caesar, and to have suffered
his glory and authority which he had gotten by his great victories, to
consume with time. But Cassius being a choleric man, and hating Caesar
privately, more than he did the tyranny openly: he incensed Brutus
against him....
