      the war," he says. "Could one American, unless those shut up in New
      York and Charleston, even out of prudence and self-preservation,
      declare for England, by whose general they were so unfeelingly
      abandoned?"

      [3] Livingston to Dana, October 22, 1781.

                        *          *          *

"Oh God, it is all over!" exclaimed Lord North, on hearing that
Cornwallis had surrendered. And it was all over, although we have
Franklin's authority that George III. continued to hope for a revival of
his sovereignty over America "on the same terms as are now making with
Ireland." These hopes were soon dissipated, and a treaty of peace was
finally signed at Paris, September 23, 1783. The British troops sailed
away from New York on November 25, and General Washington, after a tender
parting with his officers, resigned his commission. A great number of
Tory refugees departed from New York with the British, but it is doubtful
whether their lot was happier than that of those who remained to accept
the new order of things. It is only necessary to glance at the diary of
Hutchinson, the royalist governor of Massachusetts, to perceive that,
even under the most favorable circumstances, the situation of the exiled
Tories was miserable indeed. Many of them settled in Canada, there to
hand down to their descendants feelings of antipathy which, in America,
have long been discarded. Many of them wisely returned to the United
States, and were magnanimously forgiven and received as brethren and
citizens. No voice was raised to plead more eloquently in their behalf
than that of Patrick Henry. "I feel no objection," he exclaimed, "to the
return of those deluded people. They have, to be sure, mistaken their own
interests most wofully, and most wofully have they suffered the
punishment due to their offences. * * * Afraid of them!--what, sir--shall
we who have laid the proud British lion at our feet, now be afraid of his
whelps?"




FOURTH PERIOD.

Union.




CHAPTER XX.

Condition of the United States at the Close of the Revolution--New
England Injured and New York Benefited Commercially by the Struggle--
Luxury of City Life--Americans an Agricultural People--The Farmer's
Home--Difficulty in Traveling--Contrast Between North and South--Southern
Aristocracy--Northern Great Families--White Servitude--The Western
Frontier--Karly Settlers West of the Mountains--A Hardy Population--
Disappearance of the Colonial French--The Ordinance of 1787--Flood of
Emigration Beyond the Ohio.


Peace with Great Britain left the United States free and independent, but
burdened with the expenses of the war, and agitated by the problems which
independence presented. The soldiers of the Continental Army went back to
their firesides and their fields, and trade began to show signs of
revival. New England's commercial interests had received a serious blow
from the Revolution, while New York city, occupied by the British
throughout the war, the headquarters of the royal forces with their
lavish expenditures, and its commerce protected and convoyed by the
British fleet, was benefited instead of injured by the struggle. The
merchants of New York, whether attached or not at heart to the royalist
cause, put business before patriotism, while the flag of St. George
floated over their city, and urged the British to severer measures
against the "rebels" in order that New York's mercantile interests might
be promoted and safeguarded.[1] Apart from natural advantages, next in
importance to the Erie Canal as a cause of New York's leading commercial
position is the fact that the British were in possession of the city
during the Revolution.

      [1] A number of years ago the Hon. William M. Evarts delivered
      a speech before the New York Chamber of Commerce in which he
      congratulated that body on its patriotism "during the Revolution."
      Having been allowed to examine the records of the Chamber for the
      revolutionary period, I wrote an article which appeared over my
      initials in the New York _Sun_ pointing out that the Chamber, as
      shown by its own records, had been ultra-loyal, instead of
      patriotic.--_H. M._

There was considerable luxury in city life then as now. "By Revolutionary
times love of dress everywhere prevailed throughout the State of New
York," says Mrs. Alice Morse Earle, "a love of dress which caused great
extravagance and was noted by all travelers."[2] "If there is a town on
the American continent," said the Chevalier de Crevecoeur, "where English
luxury displayed its follies it is in New York." Philadelphia was not far
behind New York in extravagance, notwithstanding Quaker traditions, while
Boston, rich in solid wealth, was more conservative in displaying it, and
retained in appearance at least something of Puritan simplicity.

      [2] Costumes of Colonial Times.

The urban residents of those days were, however, insignificant in numbers
as compared with the total population. The Americans were an agricultural
people, and they were a self-dependent people. The articles of clothing
needed in the farmer's home were manufactured in the home; the tailor
went around from house to house making into suits the cloth which the
family had woven; the school teacher "boarded around" as an equivalent
for salary that might otherwise have been paid in worthless currency, and
the simple requirements of rural existence were supplied in a large
degree by trade and barter without the use of what passed as money. The
farmer's cottage stood upon a level sward of green. The kitchen was the
living-room, and there the family spent their time when not out at work
or retired to rest. It was the largest apartment in the house, and its
great fire-place, with a ruddy back-log and pine knots flaming and
sparkling on the iron-dogs, offered a most cheerful welcome on a New
England winter's night. The baking oven, heated with fine-split dry wood,
cooked the frugal but savory meal, which was served up on a solid
old-fashioned table, around which the household gathered, first giving
thanks to the Giver of all. When not busied with other duties, the
housewife pressed with measured round the treadles of the loom, as she
twilled the web she was weaving; and as the shades of evening descended
the sonorous hum of the spinning-wheel gave token to the young man on
courtship intent that the daughter of the house was at home. From the
kitchen a door opened into the best room, a cheerless sort of place only
thrown open on special occasions, and not to compare in comfort with the
kitchen, its high-backed settle and its genial fire, whose glowing ashes
seemed to reflect the warmer glow of loving eyes. Other doors from the
kitchen opened into sleeping-rooms, although in the larger houses the
family usually slept upstairs. The well was used for cooling purposes as
well as water supply, and the old oaken bucket suspended from the
well-sweep by means of a slender pole, invited the passing stranger to
quaff nature's wholesome beverage. Wheeled vehicles were not often seen
in the rural districts, horses being commonly used for locomotion. The
difficulty of traveling discouraged intercourse between different
communities, and a journey from Boston to New York, taking a week by
stage-coach, and three or four days by sailing vessel, was a more
momentous undertaking than a voyage to Europe now. Few traveled for
pleasure. Few took any active interest in public affairs beyond their own
neighborhood, or at most their own State, and the bond of the
confederation rested loosely on communities now no longer united by the
apprehension of common danger.

                        *          *          *

Between the North and the South the contrast was already ominous of
future strife. The Southern planter lived like an aristocrat surrounded
by servants and slaves, dispensing hospitality according to his means
after the fashion of the British nobility. Cotton had not yet poured the
gold of England into the lap of the South, but tobacco held its own as a
substantial basis of wealth. In the North, on the other hand, the tiller
of the soil was usually its owner, assisted sometimes by indentured
servants or slaves, but never himself above the toil which he exacted
from others. The North, too, had its great families, descendants of
patroons and others who had received large grants of land and enjoyed
exceptional privileges, and were now growing in wealth with the
increasing value of their property; but the aristocratic Northern
families were gradually losing political power and influence, and sinking
toward the level of the people; whereas in the South the aristocratic
element was arrogating more and more the control of State affairs, and
the representation of Southern States in the councils of the nation. In
the North also equality was promoted by the potent influence of the
Revolution in breaking up the system of servile white labor. Master and
man were summoned for the defence of their country; they fought, they
suffered and endured together the same privations for a common cause.
Distinctions of class were obliterated by the blood that flowed freely
for the freedom of all, and what remained of ancient aristocratic
prejudice was yet more thoroughly undermined by the example of the great
social upheaval in France. Nevertheless the system of white servitude was
not entirely abolished until long after the close of the eighteenth
century, immigrants to this country frequently selling themselves as
"redemptioners" to pay the cost of their passage. The limits of this form
of service seldom exceeded seven years. No taint was apparently attached
to it, and many a worthy family had a "redemptioner" for its first
American ancestor.

                        *          *          *

Looking to the western frontier just after the Revolution, and in
particular the forks of the Ohio, we see a population very different in
character from that of the older settlements. The peace-loving Quaker
clung to the eastern counties, where life and property were secured from
raid and reprisal, and formed his ideas of the Indian character and
deserts from the red men, who, either Christianized or demoralized,
preferred the grudging charity of civilization to the rude and frugal
spoils of the chase, or the blood-stained rapine of war. This specimen of
Indian was usually so harmless, in some instances perhaps so deserving,
that the well-meaning Quaker learned to receive with discredit the
stories of horror from the frontier, and discouraged with his voice and
influence every step toward the subjection of the hostile Indian and his
European allies. Emigrants were forbidden, under stern penalties, to
encroach on the Indian domain, and petitions from invaded settlements for
arms and assistance, were met with cold indifference or positive refusal.
The men and women who, in face of such discouragement, cast their lot
beyond the mountains, must have been a hardy set indeed, and made of
stuff not likely to yield in a wrestle with wild nature and wilder
humanity.

The early inhabitants of that frontier region were of sturdy Scotch and
Irish stock. The troublous political times in their native countries
doubtless had much to do with their emigration hither. The star of the
Stuart line had set never to rise again, and its bright and hopeless
flicker, in the days of '45, was extinguished in the blood of Scotland's
noblest sons. But while order reigned, content was far from prevailing,
and many a brave heart sought, on the distant shore of America, to forget
the anguish of the past in the building of a prosperous future. With a
final sigh for "Lochaber No More," the Highlander turned his gaze from
the lochs and glens of his fathers, and crossed the ocean to that new
land of promise where every man might be a laird, and a farm might be had
for the asking, where no Culloden would remind him of the fate of his
kindred, and his children could grow up far from the barbarous laws that
crushed out the spirit of the ancient clans. Along the banks of the
Monongahela those Scotch and Irish settlers built their rude cabins under
the guns of Fort Pitt, guarded--strange irony of fate--from a savage
enemy by the very flag which flaunted oppression in their native Britain
and Ireland. That they learned to love their adopted land who can
question? A Virginian cavalier, accustomed to the graces and _politesse_
of a slave-owning aristocracy, saw fit to sneer at their humble abodes,
and their lack of the finer accessories of civilization, forgetting that a
cabin is more often than a palace the cradle of the purest patriotism, and
that as true American hearts beat in those huts in the wilderness as in
the courtly precincts of Richmond.

But the "poor mechanics and laborers" exercised a tremendous influence on
the destinies of the young, and as yet disunited republic. They were
freemen. Pittsburg, the outpost of civilization, had no slave within
sight of its redoubts, and the spirit of freedom which hovered there,
found rest and refreshment for its broader flight toward the great
northwest. The decision of 1780, which saved Pittsburg to Pennsylvania,
preserved it as a stronghold of freedom and of free labor, and now it far
surpasses in industry, wealth and population the then slave-labor capital
of the Old Dominion.

It is an interesting fact that the colonial French left no impress on the
site where they made such a gallant stand for New France. They have
vanished as completely as the Indian. In Detroit, in St. Louis, French
ancestry can be traced in families of high position and honorable
lineage. Such families are to those cities what the Knickerbockers are to
New York. They give a gracious flavor to society; they are a link between
the dim and heroic past and the dashing, eager, practical present; they
add a dreamy fascination to the social landscape, like the lingering haze
of morning illumined by the rays of the sun fast mounting to zenith.
Where Duquesne stood, neither track nor mark remains of the volatile,
daring and glory-loving race whose lily flag greeted the bearers of brave
Beaujeu's remains from the fatal field of Braddock. No authentic trace
has been discovered even of the fortifications which they erected, and
Fort Duquesne is known only by its tragic place in American history.

The ordinance of 1787, creating the Northwestern Territory, and throwing
it open for settlement, at once induced a large emigration to the lands
beyond the Ohio. Descendants of the Puritans mingled in the pioneer
throng with rangers from Virginia and backwoodsmen from Pennsylvania. The
frontiersman in hunting-shirt and moccasins blazed a path for the New
Englander in broadcloth coat, velvet collar, bell-crowned hat and heavy
boots. These emigrants all possessed valuable qualities for the building
up of new States, and they all displayed in the trials which immediately
beset them the courage which had carried the nation successfully through
the war for independence. They were entering upon a vast and fertile
domain which the aboriginal possessors, notwithstanding treaties, did not
propose to abandon, and which was the scene of sanguinary conflict before
it was finally surrendered.




CHAPTER XXI.

The Spirit of Disunion--Shays' Rebellion--A National Government Necessary
--Adoption of the Constitution--Tariff and Internal Revenue--The Whiskey
Insurrection--President Washington Calls Out the Military--Insurgents
Surrender--"The Dreadful Night"--Hamilton's Inquisition.


The spirit of disunion was brewing; the people were tax-ridden, the
States without credit and the prevailing discontent found expression in
riot and rebellion. The insurrection of Daniel Shays and his followers in
Massachusetts, the disturbances in western North Carolina and other
outbreaks in various parts of the country were but symptoms of radical
weakness in the body politic, and of the complete failure of the
loose-jointed confederation to command the confidence of the people and
maintain the credit of the nation. It became evident that union was as
vitally important in peace as in war; that national burdens could only be
sustained by a national government, and that the welfare of trade and
commerce required one system of interstate laws enforced by the united
power of all the States. The adoption of the Federal Constitution created
a nation; it created a free government worth all that it had cost; it
realized the dream of Franklin and the prediction of Adams; it made
possible the American Republic of to-day, and the great work was
fittingly crowned with the election of George Washington as first
President.

                        *          *          *

The first business of the new government was to establish the public
credit. Alexander Hamilton, Washington's Secretary of the Treasury,
proposed with this object a tariff on imports, and a tax on whiskey. To
the former the people submitted readily enough; the latter provoked an
insurrection which for some time threatened to be formidable. The farmers
of the western counties of Pennsylvania--Westmoreland, Fayette,
Washington and Allegheny--having no market for grain, in the decade
following the Revolution, on account of the absence of large settlements
in their vicinity, and the lack of facilities to transport to more
distant places, were from necessity compelled to reduce the bulk of their
grain by converting it into whiskey. A horse could carry two kegs of
eight gallons each, worth about fifty cents per gallon on the western,
and one dollar on the eastern side of the mountains, and return with a
little iron and salt, the former worth fifteen to twenty cents per pound,
the latter five dollars per bushel, at Pittsburg. The still was therefore
the necessary appendage of every farm, where the farmer was able to
procure it; if he was not he carried his grain to the more wealthy to be
distilled. To the large majority of these farmers excise laws were
peculiarly odious. The State of Pennsylvania made some attempt, during
and just after the Revolution, to enforce an excise law; but without
effect. A man named Graham, who had kept a public house in Philadelphia,
accepted the appointment of Collector for the western counties. He was
assailed, his head shaven and he was threatened with death. Other
collectors were equally unsuccessful.

The United States excise law was enacted in March, 1791. While the bill
was before Congress, the subject was taken up by the Pennsylvania
Legislature, then in session, and resolutions were passed in strong terms
against the law, and requesting the senators and representatives, by a
vote of thirty-six to eleven, to oppose its passage; the minority voting
on the principle that it was improper to interfere with the action of the
Federal Government, and not from approval of the measure. The law imposed
a tax of from nine to twenty-five cents per gallon, according to
strength, upon spirits distilled from grain. To secure the collection of
the duties, suitable regulations were made. Inspection districts were
established, one or more in each State, with an inspector for each.
Distillers were to furnish at the nearest inspection office full
descriptions of their buildings, which were always subject to examination
by a person appointed for that purpose, who was to gauge and brand the
casks; duties to be paid before removal. But to save trouble to small
distillers, not in any town or village, they were allowed to pay an
annual tax of sixty cents per gallon on the capacity of the still.

Such a measure could not fail to be intensely unpopular, especially among
the small farmers to whom the whiskey derived from their grain was the
principal source of income and support. To the large distillers the tax
was not altogether odious, as they comprehended that the new law would
add greatly to their trade by cutting off their lesser rivals, and
securing the manufacture of spirits to the well-to-do and
well-established few. On the same ground distillers to-day are very
generally opposed to the removal of the internal revenue tax on spirits.
But popular clamor carried all before it, and it would have been unsafe
