
"Yes, father; but then young Eden is suffering too in the same way, and
I think he got the worst of it."

"I'm glad of it, Ralph.  I think you behaved very bravely."

"What; in fighting the robbers?"

"I did not mean that.  I meant in defending yourself," said Sir Morton
austerely.  "There, that will do: I want to go on studying this book."

But Ralph was fidgety from the state of his wound, and went on again.

"Couldn't the old trouble be settled by law?"

"Pooh, boy!  As I have told you before, the law does not reach here
among these mountainous wilds.  I am the law here.  I could settle the
matter; but that man Eden would never agree to what I said."

"And I suppose, father, that you would never agree to what he considered
was the proper law."

"Certainly not, Ralph," said Sir Morton impatiently.  "But why are you
going on like this?"

"Because I was thinking again how easy it would be if you and Sir Edward
Eden were to join and attack that Captain Purlrose and his men.  You
would be able to drive the gang out of the neighbourhood."

"I shall be able to drive this fellow out of the district, my boy,
without the help of the Edens, who ought to be driven out too, for they
are very little better than Captain Purlrose and his men.  Stop, sir;
what are you going to do?"

"Go out, father.  It's so dull sitting here."

"You had better stay in: the sun is hot, and you have been rather
feverish.  I want you to grow quite well."

"So do I, father," said the lad, smiling.

"Then do what Master Rayburn advised you.  Keep perfectly quiet."

"But it is such weary work doing nothing, father.  I'm sure I should get
better if I were out in the fresh air.  Ah, there is Minnie;" for just
then his sister came to the open window, and looked in.

"Why don't you come out and sit in the shade here, Ralph?" she said.
"Come and read with me."

Ralph glanced at his father, who shrugged his shoulders and nodded, as
much as to say, "Well, be off;" and the lad went out into the
castle-yard, and then on to the little terrace where the new basin and
fountain were looking bright and attractive, though still wanting in the
fish Ralph was to have procured.

Brother and sister sat down in a shady nook, and watched the glint of
the river through the trees far below, looked over the lovely prospect
of hill and dale; and finally Minnie's eyes rested upon the shoulder of
the great shaley hill at whose foot the encounter with the disbanded
soldiers had taken place.

"When is father going to lead the men to drive out those dreadful
people?" said the girl at last.

"I don't know: soon, I hope.  When I'm better."

"Well, you are better, Ralph."

"That's what I told father.  Only a bit sore.  I'm sick of being coddled
up."

"That's because you are a boy.  You are never happy unless you are in
the open-air."

"You would not be, if you were a boy," said Ralph sharply.

"Well, I don't know that I am, even as a girl.  It's dreadful.  You
know, father has given orders that I am not to go outside the walls.  No
walks, no rides; and my poor pony looked so reproachfully at me.  Wants
to go out as badly as I do.  Don't you think it's being too particular?"

"Well, no, Min," said Ralph thoughtfully.  "While those men are about, I
don't think you ought to go out alone."

"Now, Ralph," said the girl, pouting, "you're as bad as father.  I
declare you are not a bit like a nice, brave, merry boy now.  You used
to be; but ever since you've been at that great school you have been
growing more and more serious, till you are getting to be quite an old
man."

"And quite grey," said Ralph drily.

"It only wants that," said the girl, with a merry laugh.  "I declare
that old Master Rayburn has more fun in him than you."

"Wouldn't say so if you had been wounded, and had him to pull the
bandages about."

"What nonsense! he said I was to come and see him as soon as ever I
could."

"And you can't go and see him.  He wouldn't advise you to go out while
those ruffians are yonder."

"No," replied the girl, smiling frankly.  "He said I must wait till the
wasps' nest had been burned out, and I suppose he meant the cave where
those men are.  Oh, I wish I were a man, and could go and fight the
wretches.  They've been robbing and frightening people in all
directions.  They even went last night and frightened old Mistress
Garth, Nick's mother, and took away her bag of meal."

"They did that!" cried Ralph angrily.  "How do you know?"

"Nick told me, and he says he means to kill the captain first time they
meet."

"Nick says so?"

"Yes; but I suppose it's only boasting.  I don't think he's very brave,
is he?"

"Don't know," said Ralph thoughtfully.  "But it's quite time something
was done."

"And it was so funny, Ralph," continued the girl; "he actually said to
me that he didn't care a bit for his mother, for she has the worst
temper of any one he knows, and is always scolding when he goes to see
her; but he won't have any one interfere with her, and he'll kill that
captain for stealing the meal-bag as sure as he's alive."

"Well, it shows he's a good son," said Ralph quietly.  "But you see that
it is not safe for you to go out."

"Yes," said Minnie with a sigh; "but it seems very silly.  The other day
one was obliged to stop in because of the Edens; now it's because of
those men."

"I suppose it's as bad for the Edens as it is for us," replied Ralph,
who became now very thoughtful; and when, soon afterwards, Minnie looked
up to see why he did not speak, she found that his head was resting
against the stone, beside a crenelle, and that he was fast asleep.

"Poor boy!" she said softly, "he is weak yet, and soon worn-out.  It was
very brave of him to fight as he did--with Mark Eden, I mean--against
the men who attacked them, and for both to be wounded.  I wonder what
Mark Eden is like.  Ralph has met him three times, he says, but he only
growls if I begin to ask him questions.  What a pity it is, when we
might all be so friendly and nice.  How stupid it does seem of people to
quarrel!"



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

HOW MARK'S SISTER LOST HER WHIP.

Fate seemed to be determined that the young people of the rival families
should become intimate, in spite of all the stringent rules laid down by
the heads; for Ralph was out one day, making a round, when it occurred
to him that he would call upon Master Rayburn, to let him see how well
the wound was healing up, and to say a few words of thanks to the old
man for his kindness and attention.

He found the object of his visit seated in a kind of grotto, shaded by a
great sycamore, with his doublet off, hat on the floor, and beautifully
white sleeves rolled up, busily at work, tying up some peculiar little
combinations of wool, hair, and feathers, to the back of a hook; and as
the lad approached, he held up the curious object by the piece of
horsehair to which it was tied.

"Well, patient," he said, "what do you think of that?"

"Nothing at all," cried the lad.  "No fish would ever take that.  What
do you call it?"

"A bumble-bee, and the fish will take it, Mr Cleversides; but not if
they see a big lubberly boy staring at them with his arm in a sling, or
an old grey-headed man, either, Ralph.  There, don't frown.  It's very
nice to be a big lubberly boy; much better than being a worn-out old
man, with not much longer to live.  Ah, you laugh at my bumble-bee, and
it certainly is not like one, but the best I can do, and I find it a
great bait for a chevin, if used with guile.  Take these two, Ralph,
boy, and early some sunny morning go down behind the trees, where they
overhang the stream, and don't show so much as your nose, let alone your
shadow, for it would send them flying.  Then gently throw your fly."

[Note: a chevin is a chub.]

"How can you," said Ralph quickly, "with the boughs overhanging the
water?"

"Good, lad! what I expected you to say; but there is where the guile
comes in.  I don't want you to throw your fly into the water, but to let
it drop on the leaves just above it, a few inches or a foot, and then
shake the line tenderly, till the bee softly rolls off, and drops
naturally from a leaf, hardly making a splash.  Then you'll find that
there will be a dimple on the water, the smacking of two lips, and the
chevin will have taken the bait.  Then it is your fault if it is not
laid in your creel."

"Thank you, Master Rayburn; I'll try.  I haven't had a fish since I was
wounded."

"No: it would have been bad work if you had gone whipping about, and
irritating the two little holes in your arm.  Well, how is it?"

"Oh, quite well now," said the lad, as he carefully hooked the bees in
his cap, and twisted the hair to which they were attached under the
band; "and I've come to say how thankful I am for all you have done for
me, and--"

"That's enough, my dear boy," cried the old man warmly; "look the rest.
And now about those wild men of the mountains; have you heard how they
are going on?"

"A little; not much."

"Ah, you don't know, or you would not talk about a little.  Why, Ralph,
boy, the country round is full of complaints of their doings.  About a
dozen great idle scoundrels are living up at Ergles in that cave, laying
the people for miles round under contribution; picking the fat of the
land, and committing outrage after outrage.  Only during the past week,
I've had to bind up two broken heads, and strap up a broken shoulder,
where the poor fellows had made a brave fight for it--one man against
seven or eight."

"You don't mean that!" cried Ralph flushing.

"But I do, boy.  They are growing worse and worse, and making themselves
a scourge to the country."

"I did not know it was so bad."

"No, I suppose not, sir; and here are you people living safely in your
castles, with plenty of stout men about you, ready to arm and defend you
behind your walls and gates.  But if the scoundrels came and robbed you,
perhaps you would do something.  Don't you think you ought to begin?"

"Yes, that I do," cried Ralph quickly.  "My father has been talking
about it for some time."

"Yes; and so has Sir Edward Eden been talking about it for some time;
but neither of them does anything, and the wasps' nest thrives; all the
best things in the country are carried up there--the wasps robbing the
bees; and I, though I am a man of peace, say that it is the duty of you
gentlemen to burn that wasps' nest out before anything worse is done,
for the ruffians grow more bold and daring every day, feeling, I
suppose, that they can do these things with impunity."

"Father shall do something at once," cried the lad.

"That's right," cried the old man, patting his late patient on the
shoulder.  "I don't want blood shed, and I hardly think any of your
people would come to much harm, for, like most scoundrels of their kind,
I believe the enemy would prove miserable cowards."

"They have proved to be so," cried Ralph warmly.  "Father must act now."

"I'll tell you what he ought to do, boy," said the old man, grasping his
visitor by the arm.  "Of course he need not make friends, but he ought
to go or send to the Black Tor, and ask Sir Edward to head so many men,
your father doing the same; and then they could march together, and rout
out the scoundrels."

"Yes, it would be easy enough then," said Ralph sadly; "but I know my
father too well: he would not do that."

"No," said the old man, "he would not do that."

The tone in which this was said roused the lad's indignation.

"Well," he said hotly, "do you think this Sir Edward Eden would come and
ask my father to join him?"

"No, boy, I do not," replied the old man, "for I said something of this
kind to Mark Eden only yesterday, when I was fishing up that way, and he
spoke just in the same way as you do."

"You saw him yesterday?" said Ralph eagerly.  "How is he?"

"What's that to do with you?" said the old man rather roughly.  "You
don't want to know how your enemy is.  But all the same, his leg is
nearly well.  He limps a little: that is all.  Going?"

"Yes," said Ralph hurriedly; "I must be off now.  I am going on about a
mile, and coming back this way.  Perhaps I shall see you then."

"Going about a mile?  Not going to see old Mother Garth?"

"Yes: to take her a present from my sister.  Nick told her about his
mother being robbed."

"And your sister wants to make it up to her.  Poor old woman! she is in
great trouble, but she will not hear of leaving her cottage up there on
the moor; and she says that next time the men come to rob her, they'll
find she has two pots of boiling water ready for them."

Ralph laughed, and went off, crossed the river at the shallows, and
climbed the ascent to where the old woman lived in her rough stone cot,
in its patch of garden; and as soon as he had given his present, with an
addition from his own purse, and the fierce old lady had secured it in
her pocket, she turned upon him angrily, upbraiding him and his for
allowing such outrages to be committed.

"But there," she cried, when quite out of breath, "it's of no use to
speak: there are no men now, and no boys.  When I was young, they'd have
routed out those wretches and hung them before they knew where they
were.  But only let them come here again, and they shall know what
boiling water is."

"They'll be well punished before long," said Ralph, as soon as he could
get in a word.

"I don't believe it," cried the old woman.  "Don't tell me!  I want to
know what my boy, Nick, is about for not making his master do something.
It's shameful.  But I see how it is: I shall have to go and do it
myself."

Ralph was not sorry to get away from the ungracious old dame, who stood
at her door, shouting messages to his father about his duty and her
intentions, till the lad was out of sight, when he could not help seeing
the comic side of the matter, and wondered, laughingly, what his father
would say to her if she kept her word, and came up to the castle to ask
him why he and her son, Nick, did not go and punish those wicked men for
coming and stealing her bag of meal.

"I should like to be there," said Ralph, half-aloud, as he tramped on:
and then his thoughts took a serious turn again, and he began to ponder
upon the possibilities of his father and their men attacking Captain
Purlrose, and the chances of success.

"It ought to be done," thought Ralph, as he began to climb the path
leading to the shelf upon which Master Rayburn's cottage was built,
half-a-mile farther on, "so as to take them by surprise when part of the
men are away.  It can hardly be called cowardly with men like them.
Then we could hide in the cavern, and wait till the rest came back, and
take them prisoners too.  What's that?"

He listened, and made out the sound of a horse galloping, wondering the
while who it could be.  Then his interest increased, for the track was
narrow and stony, and ran along like a shelf beside the cliff, with a
steep descent to the river--altogether about as dangerous a place for a
canter as any one could choose.  But he recalled immediately how
sure-footed the ponies of the district were, and thought no more of it
for a few moments.  Then his face flushed as he remembered how Mark Eden
had galloped after him.  Would it be he, and if so, now they were going
to meet again, would it be upon inimical terms, and with drawn swords?

His heart began to beat faster, and the next minute it was beating
faster still, for he caught sight, at a curve of the track, of the pony
and its burden, not Mark Eden, but a lady; and then his heart seemed to
stand still in his horror at seeing that she had lost control of the
spirited little animal, which was tearing along as hard as he could go.

The next minute it was nearly abreast of Ralph, who, without thinking of
the consequences of such an act, leaped at the rein, caught it, and was
dragged along some twenty yards, before, snorting and trembling, the
little animal, which he knew as Mark Eden's, stopped short, and began to
rear.

"Quick!" shouted the lad.  "I can't hold him: try and slip off."

His words were heard by the frightened rider, but there was little need
to tell her to slip off, for the pony reared again, nearly upright, the
rider glided from the saddle over the animal's haunches, and fell
amongst the bushes by the track, while Ralph was dragged onward again.

It all occurred in a few moments, the pony stopped, reared again, made
another bound, dropped off the track, and, as Ralph loosed his hold,
rolled over and over down the steep slope right into the river with a
tremendous splash, which cooled it on the instant; and it regained its
feet, scrambled actively ashore, gave itself a shake, and then began to
graze, as if nothing was the matter.

"Mark Eden's sister," thought Ralph, as he hurriedly climbed back to the
track, where, looking wild and scared, Mary Eden had just regained her
feet, and was standing trembling.

"Are you hurt?" he cried aloud.

"Yes, dreadfully.  No: I don't think so.  Only scratched," she replied,
half-crying.  "I couldn't stop him.  He hasn't been out lately.  He ran
away with me.  What shall I do?" she sobbed now.  "Mark will be so
angry.  Is his pony much hurt?"

"Oh, never mind the pony," cried Ralph, taking her hand.  "Here, let me
help you to Master Rayburn's."

"But I do mind about the pony," cried the girl angrily.  "It doesn't
matter about me.  Do you think he has broken his knees, or his legs?"

"It does not seem like it," said Ralph, smiling.  "Look, he is browsing
on the thick grass down there."
