The reliefs upon it are tolerably well executed, but lack invention
and novelty. They are partly borrowed from an older work, partly
combined from various sources in an extraordinary manner; horsemen
hovering in the air, and below them, prisoners and corpses scattered
around. They are intended to represent a triumphal procession, or
possibly a military _decursio_, to which allusion has been made above.

It may appear indiscreet and even insulting on the part of Anastasius
IV. to have removed the remains of a canonized empress from this noble
sarcophagus in order to have his own placed in it; but we must bear in
mind that although the Torre Pignattara has all the appearance of a
royal mausoleum, and although the ground on which it stands is known
to have belonged to the crown, Eusebius and Socrates deny that Helena
was buried in Rome. Their assertion is contradicted by the "Liber
Pontificalis" and by Bede, and above all by the similarity between
this porphyry coffin and the one discovered in the second mausoleum of
which I have spoken,--that of S. Constantia, on the Via Nomentana.

[Illustration: SARCOPHAGUS OF HELENA, MOTHER OF CONSTANTINE]

When the love of splendor which was characteristic of the Romans of
the decadence induced them to take possession of the enormous block of
primeval stone of which this second sarcophagus was made, the art of
sculpture had already degenerated; all that it could accomplish was to
impart to this mass of rock more of an architectural than a plastic
shape. The representations with which the sarcophagus is adorned or
disfigured, as the case may be, if met with elsewhere would
scarcely attract our attention. On the sides are festoons enclosing
groups of winged boys gathering grapes; on the ends are similar
figures treading out the grapes. This sarcophagus was removed to the
Hall of the Greek Cross by the same enlightened Pope Pius VI.

[Illustration: The Mausoleum of S. Constantia.]

The same vintage scenes are represented in the beautiful mosaics with
which the vault of the mausoleum is encrusted, and from this
circumstance the monument received the erroneous name of the Temple of
Bacchus, at the time of the Renaissance. There is no doubt that this
is the tomb of the princess whose name it bears. Amianus Marcellinus,
Book XXI., chapter i., says that the three daughters of
Constantine--Helena, wife of Julian, Constantina, wife of Gallus
Caesar, and Constantia, who had vowed herself to chastity, and to the
management of a congregation of virgins which she had established at
S. Agnese--were all buried in the same place.

[Illustration: Plan of the Imperial Mausoleum.]

The study of these two structures may help us greatly to explain the
origin and purpose of the two rotundas which are known to have existed
on the south side of S. Peter's, in the arena of Nero's circus. One of
them, dedicated to S. Petronilla, was destroyed in the sixteenth
century; the other, called the Church of S. Maria della Febbre, met
with the same fate during the pontificate of Pius VI. Their exact
situation in relation to the modern basilica is shown by the
accompanying diagram.

Mention of the structure, with its classical denomination of
"Mausileos," appears in the life of Stephen II. (A. D. 752). To fulfil
a promise which he had made to Pepin, king of France, that the remains
of Petronilla, who was believed to be the daughter of Peter, should
be no longer exposed to barbaric profanations in their original
resting-place on the Via Ardeatina, but put under the shelter of the
Leonine walls near the remains of her supposed father, he selected one
of these two rotundas, which became known as the "chapel of the kings
of France." The early topographers of the Renaissance, ignorant of its
history, gave a wrong name to the building, calling it the Temple of
Apollo. That it was, however, of Christian origin, is proved not only
by the fact that a temple could never have been built across the
_spina_ of the circus, and by the technical details of its
construction, which show it to be a work of the end of the fourth or
the beginning of the fifth century, but also by historical evidence.
In 423 Honorius was buried in the mausoleum close by S. Peter's
(_juxta beati Petri apostoli atrium in mausoleo_). In 451 the remains
of the Emperor Theodosius II. were removed from Constantinople to the
_mausoleum ad apostolum Petrum_. In 483 Basilius, prefect of the
Praetorium, summoned the leaders of the clergy and of the laity to the
mausoleum _quod est apud beatissimum Petrum_. A precious engraving by
Bonanni, No. lxxiv. of his volume on the Vatican, represents the
outside of one of the rotundas, the nearest to the obelisk of the
circus. The architecture of the building, so similar to the tomb of S.
Helena at Torre Pignattara, gives some conception of the enormous
downfall of Roman art and civilization, when we compare it with the
tombs of Augustus and Hadrian.

The discovery of the imperial graves which filled the two rotundas did
not take place at one and the same time. Their profanation and robbery
was accomplished in various stages, by various persons; and so little
has been said or written about them, that only in these last years has
de Rossi been able to reconstruct in its entirety this chapter in the
history of the destruction of Rome.

[Illustration: ROTUNDA AND OBELISK SOUTH OF OLD S. PETER'S. (After
Bonanni)]

In the chronicle of Nicolo della Tuccia of Viterbo is the following
entry, dated 1458: "On the 27th day of June, news was circulated in
Viterbo that two days before a great discovery had been made in S.
Peter's of Rome. A priest of that church, having manifested the wish
to be buried in the chapel of S. Petronilla, in the tribune on the
right, where the story of the emperor Constantine was painted in
ancient times, they found, while digging there, a tomb of exquisite
marble, containing a sarcophagus, and inside of it, a smaller coffin
of cypress wood overlaid with silver. This silver, of eleven carats
standard, weighed eight hundred and thirty-two pounds. The bodies were
wrapped in a golden cloth which yielded sixteen pounds of that
precious metal. It was said that the bodies were those of Constantine
and his little son. No written record or sign was found except a cross
made in this shape: [Symbol: Maltese Cross] The Pope, Callixtus III.,
took possession of everything and sent the gold and silver to the
mint." We hear no more of the imperial mausoleum during the sixty
following years. In the diary of Marcantonio Michiel, of Venice, the
next discovery is registered under the date of December 4, 1519: "A
few days ago, while excavations were going on in the chapel of the
kings of France, for the rebuilding of one of the altars, several
antique coffins were found, and in one of them the bones of an old
Christian prince, wrapped in a pall of gold cloth and surrounded with
articles of jewelry. There was a necklace with a cross-shaped pendant,
believed to be worth three thousand ducats. I know that a certain
jeweller offered that amount of money for the dress alone to Giuliano
Lena, who was in charge of the excavations. The Pope attached great
importance to the jewels, although it was found out afterwards that
they were not worth two thousand ducats, on account of some flaws
in the stones, and of injury wrought by time on their mounting. The
prospect of finding more made them overturn the whole pavement of the
chapel." Another entry of the same diary, under the date of December
23, says: "The treasure-trove in the chapel of the kings of France
consists of eight pounds of gold from the melting of dresses, of a
cross of gold, dotted with emeralds, and of a second plain one, the
value of all being a little over one thousand ducats. The Pope made a
present of some to the chapter of S. Peter's that they might make a
new reliquary for the skull of S. Petronilla."

The search was doubtless irregular, imperfect and careless, as is
proved by other and far richer discoveries which were made in 1544.
Unfortunately, if the accounts we have of these are complete, no
drawings were made before the dispersion of the objects. The only
sketches which have reached us represent a few perfume bottles found
inside the grave. Of these _flacons_ there are two sets of drawings,
one in a codex of marchese Raffaelli di Cingoli, f. 43, with the
legend, "Five goblets of agate discovered in the foundations of S.
Peter's during the pontificate of Paul III. in the tomb of Maria,
daughter of Stilicho and wife of Honorius;" the other in the codex of
Fulvio Orsino, No. 3439 of the Vatican Library.

The discovery took place in 1544. A greater treasure of gems, gold,
and precious objects has never been found in a single tomb. The
beautiful empress was lying in a coffin of red granite, clothed in a
state robe woven of gold. Of the same material were the veil, and the
shroud which covered the head and breast. The melting of these
materials produced a considerable amount of pure gold, its weight
being variously stated at thirty-five or forty pounds. Bullinger puts
it at eighty, with manifest exaggeration. At the right of the body was
placed a casket of solid silver, full of goblets and smelling-bottles,
cut in rock crystal, agate, and other precious stones. There were
thirty in all, among which were two cups, one round, one oval,
decorated with figures in high relief, of exquisite taste, and a lamp,
made of gold and crystal, in the shape of a corrugated sea-shell, the
hole for the oil being protected and concealed by a golden fly, which
moved around a socket. There were also four golden vases, one of which
was studded with gems.

In a second casket of gilded silver, placed at the left side, were
found one hundred and fifty objects,--gold rings with engraved stones,
earrings, brooches, necklaces, buttons, hair-pins, etc. covered with
emeralds, pearls and sapphires; a golden nut, which opened in halves;
a _bulla_ which has been published in a special work by
Mazzucchelli;[102] and an emerald engraved with the bust of Honorius,
valued at five hundred ducats. Silver objects were scarce; of these we
find mentioned only a hairpin and a buckle of repousse work.

The letters and names engraved on some pieces prove that they formed
the _mundus muliebris_ (wedding gifts) and toilet articles of Maria,
daughter of Stilicho and Serena, sister of Thermantia and Eucherius,
and wife of the emperor Honorius. Besides the names of the four
arch-angels--Raphael, Gabriel, Michael and Uriel--engraved on a band
of gold, those of Domina Nostra Maria, and of Dominus Noster Honorius,
were seen on other objects. The _bulla_ was inscribed with the names
of Honorius, Maria, Stilicho, Serena, Thermantia, and Eucherius,
radiating in the form of a double cross [Symbol: radiating star]
with the exclamation "Vivatis!" between them. With the exception of
this _bulla_, which was bought by Marchese Trivulzio of Milan, at the
beginning of the present century, every article has disappeared. That
the gold was melted, and that the precious stones were disposed of in
various ways, so as to deprive them of their identity, is easy to
understand, but where have the vases gone? Were it not for the rough
sketches made at the time of discovery we should not be able to form
an idea of their beauty and elegance of shape. They were not the work
of goldsmiths of the fifth century, but were of classical origin; in
fact they represent a portion of the imperial state jewels, which
Honorius had inherited from his predecessors, and which he had offered
to Maria on her wedding day. Claudianus, the court poet, described
them expressly as having sparkled on the breast and forehead of
empresses in bygone days.

We know from Paul Diaconus that Honorius was laid to rest by the side
of his empress; his coffin, however, has never been found. It must
still be concealed under the pavement of the modern church at the
southern end of the transept, near the altar of the crucifixion of S.
Peter.

An incident narrated by Flavius Josephus ("Antiqq." xvi., ii.) proves
that even in this line of discoveries there is nothing new under the
sun. Speaking of the financial troubles of King Herod, and of his
urgent need of new resources for the royal treasury, he describes how
Hircanus had rifled the sum of three thousand silver talents
($3,940,000) from the tomb of David. Herod, on being reminded of this
experiment, decided to try it again, in the hope that other treasures
might be concealed in the recesses of the royal vault. Precautions
were taken to conceal the attempt from the people: the tomb was
entered in the darkness of the night, and only a few intimate friends
were admitted to the secret. Herod found no more silver in coin or
bars, but a considerable quantity of vases and other objects
beautifully chiselled in gold. With the help of his associates the
booty was removed to the palace. But the more the king had, the more
he wanted: and setting aside dignity, self-respect and reverence for
the memory of his great predecessors, he ordered his guard to search
the vaults, even to the very coffins of David and Solomon. The legend
says that the profanation was prevented by an outburst of flames which
killed two of the men. This event filled Herod with fear, and to
expiate his sacrilege he raised a beautiful monument of white marble
at the entrance of the tombs.

The reader must not believe that such discoveries are either of
doubtful credibility or a matter of the past only. They have taken
place in all centuries, the present included; they take place now.

In July, 1793, behind the choir of the nuns of S. Francesco di Paola,
in the Via di S. Lucia in Selci, a room of a private Roman house was
discovered, and in a corner of it a magnificent silver service, which
had once belonged to Projecta, wife of Turcius Asterius Secundus, who
was prefect of the city in 362 A. D. The discovery was witnessed and
described by Ennio Quirino Visconti and Filippo Aurelio Visconti. The
objects were of pure silver, heavily gilded, and weighed one thousand
and twenty-nine ounces. Besides plates and saucers, forks and spoons,
candelabras of various sizes and shapes, there was a wedding-casket
with bas-reliefs representing the bride and groom crowned with wreaths
of myrtle; she, with braids of hair encircling her head many times, in
the fashion of the age of the empress Helena; he, with the beard cut
square, in the style worn by Julian the apostate, and Eugenius. The
reliefs of the body of the casket represented love-scenes, Venus and
the Nereids, the Muses and other pagan subjects; and just under them
was engraved the salutation:--

    "Secundus and Proiecta, may you live in Christ."

The casket was filled with toilet articles and jewels. Later
discoveries brought the total weight of the silver to fifteen hundred
ounces.

In 1810 a peasant ploughing his field in the territory of Faleria,
three miles from Civita Castellana, met with an obstacle which, on
closer examination, proved to be a box filled with silver. He loaded
himself with the precious spoils, as did many other peasants, whom the
news of the discovery had attracted to the spot. There were plates,
cups and saucers; a tureen weighing four pounds, wrought in enamelled
repousse, with birds, lizards, branches of ivy, berries, and other
fruits and animals, and signed by the maker; a statue of a centaur;
and a wine jug, which, after passing through many hands, became the
property of the queen of Naples, Caroline Murat, at a cost of five
thousand ducats.

Alessandro Visconti reported the treasure-trove at once to count
Tournon, the French prefect; but he took no official notice of it, and
the silver was melted in the mint of Rome, and by the silversmiths of
Viterbo and Perugia. Visconti estimates the weight of the silver at
_thirty thousand ounces_.[103]

In 1821, under the foundations of a house at Parma, precious objects
were found to the value of several thousand scudi. The few bought for
the Museo Parmense by its director, Pietro de Lama, comprise eight
bracelets, four rings, a necklace, a chain to which is attached a
medallion of Gallienus, a brooch, and thirty-four medals; all of pure
gold, and weighing three pounds and four ounces.

On May 9, 1877, two earthen jars were discovered at Belinzago, near
Milan, in a farm belonging to a man named Erba. They contained
twenty-seven thousand bronze coins, with a total weight of three
hundred and sixty pounds. Except a few pieces belonging to Romulus,
Maximian, Chlorus, Galerius, Galeria Valeria, and Licinius, the great
mass bear the effigy and name of Maxentius, with an astonishing
variety of letters and symbols on the reverse.

My personal experience in the discovery of treasure, in the special
significance of the word, is limited to the fragments of a bedstead
(?) of gilt brass, studded with gems. This discovery took place in
1879, near the southwest corner of the Piazza Vittorio Emanuele, on
the Esquiline, in a room belonging to the Horti Lamiani, the favorite
residence of Caligula and of Alexander Severus. The frame of the couch
rested on four supports, most gracefully cut in rock-crystal; the
frame itself was ornamented with bulls' heads and inlaid with cameos
and gems, to the number of four hundred and thirty. There was also a
"glass paste" representing the heads of Septimius Severus and his
empress Julia Domna. It seems that parts of this rich piece of
furniture must have been inlaid with agate incrustations, of which one
hundred and sixty-eight pieces were discovered in the same room.

FOOTNOTES:

[94] See Otto Hirschfeld: _Die kaiserlichen Grabstaetten in Rom_, in
the _Sitzungsberichte der kgl. Akademie der Wissenschaften_. Berlin,
1866.

[95] Visitors to Rome may form an idea of a [Greek: sebasteion] from
that found at Ostia, in 1889, in the barracks of the firemen. I have
given an illustrated description of this remarkable discovery in the
_Melanges de l'Ecole francaise de Rome_, tome ix., 1889, and in the
_Notizie degli scavi_, January-April, 1889.

[96] The birthplace of Mithridates the Great, and of the geographer
Strabo; it still retains its ancient name.

[97] See Mommsen: _Res gestae divi Augusti_, 2d edition. Berlin,
Weidmann, 1883.

[98] Augustus enrolled his first army in October of the year 41 B. C.
He died in August, A. D. 14.

[99] This house is described in _Ancient Rome_, chapter i., p. 17.

[100] _Don Juan_, canto III. eix.

[101] The other instance was in the excavations of the palace of the
Valerii Aradii, near S. Erasmo, on the Caelian, the most successful
ever made in Rome.

[102] _La bolla di Maria, moglie di Onorio._ Milan, 1819.

[103] _Dissertazione su d' una antica argenteria, letta nell'
accademia archeologica il di 7 gennaio_, 1811.




CHAPTER V.

PAPAL TOMBS.

     Portraits of the early Popes.--Those of SS. Peter and Paul.--The
     tombs of the Popes.--Their interest for the student.--The tomb of
     Cornelius Martyr.--Inscriptions and other monuments found in his
     crypt.--The two Cornelii, pagan and Christian.--The pontifical
     crypt in the Cemetery of Callixtus.--The tomb of Gregory the
     Great.--S. Peter's as a burial-place for the Popes.--Gregory's
     several resting-places.--The stress of Rome in his time.--The
     legend of the angel.--Gregory's good works.--His house.--The tomb
     of the Saxon Ceadwalla.--That of Benedict VII.--The turbulent
     times in which he lived.--The Crescenzi.--The church of Santa
     Croce in Gerusalemme.--Pope Sylvester II.--The tradition about
     his death and tomb.--The vicissitudes of the Lateran
     basilica.--The Vassalletti.--Study of the antique by mediaeval
     artists.--The stone-cutter's shop on the site of the Banca
     Nazionale.--The tomb of Innocent VIII.--The story of the holy
     lance.--The tomb of Paul III.--His services to art.--The tomb of
     Clement XIII.--Bracci and Canova.--The Jesuits in Clement's time.


Among the curiosities of the three principal basilicas of Rome,--the
Lateran, the Vatican, and the Ostiensis (S. Paul's),--were collections
of portrait heads of the Popes, which were painted above the colonnade
on the three sides of the nave. In S. Peter's there were two sets, one
on the frieze, above the capitals of the columns, the other on the
walls of the nave, above the cornice; the first is marked with the
letters "G H." in the drawing of Ciampini which is reproduced in
chapter iii., p. 134; the second, with the letters "I L." The set of
the Lateran was painted by order of Nicholas III. (1277-1280). Since
his time the basilica has been burned to the ground twice--in 1308 and
1360--and restored three times. Its last disfigurement, by Innocent X.
and Borromini in 1644, concealed whatever was left standing of the old
building, and made it impossible for us to study its iconic pictures,
if there were any still existing. We possess better information in
regard to S. Peter's, thanks to Grimaldi, who described and copied
both series of medallions before their destruction by Paul V. in 1607.
The lower series, which was painted by order of Nicholas III., began
with Pope Pius I. (142-157) and ended with Anastasius (397-401).
Grimaldi remarks that the Popes of the times of the persecutions, from
Pius to Sylvester, were bareheaded; those of a later age wore the
tiara; all had the round halo, or nimbus, except Tiberius (352-366),
who had a square one. This last particular would prove that the
portraits were originally painted in the time of Tiberius, because the
square nimbus is the symbol of living persons. The upper series above
the cornice was the more important of the two, on account of the
chronological inscriptions which accompanied and explained each
medallion. These inscriptions, which were too small and faint to be
read with the naked eye from below, were not copied before their
destruction. Grimaldi could decipher but a few: SIRICIUS. SEDIT
ANN(_is_) XV. M(_ensibus_) V. D(_iebus_) XX.--FELIX. SEDIT ANN(_o_) I.
M(_ensibus_) ... etc. The heads were bare, and framed by a round halo.
They seem to have been painted at the time of Pope Formosus (891-896),
as were also the fresco-panels which appear in the above-mentioned
drawing of Ciampini.

The guide-books of modern Rome describe the series of S. Paul's,
restored in mosaic after the fire of 1823, as made up of imaginary
likenesses except in the case of later Popes. This statement is not
correct. The original medallions were painted on each side of the
nave, and on the cross or end wall above the entrances. Those of the
end wall disappeared long since, on the occasion of some repairs to
this part of the basilica. Those of the left side perished in the fire
of 1823; but those of the right side, beginning with S. Peter and
ending with Innocent (401-417), were saved. They have since been
detached from the wall, transferred first to canvas, then to stone,
and are now exhibited in one of the corridors of the monastery.[104]
As regards those which perished in the fire, they had already been
copied, first in the seventeenth century by order of Cardinal
Francesco Barberini, and again in 1751 by Marangoni. The new series in
mosaic is therefore not all fanciful and imaginary, but follows the
tradition of the likenesses as they were first produced in the fifth
century. At that time the study of the pontifical succession was
receiving considerable attention in Rome. There were written
catalogues inserted in liturgical books, which were read to the
congregation on certain days of the year, so that everybody could
argue on the subject, and remember the order of succession of the
bishops. To impress this more forcibly on the minds of the people, it
was written on the walls of the newly erected basilica of S. Paul, and
illustrated with portraits. The series must have struck the
imagination of visitors and pilgrims. The idea of apostolic
inheritance, of uninterrupted hierarchy, of the supremacy of the See
of Rome, took a definite shape in the array of these busts of bishops,
led by S. Peter, and congregated, as it were, around the grave of S.
Paul.

[Illustration: _A_ Portrait head of S. Peter; from a medallion in
repousse discovered by Boldetti in the Catacombs of Domitilla.--_B_
Portrait head of S. Paul; from a medallion preserved in the Museo
Sacro Vaticano.--Both are works of the second century.]

The custom found imitators in other churches and in other cities.
Speaking of the gallery of Popes in the duomo at Siena, Symonds
remarks how the accumulated majesty of their busts, larger than life,
with solemn faces, each leaning from his separate niche, brings the
whole past history of the Church into the presence of its living
members. A bishop walking up the nave of Siena must feel as a Roman
felt among the waxen images of ancestors renowned in council or war.
