invocations to the saints; Malcolm's memory and tongue alike seemed inert
and paralyzed with horror--his brain was giddy, his eyes stretched open;
and when Death suddenly turned and darted in his direction, one horrible
gush of thought--'Fallen, fallen!  Lost, lost!  No confession!'--came
over him; he would have sobbed out an entreaty for mercy and for a
priest, but it became a helpless shriek; and while Percy's sword flashed
before his eyes, he felt himself falling, death-stricken, to the earth,
and knew no more.

'There--he moved,' said a voice above him.

'How now, Glenuskie?' cried Ralf Percy.  'Look up; I verily thought you
were sped by Death in bodily shape; but 'twas all an abominable grisly
pageant got up by some dismal caitiffs.'

'It was the Danse Macabre,' added the sweet tone that did indeed unclose
Malcolm's eyes, to see Esclairmonde bending over him, and holding wine to
his lips.  Ralf raised him that he might swallow it, and looking round,
he saw that he was in a small wainscoted chamber, with an old burgher
woman, Ralf Percy, and Esclairmonde; certainly not in the other world.  He
strove to ask 'what it meant,' and Esclairmonde spoke again:

'It is the Danse Macabre; I have seen it in Holland.  It was invented as
a warning to those of sinful life, and this good woman tells me it has
become the custom to enact it every evening at this churchyard of the
Holy Innocents.'

'A custom I devoutly hope King Harry will break!' exclaimed Ralf.  'If
not, I'll some day find the way between those painted ribs of Monseigneur
de la Mort, I can tell him!  I had nearly given him a taste of my sword
as it was, only some Gascon rogue caught my arm, and he was off ere I
could get free.  So I jumped off, that your poor corpse should not be
trodden by French heels; and I hardly know how it was, but the Lady
Esclairmonde was by my side as I dragged you out, and caused these good
folks to let me bring you in behind their shop.'

'Lady, lady, I am for ever beholden,' cried Malcolm, gathering himself up
as if to fall at her feet, and his heart bounding high with joy, for this
was from death to life indeed.

'I saw there was some one hurt,' said Esclairmonde in her repressive
manner.  'Drink some more wine, eat this bread, and you will be able to
ride to the Hotel de St. Pol.'

'Oh, lady, let me speak of my bliss!' and he snatched at her hand, but
was still so dizzy that he sank back, becoming aware that he was stiff
and bruised from his fall.  Almost at the same moment a new step and
voice were heard in the little open booth where the cutler displayed his
wares, and King James was at once admitted.

'How goes it, laddie?' he asked.  'They told me grim Death had clutched
you and borne you off to his charnel-house; but at least I see an angel
has charge of you.'

Esclairmonde slightly coloured as she made answer:

'I saw some one fall, and came to offer my poor skill, Sir; but as the
Sieur de Glenuskie is fast recovering, if you will permit Sir Nigel Baird
to attend me, Sir, I will at once return.'

'I am ready--I am not hurt.  Oh, let us go together!' panted Malcolm,
leaping up.

'Eh, gentlemen!' exclaimed the hospitable cutler's wife; 'you will not
away so fast!  This gallant knight will permit you to remain.  And the
fair lady, she will do me the honour to drink a cup of wine to the
recovery of her betrothed.'

'Not so, good woman,' said Esclairmonde, a little apart, 'I am the
betrothed of Heaven.  I only assisted because I feared the youth's fall
was more serious than it proves.'

The bourgeoise begged pardon, and made a curtsey; there was nothing
unusual in the avowal the lady had made, when the convent was a
thoroughly recognized profession; but Esclairmonde could not carry out
her purpose of departing separately with old Sir Nigel Baird; Malcolm was
on his feet, quite ready to mount, and there was no avoiding the being
assisted to her saddle by any but the King, who was in truth quite as
objectionable a companion, as far as appearances went, for a young
solitary maiden, as was Malcolm himself.  Esclairmonde felt that her
benevolence might have led her into a scrape.  When she had seen the
fall, knowing that to the unprepared the ghastly pageant must seem
reality, she had obeyed the impulse to hurry to the rescue, to console
and aid in case of injury, and she had not even perceived that her female
companions did not attempt to accompany her.  However, the mischance
could best be counteracted by simplicity and unconsciousness; so, as she
found herself obliged to ride by the King, she unconcernedly observed
that these fantastic dances might perhaps arouse sinners, but that they
were a horrible sight for the unprepared.

'Very like a dream becoming flesh and blood,' said James.  'We in advance
were slow to perceive what it was, and then the King merely thought
whether it would alarm the Queen.'

'I trow it did not.'

'No; the thing has not been found that will stir her placid face.  She
merely said it was very lugubrious, and an ill turn in the Parisians thus
to greet her, but they were always senseless _betes_; and he, being
relieved of care for her, looked with all his eyes, with a strange
mixture of drollery at the antics and the masques, yet of grave musing at
the likeness to this present life.'

'I think,' said Esclairmonde, 'that King Henry is one of the few men to
whom the spectacle _is_ a sermon.  He laughs even while he lays a thing
to heart.'

These few sentences had brought them to the concourse around the gateway
of the great Hotel de St. Pol, in whose crowded courtyard Esclairmonde
had to dismount; and, after being handed through the hall by King James,
to make her way to the ladies' apartments, and there find out, what she
was most anxious about, how Alice, who had been riding at some distance
from her with her father, had fared under the alarm.

Alice ran up to her eagerly.  'Ah, dear Clairette, and was he greatly
hurt?'

'Not much; he had only swooned for fright.'

'Swooned! to be a prince, and not have the heart of a midge!'

'And how was it with you, you very wyvern for courage?'

'With me?  Oh, I was somewhat appalled at first, when my father took hold
of my rein, and bade me never fear; for I saw his face grow amazed.  Sir
Richard Nevil rode up on the other side, and said the hobgoblins should
eat out his heart ere they hurt me; and I looked into his face as he said
that, and liked it more than ever I thought to like any but yours,
Clairette.  I think my father was going to leave me to him and see
whether the King needed some one to back him; but up came a French lord,
and said 'twas all a mere show, and my father said he was glad I was a
stout-hearted wench that had never cried out for fear; and then I was so
pleased, that I never heeded the ugly sight any more.  Ay, and when Sir
Richard lifted me off my horse, he kissed my hand of his own accord.'

'This is all he has ever said to you?' said Esclairmonde, smiling.  'It
is like an Englishman--to the purpose.'

'Yea, is it not?  Oh! is it not better than all the fine speeches and
compliments that Joan Beaufort gets from her Scottish king?'

'They have truths in them too, child.'

'Ay; but too fine-spun, too minstrel-like, for a plain English maid.  The
hobgoblins should eat out his heart ere they touched me!' she repeated to
herself, as though the saying were the most poetical concert sung on
minstrel lover's lute.

Death's Dance had certainly brought this affianced pair to a better
understanding than all the gayest festivities of the Court.

Esclairmonde would have been happy if no one had noticed her benevolence
to the young Scot save Alice Montagu; but she had to endure countless
railleries from every lady, from Countess Jaqueline downwards, on the
unmistakable evidence that her heart had spoken; and her grave dignity
had less effect in silencing them than usual, so diverting was the
alleged triumph over her propriety, well as they knew that she would have
done the same for the youngest horse-boy, or the oldest man-at-arms.




CHAPTER X: THE WHITSUNTIDE FESTIVAL


'Lady, fairest lady!  Ah, suffer your slave to fall at your feet with his
thanks!'

'No thanks are due, Sir.  I knew not who had fallen.'

'Cruel coyness!  Take not away the joy that has fed a hungry heart.'

'Lord Glenuskie's heart was wont to hunger for better joys.'

'Lady, I have ceased to be a foolish boy.'

'Such foolishness was better than some men's wisdom.'

'Listen, belle demoiselle.  I have been forth into the world, and have
learnt to see that monasteries have become mere haunts for the sluggard,
who will not face the world; and that honour, glory, and all that is
worth living for, lie beyond.  Ah, lady! those eyes first taught me what
life could give.'

'Hush, Sir!' said Esclairmonde.  'I can believe that as a child you
mistook your vocation, and the secular life may be blest to you; but with
me it can never be so; and if any friendship were shown to you on my
part, it was when I deemed that we were brother and sister in our vows.
If I unwittingly inspired any false hopes, I must do penance for the
evil.'

'Call it not evil, lady,' entreated Malcolm.  'It cannot be evil to have
wakened me to life and hope and glory.'

'What should you call it in him who should endeavour to render Lady Joan
Beaufort faithless to your king, Lord Malcolm?  What then must it be to
tempt another to break troth-plight to the King of Heaven?'

'Nay, madame,' faltered Malcolm; 'but if such troth were forbidden and
impossible?'

'None has the right or power to cancel mine,' replied the lady.

'Yet,' he still entreated, 'your kindred are mighty.'

'But my Bridegroom is mightier,' she said.

'O lady, yet--Say, at least,' cried Malcolm, eagerly, 'that were you free
in your own mind to wed, at least you would less turn from me than from
the others proposed to you.'

'That were saying little for you,' said Esclairmonde, half smiling.  'But,
Sir,' she added gravely, 'you have no right to put the question; and I
will say nothing on which you can presume.'

'You were kinder to me in England,' sighed Malcolm, with tears in his
eyes.

'Then you seemed as one like-minded,' she answered.

'And,' he cried, gathering fresh ardour, 'I would be like-minded again.
You would render me so, sweetest lady.  I would kiss your every step,
pray with you, bestow alms with you, found churches, endow your Beguines,
and render our change from our childish purpose a blessing to the whole
world; become your very slave, to do your slightest bidding.  O lady,
could I but give you my eyes to see what it might be!'

'It could not be, if we began with a burthened conscience,' said
Esclairmonde.  'We have had enough of this, Sieur de Glenuskie.  You know
that with me it is no matter of likes or dislikes, but that I am under a
vow, which I will never break!  Make way, Sir.'

He could but obey: she was far too majestic and authoritative to be
gainsaid.  And Malcolm, in an access of misery, stood lost to all the
world, kneeling in the window-seat, where she had left him resting his
head against the glass, when suddenly a white plump hand was laid on his
shoulder, and a gay voice cried:

'All _a la mort_, my young damoiseau!  What, has our saint been
unpropitious?  Never mind, you shall have her yet.  We will see her like
the rest of the world, ere we have done within her!'

And Malcolm found himself face to face with the free-spoken Jaqueline of
Hainault.

'You are very good, madame,' he stammered.

'You shall think me very good yet!  I have no notion of being opposed by
a little vassal of mine; and we'll succeed, if it were but for the fun of
the thing!  Monseigneur de Therouenne is on your side, or would be, if he
were sure of the Duke of Burgundy.  You see, these prelates hate nothing
so much as the religious orders; and all the pride of the Luxemburgs is
in arms against Clairette's fancy for those beggarly nursing Sisters; so
it drives him mad to hear her say she only succoured you for charity.  He
thinks it a family disgrace, that can only be wiped off by marrying her
to you; and he would do it _bon gre, mal gre_, but that he waits to hear
what Burgundy will say.  You have only to hold out, and she shall be
yours, if I hold her finger while you put on the ring.  Only let us be
sure of Burgundy.'

This was not a very flattering way of obtaining a bride; but Malcolm was
convinced that when once married to Esclairmonde, his devotion would
atone to her for all that was unpleasant in obtaining her.  At least, she
loved no one else; she had even allowed that she had once thought him
like-minded; she had formerly distinguished him; and nothing lay between
them but her scruples; and when they were overcome, by whatever means,
his idol would be his, to adore, to propitiate, to win by the most
intense devotion.  All now must, however, turn upon the Duke of Burgundy,
without whose sanction Madame of Hainault would be afraid to act openly.

The Duke was expected at Paris for the Whitsuntide festival, which was to
be held with great state.  The custom was for the Kings of France to
feast absolutely with all Paris, with interminable banquet tables, open
to the whole world without question.  And to this Henry had conformed on
his first visit to the city; but he had learnt that the costly and lavish
feast had been of very little benefit to the really distressed, who had
been thrust aside by loud-voiced miscreants and sturdy beggars, such as
had no shame in driving the feeble back with blows, and receiving their
own share again and again.

By the advice of Dr. Bennet, his almoner, he was resolved that this
should not happen again; that the feast should be limited to the official
guests, and that the cost of the promiscuous banquet should be
distributed to those who really needed it, and who should be reached
through their parish priests and the friars known to be most charitable.

Dr. Bennet, as almoner, with the other chaplains, was to arrange the
matter; and horrible was the distress that he discovered in the city,
that had for five-and-twenty years been devastated by civil fury, as well
as by foreign wars; and famines, pestilences, murders, and tyrannies had
held sway, so as to form an absolute succession of reigns of terror.  The
poor perished like flies in a frost; the homeless orphans of the parents
murdered by either faction roamed the streets, and herded in the corners
like the vagrant dogs of Eastern cities; and meantime, the nobles and
their partisans revelled in wasteful pomp.

Scholar as he was, Dr. Bennet was not familiar enough with Parisian ways
not to be very grateful for aid from Esclairmonde in some of his
conferences, and for her explanations of the different tastes and needs
of French and English poor.

What she saw and heard, on the other hand, gave form and purpose to her
aspirations.  The Dutch Sisters of St. Bega, the English Bedeswomen of
St. Katharine, were sorely needed at Paris.  They would gather up the
sufferers, collect the outcast children, feed the hungry, follow with
balm wherever a wound had been.  To found a Beguinage at Paris seemed to
her the most befitting mode of devoting her wealth; and her little
admirer, Alice, gave up her longing desire that the foundation should be
in England, when she learned that, as the wife of Nevil, her abode was
likely to be in France as long as that country required English
garrisons.

To the young heiress of Salisbury, her own marriage, though close at
hand, seemed a mere ordinary matter compared with Esclairmonde's
Beguinage, to her the real romance.  Never did she see a beggar crouching
at the church door, without a whisper to herself that there was a subject
for the Beguines; and, tender-hearted as she was, she looked quite
gratified at any lamentable tale which told the need.

If Esclairmonde had a climax to her visions of her brown-robed messengers
of mercy, it was that the holy Canon of St. Agnes should be induced to
come and act the part of master to her bedeswomen, as did Master Kedbesby
at home.

She had even dared to murmur her design to Dr. Bennet; and when he, under
strict seal of secrecy, had sounded King Henry, the present real master
of Paris, he reported that the tears had stood in the King's eyes for a
moment, as he said, 'Blessings on the maiden!  Should she be able to do
this for this city, I shall know that Heaven hath indeed sent a blessing
by my arms!'

For one brief week, Esclairmonde and Alice were very happy in this secret
hope; but at the end of that time the Bishop of Therouenne appeared.
Esclairmonde had ventured to hope that the King's influence, and likewise
the fact that her intention was not to enrich one of the regular monastic
orders, might lead him to lend a favourable ear to her scheme; but she
was by no means prepared to find him already informed of the affair of
the Dance of Death, and putting his own construction on it.

'So, my fair cousin, this is the end of your waywardness.  The tokens
were certainly somewhat strong; but the young gentleman's birth being
equal to yours, after the spectacle you have presented, your uncle of St.
Pol, and I myself, must do our utmost to obtain the consent of the Duke
of Burgundy.'

'Monseigneur is mistaken,' said Esclairmonde.

'Child, we will have no more folly.  You have flown after this young Scot
in a manner fitted only for the foolish name your father culled for you
out of his books of chivalry.  You have given a lesson to the whole Court
and city on the consequences of a damsel judging for herself, and running
a mad course over the world, instead of submitting to her guardians.'

'The Court understands my purpose as well as you do, Monseigneur.'

'Silence, Mademoiselle.  Your convent obstinacy is ended for ever now,
since to send you to one would be to appear to hide a scandal.'

'I do not wish to enter a convent,' said Esclairmonde.  'My desire is to
dedicate my labour and my substance to the foundation of a house here at
Paris, such as are the Beguinages of our Netherlands,'

The Bishop held up his hands.  He had never heard of such lunacy and it
angered him, as such purposes are wont to anger worldly-hearted men.  That
a lady of Luxemburg should have such vulgar tastes as to wish to be a
Beguine was bad enough; but that Netherlandish wealth should be devoted
to support the factious poor of Paris was preposterous.  Neither the Duke
of Burgundy, nor her uncle of St. Pol, would allow a sou to pass out of
their grasp for so absurd a purpose; the Pope would give no license--above
all to a vain girl, who had helped a wife to run away from her
husband--for new religious houses; and, unless Esclairmonde was prepared
to be landless, penniless, and the scorn of every one, for her wild
behaviour, she must submit, _bon gre, mal gre_, to become the wife of the
Scottish prince.

'Landless and penniless then will I be, Monseigneur,' said Esclairmonde.
'Was not poverty the bride of St. Francis?'

The Bishop made a growl of contempt; but recollecting himself, and his
respect for the saint, began to argue that what was possible for a man, a
mere merchant's son, an inspired saint besides, was not possible to a
damsel of high degree, and that it was mere presumption, vanity, and
obstinacy in her to appeal to such a precedent.

There was something in this that struck Esclairmonde, for she was
conscious of a certain satisfaction in her plan of being the first to
introduce a Beguinage at Paris, and that she was to a certain degree
