be old enough to rule France unaided. You, baron, are like myself a
foreigner, and ready to risk your life in the service of France, and
you will understand how I am situated and how I feel. You, happily
for yourself, are not so highly placed as to excite enmity, although
doubtless not a few of those who flocked round you yesterday evening to
congratulate you on your good fortune felt a sensation of envy that a
young soldier of fortune should be so honoured.

"In my case envy is accompanied by the deepest animosity. The great
nobles find me an obstacle in the way of their grasping power, and they
would hesitate at nothing to rid themselves of me. Were it not for the
support of the queen, my position would be untenable even for an hour.
Without me the queen herself would speedily become as much a cipher as
she was so long as the weak king reigned. We have need, both of us,
of men of heart and devotion such as I take you to be. I ask for no
engagements, sir, but I felt that there was a genuine ring in your voice
yesterday evening when you promised faithful service to her majesty, and
I feel that if such service is needed you will be ready to render it."

"I shall indeed, your eminence. I cannot conceive that any circumstances
can occur that would render such aid as I could offer of service to you,
but be assured that should such an occasion arise, the queen may count
upon me to render it to the extent of my life; and when I say the
queen I, of course, include your eminence as her trusted adviser and
supporter."

"Well spoken, sir. I believe your words, and it may be that the occasion
is not so far distant as you may imagine. Here is the box, sir. By the
way, it will, I am sure, be a pleasure for you to know that her majesty
has the intention of creating the Viscount de Turenne field marshal as
soon as he arrives in Paris."

"It is indeed, monseigneur; never did a soldier better earn such honour.
There, indeed sir, is a true and noble heart, loyal to his duty beyond
all things, adored by his soldiers, ready to serve under officers
altogether inferior to himself, incapable of jealousy, and devoted to
his sovereign and his country."

"You do not speak too warmly of him," the cardinal said; "and among all
the difficulties of the situation there seems to be but one fixed
point, and that point is that upon Monsieur de Turenne we can at least
confidently rely."

Hector felt that his audience was at an end, and taking the box from the
table, and again thanking the cardinal for the honour bestowed upon him,
he retired. The cardinal's chamberlain met him at the door. "Will you
step in here, monsieur le baron?" he said, and led the way into a small
apartment. "As a stranger to the court, monsieur, you are probably
unaware of the value of the gift that has been granted to you, or of its
duties and obligations."

"Altogether, sir; beyond the fact that it is in Poitou, which her
majesty mentioned yesterday, I know absolutely nothing about it."

"Without being an estate of the first class," the chamberlain said, "it
is one which is of importance in its province. The revenue is punctually
paid and is amply sufficient to enable its lord to make a good figure at
court, and to rank among the notables in the province. It is a fief held
directly from the crown; its owner is bound to furnish feudal service
of twenty-five mounted men and twenty-five arquebusiers, or, should he
prefer it, fifty horsemen in all. Some of its owners have in times of
peril raised a force of thrice that strength. So you will see that the
Lord of la Villar is not an unimportant personage. The estate is held at
present by a royal intendant. You will find in that box an order for him
to place you in possession of the castle and estate whensoever you may
present yourself, and as at the present moment your services can be
spared from the army, it might be as well to visit it at once, if only
for a few days. Possibly the cardinal did not inform you that he has
ordered that the regiment that has been just recruited shall bear the
name of the regiment of Poitou, and has appointed you to its command."

This news gave much greater pleasure to Hector than did the gift of the
fief, or the rank that accompanied it.

"Will you please give my earnest thanks to his excellency," he said,
"and assure him that he can depend upon my devotion."

When Hector returned to the Hotel Conde he found that the soldiers who
had started with him from Rocroi had all arrived, bringing with them the
twelve horses that had been left on the road; four of these were to be
handed over to each of the officers. The division was just being made as
he entered the courtyard, each officer taking the four he had ridden by
the way.

Paolo at once came up to him. "What are we to do with these horses,
master?" he asked, with an air of bewilderment.

"We have now seven of them, counting mine, the one I led, and that you
rode when you set out."

"I must see where I can bestow them for the present until we think the
matter over;" and going up to one of Conde's officers, he asked him if
he could recommend a place where he might leave safely four horses for a
time.

"The auberge of the Pome d'Or is but a street from here, monsieur; it
has good stables, and the host is an honest man, which is not often the
case with men of his class. When the stables here are full the prince
often engages extra stalls there for the use of his guests. I will send
four men with the horses at once, if such is your pleasure."

"You will greatly oblige me by doing so," Hector replied. Having seen
the horses safely and comfortably lodged at the inn, Hector returned to
the hotel with Paolo.

"You are not tired, I hope, Paolo?" he asked as they walked back.

"No, master; we have taken three days to do what you did in one, and
have fatigued neither ourselves nor our beasts."

"That is well, for I am going to start on a journey this afternoon, that
is to say, if I can manage to make my arrangements."

"May I ask where you are going, master?"

"You will be surprised to hear that I am going to visit my estates in
Poitou."

Paolo looked sharply up to see whether Hector was joking. Seeing that he
looked serious, he said hesitatingly, "But I did not know, master, that
you had estates in Poitou. I never heard you speak of them."

"Because I had them not, Paolo. That box that you are carrying holds the
titles. The fief was granted to me last night by the queen herself, the
Duc d'Enghien and General Gassion having been good enough to make a good
deal more of that night adventure of ours than it deserved. The estates
carry a title with them, and I am now the Baron de la Villar."

Paolo gave an exclamation of delight. "Well, master, I am glad indeed;
but," he went on in a changed tone, "now that you, monsieur, have become
a noble, you will no longer require the services of a lad from Savoy."

"Indeed I shall, Paolo, as long as you choose to remain with me. Why,
have you not shared with me in the adventures, one of which made me a
captain, and the other a colonel and a noble? Of course I shall have
other servants, but you will always be my bodyservant and companion."

"And are you going to leave the army, monsieur?" Paolo asked, after
pouring out his thanks.

"No, I shall still remain in the army. Turenne will be in Paris soon,
and will then go to the Rhine to take the command there, and I hope to
go with my regiment."

"Then you have a regiment, master?"

"Yes; one of the newly formed regiments has been named the regiment of
Poitou, and I am to have the command. Of course, it may be sent either
to him or to Enghien, but I hope that it will be to Turenne; and I
should think so, because from what I hear there is scarcely any army
left on the Rhine, and therefore it is probable that the new regiments
will all be sent there, as Enghien's force is quite sufficient to cope
with any enemy he is likely to meet with in Flanders. Now, I am going
down to the barracks, and for the next two or three hours you can amuse
yourself by taking a look at Paris."

It was not to the barracks that Hector made his way, but to The Scottish
Soldier.

"I did not expect to see you so soon again, colonel. Your man brought me
word that I was not to come this morning, as you would be engaged," the
sergeant said when he entered.

"Yes, but our talk was only postponed, sergeant; now I want you to aid
me in a matter that I have on hand."

"What sort of matter is it?"

"I want to find four good men to take into my service. The queen has
granted me an estate, as if a colonelcy was not an ample and more than
ample reward for discovering that ambuscade. It is the fief of la Villar
in Poitou, and the most absurd point of the thing is that with it is a
title, and I am now Colonel Campbell, Baron de la Villar."

"Well, well," the sergeant exclaimed; "you will be coming and telling me
next that you are going to marry a princess of the blood. Did one ever
hear of such things! However, Hector, lad, I congratulate you with all
my heart, and I am as glad as if it had been a bairn of my own that had
had your good fortune. Now, in what can I help you about the four men?
What sort of men do you want?"

"I want four good men and true, sergeant, men that I can rely upon. I
shall want them to ride with me in the field as orderlies, for I have
been appointed to the command of an infantry regiment. Of course, I
should like young and active men, but that they should be steady and
accustomed to arms is still more important."

"I know but few men outside the regiment," the sergeant said. "The
laddies like to have the place to themselves, and I don't encourage
others about; but if you can do with good men who have somewhat passed
their prime, but are still capable of service and handy with their arms,
I know just the men that will suit you. We had a little bit of trouble
in the regiment a week since; four of the men--Allan Macpherson, Jock
Hunter, Donald Nicholl, and Sandy Grahame--came in after tattoo, and all
a bit fu'. It was not here they got it, though; I know better than
to supply men with liquor when it is time for them to be off to the
barracks. Captain Muir, who is the only dour carl in the regiment,
happened to be on duty, and he spoke a good deal more hardly to them
than to my mind there was any occasion, seeing that they are good
soldiers and not in the guardroom more often than others. They answered
him more freely, no doubt, than they would have done had they not been
in their cups.

"They were had up before the colonel the next morning. They had all
served their time, and having been greatly angered at their treatment,
they at once up and told the colonel that they would take their
discharges. The colonel would have pacified them, but Captain Muir stood
out strongly, and said that if such insolence as theirs was allowed to
go unpunished it would be a bad example indeed for the regiment; so
the colonel paid them up to the day and gave them their papers. It has
caused a lot of feeling in the regiment, as you may guess, and the men
all groaned and booed when Muir came on parade the next day, and it was
as much as the colonel himself--whom they all love as a father--could
do to silence them. It is said that he spoke very sharply to Muir
afterwards, and that it is likely the captain will get transferred to
another regiment. However, that is too late for the men who have left.
Their comrades are going to get up a subscription to send them back to
Scotland, for you may be sure the hotheaded fools have not a bawbee of
their pay laid by."

"I know them all, sergeant, and I should say they would be the very men
to suit me; they are all strong and hearty fellows, and might have
been good for another ten years campaigning if it had not been for this
business. Can you send for them?"

"They will all be here in half an hour for their meal," the sergeant
said. "They are lodged upstairs, for you may be sure that they would
come to me; and even if I kept them for six months, I should not have
lost much when I reckon what they have spent here during their service.
I have no doubt they will jump at the offer; for they were mere lads
when they came over--it was your father who sent for them--and I know
that they reckon they will find none of the old folk when they return
home. And now what are your estates like, lad?"

"I know very little about them at present, beyond the fact that I am
bound by my feudal obligations to put fifty men in the field when called
upon to do so."

"Then it must be a place of good size," the sergeant said. "And you hold
it direct from the crown?"

Hector nodded.

"That is good. When you hold from one of the great lords, you never know
whom you may be called upon to fight against--it may be the king, it may
be his minister, it may be some other noble--while holding direct, you
have only the king's enemies to fight against."

"Or rather, MacIntosh, the chief minister's enemies; for, after all,
when a king signs a proclamation, it is usually a minister's signature
that ought to be attached to it."

"Well, well, Master Hector, it makes little difference to us Scots who
it is that we fight for, it is no quarrel of ours. We have taken service
under the King of France; but when there are two parties, and each
claims to be in favour of the king, we have simply to fight for whoever
happens to have the king's signature. If they both have it, then it
is the general who commands our division who gives us orders, and it
matters nought to us whom he takes his orders from."

"At any rate, MacIntosh, it is not for soldiers to inquire too deeply
into these matters; if we did, we should have one half of the regiment
firing into the other."

"So we should, lad, so we should; therefore we soldiers do wisely in
leaving the matter to our officers. If the colonel says 'Charge!' we
charge; if he says 'Dismount and take to your musketoons!' we do so,
without troubling our heads as to whether it is Germans or Spaniards or
Frenchmen whom we have to aim at. Ah, here come your four men!"

As the four troopers entered the cabaret and saw who was speaking to
MacIntosh they hesitated, and would have turned, but the sergeant called
out, "Attention! salute!" and they stood as motionless as statues till
Hector ordered them to stand easy.

"I have been talking about you men to Sergeant MacIntosh, who tells me
that you have taken your discharge and the reason for your so doing. I
think that you acted hastily; however, that is your affair. The matter
that concerns me is this:--I am appointed colonel of an infantry
regiment and I want four good men as orderlies. They will be mounted,
and I shall see that they draw rations when there are any rations to be
had; but they will be my troopers and not soldiers of the regiment. I
want good men, who can be relied upon in any emergency; they will ride
behind me in battle, act as scouts if necessary, and they will receive
double the pay of ordinary troopers. In peacetime, or when the regiment
is in winter quarters, I shall pass my time either in Paris or on my
estate in Poitou, and they will of course accompany me. I may tell
you that I am now Baron de la Villar, but I should wish to be always
addressed as Colonel Campbell. I know you all of old, and that your only
failing is somewhat too great a love for the wine flask; that must only
be indulged in at times when you are not only off duty, but when there
is no possibility of your services being required. Now, what do you
think, men; will my service suit you?"

"That it would, sir," burst from them simultaneously.

"Of course, there will be some other advantages beyond that of pay. When
the time comes that you get beyond active service in the field, I shall
be able to provide you with easier posts at la Villar, and there you
will find a comfortable home in your old age, if you prefer to stay with
me rather than to return to Scotland."

"No further word need be spoken, colonel," Allan Macpherson said; "we
are your men, and shall be proud to follow you, were there no question
of pay at all, but just our rations and a home to look forward to when
our arms get weak and eyes dim."

"Then, men, if so say you all, the service begins from the present time.
You have your armour and headpieces, your doublets and jackboots,
so there is not much to buy. I have horses ready for you. You have
pistols."

"Yes, we have all pistols and swords, colonel, but the musketoons
belonged to the regiment."

"There will be no occasion for you to carry them. Get for yourselves
four long cloaks well lined and serviceable--'tis best that they should
be all of a colour, dark blue or gray--and broad hats to match the
cloaks; have in each a small red feather. I would that you should make a
decent show, for we shall start in two hours for Poitou. Here are twenty
crowns. See that you have ammunition for your pistols. Be at the Hotel
Conde in two hours from the present time. Your dinner here is ready for
you, eat heartily, but do not drink too deeply in honour of your new
service.

"Now, MacIntosh, I have a word or two further to speak to you."

They went into an inner room.

"Now, old friend, are you tired of this life of keeper of a cabaret?
because I shall want you down in Poitou. Your house was mine when
I sorely needed it, and mine shall be yours now. You are as yet but
fifty-five, and I take it that you can do a man's work still, for you
no longer suffer from that wound that disabled you ten years ago. Now,
I shall require someone to drill the fifty men who will form my
contingent, if all vassals of the king are called upon to take the
field. Of course they will not always be under arms; most of them will
be the sons of tenants, or substitutes provided by them, and will only
give two or three days' service a month. It is probable, however, that
half will be regular retainers at the castle. I know nothing about the
castle at present, or how large it is, or whether it is defensible or
not; still, it was spoken of as a castle, and 'tis, I suppose, one to a
certain degree.

"At any rate, I desire that if I do put a troop in the field they shall
be as well drilled and as well equipped as are the Scottish regiment of
musketeers. I suppose that there must be an official to act as my agent
when I am away, and to act as castellan, but in any case the captain of
my troop will be in charge of all matters connected with its defence.
Now, old friend, the post is yours if you like to take it. As a soldier,
none can be better fitted for the post than a sergeant of the Scottish
regiment; as a man, there is no one I could rely on better than you.
Your duties would not be heavy, your position an honourable one. The
castle would be your home as well as mine, and when I am there you would
have the four troopers to crack with."

"Your offer is a most kind one," the sergeant said, "but I must think
it over in all lights before I answer. I should miss the company of the
lads, but already many of my old comrades are gone; most are still in
Paris earning with difficulty their bread, some are under the sod, some
have returned home. Every year the number who rode with me lessens. They
will be countrymen, but no longer comrades. Certainly I have no thought
of returning to Scotland, the people are ower gude for me; besides,
the country is all in a stir and the folks are flying at each other's
throats. I wudna go back, not if they offered me a barony. Then, on the
other hand, I misdoubt me how I should feel among strangers--I don't say
foreigners, for I have been so long here that as far as tongue goes I
am as much French as I am Scottish. Still, I would rather be forming
troopers in your service than drawing stoups of wine, and the young
soldiers do not regard me as the old ones did, and grumble if I will
draw them no more. Most of all, I should like to be with you and in your
service, and to know that I had a home in my old age."

"That you will have whenever you come to claim it, MacIntosh, whether
you accept my offer or not. However, I think that what you say is best,
and that it would be well for you to think the matter well over and give
me no answer until I return. I should be sorry indeed if, after giving
up your place here and going down to Poitou, you should regret the
exchange. Therefore, we will leave it so. And now I must be going; we
must postpone our chat over old times and the regiment until I return."

On returning to Conde's hotel Hector found Paolo awaiting him.

"Paolo, you must go out and buy six horse cloths and five housings; let
them be fairly handsome. I have taken four old soldiers into my service,
and should wish their horse appointments to be fit for troopers in one
of the royal regiments, but without any insignia or cognizance, say
maroon with yellow braiding. I shall also want four valises for the men,
and bags for carrying forage. You can wrap up the housings that came
with the horses; they all bear Enghien's cognizance, and this must be
removed before we can use them. The men can strap them behind their
valises. Were there pistols in the holsters?"

"Yes, master, they were just as when you rode them."

"It was a princely gift," Hector said, "for the horses are all splendid
animals. Have you packed up my things?"

"Yes, master, they are all ready for placing on the sumpter horse. I
bought a dozen of good wine, thinking that you might need it on the way,
for some of these country auberges keep but poor stuff."

"We are getting luxurious all at once," Hector laughed. "How about my
armour?"

"That is also packed up. I thought that you would not care to ride
heavily accoutred."

"Certainly not. Which of the horses do you take to be the best?"

"Certainly the one you rode in upon is the best, master, but all four
are grand animals. The two I picked up on the battlefield are fine
animals also."

"It does not make much matter which I ride now, Paolo; we shall have the
opportunity of seeing which has the most fire and endurance as we ride
along; and at any rate I shall keep Enghien's four horses for my own
riding, keeping two with me and leaving two behind at the castle. I
shall buy four strong and serviceable horses for the troopers when I get
my first rents, for in sooth my purse is beginning to run very low."

"Possibly, master, when you look in the armoire in your room you may
find something to replenish it. One of the cardinal's servants brought a
packet for you. I stowed it away and locked the door of your room."

"Well, there is no time to lose, Paolo, so see at once about the matters
that I have told you. Here is sufficient money to buy the other goods."

"Here is the key of the room, sir."

Having seen Paolo hurry away, Hector went up to his room. In the armoire
he found the packet, which was a heavy one. Opening it, he found a
letter and a bag sealed with wax. The letter was from the intendant
general. It was directed, "A Monsieur le Baron de la Villar."

"It does not look as if it could be for me," Hector said, with a merry
laugh. Breaking the seal he found:
