of piles to be driven in among and beside them to enable them to resist
the force of the current.

On the night of the fourth day the king caused a number of fires to be
lighted near the river, fed with green wood and damp straw. A favourable
wind blew the smoke towards the enemy, and thus concealed the ground
from them. At daybreak on the 5th of April, a thousand picked men
crossed the river in two boats, and having reached the other side
at once proceeded to throw up intrenchments to cover the head of the
bridge, while at the same time the workmen began to place the trestles
in position.

As soon as day broke Tilly became aware of what was being done, and
two batteries opened fire upon the work at the head of the bridge and
against the bridge itself; but the low and swampy nature of the ground
on the Imperialist side of the river prevented his placing the batteries
in a position from which they could command the works, and their fire
proved ineffective in preventing the construction of the bridge. Seeing
this, Tilly at once commenced preparations for arresting the further
advance of the Swedes.

To reach his position they would be obliged to cross the swampy ground
exposed to the fire of his troops, and to render their progress still
more difficult he proceeded to cut down large trees, lopping and
sharpening their branches to form a chevaux-de-frise before his troops.
All the morning a heavy cannonade was kept up on both sides, but by noon
the bridge was completed and the advance guard of the Swedes, led by
Colonels Wrandel and Gassion, advanced across it. As the other brigades
were following, Tilly directed General Altringer to lead his cavalry
against them.

Altringer led his troops round the end of the marsh and charged with
great bravery down upon the Swedes. These, however, had time to form up,
and a tremendous fire of musketry was poured into the Imperialist horse,
while the round shot from the three Swedish batteries ploughed their
ranks in front and on both flanks. Under such circumstances, although
fighting with reckless bravery, the Imperialist cavalry were repulsed.
Altringer, however, rallied them and led them back again to the charge,
but a cannonball grazed his temple and he was carried senseless from
the field. His men, shaken by the tremendous fire and deprived of their
leader, fell back in confusion.

Tilly at once placed himself at the head of a chosen body of troops
and advanced to the attack, fighting with the ardour and bravery which
always distinguished him. He was short in stature and remarkable for his
ugliness as well as his bravery. Lean and spare in figure, he had hollow
cheeks, a long nose, a broad wrinkled forehead, heavy moustaches, and
a sharp pointed chin. He had from his boyhood been fighting against the
Protestants. He had learned the art of war under the cruel and pitiless
Spanish general Alva in the Netherlands, of which country he was a
native, and had afterwards fought against them in Bavaria, in Bohemia,
and the Palatinate, and had served in Hungary against the Turks.

Until he met Gustavus at Breitenfeld he had never known a reverse. A
bigoted Catholic, he had never hesitated at any act of cruelty which
might benefit the cause for which he fought, or strike terror into the
Protestants; and the singularity of his costume and the ugliness of his
appearance heightened the terror which his deeds inspired among them.
When not in armour his costume was modelled upon that of the Duke of
Alva, consisting of a slashed doublet of green silk, with an enormously
wide-brimmed and high conical hat adorned with a large red ostrich
feather. In his girdle he carried a long dagger and a Toledo sword of
immense length. His personal bravery was famous, and never did he
fight more gallantly than when he led his veterans to the attack of the
Swedes.

For twenty minutes a furious hand to hand conflict raged, and the result
was still uncertain when a shot from a falconet struck Tilly on the
knee and shattered the bone, and the old general fell insensible to
the ground. He was carried off the field, and his troops, now without a
leader, gave way, the movement being hastened by two bodies of Swedish
horse, who, eager for action, swam their horses across the river and
threatened to cut off the retreat. By this time evening was at hand. The
Swedes had secured the passage of the river, but the Imperialist army
still held its intrenched position in the wood behind the Lech. Gustavus
brought the rest of his army across and halted for the night.

The Imperialist position was tremendously strong, being unassailable on
the right and covered in the front by the marshy ground. It could
still have been defended with every prospect of success by a determined
general, but the two best Imperialist commanders were hors de combat,
and Maximilian of Bavaria, the nominal generalissimo, had no military
experience. The army, too, was disheartened by the first success of the
Swedes and by the loss of the general whom they regarded as well nigh
invincible.

Tilly had now recovered his senses, but was suffering intense agony from
his wound, and on being consulted by Maximilian he advised him to fall
back, as the destruction of his army would leave the whole country open
to the Swedes.

The Imperialists accordingly evacuated their position and fell back in
good order during the night on Neuberg, and then to Ingolstadt. Rain and
Neuberg were occupied the next day by the Swedes. Gustavus despatched
Marshal Horn to follow the retreating enemy to Ingolstadt, and he
himself with the rest of his army marched up the Lech to Augsburg, which
was held by Colonel Breda with four thousand five hundred men.

The Imperialists had broken down the bridge, but Gustavus immediately
built two others, one above and the other below the city, and summoned
it to surrender. Breda, hearing that Tilly was dying, Altringer severely
wounded, and that no help was to be expected from Maximilian, considered
it hopeless to resist, and surrendered the town, which Gustavus,
attended by the titular King of Bohemia and many other princes, entered
in triumph on the following day, April 14th. The capture of Augsburg
was hailed with peculiar satisfaction, as the city was regarded as the
birthplace of the Reformation in Germany. Leaving a garrison there the
king retraced his steps along the Lech to Neuberg, and marched thence to
join Marshal Horn in front of Ingolstadt.

This town was one of the strongest places in Germany and had never been
captured. It was now held by a formidable garrison, and the Imperialist
army covered it on the north. Tilly had implored Maximilian to defend
it and Ratisbon at all hazards, as their possession was a bar to the
further advance of Gustavus.

The king arrived before it on the 19th, and on the following day
advanced to reconnoitre it closely. The gunners of the town, seeing a
number of officers approaching, fired, and with so good an aim that
a cannonball carried off the hindquarters of the horse the king was
riding. A cry of alarm and consternation burst from the officers, but
their delight was great when the king rose to his feet, covered with
dust and blood indeed, but otherwise unhurt.

On the following day a cannonball carried off the head of the Margrave
of Baden-Durlach, and on the same day Tilly expired. With his last
breath he urged Maximilian never to break his alliance with the emperor,
and to appoint Colonel Cratz, an officer of great courage and ability,
to the command of his army.

Gustavus remained eight days before Ingolstadt, and then, finding that
the reduction of the place could not be effected without the loss of
much valuable time, he raised the siege. On his march he took possession
of Landshut and forced it to pay a ransom of 100,000 thalers and to
receive a garrison, and then continued his way to Munich.

The Bavarian capital surrendered without a blow on the 17th of May.
Gustavus made a triumphal entry into the town, where he obtained
possession of a vast quantity of treasure and stores. Here he remained
some little time reducing the country round and capturing many cities
and fortresses. The Green Brigade had suffered severely at Ingolstadt.
On the evening of the 19th of April the king, expecting a sally, had
ordered Hepburn to post the brigade on some high ground near the gate
and the soldiers remained under arms the whole night.

The glow of their matches enabled the enemy to fire with precision, and
a heavy cannonade was poured upon them throughout the whole night. Three
hundred men were killed as they stood, Munro losing twelve men by one
shot; but the brigade stood their ground unflinchingly, and remained
until morning in steady line in readiness to repel any sortie of the
enemy.

The army suffered greatly on the march from the Lech to Ingolstadt,
and thence to Munich, from the attacks of the country people, who were
excited against them by the priests. Every straggler who fell into their
hands was murdered with horrible cruelty, the hands and feet being cut
off, and other savage mutilations being performed upon them, in revenge
for which the Swedes and Scots shot all the Bavarians who fell into
their hands, and burned two hundred towns and villages.



CHAPTER XIII CAPTURED BY THE PEASANTS


Malcolm Graheme was not present at the siege of Ingolstadt. The orders
after crossing the Lech had been very strict against straggling, so soon
as the disposition of the country people was seen; but it is not easy
to keep a large column of troops in a solid body. The regiments in the
march indeed, under the eye of the officers, can be kept in column, but
a considerable number of troops are scattered along the great convoy
of wagons containing the tents, stores, and ammunition of the army, and
which often extends some miles in length. Even if the desire for plunder
does not draw men away, many are forced to fall behind either from
sickness, sore feet, or other causes.

The number of these was comparatively small in the army of Gustavus,
for discipline was strict and the spirit of the troops good. As soon,
however, as it was found that every straggler who fell into the hands of
the peasantry was murdered under circumstances of horrible atrocity
it became very difficult for the officers to keep the men together,
so intense was their fury and desire for vengeance against the savage
peasantry, and on every possible occasion when a village was seen near
the line of march men would slip away and slay, plunder, and burn.

Gustavus endeavoured to repress these proceedings. He shared the
indignation of his troops at the barbarous conduct of the peasantry,
but throughout the war he always tried to carry on hostilities so as
to inflict as little loss and suffering as possible upon noncombatants.
This state of warfare too between his troops and the country people
added to his difficulties, for the peasantry drove off their cattle and
burned their stacks, and rendered it necessary for provisions and forage
to be carried with the army. Parties were therefore sent out on the
flanks of the column for the double purpose of preventing soldiers
stealing off to plunder and burn, and of picking up stragglers and
saving them from the fury of the peasants.

A strong rear guard followed a short distance behind the army. It was
accompanied by some empty wagons, in which those who fell out and were
unable to keep up with the march were placed. Two days after the advance
from the Lech, Malcolm was in charge of a small party on the right flank
of the column. There was no fear of an attack from the enemy, for the
Swedish horsemen were out scouring the country, and the Imperialists
were known to have fallen back to Ingolstadt. The villages were found
deserted by the male inhabitants, the younger women too had all left,
but a few old crones generally remained in charge. These scowled at the
invaders, and crossing themselves muttered curses beneath their breath
upon those whom their priests had taught them to regard as devils. There
was nothing to tempt the cupidity of the soldiers in these villages.
Malcolm's duty was confined to a casual inspection, to see that no
stragglers had entered for the purpose of procuring wine.

The day's march was nearly over when he saw some flames rise from a
village a short distance away. Hurrying forward with his men he found
a party of ten of the Swedish soldiers who had stolen away from the
baggage guard engaged in plundering. Two peasants lay dead in the
street, and a house was in flames.

Malcolm at once ordered his detachment, who were twenty strong, to
arrest the Swedes and to march them back to the columns. While they were
doing this he went from house to house to see that none of the party
were lurking there. At the door of the last house of the village three
women were standing.

"Are any of the soldiers here?" he asked.

The women gave him an unintelligible answer in the country patois, and
passing between them he entered the cottage. On the table stood a large
jug of water, and lifting it he took a long draught. There was a sudden
crash, and he fell heavily, struck down from behind with a heavy mallet
by one of the women. He was stunned by the blow, and when he recovered
his senses he found that he was bound hand and foot, a cloth had been
stuffed tightly into his mouth, and he was covered thickly with a heap
of straw and rubbish. He struggled desperately to free himself, but so
tightly were the cords bound that they did not give in the slightest.

A cold perspiration broke out on his forehead as he reflected that he
was helpless in the power of these savage peasants, and that he should
probably be put to death by torture. Presently he could hear the shouts
of his men, who, on finding that he did not return, had scattered
through the village in search of him. He heard the voice of his
sergeant.

"These old hags say they saw an officer walk across to the left. The
captain may have meant us to march the prisoners at once to the column,
and be waiting just outside the village for us, but it is not likely. At
any rate, lads, we will search every house from top to bottom before we
leave. So set to work at once; search every room, cupboard, and shed.
There may be foul play; though we see no men about, some may be in
hiding."

Malcolm heard the sound of footsteps, and the crashing of planks as
the men searched the cottages, wrenched off the doors of cupboards, and
ransacked the whole place. Gradually the sound ceased, and everything
became quiet. Presently he heard the sound of drums, and knew that the
regiment which formed the rear guard was passing.

It was bitterness indeed to know that his friends were within sound of a
call for aid, and that he was bound and helpless. The halting place for
the night was, he knew, but a mile or two in advance, and his only hope
was that some band of plunderers might in the night visit the village;
but even then his chances of being discovered were small indeed, for
even should they sack and burn it he would pass unnoticed lying hidden
in the straw yard. His captors were no doubt aware of the possibility of
such a visit, for it was not until broad daylight, when the army would
again be on its forward march, that they uncovered him.

Brave as Malcolm was he could scarce repress a shudder as he looked at
the band of women who surrounded him. All were past middle age, some
were old and toothless, but all were animated by a spirit of ferocious
triumph. Raising him into a sitting position, they clustered round him,
some shook their skinny hands in his face, others heaped curses upon
him, some of the most furious assailed him with heavy sticks, and had he
not still been clothed in his armour, would then and there have killed
him.

This, however, was not their intention, for they intended to put him to
death by slow torture. He was lifted and carried into the cottage.
There the lacings of his armour were cut, the cords loosened one by one,
sufficient to enable them to remove the various pieces of which it was
composed, then he was left to himself, as the hags intended to postpone
the final tragedy until the men returned from the hills.

This might be some hours yet, as the Swedish cavalry would still be
scouring the country, and other bodies of troops might be marching up.
From the conversation of the women, which he understood but imperfectly,
Malcolm gathered that they thought the men would return that night. Some
of the women were in favour of executing the vengeance themselves, but
the majority were of opinion that the men should have their share of the
pleasure.

All sorts of fiendish propositions were made as to the manner in which
his execution should be carried out, but even the mildest caused Malcolm
to shudder in anticipation. His arms were bound tightly to his side at
the elbows, and the wrists were fastened in front of him, his legs were
tied at the knees and ankles. Sometimes he was left alone as the women
went about their various avocations in the village, but he was so
securely bound that to him as to them his escape appeared altogether
impossible. The day passed heavily and slowly. The cloth had been
removed from his mouth, but he was parched with thirst, while the
tightly bound cords cut deeply into his flesh.

He had once asked for water, but his request had been answered with such
jeers and mockery that he resolved to suffer silently until the last. At
length the darkness of the winter evening began to fall when a thought
suddenly struck him. On the hearth a fire was burning; he waited until
the women had again left the hut. He could hear their voices without
as they talked with those in the next cottage. They might at any moment
return, and it was improbable that they would again go out, for the cold
was bitter, and they would most likely wait indoors for the return of
the men.

This then was his last opportunity. He rolled himself to the fire, and
with his teeth seized the end of one of the burning sticks. He raised
himself into a sitting position, and with the greatest difficulty laid
the burning end of the stick across the cords which bound his wrists. It
seemed to him that they would never catch fire. The flesh scorched and
frizzled, and the smoke rose up with that of the burning rope. The agony
was intense, but it was for life, and Malcolm unflinchingly held the
burning brand in its place until the cords flew asunder and his hands
were free. Although almost mad with the pain, Malcolm set to work
instantly to undo the other ropes. As soon as one of his arms was free
he seized a hatchet, which lay near him, and rapidly cut the rest. He
was not a moment too soon, for as he cut the last knot he heard the
sound of steps, and two women appeared at the door.

On seeing their prisoner standing erect with an axe in his hand they
turned and fled shrieking loudly. It was well for Malcolm that they did
so, for so stiff and numbed were his limbs that he could scarcely hold
the axe, and the slightest push would have thrown him to the ground.

Some minutes passed before, by stamping his feet and rubbing his legs
he restored circulation sufficiently to totter across the room. Then he
seized a brand and thrust it into the thatch of the house, having first
put on his helmet and placed his sword and pistols in his belt. His
hands were too crippled and powerless to enable him to fasten on the
rest of his armour. He knew that he had no time to lose. Fortunately the
women would not know how weak and helpless he was, for had they returned
in a body they could easily have overpowered him; but at any moment the
men might arrive, and if he was found there by them his fate was sealed.

Accordingly as soon as he had fired the hut he made his way from the
village as quickly as he could crawl along. He saw behind him the flames
rising higher and higher. The wind was blowing keenly, and the fire
spread rapidly from house to house, and by the time he reached the road
along which the army had travelled the whole village was in flames. He
felt that he could not travel far, for the intense sufferings which he
had endured for twenty-four hours without food or water had exhausted
his strength.

His limbs were swollen and bruised from the tightness of the cords, the
agony of his burned wrists was terrible, and after proceeding slowly for
about a mile he drew off from the broad trampled track which the army
had made in passing, and dragging himself to a clump of trees a short
distance from the road, made his way through some thick undergrowth and
flung himself down. The night was intensely cold, but this was a relief
to him rather than otherwise, for it alleviated the burning pain of his
limbs while he kept handfuls of snow applied to his wrists.

Two hours after he had taken refuge he heard a number of men come along
the road at a run. Looking through the bushes he could see by their
figures against the snow that they were peasants, and had no doubt that
they were the men of the village who had returned and at once started in
pursuit of him.

An hour later, feeling somewhat relieved, he left his hiding place and
moved a mile away from the road, as he feared that the peasants, failing
to overtake him, might, as they returned, search every possible hiding
place near it. He had no fear of the track being noticed, for the
surface of the snow was everywhere marked by parties going and returning
