
'Ha! And you know him? You avouch him to be what he represents himself?'

'I knew him at court. I know him well. Father, make these fellows cease
their insults! I have heard nothing yet. See here!' holding out what
Mericour had put into his hand; 'this you cannot doubt, mother.'

'Parted the pearls! Ah, the little minx!' cried the lady, as she
recognized the jewels.

'I thought he had been robbed?' added Sir Marmaduke.

'The gentleman doubts?' said Mericour, catching some of the words. 'He
should know that what is confided in a French gentleman is only taken
from him with his life. Much did I lose; but the pearl I kept hidden in
my mouth.'

Therewith he produced the letter. Lady Thistlewood pronounced that no
power on earth should induce her to open it, and drew off herself and
her little girls to a safe distance from the secret poison she fancied
it contained; while Sir Marmaduke was rating the constables for taking
advantage of his absence to interpret the Queen's Vagrant Act in their
own violent fashion; ending, however, by sending them round to the
buttery-hatch to drink the young Lord's health. For the messeger, the
good knight heartily grasped his hand, welcoming him and thanking him
for having 'brought comfort to you poor lad's heart.'

But there Sir Marmaduke paused, doubting whether the letter had indeed
brought comfort; for Berenger, who had seized on it, when it was refused
by his mother, was sitting under the tree--turning away indeed, but not
able to conceal that his tears were gushing down like rain. The anxious
exclamation of his step-father roused him at length, but he scarce found
power or voice to utter, as he thrust the letter into the knight's hand,
'Ah! see what has she not suffered for me! me, whom you would have had
believed her faithless!'

He then grasped his friend's arm, and with him disappeared into the
house, leaving Sir Marmaduke holding the letter in a state of the utmost
bewilderment, and calling by turns on his wife and daughter to read and
explain it to him.

And as Lucy read the letter, with her mother could not yet prevail on
herself to touch, she felt at each word more grateful to the good Aunt
Cecily, whose influence had taught her always to view Berenger as a
brother, and not to condemn unheard the poor young wife. If she had not
been thus guarded, what distress might not this day of joy to Berenger
have brought to Lucy! Indeed, Lady Thistlewood was vexed enough as
it was, and ready to carry her incredulity to the most inconsistent
lengths. 'It was all a trick for getting the poor boy back, that
they might make an end of him altogether. Tell her they thought him
dead.--'Tilley-valley! It was a mere attempt on her own good-nature, to
get a little French impostor on her hands. Let Sir Duke look well to
it, and take care that her poor boy was not decoyed among them. The
Frenchman might be cutting his throat at that moment! Where was he? Had
Sir Duke been so lost as to let them out of sight together? No one had
either pity or prudence now that her poor father was gone;' and she
began to weep.

'No great fear on that score, dame,' laughed the knight. 'Did you not
hear the lad shouting for 'Phil, Phil!' almost in a voice like old
times? It does one good to hear it.'

Just at twilight, Berenger came down the steps, conducting a graceful
gentleman in black, to whom Lady Thistlewood's instinct impelled her
to make a low courtesy, before Berenger had said, 'Madam, allow me to
present to you my friend, the Abbe de Mericour.'

'Is it the same?' whispered Bessie to Annora. 'Surely he is translated!'

'Only into Philip's old mourning suit. I know it by the stain on the
knee.

'Then it is translated too. Never did it look so well on Philip! See,
our mother is quite gracious to him; she speaks to him as though he were
some noble visitor to my Lord.'

Therewith Sir Marmaduke came forward, shook Mericour with all his might
by the hand, shouted to him his hearty thanks for the good he had done
his poor lad and assured him of a welcome from the very bottom of his
heart. The good knight would fain have kept both Berenger and his friend
at the Manor, but Berenger was far too impatient to carry home his joy,
and only begged the loan of a horse for Mericour. For himself, he felt
as if fatigue or dejection would never touch him again, and he kissed
his mother and his sisters, including Lucy, all round, with an effusion
of delight.

'Is that indeed your step-father?' said Mericour, as they rode away
together. 'And the young man, is he your half-brother?'

'Brother wholly in dear love,' said Berenger; 'no blood relation. The
little girls are my mother's children.'

'Ah! so large a family all one? All at home? None in convents?'

'We have no convents.'

'Ah, no, but all at home! All at peace! This is a strange place, your
England.'




CHAPTER XXII. DEPARTURE



             It is my mistress!
     Since she is living, let the time run on
         To good or bad.--CYMBELINE


Mericour found the welcome at Hurst Walwyn kindly and more polished than
that at Combe Manor. He was more readily understood, and found himself
at his natural element. Lord Walwyn, in especial, took much notice of
him, and conversed with him long and earnestly; while Berenger, too
happy and too weary to exert himself to say many words, sat as
near Cecily as he could, treating her as though she, who had never
contradicted in his trust in Eustacie, were the only person who could
worthily share his infinite relief, peace, and thankfulness.

Lord Walwyn said scarcely anything to his grandson that night, only when
Berenger, as usual, bent his knee to ask his blessing on parting for the
night, he said, gravely, 'Son, I am glad of your joy; I fear me you have
somewhat to pardon your grandsire. Come to my library so soon as morning
prayers be over; we will speak then. Not now, my dear lad,' he added, as
Berenger, with tears in his eyes, kissed his hand, and would have begun;
'you are too much worn and spent to make my dear ears hear. Sleep, and
take my blessing with you.'

It was a delight to see the young face freed from the haggard, dejected
expression that had been sadder than the outward wound; and yet it was
so questionable how far the French connection was acceptable to the
family, that when Berenger requested Mr. Adderley to make mention of the
mercy vouch-safed to him in the morning devotions, the chaplain bowed,
indeed, but took care to ascertain that his so doing would be agreeable
to my Lord and my Lady.

He found that if Lady Walwyn was still inclined to regret that the
Frenchwoman was so entirely a wife, and thought Berenger had been very
hasty and imprudent, yet that the old Lord was chiefly distressed at
the cruel injustice he had so long been doing this poor youth thing.
A strong sense of justice, and long habit of dignified self-restraint,
alone prevented Lord Walwyn from severely censuring Mr. Adderley for
misrepresentations; but the old nobleman recollected that Walsingham had
been in the same story, and was too upright to visit his own vexation on
the honestly-mistaken tutor.

However, when Berenger made his appearance in the study, looking as
if not one right, but weeks, had been spent in recovering health and
spirit, the old man's first word was a gentle rebuke for his having been
left unaware of how far matters had gone; but he cut short the attempted
reply, but saying he knew it was chiefly owing to his own over-hasty
conclusion, and fear of letting his grandson injure himself by vainly
discussing the subject. Now, however, he examined Berenger closely on
all the proceedings Paris and at Montpipeau, and soon understood that
the ceremony had been renewed, ratifying the vows taken in infancy. The
old statesman's face cleared up at once; for, as he explained, he had
now no anxieties as to the validity of the marriage by English law, at
least, in spite of the decree from Rome, which, as he pointed out to his
grandson, was wholly contingent on the absence of subsequent consent,
since the parties had come to an age for free-will. Had he known of
this, the re-marriage, he said, he should certainly have been less
supine. Why had Berenger been silent?

'I was commanded, sir. I fear I have transgressed the command by
mentioning it now. I must pray you to be secret.'

'Secret, foolish lad. Know you not that the rights of your wife and your
children rest upon it?' and as the change in Berenger's looks showed
that he had not comprehended the full importance of the second ceremony
as nullifying the papal sentence, which could only quash the first on
the ground of want of mutual consent, he proceeded, 'Command, quotha?
Who there had any right to command you, boy?'

'Only one, sir.'

'Come, this no moment for lover's folly. It was not the girl, then? Then
it could no other than the miserable King--was it so?'

'Yes, sir,' said Berenger. 'He bade me as king, and requested me as the
friend who gave her to me. I could do no otherwise, and I thought it
would be but a matter of a few days, and that our original marriage was
the only important one.'

'Have you any parchment to prove it?'

'No, sir. It passed but as a ceremony to satisfy the Queen's scruples
ere she gave my wife to me to take home. I even think the King was
displeased at her requiring it.'

'Was Mr. Sidney a witness?'

'No, sir. None was present, save the King and Queen, her German
countess, and the German priest.'

'The day?'

'Lammas-day.'

'The 1st of August of the year of grace 1572. I will write to Walsingham
to obtain the testimony, if possible, of king or of priest; but belike
they will deny it all. It was part of the trick. Shame upon it that a
king should dig pits for so small a game as you, my poor lad!'

'Verily, my Lord,' said Berenger, 'I think the King meant us kindly,
and would gladly have sped us well away. Methought he felt his bondage
bitterly, and would fain have dared to be a true king. Even at the last,
he bade me to his _garde-robe_, and all there were unhurt.'

'And wherefore obeyed you not?'

'The carouse would have kept me too late for our flight.'

'King's behests may not lightly be disregarded,' said the old courtier,
with a smile. 'However, since he showed such seeming favour to you,
surely you might send a petition to him privately, through Sir Francis
Walsingham, to let the priest testify to your renewal of contract,
engaging not to use it to his detriment in France.'

'I will do so, sir. Meanwhile,' he added, as one who felt he had earned
a right to be heard in his turn, 'I have your permission to hasten to
bring home my wife?'

Lord Walwyn was startled at this demand from one still so far from
recovered as Berenger. Even this talk, eager as the youth was, had
not been carried on without much difficulty, repetitions, and altered
phrases, when he could not pronounce distinctly enough to be understood
and the effort brought lines of pain into his brow. He could take little
solid food, had hardly any strength for walking or riding; and, though
all his wounds were whole, except that one unmanageable shot in the
mouth, he looked entirely unfit to venture on a long journey in the very
country that had sent him home a year before scarcely alive. Lord Walwyn
had already devised what he thought a far more practicable arrangement;
namely, to send Mr. Adderley and some of my Lady's women by sea, under
the charge of Master Hobbs, a shipmaster at Weymouth, who traded with
Bordeaux for wine, and could easily put in near La Sablerie, and bring
off the lady and child, and, if she wished it, the pastor to whom such a
debt of gratitude was owing.

Berenger was delighted with the notion of the sea rather than the land
journey; but he pointed out at once that this would remove all objection
to his going in person. He had often been out whole nights with the
fishermen, and knew that a sea-voyage would be better for his health
than anything,--certainly better than pining and languishing at home,
as he had done for months. He could not bear to think of separation
from Eustacie an hour longer than needful; nay, she had been cruelly
entreated enough already; and as long as he could keep his feet, it was
absolutely due to her that he should not let others, instead of himself,
go in search of her. It would be almost death to him to stay at home.

Lord Walwyn looked at the pallid, wasted face, with all its marks
of suffering and intense eagerness of expression, increased by the
difficulty of utterance and need of subduing agitation. He felt that the
long-misunderstood patience and endurance had earned something; and he
knew, too, that for all his grandson's submission and respect, the
boy, as a husband and father, had rights and duties that would assert
themselves manfully if opposed. It was true that the sea-voyage obviated
many difficulties, and it was better to consent with a good grace than
drive one hitherto so dutiful to rebellion. He did then consent, and was
rewarded by the lightning flash of joy and gratitude in the bright
blue eyes, and the fervent pressure and kiss of his hand, as Berenger
exclaimed, 'Ah! sir, Eustacie will be such a daughter to you. You should
have seen how the Admiral liked her!'

The news of Lord Walwyn's consent raised much commotion in the family.
Dame Annora was sure her poor son would be murdered outright this time,
and that nobody cared because he was only HER son; and she strove hard
to stir up Sir Marmaduke to remonstrate with her father; but the good
knight had never disputed a judgment of 'my Lord's' in his whole life,
and had even received his first wife from his hands, when forsaken by
the gay Annora. So she could only ride over the Combe, be silenced by
her father, as effectually as if Jupiter had nodded, and bewail and
murmur to her mother till she lashed Lady Walwyn up into finding every
possible reason why Berenger should and must sail. Then she went home,
was very sharp with Lucy, and was reckoned by saucy little Nan to have
nineteen times exclaimed 'Tilley-valley' in the course of one day.

The effect upon Philip was a vehement insistence on going with his
brother. He was sure no one else would see to Berry half as well; and as
to letting Berry go to be murdered again without him, he would not hear
of it; he must go, he would not stay at home; he should not study; no,
no, he should be ready to hang himself for vexation, and thinking
what they were doing to his brother. And thus he extorted from his
kind-hearted father an avowal that he should be easier a bout the lad
if Phil were there, and that he might go, provided Berry would have him,
and my Lord saw no objection. The first point was soon settled; and
as to the second, there was no reason at all that Philip should not
go where his brother did. In fact, excepting for Berenger's state of
health, there was hardly any risk about the matter. Master Hobbs, to
whom Philip rode down ecstatically to request him to come and speak to
my Lord, was a stout, honest, experienced seaman, who was perfectly at
home in the Bay of Biscay, and had so strong a feudal feeling for the
house of Walwyn, that he placed himself and his best ship, the THROSTLE,
entirely at his disposal. The THROSTLE was a capital sailer, and carried
arms quite sufficient in English hands to protect her against Algerine
corsairs or Spanish pirates. He only asked for a week to make her cabin
ready for the reception of a lady, and this time was spent in sending
a post to London, to obtain for Berenger the permit from the Queen,
and the passport from the French Ambassador, without which he could not
safely have gone; and, as a further precaution, letters were requested
from some of the secret agents of the Huguenots to facilitate his
admission into La Sablerie.

In the meantime, poor Mr. Adderley had submitted meekly to the decree
that sentenced him to weeks of misery on board the THROSTLE, but to his
infinite relief, an inspection of the cabins proved the space so small,
that Berenger represented to him grandfather that the excellent tutor
would be only an incumbrance to himself and every one else, and that
with Philip he should need no one. Indeed, he had made such a start into
vigour and alertness during the last few days that there was far less
anxiety about him, though with several sighs for poor Osbert. Cecily
initiated Philip into her simple rules for her patient's treatment in
case of the return of his more painful symptoms. The notion of sending
female attendants for Eustacie was also abandoned: her husband's
presence rendered them unnecessary, or they might be procured at La
Sablerie; and thus it happened that the only servants whom Berenger was
to take with him were Humfrey Holt and John Smithers, the same honest
fellows whose steadiness had so much conduced to his rescue at Paris.

Claude de Mericour had in the meantime been treated as an honoured guest
at Combe Walwyn, and was in good esteem with its master. He would have
set forth at once on his journey to Scotland, but that Lord Walwyn
advised him to wait and ascertain the condition of his relatives there
before throwing himself on them. Berenger had, accordingly, when writing
to Sidney by the messenger above mentioned, begged him to find out from
Sir Robert Melville, the Scottish Envoy, all he could about the family
whose designation he wrote down at a venture from Mericour's lips.

Sidney returned a most affectionate answer, saying that he had never
been able to believe the little shepherdess a traitor and was charmed
that she had proved herself a heroine; he should endeavour to greet her
with all his best powers as a poet, when she should brighten the English
court; but his friend, Master Spenser, alone was fit to celebrate such
constancy. As to M. l'Abbe de Mericour's friends, Sir Robert Melville
had recognized their name at once, and had pronounced them to be fierce
Catholics and Queensmen, so sorely pressed by the Douglases, that it was
believed they would soon fly the country altogether; and Sidney added,
what Lord Walwyn had already said, that to seek Scotland rather than
France as a resting-place in which to weigh between Calvinism and
Catholicism, was only trebly hot and fanatical. His counsel was that M.
de Mericour should so far conform himself to the English Church as to
obtain admission to one of the universities, and, through his uncle of
Leicester, he could obtain for him an opening at Oxford, where he might
fully study the subject.

There was much to incline Mericour to accept this counsel. He had had
much conversation with Mr. Adderley, and had attended his ministrations
in the chapel, and both satisfied him far better than what he had seen
among the French Calninists; and the peace and family affection of the
two houses were like a new world to him. But he had not yet made up his
mind to that absolute disavowal of his own branch of the Church, which
alone could have rendered him eligible for any foundation at Oxford.
His attainments in classics would, Mr. Adderley thought, reach such a
standard as to gain one of the very few scholarships open to foreigners;
and his noble blood revolted at becoming a pensioner of Leicester's, or
of any other nobleman.

Lord Walwyn, upon this, made an earnest offer of his hospitality, and
entreated the young man to remain at Hurst Walwyn till the return
of Berenger and Philip, during which time he might study under the
directions of Mr. Adderley, and come to a decision whether to seek
reconciliation with his native Church and his brother, or to remain in
England. In this latter case, he might perhaps accompany both the youths
to Oxford, for, in spite of Berenger's marriage, his education was
still not supposed to be complete. And when Mericour still demurred with
reluctance to become a burden on the bounty of the noble house, he was
reminded gracefully of the debt of gratitude that the family owed to him
for the relief he had brought to Berenger; and, moreover, Dame Annora
giggled out that, 'if he would teach Nan and Bess to speak and read
French and Italian, it would be worth something to them.' The others of
the family would have hushed up this uncalled-for proposal; but Mericour
caught at it as the most congenial mode of returning the obligation.
Every morning he undertook to walk or ride over to the Manor, and
there gave his lessons to the young ladies, with whom he was extremely
popular. He was a far more brilliant teacher than Lucy, and ten thousand
times preferable to Mr. Adderley, who had once begun to teach Annora her
accidence with lamentable want of success.




CHAPTER XXIII. THE EMPTY CRADLE


            Eager to know
     The worst, and with that fatal certainty
      To terminate intolerable dread,
      He spurred his courser forward--all his fears
      Too surely are fulfilled.--SOUTHEY


Contrary winds made the voyage of the THROSTLE much more tardy than had
been reckoned on by Berenger's impatience; but hope was before him, and
he often remembered his days in the little vessel as much happier than
he had known them to be at the time.

It was in the calm days of right October that Captain Hobbs at length
was putting into the little harbour nearest to La Sablerie. Berenger, on
that morning, had for the first time been seized by a fit of anxiety as
to the impression his face would make, with its terrible purple scar,
great patch, and bald forehead, and had brought out a little black
velvet mask, called a _tour de nez_, often used in riding to protect the
complexion, intending to prepare Eustacie for his disfigurement. He had
fastened on a carnation-coloured sword-knot, would a scarf of the same
colour across his shoulder, clasped a long ostrich plume into his broad
Spanish hat, and looked out his deeply-fringed Spanish gloves; and
Philip was laughing merrily, not to say rudely, at him, for trying to
deck himself out so bravely.

'See, Master Hobbs,' cried the boy in his high spirits, as he followed
his brother on deck, 'you did not know you had so fine a gallant on
board. Here be braveries for my Lady.'

'Hush, Phil,' broke in Berenger, who had hitherto taken all the raillery
in perfect good part. 'What is amiss, Master Hobbs?'

'I cannot justly say, sir,' returned Master Hobbs, without taking his
gaze off the coast, 'but by yonder banks and creeks this should be the
Sables d'Olonne; and I do not see the steeple of La Sablerie, which has
always been the landmark for the harbour of St. Julien.'

'What do you understand by that?' asked Berenger, more struck by his
manner than his words.

'Well, sir, if I am right, a steeple that has stood three or four
hundred years does not vanish out of sight like a cloud of smoke for
nothing. I may be lightning, to be sure; or the Protestants may have
had it down for Popery; but methinks they would have too much Christian
regard for poor mariners than to knock down the only landmark on this
coast till you come to Nissard spire.' Then he hailed the man at the
mast-head, demanding if he saw the steeple of La Sablerie. 'No, no,
sir.' But as other portions of the land became clearer, there was no
doubt that the THROSTLE was right in her bearings; so the skipper
gave orders to cast anchor and lower a boat. The passengers would have
pressed him with inquiries as to what he thought the absence of his
landmark could portend; but he hurried about, and shouted orders, with
the deaf despotism of a nautical commander; and only when all was made
ready, turned round and said, 'Now, sir, maybe you had best let me go
ashore first, and find out how the land lies.'

'Never!' said Berenger, in an agony of impatience.

'I thought so,' said the captain. 'Well, then, sir, are your fellows
ready? Armed? All right.'

So Berenger descended to the boat, followed by Philip; next came the
captain, and then the two serving-men. Six of the crew were ready to row
them to the shore, and were bidden by their captain to return at once
to the vessel, and only return on a signal from him. the surging rush of
intense anxiety, sure to precede the destined moment of the consummation
of hope long deferred, kept Berenger silent, choked by something between
fear and prayer; but Philip, less engrossed, asked Master Hobbs if it
were not strange that none of the inhabitants of the squalid little huts
on the shore had not put out to greet them in some of the boats that
were drawn up on the beach.

'Poor wretches,' said Hobbs; 'they scarce know friend from foe, and are
slow to run their heads into the lion's mouth. Strange fellows have the
impudence to sail under our flag at times.'

However, as they neared the low, flat, sandy shore, a few red caps
peeped out at the cottage-doors, and then, apparently gaining confidence
from the survey, some wiry, active figures appeared, and were hailed by
Hobbs. His Bordeaux trade had rendered him master of the coast language;
and a few incomprehensible shouts between him and the natives resulted
in a line being thrown to them, and the boat dragged as near as possible
to the landing-place, when half a dozen ran up, splashing with their
bare legs, to offer their shoulders for the transport of the passengers,
both of whom were seized upon before they were aware, Philip struggling
with all his might, till a call from Captain Hobbs warned him to resign
himself; and then he became almost helpless with laughter at the figure
cut by the long-legged Berenger upon a small fisherman's back.

They were landed. Could it be that Berenger was only two miles--only
half an hour's walk form Eustacie? The bound his heart gave as he
touched the shore seemed to stifle him. He could not believe it. Yet he
knew how fully he had believed it, the next moment, when he listened to
what the fishermen were saying to Captain Hobbs.

'Did Monsieur wish to go to La Sablerie? Ah! then he did not know
what had happened. The soldiers had been there; there had been a great
burning. They had been out in their boats at sea, but they had seen the
sky red--red as a furnace, all night; and the steeple was down. Surely,
Monsieur had missed the steeple that was a guide to all poor seafarers;
and now they had to go all the way to Brancour to sell their fish.'

'And the townspeople?' Hobbs asked.

'Ah! poor things; 'twas pity of them, for they were honest folk to deal
with, even if they were heretics. They loved fish at other seasons if
not in Lent; and it seemed but a fair return to go up and bury as many
of them as were not burnt to nothing in their church; and Dom Colombeau,
the good priest of Nissard, has said it was a pious work; and he was a
saint, if any one was.'

'Alack, sir,' said Hobbs, laying his hand on the arm of Berenger, who
seemed neither to have breathed nor moved while the man was speaking:
'I feared that there had been some such bloody work when I missed the
steeple. But take heart yet: your lady is very like to have been out of
the way. We might make for La Rochelle, and there learn!' Then, again to
the fisherman, 'None escaped, fellow?'

'Not one,' replied the man. 'They say that one of the great folks was in
a special rage with them for sheltering the lady he should have wedded,
but who had broken convent and turned heretic; and they had victualled
Montgomery's pirates too.'

'And the lady?' continued Hobbs, ever trying to get a more supporting
hold of his young charge, in case the rigid tension of his limbs should
suddenly relax.'

'I cannot tell, sir. I am a poor fisher; but I could guide you to the
place where old Gillot is always poking about. He listened to their
preachings, and knows more than we do.'

'Let us go,' said Berenger, at once beginning to stride along in his
heavy boots through the deep sand. Philip, who had hardly understood a
word of the _patois_, caught hold of him, and begged to be told what had
happened; but Master Hobbs drew the boy off, and explained to him and
to the two men what were the dreadful tidings that had wrought such
a change in Berenger's demeanour. The way over the shifting sands was
toilsome enough to all the rest of the party; but Berenger scarcely
seemed to feel the deep plunge at every step as they almost ploughed
their way along for the weary two miles, before a few green bushes and
half-choked trees showed that they were reaching the confines of the
sandy waste. Berenger had not uttered a word the whole time, and his
silence hushed the others. The ground began to rise, grass was seen
still struggling to grow, and presently a large straggling mass of
black and gray ruins revealed themselves, with the remains of a once
well-trodden road leading to them. But the road led to a gate-way choked
by a fallen jamb and barred door, and the guide led them round the
ruins of the wall to the opening where the breach had been. The sand
was already blowing in, and no doubt veiled much; for the streets were
scarcely traceable through remnants of houses more or less dilapidated,
with shreds of broken or burnt household furniture within them.

'Ask him for _la rue des Trois Fees_,' hoarsely whispered Berenger.

The fisherman nodded, but soon seemed at fault; and an old man, followed
by a few children, soon appearing, laden with piece of fuel, he appealed
to him as Father Gillot, and asked whether he could find the street. The
old man seemed at home in the ruins, and led the way readily. 'Did he
know the Widow Laurent's house?'

'Mademoiselle [footnote: This was the title of _bourgeoise_ wives, for
many years, in France.] Laurent! Full well he knew her; a good pious
soul was she, always ready to die for the truth,' he added, as he read
sympathy in the faces round; 'and no doubt she had witnessed a good
confession.'

'Knew he aught of the lady she had lodged?'

'He knew nothing of ladies. Something he had heard of the good widow
having sheltered that shining light, Isaac Gardon, quenched, no doubt,
in the same destruction; but for his part, he had a daughter in one of
the isles out there, who always sent for him if she suspected danger
here on the mainland, and he had only returned to his poor farm a day
or two after Michael-mas.' So saying, he led them to the threshold of a
ruinous building, in the very centre, as it were, of the desolation, and
said, 'That, gentlemen, is where the poor honest widow kept her little
shop.'

Black, burnt, dreary, lay the hospitable abode. The building had fallen,
but the beams of the upper floor had fallen aslant, so as to shelter a
portion of the lower room, where the red-tile pavement, the hearth with
the gray ashes of the harmless home-fire, some unbroken crocks, a chain,
and a _sabot_, were still visible, making the contrast of dreariness
doubly mournful.

Berenger had stepped over the threshold, with his hat in his hand, as if
the ruin were a sacred place to him, and stood gazing in a transfixed,
deadened way. The captain asked where the remains were.

'Our people,' said the old man and the fisher, 'laid them by night in
the earth near the church.'

Just then Berenger's gaze fell on something half hidden under the fallen
timbers. He instantly sprang forward, and used all his strength to drag
it out in so headlong a manner that all the rest hurried to prevent his
reckless proceedings from bringing the heavy beams down on his head.
When brought to light, the object proved to be one of the dark, heavy,
wooden cradles used by the French peasantry, shining with age, but
untouched by fire.

'Look in,' Berenger signed to Philip, his own eyes averted, his mouth
set.

The cradle was empty, totally empty, save for a woolen covering, a
little mattress, and a string of small yellow shells threaded.

Berenger held out his hand, grasped the baby-play thing convulsively,
then dropped upon his knees, clasping his hands over his ashy face, the
string of shells still wound among his fingers. Perhaps he had hitherto
hardly realized the existence of his child, and was solely wrapped up in
the thought of his wife; but the wooden cradle, the homely toy, stirred
up fresh depths of feelings; he saw Eustacie wither tender sweetness as
a mother, he beheld the little likeness of her in the cradle; and oh!
that this should have been the end! Unable to repress a moan of anguish
from a bursting heart, he laid his face against the senseless wood, and
kissed it again and again, then lay motionless against it save for the
long-drawn gasps and sobs that shook his frame. Philip, torn to the
heart, would have almost forcibly drawn him away; but Master Hobbs,
with tears running down his honest cheeks, withheld the boy. 'Don't ye,
Master Thistlewood, 'twill do him good. Poor young gentleman! I know
how it was when I came home and found our first little lad, that we had
thought so much on, had been take. But then he was safe laid in his
own churchyard, and his mother was there to meet me; while your poor
brother---Ah! God comfort him!'

'_Le pauvre Monsieur_!' exclaimed the old peasant, struck at the sight
of his grief, 'was it then his child? And he, no doubt, lying wounded
elsewhere while God's hand was heavy on this place. Yet he might hear
more. They said the priest came down and carried off the little ones to
be bred up in convents.'

'Who?--where?' asked Berenger, raising his head as if catching at a
straw in this drowning of all his hopes.

''Tis true,' added the fisherman. 'It was the holy priest of Nissard,
for he send down to St. Julien for a woman to nurse the babes.'

'To Nissard, then,' said Berenger, rising.

'It is but a chance,' said the old Huguenot; 'many of the innocents were
with their mothers in yonder church. Better for them to perish like the
babes of Bethlehem than to be bred up in the house of Baal; but perhaps
Monsieur is English, and if so he might yet obtain the child. Yet he
must not hope too much.'

'No, for there was many a little corpse among those we buried,' said the
fisher. 'Will the gentleman see the place?'

'Oh, no!' exclaimed Philip, understanding the actions, and indeed many
of the words; 'this place will kill him.'

'To the grave,' said Berenger, as if he heard nothing.

'See,' added Philip, 'there are better things than graves,' and he
pointed to a young green sucker of a vine, which, stimulated by the
burnt soil, had shot up between the tiles of the floor. 'Look, there is
hope to meet you even here.'

Berenger merely answered by gathering a leaf from the vine and putting
it into his bosom; and Philip, whom only extreme need could have thus
inspired, perceived that he accepted it as the augury of hope.
