CHAPTER XXII--ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SIXTH


PART THE FIRST


It had been the wish of the late King, that while his infant son KING
HENRY THE SIXTH, at this time only nine months old, was under age, the
Duke of Gloucester should be appointed Regent.  The English Parliament,
however, preferred to appoint a Council of Regency, with the Duke of
Bedford at its head: to be represented, in his absence only, by the Duke
of Gloucester.  The Parliament would seem to have been wise in this, for
Gloucester soon showed himself to be ambitious and troublesome, and, in
the gratification of his own personal schemes, gave dangerous offence to
the Duke of Burgundy, which was with difficulty adjusted.

As that duke declined the Regency of France, it was bestowed by the poor
French King upon the Duke of Bedford.  But, the French King dying within
two months, the Dauphin instantly asserted his claim to the French
throne, and was actually crowned under the title of CHARLES THE SEVENTH.
The Duke of Bedford, to be a match for him, entered into a friendly
league with the Dukes of Burgundy and Brittany, and gave them his two
sisters in marriage.  War with France was immediately renewed, and the
Perpetual Peace came to an untimely end.

In the first campaign, the English, aided by this alliance, were speedily
successful.  As Scotland, however, had sent the French five thousand men,
and might send more, or attack the North of England while England was
busy with France, it was considered that it would be a good thing to
offer the Scottish King, James, who had been so long imprisoned, his
liberty, on his paying forty thousand pounds for his board and lodging
during nineteen years, and engaging to forbid his subjects from serving
under the flag of France.  It is pleasant to know, not only that the
amiable captive at last regained his freedom upon these terms, but, that
he married a noble English lady, with whom he had been long in love, and
became an excellent King.  I am afraid we have met with some Kings in
this history, and shall meet with some more, who would have been very
much the better, and would have left the world much happier, if they had
been imprisoned nineteen years too.

In the second campaign, the English gained a considerable victory at
Verneuil, in a battle which was chiefly remarkable, otherwise, for their
resorting to the odd expedient of tying their baggage-horses together by
the heads and tails, and jumbling them up with the baggage, so as to
convert them into a sort of live fortification--which was found useful to
the troops, but which I should think was not agreeable to the horses.  For
three years afterwards very little was done, owing to both sides being
too poor for war, which is a very expensive entertainment; but, a council
was then held in Paris, in which it was decided to lay siege to the town
of Orleans, which was a place of great importance to the Dauphin's cause.
An English army of ten thousand men was despatched on this service, under
the command of the Earl of Salisbury, a general of fame.  He being
unfortunately killed early in the siege, the Earl of Suffolk took his
place; under whom (reinforced by SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, who brought up four
hundred waggons laden with salt herrings and other provisions for the
troops, and, beating off the French who tried to intercept him, came
victorious out of a hot skirmish, which was afterwards called in jest the
Battle of the Herrings) the town of Orleans was so completely hemmed in,
that the besieged proposed to yield it up to their countryman the Duke of
Burgundy.  The English general, however, replied that his English men had
won it, so far, by their blood and valour, and that his English men must
have it.  There seemed to be no hope for the town, or for the Dauphin,
who was so dismayed that he even thought of flying to Scotland or to
Spain--when a peasant girl rose up and changed the whole state of
affairs.

The story of this peasant girl I have now to tell.



PART THE SECOND: THE STORY OF JOAN OF ARC


In a remote village among some wild hills in the province of Lorraine,
there lived a countryman whose name was JACQUES D'ARC.  He had a
daughter, JOAN OF ARC, who was at this time in her twentieth year.  She
had been a solitary girl from her childhood; she had often tended sheep
and cattle for whole days where no human figure was seen or human voice
heard; and she had often knelt, for hours together, in the gloomy, empty,
little village chapel, looking up at the altar and at the dim lamp
burning before it, until she fancied that she saw shadowy figures
standing there, and even that she heard them speak to her.  The people in
that part of France were very ignorant and superstitious, and they had
many ghostly tales to tell about what they had dreamed, and what they saw
among the lonely hills when the clouds and the mists were resting on
them.  So, they easily believed that Joan saw strange sights, and they
whispered among themselves that angels and spirits talked to her.

At last, Joan told her father that she had one day been surprised by a
great unearthly light, and had afterwards heard a solemn voice, which
said it was Saint Michael's voice, telling her that she was to go and
help the Dauphin.  Soon after this (she said), Saint Catherine and Saint
Margaret had appeared to her with sparkling crowns upon their heads, and
had encouraged her to be virtuous and resolute.  These visions had
returned sometimes; but the Voices very often; and the voices always
said, 'Joan, thou art appointed by Heaven to go and help the Dauphin!'
She almost always heard them while the chapel bells were ringing.

There is no doubt, now, that Joan believed she saw and heard these
things.  It is very well known that such delusions are a disease which is
not by any means uncommon.  It is probable enough that there were figures
of Saint Michael, and Saint Catherine, and Saint Margaret, in the little
chapel (where they would be very likely to have shining crowns upon their
heads), and that they first gave Joan the idea of those three personages.
She had long been a moping, fanciful girl, and, though she was a very
good girl, I dare say she was a little vain, and wishful for notoriety.

Her father, something wiser than his neighbours, said, 'I tell thee,
Joan, it is thy fancy.  Thou hadst better have a kind husband to take
care of thee, girl, and work to employ thy mind!'  But Joan told him in
reply, that she had taken a vow never to have a husband, and that she
must go as Heaven directed her, to help the Dauphin.

It happened, unfortunately for her father's persuasions, and most
unfortunately for the poor girl, too, that a party of the Dauphin's
enemies found their way into the village while Joan's disorder was at
this point, and burnt the chapel, and drove out the inhabitants.  The
cruelties she saw committed, touched Joan's heart and made her worse.  She
said that the voices and the figures were now continually with her; that
they told her she was the girl who, according to an old prophecy, was to
deliver France; and she must go and help the Dauphin, and must remain
with him until he should be crowned at Rheims: and that she must travel a
long way to a certain lord named BAUDRICOURT, who could and would, bring
her into the Dauphin's presence.

As her father still said, 'I tell thee, Joan, it is thy fancy,' she set
off to find out this lord, accompanied by an uncle, a poor village
wheelwright and cart-maker, who believed in the reality of her visions.
They travelled a long way and went on and on, over a rough country, full
of the Duke of Burgundy's men, and of all kinds of robbers and marauders,
until they came to where this lord was.

When his servants told him that there was a poor peasant girl named Joan
of Arc, accompanied by nobody but an old village wheelwright and cart-
maker, who wished to see him because she was commanded to help the
Dauphin and save France, Baudricourt burst out a-laughing, and bade them
send the girl away.  But, he soon heard so much about her lingering in
the town, and praying in the churches, and seeing visions, and doing harm
to no one, that he sent for her, and questioned her.  As she said the
same things after she had been well sprinkled with holy water as she had
said before the sprinkling, Baudricourt began to think there might be
something in it.  At all events, he thought it worth while to send her on
to the town of Chinon, where the Dauphin was.  So, he bought her a horse,
and a sword, and gave her two squires to conduct her.  As the Voices had
told Joan that she was to wear a man's dress, now, she put one on, and
girded her sword to her side, and bound spurs to her heels, and mounted
her horse and rode away with her two squires.  As to her uncle the
wheelwright, he stood staring at his niece in wonder until she was out of
sight--as well he might--and then went home again.  The best place, too.

Joan and her two squires rode on and on, until they came to Chinon, where
she was, after some doubt, admitted into the Dauphin's presence.  Picking
him out immediately from all his court, she told him that she came
commanded by Heaven to subdue his enemies and conduct him to his
coronation at Rheims.  She also told him (or he pretended so afterwards,
to make the greater impression upon his soldiers) a number of his secrets
known only to himself, and, furthermore, she said there was an old, old
sword in the cathedral of Saint Catherine at Fierbois, marked with five
old crosses on the blade, which Saint Catherine had ordered her to wear.

{Joan of Arc: p158.jpg}

Now, nobody knew anything about this old, old sword, but when the
cathedral came to be examined--which was immediately done--there, sure
enough, the sword was found!  The Dauphin then required a number of grave
priests and bishops to give him their opinion whether the girl derived
her power from good spirits or from evil spirits, which they held
prodigiously long debates about, in the course of which several learned
men fell fast asleep and snored loudly.  At last, when one gruff old
gentleman had said to Joan, 'What language do your Voices speak?' and
when Joan had replied to the gruff old gentleman, 'A pleasanter language
than yours,' they agreed that it was all correct, and that Joan of Arc
was inspired from Heaven.  This wonderful circumstance put new heart into
the Dauphin's soldiers when they heard of it, and dispirited the English
army, who took Joan for a witch.

So Joan mounted horse again, and again rode on and on, until she came to
Orleans.  But she rode now, as never peasant girl had ridden yet.  She
rode upon a white war-horse, in a suit of glittering armour; with the
old, old sword from the cathedral, newly burnished, in her belt; with a
white flag carried before her, upon which were a picture of God, and the
words JESUS MARIA.  In this splendid state, at the head of a great body
of troops escorting provisions of all kinds for the starving inhabitants
of Orleans, she appeared before that beleaguered city.

When the people on the walls beheld her, they cried out 'The Maid is
come!  The Maid of the Prophecy is come to deliver us!'  And this, and
the sight of the Maid fighting at the head of their men, made the French
so bold, and made the English so fearful, that the English line of forts
was soon broken, the troops and provisions were got into the town, and
Orleans was saved.

Joan, henceforth called THE MAID OF ORLEANS, remained within the walls
for a few days, and caused letters to be thrown over, ordering Lord
Suffolk and his Englishmen to depart from before the town according to
the will of Heaven.  As the English general very positively declined to
believe that Joan knew anything about the will of Heaven (which did not
mend the matter with his soldiers, for they stupidly said if she were not
inspired she was a witch, and it was of no use to fight against a witch),
she mounted her white war-horse again, and ordered her white banner to
advance.

The besiegers held the bridge, and some strong towers upon the bridge;
and here the Maid of Orleans attacked them.  The fight was fourteen hours
long.  She planted a scaling ladder with her own hands, and mounted a
tower wall, but was struck by an English arrow in the neck, and fell into
the trench.  She was carried away and the arrow was taken out, during
which operation she screamed and cried with the pain, as any other girl
might have done; but presently she said that the Voices were speaking to
her and soothing her to rest.  After a while, she got up, and was again
foremost in the fight.  When the English who had seen her fall and
supposed her dead, saw this, they were troubled with the strangest fears,
and some of them cried out that they beheld Saint Michael on a white
horse (probably Joan herself) fighting for the French.  They lost the
bridge, and lost the towers, and next day set their chain of forts on
fire, and left the place.

But as Lord Suffolk himself retired no farther than the town of Jargeau,
which was only a few miles off, the Maid of Orleans besieged him there,
and he was taken prisoner.  As the white banner scaled the wall, she was
struck upon the head with a stone, and was again tumbled down into the
ditch; but, she only cried all the more, as she lay there, 'On, on, my
countrymen!  And fear nothing, for the Lord hath delivered them into our
hands!'  After this new success of the Maid's, several other fortresses
and places which had previously held out against the Dauphin were
delivered up without a battle; and at Patay she defeated the remainder of
the English army, and set up her victorious white banner on a field where
twelve hundred Englishmen lay dead.

She now urged the Dauphin (who always kept out of the way when there was
any fighting) to proceed to Rheims, as the first part of her mission was
accomplished; and to complete the whole by being crowned there.  The
Dauphin was in no particular hurry to do this, as Rheims was a long way
off, and the English and the Duke of Burgundy were still strong in the
country through which the road lay.  However, they set forth, with ten
thousand men, and again the Maid of Orleans rode on and on, upon her
white war-horse, and in her shining armour.  Whenever they came to a town
which yielded readily, the soldiers believed in her; but, whenever they
came to a town which gave them any trouble, they began to murmur that she
was an impostor.  The latter was particularly the case at Troyes, which
finally yielded, however, through the persuasion of one Richard, a friar
of the place.  Friar Richard was in the old doubt about the Maid of
Orleans, until he had sprinkled her well with holy water, and had also
well sprinkled the threshold of the gate by which she came into the city.
Finding that it made no change in her or the gate, he said, as the other
grave old gentlemen had said, that it was all right, and became her great
ally.

So, at last, by dint of riding on and on, the Maid of Orleans, and the
Dauphin, and the ten thousand sometimes believing and sometimes
unbelieving men, came to Rheims.  And in the great cathedral of Rheims,
the Dauphin actually was crowned Charles the Seventh in a great assembly
of the people.  Then, the Maid, who with her white banner stood beside
the King in that hour of his triumph, kneeled down upon the pavement at
his feet, and said, with tears, that what she had been inspired to do,
was done, and that the only recompense she asked for, was, that she
should now have leave to go back to her distant home, and her sturdily
incredulous father, and her first simple escort the village wheelwright
and cart-maker.  But the King said 'No!' and made her and her family as
noble as a King could, and settled upon her the income of a Count.

Ah! happy had it been for the Maid of Orleans, if she had resumed her
rustic dress that day, and had gone home to the little chapel and the
wild hills, and had forgotten all these things, and had been a good man's
wife, and had heard no stranger voices than the voices of little
children!

It was not to be, and she continued helping the King (she did a world for
him, in alliance with Friar Richard), and trying to improve the lives of
the coarse soldiers, and leading a religious, an unselfish, and a modest
life, herself, beyond any doubt.  Still, many times she prayed the King
to let her go home; and once she even took off her bright armour and hung
it up in a church, meaning never to wear it more.  But, the King always
won her back again--while she was of any use to him--and so she went on
and on and on, to her doom.

When the Duke of Bedford, who was a very able man, began to be active for
England, and, by bringing the war back into France and by holding the
Duke of Burgundy to his faith, to distress and disturb Charles very much,
Charles sometimes asked the Maid of Orleans what the Voices said about
it?  But, the Voices had become (very like ordinary voices in perplexed
times) contradictory and confused, so that now they said one thing, and
now said another, and the Maid lost credit every day.  Charles marched on
Paris, which was opposed to him, and attacked the suburb of Saint Honore.
In this fight, being again struck down into the ditch, she was abandoned
by the whole army.  She lay unaided among a heap of dead, and crawled out
how she could.  Then, some of her believers went over to an opposition
Maid, Catherine of La Rochelle, who said she was inspired to tell where
there were treasures of buried money--though she never did--and then Joan
accidentally broke the old, old sword, and others said that her power was
broken with it.  Finally, at the siege of Compiegne, held by the Duke of
Burgundy, where she did valiant service, she was basely left alone in a
retreat, though facing about and fighting to the last; and an archer
pulled her off her horse.

O the uproar that was made, and the thanksgivings that were sung, about
the capture of this one poor country-girl!  O the way in which she was
demanded to be tried for sorcery and heresy, and anything else you like,
by the Inquisitor-General of France, and by this great man, and by that
great man, until it is wearisome to think of! She was bought at last by
the Bishop of Beauvais for ten thousand francs, and was shut up in her
narrow prison: plain Joan of Arc again, and Maid of Orleans no more.

I should never have done if I were to tell you how they had Joan out to
examine her, and cross-examine her, and re-examine her, and worry her
into saying anything and everything; and how all sorts of scholars and
doctors bestowed their utmost tediousness upon her.  Sixteen times she
was brought out and shut up again, and worried, and entrapped, and argued
with, until she was heart-sick of the dreary business.  On the last
occasion of this kind she was brought into a burial-place at Rouen,
dismally decorated with a scaffold, and a stake and faggots, and the
executioner, and a pulpit with a friar therein, and an awful sermon
ready.  It is very affecting to know that even at that pass the poor girl
honoured the mean vermin of a King, who had so used her for his purposes
and so abandoned her; and, that while she had been regardless of
reproaches heaped upon herself, she spoke out courageously for him.

It was natural in one so young to hold to life.  To save her life, she
signed a declaration prepared for her--signed it with a cross, for she
couldn't write--that all her visions and Voices had come from the Devil.
Upon her recanting the past, and protesting that she would never wear a
man's dress in future, she was condemned to imprisonment for life, 'on
the bread of sorrow and the water of affliction.'

But, on the bread of sorrow and the water of affliction, the visions and
the Voices soon returned.  It was quite natural that they should do so,
for that kind of disease is much aggravated by fasting, loneliness, and
anxiety of mind.  It was not only got out of Joan that she considered
herself inspired again, but, she was taken in a man's dress, which had
been left--to entrap her--in her prison, and which she put on, in her
solitude; perhaps, in remembrance of her past glories, perhaps, because
the imaginary Voices told her.  For this relapse into the sorcery and
heresy and anything else you like, she was sentenced to be burnt to
death.  And, in the market-place of Rouen, in the hideous dress which the
monks had invented for such spectacles; with priests and bishops sitting
in a gallery looking on, though some had the Christian grace to go away,
unable to endure the infamous scene; this shrieking girl--last seen
amidst the smoke and fire, holding a crucifix between her hands; last
heard, calling upon Christ--was burnt to ashes.  They threw her ashes
into the river Seine; but they will rise against her murderers on the
last day.

From the moment of her capture, neither the French King nor one single
man in all his court raised a finger to save her.  It is no defence of
them that they may have never really believed in her, or that they may
have won her victories by their skill and bravery.  The more they
pretended to believe in her, the more they had caused her to believe in
herself; and she had ever been true to them, ever brave, ever nobly
devoted.  But, it is no wonder, that they, who were in all things false
to themselves, false to one another, false to their country, false to
Heaven, false to Earth, should be monsters of ingratitude and treachery
to a helpless peasant girl.

In the picturesque old town of Rouen, where weeds and grass grow high on
the cathedral towers, and the venerable Norman streets are still warm in
the blessed sunlight though the monkish fires that once gleamed horribly
upon them have long grown cold, there is a statue of Joan of Arc, in the
scene of her last agony, the square to which she has given its present
name.  I know some statues of modern times--even in the World's
metropolis, I think--which commemorate less constancy, less earnestness,
smaller claims upon the world's attention, and much greater impostors.



PART THE THIRD


Bad deeds seldom prosper, happily for mankind; and the English cause
gained no advantage from the cruel death of Joan of Arc.  For a long
time, the war went heavily on.  The Duke of Bedford died; the alliance
with the Duke of Burgundy was broken; and Lord Talbot became a great
general on the English side in France.  But, two of the consequences of
wars are, Famine--because the people cannot peacefully cultivate the
ground--and Pestilence, which comes of want, misery, and suffering.  Both
these horrors broke out in both countries, and lasted for two wretched
years.  Then, the war went on again, and came by slow degrees to be so
badly conducted by the English government, that, within twenty years from
the execution of the Maid of Orleans, of all the great French conquests,
the town of Calais alone remained in English hands.

While these victories and defeats were taking place in the course of
time, many strange things happened at home.  The young King, as he grew
up, proved to be very unlike his great father, and showed himself a
miserable puny creature.  There was no harm in him--he had a great
aversion to shedding blood: which was something--but, he was a weak,
silly, helpless young man, and a mere shuttlecock to the great lordly
battledores about the Court.

Of these battledores, Cardinal Beaufort, a relation of the King, and the
Duke of Gloucester, were at first the most powerful.  The Duke of
Gloucester had a wife, who was nonsensically accused of practising
witchcraft to cause the King's death and lead to her husband's coming to
the throne, he being the next heir.  She was charged with having, by the
help of a ridiculous old woman named Margery (who was called a witch),
made a little waxen doll in the King's likeness, and put it before a slow
fire that it might gradually melt away.  It was supposed, in such cases,
that the death of the person whom the doll was made to represent, was
sure to happen.  Whether the duchess was as ignorant as the rest of them,
and really did make such a doll with such an intention, I don't know;
but, you and I know very well that she might have made a thousand dolls,
if she had been stupid enough, and might have melted them all, without
hurting the King or anybody else.  However, she was tried for it, and so
was old Margery, and so was one of the duke's chaplains, who was charged
with having assisted them.  Both he and Margery were put to death, and
the duchess, after being taken on foot and bearing a lighted candle,
three times round the City, as a penance, was imprisoned for life.  The
duke, himself, took all this pretty quietly, and made as little stir
about the matter as if he were rather glad to be rid of the duchess.

But, he was not destined to keep himself out of trouble long.  The royal
shuttlecock being three-and-twenty, the battledores were very anxious to
get him married.  The Duke of Gloucester wanted him to marry a daughter
of the Count of Armagnac; but, the Cardinal and the Earl of Suffolk were
all for MARGARET, the daughter of the King of Sicily, who they knew was a
resolute, ambitious woman and would govern the King as she chose.  To
make friends with this lady, the Earl of Suffolk, who went over to
arrange the match, consented to accept her for the King's wife without
any fortune, and even to give up the two most valuable possessions
England then had in France.  So, the marriage was arranged, on terms very
advantageous to the lady; and Lord Suffolk brought her to England, and
she was married at Westminster.  On what pretence this queen and her
party charged the Duke of Gloucester with high treason within a couple of
years, it is impossible to make out, the matter is so confused; but, they
pretended that the King's life was in danger, and they took the duke
prisoner.  A fortnight afterwards, he was found dead in bed (they said),
and his body was shown to the people, and Lord Suffolk came in for the
best part of his estates.  You know by this time how strangely liable
state prisoners were to sudden death.

If Cardinal Beaufort had any hand in this matter, it did him no good, for
he died within six weeks; thinking it very hard and curious--at eighty
years old!--that he could not live to be Pope.

This was the time when England had completed her loss of all her great
French conquests.  The people charged the loss principally upon the Earl
of Suffolk, now a duke, who had made those easy terms about the Royal
Marriage, and who, they believed, had even been bought by France.  So he
was impeached as a traitor, on a great number of charges, but chiefly on
accusations of having aided the French King, and of designing to make his
own son King of England.  The Commons and the people being violent
against him, the King was made (by his friends) to interpose to save him,
by banishing him for five years, and proroguing the Parliament.  The duke
had much ado to escape from a London mob, two thousand strong, who lay in
wait for him in St. Giles's fields; but, he got down to his own estates
in Suffolk, and sailed away from Ipswich.  Sailing across the Channel, he
sent into Calais to know if he might land there; but, they kept his boat
and men in the harbour, until an English ship, carrying a hundred and
fifty men and called the Nicholas of the Tower, came alongside his little
vessel, and ordered him on board.  'Welcome, traitor, as men say,' was
the captain's grim and not very respectful salutation.  He was kept on
board, a prisoner, for eight-and-forty hours, and then a small boat
appeared rowing toward the ship.  As this boat came nearer, it was seen
to have in it a block, a rusty sword, and an executioner in a black mask.
The duke was handed down into it, and there his head was cut off with six
strokes of the rusty sword.  Then, the little boat rowed away to Dover
beach, where the body was cast out, and left until the duchess claimed
it.  By whom, high in authority, this murder was committed, has never
appeared.  No one was ever punished for it.

There now arose in Kent an Irishman, who gave himself the name of
Mortimer, but whose real name was JACK CADE.  Jack, in imitation of Wat
Tyler, though he was a very different and inferior sort of man, addressed
the Kentish men upon their wrongs, occasioned by the bad government of
England, among so many battledores and such a poor shuttlecock; and the
Kentish men rose up to the number of twenty thousand.  Their place of
assembly was Blackheath, where, headed by Jack, they put forth two
papers, which they called 'The Complaint of the Commons of Kent,' and
'The Requests of the Captain of the Great Assembly in Kent.'  They then
retired to Sevenoaks.  The royal army coming up with them here, they beat
it and killed their general.  Then, Jack dressed himself in the dead
general's armour, and led his men to London.

Jack passed into the City from Southwark, over the bridge, and entered it
in triumph, giving the strictest orders to his men not to plunder.  Having
made a show of his forces there, while the citizens looked on quietly, he
went back into Southwark in good order, and passed the night.  Next day,
he came back again, having got hold in the meantime of Lord Say, an
unpopular nobleman.  Says Jack to the Lord Mayor and judges: 'Will you be
so good as to make a tribunal in Guildhall, and try me this nobleman?'
The court being hastily made, he was found guilty, and Jack and his men
cut his head off on Cornhill.  They also cut off the head of his son-in-
law, and then went back in good order to Southwark again.

But, although the citizens could bear the beheading of an unpopular lord,
they could not bear to have their houses pillaged.  And it did so happen
that Jack, after dinner--perhaps he had drunk a little too much--began to
plunder the house where he lodged; upon which, of course, his men began
to imitate him.  Wherefore, the Londoners took counsel with Lord Scales,
who had a thousand soldiers in the Tower; and defended London Bridge, and
kept Jack and his people out.  This advantage gained, it was resolved by
divers great men to divide Jack's army in the old way, by making a great
many promises on behalf of the state, that were never intended to be
performed.  This _did_ divide them; some of Jack's men saying that they
ought to take the conditions which were offered, and others saying that
they ought not, for they were only a snare; some going home at once;
others staying where they were; and all doubting and quarrelling among
themselves.
