the humours of the evening--"it was prudently done to keep light tongued
companions out of the way. But St. John's absenting himself from our
solemn revels, so long before decreed, is flat mutiny and disclamation
of allegiance. Or, if the knight be really the prisoner of illness and
melancholy, we must ourself grace him with a visit, seeing there can be
no better cure for those maladies than our own presence, and a gentle
kiss of the calabash. Forward, ushers, minstrels, guard, and attendants!
Bear on high the great emblem of our dignity. Up with the calabash, I
say, and let the merry men who carry these firkins, which are to supply
the wine cup with their life blood, be chosen with regard to their state
of steadiness. Their burden is weighty and precious, and if the fault
is not in our eyes, they seem to us to reel and stagger more than were
desirable. Now, move on, sirs, and let our minstrels blow their blythest
and boldest."

On they went with tipsy mirth and jollity, the numerous torches flashing
their red light against the small windows of the narrow streets, from
whence nightcapped householders, and sometimes their wives to boot,
peeped out by stealth to see what wild wassail disturbed the peaceful
streets at that unwonted hour. At length the jolly train halted before
the door of Sir John Ramorny's house, which a small court divided from
the street.

Here they knocked, thundered, and halloo'd, with many denunciations of
vengeance against the recusants who refused to open the gates. The least
punishment threatened was imprisonment in an empty hogshead, within the
massamore [principal dungeon] of the Prince of Pastimes' feudal palace,
videlicet, the ale cellar. But Eviot, Ramorny's page, heard and knew
well the character of the intruders who knocked so boldly, and thought
it better, considering his master's condition, to make no answer at
all, in hopes that the revel would pass on, than to attempt to deprecate
their proceedings, which he knew would be to no purpose. His master's
bedroom looking into a little garden, his page hoped he might not be
disturbed by the noise; and he was confident in the strength of the
outward gate, upon which he resolved they should beat till they tired
themselves, or till the tone of their drunken humour should change. The
revellers accordingly seemed likely to exhaust themselves in the noise
they made by shouting and beating the door, when their mock prince
(alas! too really such) upbraided them as lazy and dull followers of the
god of wine and of mirth.

"Bring forward," he said, "our key, yonder it lies, and apply it to this
rebellious gate."

The key he pointed at was a large beam of wood, left on one side of the
street, with the usual neglect of order characteristic of a Scottish
borough of the period.

The shouting men of Ind instantly raised it in their arms, and,
supporting it by their united strength, ran against the door with such
force, that hasp, hinge, and staple jingled, and gave fair promise of
yielding. Eviot did not choose to wait the extremity of this battery: he
came forth into the court, and after some momentary questions for form's
sake, caused the porter to undo the gate, as if he had for the first
time recognised the midnight visitors.

"False slave of an unfaithful master," said the Prince, "where is our
disloyal subject, Sir John Ramorny, who has proved recreant to our
summons?"

"My lord," said Eviot, bowing at once to the real and to the assumed
dignity of the leader, "my master is just now very much indisposed: he
has taken an opiate--and--your Highness must excuse me if I do my duty
to him in saying, he cannot be spoken with without danger of his life."

"Tush! tell me not of danger, Master Teviot--Cheviot--Eviot--what is it
they call thee? But show me thy master's chamber, or rather undo me the
door of his lodging, and I will make a good guess at it myself. Bear
high the calabash, my brave followers, and see that you spill not a drop
of the liquor, which Dan Bacchus has sent for the cure of all diseases
of the body and cares of the mind. Advance it, I say, and let us see the
holy rind which incloses such precious liquor."

The Prince made his way into the house accordingly, and, acquainted
with its interior, ran upstairs, followed by Eviot, in vain imploring
silence, and, with the rest of the rabble rout, burst into the room of
the wounded master of the lodging.

He who has experienced the sensation of being compelled to sleep in
spite of racking bodily pains by the administration of a strong opiate,
and of having been again startled by noise and violence out of the
unnatural state of insensibility in which he had been plunged by the
potency of the medicine, may be able to imagine the confused and alarmed
state of Sir John Ramorny's mind, and the agony of his body, which
acted and reacted upon each other. If we add to these feelings the
consciousness of a criminal command, sent forth and in the act of being
executed, it may give us some idea of an awakening to which, in the mind
of the party, eternal sleep would be a far preferable doom. The groan
which he uttered as the first symptom of returning sensation had
something in it so terrific, that even the revellers were awed into
momentary silence; and as, from the half recumbent posture in which
he had gone to sleep, he looked around the room, filled with fantastic
shapes, rendered still more so by his disturbed intellects, he muttered
to himself:

"It is thus, then, after all, and the legend is true! These are fiends,
and I am condemned for ever! The fire is not external, but I feel it--I
feel it at my heart--burning as if the seven times heated furnace were
doing its work within!"

While he cast ghastly looks around him, and struggled to recover some
share of recollection, Eviot approached the Prince, and, falling on his
knees, implored him to allow the apartment to be cleared.

"It may," he said, "cost my master his life."

"Never fear, Cheviot," replied the Duke of Rothsay; "were he at the
gates of death, here is what should make the fiends relinquish their
prey. Advance the calabash, my masters."

"It is death for him to taste it in his present state," said Eviot: "if
he drinks wine he dies."

"Some one must drink it for him--he shall be cured vicariously; and
may our great Dan Bacchus deign to Sir John Ramorny the comfort, the
elevation of heart, the lubrication of lungs, and lightness of fancy,
which are his choicest gifts, while the faithful follower, who quaffs
in his stead, shall have the qualms, the sickness, the racking of the
nerves, the dimness of the eyes, and the throbbing of the brain, with
which our great master qualifies gifts which would else make us too like
the gods. What say you, Eviot? will you be the faithful follower that
will quaff in your lord's behalf, and as his representative? Do this,
and we will hold ourselves contented to depart, for, methinks, our
subject doth look something ghastly."

"I would do anything in my slight power," said Eviot, "to save my master
from a draught which may be his death, and your Grace from the sense
that you had occasioned it. But here is one who will perform the feat of
goodwill, and thank your Highness to boot."

"Whom have we here?" said the Prince, "a butcher, and I think fresh from
his office. Do butchers ply their craft on Fastern's Eve? Foh, how he
smells of blood!"

This was spoken of Bonthron, who, partly surprised at the tumult in the
house, where he had expected to find all dark and silent, and partly
stupid through the wine which the wretch had drunk in great quantities,
stood in the threshold of the door, staring at the scene before him,
with his buff coat splashed with blood, and a bloody axe in his hand,
exhibiting a ghastly and disgusting spectacle to the revellers, who
felt, though they could not tell why, fear as well as dislike at his
presence.

As they approached the calabash to this ungainly and truculent looking
savage, and as he extended a hand soiled as it seemed with blood, to
grasp it, the Prince called out:

"Downstairs with him! let not the wretch drink in our presence; find him
some other vessel than our holy calabash, the emblem of our revels: a
swine's trough were best, if it could be come by. Away with him! let him
be drenched to purpose, in atonement for his master's sobriety. Leave me
alone with Sir John Ramorny and his page; by my honour, I like not yon
ruffian's looks."

The attendants of the Prince left the apartment, and Eviot alone
remained.

"I fear," said the Prince, approaching the bed in different form from
that which he had hitherto used--"I fear, my dear Sir John, that this
visit has been unwelcome; but it is your own fault. Although you know
our old wont, and were your self participant of our schemes for the
evening, you have not come near us since St. Valentine's; it is now
Fastern's Even, and the desertion is flat disobedience and treason to
our kingdom of mirth and the statutes of the calabash."

Ramorny raised his head, and fixed a wavering eye upon the Prince; then
signed to Eviot to give him something to drink. A large cup of ptisan
was presented by the page, which the sick man swallowed with eager and
trembling haste. He then repeatedly used the stimulating essence left
for the purpose by the leech, and seemed to collect his scattered
senses.

"Let me feel your pulse, dear Ramorny," said the Prince; "I know
something of that craft. How! Do your offer me the left hand, Sir John?
that is neither according to the rules of medicine nor of courtesy."

"The right has already done its last act in your Highness's service,"
muttered the patient in a low and broken tone.

"How mean you by that?" said the Prince. "I am aware thy follower, Black
Quentin, lost a hand; but he can steal with the other as much as will
bring him to the gallows, so his fate cannot be much altered."

"It is not that fellow who has had the loss in your Grace's service: it
is I, John of Ramorny."

"You!" said the Prince; "you jest with me, or the opiate still masters
your reason."

"If the juice of all the poppies in Egypt were blended in one draught,"
said Ramorny, "it would lose influence over me when I look upon this."
He drew his right arm from beneath the cover of the bedclothes, and
extending it towards the Prince, wrapped as it was in dressings, "Were
these undone and removed," he said, "your Highness would see that a
bloody stump is all that remains of a hand ever ready to unsheath the
sword at your Grace's slightest bidding."

Rothsay started back in horror. "This," he said, "must be avenged!"

"It is avenged in small part," said Ramorny--"that is, I thought I saw
Bonthron but now; or was it that the dream of hell that first arose in
my mind when I awakened summoned up an image so congenial? Eviot, call
the miscreant--that is, if he is fit to appear."

Eviot retired, and presently returned with Bonthron, whom he had rescued
from the penance, to him no unpleasing infliction, of a second calabash
of wine, the brute having gorged the first without much apparent
alteration in his demeanour.

"Eviot," said the Prince, "let not that beast come nigh me. My soul
recoils from him in fear and disgust: there is something in his looks
alien from my nature, and which I shudder at as at a loathsome snake,
from which my instinct revolts."

"First hear him speak, my lord," answered Ramorny; "unless a wineskin
were to talk, nothing could use fewer words. Hast thou dealt with him,
Bonthron?"

The savage raised the axe which he still held in his hand, and brought
it down again edgeways.

"Good. How knew you your man? the night, I am told, is dark."

"By sight and sound, garb, gait, and whistle."

"Enough, vanish! and, Eviot, let him have gold and wine to his brutish
contentment. Vanish! and go thou with him."

"And whose death is achieved?" said the Prince, released from the
feelings of disgust and horror under which he suffered while the
assassin was in presence. "I trust this is but a jest! Else must I call
it a rash and savage deed. Who has had the hard lot to be butchered by
that bloody and brutal slave?"

"One little better than himself," said the patient, "a wretched artisan,
to whom, however, fate gave the power of reducing Ramorny to a mutilated
cripple--a curse go with his base spirit! His miserable life is but
to my revenge what a drop of water would be to a furnace. I must speak
briefly, for my ideas again wander: it is only the necessity of the
moment which keeps them together; as a thong combines a handful of
arrows. You are in danger, my lord--I speak it with certainty: you have
braved Douglas, and offended your uncle, displeased your father, though
that were a trifle, were it not for the rest."

"I am sorry I have displeased my father," said the Prince, entirely
diverted from so insignificant a thing as the slaughter of an artisan by
the more important subject touched upon, "if indeed it be so. But if
I live, the strength of the Douglas shall be broken, and the craft of
Albany shall little avail him!"

"Ay--if--if. My lord," said Ramorny, "with such opposites as you have,
you must not rest upon if or but; you must resolve at once to slay or be
slain."

"How mean you, Ramorny? Your fever makes you rave" answered the Duke of
Rothsay.

"No, my lord," said Ramorny, "were my frenzy at the highest, the
thoughts that pass through my mind at this moment would qualify it. It
may be that regret for my own loss has made me desperate, that anxious
thoughts for your Highness's safety have made me nourish bold designs;
but I have all the judgment with which Heaven has gifted me, when I tell
you that, if ever you would brook the Scottish crown, nay, more, if ever
you would see another St. Valentine's Day, you must--"

"What is it that I must do, Ramorny?" said the Prince, with an air of
dignity; "nothing unworthy of myself, I hope?"

"Nothing, certainly, unworthy or misbecoming a prince of Scotland, if
the bloodstained annals of our country tell the tale truly; but that
which may well shock the nerves of a prince of mimes and merry makers."

"Thou art severe, Sir John Ramorny," said the Duke of Rothsay, with an
air of displeasure; "but thou hast dearly bought a right to censure us
by what thou hast lost in our cause."

"My Lord of Rothsay," said the knight, "the chirurgeon who dressed this
mutilated stump told me that the more I felt the pain his knife and
brand inflicted, the better was my chance of recovery. I shall not,
therefore, hesitate to hurt your feelings, while by doing so I may be
able to bring you to a sense of what is necessary for your safety. Your
Grace has been the pupil of mirthful folly too long; you must now assume
manly policy, or be crushed like a butterfly on the bosom of the flower
you are sporting on."

"I think I know your cast of morals, Sir John: you are weary of merry
folly--the churchmen call it vice--and long for a little serious crime.
A murder, now, or a massacre, would enhance the flavour of debauch, as
the taste of the olive gives zest to wine. But my worst acts are but
merry malice: I have no relish for the bloody trade, and abhor to see or
hear of its being acted even on the meanest caitiff. Should I ever fill
the throne, I suppose, like my father before me, I must drop my own
name, and be dubbed Robert, in honour of the Bruce; well, an if it be
so, every Scots lad shall have his flag on in one hand and the other
around his lass's neck, and manhood shall be tried by kisses and
bumpers, not by dirks and dourlachs; and they shall write on my grave,
'Here lies Robert, fourth of his name. He won not battles like Robert
the First. He rose not from a count to a king like Robert the Second.
He founded not churches like Robert the Third, but was contented to live
and die king of good fellows!' Of all my two centuries of ancestors, I
would only emulate the fame of--

"Old King Coul, Who had a brown bowl."

"My gracious lord," said Ramorny, "let me remind you that your joyous
revels involve serious evils. If I had lost this hand in fighting to
attain for your Grace some important advantage over your too powerful
enemies, the loss would never have grieved me. But to be reduced from
helmet and steel coat to biggin and gown in a night brawl--"

"Why, there again now, Sir John," interrupted the reckless Prince. "How
canst thou be so unworthy as to be for ever flinging thy bloody hand in
my face, as the ghost of Gaskhall threw his head at Sir William Wallace?
Bethink thee, thou art more unreasonable than Fawdyon himself; for wight
Wallace had swept his head off in somewhat a hasty humour, whereas I
would gladly stick thy hand on again, were that possible. And, hark
thee, since that cannot be, I will get thee such a substitute as the
steel hand of the old knight of Carslogie, with which he greeted his
friends, caressed his wife, braved his antagonists, and did all that
might be done by a hand of flesh and blood, in offence or defence.
Depend on it, John Ramorny, we have much that is superfluous about us.
Man can see with one eye, hear with one ear, touch with one hand, smell
with one nostril; and why we should have two of each, unless to supply
an accidental loss or injury, I for one am at a loss to conceive."

Sir John Ramorny turned from the Prince with a low groan.

"Nay, Sir John;" said the Duke, "I am quite serious. You know the truth
touching the legend of Steel Hand of Carslogie better than I, since he
was your own neighbour. In his time that curious engine could only be
made in Rome; but I will wager an hundred marks with you that, let the
Perth armourer have the use of it for a pattern, Henry of the Wynd
will execute as complete an imitation as all the smiths in Rome could
accomplish, with all the cardinals to bid a blessing on the work."

"I could venture to accept your wager, my lord," answered Ramorny,
bitterly, "but there is no time for foolery. You have dismissed me from
your service, at command of your uncle?"

"At command of my father," answered the Prince.

"Upon whom your uncle's commands are imperative," replied Ramorny. "I
am a disgraced man, thrown aside, as I may now fling away my right hand
glove, as a thing useless. Yet my head might help you, though my hand
be gone. Is your Grace disposed to listen to me for one word of serious
import, for I am much exhausted, and feel my force sinking under me?"

"Speak your pleasure," said the Prince; "thy loss binds me to hear
thee, thy bloody stump is a sceptre to control me. Speak, then, but be
merciful in thy strength of privilege."

"I will be brief for mine own sake as well as thine; indeed, I have but
little to say. Douglas places himself immediately at the head of his
vassals. He will assemble, in the name of King Robert, thirty thousand
Borderers, whom he will shortly after lead into the interior, to demand
that the Duke of Rothsay receive, or rather restore, his daughter to
the rank and privileges of his Duchess. King Robert will yield to any
conditions which may secure peace. What will the Duke do?"

"The Duke of Rothsay loves peace," said the Prince, haughtily; "but he
never feared war. Ere he takes back yonder proud peat to his table
and his bed, at the command of her father, Douglas must be King of
Scotland."

"Be it so; but even this is the less pressing peril, especially as it
threatens open violence, for the Douglas works not in secret."

"What is there which presses, and keeps us awake at this late hour? I am
a weary man, thou a wounded one, and the very tapers are blinking, as if
tired of our conference."

"Tell me, then, who is it that rules this kingdom of Scotland?" said
Ramorny.

"Robert, third of the name," said the Prince, raising his bonnet as he
spoke; "and long may he sway the sceptre!"

"True, and amen," answered Ramorny; "but who sways King Robert, and
dictates almost every measure which the good King pursues?"

"My Lord of Albany, you would say," replied the Prince. "Yes, it is true
my father is guided almost entirely by the counsels of his brother; nor
can we blame him in our consciences, Sir John Ramorny, for little help
hath he had from his son."

"Let us help him now, my lord," said Ramorny. "I am possessor of a
dreadful secret: Albany hath been trafficking with me, to join him
in taking your Grace's life! He offers full pardon for the past, high
favour for the future."

"How, man--my life? I trust, though, thou dost only mean my kingdom? It
were impious! He is my father's brother--they sat on the knees of the
same father--lay in the bosom of the same mother. Out on thee, man, what
follies they make thy sickbed believe!"

"Believe, indeed!" said Ramorny. "It is new to me to be termed
credulous. But the man through whom Albany communicated his temptations
is one whom all will believe so soon as he hints at mischief--even the
medicaments which are prepared by his hands have a relish of poison."

"Tush! such a slave would slander a saint," replied the Prince. "Thou
art duped for once, Ramorny, shrewd as thou art. My uncle of Albany
is ambitious, and would secure for himself and for his house a larger
portion of power and wealth than he ought in reason to desire. But to
suppose he would dethrone or slay his brother's son--Fie, Ramorny! put
me not to quote the old saw, that evil doers are evil dreaders. It is
your suspicion, not your knowledge, which speaks."

"Your Grace is fatally deluded. I will put it to an issue. The Duke of
Albany is generally hated for his greed and covetousness. Your Highness
is, it may be, more beloved than--"

Ramorny stopped, the Prince calmly filled up the blank: "More beloved
than I am honoured. It is so I would have it, Ramorny."

"At least," said Ramorny, "you are more beloved than you are feared,
and that is no safe condition for a prince. But give me your honour and
knightly word that you will not resent what good service I shall do in
your behalf, and lend me your signet to engage friends in your name,
and the Duke of Albany shall not assume authority in this court till the
wasted hand which once terminated this stump shall be again united to
the body, and acting in obedience to the dictates of my mind."

"You would not venture to dip your hands in royal blood?" said the
Prince sternly.

"Fie, my lord, at no rate. Blood need not be shed; life may, nay, will,
be extinguished of itself. For want of trimming it with fresh oil, or
screening it from a breath of wind, the quivering light will die in the
socket. To suffer a man to die is not to kill him."

"True--I had forgot that policy. Well, then, suppose my uncle Albany
does not continue to live--I think that must be the phrase--who then
rules the court of Scotland?"

"Robert the Third, with consent, advice, and authority of the most
mighty David, Duke of Rothsay, Lieutenant of the Kingdom, and alter ego;
in whose favour, indeed, the good King, wearied with the fatigues and
troubles of sovereignty, will, I guess, be well disposed to abdicate. So
long live our brave young monarch, King David the Third!

"Ille manu fortis Anglis ludebit in hortis."

"And our father and predecessor," said Rothsay, "will he continue to
live to pray for us, as our beadsman, by whose favour he holds the
privilege of laying his grey hairs in the grave as soon, and no earlier,
than the course of nature permits, or must he also encounter some of
those negligences in consequence of which men cease to continue to live,
and can change the limits of a prison, or of a convent resembling one,
for the dark and tranquil cell, where the priests say that the wicked
cease from troubling and the weary are at rest?"

"You speak in jest, my lord," replied Ramorny: "to harm the good old
King were equally unnatural and impolitic."

"Why shrink from that, man, when thy whole scheme," answered the Prince,
in stern displeasure, "is one lesson of unnatural guilt, mixed with
short sighted ambition? If the King of Scotland can scarcely make
head against his nobles, even now when he can hold up before them an
unsullied and honourable banner, who would follow a prince that is
blackened with the death of an uncle and the imprisonment of a father?
Why, man, thy policy were enough to revolt a heathen divan, to say
nought of the council of a Christian nation. Thou wert my tutor,
Ramorny, and perhaps I might justly upbraid thy lessons and example for
some of the follies which men chide in me. Perhaps, if it had not been
for thee, I had not been standing at midnight in this fool's guise
(looking at his dress), to hear an ambitious profligate propose to me
the murder of an uncle, the dethronement of the best of fathers. Since
it is my fault as well as thine that has sunk me so deep in the gulf of
infamy, it were unjust that thou alone shouldst die for it. But dare not
to renew this theme to me, on peril of thy life! I will proclaim thee to
my father--to Albany--to Scotland--throughout its length and breadth.
As many market crosses as are in the land shall have morsels of
the traitor's carcass, who dare counsel such horrors to the heir of
Scotland. Well hope I, indeed, that the fever of thy wound, and the
intoxicating influence of the cordials which act on thy infirm brain,
have this night operated on thee, rather than any fixed purpose."

"In sooth, my lord," said Ramorny, "if I have said any thing which could
so greatly exasperate your Highness, it must have been by excess of
zeal, mingled with imbecility of understanding. Surely I, of all men, am
least likely to propose ambitious projects with a prospect of advantage
to myself! Alas! my only future views must be to exchange lance and
saddle for the breviary and the confessional. The convent of Lindores
must receive the maimed and impoverished knight of Ramorny, who will
there have ample leisure to meditate upon the text, 'Put not thy faith
in princes.'"

"It is a goodly purpose," said the Prince, "and we will not be lacking
to promote it. Our separation, I thought, would have been but for a
time. It must now be perpetual. Certainly, after such talk as we have
held, it were meet that we should live asunder. But the convent of
Lindores, or what ever other house receives thee, shall be richly
endowed and highly favoured by us. And now, Sir John of Ramorny,
sleep--sleep--and forget this evil omened conversation, in which the
fever of disease and of wine has rather, I trust, held colloquy than
your own proper thoughts. Light to the door, Eviot."

A call from Eviot summoned the attendants of the Prince, who had been
sleeping on the staircase and hall, exhausted by the revels of the
evening.

"Is there none amongst you sober?" said the Duke of Rothsay, disgusted
by the appearance of his attendants.

"Not a man--not a man," answered the followers, with a drunken shout,
"we are none of us traitors to the Emperor of Merry makers!"

"And are all of you turned into brutes, then?" said the Prince.

"In obedience and imitation of your Grace," answered one fellow; "or, if
we are a little behind your Highness, one pull at the pitcher will--"

"Peace, beast!" said the Duke of Rothsay. "Are there none of you sober,
I say?"

"Yes, my noble liege," was the answer; "here is one false brother,
Watkins the Englishman."

"Come hither then, Watkins, and aid me with a torch; give me a cloak,
too, and another bonnet, and take away this trumpery," throwing down
his coronet of feathers. "I would I could throw off all my follies
as easily. English Wat, attend me alone, and the rest of you end your
revelry, and doff your mumming habits. The holytide is expended, and the
fast has begun."

"Our monarch has abdicated sooner than usual this night," said one
of the revel rout; but as the Prince gave no encouragement, such as
happened for the time to want the virtue of sobriety endeavoured to
assume it as well as they could, and the whole of the late rioters began
to adopt the appearance of a set of decent persons, who, having been
surprised into intoxication, endeavoured to disguise their condition by
assuming a double portion of formality of behaviour. In the interim the
Prince, having made a hasty reform in his dress, was lighted to the door
by the only sober man of the company, but, in his progress thither, had
well nigh stumbled over the sleeping bulk of the brute Bonthron.

"How now! is that vile beast in our way once more?" he said in anger and
disgust. "Here, some of you, toss this caitiff into the horse trough;
that for once in his life he may be washed clean."

While the train executed his commands, availing themselves of a fountain
which was in the outer court, and while Bonthron underwent a discipline
which he was incapable of resisting, otherwise than by some inarticulate
groans and snorts, like, those of a dying boar, the Prince proceeded on
his way to his apartments, in a mansion called the Constable's lodgings,
from the house being the property of the Earls of Errol. On the way, to
divert his thoughts from the more unpleasing matters, the Prince asked
his companion how he came to be sober, when the rest of the party had
been so much overcome with liquor.

"So please your honour's Grace," replied English Wat, "I confess it was
very familiar in me to be sober when it was your Grace's pleasure that
your train should be mad drunk; but in respect they were all Scottishmen
but myself, I thought it argued no policy in getting drunken in their
company, seeing that they only endure me even when we are all sober, and
if the wine were uppermost, I might tell them a piece of my mind, and be
paid with as many stabs as there are skenes in the good company."

"So it is your purpose never to join any of the revels of our
household?"

"Under favour, yes; unless it be your Grace's pleasure that the residue
of your train should remain one day sober, to admit Will Watkins to get
drunk without terror of his life."

"Such occasion may arrive. Where dost thou serve, Watkins?"

"In the stable, so please you."

"Let our chamberlain bring thee into the household, as a yeoman of the
night watch. I like thy favour, and it is something to have one sober
fellow in the house, although he is only such through the fear of death.
Attend, therefore, near our person; and thou shalt find sobriety a
thriving virtue."

Meantime a load of care and fear added to the distress of Sir John
Ramorny's sick chamber. His reflections, disordered as they were by the
opiate, fell into great confusion when the Prince, in whose presence he
had suppressed its effect by strong resistance, had left the apartment.
His consciousness, which he had possessed perfectly during the
interview, began to be very much disturbed. He felt a general sense
that he had incurred a great danger, that he had rendered the Prince his
enemy, and that he had betrayed to him a secret which might affect his
own life. In this state of mind and body, it was not strange that he
should either dream, or else that his diseased organs should become
subject to that species of phantasmagoria which is excited by the use
of opium. He thought that the shade of Queen Annabella stood by his
bedside, and demanded the youth whom she had placed under his charge,
simple, virtuous, gay, and innocent.

"Thou hast rendered him reckless, dissolute, and vicious," said the
shade of pallid Majesty. "Yet I thank thee, John of Ramorny, ungrateful
to me, false to thy word, and treacherous to my hopes. Thy hate shall
counteract the evil which thy friendship has done to him. And well do
I hope that, now thou art no longer his counsellor, a bitter penance on
earth may purchase my ill fated child pardon and acceptance in a better
world."

Ramorny stretched out his arms after his benefactress, and endeavoured
to express contrition and excuse; but the countenance of the apparition
became darker and sterner, till it was no longer that of the late Queen,
but presented the gloomy and haughty aspect of the Black Douglas; then
the timid and sorrowful face of King Robert, who seemed to mourn over
the approaching dissolution of his royal house; and then a group of
fantastic features, partly hideous, partly ludicrous, which moped, and
chattered, and twisted themselves into unnatural and extravagant
forms, as if ridiculing his endeavour to obtain an exact idea of their
lineaments.



CHAPTER XVIII.

     A purple land, where law secures not life.

     BYRON.


The morning of Ash Wednesday arose pale and bleak, as usual at this
season in Scotland, where the worst and most inclement weather often
occurs in the early spring months. It was a severe day of frost, and the
citizens had to sleep away the consequences of the preceding holiday's
debauchery. The sun had therefore risen for an hour above the horizon
before there was any general appearance of life among the inhabitants
of Perth, so that it was some time after daybreak when a citizen, going
early to mass, saw the body of the luckless Oliver Proudfute lying on
its face across the kennel in the manner in which he had fallen under
the blow; as our readers will easily imagine, of Anthony Bonthron, the
"boy of the belt"--that is the executioner of the pleasure--of John of
Ramorny.

This early citizen was Allan Griffin, so termed because he was master
of the Griffin Inn; and the alarm which he raised soon brought together
first straggling neighbours, and by and by a concourse of citizens. At
first from the circumstance of the well known buff coat and the crimson
feather in the head piece, the noise arose that it was the stout smith
that lay there slain. This false rumour continued for some time, for the
host of the Griffin, who himself had been a magistrate, would not permit
the body to be touched or stirred till Bailie Craigdallie arrived, so
that the face was not seen..

"This concerns the Fair City, my friends," he said, "and if it is the
stout Smith of the Wynd who lies here, the man lives not in Perth who
will not risk land and life to avenge him. Look you, the villains have
struck him down behind his back, for there is not a man within ten
Scotch miles of Perth, gentle or simple, Highland or Lowland, that
would have met him face to face with such evil purpose. Oh, brave men of
Perth! the flower of your manhood has been cut down, and that by a base
and treacherous hand."

