unconscious, that nobody except myself divined how strong was the
attraction which, as it drew them nearer together, invested both with
a lustre and a sweetness which charmed all around them.

But I see the sun is declining, and warns me to cut short a tale which
would keep us here till dawn if I were to detail it as I should like
to do in my own memories. The progress of this affair interested me
deeply; for, like all persons whose perceptions are more lively than
their hopes, I delight to live from day to day in the more ardent
experiments of others. I looked on with curiosity, with sympathy, with
fear. How could it end? What would become of them, unhappy lovers? One
too noble, the other too delicate, ever to find happiness in an
unsanctioned tie.

I had, however, no right to interfere, and did not, even by a look,
until one evening, when the occasion was forced upon me.

There was a summer fete given at L----'s. I had mingled for a while
with the guests in the brilliant apartments; but the heat oppressed,
the conversation failed to interest me. An open window tempted me to
the garden, whose flowers and tufted lawns lay bathed in moonlight. I
went out alone; but the music of a superb band followed my steps, and
gave impulse to my thoughts. A dreaming state, pensive though not
absolutely sorrowful, came upon me,--one of those gentle moods when
thoughts flow through the mind amber-clear and soft, noiseless,
because unimpeded. I sat down in an arbor to enjoy it, and probably
stayed much longer than I could have imagined; for when I reentered
the large saloon it was deserted. The lights, however, were not
extinguished, and, hearing voices in the inner room, I supposed some
guests still remained; and, as I had not spoken with Emily that
evening, I ventured in to bid her good-night. I started, repentant, on
finding her alone with V----, and in a situation that announced their
feelings to be no longer concealed from each other. She, leaning back
on the sofa, was weeping bitterly, while V----, seated at her feet,
holding her hands within his own, was pouring forth his passionate
words with a fervency which prevented him from perceiving my entrance.
But Emily perceived me at once, and starting up, motioned me not to
go, as I had intended. I obeyed, and sat down. A pause ensued, awkward
for me and for V----, who sat with his eyes cast down and blushing
like a young girl detected in a burst of feeling long kept secret.
Emily sat buried in thought, the tears yet undried upon her cheeks.
She was pale, but nobly beautiful, as I had never yet seen her.

After a few moments I broke the silence, and attempted to tell why I
had returned so late. She interrupted me: "No matter, Aglauron, how it
happened; whatever the chance, it promises to give both V---- and
myself, what we greatly need, a calm friend and adviser. You are the
only person among these crowds of men whom I could consult; for I have
read friendship in your eye, and I know you have truth and honor.
V---- thinks of you as I do, and he too is, or should be, glad to have
some counsellor beside his own wishes."

V---- did not raise his eyes; neither did he contradict her. After a
moment he said, "I believe Aglauron to be as free from prejudice as
any man, and most true and honorable; yet who can judge in this matter
but ourselves?"

"No one shall judge," said Emily; "but I want counsel. God help me! I
feel there is a right and wrong; but how can my mind, which has never
been trained to discern between them, be confident of its power at
this important moment? Aglauron, what remains to me of happiness,--if
anything do remain; perhaps the hope of heaven, if, indeed, there be a
heaven,--is at stake! Father and brother have failed their trust. I
have no friend able to understand, wise enough to counsel me. The only
one whose words ever came true to my thoughts, and of whom you have
often reminded me, is distant. Will you, this hour, take her place?"

"To the best of my ability," I replied without hesitation, struck by
the dignity of her manner.

"You know," she said, "all my past history; all do so here, though
they do not talk loudly of it. You and all others have probably blamed
me. You know not, you cannot guess, the anguish, the struggles of my
childish mind when it first opened to the meaning of those words,
Love, Marriage, Life. When I was bound to Mr. L----, by a vow which
from my heedless lips was mockery of all thought, all holiness, I had
never known a duty, I had never felt the pressure of a tie. Life had
been, so far, a sweet, voluptuous dream, and I thought of this
seemingly so kind and amiable person as a new and devoted ministrant
to me of its pleasures. But I was scarcely in his power when I awoke.
I perceived the unfitness of the tie; its closeness revolted me.

"I had no timidity; I had always been accustomed to indulge my
feelings, and I displayed them now. L----, irritated, averted his
mastery; this drove me wild; I soon hated him, and despised too his
insensibility to all which I thought most beautiful. From all his
faults, and the imperfection of our relation, grew up in my mind the
knowledge of what the true might be to me. It is astonishing how the
thought grow upon me day by day. I had not been married more than
three months before I knew what it would be to love, and I longed to
be free to do so. I had never known what it was to be resisted, and
the thought never came to me that I could now, and for all my life, be
bound by so early a mistake. I thought only of expressing my resolve
to be free.

"How I was repulsed, how disappointed, you know, or could divine if
you did not know; for all but me have been trained to bear the burden
from their youth up, and accustomed to have the individual will
fettered for the advantage of society. For the same reason, you cannot
guess the silent fury that filled my mind when I at last found that I
had struggled in vain, and that I must remain in the bondage that I
had ignorantly put on.

"My affections were totally alienated from my family, for I felt they
had known what I had not, and had neither put me on my guard, nor
warned me against precipitation whose consequences must be fatal. I
saw, indeed, that they did not look on life as I did, and could be
content without being happy; but this observation was far from making
me love them more. I felt alone, bitterly, contemptuously alone. I
hated men who had made the laws that bound me. I did not believe in
God; for why had He permitted the dart to enter so unprepared a
breast? I determined never to submit, though I disdained to struggle,
since struggle was in vain. In passive, lonely wretchedness I would
pass my days. I would not feign what I did not feel, nor take the hand
which had poisoned for me the cup of life before I had sipped the
first drops.

"A friend--the only one I have ever known--taught me other thoughts.
She taught me that others, perhaps all others, were victims, as much
as myself. She taught me that if all the wrecked submitted to be
drowned, the world would be a desert. She taught me to pity others,
even those I myself was paining; for she showed me that they had
sinned in ignorance, and that I had no right to make them suffer so
long as I myself did, merely because they were the authors of my
suffering.

"She showed me, by her own pure example, what were Duty and
Benevolence and Employment to the soul, even when baffled and sickened
in its dearest wishes. That example was not wholly lost: I freed my
parents, at least, from their pain, and, without falsehood, became
less cruel and more calm.

"Yet the kindness, the calmness, have never gone deep. I have been
forced to live out of myself; and life, busy or idle, is still most
bitter to the homeless heart. I cannot be like Almeria; I am more
ardent; and, Aglauron, you see now I might be happy,"

She looked towards V----. I followed her eye, and was well-nigh melted
too by the beauty of his gaze.

"The question in my mind is," she resumed, "have I not a right to fly?
To leave this vacant life, and a tie which, but for worldly
circumstances, presses as heavily on L---- as on myself. I shall
mortify him; but that is a trifle compared with actual misery. I shall
grieve my parents; but, were they truly such, would they not grieve
still more that I must reject the life of mutual love? I have already
sacrificed enough; shall I sacrifice the happiness of one I could
really bless for those who do not know one native heart-beat of my
life?"

V---- kissed her hand.

"And yet," said she, sighing, "it does not always look so. We must, in
that case, leave the world; it will not tolerate us. Can I make V----
happy in solitude? And what would Almeria think? Often it seems that
she would feel that now I do love, and could make a green spot in the
desert of life over which she mourned, she would rejoice to have me do
so. Then, again, something whispers she might have objections to make;
and I wish--O, I long to know them! For I feel that this is the great
crisis of my life, and that if I do not act wisely, now that I have
thought and felt, it will be unpardonable. In my first error I was
ignorant what I wished, but now I know, and ought not to be weak or
deluded."

I said, "Have you no religious scruples? Do you never think of your
vow as sacred?"

"Never!" she replied, with flashing eyes. "Shall the woman be bound by
the folly of the child? No!--have never once considered myself as
L----'s wife. If I have lived in his house, it was to make the best of
what was left, as Almeria advised. But what I feel he knows perfectly.
I have never deceived him. But O! I hazard all! all! and should I be
again ignorant, again deceived"----

V---- here poured forth all that can be imagined.

I rose: "Emily, this case seems to me so extraordinary that I must
have time to think. You shall hear from me. I shall certainly give you
my best advice, and I trust you will not over-value it."

"I am sure," she said, "it will be of use to me, and will enable me to
decide what I shall do.   V----, now go away with Aglauron; it is too
late for you to stay here."

I do not know if I have made obvious, in this account, what struck me
most in the interview,--a certain savage force in the character of
this beautiful woman, quite independent of the reasoning power. I saw
that, as she could give no account of the past, except that she saw it
was fit, or saw it was not, so she must be dealt with now by a strong
instalment made by another from his own point of view, which she would
accept or not, as suited her.

There are some such characters, which, like plants, stretch upwards to
the light; they accept what nourishes, they reject what injures them.
They die if wounded,--blossom if fortunate; but never learn to analyze
all this, or find its reasons; but, if they tell their story, it is in
Emily's way;--"it was so;" "I found it so."

I talked with V----, and found him, as I expected, not the peer of her
he loved, except in love. His passion was at its height. Better
acquainted with the world than Emily,--not because he had seen it
more, but because he had the elements of the citizen in him,--he had
been at first equally emboldened and surprised by the ease with which
he won her to listen to his suit. But he was soon still more surprised
to find that she would only listen. She had no regard for her position
in society as a married woman,--none for her vow. She frankly
confessed her love, so far as it went, but doubted as to whether it
was _her whole love_, and doubted still more her right to leave
L----, since she had returned to him, and could not break the bond so
entirely as to give them firm foot-hold in the world.

"I may make you unhappy," she said, "and then be unhappy myself; these
laws, this society, are so strange, I can make nothing of them. In
music I am at home. Why is not all life music? We instantly know when
we are going wrong there. Convince me it is for the best, and I will
go with you at once. But now it seems wrong, unwise, scarcely better
than to stay as we are. We must go secretly, must live obscurely in a
corner. That I cannot bear,--all is wrong yet. Why am I not at liberty
to declare unblushingly to all men that I will leave the man whom I
_do not_ love, and go with him I _do_ love? That is the only
way that would suit me,--I cannot see clearly to take any other
course."

I found V---- had no scruples of conscience, any more than herself. He
was wholly absorbed in his passion, and his only wish was to persuade
her to elope, that a divorce might follow, and she be all his own.

I took my part. I wrote next day to Emily. I told her that my view
must differ from hers in this: that I had, from early impressions, a
feeling of the sanctity of the marriage vow. It was not to me a
measure intended merely to insure the happiness of two individuals,
but a solemn obligation, which, whether it led to happiness or not,
was a means of bringing home to the mind the great idea of Duty, the
understanding of which, and not happiness, seemed to be the end of
life. Life looked not clear to me otherwise. I entreated her to
separate herself from V---- for a year, before doing anything
decisive; she could then look at the subject from other points of
view, and see the bearing on mankind as well as on herself alone.   If
she still found that happiness and V---- were her chief objects, she
might be more sure of herself after such a trial. I was careful not to
add one word of persuasion or exhortation, except that I recommended
her to the enlightening love of the Father of our spirits.

_Laurie_. With or without persuasion, your advice had small
chance, I fear, of being followed.

_Aglauron_. You err. Next day V---- departed. Emily, with a calm
brow and earnest eyes, devoted herself to thought, and such reading as
I suggested.

_Laurie_. And the result?

_Aglauron_. I grieve not to be able to point my tale with the
expected moral, though perhaps the true denouement may lead to one as
valuable. L---- died within the year, and she married V----.

_Laurie_. And the result?

_Aglauron_. Is for the present utter disappointment in him. She
was infinitely blest, for a time, in his devotion, but presently her
strong nature found him too much hers, and too little his own. He
satisfied her as little as L---- had done, though always lovely and
dear. She saw with keen anguish, though this time without bitterness,
that we are never wise enough to be sure any measure will fulfil our
expectations.

But--I know not how it is--Emily does not yet command the changes of
destiny which she feels so keenly and faces so boldly. Born to be
happy only in the clear light of religious thought, she still seeks
happiness elsewhere. She is now a mother, and all other thoughts are
merged in that. But she will not long be permitted to abide there. One
more pang, and I look to see her find her central point, from which
all the paths she has taken lead. She loves truth so ardently, though
as yet only in detail, that she will yet know truth as a whole. She
will see that she does not live for Emily, or for V----, or for her
child, but as one link in a divine purpose. Her large nature must at
last serve knowingly.

_Myself_. I cannot understand you, Aglauron; I do not guess the
scope of your story, nor sympathize with your feeling about this lady.
She is a strange, and, I think, very unattractive person. I think her
beauty must have fascinated you. Her character seems very
inconsistent.

_Aglauron_. Because I have drawn from life.

_Myself_. But, surely, there should be a harmony somewhere.

_Aglauron_. Could we but get the right point of view.

_Laurie_. And where is that?

He pointed to the sun, just sinking behind the pine grove. We mounted
and rode home without a word more. But I do not understand Aglauron
yet, nor what he expects from this Emily. Yet her character, though
almost featureless at first, gains distinctness as I think of it more.
Perhaps in this life I shall find its key.




THE WRONGS OF AMERICAN WOMEN. THE DUTY OF AMERICAN WOMEN.


The same day brought us a copy of Mr. Burdett's little book,--in which
the sufferings and difficulties that beset the large class of women
who must earn their subsistence in a city like New York, are
delineated with so much simplicity, feeling, and exact adherence to
the facts,--and a printed circular, containing proposals for immediate
practical adoption of the plan wore fully described in a book
published some weeks since, under the title, "The Duty of American
Women to their Country," which was ascribed alternately to Mrs. Stowe
and Miss Catharine Beecher. The two matters seemed linked to one
another by natural parity. Full acquaintance with the wrong must call
forth all manner of inventions for its redress.

The circular, in showing the vast want that already exists of good
means for instructing the children of this nation, especially in the
West, states also the belief that among women, as being less immersed
in other cares and toils, from the preparation it gives for their task
as mothers, and from the necessity in which a great proportion stand
of earning a subsistence somehow, at least during the years which
precede marriage, if they _do_ marry, must the number of teachers
wanted be found, which is estimated already at _sixty thousand_.

We cordially sympathize with these views.

Much has been written about woman's keeping within her sphere, which
is defined as the domestic sphere. As a little girl she is to learn
the lighter family duties, while she acquires that limited
acquaintance with the realm of literature and science that will enable
her to superintend the instruction of children in their earliest
years. It is not generally proposed that she should be sufficiently
instructed and developed to understand the pursuits or aims of her
future husband; she is not to be a help-meet to him in the way of
companionship and counsel, except in the care of his house and
children. Her youth is to be passed partly in learning to keep house
and the use of the needle, partly in the social circle, where her
manners may be formed, ornamental accomplishments perfected and
displayed, and the husband found who shall give her the domestic
sphere for which she is exclusively to be prepared.

Were the destiny of Woman thus exactly marked out; did she invariably
retain the shelter of a parent's or guardian's roof till she married;
did marriage give her a sure home and protector; were she never liable
to remain a widow, or, if so, sure of finding immediate protection
from a brother or new husband, so that she might never be forced to
stand alone one moment; and were her mind given for this world only,
with no faculties capable of eternal growth and infinite improvement;
we would still demand for her a for wider and more generous culture,
than is proposed by those who so anxiously define her sphere. We would
demand it that she might not ignorantly or frivolously thwart the
designs of her husband; that she might be the respected friend of her
sons, not less than of her daughters; that she might give more
refinement, elevation and attraction, to the society which is needed
to give the characters of _men_ polish and plasticity,--no less
so than to save them from vicious and sensual habits. But the most
fastidious critic on the departure of Woman from her sphere can
scarcely fail to see, at present, that a vast proportion of the sex,
if not the better half, do not, _cannot_ have this domestic
sphere. Thousands and scores of thousands in this country, no less
than in Europe, are obliged to maintain themselves alone. Far greater
numbers divide with their husbands the care of earning a support for
the family. In England, now, the progress of society has reached so
admirable a pitch, that the position of the sexes is frequently
reversed, and the husband is obliged to stay at home and "mind the
house and bairns," while the wife goes forth to the employment she
alone can secure.

We readily admit that the picture of this is most painful;--that
Nature made an entirely opposite distribution of functions between the
sexes. We believe the natural order to be the best, and that, if it
could be followed in an enlightened spirit, it would bring to Woman
all she wants, no less for her immortal than her mortal destiny. We
are not surprised that men who do not look deeply and carefully at
causes and tendencies, should be led, by disgust at the hardened,
hackneyed characters which the present state of things too often
produces in women, to such conclusions as they are. We, no more than
they, delight in the picture of the poor woman digging in the mines in
her husband's clothes. We, no more than they, delight to hear their
voices shrilly raised in the market-place, whether of apples, or of
celebrity. But we see that at present they must do as they do for
bread. Hundreds and thousands must step out of that hallowed domestic
sphere, with no choice but to work or steal, or belong to men, not as
wives, but as the wretched slaves of sensuality.

And this transition state, with all its revolting features, indicates,
we do believe, an approach of a nobler era than the world has yet
known. We trust that by the stress and emergencies of the present and
coming time the minds of women will be formed to more reflection and
higher purposes than heretofore; their latent powers developed, their
characters strengthened and eventually beautified and harmonized.
Should the state of society then be such that each may remain, as
Nature seems to have intended, Woman the tutelary genius of home,
while Man manages the outdoor business of life, both may be done with
a wisdom, a mutual understanding and respect, unknown at present. Men
will be no less gainers by this than women, finding in pure and more
religious marriages the joys of friendship and love combined,--in
their mothers and daughters better instruction, sweeter and nobler
companionship, and in society at large, an excitement to their finer
powers and feelings unknown at present, except in the region of the
fine arts.

Blest be the generous, the wise, who seek to forward hopes like these,
instead of struggling, against the fiat of Providence and the march of
Fate, to bind down rushing life to the standard of the past! Such
efforts are vain, but those who make them are unhappy and unwise.

It is not, however, to such that we address ourselves, but to those
who seek to make the best of things as they are, while they also
strive to make them better. Such persons will have seen enough of the
state of things in London, Paris, New York, and manufacturing regions
everywhere, to feel that there is an imperative necessity for opening
more avenues of employment to women, and fitting them better to enter
them, rather than keeping them back.
