seen that any of these men had paid the penalty, and what, if he sees
it, he will still do. But when he hears that they address you, and
enjoy a high reputation with you, and prosecute others, what is he to
do? Is he to seek to spend much, when he can spend less? or to desire
to court the favour of all, when he need but court two or three? That
would be madness. For even those public benefits which Philip conferred
upon the Thebans he conferred not from choice-- far from it--but
because he was induced to do so by their ambassadors; and I will tell
you how. {139} Ambassadors came to him from Thebes just at the time
when we were there upon our mission from you. Philip wished to give
them money, and that (so they said) in very large amounts. The Theban
ambassadors would not accept or receive it. After that, while drinking
at a sacrificial banquet and displaying his generosity towards them,
Philip offered, as he drank to them, presents of many kinds--captives
and the like--and finally he offered them goblets of gold and silver.
All these they steadily refused, declining to put themselves in his
power in any way. {140} At last Philo, one of the ambassadors, made a
speech, men of Athens, which was worthy to be made in the name, not of
Thebes, but of yourselves. For he said that it gave them pleasure and
delight to see the magnanimous and generous attitude of Philip towards
them; but for their own personal part, they were already his good
friends even without these presents; and they begged him to apply his
generosity to the existing political situation of their country, and to
do something worthy of himself and Thebes, promising that, if he did
so, their whole city, as well as themselves, would become attached to
him. {141} And now observe what the Thebans have gained by this, and
what consequences have followed; and contemplate in a real instance the
advantages of refusing to sell your country's interests. First of all,
they obtained peace when they were already distressed and suffering
from the war, in which they were the losing side. Next, they secured
the utter ruin of their enemies, the Phocians, and the complete
destruction of their walls and towns. And was this all? No, indeed! For
besides all this they obtained Orchomenus, Coroneia, Corsia, the
Tilphossaeum, and as much of the territory of the Phocians as they
desired. {142} This then was what the Thebans gained by the Peace; and
surely no more could they have asked even in their prayers. And the
ambassadors of Thebes gained--what? Nothing but the credit of having
brought this good fortune to their country; and a noble reward it was,
men of Athens, a proud record on the score of merit and honour--that
honour which Aeschines and his party sold for money. Let us now set
against one another the consequences of the Peace to the city of Athens
and to the Athenian ambassadors respectively; and then observe whether
its effects have been similar in the case of the city and of these men
personally. {143} The city has surrendered all her possessions and all
her allies; she has sworn to Philip that even if another approaches
them to preserve them for her, you will prevent him; that you will
consider any one who wishes to give them up to you as your enemy and
foe, and the man who has robbed you of them as your ally and friend.
{144} That is the resolution which Aeschines supported, and which was
moved by his accomplice Philocrates; and although on the first day I
was successful, and had persuaded you to ratify the decree of the
allies and to summon Philip's envoys,[n] the defendant forced an
adjournment of the question till the next day, and persuaded you to
adopt the resolution of Philocrates, in which these proposals, and many
others even more atrocious, are made. {145} These were the consequences
of the Peace to Athens. It would not be easy to devise anything more
shameful. What were the consequences to the ambassadors who brought
these things about? I say nothing of all that you have seen for
yourselves--the houses, the timber, the wheat. But they also possess
properties and extensive estates in the country of your ruined allies,
bringing in incomes of a talent to Philocrates and thirty minae to the
defendant. {146} Yet surely, men of Athens, it is an atrocious and a
monstrous thing, that the calamities of your allies should have become
sources of revenue to your ambassadors, and that the same Peace which
to the city that sent them meant the ruin of her allies, the surrender
of her possessions, and shame in the place of honour, should have
created for the ambassadors who brought these things to pass against
their country, revenue, affluence, property, and wealth, in the place
of abject poverty. To prove, however, that what I am telling you is
true (_to the clerk_) call me the witnesses from Olynthus.

[_The witnesses are called._]

{147} Now I should not wonder if he even dared to make some such
statement as this--that the Peace which we were making could not have
been made an honourable one, or such as I demanded, because our
generals had mismanaged the war. If he argues thus, then remember, in
Heaven's name, to ask him whether[n] it was from some other city that
he went as ambassador, or from this city itself? If it was from some
other, to whose success in war and to whose excellent generals he can
point, then it was natural for him to take Philip's money: but if it
was from Athens itself, why do we find him taking presents as part of a
transaction which involved the surrender of her possessions by the city
which sent him? For in any honest transaction the city that sent the
ambassadors ought to have shared the same fortune as the ambassadors
whom she sent. {148} Consider also this further point, men of Athens.
Do you think that the successes of the Phocians against the Thebans in
the war, or the successes of Philip against you, were the more
considerable? Those of the Phocians against the Thebans, I am quite
certain. At least, they held Orchomenus and Coroneia and the
Tilphossaeum;[n] they had intercepted the Theban garrison at Neones;[n]
they had slain two hundred of them on Hedyleum;[n] a trophy had been
raised, their cavalry were victorious, and a whole Iliad of misfortunes
had beset the Thebans. You were in no such position as this, and may
you never be so in the future! Your most serious disadvantage in your
hostilities with Philip was your inability to inflict upon him all the
damage that you desired; you were completely secure against suffering
any harm yourselves. How is it then that, as the result of one and the
same Peace, the Thebans, who were being so badly worsted in the war,
have recovered their own possessions and, in addition, have gained
those of their enemies; while you, the Athenians, have lost under the
Peace even what you retained safely through the war? It is because
their ambassadors did not sell their interests, while these men have
sold yours. [Ah! he will say,[n] but the allies were exhausted by the
war....]. That this is how these things were accomplished, you will
realize still more clearly from what I have yet to say.

{150}For when this Peace was concluded--the Peace of Philocrates, which
Aeschines supported--and when Philip's envoys had set sail, after
receiving the oaths from us--and up to this time nothing that had been
done was irreparable, for though the Peace was disgraceful and unworthy
of Athens, still we were to get those marvellous good things in
return--then I say, I asked and told the ambassadors to sail as quickly
as possible to the Hellespont, and not to sacrifice any of our
positions there, nor allow Philip to occupy them in the interval. {151}
For I knew very well that everything that is sacrificed when peace is
in process of being concluded after war, is lost to those who are so
neglectful; since no one who had been induced to make peace with regard
to the situation as a whole ever yet made up his mind to fight afresh
for the sake of possessions which had been left unsecured; such
possessions those who first take them keep. And, apart from this, I
thought that, if we sailed, the city could not fail to secure one of
two useful results. Either, when we were there and had received
Philip's oath according to the decree, he would restore the possessions
of Athens which he had taken, and keep his hands off the rest; {152}
or, if he did not do so, we should immediately report the fact to you
here, and so, when you saw his grasping and perfidious disposition in
regard to those your remoter and less important interests, you would
not in dealing with greater matters close at hand--in other words, with
the Phocians and Thermopylae--let anything be lost. If he failed to
forestall you in regard to these, and you were not deceived, your
interests would be completely secured, and he would give you your
rights without hesitation. {153} And I had good reason for such
expectations. For if the Phocians were still safe and sound, as they
then were, and were in occupation of Thermopylae, Philip would have had
no terror to brandish before you, which could make you overlook any of
your rights. For he was not likely either to make his way through by
land, or to win a victory by sea, and so reach Attica; while if he
refused to act as was right, you would instantly close his ports,
reduce him to straits for money and other supplies, and place him in a
state of siege; and in that case it would be he, and not you, to whom
the advantages of peace would be the overmastering consideration. {154}
And that I am not inventing this or claiming wisdom after the
event--that I knew it at once, and, with your interest in view, foresaw
what must happen and told my colleagues--you will realize from the
following facts. When there was no longer any meeting of the Assembly
available (since you had used up all the appointed days) and still the
ambassadors did not depart, but wasted time here, I proposed a decree
as a member of the Council, to which the people had given full powers,
that the ambassadors should depart directly, and that the admiral
Proxenus should convey them to any district in which he should
ascertain Philip to be. My proposal was just what I now tell you,
couched expressly in those terms. (_To the clerk_.) Take this decree
and read it.

[_The decree is read_.]

{155} I brought them away, then, from Athens, sorely against their
will, as you will clearly understand from their subsequent conduct.
When we reached Oreus and joined Proxenus, instead of sailing and
following their instructions, they made a circuitous journey by land,
and before we reached Macedonia we had spent three and twenty days. All
the rest of the time, until Philip's arrival, we were sitting idle at
Pella; and this, with the journey, brought the time up to fifty days in
all. {156} During this interval, in a time of peace and truce, Philip
was taking Doriscus,[n] Thrace, the district towards the Walls, the
Sacred Mountain--everything, in fact, and making his own arrangements
there; while I spoke out repeatedly and insistently, first in the tone
of a man giving his opinion to his colleagues, then as though I were
informing the ignorant, till at last I addressed them without any
concealment as men who had sold themselves and were the most impious of
mankind. {157} And the man who contradicted me openly and opposed
everything which I urged and which your decree enjoined, was Aeschines.
Whether his conduct pleased all the other ambassadors as well, you will
know presently; for as yet I allege nothing about any of them, and make
no accusation: no one of them need appear an honest man to-day because
I oblige him to do so, but only of his own free will, and because he
was no partner in Aeschines' crimes. That the conduct in question was
disgraceful, atrocious, venal, you have all seen. Who were the partners
in it, the facts will show.

{158} 'But of course, during this interval they received the oaths from
Philip's allies, or carried out their other duties.' Far from it! For
though they had been absent from home three whole months, and received
1,000 drachmae from you for their expenses, they did not receive the
oaths from a single city, either on their journey to Macedonia, or on
the way back. It was in the inn before the temple of the Dioscuri--any
one who has been to Pherae will understand me--when Philip was already
on the march towards Athens at the head of an army, that the oaths were
taken, in a fashion which was disgraceful, men of Athens, and insulting
to you. {159} To Philip, however, it was worth anything that the
transaction should have been carried out in this form. These men had
failed in their attempt to insert among the terms of the Peace the
clause which excluded the people of Halus and Pharsalus; Philocrates
had been forced by you to expunge the words, and to write down
expressly 'the Athenians and the allies of the Athenians'; and Philip
did not wish any of his own allies to have taken such an oath; for then
they would not join him in his campaign against those possessions of
yours which he now holds, but would plead their oaths in excuse; {160}
nor did he wish them to be witnesses of the promises on the strength of
which he was obtaining the Peace. He did not wish it to be revealed to
the world that the city of Athens had not, after all, been defeated in
the war, and that it was Philip who was eager for peace, and was
promising to do great things for Athens if he obtained it. It was just
to prevent the revelation of these facts that he thought it inadvisable
that the ambassadors should go to any of the cities; while for their
part, they sought to gratify him in everything, with ostentatious and
extravagant obsequiousness. {161} But when all this is proved against
them--their waste of time, their sacrifice of your position in Thrace,
their complete failure to act in accordance either with your decree or
your interests, their lying report to you--how is it possible that
before a jury of sane men, anxious to be true to their oath, Aeschines
can be acquitted? To prove, however, that what I say is true (_to the
clerk_), first read the decree, under which it was our duty to exact
the oaths, then Philip's letter, and then the decree of Philocrates and
that of the people.

[_The decrees and letter are read._]

{162} And now, to prove that we should have caught Philip in the
Hellespont, had any one listened to me, and carried out your
instructions as contained in the decrees, (_to the clerk_) call the
witnesses who were there on the spot.

[_The witnesses are called._]

(_To the clerk._) Next read also the other deposition--Philip's answer
to Eucleides,[n] who is present here, when he went to Philip afterwards.

[_The deposition is read._]

{163} Now listen to me, while I show that they cannot even deny that it
was to serve Philip's interest that they acted as they did. For when we
set out on the First Embassy--that which was to discuss the Peace--you
dispatched a herald in advance to procure us a safe conduct. Well, on
that occasion, as soon as ever they had reached Oreus, they did not
wait for the herald, or allow any time to be lost; but though Halus was
being besieged, they sailed there direct, and then, leaving the town
again, came to Parmenio, who was besieging it, set out through the
enemy's camp to Pagasae, and, continuing their journey, only met the
herald at Larissa: with such eager haste did they proceed. {164} But at
a time when there was peace and they had complete security for their
journey and you had instructed them to make haste, it never occurred to
them either to quicken their pace or to go by sea. And why? Because on
the former occasion Philip's interest demanded that the Peace should be
made as soon as possible; whereas now it required that as long an
interval as possible should be wasted before the oaths were taken.
{165} To prove that this is so, (_to the clerk_) take and read this
further deposition.

[_The deposition is read._]

How could men be more clearly convicted of acting to serve Philip's
interest throughout, than by the fact that they sat idle, when in your
interest they ought to have hurried, on the very same journey over
which they hastened onward, without even waiting for the herald, when
they ought not to have moved at all?

{166} Now observe how each of us chose to conduct himself while we were
there, sitting idle at Pella. For myself, I chose to rescue and seek
out the captives, spending my own money and asking Philip to procure
their ransom[n] with the sums which he was offering us in the form of
presents. How Aeschines passed his whole time you shall hear presently.
{167} What then was the meaning of Philip's offering money to us in
common? He kept sounding us all--for this too I would have you know.
And how? He sent round privately to each of us, and offered us, men of
Athens, a very large sum in gold. But when he failed in a particular
case (for I need not mention my own name myself, since the proceedings
and their results will of themselves show to whom I refer), he thought
that we should all be innocent enough to accept what was given to us in
common; and then, if we all alike had a share, however small, in the
common present, those who had sold themselves privately would be
secure. {168} Hence these offers, under the guise of presents to his
guest-friends. And when I prevented this, my colleagues further divided
among themselves the sum thus offered. But when I asked Philip to spend
this sum on the prisoners, he could neither, without discredit,
denounce my colleagues, and say, 'But So-and-so has the money, and
So-and-so,' nor yet evade the expense. So he gave the promise, but
deferred its fulfilment, saying that he would send the prisoners home
in time for the Panathenaea. (_To the clerk._) Read the evidence of
Apollophanes, and then that of the rest of those present.

[_The evidence is read._]

{169} Now let me tell you how many of the prisoners I myself ransomed.
For while we were sitting waiting there at Pella, before Philip's
arrival, some of the captives--all, in fact, who were out on bail--not
trusting, I suppose, my ability to persuade Philip to act as I wished,
said that they wished to ransom themselves, and to be under no
obligation to Philip for their freedom: and they borrowed, one three
minae, another five, and another--whatever the amount of the ransom was
in each case. {170} But when Philip had promised that he would ransom
the rest, I called together those to whom I had advanced the money; I
reminded them of the circumstances; and, lest they should seem to have
suffered by their impatience, and to have been ransomed at their own
cost, poor men as they were, when all their comrades expected to be set
free by Philip, I made them a present of their ransom. To prove that I
am speaking the truth, (_to the clerk_) read these depositions.

[_The depositions are read._]

{171} These, then, are the sums which I excused them, and gave as a
free gift to fellow citizens who had met with misfortune. And so, when
Aeschines says presently, in his speech to you, 'Demosthenes, if, as
you say, you knew, from the time when I supported Philocrates'
proposal, that we were acting altogether dishonestly, why did you go
again as our colleague on the subsequent mission to take the oaths,
instead of entering a sworn excuse?' remember this, that I had promised
those whose freedom I had procured that I would bring them their
ransom, and deliver them to the best of my power. {172} It would have
been a wicked thing to break my word and abandon my fellow citizens in
their misfortune; while, on the other hand, if I had excused myself
upon oath from service, it would not have been altogether honourable,
nor yet safe, to make a tour there in a private capacity. For let
destruction, utter and early, fall upon me, if I would have joined in a
mission with these men for a very large sum of money, had it not been
for my anxiety to rescue the prisoners. It is a proof of this, that
though you twice elected me to serve on the Third Embassy, I twice
swore an excuse. And all through the journey in question my policy was
entirely opposed to theirs. {173} All, then, that it was within my own
power to decide in the course of my mission resulted as I have
described; but wherever in virtue of their majority they gained their
way, all has been lost. And yet, had there been any who listened to me,
all would have been accomplished in a manner congruous with my own
actions. For I was not so pitiful a fool as to give away money, when I
saw others receiving it, in my ambition to serve you, and yet not to
desire what could have been accomplished without expense, and would
have brought far greater benefits to the whole city. I desired it
intensely, men of Athens; but, of course, they had the advantage over
me.

{174} Come now and contemplate the proceedings of Aeschines and those
of Philocrates, by the side of my own; for the comparison will bring
out their character more vividly. Well, they first pronounced the
exclusion from the Peace of the Phocians and the people of Halus, and
of Cersobleptes, contrary to your decree and to the statements made to
you. Then they attempted to tamper with and alter the decree, which we
had come there as ambassadors to execute. Then they entered the
Cardians as allies of Philip and voted against sending the dispatch
which I had written to you, sending in its stead an utterly unsound
dispatch of their own composition. {175} And then the gallant gentleman
asserted that I had promised Philip that I would overthrow your
constitution, because I censured these proceedings, not only from a
sense of their disgracefulness, but also from fear lest through the
fault of these men I might have to share their ruin: while all the time
he was himself having incessant private interviews with Philip. And, to
pass over all besides, Dercylus (not I) watched him through the night
at Pherae, along with my slave who is here present; and as the slave
came out of Philip's tent he took him and bade him report what he had
seen, and remember it himself; and finally, this disgusting and
shameless fellow was left behind with Philip for a night and a day,
when we went away. {176} And to prove that I am speaking the truth, I
will myself give evidence which I have committed to writing,[n] so as
to put myself in the position of a responsible witness; and after that
I call upon each of the other ambassadors, and I will compel them to
choose their alternative--either to give evidence, or to swear that
they have no knowledge of the matter. If they take the latter course, I
shall convict them of perjury beyond doubt.

[_Evidence is read._]

{177} You have seen now by what mischief and trouble I was hampered,
throughout our absence from home. For what must you imagine their
conduct to have been there, with their paymaster close at hand, when
they act as they do before your very eyes, though you have power either
to confer honour or, on the other hand, to inflict punishment upon them?

I wish now to reckon up from the beginning the charges which I have
made, in order to show you that I have done all that I undertook to do
at the beginning of my speech. {178} I have proved that there was no
truth in his report--that, on the contrary, he deceived you--by the
evidence not of words but of the actual course of events. I have proved
that he was the cause of your unwillingness to hear the truth from my
mouth, captivated as you were at the time by his promises and
undertakings; that he gave you advice which was the exact opposite of
that which he ought to have given, opposing the Peace which was
suggested by the allies, and advocating the Peace of Philocrates; that
he wasted time, in order that you might not be able to march to the aid
of the Phocians, even if you wished to do so; and that he has done many
atrocious deeds during his absence from home; for he has betrayed and
sold everything, he has taken bribes, and has left no form of rascality
untried. These are the points which I promised at the outset to prove,
and I have proved them. {179} Observe, then, what follows; for what I
have now to say to you has already become a simple matter. You have
sworn that you will vote according to the laws and the decrees of the
people and the Council of Five Hundred. The defendant is proved, in all
his conduct as ambassador, to have acted in contravention of the laws,
of the decrees, and of justice. He ought, therefore, to be convicted in
