accuracy what I have no doubt he could have sketched with force and
expression. In short, the Author believes his brother would have made
himself distinguished in that striking field in which, since that
period, Mr. Cooper has achieved so many triumphs. But Mr. T. Scott was
already affected by bad health, which wholly unfitted him for literary
labour, even if he could have reconciled his patience to the task. He
never, I believe, wrote a single line of the projected work; and I only
have the melancholy pleasure of preserving in the Appendix [Footnote:
See Appendix No. III.] the simple anecdote on which he proposed to
found it.

To this I may add, I can easily conceive that there may have been
circumstances which gave a colour to the general report of my brother
being interested in these works; and in particular that it might derive
strength from my having occasion to remit to him, in consequence of
certain family transactions, some considerable sums of money about that
period. To which it is to be added that if any person chanced to evince
particular curiosity on such a subject, my brother was likely enough to
divert himself with practising on their credulity.

It may be mentioned that, while the paternity of these Novels was from
time to time warmly disputed in Britain, the foreign booksellers
expressed no hesitation on the matter, but affixed my name to the whole
of the Novels, and to some besides to which I had no claim.

The volumes, therefore, to which the present pages form a Preface are
entirely the composition of the Author by whom they are now
acknowledged, with the exception, always, of avowed quotations, and
such unpremeditated and involuntary plagiarisms as can scarce be
guarded against by any one who has read and written a great deal. The
original manuscripts are all in existence, and entirely written
(horresco referens) in the Author's own hand, excepting during the
years 1818 and 1819, when, being affected with severe illness, he was
obliged to employ the assistance of a friendly amanuensis.

The number of persons to whom the secret was necessarily entrusted, or
communicated by chance, amounted, I should think, to twenty at least,
to whom I am greatly obliged for the fidelity with which they observed
their trust, until the derangement of the affairs of my publishers,
Messrs. Constable and Co., and the exposure of their account books,
which was the necessary consequence, rendered secrecy no longer
possible. The particulars attending the avowal have been laid before
the public in the Introduction to the Chronicles of the Canongate.

The preliminary advertisement has given a sketch of the purpose of this
edition. I have some reason to fear that the notes which accompany the
tales, as now published, may be thought too miscellaneous and too
egotistical. It maybe some apology for this, that the publication was
intended to be posthumous, and still more, that old men may be
permitted to speak long, because they cannot in the course of nature
have long time to speak. In preparing the present edition, I have done
all that I can do to explain the nature of my materials, and the use I
have made of them; nor is it probable that I shall again revise or even
read these tales. I was therefore desirous rather to exceed in the
portion of new and explanatory matter which is added to this edition
than that the reader should have reason to complain that the
information communicated was of a general and merely nominal character.
It remains to be tried whether the public (like a child to whom a watch
is shown) will, after having been satiated with looking at the outside,
acquire some new interest in the object when it is opened and the
internal machinery displayed to them.

That Waverly and its successors have had their day of favour and
popularity must be admitted with sincere gratitude; and the Author has
studied (with the prudence of a beauty whose reign has been rather
long) to supply, by the assistance of art, the charms which novelty no
longer affords. The publishers have endeavoured to gratify the
honourable partiality of the public for the encouragement of British
art, by illustrating this edition with designs by the most eminent
living artists. [Footnote: The illustrations here referred to were made
for the edition of 1829]

To my distinguished countryman, David Wilkie, to Edwin Landseer, who
has exercised his talents so much on Scottish subjects and scenery, to
Messrs. Leslie and Newton, my thanks are due, from a friend as well as
an author. Nor am I less obliged to Messrs. Cooper, Kidd, and other
artists of distinction to whom I am less personally known, for the
ready zeal with which they have devoted their talents to the same
purpose.

Farther explanation respecting the Edition is the business of the
publishers, not of the Author; and here, therefore, the latter has
accomplished his task of introduction and explanation. If, like a
spoiled child, he has sometimes abused or trifled with the indulgence
of the public, he feels himself entitled to full belief when he
exculpates himself from the charge of having been at any time
insensible of their kindness.

ABBOTSFORD, 1st January, 1829.





WAVERLEY

OR 'T IS SIXTY YEARS SINCE

    Under which King, Bezonian? speak, or die!

    Henry IV, Part II.

VOLUME II



INTRODUCTION


The plan of this edition leads me to insert in this place some account
of the incidents on which the Novel of Waverley is founded. They have
been already given to the public by my late lamented friend, William
Erskine, Esq. (afterwards Lord Kinneder), when reviewing the Tales of
My Landlord for the Quarterly Review in 1817. The particulars were
derived by the critic from the Author's information. Afterwards they
were published in the Preface to the Chronicles of the Canongate. They
are now inserted in their proper place.

The mutual protection afforded by Waverley and Talbot to each other,
upon which the whole plot depends, is founded upon one of those
anecdotes which soften the features even of civil war; and, as it is
equally honourable to the memory of both parties, we have no hesitation
to give their names at length. When the Highlanders, on the morning of
the battle of Preston, 1745, made their memorable attack on Sir John
Cope's army, a battery of four field-pieces was stormed and carried by
the Camerons and the Stewarts of Appine. The late Alexander Stewart of
Invernahylewas one of the foremost in the charge, and observing an
officer of the King's forces, who, scorning to join the flight of all
around, remained with his sword in his hand, as if determined to the
very last to defend the post assigned to him, the Highland gentleman
commanded him to surrender, and received for reply a thrust, which he
caught in his target. The officer was now defenceless, and the
battle-axe of a gigantic Highlander (the miller of Invernahyle's mill)
was uplifted to dash his brains out, when Mr. Stewart with difficulty
prevailed on him to yield. He took charge of his enemy's property,
protected his person, and finally obtained him liberty on his parole.
The officer proved to be Colonel Whitefoord, an Ayrshire gentleman of
high character and influence, and warmly attached to the House of
Hanover; yet such was the confidence existing between these two
honourable men, though of different political principles, that, while
the civil war was raging, and straggling officers from the Highland
army were executed without mercy, Invernahyle hesitated not to pay his
late captive a visit, as he returned to the Highlands to raise fresh
recruits, on which occasion he spent a day or two in Ayrshire among
Colonel Whitefoord's Whig friends, as pleasantly and as good-humouredly
as if all had been at peace around him.

After the battle of Culloden had ruined the hopes of Charles Edward and
dispersed his proscribed adherents, it was Colonel Whitefoord's turn to
strain every nerve to obtain Mr. Stewart's pardon. He went to the Lord
Justice Clerk to the Lord Advocate, and to all the officers of state,
and each application was answered by the production of a list in which
Invernahyle (as the good old gentleman was wont to express it) appeared
'marked with the sign of the beast!' as a subject unfit for favour or
pardon.

At length Colonel Whitefoord applied to the Duke of Cumberland in
person. From him, also, he received a positive refusal. He then limited
his request, for the present, to a protection for Stewart's house,
wife, children, and property. This was also refused by the Duke; on
which Colonel Whitefoord, taking his commission from his bosom, laid it
on the table before his Royal Highness with much emotion, and asked
permission to retire from the service of a sovereign who did not know
how to spare a vanquished enemy. The Duke was struck, and even
affected. He bade the Colonel take up his commission, and granted the
protection he required. It was issued just in time to save the house,
corn, and cattle at Invernahyle from the troops, who were engaged in
laying waste what it was the fashion to call 'the country of the
enemy.' A small encampment of soldiers was formed on Invernahyle's
property, which they spared while plundering the country around, and
searching in every direction for the leaders of the insurrection, and
for Stewart in particular. He was much nearer them than they suspected;
for, hidden in a cave (like the Baron of Bradwardine), he lay for many
days so near the English sentinels that he could hear their muster-roll
called. His food was brought to him by one of his daughters, a child of
eight years old, whom Mrs. Stewart was under the necessity of
entrusting with this commission; for her own motions, and those of all
her elder inmates, were closely watched. With ingenuity beyond her
years, the child used to stray about among the soldiers, who were
rather kind to her, and thus seize the moment when she was unobserved
and steal into the thicket, when she deposited whatever small store of
provisions she had in charge at some marked spot, where her father
might find it. Invernahyle supported life for several weeks by means of
these precarious supplies; and, as he had been wounded in the battle of
Culloden, the hardships which he endured were aggravated by great
bodily pain. After the soldiers had removed their quarters he had
another remarkable escape.

As he now ventured to his own house at night and left it in the
morning, he was espied during the dawn by a party of the enemy, who
fired at and pursued him. The fugitive being fortunate enough to escape
their search, they returned to the house and charged the family with
harbouring one of the proscribed traitors. An old woman had presence of
mind enough to maintain that the man they had seen was the shepherd.
'Why did he not stop when we called to him?' said the soldier. 'He is
as deaf, poor man, as a peat-stack,' answered the ready-witted
domestic. 'Let him be sent for directly.' The real shepherd accordingly
was brought from the hill, and, as there was time to tutor him by the
way, he was as deaf when he made his appearance as was necessary to
sustain his character. Invernahyle was afterwards pardoned under the
Act of Indemnity.

The Author knew him well, and has often heard these circumstances from
his own mouth. He was a noble specimen of the old Highlander, far
descended, gallant, courteous, and brave, even to chivalry. He had been
out, I believe, in 1715 and 1745, was an active partaker in all the
stirring scenes which passed in the Highlands betwixt these memorable
eras; and, I have heard, was remarkable, among other exploits, for
having fought a duel with the broadsword with the celebrated Rob Roy
MacGregor at the clachan of Balquidder.

Invernahyle chanced to be in Edinburgh when Paul Jones came into the
Firth of Forth, and though then an old man, I saw him in arms, and
heard him exult (to use his own words) in the prospect of drawing his
claymore once more before he died.' In fact, on that memorable
occasion, when the capital of Scotland was menaced by three trifling
sloops or brigs, scarce fit to have sacked a fishing village, he was
the only man who seemed to propose a plan of resistance. He offered to
the magistrates, if broadswords and dirks could be obtained, to find as
many Highlanders among the lower classes as would cut off any boat's
crew who might be sent into a town full of narrow and winding passages,
in which they were like to disperse in quest of plunder. I know not if
his plan was attended to, I rather think it seemed too hazardous to the
constituted authorities, who might not, even at that time, desire to
see arms in Highland hands. A steady and powerful west wind settled the
matter by sweeping Paul Jones and his vessels out of the Firth.

If there is something degrading in this recollection, it is not
unpleasant to compare it with those of the last war, when Edinburgh,
besides regular forces and militia, furnished a volunteer brigade of
cavalry, infantry, and artillery to the amount of six thousand men and
upwards, which was in readiness to meet and repel a force of a far more
formidable description than was commanded by the adventurous American.
Time and circumstances change the character of nations and the fate of
cities; and it is some pride to a Scotchman to reflect that the
independent and manly character of a country, willing to entrust its
own protection to the arms of its children, after having been obscured
for half a century, has, during the course of his own lifetime,
recovered its lustre.

Other illustrations of Waverley will be found in the Notes at the foot
of the pages to which they belong. Those which appeared too long to be
so placed are given at the end of the chapters to which they severally
relate. [Footnote: In this edition at the end of the several volumes.]





PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION


To this slight attempt at a sketch of ancient Scottish manners the
public have been more favourable than the Author durst have hoped or
expected. He has heard, with a mixture of satisfaction and humility,
his work ascribed to more than one respectable name. Considerations,
which seem weighty in his particular situation, prevent his releasing
those gentlemen from suspicion by placing his own name in the
title-page; so that, for the present at least, it must remain uncertain
whether Waverley be the work of a poet or a critic, a lawyer or a
clergyman, or whether the writer, to use Mrs. Malaprop's phrase, be,
'like Cerberus, three gentlemen at once.' The Author, as he is
unconscious of anything in the work itself (except perhaps its
frivolity) which prevents its finding an acknowledged father, leaves it
to the candour of the public to choose among the many circumstances
peculiar to different situations in life such as may induce him to
suppress his name on the present occasion. He may be a writer new to
publication, and unwilling to avow a character to which he is
unaccustomed; or he may be a hackneyed author, who is ashamed of too
frequent appearance, and employs this mystery, as the heroine of the
old comedy used her mask, to attract the attention of those to whom her
face had become too familiar. He may be a man of a grave profession, to
whom the reputation of being a novel-writer might be prejudicial; or he
may be a man of fashion, to whom writing of any kind might appear
pedantic. He may be too young to assume the character of an author, or
so old as to make it advisable to lay it aside.

The Author of Waverley has heard it objected to this novel, that, in
the character of Callum Beg and in the account given by the Baron of
Bradwardine of the petty trespasses of the Highlanders upon trifling
articles of property, he has borne hard, and unjustly so, upon their
national character. Nothing could be farther from his wish or
intention. The character of Callum Beg is that of a spirit naturally
turned to daring evil, and determined, by the circumstances of his
situation, to a particular species of mischief. Those who have perused
the curious Letters from the Highlands, published about 1726, will find
instances of such atrocious characters which fell under the writer's
own observation, though it would be most unjust to consider such
villains as representatives of the Highlanders of that period, any more
than the murderers of Marr and Williamson can be supposed to represent
the English of the present day. As for the plunder supposed to have
been picked up by some of the insurgents in 1745, it must be remembered
that, although the way of that unfortunate little army was neither
marked by devastation nor bloodshed, but, on the contrary, was orderly
and quiet in a most wonderful degree, yet no army marches through a
country in a hostile manner without committing some depredations; and
several, to the extent and of the nature jocularly imputed to them by
the Baron, were really laid to the charge of the Highland insurgents;
for which many traditions, and particularly one respecting the Knight
of the Mirror, may be quoted as good evidence. [Footnote: A homely
metrical narrative of the events of the period, which contains some
striking particulars, and is still a great favourite with the lower
classes, gives a very correct statement of the behaviour of the
mountaineers respecting this same military license; and, as the verses
are little known, and contain some good sense, we venture to insert
them.]





THE AUTHOR'S ADDRESS TO ALL IN GENERAL


    Now, gentle readers, I have let you ken
    My very thoughts, from heart and pen,
    'Tis needless for to conten'
                  Or yet controule,
    For there's not a word o't I can men';
                  So ye must thole.

    For on both sides some were not good;
    I saw them murd'ring in cold blood,
    Not the gentlemen, but wild and rude,
                  The baser sort,
    Who to the wounded had no mood
                  But murd'ring sport!

    Ev'n both at Preston and Falkirk,
    That fatal night ere it grew mirk,
    Piercing the wounded with their durk,
                  Caused many cry!
    Such pity's shown from Savage and Turk
                  As peace to die.

    A woe be to such hot zeal,
    To smite the wounded on the fiell!
    It's just they got such groats in kail,
                  Who do the same.
    It only teaches crueltys real
                  To them again.

    I've seen the men call'd Highland rogues,
    With Lowland men make shangs a brogs,
    Sup kail and brose, and fling the cogs
                  Out at the door,
    Take cocks, hens, sheep, and hogs,
                  And pay nought for.

    I saw a Highlander,'t was right drole,
    With a string of puddings hung on a pole,
    Whip'd o'er his shoulder, skipped like a fole,
                        Caus'd Maggy bann,
    Lap o'er the midden and midden-hole,
                        And aff he ran.

    When check'd for this, they'd often tell ye,
    'Indeed her nainsell's a tume belly;
    You'll no gie't wanting bought, nor sell me;
                        Hersell will hae't;
    Go tell King Shorge, and Shordy's Willie,
                        I'll hae a meat.'

    I saw the soldiers at Linton-brig,
    Because the man was not a Whig,
    Of meat and drink leave not a skig,
                        Within his door;
    They burnt his very hat and wig,
                        And thump'd him sore.

    And through the Highlands they were so rude,
    As leave them neither clothes nor food,
    Then burnt their houses to conclude;
                        'T was tit for tat.
    How can her nainsell e'er be good,
                        To think on that?

    And after all, O, shame and grief!
    To use some worse than murd'ring thief,
    Their very gentleman and chief,
                        Unhumanly!
    Like Popish tortures, I believe,
                        Such cruelty.

    Ev'n what was act on open stage
    At Carlisle, in the hottest rage,
    When mercy was clapt in a cage,
                        And pity dead,
    Such cruelty approv'd by every age,
                        I shook my head.

    So many to curse, so few to pray,
    And some aloud huzza did cry;
    They cursed the rebel Scots that day,
                        As they'd been nowt
    Brought up for slaughter, as that way
                        Too many rowt.

    Therefore, alas! dear countrymen,
    O never do the like again,
    To thirst for vengeance, never ben'
                        Your gun nor pa',
    But with the English e'en borrow and len',
                        Let anger fa'.

    Their boasts and bullying, not worth a louse,
    As our King's the best about the house.
    'T is ay good to be sober and douce,
                        To live in peace;
    For many, I see, for being o'er crouse,
                        Gets broken face.





WAVERLEY

OR 'TIS SIXTY YEARS SINCE





CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY


The title of this work has not been chosen without the grave and solid
deliberation which matters of importance demand from the prudent. Even
its first, or general denomination, was the result of no common
research or selection, although, according to the example of my
predecessors, I had only to seize upon the most sounding and euphonic
surname that English history or topography affords, and elect it at
once as the title of my work and the name of my hero. But, alas! what
could my readers have expected from the chivalrous epithets of Howard,
Mordaunt, Mortimer, or Stanley, or from the softer and more sentimental
sounds of Belmour, Belville, Belfield, and Belgrave, but pages of
inanity, similar to those which have been so christened for half a
century past? I must modestly admit I am too diffident of my own merit
to place it in unnecessary opposition to preconceived associations; I
have, therefore, like a maiden knight with his white shield, assumed
for my hero, WAVERLEY, an uncontaminated name, bearing with its sound
little of good or evil, excepting what the reader shall hereafter be
pleased to affix to it. But my second or supplemental title was a
matter of much more difficult election, since that, short as it is, may
be held as pledging the author to some special mode of laying his
scene, drawing his characters, and managing his adventures. Had I, for
example, announced in my frontispiece, 'Waverley, a Tale of other
Days,' must not every novel-reader have anticipated a castle scarce
less than that of Udolpho, of which the eastern wing had long been
uninhabited, and the keys either lost, or consigned to the care of some
aged butler or housekeeper, whose trembling steps, about the middle of
the second volume, were doomed to guide the hero, or heroine, to the
ruinous precincts? Would not the owl have shrieked and the cricket
cried in my very title-page? and could it have been possible for me,
with a moderate attention to decorum, to introduce any scene more
lively than might be produced by the jocularity of a clownish but
faithful valet, or the garrulous narrative of the heroine's
fille-de-chambre, when rehearsing the stories of blood and horror which
she had heard in the servants' hall? Again, had my title borne,
'Waverley, a Romance from the German,' what head so obtuse as not to
image forth a profligate abbot, an oppressive duke, a secret and
mysterious association of Rosycrucians and Illuminati, with all their
properties of black cowls, caverns, daggers, electrical machines,
trap-doors, and dark-lanterns? Or if I had rather chosen to call my
work a 'Sentimental Tale,' would it not have been a sufficient presage
of a heroine with a profusion of auburn hair, and a harp, the soft
solace of her solitary hours, which she fortunately finds always the
means of transporting from castle to cottage, although she herself be
sometimes obliged to jump out of a two-pair-of-stairs window, and is
more than once bewildered on her journey, alone and on foot, without
any guide but a blowzy peasant girl, whose jargon she hardly can
understand? Or, again, if my Waverley had been entitled 'A Tale of the
Times,' wouldst thou not, gentle reader, have demanded from me a
dashing sketch of the fashionable world, a few anecdotes of private
scandal thinly veiled, and if lusciously painted, so much the better? a
heroine from Grosvenor Square, and a hero from the Barouche Club or the
Four-in-Hand, with a set of subordinate characters from the elegantes
of Queen Anne Street East, or the dashing heroes of the Bow-Street
Office? I could proceed in proving the importance of a title-page, and
displaying at the same time my own intimate knowledge of the particular
ingredients necessary to the composition of romances and novels of
various descriptions;--but it is enough, and I scorn to tyrannise
longer over the impatience of my reader, who is doubtless already
anxious to know the choice made by an author so profoundly versed in
the different branches of his art.

By fixing, then, the date of my story Sixty Years before this present
1st November, 1805, I would have my readers understand, that they will
meet in the following pages neither a romance of chivalry nor a tale of
modern manners; that my hero will neither have iron on his shoulders,
as of yore, nor on the heels of his boots, as is the present fashion of
Bond Street; and that my damsels will neither be clothed 'in purple and
in pall,' like the Lady Alice of an old ballad, nor reduced to the
primitive nakedness of a modern fashionable at a rout. From this my
choice of an era the understanding critic may farther presage that the
object of my tale is more a description of men than manners. A tale of
manners, to be interesting, must either refer to antiquity so great as
to have become venerable, or it must bear a vivid reflection of those
scenes which are passing daily before our eyes, and are interesting
from their novelty. Thus the coat-of-mail of our ancestors, and the
triple-furred pelisse of our modern beaux, may, though for very
different reasons, be equally fit for the array of a fictitious
character; but who, meaning the costume of his hero to be impressive,
would willingly attire him in the court dress of George the Second's
reign, with its no collar, large sleeves, and low pocket-holes? The
same may be urged, with equal truth, of the Gothic hall, which, with
its darkened and tinted windows, its elevated and gloomy roof, and
massive oaken table garnished with boar's-head and rosemary, pheasants
and peacocks, cranes and cygnets, has an excellent effect in fictitious
description. Much may also be gained by a lively display of a modern
fete, such as we have daily recorded in that part of a newspaper
entitled the Mirror of Fashion, if we contrast these, or either of
them, with the splendid formality of an entertainment given Sixty Years
Since; and thus it will be readily seen how much the painter of antique
or of fashionable manners gains over him who delineates those of the
last generation.

Considering the disadvantages inseparable from this part of my subject,
I must be understood to have resolved to avoid them as much as
possible, by throwing the force of my narrative upon the characters and
passions of the actors;--those passions common to men in all stages of
society, and which have alike agitated the human heart, whether it
throbbed under the steel corslet of the fifteenth century, the brocaded
coat of the eighteenth, or the blue frock and white dimity waistcoat of
the present day. [Footnote: Alas' that attire, respectable and
gentlemanlike in 1805, or thereabouts, is now as antiquated as the
Author of Waverley has himself become since that period! The reader of
fashion will please to fill up the costume with an embroidered
waistcoat of purple velvet or silk, and a coat of whatever colour he
pleases.] Upon these passions it is no doubt true that the state of
manners and laws casts a necessary colouring; but the bearings, to use
the language of heraldry, remain the same, though the tincture may be
not only different, but opposed in strong contradistinction. The wrath
of our ancestors, for example, was coloured gules; it broke forth in
acts of open and sanguinary violence against the objects of its fury.
Our malignant feelings, which must seek gratification through more
indirect channels, and undermine the obstacles which they cannot openly
bear down, may be rather said to be tinctured sable. But the
deep-ruling impulse is the same in both cases; and the proud peer, who
can now only ruin his neighbour according to law, by protracted suits,
is the genuine descendant of the baron who wrapped the castle of his
competitor in flames, and knocked him on the head as he endeavoured to
escape from the conflagration. It is from the great book of Nature, the
same through a thousand editions, whether of black-letter, or wire-wove
and hot-pressed, that I have venturously essayed to read a chapter to
the public. Some favourable opportunities of contrast have been
afforded me by the state of society in the northern part of the island
at the period of my history, and may serve at once to vary and to
illustrate the moral lessons, which I would willingly consider as the
most important part of my plan; although I am sensible how short these
will fall of their aim if I shall be found unable to mix them with
amusement--a task not quite so easy in this critical generation as it
was 'Sixty Years Since.'





CHAPTER II

WAVERLEY-HONOUR--A RETROSPECT


It is, then, sixty years since Edward Waverley, the hero of the
following pages, took leave of his family, to join the regiment of
dragoons in which he had lately obtained a commission. It was a
melancholy day at Waverley-Honour when the young officer parted with
Sir Everard, the affectionate old uncle to whose title and estate he
was presumptive heir.

A difference in political opinions had early separated the Baronet from
his younger brother Richard Waverley, the father of our hero. Sir
Everard had inherited from his sires the whole train of Tory or
High-Church predilections and prejudices which had distinguished the
house of Waverley since the Great Civil War. Richard, on the contrary,
who was ten years younger, beheld himself born to the fortune of a
second brother, and anticipated neither dignity nor entertainment in
sustaining the character of Will Wimble. He saw early that, to succeed
in the race of life, it was necessary he should carry as little weight
as possible. Painters talk of the difficulty of expressing the
existence of compound passions in the same features at the same moment;
it would be no less difficult for the moralist to analyse the mixed
motives which unite to form the impulse of our actions. Richard
Waverley read and satisfied himself from history and sound argument
that, in the words of the old song,

      Passive obedience was a jest,
      And pshaw! was non-resistance;

yet reason would have probably been unable to combat and remove
hereditary prejudice could Richard have anticipated that his elder
brother, Sir Everard, taking to heart an early disappointment, would
have remained a bachelor at seventy-two. The prospect of succession,
however remote, might in that case have led him to endure dragging
through the greater part of his life as 'Master Richard at the Hall,
the Baronet's brother,' in the hope that ere its conclusion he should
be distinguished as Sir Richard Waverley of Waverley-Honour, successor
to a princely estate, and to extended political connections as head of
the county interest in the shire where it lay.

But this was a consummation of things not to be expected at Richard's
outset, when Sir Everard was in the prime of life, and certain to be an
acceptable suitor in almost any family, whether wealth or beauty should
be the object of his pursuit, and when, indeed, his speedy marriage was
a report which regularly amused the neighbourhood once a year. His
younger brother saw no practicable road to independence save that of
relying upon his own exertions, and adopting a political creed more
consonant both to reason and his own interest than the hereditary faith
of Sir Everard in High-Church and in the house of Stuart. He therefore
read his recantation at the beginning of his career, and entered life
as an avowed Whig and friend of the Hanover succession.

The ministry of George the First's time were prudently anxious to
diminish the phalanx of opposition. The Tory nobility, depending for
their reflected lustre upon the sunshine of a court, had for some time
been gradually reconciling themselves to the new dynasty. But the
wealthy country gentlemen of England, a rank which retained, with much
of ancient manners and primitive integrity, a great proportion of
obstinate and unyielding prejudice, stood aloof in haughty and sullen
opposition, and cast many a look of mingled regret and hope to Bois le
Due, Avignon, and Italy. [Footnote: Where the Chevalier St. George, or,
as he was termed, the Old Pretender, held his exiled court, as his
situation compelled him to shift his place of residence.] The accession
of the near relation of one of those steady and inflexible opponents
was considered as a means of bringing over more converts, and therefore
Richard Waverley met with a share of ministerial favour more than
proportioned to his talents or his political importance. It was,
however, discovered that he had respectable talents for public
business, and the first admittance to the minister's levee being
negotiated, his success became rapid. Sir Everard learned from the
public 'News-Letter,' first, that Richard Waverley, Esquire, was
returned for the ministerial borough of Barterfaith; next, that Richard
Waverley, Esquire, had taken a distinguished part in the debate upon
the Excise Bill in the support of government; and, lastly, that Richard
Waverley, Esquire, had been honoured with a seat at one of those boards
where the pleasure of serving the country is combined with other
important gratifications, which, to render them the more acceptable,
occur regularly once a quarter.

Although these events followed each other so closely that the sagacity
of the editor of a modern newspaper would have presaged the two last
even while he announced the first, yet they came upon Sir Everard
gradually, and drop by drop, as it were, distilled through the cool and
procrastinating alembic of Dyer's 'Weekly Letter.' [Footnote: See Note
I. ] For it may be observed in passing, that instead of those
mail-coaches, by means of which every mechanic at his six-penny club,
may nightly learn from twenty contradictory channels the yesterday's
news of the capital, a weekly post brought, in those days, to
Waverley-Honour, a Weekly Intelligencer, which, after it had gratified
Sir Everard's curiosity, his sister's, and that of his aged butler, was
regularly transferred from the Hall to the Rectory, from the Rectory to
Squire Stubbs's at the Grange, from the Squire to the Baronet's steward
at his neat white house on the heath, from the steward to the bailiff,
and from him through a huge circle of honest dames and gaffers, by
whose hard and horny hands it was generally worn to pieces in about a
month after its arrival.

This slow succession of intelligence was of some advantage to Richard
Waverley in the case before us; for, had the sum total of his
enormities reached the ears of Sir Everard at once, there can be no
doubt that the new commissioner would have had little reason to pique
himself on the success of his politics. The Baronet, although the
mildest of human beings, was not without sensitive points in his
character; his brother's conduct had wounded these deeply; the Waverley
estate was fettered by no entail (for it had never entered into the
head of any of its former possessors that one of their progeny could be
guilty of the atrocities laid by Dyer's 'Letter' to the door of
Richard), and if it had, the marriage of the proprietor might have been
fatal to a collateral heir. These various ideas floated through the
brain of Sir Everard without, however, producing any determined
conclusion.

He examined the tree of his genealogy, which, emblazoned with many an
emblematic mark of honour and heroic achievement, hung upon the
well-varnished wainscot of his hall. The nearest descendants of Sir
Hildebrand Waverley, failing those of his eldest son Wilfred, of whom
Sir Everard and his brother were the only representatives, were, as
this honoured register informed him (and, indeed, as he himself well
knew), the Waverleys of Highley Park, com. Hants; with whom the main
branch, or rather stock, of the house had renounced all connection
since the great law-suit in 1670.

This degenerate scion had committed a farther offence against the head
and source of their gentility, by the intermarriage of their
representative with Judith, heiress of Oliver Bradshawe, of Highley
Park, whose arms, the same with those of Bradshawe the regicide, they
had quartered with the ancient coat of Waverley. These offences,
however, had vanished from Sir Everard's recollection in the heat of
his resentment; and had Lawyer Clippurse, for whom his groom was
despatched express, arrived but an hour earlier, he might have had the
benefit of drawing a new settlement of the lordship and manor of
Waverley-Honour, with all its dependencies. But an hour of cool
reflection is a great matter when employed in weighing the comparative
evil of two measures to neither of which we are internally partial.
Lawyer Clippurse found his patron involved in a deep study, which he
was too respectful to disturb, otherwise than by producing his paper
and leathern ink-case, as prepared to minute his honour's commands.
Even this slight manoeuvre was embarrassing to Sir Everard, who felt it
as a reproach to his indecision. He looked at the attorney with some
desire to issue his fiat, when the sun, emerging from behind a cloud,
poured at once its chequered light through the stained window of the
gloomy cabinet in which they were seated. The Baronet's eye, as he
raised it to the splendour, fell right upon the central scutcheon,
inpressed with the same device which his ancestor was said to have
borne in the field of Hastings,--three ermines passant, argent, in a
field azure, with its appropriate motto, Sans tache. 'May our name
rather perish,' exclaimed Sir Everard, 'than that ancient and loyal
symbol should be blended with the dishonoured insignia of a traitorous
Roundhead!'

All this was the effect of the glimpse of a sunbeam, just sufficient to
light Lawyer Clippurse to mend his pen. The pen was mended in vain. The
attorney was dismissed, with directions to hold himself in readiness on
the first summons.

The apparition of Lawyer Clippurse at the Hall occasioned much
speculation in that portion of the world to which Waverley-Honour
formed the centre. But the more judicious politicians of this microcosm
augured yet worse consequences to Richard Waverley from a movement
which shortly followed his apostasy. This was no less than an excursion
of the Baronet in his coach-and-six, with four attendants in rich
liveries, to make a visit of some duration to a noble peer on the
confines of the shire, of untainted descent, steady Tory principles,
and the happy father of six unmarried and accomplished daughters.

Sir Everard's reception in this family was, as it may be easily
conceived, sufficiently favourable; but of the six young ladies, his
taste unfortunately determined him in favour of Lady Emily, the
youngest, who received his attentions with an embarrassment which
showed at once that she durst not decline them, and that they afforded
her anything but pleasure.

Sir Everard could not but perceive something uncommon in the restrained
emotions which the young lady testified at the advances he hazarded;
but, assured by the prudent Countess that they were the natural effects
of a retired education, the sacrifice might have been completed, as
doubtless has happened in many similar instances, had it not been for
the courage of an elder sister, who revealed to the wealthy suitor that
Lady Emily's affections were fixed upon a young soldier of fortune, a
near relation of her own.

Sir Everard manifested great emotion on receiving this intelligence,
which was confirmed to him, in a private interview, by the young lady
herself, although under the most dreadful apprehensions of her father's
indignation.

Honour and generosity were hereditary attributes of the house of
Waverley. With a grace and delicacy worthy the hero of a romance, Sir
Everard withdrew his claim to the hand of Lady Emily. He had even,
before leaving Blandeville Castle, the address to extort from her
father a consent to her union with the object of her choice. What
