the barbarians, the double S being changed to T).

[Adenystrae was a strong post to which one Sentius, a
centurion, had been sent as an envoy to Mebarsapes. He was imprisoned by
the latter in that place, and later, at the approach of the Romans, he
made an arrangement with some of his fellow-prisoners, and with their aid
escaped from his shackles, killed the commander of the garrison, and
opened the gates to his countrymen.] [Sidenote:--26--] Hereupon they
advanced as far as Babylon itself, being quite free from molestation,
since the Parthian power had been ruined by civil conflicts and was still
at this time involved in dissensions.

[Sidenote:--27--] Cassius Dio Cocceianus in writings concerning the Latins
has written that this city [i.e. Babylon] comprised a circuit of four
hundred stades. (Compare also Tzetzes, Exegesis of Homer's Iliad, p. 141,
15 ff).

Here, moreover, Trajan saw the asphalt out of which the walls of Babylon
had been built. When mixed with baked bricks or smooth stones this
material affords so great strength as to render them stronger than rock or
any kind of iron. He also looked at the opening from which issues a deadly
vapor that destroys any creature living upon the earth and any winged
thing that so much as inhales a breath of it. If it extended far above
ground or had several vents, the place would not be inhabitable; but, as
it is, this gas circles round within itself and remains stationary. Hence
creatures that fly high enough above it and such as remain to one side are
safe. I saw another opening like it at Hierapolis in Asia, and tested it
by means of birds; I bent over it myself and myself gazed down upon the
vapor. It is enclosed in a sort of a cistern and a theatre had been built
over it. It destroys all living things save human beings that have been
emasculated. The reason for that I can not comprehend. I relate what I
have seen as I have seen it and what I have heard as I have heard it.

[Sidenote: A.D. 116 (a.u. 869)] Trajan had planned to conduct the
Euphrates through a channel into the Tigris, in order that boats might be
floated down by this route, affording him an opportunity to make a bridge.
But on learning that it had a much higher elevation than the Tigris, he
did not do it, fearing that the water might rush pell-mell down hill and
render the Euphrates unnavigable. So he conveyed the boats across by means
of hauling engines at the point where the space between the rivers is the
least--the whole stream of the Euphrates empties into a swamp and from
there somehow joins the Tigris--then crossed the Tigris and entered
Ctesiphon. Having taken possession of this town he was saluted as
imperator and established his right to the title of Parthicus. Various
honors were voted him by the senate, among others the privilege of
celebrating as many triumphs as he might desire.

After his capture of Ctesiphon he felt a wish to sail down into the Red
Sea. This is a part of the ocean and has been so named [Footnote: [Greek:
erythra] from Erythras, who was said to have been drowned in it (as if in
English we should invent a King Redd).] from some person formerly ruler
there. Mesene, the island in the Tigris of which Athambelus was king, he
acquired without difficulty. [And it remained loyal to Trajan, although
ordered to pay tribute.] But through a storm, and the violence of the
Tigris, and the backward flow from the ocean, he fell into danger. The
inhabitants of the so-called palisade of Spasinus [they were subject to
the dominion of Athambelus] received him kindly.

[Sidenote:--29--] Thence he came to the ocean itself, and when he had
learned its nature and seen a boat sailing to India, he said: "I should
certainly have crossed over to the Indi, if I were still young." He gave
much thought to the Indi, and was curious about their affairs. Alexander
he counted a happy man and at the same time declared that he himself had
advanced farther. This was the tenor of the despatch that he forwarded to
the senate, although he was unable to preserve even what territory had
been subdued. On its receipt he obtained among other honors the privilege
of celebrating a triumph for as many nations as he pleased. For, on
account of the number of those peoples regarding which communications in
writing were being constantly forwarded to them, they were unable to
understand them or even to name some of them correctly. So the citizens of
the capital prepared a trophy-bearing arch, besides many other decorations
in his own forum, and were getting themselves in readiness to meet him
some distance out when he should return. But he was destined never to
reach Rome again nor to accomplish anything deserving comparison with his
previous exploits, and furthermore to lose even those earlier
acquisitions. For, during the time that he was sailing down the ocean and
returning from there again, all his conquests were thrown into tumult and
revolted. And the garrisons placed among the various peoples were in some
cases driven out and in others killed.

[Sidenote:--30--] Trajan ascertained this in Babylon. [Footnote: The
Tauchnitz reading, [Greek: en ploio] will not fit the context. Just below
[Greek: ithous] (Bekker) has to be read for [Greek: mythous].] He had
taken the side-trip there on the basis of reports, unmerited by aught that
he saw (which were merely mounds and stones and ruins), and for the sake
of Alexander, to whose spirit he offered sacrifice in the room where he
had died. When, therefore, he ascertained it, he sent Lusius and Maximus
against the rebels. The latter perished after a defeat in the field; but
Lusius was generally successful, recovering Nisibis, besieging Edessa,
plundering and burning. Seleucia was also captured by Erucius Clarus and
Julius Alexander, lieutenants, and was burned. Trajan, in fear that the
Parthians, too, might begin some revolt, decided to give them a king of
their own. And when he came to Ctesiphon he called together in a great
plain all the Romans and likewise all the Parthians that were there at the
time. He mounted a lofty platform, and, after describing in lofty language
what he had accomplished, he appointed Parthamaspates king of the
Parthians and set the diadem upon his head.

[Sidenote: LXXV, 9, 6] When Volgaesus, the son of Sanatruces, confronted
in battle array the followers of Severus and before coming to an actual
test of strength asked and secured an armistice, Trajan sent envoys to him
and granted him a portion of Armenia in return for peace.

[Sidenote:--31--] Next he came into Arabia and commenced operations
against the people of Hatra, since they, too, had revolted. This city is
neither large nor prosperous. The surrounding country is mostly desert and
holds no water (save a small amount, poor in quality), nor timber, nor
herb. It is protected by these very features, which make a siege in any
form impossible, and by the Sun, to whom it is, in a way, consecrated. It
was neither at this time taken by Trajan nor later by Severus, although
they knocked down some parts of its wall. Trajan sent the cavalry ahead
against the wall but failed in his attempt, and the attacking force was
hurled back into the camp. As he was riding by, he barely missed being
wounded himself, in spite of the fact that he had laid aside his imperial
attire to avoid being recognized. Seeing the majestic gray head and his
august countenance they suspected him to be the man he was, shot at him,
and killed a cavalryman in his escort. There were peals of thunder and
rainbow tints glimmered indistinctly. Flashes of lightning and spray-like
storms, hail and thunderbolts fell upon the Romans as often as they made
assaults. And whenever they ate a meal, flies settled on the food and
drink causing universal discomfort. Thus Trajan left the place and not
long after began to fail in health.

[Sidenote:--32--] Meanwhile the Jews in the region of Cyrene had put one
Andreas at their head and were destroying both the Romans and the Greeks.
They would cook their flesh, make belts for themselves of their entrails,
anoint themselves with their blood, and wear their skins for clothing.
Many they sawed in two, from the head downwards. Others they would give to
wild beasts and force still others to fight as gladiators. In all,
consequently, two hundred and twenty thousand perished. In Egypt, also,
they performed many similar deeds, and in Cyprus under the leadership of
Artemio. There, likewise, two hundred and forty thousand perished. For
this reason no Jew may set foot in that land, but even if one of them is
driven upon the island by force of the wind, he is put to death. Various
persons took part in subduing these Jews, one being Lusius, who was sent
by Trajan.

[Lusius Quietus was a Moor, himself a leader of the
Moors, and had belonged to [Footnote: Some puzzling corruption in the MS.]
a troop in the cavalry. Condemned for base conduct he was temporarily
relieved of his command and dishonored. [Footnote: Probably in the days of
Domitian.] But later, when the Dacian war came on and the army stood in
need of the Moorish alliance, he came to it of his own accord and gave
great exhibitions of prowess. For this he was honored, and in the second
war performed far greater and more numerous exploits. Finally, he advanced
so far in bravery and good fortune during this war which we are
considering that he was enrolled among the ex-praetors, became consul, and
governed Palestine. To this chiefly was due the jealousy and hatred felt
for him, and his destruction.] Now when Trajan had invaded the hostile
territory, the satraps and kings of that region approached him with gifts.
 One of these gifts was a horse taught to do obeisance. It would kneel
with its front legs and place its head beneath the feet of whoever stood
near.

[Sidenote: A.D. 117 (a.u. 870)] [Sidenote:--33--] Now Trajan was preparing
to make a new expedition into Mesopotamia. Finding himself, however, held
fast by the clutches of the disease, he started to sail to Italy himself
and left behind Publius Aelius Hadrian with the army in Syria. So the
Romans, who had conquered Armenia, most of Mesopotamia, and the Parthians,
had labored in vain and had vainly undergone danger. The Parthians
disdained Parthamaspates and began to have kings according to their
original custom. Trajan suspected that his falling sick was due to the
administration of poison. Some declare it was because his blood, which
annually descended into the lower part of his body, was kept from flowing.
He had also become paralyzed, so that part of his body was disabled, and
his general diathesis was dropsical. And on coming to Selinus in Cilicia,
which we also call Traianoupolis, he suddenly expired after a reign of
nineteen years, six months, and fifteen days.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY
69

Hadrian without being adopted succeeds, through the favor of Plotina
(chapters 1, 2).

About the assassinations authorized by Hadrian: about his varied learning
and jealousies (chapters 3, 4).

His virtues, particularly affability and generosity: old arrears of debt
forgiven (chapters 5, 8).

Travels: discipline of the army reformed: interest in hunting (chapters 9,
10).

How he honored Antinous with various marks of remembrance (chapter 11).

Uprising of Jews on account of the founding of Capitolina: Bithynia
recovered (chapters 12-14).

The Albanians are held in check: Pharasmanes the Iberian is honored
(chapter 15).

The Temple of Jupiter Olympius and the Panellenium are consecrated
(chapter 16).

Growing ill, he adopts Commodus, slays Servianus: the distinguished
services of Turbo, Fronto, Similis (chapters 17-19).

On the death of Commodus he adopts Antoninus, the latter adopting at the
same time Marcus and Verus (chapters 20, 21).

How Hadrian departed this life (chapters 22, 23).


DURATION OF TIME.

Quinctius Niger, Vipsanius Apronianus. (A.D. 117 = a.u. 870 = First of
Hadrian, from Aug. 11th).

Hadrianus Aug. (II), Claudius Fuseus Salinator. (A.D. 118 = a.u. 871 =
Second of Hadrian).

Hadrianus Aug. (III), Q. Iunius Rusticus. (A.D. 119 = a.u. 872 = Third of
Hadrian).

L. Catilius Severus, T. Aurelius Fulvus. (A.D. 120 = a.u. 873 = Fourth of
Hadrian).

L. Annius Verus, Aur. Augurinus. (A.D. 121 = a.u. 874 = Fifth of Hadrian).

Acilius Aviola, Corellius Pansa. (A.D. 122 = a.u. 875 = Sixth of Hadrian).
Q. Arrius Paetinus, C. Ventidius Apronianus. (A.D. 123 = a.u. 876 =
Seventh of Hadrian).

Manius Acilius Glabrio, C. Bellicius Torquatus. (A.D. 124 = a.u. 877 =
Eighth of Hadrian).

P. Corn. Scipio Asiaticus (II), Q. Vettius Aquilinus. (A.D. 125 = a.u. 878
= Ninth of Hadrian).

Annius Verus (III), L. Varius Ambibulus. (A.D. 126 = a.u. 879 = Tenth of
Hadrian).

Gallicianus, Caelius Titianus. (A.D. 127 = a.u. 880 = Eleventh of
Hadrian).

L. Nonius Asprenas Torquatus (II), M. Annius Libo. (A.D. 128 = a.u. 881 =
Twelfth of Hadrian).

Iuventius Celsus (II), Marcellus. (A.D. 129 = a.u. 882 = Thirteenth of
Hadrian).

Q. Fabius Catullinus, M. Flavius Aper. (A.D. 130 = a.u. 883 = Fourteenth
of Hadrian).

Ser. Octav. Laenas Pontianus, M. Antonius Rufinus. (A.D. 131 = a.u. 884 =
Fifteenth of Hadrian).

Augurinus, Severianus (or, according to others, Sergianus). (A.D. 132 =
a.u. 885 = Sixteenth of Hadrian).

Hiberus, Iunius Silanus Sisenna. (A.D. 133 = a.u. 886 = Seventeenth of
Hadrian).

Servianus (III), Vibius Varus. (A.D. 134 = a.u. 887 = Eighteenth of
Hadrian).

Pontianus, Atilianus. (A.D. 135 = a.u. 888 = Nineteenth of Hadrian).

L. Ceionius Commodus Verus, Sex. Vetulenus Civica Pompeianus. (A.D. 136 =
a.u. 889 = Twentieth of Hadrian).

L. Aelius Verus Caesar, P. Caelius Balbinus Vibullius. (A.D. 137 = a.u.
890 = Twenty-first of Hadrian).

Camerinus, Niger. (A.D. 138 = a.u. 891 = Twenty-second of Hadrian, to July
10th).


[Sidenote: A.D. 117 (a.u. 870)] [Sidenote:--1--] Hadrian had not been
adopted by Trajan. He was merely a fellow-citizen of the latter, had
enjoyed Trajan's services as guardian, was of near kin to him, and had
married his niece. In fine, he was a companion of his, sharing his daily
life, and had been assigned to Syria for the Parthian War. However, he had
received no distinguishing mark of favor from Trajan and had not been one
of the first to be appointed consul. His position as Caesar and emperor
was due to the fact that, when Trajan died without an heir, Attianus, a
fellow-citizen and former guardian, together with Plotina, who was in love
with him, secured him the appointment,--their efforts being facilitated by
his proximity and his having a large force under his command. My father
Apronianus, who was governor of Cilicia, had ascertained accurately the
whole story about him. He used to relate the different incidents, and said
in particular that the death of Trajan was concealed for several days to
the end that the adoption might be announced. This was shown also by his
letters to the senate, the signature upon which was not his, but
Plotina's. She had not done this in any previous instance.

[Sidenote:--2--] At the time that he was declared emperor, Hadrian was in
Antioch, the metropolis of Syria, of which he was governor. In a dream
just before that day he seemed to see fire descend from heaven in the
midst of clear sky and wholly fair weather and fall first upon the left of
his throat and then upon the right also, though it neither frightened nor
injured him. And Hadrian wrote to the senate, asking that his sovereignty
be confirmed also by that body, and forbidding any measure to be voted (as
was so often done) either then or thereafter that contained any special
honor for him, unless he should first himself approve it.

The bones of Trajan were deposited in his column, and the so-called
Parthian games continued for a number of years. At a later date even this
observance, like many others, was abolished.

Hadrian's rule was in general most humane. [In a letter he expresses
himself with the greatest degree of consideration for others and swears
that he will neither do anything contrary to the public advantage nor put
to death any senator, calling down destruction upon himself, if he shall
transgress these principles in any way. But] Still he was spoken against
on account of some murders of excellent men that he had sanctioned in the
beginning of his reign and near the end of his life. And for this reason
he came near not being enrolled among the heroes. Those murdered at the
beginning were Palma and Celsus, Nigrinus and Lusius, the first two for
the alleged reason that they had conspired against him during a hunt, and
the others on certain other complaints, because they had great influence,
or were in a strong position as regards wealth and fame. Hadrian felt so
keenly the talk that was made about them that he defended himself and
declared upon oath that he had not ordered their deaths. Those that
perished at the end of the reign were Servianus and his grandson Fuscus.

Hadrian was a pleasant man to meet and his presence shed a kind of grace.

[Sidenote:--3--] As for Hadrian's family, he was a son of [a man of
senatorial rank, an ex-praetor] Hadrianus, [for thus he was named]. In
