
Then Dudda and the other rowers sank the boats, lest they should be seen
by chance, and so betray us and our crossing.

Now we went--I leading through this place I knew so well--round the
head of the little creek, and so on up the hill, walking in single file
almost, and very silently. And when we topped the hill--there before
us, among the tree trunks, glowed a little fire, and round that sat six
Danes, wrapped in their red cloaks, and, as I could see, all or most of
them asleep.

At that I stopped, and the line behind me stopped also, making a clatter
of arms as men ran against one another in the dark.

One of the Danes stirred at that, and looked up and round; but he could
see nothing, and so folded himself up again. Then I saw that they had an
ale cask.

Now I knew that this post must be surrounded and taken, and whispered to
Wulfhere, who was next me, what to do. And he answered that he would
manage it, bidding me stand still. Then he went down the line,
whispering in each man's ear, till he had told off twenty men, and them
he sent off right and left into the darkness and I was left with Wislac
standing alone, watching the Danes.

I kept my eyes fixed on them till they seemed to waver and grow dim, so
intently did I watch them; and then all of a sudden there was the sound
of a raven's croak, and into the firelight and on those careless
watchers leapt Wulfhere and his men from all around.

There was one choked cry, and that was all, and Wulfhere beckoned to me.
I advanced, and the line closed up and followed.

Now we stood on Combwich hill, and all was well so far. Ealhstan came up
to me, unknowing of what had caused the halt, being over the brow of the
hill, and when he knew, said it was well done, and that now we might
rest safely for a time.

So we bade the men sit down, and those who were wet made up the fire
afresh: for there was no need to put it out, but rather reason for
allowing the Danes to see it burning, as if in safety.

When we three sat by the bishop, Wislac asked what we were to wait for,
and, indeed, that must be the next thought.

Then said the bishop that after a while he would take the force to the
woods that overhung the roadway, and so wait for the Danes as Eanulf and
Osric drove them back; but that it was not more than midnight yet.

Then came a little silence, and in that I seemed to hear the sound of
footsteps coming up the hill from Combwich, and bade the others listen.
And at the same time some of the men heard the sound, and started up to
see who came. But they were the steps of one man only, walking carelessly.

Into the light of the fire stepped one, at the sight of whom the men
stared, though Wislac laughed quietly. It was that young thane who had
wanted to fight my friend Wislac on the day of the council. He was very
wet, and tired, throwing himself down beside us when he saw where we sat.

Ealhstan asked him who bade him come, and how he had followed us.

"Nearly had I forgotten a dispute I have with Wislac the Thane here.
Wherefore I asked no man's leave, but followed you just too late for the
crossing. So needs must swim. And here am I to see that Wislac counts
fairly, and that he may have the same surety of me."

Whereat we were obliged to laugh, and most of all the bishop, because he
would fain have been angry, and could not. Then the thane, whose name
was Aldhelm, asked who was the slain man over whose body he had
well-nigh fallen on the other side of the river. So I told them of Elgar
the fisher and of his brave deeds, and they were silent, thinking of
what his worth was; too great indeed for praise. Only the bishop said he
should surely have a mound raised over him as over a warrior, charging
us three, or whichever lived after this fight, to see to that.

Now we slept a little, posting sentries at many points, and giving those
next the Danes on either side the red cloaks of the picket we had slain,
lest daylight should betray them. It was in all our minds that at
daybreak our men would attack from Bridgwater, driving the Danes back on
us, and so we should fall on them while they were retreating, and
complete the victory. So we had men on the hill overlooking the road to
Bridgwater through Cannington that they might give us the first warning.

Therefore I slept quietly, and all with me. And as I slept I dreamed.

It seemed that I was standing alone on Brent Hill and from that I could
look all over the land of Somerset, as an eagle might look, but being
close to everything that I would see. And I saw all that I had done
since I stood there as a prisoner, watching myself curiously in all that
I did, and yet knowing all the thoughts that drove me to deed after deed.

And so through the mirk wood till I turned and slew, and armed myself,
and tormented my prisoner; then to the collier's hut, and my talking
with the child; then on till I saw the lights of the viking ships and so
thereafter bore the war arrow--everything, till at last I saw myself
sleeping under the trees, on the top of this hill of Combwich, and there
I thought my dream would surely end; but it did not.

For now out of the shadows came Matelgar and stood beside me and waked
me, and he told me that when the tide was out I must be up and doing.
And so he passed. And the old crone, Gundred, came out of the shadows,
and sat on her bundle of sticks and looked at me, and she too bade me be
up and doing when the tide was low. And she looked at the standard that
lay beside me, and said, "Aye, a standard; but not yet the Dragon of
Wessex"; and so she, too, faded away.

And then came Alswythe, and as she came, it seemed, as I looked, that I
stretched my arms to her; but she smiled and said, "Love, when the tide
is out, I shall be praying in the abbey for you and your men."

And then from beside her came Turkil, the little child, smiling also,
but hanging to Alswythe's dress as he said, "Warrior, when the water
falls low, my father will call me from the hill, and I will pray for you
and for him."

So these two were gone. And at that I seemed to see our men lie in
Bridgwater, and there was Turkil's father, the franklin, sleeping with
the rest. But up and down among them went Eanulf the Ealdorman, watching
ever.

Then fled I, as it were, to that hill where lay the Danes, and on the
road thither I saw Osric and twenty men, looking up at the fires that
burnt where the enemy lay.

And then I looked on those fires, and there were no men round them.

One shook me by the shoulder, and my dream went.

It was Dudda, and his eyes were bright in the firelight.

And over Brent the first streaks of dawn were broadening, and the mists
were gone.

"Master, master," he said, "come with me to the roadway. Something is
afoot."

Then I woke Wulfhere, asking him to wait for me, guarding the standard,
and followed my man swiftly to the place where the road cuts the hill.
And there was a knot of the men, standing and listening.

I listened also, and far off towards Cannington I could hear the sound
of the tread of many feet, for the morning was still and quiet; and the
men said that this was growing nearer.

Then knew I that the Danes were falling back to the ships without
risking battle, and my dream came back to me, with its vision of
unguarded watch fires, and it seemed to me that surely, unless we could
stay them, they would depart with the tide as it fell.

"How is the tide?" asked I of the men round me.

"Failing now," said one who knew, "but not fast."

Then I remembered things I had hardly noted in years gone by. How the
tide hung around Stert Point, as though Severn and Parret warred for a
while, before the mighty Severn ebb sucked Parret dry, and how the ebb
at last came swift and sudden.

"When the tide is low," said they whom I had seen in my dream.

And in a moment I recalled the first fight, and the words of Gundred,
and I knew that we had the Danes in a trap.

They were marching now in time to gain their ships and be off as the
last man stepped on board, with the full draft of the ebb to set them
out to sea beyond Lundy Isle, into open water. Nor had they left their
post till the last moment, lest our levy should be on their heels, or
else some more distant marauding party had not come in till late.

I went back to Wulfhere and told him this, and in it all he agreed.

And, as we whispered together, Ealhstan sat up, asking quickly, "Who
spoke to me?" and looking round for one near him, as it seemed.

"None spoke, Father," said I, "or none but Wulfhere to me, whispering."

"What said Wulfhere?"

"That the tide was failing," I answered.

The bishop was silent for a moment, and then he said:

"I heard a voice, plainly, that cried to me, 'Up! for the Lord has
delivered these heathen into your hands'."

"We heard no such voice, Father," I said, "but I think it spoke true."

Now the light was broadening, making all things cold and gray as it
came. And quickly I told Ealhstan what I had heard, and what both I and
Wulfhere thought of the matter.

"Can we let them pass us, and so fall on them as they gain the level
land of Stert?" asked Ealhstan, saying nothing more.

"That can we," I answered. "They will keep to the road, and we can draw
back to the edge of the hill, so taking them in flank as they leave it."

For the hills bend round a little beyond the place where the road falls
into the level below Matelgar's hall.

"So be it," said the bishop. "Go you, Wulfhere, and see how near the
host is, and come back quickly."

When he was gone the bishop bade me wake the men. And at first I was for
going round, but by this thane Wislac had waked, and had been listening
to us: and he said that if I would let him wake the men he could do it
without alarm or undue noise. Only I must raise the standard and bid
them be silent. At that the bishop smiled and nodded, and I raised the
standard, and waited.

Then Wislac stood up and crowed like a cock, and instantly the men began
to turn and sit up, and as their eyes lit on the standard raised in
their midst, became broad awake, each man rousing the next sleeper if
one lay near him. And there was the bishop, finger on lip, and they were
silent.

"Verily I thought on the hard chapel stones," muttered Guthlac, the lay
brother, behind me.

"It is the war chime, not the matin bell, you shall hear this morning,"
said one of his brethren.

"That is better--mea culpa," said Guthlac, clapping his hand on his
mouth to stop his own warlike ejaculation.

Then came Wulfhere back, swiftly. Barely a mile were they from the hill,
he said, and coming on quickly in loose order. Moreover, a horseman had
passed, riding hard to the ships, doubtless to bid them be ready. But
that would take little time, for these vikings are ever ready for
flight, keeping their ships prepared from day to day.



CHAPTER XV. THE GREAT FIGHT AT PARRET MOUTH.


Now very silently we drew off from that place to the edge of the hill
which looks across the road to Stert. And there the bishop drew us up in
line, four deep, and told the men what we must do, bidding them be
silent till we charged, though that could not prevent a hum of stern
approval going down the line.

One man the bishop called out by name, and when he stood before him,
bade him, as a swift runner, hasten back to Eanulf or Osric, and bid
them on here with all speed. And, when the man's face fell, the bishop
bade him cheer up and go, for the swifter he went the sooner would he be
back at the sword play. Whereat the man bowed, and, leaving his mail at
a tree foot, started at a steady run over the ground we had covered
already, and was lost in the trees.

Then we waited, and the light grew stronger every moment. As we lay in
line among the bushes we could see without much fear of being ourselves
seen, and by and by we could make out the ships. They had their masts
raised, and the sails were plain to be seen, ready for hoisting. The men
were busy about their decks, and on shore as well, while the vessels
were yet close up to the land.

They must haul off soon, little by little, or they would be aground, as
doubtless they had been with every tide till this, for rocks are none,
only soft mud on which a ship may lie safely, but through which no man
may go, save on such a "horse" as the fishers use to reach their nets
withal, sledge-like contrivances of flat boards which sink not.

The wait seemed long, but at last we heard the hum of voices, and the
tramp of feet, and our hearts beat fast and thick, for the time was coming.

Over the hill and down it they streamed in a long, loose line, laughing
and shouting as the ships came in sight. A long breath came from us, and
there was a little stir among the men; but the time was not yet, and we
crouched low, waiting to make our spring.

Then ran up a long red forked flag, with a black raven on it, from the
largest ship, and that seemed to be a signal for haste, for the tide was
failing, so that some of the foremost men began to stream away from
their comrades. And then I saw that many carried packs full of plunder,
and also that the last of them were on the level.

So also saw the bishop, and he rose to his feet, pointing with the great
mace he bore (for he might not wield sword) to the Danes, and saying:

"For the honour of Dorset--for the holy cross--charge!"

With a mighty shout we rose up, each in his place, and down the hill we
rushed sword and axe aloft, on that straggling line.

Then from the Danes came a howl of wrath and terror, and, for a moment,
dropping their burdens, they fled in a panic towards the ships.

Yet that was not the way of Danish men and vikings, and that flight
stayed almost before it had gone fifty yards. Up rose amidst the throng
a mighty double axe, and a great voice was heard shouting, and round
their chief began to form a great ring of tried warriors, shoulder to
shoulder as well as might be. But that ring might not be perfect all at
once--too close were we upon them, having already cut down many of the
last to fly.

And then the battle began in earnest, and I will tell what I saw of it.
For I was in the centre of our line, as befitted, and on either side of
me were Wulfhere and Wislac, and on either side of them again, my
collier next to Wulfhere, and next to Wislac his young thane. Before me
were Guthlac and two brethren, and the other three behind me. That was
the standard's shield wall. Behind that came Ealhstan the Bishop, hemmed
in by twelve of his own best men.

So, with voice, and gesture of arm and mace the bishop swung our line in
a half circle round the face of that grim ring of vikings, and as they
closed up we closed, and faced them. Then saw I that we were outnumbered
by three to one, but we were fresh, and they tired with a long march,
quickly made, and under burdens.

Now began the spears to fly from one side to the other, and men began to
fall. And yet there was no great attack made on either side. Then grew I
impatient, for it seemed to me that as we were the weaker side the first
charge might do all for us. So I spoke to Wulfhere, saying:

"We must charge before they. Let us break into that circle."

"Aye!" said the veteran, and "Aye!" shouted Wislac; and so I pointed the
banner forward and shouted for my shield men to charge.

And that, with a great roar, they did; and down before the brawny arms
of those foremost three lay brethren went three of the heathen, and we
were pressing into the circle. Then a brother fell, dragging a Dane with
him, and Wislac took his place, and three more Danes fell. Then went
Aldhelm to Wislac's side, and Lo! the circle was broken, and our
standard stood in the midst.

Yet was not that ring destroyed, and in a moment it closed after us, and
now were we ten in the midst of a crowd of foes, while again outside
them raged Ealhstan and his men, striving to break through to us.

Then knew I that our case was hard, and I struck the spear that held the
standard into the ground, and round it we stood, back to back, Wulfhere
and Wislac once more to right and left of me. And it would seem that so
grim looked we in our desperation, that they feared us a little, or, at
least, that each feared to be the first to fall on us, for the Danes
drew back and let us stand for a breathing space, until that great chief
who rallied the men--leaving the care of the outer ring for a moment
--came and faced me, speaking in fair Saxon enough, and bidding us
surrender.

And for answer I threw my seax at him, and as he raised shield to stop
it, for it flew straight and hard as a forester can throw, I leapt at
him, going in under his shield, and he fell heavily, moving not, for my
blow went home. Well it was that Wulfhere came after me, for he warded
blow of axe that would have slain me. And then the Danes howled and fell
on us.

Hard fighting it was, but round us grew a ring of dead, and no man had
laid hands on the standard. Guthlac was down, and Aldhelm, two lay
brethren also, and we were all but sped when I was ware of a Saxon
shout, and the crash of a great mace on a helmet before me, and then,
"Well done, my sons!" cried Ealhstan the Bishop, as he came and ringed
us round with his own men, and we might breathe again.

Now was the ring of Danes parted, and the ring was of our men; yet round
it raged the vikings, as we had raged round their ring but a short space
before. Yet, every man of us knew that we had won, for, even if each one
of us fell before Eanulf came, the ships would not sail that tide. For
the tall masts were listing over as two ships took the ground unheeded,
and four were hauling out as the tide fell.

And I thought of my vision last night, and of those I had seen, and of
what they had bid me think of them; and the roar of battle went on
unheeded by me as I leant against the standard staff while I might, and
found my strength again.

"See," cried Wislac, pointing. And I looked over to the hill where the
road came down. It was full of horsemen, charging with levelled spears,
and surely that was Osric at their head! Then near me a voice cried
thrice "Victory!" but it seemed not as one of our men's rough voices,
but very strange.

Over the level the spearmen swept, and a cry broke from the Danes as
they saw the fresh foe upon them, and again they fell back from us
quickly, and, spite of our charge on them, and the spears of the leading
horsemen, once more closed up into their iron ring. But now it was not
motionless, but moved ever towards the ships, going backward steadily.
