also ch. 8--9 for [Greek: ananke]. Plato's doctrine of [Greek: ananke],
which is diametrically opposed to that of the Stoics, is to be found in
_Timaeus_ p. 47, 48, Grote's _Plato_, III. 249--59.

    Sec.Sec.30--32. Part iv. of Varro's Exposition: Antiochus' _Ethics_. Summary.
    Although the old Academics and Peripatetics based knowledge on the
    senses, they did not make the senses the criterion of truth, but the
    mind, because it alone saw the permanently real and true (30). The
    senses they thought heavy and clogged and unable to gain knowledge of
    such things as were either too small to come into the domain of sense,
    or so changing and fleeting that no part of their being remained
    constant or even the same, seeing that all parts were in a continuous
    flux. Knowledge based _only_ on sense was therefore mere opinion (31).
    Real knowledge only came through the reasonings of the mind, hence they
    _defined_ everything about which they argued, and also used verbal
    explanations, from which they drew proofs. In these two processes
    consisted their dialectic, to which they added persuasive rhetoric
    (32).

Sec.30. _Quae erat_: the Platonic [Greek: en], = was, as we said. _In ratione
et disserendo_: an instance of Cicero's fondness for tautology, cf. _D.F._
I. 22 _quaerendi ac disserendi_. _Quamquam oriretur_: the sentence is
inexact, it is _knowledge_ which takes its rise in the senses, not the
criterion of truth, which is the mind itself; cf. however II. 30 and n.
_Iudicium_: the constant translation of [Greek: kriterion], a word foreign
to the older philosophy. _Mentem volebant rerum esse iudicem_: Halm with
his pet MS. writes _esse rerum_, thus giving an almost perfect iambic,
strongly stopped off before and after, so that there is no possibility of
avoiding it in reading. I venture to say that no real parallel can be found
to this in Cic., it stands in glaring contradiction to his own rules about
admitting metre in prose, _Orator_ 194 sq., _De Or._ III. 182 sq. _Solam
censebant ... tale quale esset_: probably from Plato's _Tim._ 35 A thus
translated by Cic., _Tim._ c. 7 _ex ea materia quae individua est et unius
modi_ ([Greek: aei kata tauta echouses] cf. 28 A. [Greek: to kata tauta
echon]) _et sui simile_, cf. also _T.D._ I. 58 _id solum esse quod semper
tale sit quale sit, quam_ [Greek: idean] _appellat ille, nos speciem_, and
_Ac._ II. 129. _Illi_ [Greek: idean], etc.: there is more than one
difficulty here. The words _iam a Platone ita nom_ seem to exclude Plato
from the supposed old Academico-Peripatetic school. This may be an
oversight, but to say first that the school (_illi_, cf. _sic tractabatur
ab utrisque_) which included Aristotle held the doctrine of [Greek: ideai],
and next, in 33, that Aristotle crushed the same doctrine, appears very
absurd. We may reflect, however, that the difference between Plato's
[Greek: ideai] and Aristotle's [Greek: ta kathalou] would naturally seem
microscopic to Antiochus. Both theories were practically as dead in his
time as those of Thales or Anaxagoras. The confusion must not be laid at
Cicero's door, for Antiochus in reconciling his own dialectics with Plato's
must have been driven to desperate shifts. Cicero's very knowledge of Plato
has, however, probably led him to intensify what inconsistency there was in
Antiochus, who would have glided over Plato's opinions with a much more
cautious step.

Sec.31. _Sensus omnis hebetes_: this stands in contradiction to the whole
Antiochean view as given in II. 12--64, cf. esp. 19 _sensibus quorum ita
clara et certa iudicia sunt_, etc.: Antiochus would probably defend his
agreement with Plato by asserting that though sense is naturally dull,
reason may sift out the certain from the uncertain. _Res eas ... quae
essent aut ita_: Halm by following his pet MS. without regard to the
meaning of Cic. has greatly increased the difficulty of the passage. He
reads _res ullas ... quod aut ita essent_; thus making Antiochus assert
that _no_ true information can be got from sensation, whereas, as we shall
see in the _Lucullus_, he really divided sensations into true and false. I
believe that we have a mixture here of Antiochus' real view with Cicero's
reminiscences of the _Theaetetus_ and of Xenocrates; see below. _Nec
percipere_: for this see _Lucullus_ passim. Christ's conj. _percipi, quod
perceptio sit mentis non sensuum_, which Halm seems to approve, is a wanton
corruption of the text, cf. II. 101 _neget rem ullam percipi posse
sensibus_, so 21, 119 (just like _ratione percipi_ 91), also I. 41 _sensu
comprehensum_. _Subiectae sensibus_: cf. II. 74 and Sext. Emp. _Adv. Math._
VIII. 9, [Greek: ta hypopiptonta te aisthesei]. _Aut ita mobiles_, etc.:
this strongly reminds one of the _Theaetetus_, esp. 160 D sq. For
_constans_ cf. [Greek: estekos], which so often occurs there and in the
_Sophistes_. _Ne idem_: Manut. for MSS. _eidem_. In the _Theaetetus_,
Heraclitus' theory of flux is carried to such an extent as to destroy the
self-identity of things; even the word [Greek: eme] is stated to be an
absurdity, since it implies a permanent subject, whereas the subject is
changing from moment to moment; the expression therefore ought to be
[Greek: tous eme]. _Continenter_: [Greek: ounechos]; cf. Simplicius quoted
in Grote's Plato, I. p. 37, about Heraclitus, [Greek: en metabole gar
synechei ta onta]. _Laberentur et fluerent_: cf. the phrases [Greek: rhoe,
panta rhei, hoion rheumata kineisthai ta panta], etc., which are scattered
thickly over the _Theaet._ and the ancient texts about Heraclitus; also a
very similar passage in _Orator_ 10. _Opinabilem_: [Greek: doxasten], so
_opinabile_ = [Greek: doxaston] in Cic. _Tim_ ch. II. The term was largely
used by Xenocrates (R. and P. 243--247), Arist. too distinguishes between
the [Greek: doxaston] and the [Greek: episteton], e.g _Analyt. Post._ I. 33
(qu. R. and P. 264).

Sec.32. For this cf. _D.F._ IV. 8--10. _Notionibus_: so one MS. for
_motionibus_ which the rest have. _Notio_ is Cicero's regular translation
for [Greek: ennoia], which is Stoic. This statement might have been made
both by Aristotle and Plato, though each would put a separate meaning on
the word _notio_. [Greek: Episteme] in Plato is of the [Greek: ideai] only,
while in Aristotle it is [Greek: ton katholou]; cf. _Anal. Post._ I. 33 (R.
and P. 264), [Greek: lego noun archen epistemes]. _Definitiones rerum_:
these must be carefully distinguished fiom _definitiones nominum_, see the
distinction drawn after Aristotle in R. and P. 265, note b. The _definitio
rei_ really involves the whole of philosophy with Plato and Aristotle (one
might almost add, with moderns too). Its importance to Plato may be seen
from the _Politicus_ and _Sophistes_, to Aristotle from the passages quoted
in R. and P. pp. 265, 271, whose notes will make the subject as clear as it
can be made to any one who has not a knowledge of the whole of Aristotle's
philosophy. _Verborum explicatio_: this is quite a different thing from
those _definitiones nominum_ just referred to; it is _derivation_, which
does not necessitate definition. [Greek: etymologian]: this is almost
entirely Stoic. The word is foreign to the Classic Greek Prose, as are
[Greek: etymos] and all its derivatives. ([Greek: Etymos] means
"etymologically" in the _De Mundo_, which however is not Aristotle's). The
word [Greek: etymologia] is itself not frequent in the older Stoics, who
use rather [Greek: onomaton orthotes] (Diog. Laert. VII. 83), the title of
their books on the subject preserved by Diog. is generally "[Greek: peri
ton etymologikon]" The systematic pursuit of etymology was not earlier than
Chrysippus, when it became distinctive of the Stoic school, though Zeno and
Cleanthes had given the first impulse (_N.D._ III. 63). Specimens of Stoic
etymology are given in _N.D._ II. and ridiculed in _N.D._ III. (cf. esp. 62
_in enodandis nominibus quod miserandum sit laboratis_). _Post argumentis
et quasi rerum notis ducibus_: the use of etymology in rhetoric in order to
prove something about the thing denoted by the word is well illustrated in
_Topica_ 10, 35. In this rhetorical sense Cic. rejects the translation
_veriloquium_ of [Greek: etymologia] and adopts _notatio_, the _rerum nota_
(Greek [Greek: symbolon]) being the name so explained (_Top._ 35). Varro
translated [Greek: etymologia] by _originatio_ (Quintil. I. 6, 28).
Aristotle had already laid down rules for this rhetorical use of etymology,
and Plato also incidentally adopts it, so it may speciously be said to
belong to the old Academico-Peripatetic school. A closer examination of
authorities would have led Halm to retract his bad em. _notationibus_ for
_notas ducibus_, the word _notatio_ is used for the whole science of
etymology, and not for particular derivations, while Cic. in numerous
passages (e.g. _D.F._ V. 74) describes _verba_ or _nomina_ as _rerum
notae_. Berkley's _nodis_ for _notis_ has no support, (_enodatio nominum_
in _N.D._ III. 62 is quite different). One more remark, and I conclude this
wearisome note. The _quasi_ marks _rerum nota_ as an unfamiliar trans. of
[Greek: symbolon]. Davies therefore ought not to have placed it before
_ducibus_, which word, strong as the metaphor is, requires no
qualification, see a good instance in _T.D._ I. 27. _Itaque tradebatur_: so
Halm improves on Madvig's _ita_ for _in qua_ of the MSS., which cannot be
defended. Orelli's reference to 30 _pars_ for an antecedent to _qua_ (_in
ea parte in qua_) is violent, while Goerenz's resort to _partem rerum
opinabilem_ is simply silly. Manut. conj. _in quo_, Cic. does often use the
neut. pronoun, as in _Orator_ 3, but not quite thus. I have sometimes
thought that Cic. wrote _haec, inquam_ (cf. _huic_ below). _Dialecticae_:
as [Greek: logike] had not been Latinised, Cic. is obliged to use this word
to denote [Greek: logike], of which [Greek: dialektike] is really one
subdivision with the Stoics and Antiochus, [Greek: rhetorike] which is
mentioned in the next sentence being the other; see Zeller 69, 70.
_Orationis ratione conclusae_: speech drawn up in a syllogistic form which
becomes _oratio perpetua_ under the influence of [Greek: rhetorike]. _Quasi
ex altera parte_: a trans. of Aristotle's [Greek: antistrophos] in the
beginning of the _Rhetoric_. _Oratoria_: Halm brackets this word; cf.
however a close parallel in _Brut._ 261 _oratorio ornamenta dicendi_. The
construction is simply a variation of Cic.'s favourite double genitive
(_T.D._ III. 39), _oratoria_ being put for _oratoris_. _Ad persuadendum_:
[Greek: to pithanon] is with Arist. and all ancient authorities the one aim
of [Greek: rhetorike].

    Sec.Sec.33--42. Part v. of Varro's exposition: the departures from the old
    Academico-Peripatetic school. Summary. Arist. crushed the [Greek:
    ideai] of Plato, Theophrastus weakened the power of virtue (33). Strato
    abandoned ethics for physics, Speusippus, Xenocrates, Polemo, Crates,
    Crantor faithfully kept the old tradition, to which Zeno and Arcesilas,
    pupils of Polemo, were both disloyal (34). Zeno maintained that nothing
    but virtue could influence happiness, and would allow the name _good_
    to nothing else (35). All other things he divided into three classes,
    some were in accordance with nature, some at discord with nature, and
    some were neutral. To the first class he assigned a positive value, and
    called them _preferred_ to the second a negative value and called them
    _rejected_, to the third no value whatever--mere verbal alterations on
    the old scheme (36, 37). Though the terms _right action_ and _sin_
    belong only to virtue and vice, he thought there was an appropriate
    action (_officium_) and an inappropriate, which concerned things
    _preferred_ and things _rejected_ (37). He made _all_ virtue reside in
    the reason, and considered not the _practice_ but the mere _possession_
    of virtue to be the important thing, although the possession could not
    but lead to the practice (38). All emotion he regarded as unnatural and
    immoral (38, 39). In physics he discarded the fifth element, and
    believed fire to be the universal substance, while he would not allow
    the existence of anything incorporeal (39). In dialectic he analysed
    sensation into two parts, an impulse from without, and a succeeding
    judgment of the mind, in passing which the will was entirely free (40).
    Sensations (_visa_) he divided into the true and the untrue; if the
    examination gone through by the mind proved irrefragably the truth of a
    sensation he called it _Knowledge_, if otherwise, _Ignorance_ (41).
    _Perception_, thus defined, he regarded as morally neither right nor
    wrong but as the sole ultimate basis of truth. Rashness in giving
    assent to phenomena, and all other defects in the application to them
    of the reason he thought could not coexist with virtue and perfect
    wisdom (42).

Sec.33. _Haec erat illis forma_: so Madv. _Em._ 118 for MSS. _prima_,
comparing _formulam_ in 17, also _D.F._ IV. 19, V. 9, _T.D._ III. 38, to
which add _Ac._ I. 23. See other em. in Halm. Goer. proposes to keep the
MSS. reading and supply _pars_, as usual. His power of _supplying_ is
unlimited. There is a curious similarity between the difficulties involved
in the MSS. readings in 6, 15, 32 and here. _Immutationes_: so Dav. for
_disputationes_, approved by Madv. _Em._ 119 who remarks that the phrase
_disputationes philosophiae_ would not be Latin. The em. is rendered almost
certain by _mutavit_ in 40, _commutatio_ in 42, and _De Leg._ I. 38. Halm's
odd em. _dissupationes_, so much admired by his reviewer in Schneidewin's
_Philologus_, needs support, which it certainly does not receive from the
one passage Halm quotes, _De Or._ III. 207. _Et recte_: for the _et_ cf.
_et merito_, which begins one of Propertius' elegies. _Auctoritas_:
"system". _Inquit_: sc. Atticus of course. Goer., on account of the
omission of _igitur_ after Aristoteles, supposes Varro's speech to begin
here. To the objection that Varro (who in 8 says _nihil enim meorum magno
opere miror_) would not eulogise himself quite so unblushingly, Goer.
feebly replies that the eulogy is meant for Antiochus, whom Varro is
copying. _Aristoteles_: after this the copyist of Halm's G. alone, and
evidently on his own conjecture, inserts _igitur_, which H. adopts. Varro's
resumption of his exposition is certainly abrupt, but if chapter IX. ought
to begin here, as Halm supposes, a reader would not be much incommoded.
_Labefactavit_, that Antiochus still continued to include Aristotle in the
supposed old Academico-Peripatetic school can only be explained by the fact
that he considered ethical resemblances as of supreme importance, cf. the
strong statement of Varro in Aug. XIX. 1 _nulla est causa philosophandi
nisi finis boni_. _Divinum_: see R. and P. 210 for a full examination of
the relation in which Plato's [Greek: ideai] stand to his notion of the
deity. _Suavis_: his constant epithet, see Gellius qu. R. and P. 327. His
real name was not Theophrastus, he was called so from his style (cf.
_loquendi nitor ille divinus_, Quint. X. 1, 83). For _suavis_ of style cf.
_Orat._ 161, _Brut._ 120. _Negavit_: for his various offences see _D.F._ V.
12 sq., _T.D._ V. 25, 85. There is no reason to suppose that he departed
very widely from the Aristotelian ethics; we have here a Stoic view of him
transmitted through Antiochus. In II. 134 Cic. speaks very differently of
him. Between the particular tenet here mentioned and that of Antiochus in
22 the difference is merely verbal. _Beate vivere_: the only translation of
[Greek: eudaimonian]. Cic. _N.D._ I. 95 suggests _beatitas_ and _beatitudo_
but does not elsewhere employ them.

Sec.34. _Strato_: see II. 121. The statement in the text is not quite true for
Diog. V. 58, 59 preserves the titles of at least seven ethical works, while
Stob. II. 6, 4 quotes his definition of the [Greek: agathon]. _Diligenter
... tuebantur_: far from true as it stands, Polemo was an inchoate Stoic,
cf. Diog. Laert. IV. 18, _Ac._ II. 131, _D.F._ II. 34, and R. and P.
_Congregati_: "_all_ in the Academic fold," cf. _Lael._ 69, _in nostro, ut
ita dicam, grege_. Of Crates and Crantor little is known. _Polemonem ...
Zeno et Arcesilas_: scarcely true, for Polemo was merely one of Zeno's many
teachers (Diog. VII. 2, 3), while he is not mentioned by Diog. at all among
the teachers of Arcesilas. The fact is that we have a mere theory, which
accounts for the split of Stoicism from Academicism by the rivalry of two
fellow pupils. Cf. Numenius in Euseb. _Praep. Ev._ XIV. 5, [Greek:
symphoitontes para Polemoni ephilo timethesan]. Dates are against the
theory, see Zeller 500.

Sec.35. _Anteiret aetate_: Arcesilas was born about 315, Zeno about 350,
though the dates are uncertain. _Dissereret_: was a deep reasoner. Bentl.
missing the meaning conj. _definiret_. _Peracute moveretur_: Bentl.
_partiretur_; this with _definiret_ above well illustrates his licence in
emendations. Halm ought not to have doubted the soundness of the text, the
words refer not to the emotional, but to the intellectual side of Zeno's
nature. The very expression occurs _Ad Fam._ XV. 21, 4, see other close
parallels in n. on II. 37. _Nervos ... inciderit_: same metaphor in
_Philipp._ XII. 8, cf. also _T.D._ II. 27 _nervos virtutis elidere_, III.
83 _stirpis aegritudinis elidere_. (In both these passages Madv. _Em. Liv._
135 reads _elegere_ for _elidere_, I cannot believe that he is right).
Plato uses [Greek: neura ektemnein] metaphorically. Notice _inciderit_ but
_poneret_. There is no need to alter (as Manut., Lamb., Dav.) for the
sequence is not uncommon in Cic., e.g. _D.F._ III. 33. _Omnia, quae_: MSS.
_quaeque_, which edd. used to take for _quaecunque_. Cf. Goerenz's
statement "_negari omnino nequit hac vi saepius pronomen illud reperiri_"
with Madvig's utter refutation in the sixth Excursus to his _D.F._ _Solum
et unum bonum_: for the Stoic ethics the student must in general consult R.
and P. and Zeller for himself. I can only treat such points as are involved
in the special difficulties of the _Academica_.

Sec.36. _Cetera_: Stoic [Greek: adiaphora], the presence or absence of which
cannot affect happiness. The Stoics loudly protested against their being
called either _bona_ or _mala_, and this question was one of the great
battle grounds of the later Greek philosophy. _Secundum naturam ...
contraria_: Gr. [Greek: kata physin, para physin]. _His ipsis ...
numerabat_: I see no reason for placing this sentence after the words _quae
minoris_ below (with Christ) or for suspecting its genuineness (with Halm).
The word _media_ is the Gk. [Greek: mesa], which word however is not
usually applied to _things_, but to _actions_. _Sumenda_: Gk. [Greek:
lepta]. _Aestimatione_: [Greek: axia], positive value. _Contraque
contraria_: Cic. here as in _D.F._ III. 50 feels the need of a word to
express [Greek: apaxia] (negative value). (Madv. in his note on that
passage coins the word _inaestimatio._) _Ponebat esse_: cf. 19, _M.D.F._ V.
73.

Sec.37. To cope thoroughly with the extraordinary difficulties of this section
the student must read the whole of the chapters on Stoic ethics in Zeller
and Ritter and Preller. There is no royal road to the knowledge, which it
would be absurd to attempt to convey in these notes. Assuming a general
acquaintance with Stoic ethics, I set out the difficulties thus: Cic.
appears at first sight to have made the [Greek: apoproegmena] a subdivision
of the [Greek: lepta] (_sumenda_), the two being utterly different. I
admit, with Madv. (_D.F._ III. 50), that there is no reason for suspecting
the text to be corrupt, the heroic remedy of Dav., therefore, who reads
_media_ in the place of _sumenda_, must be rejected. Nor can anything be
said for Goerenz's plan, who distorts the Stoic philosophy in order to save
Cicero's consistency. On the other hand, I do not believe that Cic. could
so utterly misunderstand one of the cardinal and best known doctrines of
Stoicism, as to think even for a moment that the [Greek: apoproegmena]
formed a branch of the [Greek: lepta]. This view of Madvig's is strongly
opposed to the fact that Cic. in 36 had explained with perfect correctness
the Stoic theory of the [Greek: adiaphora], nor is there anywhere in the
numerous passages where he touches on the theory any trace of the same
error. My explanation is that Cic. began with the intention to speak of the
_sumenda_ only and then rapidly extended his thought so as to embrace the
whole class of [Greek: adiaphora], which he accordingly dealt with in the
latter part of the same sentence and in the succeeding sentence. (The
remainder has its own difficulties, which I defer for the present.) Cic.
therefore is chargeable not with ignorance of Stoicism but with careless
writing. A striking parallel occurs in _D.F._ III. 52, _quae secundum locum
obtinent_, [Greek: proegmena] _id est producta nominentur, quae vel ita
appellemus, vel promota et remota_. If this language be closely pressed,
the [Greek: apoproegmena] are made of a subdivision of the [Greek:
proegmena], though no sensible reader would suppose Cic. to have had that
intention. So if his words in _D.F._ V. 90 be pressed, the _sumenda_ are
made to include both _producta_ and _reducta_, in _D.F._ III. 16
_appeterent_ includes _fugerent_, _ibid._ II. 86 the opposite of _beata
vita_ is abruptly introduced. So _D.F._ II. 88 _frui dolore_ must be
construed together, and _ibid._ II. 73 _pudor modestia pudicitia_ are said
_coerceri_, the writer's thoughts having drifted on rapidly to the vices
which are opposite to these virtues.

I now pass on to a second class of difficulties. Supposing that by _ex iis_
Cic. means _mediis_, and not _sumendis_, about which he had intended to
talk when he began the sentence; I believe that _pluris aestimanda_ and
_minoris aestimanda_ simply indicate the [Greek: axia] and [Greek: apaxia]
of the Greek, _not_ different degrees of [Greek: axia] (positive value).
That _minor aestimatio_ should mean [Greek: apaxia] need not surprise us
when we reflect (1) on the excessive difficulty there was in expressing
this [Greek: apaxia] or negative value in Latin, a difficulty I have
already observed on 36; (2) on the strong negative meaning which _minor_
bears in Latin, e.g. _sin minus_ in Cic. means "but if not." Even the
Greeks fall victims to the task of expressing [Greek: apaxia]. Stobaeus, in
a passage closely resembling ours makes [Greek: elatton axia] equivalent to
[Greek: polle apaxia] (II. 6, 6), while Sext. Emp. after rightly defining
[Greek: apoproegmena] as [Greek: ta hikanen apaxian echonta] (_Adv. Math._
XI. 62--64) again speaks of them as [Greek: ta me hikanen echonta axian]
(_Pyrrhon. Hypot._ III. 191) words which usually have an opposite meaning.
Now I contend that Cicero's words _minoris aestimanda_ bear quite as strong
a negative meaning as the phrase of Sextus, [Greek: ta me hikanen axian
