to his enemy, and as he reckoned up the chances of success, he began to
wonder how he could have been so weak as to offer Zorzi an enormous
bribe, instead of proceeding at once to his destruction.

Unconscious of his growing danger, Zorzi fed the fire of the furnace,
and then sat down at the table before the window, laid his crutches
beside him, and began to write out the details of his own experiments,
as the master had done for years. He wrote the rather elaborate
characters of the fifteenth century in a small but clear hand, very
unlike old Beroviero's. The window was open, and the light breeze blew
in, fanning his heated forehead; for the weather was growing hotter and
hotter, and the order had been given to let the main furnaces cool after
the following Saturday, as the workmen could not bear the heat many days
longer. After that, they would set to work in a shed at the back of the
glass-house to knead the clay for making new crucibles, and the night
boys would enjoy their annual holiday, which consisted in helping the
workmen by treading the stiff clay in water for several hours every day.

A man's shadow darkened the window while Zorzi was writing, and he
looked up. Pasquale was standing outside.

"There is a pestering fellow at the door," he said, "who will not be
satisfied till he has spoken with you. He says he has a message for you
from some one in Venice, which he must deliver himself."

"For me?" Zorzi rose in surprise.




CHAPTER XIII


Zorzi swung himself along the dark corridor on his crutches after
Pasquale, who opened the outer door with his usual deliberation. A
little man stood outside in grey hose and a servant's dark coat,
gathered in at the waist by a leathern belt. He was clean shaven and his
hair was cropped close to his head, which was bare, for he held his
black hat in his hand. Zorzi did not like his face. He waited for Zorzi
to speak first.

"Have you a message for me?" asked the Dalmatian. "I am Zorzi."

"That is the name, sir," answered the man respectfully. "My master begs
the honour and pleasure of your company this evening, as usual."

"Where?" asked Zorzi.

"My master said that you would know the place, sir, having been there
before."

"What is your master's name?"

"The Angel," answered the man promptly, keeping his eyes on Zorzi's
face.

The latter nodded, and the servant at once made an awkward obeisance
preparatory to going away.

"Tell your master," said Zorzi, "that I have hurt my foot and am walking
on crutches, so that I cannot come this evening, but that I thank him
for his invitation, and send greeting to him and to the other guests."

The man repeated some of the words in a tone hardly audible, evidently
committing the message to memory.

"Signor Zorzi--hurt his foot--crutches--thanks--greeting," he mumbled.
"Yes, sir," he added in his ordinary voice, "I will say all that. Your
servant, sir."

With another awkward bow, he turned away to the right and walked very
quickly along the footway. He had left his boat at the entrance to the
canal, not knowing exactly where the glass-house was. Zorzi looked after
him a moment, then turned himself on his sound foot and set his crutches
before him to go in. Pasquale was there, and must have heard what had
passed. He shut the door and followed Zorzi back a little way.

"It is no concern of mine," he said roughly. "You may amuse yourself as
you please, for you are young, and your host may be the Archangel
Michael himself, or the holy Saint Mark, and the house to which you are
bidden may be a paradise full of other angels! But I would as soon sit
down before the grating and look at the hooded brother, while the
executioner slipped the noose over my head to strangle me, as to go to
any place on a bidding delivered by a fellow with such a jail-bird's
head. It is as round as a bullet and as yellow as cheese. He has eyes
like a turtle's and teeth like those of a young shark."

"I am quite of your opinion," said Zorzi, halting at the entrance to the
garden.

"Then why did you not kick him into the canal?" inquired the porter,
with admirable logic.

"Do I look as if I could kick anything?" asked Zorzi, laughing and
glancing at his lame foot.

"And where should I have been?" inquired Pasquale indignantly. "Asleep,
perhaps? If you had said 'kick,' I would have kicked. Perhaps I am a
statue!"

Zorzi pointed out that it was not usual to answer invitations in that
way, even when declining them.

"And who knows what sort of invitation it was?" retorted the old porter
discontentedly. "Since when have you friends in Venice who bid you come
to their houses at night, like a thief? Honest men, who are friends, say
'Come and eat with me at noon, for to-day we have this, or this'--say, a
roast sucking pig, or tripe with garlic. And perhaps you go; and when
you have eaten and drunk and it is the cool of the afternoon, you come
home. That is what Christians do. Who are they that meet at night? They
are thieves, or conspirators, or dice-players, or all three."

Pasquale happened to have been right in two guesses out of three, and
Zorzi thought it better to say nothing. There was no fear that the surly
old man would tell any one of the message; he had proved himself too
good a friend to Zorzi to do anything which could possibly bring him
into trouble, and Zorzi was willing to let him think what he pleased,
rather than run the smallest risk of betraying the society of which he
had been obliged to become a member. But he was curious to know why
Contarini kept such a singularly unprepossessing servant, and why, if he
chose to keep him, he made use of him to deliver invitations. The fellow
had the look of a born criminal; he was just such a man as Zorzi had
thought of when he had jestingly proposed to Giovanni to hire a
murderer. Indeed, the more Zorzi thought of his face, the more he was
inclined to doubt that the man came from Contarini at all.

But in this he was mistaken. The message was genuine, and moreover, so
far as Contarini and the society were concerned, the man was perfectly
trustworthy. Possibly there were reasons why Contarini chose to employ
him, and also why the servant was so consistently faithful to his
master. After all, Zorzi reflected, he was certainly ignorant of the
fact that the noble young idlers who met at the house of the Agnus Dei
were playing at conspiracy and revolution.

But that night, when Contarini's friends were assembled and had counted
their members, some one asked what had become of the Murano
glass-blower, and whether he was not going to attend their meetings in
future; and Contarini answered that Zorzi had hurt his foot and was on
crutches, and sent a greeting to the guests. Most of them were glad that
he was not there, for he was not of their own order, and his presence
caused a certain restraint in their talk. Besides, he was poor, and did
not play at dice.

"He works with Angelo Beroviero, does he not?" asked Zuan Venier in a
tone of weary indifference.

"Yes," answered Contarini with a laugh. "He is in the service of my
future father-in-law."

"To whom may heaven accord a speedy, painless and Christian death!"
laughed Foscari in his black beard.

"Not till I am one of his heirs, if you please," returned Contarini. "As
soon after the wedding day as you like, for besides her rich dowry, the
lady is to have a share of his inheritance."

"Is she very ugly?" asked Loredan. "Poor Jacopo! You have the sympathy
of the brethren."

"How does he know?" sneered Mocenigo. "He has never seen her. Besides,
why should he care, since she is rich?"

"You are mistaken, for I have seen her," said Contarini, looking down
the table. "She is not at all ill-looking, I assure you. The old man was
so much afraid that I would not agree to the match that he took her to
church so that I might look at her."

"And you did?" asked Mocenigo. "I should never have had the courage. She
might have been hideous, and in that case I should have preferred not to
find it out till I was married."

"I looked at her with some interest," said Contarini, smiling in a
self-satisfied way. "I am bound to say, with all modesty, that she also
looked at me," he added, passing his white hand over his thick hair.

"Of course," put in Foscari gravely. "Any woman would, I should think."

"I suppose so," answered Contarini complacently. "It is not my fault if
they do."

"Nor your misfortune," added Fosoari, with as much gravity as before.

Zuan Venier had not joined in the banter, which seemed to him to be of
the most atrocious taste. He had liked Zorzi and had just made up his
mind to go to Murano the next day and find him out.

On that evening there was not so much as a mention of what was supposed
to bring them together. Before they had talked a quarter of an hour,
some one began to throw dice on the table, playing with his right hand
against his left, and in a few moments the real play had begun.

High up in Arisa's room the Georgian woman and Aristarchi heard all that
was said, crouching together upon the floor beside the opening the slave
had discovered. When the voices were no longer heard except at rare
intervals, in short exclamations of satisfaction or disappointment, and
only the regular rattling and falling of the dice broke the silence, the
pair drew back from the praying-stool.

"They will say nothing more to-night," whispered Arisa. "They will play
for hours."

"They had not said a word that could put their necks in danger,"
answered Aristarchi discontentedly. "Who is this fellow from the
glass-house, of whom they were speaking?"

Arisa led him away to a small divan between the open windows. She sat
down against the cushions at the back, but he stretched his bulk upon
the floor, resting his head against her knee. She softly rubbed his
rough hair with the palm of her hand, as she might have caressed a cat,
or a tame wild animal. It gave her a pleasant sensation that had a
thrill of danger in it, for she always expected that he would turn and
set his teeth into her fingers.

She told him the story of the last meeting, and how Zorzi had been made
one of the society in order that they might not feel obliged to kill him
for their own safety.

"What fools they are!" exclaimed Aristarchi with a low laugh, and
turning his head under her hand.

"You would have killed him, of course," said Arisa, "if you had been in
their place. I suppose you have killed many people," she added
thoughtfully.

"No," he answered, for though he loved her savagely, he did not trust
her. "I never killed any one except in fair fight."

Arisa laughed low, for she remembered.

"When I first saw you," she said, "your hands were covered with blood. I
think the reason why I liked you was that you seemed so much more
terrible than all the others who looked in at my cabin door."

"I am as mild as milk and almonds," said Aristarchi. "I am as timid as a
rabbit."

His deep voice was like the purring of a huge cat. Arisa looked down at
his head. Then her hands suddenly clasped his throat and she tried to
make her fingers meet round it as if she would have strangled him, but
it was too big for them. He drew in his chin a little, the iron muscles
stiffened themselves, the cords stood out, and though she pressed with
all her might she could not hurt him, even a little; but she loved to
try.

"I am sure I could strangle Contarini," she said quietly. "He has a
throat like a woman's."

"What a murderous creature you are!" purred the Greek, against hex knee.
"You are always talking of killing."

"I should like to see you fighting for your life," she answered, "or for
me."

"It is the same thing," he said.

"I should like to see it. It would be a splendid sight."

"What if I got the worst of it?" asked Aristarchi, his vast mouth
grinning at the idea.

"You?" Arisa laughed contemptuously. "The man is not born who could kill
you. I am sure of it."

"One very nearly succeeded, once upon a time," said Aristarchi.

"One man? I do not believe it!"

"He chanced to be an executioner," answered the Greek calmly, "and I had
my hands tied behind me."

"Tell me about it."

Arisa bent down eagerly, for she loved to hear of his adventures, though
he had his own way of narrating them which always made him out innocent
of any evil intention.

"There is nothing to tell. It was in Naples. A woman betrayed me and
they bound me in my sleep. In the morning I was condemned to death,
thrown into a cart and dragged off to be hanged. I thought it was all
over, for the cords were new, so that I could not break them. I tried
hard enough! But even if I had broken loose, I could never have fought
my way through the crowd alone. The noose was around my neck."

He stopped, as if he had told everything.

"Go on!" said Arisa. "How did you escape? What an adventure!"

"One of my men saved me. He had a little learning, and could pass for a
monk when he could get a cowl. He went out before it was daylight that
morning, and exchanged clothes with a burly friar whom he met in a quiet
place."

"But how did the friar agree to that?" asked Arisa in surprise.

"He had nothing to say. He was dead," answered Aristarchi.

"Do you mean to say that he chanced to find a dead friar lying in the
road?" asked the Georgian.

"How should I know? I daresay the monk was alive when he met my man, and
happened to die a few minutes afterwards--by mere chance. It was very
fortunate, was it not?"

"Yes!" Arisa laughed softly. "But what did he do? Why did he take the
trouble to dress the monk in his clothes?"

"In order to receive his dying confession, of course. I thought you
would understand! And his dying confession was that he, Michael Pandos,
a Greek robber, had killed the man for whose murder I was being hanged
that morning. My man came just in time, for as the friar's head was half
shaved, as monks' heads are, he had to shave the rest, as they do for
coolness in the south, and he had only his knife with which to do it.
But no one found that out, for he had been a barber, as he had been a
monk and most other things. He looked very well in a cowl, and spoke
Neapolitan. I did not know him when he came to the foot of the gallows,
howling out that I was innocent."

"Were you?" asked Arisa.

"Of course I was," answered Aristarchi with conviction.

"Who was the man that had been killed?"

"I forget his name," said the Greek. "He was a Neapolitan gentleman of
great family, I believe. I forget the name. He had red hair."

Arisa laughed and stroked Aristarchi's big head. She thought she had
made him betray himself.

"You had seen him then?" she said, with a question. "I suppose you
happened to see him just before he died, as your man saw the monk."

"Oh no!" answered Aristarchi, who was not to be so easily caught. "It
was part of the dying confession. It was necessary to identify the
murdered person. How should Michael Parados, the Greek robber, know the
name of the gentleman he had killed? He gave a minute description of
him. He said he had red hair."

"You are not a Greek for nothing," laughed Arisa.

"Did you ever hear of Odysseus?" asked Aristarchi.

"No. What should I know of your Greek gods? If you were a good
Christian, you would not speak of them."

"Odysseus was not a god," answered Aristarchi, with a grin. "He was a
good Christian. I have often thought that he must have been very like
me. He was a great traveller and a tolerable sailor."

"A pirate?" inquired Arisa.

"Oh no! He was a man of the most noble and upright character, incapable
of deception! In fact he was very like me, and had nearly as many
adventures. If you understood Greek, I would repeat some verses I know
about him."

"Should you love me more, if I understood Greek?" asked Arisa softly.
"If I thought so, I would learn it."

Aristarchi laughed roughly, so that she was almost afraid lest he should
be heard far down in the house.

"Learn Greek? You? To make me like you better? You would be just as
beautiful if you were altogether dumb! A man does not love a woman for
what she can say to him, in any language."

He turned up his face, and his rough hands drew her splendid head down
to him, till he could kiss her. Then there was silence for a few
minutes.

He shook his great shoulders at last.

"Everything else is a waste of time," he said, as if speaking to
himself.

Her head lay on the cushions now, and she watched him with half-closed
eyes in the soft light, and now and then the thin embroideries that
covered her neck and bosom rose and fell with a long, satisfied sigh. He
rose to his feet and slowly paced the marble floor, up and down before
her, as he would have paced the little poop-deck of his vessel.

"I am glad you told me about that glass-blower," he said suddenly. "I
have met him and talked with him, and I may meet him again. He is old
Beroviero's chief assistant. I fancy he is in love with the daughter."

"In love with the girl whom Contarini is to marry?" asked Arisa,
suddenly opening her eyes.

"Yes. I told you what I said to the old man in his private room--it was
more like a brick-kiln than a rich man's counting-house! While I was
inside, the young man was talking to the girl under a tree. I saw them
through a low window as I sat discussing business with Beroviero."

"You could not hear what they said, I suppose."

"No. But I could see what they looked." Aristarchi laughed at his own
conceit. "The girl was doing some kind of work. The young man stood
beside her, resting one hand against the tree. I could not see his face
all the time, but I saw hers. She is in love with him. They were talking
earnestly and she said something that had a strong effect upon him, for
I saw that he stood a long time looking at the trunk of the tree, and
saying nothing. What can you make of that, except that they are in love
with each other?"

"That is strange," said Arisa, "for it was he that brought the message
to Contarini, bidding him go and see her in Saint Mark's. That was how
he chanced upon them, downstairs, at their last meeting."

"How do you know it was that message, and not some other?"

"Contarini told me."

"But if the boy loves her, as I am sure he does, why should he have
delivered the message?" asked; the cunning Greek. "It would have been
very easy for him to have named another hour, and Contarini would never
have seen her. Besides, he had a fine chance then to send the future
husband to Paradise! He needed only to name a quiet street, instead of
the Church, and to appoint the hour at dusk. One, two and three in the
back, the body to the canal, and the marriage would have been broken
off."

"Perhaps he does not wish it broken off," suggested Arisa, taking an
equally amiable but somewhat different point of view. "He cannot marry
the girl, of course--but if she is once married and out of her father's
house, it will be different."

"That is an idea," assented Aristarchi. "Look at us two. It is very much
the same position, and Contarini will be indifferent about her, which he
is not, where you are concerned. Between the glass-blower and me, and
his wife and you, he will not be a man to be envied. That is another
reason for helping the marriage as much as we can."

"What if the glass-blower makes her give him money?" asked the Georgian
woman. "If she loves him she will give him everything she has, and he
will take all he can get, of course."

"Of course, if she had anything to give," said Aristarchi. "But she will
only have what you allow Contarini to give her. The young man knows well
enough that her dowry will all be paid to her husband on the day of the
marriage. It does not matter, for if he is in love he will not care much
about the money."

"I hope he will be careful. Any one else may see him with her, as you
