been as a friend who warned me of a danger unforeseen. Even thus
had Edric Streone spoken with Sigeferth, fairly and pleasantly.

I left the house, feeling uneasy therefore; but I could not think
that Edric would deem me worth crushing, and it seemed that the
lady would let her hatred of Edric go far.

They had given me lodging in the town across the river, where there
was a large guest house that had been made in the days of
OEthelfloed {11}, the brave lady of the Mercians who won back
the Five Boroughs from the Danes. One could see the great fort she
made rising from the river banks over the whole town. No other
thane was in guest quarters there with me, and I and my men had the
place to ourselves. Nor was there anyone in Stamford at the time
whom I knew, apart from the people of Eadmund's household.

So I went along the street slowly enough, and presently I passed a
house where through the open window I saw a goldsmith working, and
I thought that he could do somewhat for me. I would have the penny
of St. Eadmund set in a gold band on the scabbard of sword Foe's
Bane, where I should see it continually. There was much gilt silver
work over all the scabbard from end to end--wrought by what skilful
artists in the Norseland, or how long ago, I cannot tell--and there
was a place among the other work where such a fitting would go
well.

But I had placed the coin in safety in the house, and I must go and
fetch it, and I passed on for the time. Then I loitered on the
bridge, for the old town and its grim earthworks looks very fair
thence, and so a thane sent from Eadmund caught me up and took me
back to the great house, for he had some word for me. It was near
sunset by this time.

"Redwald, my friend," the Atheling said, when I stood before him,
"I would have you go back to Olaf. You have done your errand well,
and your kinsman will want to have you with him. You will fight for
us no less well with him than here."

Now I could speak plainly with the Atheling ever, and I said, being
anxious to know more of Streone's meanings:

"I am glad that you tell me so, my prince, for Edric the earl would
have it that our king fears that Olaf's good faith may be little."

"That is new to me," Eadmund said, frowning; "but, as you know, my
father and I have had little to say to each other of late."

"Then you doubt him not?" I asked.

"I would as soon doubt Edric himself," he said, "and him I trust as
I would trust myself."

"That is well," answered I. "For I feared that you also might have
been doubtful of Olaf."

"Why, what should the king think of Olaf but that he has been his
best friend?"

"The earl tells me that he has heard that Cnut will offer Olaf some
under-kingship if he will take his part," I said.

"I cannot tell how he has heard that," Eadmund said, and he looked
puzzled.

"By your spies in Cnut's court," said I.

"We have no spies there. I hate spying," the Atheling said. "What
means he?"

Then I saw that for some reason which was beyond me Streone had let
me know more than was safe. It was plain that if he spoke truth, he
had more dealings with Cnut than were known to the Atheling. Yet
the earl might, for Ethelred's sake, watch thus on Cnut, rightly
enough, and think it safer to say nought to Eadmund, whose wisdom
was not so great as his valour. It was a poor watch enough though,
I thought, if he knew the talk about Olaf and not the plans for
sailing, which should surely have been told him first of all.

"Maybe he minded him of some old plan of Cnut's that he heard when
you were in Lindsey," I said, that being all that I could imagine.
"That were enough to return to the mind of our king in his
sickness, and trouble him."

"Aye, I think my father fears treachery from all men," the Atheling
answered. "But Olaf has done well for us both at the first and now
in sending word by you."

Then the sword I was wearing caught Eadmund's eyes, for he was ever
fond of goodly war gear.

"So--you have a new sword instead of that I gave you," he said.
"And I think you have made a good exchange. Let me see this."

"I broke the other blade strangely enough," I told him. "But this
was my father's sword, and it has come back to me."

Now I must tell him all about our great fight, and at the end he
said:

"I would that I had been there. It was a good fight." Then he
laughed, and added: "Now, I will say this, that Streone noted this
fine sword of yours, and wondered who had given it you, and why."

"Did he think that Cnut had bribed me also?" I said. "Such a sword
as this is to a simple thane as much as a petty kingdom to Olaf."

Then Eadmund spoke in the old tone of comradeship that we had been
wont to use in Normandy.

"On my word, I believe he did! But you have often spoken to me of
this sword, and you described it well. I think had I found it on a
Dane I should have claimed it for you. But I never thought you
would see it again."

"Would you have believed that I was bribed, my prince, had it not
chanced that you had heard of the sword from me beforetime?" I
asked, being bitterly hurt that the earl should have put this into
Eadmund's mind.

Did he want to make him doubt all his former friends?

"Not I, Redwald," the Atheling said. "Streone is over careful for
our safety, I think, and lets his love for us make him suspect all
men. I told him as much, and he said that perhaps it was so. Then I
said that Olaf had doubtless given you the weapon, and he would
have me ask you. He thought that you should not have lightly set
aside my gift."

Now I was sure that the earl strove to break Eadmund's friendship
with Olaf, for to anger me would help to do so. The next thing
would be to have me made away with, for that would turn Olaf into a
foe, and he would leave England maybe. I thought that the earl
would stand alone in Eadmund's counsels, and did not dream yet that
he was indeed working for Cnut in order to take the first place in
England as Thorkel did in Denmark. But that was plain enough ere
long, and all men know it now. At this time, however, these matters
puzzled me, and had it not been for the slaying of Sigeferth and
Morcar and one or two others, maybe I should have thought little of
danger to myself. It was only as Olaf's kinsman that I was worth a
thought of the man whose deep statecraft I could not pretend to
understand.

So I said:

"The earl's life must be uneasy with all these doubts. But so long
as you yourself have none of King Olaf and myself, it is little
matter what he thinks. His doubts will be proved false in time, and
he will have fretted for nought."

"That is true," Eadmund answered. "I would that he troubled me not
with his suspicions."

So the matter passed, and we spoke for a little while of the fleet
and of Olaf's plans, and then I left him, saying that I would ride
back to London with the first light of morning.

"We shall have one good fight, and then peace," said Eadmund.
"Farewell, and trouble nought about my foster father and his ways
of doubting. He will doubt me next, maybe."

He laughed lightly, and I went away down the street with a troubled
mind, and was willing to get back to my lodgings through the dusk
as quickly as I might.

And when I came there I put on my mail, as the lady had bidden
me--rather blaming myself for doing so for all that, for it seemed
to show fear of somewhat that I could not name.

Then I thought of the goldsmith again, and sent a man for him,
thinking that he could do the work here in hall, so that I could be
sure of having the scabbard, which was very valuable, when I rode
away.

When he came I showed him what I would have done, and he said that
it was no long business, and took his tools into a corner and
lighted a wax taper and began to work by its light. The sword stood
by my chair as I ate my supper at the head of the long tables where
my men sat.

The goldsmith ended his work soon after the men had gone out to the
stables to tend their horses for the night, and only he and I and
my headman Thrand were left in the hall. He had put a flat band of
chased gold round the scabbard, and the silver penny showed through
a round setting that was in it.

I gave him one of the gold pieces that Earl Wulfnoth had taken from
the treasure for me, and the man weighed it, wondering at its
weight and fineness. Then he said that he was overpaid, and must
give me money for the overweight, and asked that one should go back
to his house with him and return with it.

"There were men lurking in the porches and on the bridge," he said,
"when I came down here. I suppose there will be a fray when they
meet the men they wait for, so I fear to go back alone. A goldsmith
is ever fair prey."

Then came a knocking on the door, and my man went to see what was
wanted. Then one said to him:

"Edric the earl bids Redwald the thane to speak with him at his
house before he sleeps."

Now the goldsmith stood where he could see the long streak of light
that shone from the door across the street, and he said to me in a
low voice:

"There are a dozen armed men outside, lord."

Thrand turned round to tell me this message, and as he did so
Streone's messenger pushed by him into the hail, rudely enough.

"To the stables and call my men," I whispered to the goldsmith,
pointing to the door which led thither, and he went out slowly, not
knowing why I sent him.

"Where is Redwald, Olaf's man?" the newcomer said, and his tone was
so rough that at the uncivil words I glanced at him sharply and
made no answer. He was fully armed, I saw.

But my follower would not bear this.

"Yonder is Redwald the thane," he said; "mind how you speak, man."

"Thane or not, I have come to take him to Edric the earl," was the
answer.

"Ho, thane! hear you the earl's message?"

Now when this began, I had taken up the scabbard with my right hand
and was looking at the work, and the sword was in my left, hidden
by my cloak as it fell to my side. I suppose the earl's housecarle
thought I was unarmed.

"I am Redwald," I said, putting the scabbard on the table, and so
leaving my right hand free. "I hear an uncivilly-given message
enough. And I think the earl has not sent for me in such terms as
those."

The man raised his hand a little and made a sign, and I heard the
quick steps of men crossing the street with clatter of steel. Then
I knew that Edric had sent for me, dead or alive.

"Come you must," the man said.

"What if I will not?" I answered.

"I will make you," he said, and with that he smote Thrand fairly in
the face and felled him, hitting squarely from his left shoulder,
and then his sword was out and he made one step towards me.

Quick as thought I grasped the hilt of my sword, and smote upwards
with it as I drew it from under the fold of my cloak. There is no
stopping that stroke, and the man leapt back from it as it seemed,
but the blade smote him beneath the chin, and so far as he was
concerned Edric's message had come to naught. He would never draw
sword on any man again. Nor do I think he would have been thus bold
had he not thought me unarmed.

Then at the same moment my man was up, cursing, and the doorway to
the street was full of Edric's men, and some of mine were coming
leisurely through the other.

The crash of the falling man woke my people into life, and they ran
to their spears, which were piled along the walls, and the earl's
men faltered on the threshold, for they liked not the look of sword
Foe's Bane, maybe. Then my man Thrand ran at the great door, which
opened inward, and swung it to in the faces of Edric's men, and
barred it. I heard them give a howl of rage as he did so, for one
or two of them were flung backward into the street, so suddenly and
strongly did he fling it against them in his rage.

Then we looked at one another, and at the dead man on the floor, in
silence. I was the only one of all who knew what this message
brought by armed men from Streone might mean. And all had happened
so suddenly, from the time that the man had told me that I must
come, and had drawn sword on me, to when the door slammed, that
there had been no time for thought or wonder even.

I took up the scabbard and buckled it on, and sheathed the sword,
and said:

"We shall hear more of this, men. Stamford town is no place for us
now."

"What is all this, lord?" asked the leader, who stood with his back
against the door still.

"Edric the earl has another business on hand like that of Earls
Sigeferth and Morcar," I said. Whereat the men growled fiercely.

The goldsmith came in with the last of my men, and heard me say
this, and now looked in the face of him whom I had slain.

"This is the man who brought the like message to our earls," he
said. "I was at Oxford, and saw him come. And the street then was
full of armed men, as is ours tonight. Better go hence, lord, else
you will be burnt out, as our men were when they went to avenge our
lords' deaths, and were driven into St. Frideswide's Church."

Now it seemed to me also that we had better hasten, or we should
have a strong force down on us. Then if we fought, Edric would have
occasion against me, and if not, I was lost.

"To horse, men!" I said. "We will go to Peterborough for this
night. Abbot Elfric is my friend, and will give us shelter."

"Let us take the road for London rather, and get back to Olaf the
king," said the headman. "The horses are fresh, and we can ride
far, and the nights are warm if we must lie out."

"We will speak of that outside the town," I answered. "To horse at
once, and silently, or they will take warning and bring more men."

They ran out, leaving a dozen with me. Edric's men were yet in the
street, and now they drew near the door, listening as I thought.

"How shall you escape?" I said to the goldsmith.

"Out of the back way, lord, and up the meadows to the ford if the
ferryman is asleep. But I must go before the house is beset."

"Keep the gold for your service," I said, "for I think that the
silver penny has saved me."

So he thanked me, and crept away easily enough. I suppose that
Edric's men had no orders that had made provision for trouble with
me of this sort, and that they hardly knew what had happened. But
it was likely that they would send word to Edric directly, when
they began to be sure that something had gone amiss. They tried the
door again, but without much heart. My men wanted to throw it open
and charge out on them, but I would not suffer it. So long as they
loitered outside we had time to get away. Then some of them tried
the gate of the courtyard behind the house, but the men had barred
that after the goldsmith had gone out. And all the while the horses
were being saddled silently, and they would be ready in a few
minutes.

The earl's men spoke now outside the door, and I could hear what
they said.

"Let us break in and see what has befallen Godric."

"Nay, the hall is full of men now. Let us go back."

"It was Godric's own fault. He had no reason to smite the porter,
who stayed him not."

Then I thought that the men knew not what their errand was, and
were to take orders from the slain man. Thus there would be no
fighting in the street when we came out.

So it was, for when the horses were ready, the stablemen of the
house threw open the great gates of the courtyard, which was beside
the house, as it happened, and we rode out quietly, but with
weapons ready, and they did but shrink together and stare when they
saw us. There were about thirty of them in all.

Now I would not give Edric any reason to blame me to Eadmund, and
so I wheeled my men to the right, away from the bridge and along
the great road towards London, and letting them go on slowly, I
called to a man who stood foremost.

"This is a sorry business," I said; "but your leader had no right
to smite my man, and one waxes hasty when a man behaves thus. He
was an unmannerly messenger."

"Aye, lord, he was," the men said.

"Well, then, tell your earl that I have even now left the town, and
that being ready to do so I came not with you; and say how it was
that this man was slain, and that I am sorry therefor."

"We will tell him," they said.

So I spurred my horse and rode after my company, knowing that it
would be hard for Edric to know the rights of the matter. The men
would certainly not wonder at the slaying of Godric, seeing how he
had behaved. I thought that Eadmund would never hear of this.

I believe that I escaped very narrowly, and also that the silver
penny was the cause thereof. For, first of all, it had been likely
that Eadmund's messenger would not have found me so easily had I
gone elsewhere than back to get it, and so I should have been
belated and attacked in the street by these men. And next, the
goldsmith warned me that the armed men waited outside. And then it
was certain that Godric, the earl's man, would have cut me down
before I could have drawn sword, had I not already held the weapon
