Dort. He had of course written from time to time, but his letters,
although fairly full, did not contain a tithe of the detail which
his friends were anxious to learn. The next morning, after
breakfast, he asked his host if he was unwell, for he looked worn
and anxious.

"I am well in body, but disturbed in mind," he said. "Six months
ago I stood well with my fellow citizens, and few were more popular
in Dort than myself. Now, save among the better class, men look
askance at me. Subtle whispers have gone abroad that I am in
correspondence with France; that I am a traitor to Holland; that I
correspond with the Spanish at Antwerp. In vain have I tried to
force an open accusation, in order that I might disperse it. The
merchants, and others of my rank, scoff at these rumours, and have
in full council denounced their authors as slanderers; but the
lower class still hold to their belief. Men scowl as I walk along;
the boys shout 'Traitor!' after me; and I have received threatening
letters."

"But this is abominable," Rupert said, hotly. "Is there no way of
dealing with these slanderers?"

"No," the merchant said; "I see none, beyond living it down. Some
enemy is at work, steadily and powerfully."

"Have you any enemy you suspect?"

"None, save indeed that rascal countryman of yours. He is
desperate, and, as you know, relentless. My house has always been
guarded by six stout fellows since we returned from the Hague; and
any open attempt to carry off my daughter would be useless. It is
difficult to see what he proposes to himself by stirring up a party
against me; but he might have some scheme which we cannot fathom.
Our Dutchmen are slow but obstinate, and once they get an idea in
their head it is difficult to discharge."

"You do not fear any public tumult, surely?" Rupert said.

"I do not anticipate it, and yet I regard it as possible," Van Duyk
said. "The people in our town have been given to bursts of frenzy,
in which some of our best men have been slain."

"Why don't you go down to the Hague again till this madness has
passed by?"

"I cannot do that. My enemies would take advantage of it, and might
sack my house and warehouses."

"But there is the burgher guard; and all the respectable citizens
are with you."

"That is true enough," the merchant said; "but they are always slow
to take action, and I might be killed, and my place burnt before
they came on to the ground. I will send Maria with you down to the
Hague to her aunt's. If this be the work of the man we wot of, it
may be that he will then cease his efforts, and the bad feeling he
has raised will die away; but in truth, I shall never feel that
Maria is safe until I hear that his evil course has come to an
end."

"If I come across him, I will bring it to an end, and that
quickly," Rupert said, wrathfully. "At any rate, I think that the
burgomaster ought to take steps to protect the house."

"The council laugh at the idea of danger," Van Duyk said. "To them
the idea that I should be charged with dealing with the enemy is so
supremely ridiculous that they make light of it, and are inclined
to think that the state of things I describe is purely a matter of
my own imagination. If I were attacked they would come as quickly
as they could to my aid; but they may be all too late.

"There is one thing, Rupert. This enemy hates you, and desires your
death as much as he wishes to carry off my daughter, and through
her to become possessed of my money bags. If, then, this work is
his doing, assuredly he will bring it to a head while you are here,
so as to gratify both his hate and his greed at once."

"It is a pity that you cannot make some public statement, that
unless your daughter marries a man of whom you approve you will
give her no fortune whatever."

"I might do that," Van Duyk said; "but he knows that if he forced
her to marry him, I should still give her my money. In the second
place, she has a large fortune of her own, that came to her through
her mother. And lastly, I believe that it is not marriage he wishes
now, for he must be sure that Maria would die rather than accept
him, but to carry her off, and then place some enormous sum as a
ransom on condition of her being restored safe and unharmed to me.
He knows that I would give all that I possess to save her from his
hands."

"The only way out of it that I see," Rupert said, "is for me to
find him, and put an end to him."

"You will oblige me, Rupert, if, during the time you remain here,
you would wear this fine mail shirt under your waistcoat. You do
not wear your cuirass here; and your enemy might get a dagger
planted between your shoulders as you walk the streets. It is
light, and very strong. It was worn by a Spanish general who fell,
in the days of Alva, in an attack upon Dort. My great-grandfather
shot him through the head, and kept his mail shirt as a trophy."

"It is a useful thing against such a foe as this," Rupert said,
putting it on at once. "I could not wear it in battle, for it would
be an unfair advantage; but against an assassin all arms are fair."

During the day Rupert went out with his host, and the scowling
looks which were turned upon the latter convinced him that the
merchant had not exaggerated the extent to which the feeling of the
lower class had been excited against him. So convinced was he of
the danger of the position, that, to the immense surprise of Hugh
and Joe Sedley, he ordered them to lie down at night in their
clothes, with their swords and pistols ready by them. With eight
armed men in the house--for four of the porters engaged in the
merchant's warehouse slept on truckle beds placed in the
hall--Rupert thought that they ought to be able to repel any
assault which might be made.

It was on the fourth night after Rupert's coming to Dort, that he
was aroused by a touch on his shoulder. He leapt to his feet, and
his hand, as he did so, grasped his sword, which lay ready beside
him.

"What is it?" he exclaimed.

"There is mischief afloat," Van Duyk said. "There is a sound as of
a crowd in front of the house. I have heard the tramp of many
footsteps."

Rupert went to the window and looked out. The night was dark, and
the oil lamps had all been extinguished; but it seemed to him that
a confused mass filled the place in which the house stood.

"Let me get the men under arms," he said, "and then we can open the
window, and ask what they want."

In two minutes he returned.

"Now, sir, let us ask them at once. They are probably waiting for a
leader or order."

The merchant went to the window, and threw it open.

"Who is there?" he asked. "And what means this gathering at the
door of a peaceful citizen?"

As if his voice had been the signal for which they waited, a roar
went up from the immense crowd. A thunder of axes at the door and
shutters, and a great shout arose, "Death to the traitor! Death to
the Frenchmen!"

Shots were fired at the windows, and at the same moment the alarm
bell at the top of the house pealed loudly out, one of the serving
men having previously received order to sound the signal if needed.
In answer to the alarm bell, the watchman on the tower, whose duty
it was to call the citizens from their beds in case of fire, struck
the great bell, and its deep sounds rang out over the town. Two
minutes later the church bells joined in the clamour; and the bell
on the town hall with quick, sharp strokes called the burgher guard
to arms.

Van Duyk, knowing now that all that could be done had been
effected, ran to his daughter's room, bade her dress, and keep her
door locked until she heard his voice, come what may. Then he ran
downstairs to join the defenders below.

"The shutters are giving everywhere," Rupert cried. "We must hold
this broad staircase. How long will it be, think you, before the
burgher guard are here?"

"A quarter of an hour, maybe."

"We should beat them back for that time," Rupert said. "Light as
many lights as you can, and place them so as to throw the light in
their faces, and keep us in the shade."

In two or three minutes a smashing of timber and loud shouts of
triumph proclaimed that the mob were effecting an entrance.

"For the present I will stand in front, with one of these good
fellows with their axes on each side of me. The other two shall
stand behind us, a step or two higher. You, Hugh and Joe, take post
with our host in the gallery above with your pistols, and cover us
by shooting any man who presses us hard. Fire slowly, pick off your
men, and only leave your posts and join me here on the last
necessity."

They had just taken the posts assigned to them when the door fell
in with a crash, and the mob poured in, just as a rush took place
from the side passages by those who had made their way in through
the lower windows.

"A grim set of men," Rupert said to himself.

They were indeed a grim set. Many bore torches, which, when once
need for quiet and concealment was over, they had lighted.

Dort did a large export trade in hides and in meat to the towns
lying below them, and it was clear that it was from the butchers
and skinners that the mob was chiefly drawn. Huge figures, with
poleaxes and long knives, in leathern clothes spotted and stained
with blood, showed wild and fierce in the red light of the torches,
as they brandished their weapons, and prepared to assault the
little band who held the broad stairs.

Rupert advanced a step below the rest, and shouted:

"What means this? I am an officer of the Duke of Marlborough's
army, and I warn you against lifting a hand against my host and
good friend Mynheer van Duyk."

"It's a lie!" shouted one of the crowd. "We know you; you are a
Frenchman masquerading in English uniform.

"Down with him, my friends. Death to the traitors!"

There was a rush up the stairs, and in an instant the terrible
fight began.

On open ground, Rupert, with his activity and his straight sword,
would have made short work of one of the brawny giants who now
attacked him, for he could have leapt out of reach of the
tremendous blow, and have run his opponent through ere he could
again lift his ponderous axe. But there was no guarding such
swinging blows as these with a light sword; and even the advantage
of the height of the stairs was here of little use.

At first he felt that the combat was desperate. Soon, however, he
regained confidence in his sword. With it held ever straight in
front of him, the men mounting could not strike without laying open
their breasts to the blade. There must, he felt, be no guarding on
his part; he must be ever on the offensive.

All this was felt rather than thought in the whirl of action. One
after another the leaders of the assailants fell, pierced through
the throat while their ponderous axes were in the act of
descending. By his side the Dutchman's retainers fought sturdily,
while the crack of the pistols of Hugh, Joe Sedley, and the master
of the house were generally followed by a cry and a fall from the
assailants.

As the difficulty of their task became more apparent, the yells of
fury of the crowd increased. Many of them were half drunk, and
their wild gestures and shouts, the waving of their torches, and
the brandishing of knives and axes, made the scene a sort of
pandemonium.

Ten minutes had passed since the first attack, and still the stairs
were held. One of the defenders lay dead, with his head cloven to
his shoulders with a poleaxe, but another had taken his place.

Suddenly, from behind, the figure of a man bounded down the stairs
from the gallery, and with a cry of "Die, villain!" struck Rupert
with a dagger with all his strength, and then bounded back into the
gallery. Rupert fell headlong amid his assailants below.

Hugh and Joe Sedley, with a shout of rage and horror, dashed from
their places, sword in hand, and leaping headlong down the stairs,
cutting and hewing with their heavy swords, swept all opposition
back, and stood at the foot, over the body of Rupert.

The three Dutchmen and Van Duyk followed their example, and formed
a group round the foot of the stairs. Then there was a wild storm
of falling blows, the clash of sword and axe, furious shouts, loud
death cries, a very turmoil of strife; when there was a cry at the
door of "The watch!" and then a loud command:

"Cut the knaves down! Slay every man! Dort! Dort!"

There was a rush now to escape. Down the passages fled the late
assailants, pursued by the burgher guard, who, jealous of the
honour of their town, injured by this foul attack upon a leading
citizen, cut down all they came upon; while many who made their
escape through the windows by which they had entered, were cut down
or captured by the guard outside. The defenders of the stairs made
no attempt at pursuit.

The instant the burgher guard entered the hall, Hugh and Joe threw
down their bloodstained swords, and knelt beside Rupert.

"Ough!" sighed the latter, in a long breath.

"Thank God! He is not dead."

"Dead!" Rupert gasped, "not a bit of it; only almost trodden to
death. One of my stout friends has been standing on me all the
time, though I roared for mercy so that you might have heard me a
mile off, had it not been for the din."

"But are you not stabbed, Master Rupert?"

"Stabbed! No; who should have stabbed me? One of you somehow hit me
on the back, and down I went; but there is no stab."

"He had a dagger. I saw it flash," Hugh said, lifting Rupert to his
feet.

"Had he?" Rupert said; "and who was he?

"If it was an enemy, it is your coat of mail has saved me," he
continued, turning to Van Duyk. "I have never taken it off since.
But how did he get behind me I wonder?

"Run," he continued energetically, "and see if the lady is safe.
There must have been mischief behind."

Mynheer van Duyk, closely followed by the others, ran upstairs to
his daughter's room. The door was open. He rushed into the room. It
was empty. The window was open; and looking out, two ladders were
seen, side by side.

It was clear that while the fray had been raging, Maria von Duyk
had been carried off.



Chapter 15: The End of a Feud.

After the first cry of rage and grief at the discovery of the
abduction of Maria van Duyk, there was a moment's silence. Rupert
broke it, laying his hand on the shoulder of Van Duyk, who had
dropped despairingly into a chair.

"We will find her," he said, "wherever she be. Let us lose no
moments in sorrow. Call up the burgomaster, or whoever leads the
burghers, and let us consult."

In another minute or two four of the principal magistrates of Dort
had joined the party, and Van Duyk told them what had happened.

"I told her to lock the door, and not to open until she heard my
voice. Doubtless she was standing there listening to the strife
without, when the men burst in at the window, and seized her
before, in her surprise and terror, she had time to unlock the
door. Now what is to be done to recover her? They have, no doubt,
carried her off by boat, for they could not pass through the
landward gate of the town.

"Will you order two fast boats, to be manned by strong parties of
rowers, with well-armed men? One had better go up the river, one
down; for we know not in which direction they will take their
flight.

"What think you, Master Holliday?"

"I think that a boat had better go either way, without a moment's
loss of time," Rupert said. "But I doubt whether either will find
them. But send the boats without a moment's delay, with orders to
overhaul and search every craft they overtake."

The magistrates at once called in an officer of the guard, and gave
him the necessary instructions.

"And why do you not think that either up or down the river they
will overtake them?" Van Duyk asked Rupert, as the officer left the
room.

"Because they will know that a fleet horseman will pass them; and
that by morning the people at the towns on the banks will all be on
the lookout for them. So, having sent off the boats, I should now
send off horsemen up and down the river, with a letter from you,
sirs, to the authorities at all the towns, begging them to stop and
search every boat."

Again the necessary orders were given.

"It was right to take these steps," Rupert said, "for they may be
greater fools than I take them to be; but I think that they have
done one of two things. They have gone either up or down the river
to some place, probably not far away, where horses are in
readiness, or--or, they may be still in the town."

"Still in the town!"

"Yes," Rupert said; "they will know that we should pursue them up
and down the river; that we should scour the country round; but
they may think that we should not suspect that she is still here.
There must be lots of secure hiding places in an old town like
this; and they may well think it safer to keep her hidden here
until they force her into marriage, or wring a fabulous ransom from
you."

"We will search every house," the burgomaster said, "from cellar to
roof."

"It would be useless," Rupert said. "There must be secret hiding
places where she could be stowed away, bound and gagged perhaps,
and which you could never detect. I would lose no moment of time in
sending out horsemen to every village on either side of the river
above and below us, for a circle of twenty miles. If horsemen have
passed through, some villager or other is sure to have been awoke
by the clatter of the horses. If we get news, we must follow up the
traces wherever they go. If not, it will be strong proof that they
are still here. In any case, our pursuit all over the country will
lead them to think that we have no suspicion that she is here, and
we shall have far more chance of lighting upon a clue than if they
thought we suspected it. Get trusty men to work at once. Question
the prisoners your men have taken, with some sharp pain that will
wring the truth from them; but let all be done quietly; while on
the other hand, let the chase through the country be as active and
public as possible."

Threats, and the application of a string twisted round the thumb,
and tightened until the blood spurted from beneath the nails--rough
modes of questioning which had not yet died out--soon elicited from
the captives the place where the arch-conspirator had been staying
while he laid the train for the explosion; but, as was expected, a
search showed that the bird had flown, without leaving a trace
behind him.

