[167-2] _Cf._ note 57. Las Casas, I. 359, remarks, "Its real name was
Hayti, the last syllable long and accented." He thinks it possible that
the cape first sighted may have been called Bohio.

[167-3] Columbus gave Cuba the name Juana "in memory of Prince Juan the
heir of Castile." _Historie_, p. 83.

[167-4] "In leaving the cape or eastern point of Cuba he gave it the name
Alpha and Omega, which means beginning and end, for he believed that this
cape was the end of the mainland in the Orient." Las Casas, I. 360.

[168-1] The port of St. Nicholas Mole, in Hayti. (Navarrete.)

[168-2] Cape of St. Nicholas. (_Id._)

[168-3] Punta Palmista. (_Id._)

[168-4] Puerto Escudo. (_Id._)

[168-5] The channel between Tortuga Island and the main.

[168-6] Tortoise.

[169-1] _Atalayas_, "watchtowers."

[169-2] This method of giving names in honor of the saint on whose day a
new cape or river was discovered was very commonly followed during the
period of discoveries, and sometimes the date of a discovery, or the
direction of a voyage, or other data can be verified by comparing the
names given with the calender.

[169-3] This clause should be "It extends in this manner to the
south-south-east two leagues."

[169-4] A gap in the manuscript.

[170-1] This is the "Carenero," within the port of St. Nicholas.
(Navarrete.)

[171-1] Accepting Navarrete's conjecture of _abrezuela_ or _anglezuela_
for the reading _agrezuela_ of the text.

[171-2] It should be north 11 miles. (Navarrete.)

[171-3] This is an error. It should be 15 miles. (Navarrete.) The
direction _al Leste cuarta del Sueste_ is East by South.

[171-4] Puerto Escudo. (Navarrete.)

[172-1] Bahia Mosquito. (Navarrete.)

[172-2] Cuvier notes that neither the nightingale proper nor the Spanish
myrtle are found in America.

[172-3] It should be 11 miles. (Navarrete.)

[173-1] _I.e._, Spanish Isle, not "Little Spain," which is sometimes
erroneously given in explanation of the Latin Hispaniola. This last is a
Latinized form of Espanola and not a diminutive. Las Casas, I. 367, in
the corresponding passage, has "Seeing the greatness and beauty of this
island and its resemblance to Spain although much superior and that they
had caught fish in it like the fish of Castile and for other similar
reasons he decided on December 9 when in the harbor of Concepcion to name
this island Spanish Island."

At a period some time later than his first voyage Columbus decided that
Espanola and Cipango were the same and also identical with the Ophir of
the Bible. _Cf._ his marginal note to Landino's Italian translation of
Pliny's _Natural History_, "la isola de Feyti, vel de Ofir, vel de
Cipango, a la quale habio posto nome Spagnola." _Raccolta Colombiana_,
pt. I., vol. II., p. 472.

[174-1] The distance is 11 miles. (Navarrete.)

[175-1] _Camarones._

[175-2] The proper English equivalents for these names in the original
are hard to find. The _corbina_ was a black fish and the name is found in
both Spanish and Portuguese. _Pampanos_ is translated "giltheads," but
the name is taken over into English as "pompano." It must be remembered
that in many cases the names of European species were applied to American
species which resembled them but which were really distinct species of
the same genus.

[177-1] Rather, "bread of _niames_." _Cf._ note, p. 139.

[178-1] Las Casas, I. 373, says that at that season the length of the day
in Espanola is somewhat over eleven hours. The correct latitude is 20 deg..

[179-1] Elsewhere called Babeque. (Navarrete.)

[180-1] Paradise Valley.

[180-2] Rather, "There are on the edges or banks of the shore many
beautiful stones and it is all suitable for walking." The Spanish text
seems to be defective.

[181-1] Diego de Arana of Cordova, a near relation of Beatriz Henriquez,
the mother of the Admiral's son Fernando. (Markham.) Alguazil means
constable.

[181-2] _Ajes._ The same as _mames_. _Cf._ note, p. 139.

[183-1] This Indian word survives in modern Spanish with the meaning
political boss.

[183-2] Diego de Arana.

[184-1] Rodrigo de Escobedo.

[184-2] In Spain in earlier times the Annunciation was celebrated on
December 18 to avoid having it come in Lent. When the Roman usage in
regard to Annunciation was adopted in Spain they instituted the Feast of
our Lady's Expectation on December 18. It was called "The Feast of O
because the first of the greater antiphons is said in the vespers of its
vigil." Addis and Arnold, _Catholic Dictionary_, under "Mary." The series
of anthems all begin with "O."

[186-1] The excelente was worth two castellanos or about $6 in coin
value.

[187-1] El Puerto de la Granja. (Navarrete.)

[187-2] The bay of Puerto Margot. (_Id._)

[188-1] Point and Island of Margot. (Navarrete.)

[188-2] _Camino_ for _Cabo_ (?). (Markham.)

[188-3] Mountain over Guarico. (Navarrete.)

[188-4] _Cf._ p. 178, note.

[188-5] Bahia de Acul. (Navarrete.)

[189-1] This conjecture proved to be wrong. The Peak of Teneriffe is over
12,000 ft. high, while 10,300 ft. (Mt. Tina) is the highest elevation in
Santo Domingo.

[189-2] This is one of the passages used to determine the date of
Columbus's birth. By combining his statement quoted in the _Historie_ of
Ferdinand, ch. IV., that he went to sea at 14, and this assertion that he
followed the sea steadily for 23 years, we find that he was 37 years old
in 1484 or 1485, when he left Portugal and ceased sea-faring till 1492.

[189-3] A gap of a line and a half in the manuscript.

[189-4] Another gap in the manuscript.

[190-1] The mutilation of the text makes this passage difficult. The
third line literally is, "and I saw all the east [or perhaps better the
Levant, _el Levante_] and the west which means the way to England," etc.
After the second gap read: "better than the other which I with proper
caution tried to describe." After "world," read: "and [is] enclosed so
that the oldest cable of the ship would hold it fast."

[190-2] The distance is six miles. (Navarrete.)

[190-3] Acul. (_Id._)

[191-1] _Gonze avellanada._ The interpretation of the French translators
is followed. The word _gonze_ is not given in the dictionaries.

[193-1] "This king was a great lord and king Guacanagari, one of the five
great kings and lordships of this island." Las Casas, I. 389.

[194-1] "This girdle was of fine jewellery work, like misshapen pearls,
made of fish-bones white and colored interspersed, like embroidery, so
sewed with a thread of cotton and by such delicate skill that on the
reverse side it looked like delicate embroidery, although all white,
which it was a pleasure to see." Las Casas, I. 389. From this we learn
that wampum belts were in use among the Indians of Espanola.

[196-1] Port of Guarico. (Navarrete.)

[196-2] This estimate was far too great. The island is about one-third
the size of Great Britain and one-half the size of England.

[196-3] Guarico.

[196-4] It is now called San Honorato. (Navarrete.)

[197-1] "The fact is that _Cacique_ was the word for king, and _Nitayno_
for knight and principal lord." Las Casas, I. 394.

[197-2] The similarity between the names and the report of gold made
Columbus particularly confident of the identification.

[198-1] Entrance of the Bay of Acul. (Navarrete.)

[198-2] Isla de Ratos. (_Id._)

[199-1] Puerto Frances. (Navarrete.)

[199-2] Perhaps better "a young common sailor."

[200-1] The master, who was also the owner, of the Admiral's ship was
Juan de la Cosa of Santona, afterwards well known as a draughtsman and
Pilot. (Markham.)

[200-2] Rather, "Then the seams opened but not the ship." That is, the
ship was not stove. The word translated "seams" is _conventos_, which Las
Casas, I. 398, defines as _los vagos que hay entre costillas y
costillas_. In this passage he is using _costillas_ not in the technical
sense of _costillas de nao_, "ribs," but in the sense of "planks," as in
_costillas de cuba_, "barrel staves."

[202-1] In reality Cibao was a part of Espanola.

[202-2] Made from the manioc roots or _ajes_. Cassava biscuit can be got
to-day at fancy grocery stores. It is rather insipid.

[204-1] In reality, three-quarters the size of Portugal.

[204-2] Juan de la Cosa, the master, was a native of Santona, on the
north coast of Spain. There were two other Santona men on board and
several from the north coast. (Markham.)

[206-1] "He ordered then all his people to make great haste and the king
ordered his vassals to help him and as an immense number joined with the
Christians they managed so well and with such diligence that in a matter
of ten days our stronghold was well made and as far as could be then
constructed. He named it the City of Christmas (Villa de la Navidad)
because he had arrived there on that day, and so to-day that harbor is
called Navidad, although there is no memory that there even has been a
fort or any building there, since it is overgrown with trees as large and
tall as if fifty years had passed, and I have seen them." Las Casas, I.
408.

[206-2] These were not islands, but districts whose chiefs were called by
the same names. _Cf._ Las Casas, I. 410.

[207-1] For Yanez. Vincent Yanez Pinzon.

[208-1] Rather, "For now the business appeared to be so great and
important that it was wonderful (said the Admiral) and he said he did not
wish," etc.

[208-2] The first suggestion of systematic colonization in the New World.

[209-1] See note 2 under Jan. 9, p. 218.

[210-1] The actual number was 44, according to the official list given in
a document printed by Navarrete, which is a notice to the next of kin to
apply for wages due, dated Burgos, December 20, 1507. Markham reproduces
this list in his edition of Columbus's Journal.

[210-2] Las Casas gives the farewell speech of the Admiral to those who
were left behind at Navidad, I. 415. It is translated in Thacher's
_Columbus_, I. 632.

[211-1] "It is not known how many he took from this island but I believe
he took some, altogether he carried ten or twelve Indians to Castile
according to the Portuguese History [Barros] and I saw them in Seville
yet I did not notice nor do I recollect that I counted them." Las Casas,
I. 419.

[212-1] It is N. 80 deg. E. 70 leagues. (Navarrete.)

[212-2] Los siete Hermanos. (_Id._)

[212-3] Bahia de Manzanillo. (_Id._)

[212-4] Should be S.W. three leagues.

[212-5] Rio Tapion, in the Bahia de Manzanillo. (_Id._)

[212-6] A mistake for three leagues. (_Id._)

[212-7] Should be W.S.W. (_Id._)

[213-1] Isla Cabra. (Navarrete.)

[213-2] Anchorage of Monte Cristi. (_Id._)

[213-3] Punta Rucia. (_Id._)

[214-1] Martin Alonso Pinzon had slipped away during the night of
November 21.

[215-1] Here probably the island of Iguana Grande.

[215-2] Jamaica.

[215-3] On this myth see below under January 15.

[215-4] It is remarkable that this report, which refers probably to
Yucatan and to the relatively high state of culture of the Mayas, drew no
further comment from Columbus. From our point of view it ought to have
made a much greater impression than we have evidence that it did; from
his point of view that he was off Asia it was just what was to be
expected and so is recorded without comment.

[216-1] This is the large river Yaqui, which contains much gold in its
sand. It was afterwards called the Santiago. (Navarrete.)

[217-1] Afterwards called the Rio de Santiago. (Navarrete.)

[217-2] This should be 8 leagues. (_Id._)

[217-3] Las Casas, I. 429, says the distance to the mines was not 4
leagues.

[217-4] Punta Isabelica. (_Id._)

[217-5] The distance is 10-1/2 leagues, or 42 of the Italian miles used
by Columbus. (_Id._)

[218-1] The mermaids [Spanish, "sirens"] of Columbus are the _manatis_,
or sea-cows, of the Caribbean Sea and great South American rivers. They
are now scarcely ever seen out at sea. Their resemblance to human beings,
when rising in the water, must have been very striking. They have small
rounded heads, and cervical vertebrae which form a neck, enabling the
animal to turn its head about. The fore limbs also, instead of being
pectoral fins, have the character of the arm and hand of the higher
mammalia. These peculiarities, and their very human way of suckling their
young, holding it by the forearm, which is movable at the elbow-joint,
suggested the idea of mermaids. The congener of the _manati_, which had
been seen by Columbus on the coast of Guinea, is the _dugong_. (Markham.)

[218-2] Las Casas has "on the coast of Guinea where manequeta is
gathered" (I. 430). _Amomum Melequeta_, an herbaceous, reedlike plant,
three to five feet high, is found along the coast of Africa, from Sierra
Leone to the Congo. Its seeds were called "Grains of Paradise," or
_maniguetta_, and the coast alluded to by Columbus, between Liberia and
Cape Palmas, was hence called the Grain Coast. The grains were used as a
condiment, like pepper, and in making the spiced wine called _hippocras_.
(Markham.)

[219-1] Rio Chuzona chica. (Navarrete.)

[219-2] Reading _broma_ ("ship worm") for _bruma_ ("mist") in the
sentence: _sino que tiene mucha bruma_. De la Roquette in the French
translation gives _bruma_ the meaning of "shipworm," supposing it to be a
variant form of _broma_. The Italian translator of the letter on the
fourth voyage took _broma_ to be _bruma_, translated it _pruina e bruma_,
and consequently had Columbus's ship injured by frost near Panama in
April! _Cf._ Thacher, _Christopher Columbus_, II. 625, 790.

[220-1] So called because the summit is always covered with white or
silver clouds. Las Casas, I. 432. A monastery of Dominicans was
afterwards built on Monte de Plata, in which Las Casas began to write his
history of the Indies in the year 1527. Las Casas, IV. 254. (Markham.)

[220-2] Puerto de Plata, where a flourishing seaport town was afterwards
established; founded by Ovando in 1502. It had fallen to decay in 1606.
(Markham.)

[220-3] Punta Macuris. The distance is 3, not 4 leagues. (Navarrete.)

[220-4] Punta Sesua. The distance is only one league. (_Id._)

[220-5] Cabo de la Roca. It should be 5, not 6 leagues. (_Id._)

[220-6] Bahia Escocesa. (_Id._)

[220-7] Las Casas says that none of these names remained even in his
time. I. 432.

[221-1] This was the Peninsula of Samana. (Navarrete.)

[221-2] Isla Yazual. (_Id._)

[221-3] Cabo Cabron, or Lover's Cape; the extreme N.E. point of the
island, rising nearly 2000 feet above the sea. (Markham.)

[221-4] Puerto Yaqueron. (Navarrete.)

[221-5] Cabo Samana; called Cabo de San Theramo afterwards by Columbus
(Markham.)[TN-3]

[221-6] The Bay of Samana. (Navarrete.)

[221-7] Cayo de Levantados. (_Id._)

[222-1] This should be, "who says that he was very ugly of countenance,
more so than the others that he had seen."

[222-2] Las Casas says, I. 433, "Not charcoal but a certain dye they make
from a certain fruit."

[222-3] Las Casas, I. 434, says there never were any cannibals in
Espanola.

[223-1] Las Casas, I. 434, says that a section in the northeastern part
of Espanola "was inhabited by a tribe which called themselves _Mazariges_
and others _Ciguayos_ and that they spoke different languages from the
rest of the island. I do not remember if they differed from each other in
speech since so many years have passed, and to-day there is no one to
inquire of, although I have talked many times with both generations; but
more than fifty years have gone by." The Ciguayos, he adds, were called
so because they wore their hair long as women do in Castile. This passage
shows that Las Casas was writing this part of his history a half-century
after he went first to Espanola, which was in 1502, with Ovando.

[223-2] See p. 226, note 4, under Jan. 15.

[223-3] Porto Rico. (Navarrete.)

[223-4] Las Casas, I. 434, says that Guanin was not the name of an
island, but the word for a kind of base gold.

[223-5] A gap in the original manuscript.

[224-1] Las Casas, I. 435, has, "and as word of a palm-tree board which
is very hard and very heavy, not sharp but blunt, about two fingers thick
everywhere, with which as it is hard and heavy like iron, although a man
has a helmet on his head they will crush his skull to the brain with one
blow."

[224-2] "This was the first fight that there was in all the Indies and
when the blood of the Indians was shed." Las Casas, I. 436.

[225-1] Porto Rico. Navarrete says it is certain that the Indians called
Porto Rico Isla de Carib.

[225-2] Probably Martinique or Guadeloupe. (Navarrete.)

[226-1] By this calculation the Admiral entered the service of the
Catholic Sovereigns on January 20, 1486. (Navarrete.)

[226-2] "What would he have said if he had seen the millions and millions
(_cuentos y millones_) that the sovereigns have received from his labors
since his death?" Las Casas, I. 437.

[226-3] Porto Rico.

[226-4] Columbus had read in Marco Polo of the islands of MASCULIA and
FEMININA in the Indian Seas and noted the passage in his copy. See ch.
XXXIII. of pt. III. of Marco Polo. On the other hand there is evidence
for an indigenous Amazon myth in the New World. The earliest sketch of
American folk-lore ever made, that of the Friar Ramon Pane in 1497,
preserved in Ferdinand Columbus's _Historie_ and in a condensed form in
Peter Martyr's _De Rebus Oceanicis_ (Dec. I., lib. IX.), tells the story
of the culture-hero Guagugiona, who set forth from the cave, up to that
time the home of mankind, "with all the women in search of other lands
and he came to Matinino, where at once he left the women and went away to
another country," etc., _Historie_ (London ed., 1867), p. 188. Ramon's
name is erroneously given as Roman in the _Historie_. On the Amazons in
Venezuela, see Oviedo, lib. XXV., cap. XIV. It may be accepted that the
Amazon myth as given by Oviedo, from which the great river derived its
name, River of the Amazons, is a composite of an Arawak folk-tale like
that preserved by Ramon Pane overlaid with the details of the Marco Polo
myth, which in turn derives from the classical myth.

[227-1] _Y los mas le ponen alli yerba_, "and the most of them put on
poison." The description of these arrows corresponds exactly with that
given by Sir E. im Thurn of the poisoned arrows of the Indians of Guiana,
which still have "adjustable wooden tips smeared with poison, which are
inserted in the socket at the end of a reed shaft." _Among the Indians of
Guiana_, p. 242.

[227-2] Capsicum. (Markham.)

[228-1] Gulf of the Arrows. This was the Bay of Samana, into which the
river Yuna flows. (Navarrete.)

[228-2] Porto Rico. It would have been distant about 30 leagues.
(Navarrete.)

[229-1] "The sons remain with their mothers till the age of fourteen when
they go to join their fathers in their separate abode." Marco Polo, pt.
III., ch. XXXIII. _Cf._ p. 226, note 4.

[229-2] Now called Cabod el Engano,[TN-4] the extreme eastern point of
Espanola. It had the same name when Las Casas wrote. (Markham.)

[229-3] Alcatraz.

[230-1] The _almadrabas_, or tunny fisheries of Rota, near Cadiz, were
inherited by the Duke, as well as those of Conil, a little fishing town 6
leagues east of Cadiz. (Markham.)

[230-2] _Un pescado_ (a fish), called the _rabiforcado_. For _un
pescado_, we should probably read _una ave pescadora_, and translate: a
fishing bird, called _rabiforcado_. See entry for September 29 and note.

[230-3] _Alcatraces_, _rabos de juncos_, and _rabiforcados_: boobies,
boatswain-birds, and frigate-birds. The translator has not been
consistent in selecting English equivalents for these names. In the entry
of January 18 _rabiforcado_ is frigate-bird; in that of January 19 _rabo
de junco_ is frigate-bird; in that of January 21 _rabo de junco_ is
_boatswain-bird_. September 14 _garjao_ is the tern, while on January 19
the _rabiforcado_ is the tern. On these birds, see notes 11, 12, 13, and
20. See also Oviedo, _Historia General y natural de las Indias_, lib.
XIV., cap. I., for descriptions of these birds.

[231-1] _Rabiforcados y pardelas._ Las Casas, I. 440, has _aves
pardelas_. Talhausen, _Neues Spanisch-deutsches Woerterbuch_, defines
_pardelas_ as _Peters-vogel_, _i.e._, petrel.

[231-2] _Rabos de juncos y pardelas._ The translator vacillates between
sandpipers and terns in rendering _pardelas_. _Cf._ January 28 and 31,
but as has just been noted "petrels" is the proper word.

[231-3] An error of the transcriber for miles. Each glass being
half-an-hour, going six miles an hour, they would have made 33 miles or
8-1/4 leagues in five hours and a half. (Navarrete.)

[233-1] Petrels.

[233-2] The English equivalent is dory, or gilthead.

[234-1] Petrels.

[235-1] Vicente Yanez Pinzon.

[235-2] Later a rich citizen of the city of Santo Domingo, Espanola,
where he was known as Roldan the pilot. Las Casas, I. 443.

[236-1] The name is also written Peralonso Nino. He made one of the first
voyages to the mainland of South America after the third voyage of
Columbus. See Irving, _Companions of Columbus_. Bourne, _Spain in
America_, p. 69.

[237-1] A gap in the original manuscript.

[238-1] Martin Alonso Pinzon succeeded in bringing the caravel _Pinta_
into port at Bayona in Galicia. He went thence to Palos, arriving in the
evening of the same day as the _Nina_ with the Admiral. Pinzon died very
soon afterwards. Oviedo [I. 27] says: "He went to Palos to his own house
and died after a few days since he went there very ill." (Markham.)

[239-1] Virgin of Guadalupe was the patroness of Estremadura. As many of
the early colonists went from Estremadura there came to be a good number
of her shrines in Mexico. _Cf._ R. Ford, _Handbook for Spain_, index
under "Guadalupe."

[239-2] A full account of the shrine at Loreto may be found in Addis and
Arnold, _Catholic Dictionary_, under "Loreto."

[239-3] "This is the house where the sailors of the country particularly
have their devotions." Las Casas, I. 446. Moguer was a village near
Palos.

[240-1] See page 108, note 1. and entry for October 10.

[241-1] As Beatriz Enriquez, the mother of Ferdinand, was still living,
this passage has occasioned much perplexity. A glance at the
corresponding passage, quoted in direct discourse from this entry in the
Journal, in the _Historie_ of Ferdinand, shows that the words "orphans
without father or mother" were not in the original Journal, if we can
trust this transcript. On the other hand, Las Casas, in his _Historia_,
I. 447, where he used the original Journal and not the abridgment that
has come down to us, has the words "_huerfanos de padre y madre en tierra
estrana_." It may be that Ferdinand noted the error of the original
Journal and quietly corrected it.

[241-2] In Ferdinand's text nothing is said explicitly about the Indies.

[241-3] There is nothing corresponding to this in Ferdinand's extract
from the Journal. Was this omission also a case of pious revision?

The Admiral thought that there could be no great storms in the countries
he had discovered, because trees (mangroves) actually grew with their
roots in the sea. The herbage on the beach nearly reached the waves,
which does not happen when the sea is rough. (Markham.)

[241-4] Ferdinand Columbus has preserved in his life of his father the
exact words of the Journal for the last two pages of the entry for
February 14. The extract is given here to illustrate the character of the
work of the epitomizer who prepared the text of the Journal as it has
come down to us. "I should have borne this fortune with less distress if
my life alone had been in peril, since I am aware that I am in debt to
the Most High Creator for my life and because at other times I have found
myself so near to death that almost nothing remained but to suffer it.
But what caused me boundless grief and trouble was the reflection that,
now that Our Lord had been pleased to enlighten me with the faith and
with the certainty of this undertaking in which he had already given me
the victory, that just now, when our gainsayers were to be convinced and
your Highnesses were to receive from me glory and enlargement of your
high estate, the Divine Majesty should will to block it with my death.
This last would have been more endurable if it did not involve that of
the people I brought with me with the promise of a very prosperous issue.
They seeing themselves in such a plight not only cursed their coming but
even the fear or the restraint which after my persuasions prevented them
from turning back from the way as many times they were resolved to do.
And above all this my grief was redoubled at the vision before my eyes
and at the recollection of two little sons that I had left at their
studies in Cordova without succor in a strange land and without my having
rendered (or at least without its being made manifest) the service for
which one might trust that your Highnesses would remember them.

"And although on the one hand I was comforted by the faith that I had
that Our Lord would never suffer a work which would highly exalt his
Church, which at length after so much opposition and such labors I had
brought to the last stage, to remain unaccomplished and that I should be
broken; on the other hand, I thought that, either on account of my
demerits or to prevent my enjoying so much glory in this world, it was
his pleasure to take it away from me, and so while thus in perplexity I
bethought myself of the venture of your Highnesses who even if I should
die and the ship be lost, might find means of not losing a victory
already achieved and that it might be possible in some way for the news
of the success of my voyage to come to your ears; wherefore I wrote on a
parchment with the brevity that the time demanded how I had discovered
the lands that I had promised to, and in how many days; and the route I
