again an ill-aimed cannon ball would plough through them, killing some
and wounding others, but the rest took no heed, only crying the more,
'Welcome, Tezcat, and farewell. Blessings on you, our deliverer, welcome
and farewell!'

We went slowly through the press, treading on a path of flowers, till we
came across the courtyard to the base of the pyramid. Here at the outer
gate there was a halt because of the multitude of the people, and while
we waited a warrior thrust his way through the crowd and bowed before
me. Glancing up I saw that it was Guatemoc.

'Teule,' he whispered to me, 'I leave my charge yonder,' and he nodded
towards the force who strove to break a way into the palace of Axa, 'to
bid you farewell. Doubtless we shall meet again ere long. Believe me,
Teule, I would have helped you if I could, but it cannot be. I wish
that I might change places with you. My friend, farewell. Twice you have
saved my life, but yours I cannot save.'

'Farewell, Guatemoc,' I answered 'heaven prosper you, for you are a true
man.'

Then we passed on.

At the foot of the pyramid the procession was formed, and here one of my
wives bade me adieu after weeping on my neck, though I did not weep on
hers. Now the road to the summit of the teocalli winds round and round
the pyramid, ever mounting higher as it winds, and along this road we
went in solemn state. At each turn we halted and another wife bade me a
last good-bye, or one of my instruments of music, which I did not grieve
to see the last of, or some article of my strange attire, was taken
from me. At length after an hour's march, for our progress was slow, we
reached the flat top of the pyramid that is approached by a great stair,
a space larger than the area of the churchyard here at Ditchingham, and
unfenced at its lofty edge. Here on this dizzy place stood the temples
of Huitzel and of Tezcat, soaring structures of stone and wood, within
which were placed the horrid effigies of the gods, and dreadful chambers
stained with sacrifice. Here, too, were the holy fires that burned
eternally, the sacrificial stones, the implements of torment, and the
huge drum of snakes' skin, but for the rest the spot was bare. It was
bare but not empty, for on that side of it which looked towards the
Spanish quarters were stationed some hundreds of men who hurled missiles
into their camp without ceasing. On the other side also were gathered a
concourse of priests awaiting the ceremony of my death. Below the great
square, fringed round with burnt-out houses, was crowded with thousands
of people, some of them engaged in combat with the Spaniards, but the
larger part collected there to witness my murder.

Now we reached the top of the pyramid, two hours before midday,
for there were still many rites to be carried out ere the moment of
sacrifice. First I was led into the sanctuary of Tezcat, the god whose
name I bore. Here was his statue or idol, fashioned in black marble and
covered with golden ornaments. In the hand of this idol was a shield of
burnished gold on which its jewelled eyes were fixed, reading there,
as his priests fabled, all that passed upon the earth he had created.
Before him also was a plate of gold, which with muttered invocations the
head priest cleansed as I watched, rubbing it with his long and matted
locks. This done he held it to my lips that I might breathe on it, and
I turned faint and sick, for I knew that it was being made ready to
receive the heart which I felt beating in my breast.

Now what further ceremonies were to be carried out in this unholy place
I do not know, for at that moment a great tumult arose in the square
beneath, and I was hurried from the sanctuary by the priests. Then I
perceived this: galled to madness by the storm of missiles rained upon
them from its crest, the Spaniards were attacking the teocalli. Already
they were pouring across the courtyard in large companies, led by
Cortes himself, and with them came many hundreds of their allies the
Tlascalans. On the other hand some thousands of the Aztecs were rushing
to the foot of the first stairway to give the white men battle there.
Five minutes passed and the fight grew fierce. Again and again, covered
by the fire of the arquebusiers, the Spaniards charged the Aztecs, but
their horses slipping upon the stone pavement, at length they dismounted
and continued the fray on foot. Slowly and with great slaughter the
Indians were pushed back and the Spaniards gained a footing on the first
stairway. But hundreds of warriors still crowded the lofty winding road,
and hundreds more held the top, and it was plain that if the Spaniards
won through at all, the task would be a hard one. Still a fierce hope
smote me like a blow when I saw what was toward. If the Spaniards took
the temple there would be no sacrifice. No sacrifice could be offered
till midday, so Otomie had told me, and that was not for hard upon two
hours. It came to this then, if the Spaniards were victorious within two
hours, there was a chance of life for me, if not I must die.

Now when I was led out of the sanctuary of Tezcat, I wondered because
the princess Otomie, or rather the goddess Atla as she was then called,
was standing among the chief priests and disputing with them, for I had
seen her bow her head at the door of the holy place, and thought that it
was in token of farewell, seeing that she was the last of the four women
to leave me. Of what she disputed I could not hear because of the din of
battle, but the argument was keen and it seemed to me that the priests
were somewhat dismayed at her words, and yet had a fierce joy in them.
It appeared also that she won her cause, for presently they bowed
in obeisance to her, and turning slowly she swept to my side with a
peculiar majesty of gait that even then I noted. Glancing up at her face
also, I saw that it was alight as though with a great and holy purpose,
and moreover that she looked like some happy bride passing to her
husband's arms.

'Why are you not gone, Otomie?' I said. 'Now it is too late. The
Spaniards surround the teocalli and you will be killed or taken
prisoner.'

'I await the end whatever it may be,' she answered briefly, and we spoke
no more for a while, but watched the progress of the fray, which was
fierce indeed. Grimly the Aztec warriors fought before the symbols of
their gods, and in the sight of the vast concourse of the people who
crowded the square beneath and stared at the struggle in silence. They
hurled themselves upon the Spanish swords, they gripped the Spaniards
with their hands and screaming with rage dragged them to the steep sides
of the roadway, purposing to cast them over. Sometimes they succeeded,
and a ball of men clinging together would roll down the slope and be
dashed to pieces on the stone flooring of the courtyard, a Spaniard
being in the centre of the ball. But do what they would, like some
vast and writhing snake, still the long array of Teules clad in their
glittering mail ploughed its way upward through the storm of spears and
arrows. Minute by minute and step by step they crept on, fighting as
men fight who know the fate that awaits the desecrators of the gods of
Anahuac, fighting for life, and honour, and safety from the stone of
sacrifice. Thus an hour went by, and the Spaniards were half way up
the pyramid. Louder and louder grew the fearful sounds of battle, the
Spaniards cheered and called on their patron saints to aid them, the
Aztecs yelled like wild beasts, the priests screamed invocations to
their gods and cries of encouragement to the warriors, while above all
rose the rattle of the arquebusses, the roar of the cannon, and the
fearful note of the great drum of snake's skin on which a half-naked
priest beat madly. Only the multitudes below never moved, nor shouted.
They stood silent gazing upward, and I could see the sunlight flash on
the thousands of their staring eyes.

Now all this while I was standing near the stone of sacrifice with
Otomie at my side. Round me were a ring of priests, and over the stone
was fixed a square of black cloth supported upon four poles, which were
set in sockets in the pavement. In the centre of this black cloth was
sewn a golden funnel measuring six inches or so across at its mouth,
and the sunbeams passing through this funnel fell in a bright patch,
the size of an apple, upon the space of pavement that was shaded by the
cloth. As the sun moved in the heavens, so did this ring of light creep
across the shadow till at length it climbed the stone of sacrifice and
lay upon its edge.

Then at a sign from the head priest, his ministers laid hold of me and
plucked what were left of my fine clothes from me as cruel boys pluck a
living bird, till I stood naked except for the paint upon my body and a
cloth about my loins. Now I knew that my hour had come, and strange
to tell, for the first time this day courage entered into me, and I
rejoiced to think that soon I should have done with my tormentors.
Turning to Otomie I began to bid her farewell in a clear voice, when to
my amaze I saw that as I had been served so she was being served, for
her splendid robes were torn off her and she stood before me arrayed
in nothing except her beauty, her flowing hair, and a broidered cotton
smock.

'Do not wonder, Teule,' she said in a low voice, answering the question
my tongue refused to frame, 'I am your wife and yonder is our marriage
bed, the first and last. Though you do not love me, to-day I die your
death and at your side, as I have the right to do. I could not save you,
Teule, but at least I can die with you.'

At the moment I made no answer, for I was stricken silent by my wonder,
and before I could find my tongue the priests had cast me down, and for
the second time I lay upon the stone of doom. As they held me a yell
fiercer and longer than any which had gone before, told that the
Spaniards had got foot upon the last stair of the ascent. Scarcely had
my body been set upon the centre of the great stone, when that of Otomie
was laid beside it, so close that our sides touched, for I must lie in
the middle of the stone and there was no great place for her. Then the
moment of sacrifice not being come, the priests made us fast with cords
which they knotted to copper rings in the pavement, and turned to watch
the progress of the fray.

For some minutes we lay thus side by side, and as we lay a great wonder
and gratitude grew in my heart, wonder that a woman could be so brave,
gratitude for the love she gave me, sealing it with her life-blood.
Because Otomie loved me she had chosen this fearful death, because she
loved me so well that she desired to die thus at my side rather than
to live on in greatness and honour without me. Of a sudden, in a moment
while I thought of this marvel, a new light shone upon my heart and it
was changed towards her. I felt that no woman could ever be so dear to
me as this glorious woman, no, not even my betrothed. I felt--nay, who
can say what I did feel? But I know this, that the tears rushed to my
eyes and ran down my painted face, and I turned my head to look at her.
She was lying as much upon her left side as her hands would allow, her
long hair fell from the stone to the paving where it lay in masses, and
her face was towards me. So close was it indeed that there was not an
inch between our lips.

'Otomie,' I whispered, 'listen to me. I love you, Otomie.' Now I saw her
breast heave beneath the bands and the colour come upon her brow.

'Then I am repaid,' she answered, and our lips clung together in a kiss,
the first, and as we thought the last. Yes, there we kissed, on the
stone of sacrifice, beneath the knife of the priest and the shadow of
death, and if there has been a stranger love scene in the world, I have
never heard its story.

'Oh! I am repaid,' she said again; 'I would gladly die a score of deaths
to win this moment, indeed I pray that I may die before you take back
your words. For, Teule, I know well that there is one who is dearer to
you than I am, but now your heart is softened by the faithfulness of an
Indian girl, and you think that you love her. Let me die then believing
that the dream is true.'

'Talk not so,' I answered heavily, for even at that moment the memory
of Lily came into my mind. 'You give your life for me and I love you for
it.'

'My life is nothing and your love is much,' she answered smiling. 'Ah!
Teule, what magic have you that you can bring me, Montezuma's daughter,
to the altar of the gods and of my own free will? Well, I desire no
softer bed, and for the why and wherefore it will soon be known by both
of us, and with it many other things.'



CHAPTER XXII

THE TRIUMPH OF THE CROSS


'Otomie,' I said presently, 'when will they kill us?'

'When the point of light lies within the ring that is painted over your
heart,' she answered.

Now I turned my head from her, and looked at the sunbeam which pierced
the shadow above us like a golden pencil. It rested at my side about
six inches from me, and I reckoned that it would lie in the scarlet
ring painted upon my breast within some fifteen minutes. Meanwhile the
clamour of battle grew louder and nearer. Shifting myself so far as the
cords would allow, I strained my head upwards and saw that the Spaniards
had gained the crest of the pyramid, since the battle now raged upon its
edge, and I have rarely seen so terrible a fight, for the Aztecs fought
with the fury of despair, thinking little of their own lives if they
could only bring a Spaniard to his death. But for the most part their
rude weapons would not pierce the coats of mail, so that there remained
only one way to compass their desire, namely, by casting the white men
over the edge of the teocalli to be crushed like eggshells upon the
pavement two hundred feet below. Thus the fray broke itself up into
groups of foes who rent and tore at each other upon the brink of the
pyramid, now and again to vanish down its side, ten or twelve of them
together. Some of the priests also joined in the fight, thinking less of
their own deaths than of the desecration of their temples, for I saw
one of them, a man of huge strength and stature, seize a Spanish soldier
round the middle and leap with him into space. Still, though very
slowly, the Spaniards and Tlascalans forced their way towards the centre
of the platform, and as they came the danger of this dreadful end grew
less, for the Aztecs must drag them further.

Now the fight drew near to the stone of sacrifice, and all who remained
alive of the Aztecs, perhaps some two hundred and fifty of them, besides
the priests, ringed themselves round us and it in a circle. Also the
outer rim of the sunbeam that fell through the golden funnel, creeping
on remorselessly, touched my painted side which it seemed to burn as hot
iron might, for alas, I could not command the sun to stand still while
the battle raged, as did Joshua in the valley of Ajalon. When it touched
me, five priests seized my limbs and head, and the father of them, he
who had conducted me from the palace, clasped his flint knife in both
hands. Now a deathly sickness took me and I shut my eyes dreaming that
all was done, but at that moment I heard a wild-eyed man, the chief of
the astronomers whom I had noted standing by, call out to the minister
of death:

'Not yet, O priest of Tezeat! If you smite before the sunbeam lies upon
the victim's heart, your gods are doomed and doomed are the people of
Anahuac.'

The priest gnashed his teeth with rage, and glared first at the creeping
point of light and then over his shoulder at the advancing battle.
Slowly the ring of warriors closed in upon us, slowly the golden ray
crept up my breast till its outer rim touched the red circle painted
upon my heart. Again the priest heaved up his awful knife, again I shut
my eyes, and again I heard the shrill scream of the astronomer, 'Not
yet, not yet, or your gods are doomed!'

Then I heard another sound. It was the voice of Otomie crying for help.

'Save us, Teules; they murder us!' she shrieked in so piercing a note
that it reached the ears of the Spaniards, for one shouted in answer
and in the Castilian tongue, 'On, my comrades, on! The dogs do murder on
their altars!'

Then there was a mighty rush and the defending Aztecs were swept in upon
the altar, lifting the priest of sacrifice from his feet and throwing
him across my body. Thrice that rush came like a rush of the sea, and
each time the stand of the Aztecs weakened. Now their circle was broken
and the swords of the Spaniards flashed up on every side, and now the
red ray lay within the ring upon my heart.

'Smite, priest of Tezcat,' screamed the voice of the astronomer; 'smite
home for the glory of your gods!'

With a fearful yell the priest lifted the knife; I saw the golden
sunbeam that rested full upon my heart shine on it. Then as it was
descending I saw the same sunbeam shine upon a yard of steel that
flashed across me and lost itself in the breast of the murderer priest.
Down came the great flint knife, but its aim was lost. It struck indeed,
but not upon my bosom, though I did not escape it altogether. Full upon
the altar of sacrifice it fell and was shattered there, piercing between
my side and that of Otomie, and gashing the flesh of both so that our
blood was mingled upon the stone, making us one indeed. Down too came
the priest across our bodies for the second time, but to rise no more,
for he writhed dying on those whom he would have slain.

Then as in a dream I heard the wail of the astronomer singing the dirge
of the gods of Anahuac.

'The priest is dead and his gods are fallen,' he cried. 'Tezcat has
rejected his victim and is fallen; doomed are the gods of Anahuac!
Victory is to the Cross of the Christians!'

Thus he wailed, then came the sound of sword blows and I knew that this
prophet was dead also.

Now a strong arm pulled the dying priest from off us, and he staggered
back till he fell over the altar where the eternal fire burned,
quenching it with his blood and body after it had flared for many
generations, and a knife cut the rope that bound us.

I sat up staring round me wildly, and a voice spoke above me in
Castilian, not to me indeed but to some comrade.

'These two went near to it, poor devils,' said the voice. 'Had my cut
been one second later, that savage would have drilled a hole in him as
big as my head. By all the saints! the girl is lovely, or would be if
she were washed. I shall beg her of Cortes as my prize.'

The voice spoke and I knew the voice. None other ever had that hard
clear ring. I knew it even then and looked up, slipping off the
death-stone as I looked. Now I saw. Before me fully clad in mail was my
enemy, de Garcia. It was HIS sword that by the good providence of God
had pierced the breast of the priest. He had saved me who, had he known,
would as soon have turned his steel against his own heart as on that of
my destroyer.

I gazed at him, wondering if I dreamed, then my lips spoke, without my
will as it were:

'DE GARCIA!'

He staggered back at the sound of my voice, like a man struck by a shot,
then stared at me, rubbed his eyes with his hand, and stared again. Now
at length he knew me through my paint.

'Mother of God!' he gasped, 'it is that knave Thomas Wingfield, AND I
HAVE SAVED HIS LIFE!'

By this time my senses had come back to me, and knowing all my folly, I
turned seeking escape. But de Garcia had no mind to suffer this. Lifting
his sword, he sprang at me with a beastlike scream of rage and hate.
Swiftly as thought I slipped round the stone of sacrifice and after me
came the uplifted sword of my enemy. It would have overtaken me soon
enough, for I was weak with fear and fasting, and my limbs were cramped
with bonds, but at that moment a cavalier whom by his dress and port
I guessed to be none other than Cortes himself, struck up de Garcia's
sword, saying:

'How now, Sarceda? Are you mad with the lust of blood that you would
take to sacrificing victims like an Indian priest? Let the poor devil
go.'

'He is no Indian, he is an English spy,' cried de Garcia, and once more
struggled to get at me.

'Decidedly our friend is mad,' said Cortes, scanning me; 'he says that
this wretched creature is an Englishman. Come, be off both of you, or
somebody else may make the same mistake,' and he waved his sword in
token to us to go, deeming that I could not understand his words; then
added angrily, as de Garcia, speechless with rage, made a new attempt to
get at me:

'No, by heaven! I will not suffer it. We are Christians and come to
save victims, not to slay them. Here, comrades, hold this fool who would
stain his soul with murder.'

Now the Spaniards clutched de Garcia by the arms, and he cursed and
raved at them, for as I have said, his rage was that of a beast rather
than of a man. But I stood bewildered, not knowing whither to fly.
Fortunate it was for me indeed that one was by who though she understood
no Spanish, yet had a quicker wit. For while I stood thus, Otomie
clasped my hand, and whispering, 'Fly, fly swiftly!' led me away from
the stone of sacrifice.

'Whither shall we go?' I said at length. 'Were it not better to trust to
the mercy of the Spaniards?'

'To the mercy of that man-devil with the sword?' she answered. 'Peace,
Teule, and follow me.'

Now she led me on, and the Spaniards let us by unharmed, ay, and even
spoke words of pity as we passed, for they knew that we were victims
snatched from sacrifice. Indeed, when a certain brute, a Tlascalan
Indian, rushed at us, purposing to slay us with a club, one of the
Spaniards ran him through the shoulder so that he fell wounded to the
pavement.

So we went on, and at the edge of the pyramid we glanced back and saw
that de Garcia had broken from those who held him, or perhaps he found
his tongue and had explained the truth to them. At the least he was
bounding from the altar of sacrifice nearly fifty yards away, and coming
towards us with uplifted sword. Then fear gave us strength, and we fled
like the wind. Along the steep path we rushed side by side, leaping down
the steps and over the hundreds of dead and dying, only pausing now and
again to save ourselves from being smitten into space by the bodies
of the priests whom the Spaniards were hurling from the crest of the
teocalli. Once looking up, I caught sight of de Garcia pursuing far
above us, but after that we saw him no more; doubtless he wearied of the
chase, or feared to fall into the hands of such of the Aztec warriors as
still clustered round the foot of the pyramid.

We had lived through many dangers that day, the princess Otomie and I,
but one more awaited us before ever we found shelter for awhile. After
we had reached the foot of the pyramid and turned to mingle with the
terrified rabble that surged and flowed through the courtyard of the
temple, bearing away the dead and wounded as the sea at flood reclaims
its waste and wreckage, a noise like thunder caught my ear. I looked
up, for the sound came from above, and saw a huge mass bounding down the
steep side of the pyramid. Even then I knew it again; it was the idol of
the god Tezcat that the Spaniards had torn from its shrine, and like
an avenging demon it rushed straight on to me. Already it was upon us,
there was no retreat from instant death, we had but escaped sacrifice
to the spirit of the god to be crushed to powder beneath the bulk of
his marble emblem. On he came while on high the Spaniards shouted in
triumph. His base had struck the stone side of the pyramid fifty feet
above us, now he whirled round and round in the air to strike again
within three paces of where we stood. I felt the solid mountain
shake beneath the blow, and next instant the air was filled with huge
fragments of marble, that whizzed over us and past us as though a mine
of powder had been fired beneath our feet, tearing the rocks from their
base. The god Tezcat had burst into a score of pieces, and these fell
round us like a flight of arrows, and yet we were not touched. My head
was grazed by his head, his feet dug a pit before my feet, but I stood
there unhurt, the false god had no power over the victim who had escaped
him!

After that I remember nothing till I found myself once more in my
apartments in Montezuma's palace, which I never hoped to see again.
Otomie was by me, and she brought me water to wash the paint from my
body and the blood from my wound, which, leaving her own untended, she
dressed skilfully, for the cut of the priest's knife was deep and I had
bled much. Also she clothed herself afresh in a white robe and brought
me raiment to wear, with food and drink, and I partook of them. Then I
bade her eat something herself, and when she had done so I gathered my
wits together and spoke to her.

'What next?' I said. 'Presently the priests will be on us, and we shall
be dragged back to sacrifice. There is no hope for me here, I must fly
to the Spaniards and trust to their mercy.'

'To the mercy of that man with the sword? Say, Teule, who is he?'

'He is that Spaniard of whom I have spoken to you, Otomie; he is my
mortal enemy whom I have followed across the seas.'

'And now you would put yourself into his power. Truly, you are foolish,
Teule.'

'It is better to fall into the hands of Christian men than into those of
your priests,' I answered.

'Have no fear,' she said; 'the priests are harmless for you. You have
escaped them and there's an end. Few have ever come alive from their
clutches before, and he who does so is a wizard indeed. For the rest I
think that your God is stronger than our gods, for surely He must have
cast His mantle over us when we lay yonder on the stone. Ah! Teule, to
what have you brought me that I should live to doubt my gods, ay, and to
call upon the foes of my country for succour in your need. Believe me, I
had not done it for my own sake, since I would have died with your kiss
upon my lips and your word of love echoing in my ears, who now must live
knowing that these joys have passed from me.'

'How so?' I answered. 'What I have said, I have said. Otomie, you would
have died with me, and you saved my life by your wit in calling on the
Spaniards. Henceforth it is yours, for there is no other woman in the
world so tender and so brave, and I say it again, Otomie, my wife, I
love you. Our blood has mingled on the stone of sacrifice and there
we kissed; let these be our marriage rites. Perhaps I have not long to
live, but till I die I am yours, Otomie my wife.'

Thus I spoke from the fulness of my heart, for my strength and courage
were shattered, horror and loneliness had taken hold of me. But two
things were left to me in the world, my trust in Providence and the love
of this woman, who had dared so much for me. Therefore I forgot my
troth and clung to her as a child clings to its mother. Doubtless it was
wrong, but I will be bold to say that few men so placed would have acted
otherwise. Moreover, I could not take back the fateful words that I had
spoken on the stone of sacrifice. When I said them I was expecting death
indeed, but to renounce them now that its shadow was lifted from me, if
only for a little while, would have been the act of a coward. For good
or evil I had given myself to Montezuma's daughter, and I must abide by
it or be shamed. Still such was the nobleness of this Indian lady that
