
"They will help me to plunge my sword into the entrails of the
Republic," replied the marquis in a thundering voice. "They will give me
Fougeres in three days, and all Brittany in ten! Monsieur," he added in
a gentler voice, "start at once for La Vendee; if d'Auticamp, Suzannet,
and the Abbe Bernier will act as rapidly as I do, if they'll not
negotiate with the First Consul, as I am afraid they will" (here he
wrung the hand of the Vendean chief) "we shall be within reach of Paris
in a fortnight."

"But the Republic is sending sixty thousand men and General Brune
against us."

"Sixty thousand men! indeed!" cried the marquis, with a scoffing laugh.
"And how will Bonaparte carry on the Italian campaign? As for General
Brune, he is not coming. The First Consul has sent him against the
English in Holland, and General Hedouville, _the friend of our friend
Barras_, takes his place here. Do you understand?"

As Monsieur de Fontaine heard these words he gave Montauran a look of
keen intelligence which seemed to say that the marquis had not himself
understood the real meaning of the words addressed to him. The two
leaders then comprehended each other perfectly, and the Gars replied
with an undefinable smile to the thoughts expressed in both their eyes:
"Monsieur de Fontaine, do you know my arms? our motto is 'Persevere unto
death.'"

The Comte de Fontaine took Montauran's hand and pressed it, saying: "I
was left for dead at Quatre-Chemins, therefore you need never doubt me.
But believe in my experience--times have changed."

"Yes," said La Billardiere, who now joined them. "You are young,
marquis. Listen to me; your property has not yet been sold--"

"Ah!" cried Montauran, "can you conceive of devotion without sacrifice?"

"Do you really know the king?"

"I do."

"Then I admire your loyalty."

"The king," replied the young chieftain, "is the priest; I am fighting
not for the man, but for the faith."

They parted,--the Vendean leader convinced of the necessity of yielding
to circumstances and keeping his beliefs in the depths of his heart; La
Billardiere to return to his negotiations in England; and Montauran to
fight savagely and compel the Vendeans, by the victories he expected to
win, to co-operate in his enterprise.

             *     *     *     *     *

The events of the day had excited such violent emotions in Mademoiselle
de Verneuil's whole being that she lay back almost fainting in the
carriage, after giving the order to drive to Fougeres. Francine was as
silent as her mistress. The postilion, dreading some new disaster,
made all the haste he could to reach the high-road, and was soon on the
summit of La Pelerine. Through the thick white mists of morning Marie de
Verneuil crossed the broad and beautiful valley of Couesnon (where this
history began) scarcely able to distinguish the slaty rock on which the
town of Fougeres stands from the slopes of La Pelerine. They were
still eight miles from it. Shivering with cold herself, Mademoiselle de
Verneuil recollected the poor soldier behind the carriage, and insisted,
against his remonstrances, in taking him into the carriage beside
Francine. The sight of Fougeres drew her for a time out of her
reflections. The sentinels stationed at the Porte Saint-Leonard refused
to allow ingress to the strangers, and she was therefore obliged to
exhibit the ministerial order. This at once gave her safety in entering
the town, but the postilion could find no other place for her to stop at
than the Poste inn.

"Madame," said the Blue whose life she had saved. "If you ever want a
sabre to deal some special blow, my life is yours. I am good for that.
My name is Jean Falcon, otherwise called Beau-Pied, sergeant of
the first company of Hulot's veterans, seventy-second half-brigade,
nicknamed 'Les Mayencais.' Excuse my vanity; I can only offer you the
soul of a sergeant, but that's at your service."

He turned on his heel and walked off whistling.

"The lower one goes in social life," said Marie, bitterly, "the more
we find generous feelings without display. A marquis returns death for
life, and a poor sergeant--but enough of that."

When the weary woman was at last in a warm bed, her faithful Francine
waited in vain for the affectionate good-night to which she was
accustomed; but her mistress, seeing her still standing and evidently
uneasy, made her a sign of distress.

"This is called a day, Francine," she said; "but I have aged ten years
in it."

The next morning, as soon as she had risen, Corentin came to see her and
she admitted him.

"Francine," she exclaimed, "my degradation is great indeed, for the
thought of that man is not disagreeable to me."

Still, when she saw him, she felt once more, for the hundredth time, the
instinctive repulsion which two years' intercourse had increased rather
than lessened.

"Well," he said, smiling, "I felt certain you were succeeding. Was I
mistaken? did you get hold of the wrong man?"

"Corentin," she replied, with a dull look of pain, "never mention that
affair to me unless I speak of it myself."

He walked up and down the room casting oblique glances at her,
endeavoring to guess the secret thoughts of the singular woman whose
mere glance had the power of discomfiting at times the cleverest men.

"I foresaw this check," he replied, after a moment's silence. "If you
would be willing to establish your headquarters in this town, I have
already found a suitable place for you. We are in the very centre of
Chouannerie. Will you stay here?"

She answered with an affirmative sign, which enabled Corentin to make
conjectures, partly correct, as to the events of the preceding evening.

"I can hire a house for you, a bit of national property still unsold.
They are behind the age in these parts. No one has dared buy the old
barrack because it belonged to an _emigre_ who was thought to be harsh.
It is close to the church of Saint Leonard; and on my word of honor
the view from it is delightful. Something can really be made of the old
place; will you try it?"

"Yes, at once," she cried.

"I want a few hours to have it cleaned and put in order for you, so that
you may like it."

"What matter?" she said. "I could live in a cloister or a prison without
caring. However, see that everything is in order before night, so that
I may sleep there in perfect solitude. Go, leave me; your presence is
intolerable. I wish to be alone with Francine; she is better for me than
my own company, perhaps. Adieu; go--go, I say."

These words, said volubly with a mingling of coquetry, despotism, and
passion, showed she had entirely recovered her self-possession. Sleep
had no doubt classified the impressions of the preceding day, and
reflection had determined her on vengeance. If a few reluctant signs
appeared on her face they only proved the ease with which certain women
can bury the better feelings of their souls, and the cruel dissimulation
which enables them to smile sweetly while planning the destruction of
a victim. She sat alone after Corentin had left her, thinking how she
could get the marquis still living into her toils. For the first time
in her life this woman had lived according to her inmost desires; but
of that life nothing remained but one craving,--that of
vengeance,--vengeance complete and infinite. It was her one thought,
her sole desire. Francine's words and attentions were unnoticed. Marie
seemed to be sleeping with her eyes open; and the long day passed
without an action or even a gesture that bore testimony to her thoughts.
She lay on a couch which she had made of chairs and pillows. It was late
in the evening when a few words escaped her, as if involuntarily.

"My child," she said to Francine, "I understood yesterday what it was to
live for love; to-day I know what it means to die for vengeance. Yes,
I will give my life to seek him wherever he may be, to meet him, seduce
him, make him mine! If I do not have that man, who dared to despise me,
at my feet humble and submissive, if I do not make him my lackey and my
slave, I shall indeed be base; I shall not be a woman; I shall not be
myself."

The house which Corentin now hired for Mademoiselle de Verneuil offered
many gratifications to the innate love of luxury and elegance that was
part of this girl. The capricious creature took possession of it with
regal composure, as of a thing which already belonged to her; she
appropriated the furniture and arranged it with intuitive sympathy, as
though she had known it all her life. This is a vulgar detail, but one
that is not unimportant in sketching the character of so exceptional a
person. She seemed to have been already familiarized in a dream with the
house in which she now lived on her hatred as she might have lived on
her love.

"At least," she said to herself, "I did not rouse insulting pity in him;
I do not owe him my life. Oh, my first, my last, my only love! what an
end to it!" She sprang upon Francine, who was terrified. "Do you love a
man? Oh, yes, yes, I remember; you do. I am glad I have a woman here who
can understand me. Ah, my poor Francette, man is a miserable being. Ha!
he said he loved me, and his love could not bear the slightest test!
But I,--if all men had accused him I would have defended him; if the
universe rejected him my soul should have been his refuge. In the old
days life was filled with human beings coming and going for whom I did
not care; it was sad and dull, but not horrible; but now, now, what is
life without him? He will live on, and I not near him! I shall not see
him, speak to him, feel him, hold him, press him,--ha! I would rather
strangle him myself in his sleep!"

Francine, horrified, looked at her in silence.

"Kill the man you love?" she said, in a soft voice.

"Yes, yes, if he ceases to love me."

But after those ruthless words she hid her face in her hands, and sat
down silently.

The next day a man presented himself without being announced. His face
was stern. It was Hulot, followed by Corentin. Mademoiselle de Verneuil
looked at the commandant and trembled.

"You have come," she said, "to ask me to account for your friends. They
are dead."

"I know it," he replied, "and not in the service of the Republic."

"For me, and by me," she said. "You preach the nation to me. Can the
nation bring to life those who die for her? Can she even avenge
them? But I--I will avenge them!" she cried. The awful images of the
catastrophe filled her imagination suddenly, and the graceful creature
who held modesty to be the first of women's wiles forgot herself in a
moment of madness, and marched towards the amazed commandant brusquely.

"In exchange for a few murdered soldiers," she said, "I will bring to
the block a head that is worth a million heads of other men. It is not a
woman's business to wage war; but you, old as you are, shall learn good
stratagems from me. I'll deliver a whole family to your bayonets--him,
his ancestors, his past, his future. I will be as false and treacherous
to him as I was good and true. Yes, commandant, I will bring that little
noble to my arms, and he shall leave them to go to death. I have no
other rival. The wretch himself pronounced his doom,--_a day without a
morrow_. Your Republic and I shall be avenged. The Republic!" she cried
in a voice the strange intonations of which horrified Hulot. "Is he to
die for bearing arms against the nation? Shall I suffer France to rob me
of my vengeance? Ah! what a little thing is life! death can expiate but
one crime. He has but one head to fall, but I will make him know in one
night that he loses more than life. Commandant, you who will kill him,"
and she sighed, "see that nothing betrays my betrayal; he must die
convinced of my fidelity. I ask that of you. Let him know only me--me,
and my caresses!"

She stopped; but through the crimson of her cheeks Hulot and Corentin
saw that rage and delirium had not entirely smothered all sense of
shame. Marie shuddered violently as she said the words; she seemed to
listen to them as though she doubted whether she herself had said them,
and she made the involuntary movement of a woman whose veil is falling
from her.

"But you had him in your power," said Corentin.

"Very likely."

"Why did you stop me when I had him?" asked Hulot.

"I did not know what he would prove to be," she cried. Then, suddenly,
the excited woman, who was walking up and down with hurried steps and
casting savage glances at the spectators of the storm, calmed down. "I
do not know myself," she said, in a man's tone. "Why talk? I must go and
find him."

"Go and find him?" said Hulot. "My dear woman, take care; we are not yet
masters of this part of the country; if you venture outside of the town
you will be taken or killed before you've gone a hundred yards."

"There's never any danger for those who seek vengeance," she said,
driving from her presence with a disdainful gesture the two men whom she
was ashamed to face.

"What a woman!" cried Hulot as he walked away with Corentin. "A queer
idea of those police fellows in Paris to send her here; but she'll never
deliver him up to us," he added, shaking his head.

"Oh yes, she will," replied Corentin.

"Don't you see she loves him?" said Hulot.

"That's just why she will. Besides," looking at the amazed commandant,
"I am here to see that she doesn't commit any folly. In my opinion,
comrade, there is no love in the world worth the three hundred thousand
francs she'll make out of this."

When the police diplomatist left the soldier the latter stood looking
after him, and as the sound of the man's steps died away he gave a sigh,
muttering to himself, "It may be a good thing after all to be such a
dullard as I am. God's thunder! if I meet the Gars I'll fight him hand
to hand, or my name's not Hulot; for if that fox brings him before me in
any of their new-fangled councils of war, my honor will be as soiled as
the shirt of a young trooper who is under fire for the first time."

The massacre at La Vivetiere, and the desire to avenge his friends had
led Hulot to accept a reinstatement in his late command; in fact, the
new minister, Berthier, had refused to accept his resignation under
existing circumstances. To the official despatch was added a private
letter, in which, without explaining the mission of Mademoiselle de
Verneuil, the minister informed him that the affair was entirely outside
of the war, and not to interfere with any military operations. The duty
of the commanders, he said, was limited to giving assistance to that
honorable _citoyenne_, if occasion arose. Learning from his scouts that
the movements of the Chouans all tended towards a concentration of their
forces in the neighborhood of Fougeres, Hulot secretly and with forced
marches brought two battalions of his brigade into the town. The
nation's danger, his hatred of aristocracy, whose partisans threatened
to convulse so large a section of country, his desire to avenge his
murdered friends, revived in the old veteran the fire of his youth.

             *     *     *     *     *

"So this is the life I craved," exclaimed Mademoiselle de Verneuil, when
she was left alone with Francine. "No matter how fast the hours go, they
are to me like centuries of thought."

Suddenly she took Francine's hand, and her voice, soft as that of
the first red-throat singing after a storm, slowly gave sound to the
following words:--

"Try as I will to forget them, I see those two delicious lips, that chin
just raised, those eyes of fire; I hear the 'Hue!' of the postilion; I
dream, I dream,--why then such hatred on awakening!"

She drew a long sigh, rose, and then for the first time looked out upon
the country delivered over to civil war by the cruel leader whom she was
plotting to destroy. Attracted by the scene she wandered out to breathe
at her ease beneath the sky; and though her steps conducted her at a
venture, she was surely led to the Promenade of the town by one of those
occult impulses of the soul which lead us to follow hope irrationally.
Thoughts conceived under the dominion of that spell are often
realized; but we then attribute their pre-vision to a power we call
presentiment,--an inexplicable power, but a real one,--which our
passions find accommodating, like a flatterer who, among his many lies,
does sometimes tell the truth.




III. A DAY WITHOUT A MORROW

The preceding events of this history having been greatly influenced by
the formation of the regions in which they happened, it is desirable
to give a minute description of them, without which the closing scenes
might be difficult of comprehension.

The town of Fougeres is partly built upon a slate rock, which seems to
have slipped from the mountains that hem in the broad valley of Couesnon
to the west and take various names according to their localities. The
town is separated from the mountains by a gorge, through which flows a
small river called the Nancon. To the east, the view is the same as from
the summit of La Pelerine; to the west, the town looks down into the
tortuous valley of the Nancon; but there is a spot from which a section
of the great valley and the picturesque windings of the gorge can be
seen at the same time. This place, chosen by the inhabitants of the town
for their Promenade, and to which the steps of Mademoiselle de Verneuil
were now turned, was destined to be the theatre on which the drama begun
at La Vivetiere was to end. Therefore, however picturesque the other
parts of Fougeres may be, attention must be particularly given to the
scenery which meets the eye from this terrace.

To give an idea of the rock on which Fougeres stands, as seen on this
side, we may compare it to one of those immense towers circled by
Saracen architects with balconies on each story, which were reached by
spiral stairways. To add to this effect, the rock is capped by a Gothic
church, the small spires, clock-tower, and buttresses of which make its
shape almost precisely that of a sugar-loaf. Before the portal of this
church, which is dedicated to Saint-Leonard, is a small, irregular
square, where the soil is held up by a buttressed wall, which forms a
balustrade and communicates by a flight of steps with the Promenade.
This public walk, like a second cornice, extends round the rock a few
rods below the square of Saint-Leonard; it is a broad piece of ground
planted with trees, and it joins the fortifications of the town. About
ten rods below the walls and rocks which support this Promenade (due
to a happy combination of indestructible slate and patient industry)
another circular road exists, called the "Queen's Staircase"; this is
cut in the rock itself and leads to a bridge built across the Nancon by
Anne of Brittany. Below this road, which forms a third cornice, gardens
descend, terrace after terrace, to the river, like shelves covered with
flowers.

Parallel with the Promenade, on the other side of the Nancon and
across its narrow valley, high rock-formations, called the heights of
Saint-Sulpice, follow the stream and descend in gentle slopes to the
great valley, where they turn abruptly to the north. Towards the south,
where the town itself really ends and the faubourg Saint-Leonard begins,
the Fougeres rock makes a bend, becomes less steep, and turns into
the great valley, following the course of the river, which it hems in
between itself and the heights of Saint-Sulpice, forming a sort of pass
through which the water escapes in two streamlets to the Couesnon,
into which they fall. This pretty group of rocky hills is called the
"Nid-aux-Crocs"; the little vale they surround is the "Val de Gibarry,"
the rich pastures of which supply the butter known to epicures as that
of the "Pree-Valaye."

At the point where the Promenade joins the fortifications is a tower
called the "Tour de Papegaut." Close to this square erection, against
the side of which the house now occupied by Mademoiselle de Verneuil
rested, is a wall, partly built by hands and partly formed of the native
rock where it offered a smooth surface. Here stands a gateway leading
to the faubourg of Saint-Sulpice and bearing the same name. Above, on
a breastwork of granite which commands the three valleys, rise the
battlements and feudal towers of the ancient castle of Fougeres,--one
of those enormous erections built by the Dukes of Brittany, with lofty
walls fifteen feet thick, protected on the east by a pond from which
flows the Nancon, the waters of which fill its moats, and on the west by
the inaccessible granite rock on which it stands.

Seen from the Promenade, this magnificent relic of the Middle Ages,
wrapped in its ivy mantle, adorned with its square or rounded towers,
in either of which a whole regiment could be quartered,--the castle, the
town, and the rock, protected by walls with sheer surfaces, or by
the glacis of the fortifications, form a huge horseshoe, lined with
precipices, on which the Bretons have, in course of ages, cut various
narrow footways. Here and there the rocks push out like architectural
adornments. Streamlets issue from the fissures, where the roots of
stunted trees are nourished. Farther on, a few rocky slopes, less
perpendicular than the rest, afford a scanty pasture for the goats. On
all sides heather, growing from every crevice, flings its rosy garlands
over the dark, uneven surface of the ground. At the bottom of this vast
funnel the little river winds through meadows that are always cool and
green, lying softly like a carpet.

Beneath the castle and among the granite boulders is a church dedicated
to Saint-Sulpice, whose name is given to the suburb which lies across
