
But for Brutus, his friends and countrymen, both by divers
procurements, and sundry rumours of the city, and by many bills also,
did openly call and procure him to do that he did. For, under the
image of his ancestor Junius Brutus, that drave the kings out of
Rome,[99] they wrote: Oh that it pleased the gods thou wert now alive,
Brutus: and again, that thou wert here among us now. His tribunal (or
chair) where he gave audience during the time he was Praetor, was full
of such bills: Brutus, thou art asleep, and art not Brutus indeed....

Therefore Cassius considering this matter with himself, did first of
all speak to Brutus, since they grew strange together for the suit
they had for the Praetorship. So when he was reconciled to him again,
and that they had embraced one another: Cassius asked him, If he were
determined to be in the Senate-house, the first day of the month of
March, because he heard say that Caesar's friends should move the
council that day, that Caesar should be called king by the Senate.
Brutus answered him, He would not be there. But if we be sent for said
Cassius: how then? For myself then said Brutus, I mean not to hold my
peace, but to withstand it, and rather die than lose my liberty.
Cassius being bold, and taking hold of this word: Why, quoth he, what
Roman is he alive that will suffer thee to die for the liberty? What,
knowest thou not that thou art Brutus? Thinkest thou that they be
cobblers, tapsters, or suchlike base mechanical people, that write
these bills and scrolls which are found daily in thy Praetor's chair,
and not the noblest men and best citizens that do it? No, be thou well
assured, that of other Praetors they look for gifts, common
distributions amongst the people, and for common plays, and to see
fencers fight at the sharp, to show the people pastime, but at thy
hands, they specially require (as a due debt unto them) the taking
away of the tyranny, being fully bent to suffer any extremity for thy
sake, so that thou wilt show thyself to be the man thou art taken for,
and that they hope thou art. Thereupon he kissed Brutus, and embraced
him. And so each taking leave of other, they went both to speak with
the friends about it....

Now Brutus, who knew very well that for his sake all the noblest,
valiantest, and most courageous men of Rome did venture their lives,
weighing with himself the greatness of the danger, when he was out of
his house, he did so frame and fashion his countenance and looks,
that no man could discern he had anything to trouble his mind. But
when night came that he was in his own house, then he was cleaned
changed. For, either care did wake him against his will when he could
have slept, or else oftentimes of himself he fell into such deep
thoughts of this enterprise, casting in his mind all the dangers that
might happen, that his wife lying by him, found that there was some
marvellous great matter that troubled his mind, not being wont to be
in that taking, and that he could not well determine with himself.

His wife Porcia[100] (as we have told you before) was the daughter of
Cato, whom Brutus married being his cousin, not a maiden, but a young
widow after the death of her first husband Bibulus, by whom she had
also a young son called Bibulus, who afterwards wrote a book of the
acts and gests of Brutus, extant at this present day. This young lady
being excellently well seen in philosophy, loving her husband well,
and being of a noble courage, as she was also wise; because she would
not ask her husband what he ailed before she had made some proof by
herself, she took a little razor such as barbers occupy to pare men's
nails, and causing her maids and women to go out of her chamber, gave
herself a great gash withal in her thigh, that she was straight all of
a gore-blood, and incontinently after, a vehement fever took her, by
reason of the pain of her wound.

Then perceiving her husband was marvellously out of quiet, and that he
could take no rest, even in her greatest pain of all, she spake in
this sort unto him, "I being, O Brutus," (said she) "the daughter of
Cato, was married unto thee, not to be thy bedfellow and companion in
bed and at board only, like a harlot, but to be partaker also with
thee, of thy good and evil fortune. Now for thyself, I can find no
cause of fault in thee touching our match, but for my part, how may I
show my duty towards thee, and how much I would do for thy sake, if I
cannot constantly bear a secret mischance or grief with thee, that
requireth secrecy and fidelity? I confess, that a woman's wit commonly
is too weak to keep a secret safely: but yet, Brutus, good education,
and the company of virtuous men, have some power to reform the defect
of nature. And for myself, I have this benefit, moreover, that I am
the daughter of Cato, and wife of Brutus. This notwithstanding, I did
not trust to any of these things before, until that now I have found
by experience, that no pain nor grief whatsoever can overcome me."
With those words she showed him her wound on her thigh, and told him
what she had done to prove herself. Brutus was amazed to hear what she
said unto him, and lifting up his hands to heaven, he besought the
gods to give him the grace he might bring his enterprise to so good
pass, that he might be found a husband worthy of so noble a wife as
Porcia, so he then did comfort her the best he could....

So when this day was come, Brutus went out of his house with a dagger
by his side under his long gown, that nobody saw nor knew, but his
wife only. The other conspirators were all assembled at Cassius'
house, to bring his son into the market-place, who on that day did put
on the man's gown, called _toga virilis_, and from thence they came
all in a troop together unto Pompey's porch, looking that Caesar would
straight come thither. But here is to be noted, the wonderful assured
constancy of these conspirators, in so dangerous and weighty an
enterprise as they had undertaken. For many of them being Praetors, by
reason of their office, whose duty is to minister justice to
everybody: they did not only with great quietness and courtesy hear
them that spake unto them, or that plead matters before them, and gave
them attentive ear, as if they had had no other matter in their heads:
but moreover, they gave just sentence, and carefully despatched the
causes before them. So there was one among them, who being condemned
in a certain sum of money, refused to pay it, and cried out that he
did appeal unto Caesar. Then Brutus casting his eyes upon the
conspirators said, Caesar shall not let me to see the law executed.

Notwithstanding this, by chance there fell out many misfortunes unto
them, which was enough to have marred the enterprise. The first and
chiefest was, Caesar's long tarrying, who came very late to the Senate:
for because the signs of the sacrifices appeared unlucky, his wife
Calpurnia[101] kept him at home, and the soothsayers bade him beware
he went not abroad. The second cause was, when one came unto Casca
being a conspirator, and taking him by the hand, said unto him: O
Casca, thou keepest it close from me, but Brutus hath told me all.
Casca being amazed at it, the other went on with his tale, and said:
Why, how now, how cometh it to pass thou art thus rich, that thou dost
sue to be AEdile? Thus Casca being deceived by the other's doubtful
words, he told them it was a thousand to one, he blabbed not out all
the conspiracy. Another Senator called Popilius Laenas, after he had
saluted Brutus and Cassius more friendly than he was wont to do: he
rounded softly in their ears, and told them, I pray the gods you may
go through with that you have taken in hand, but withal, despatch I
read you, for your enterprise is bewrayed. When he had said, he
presently departed from them, and left them both afraid that their
conspiracy would out.

Now in the meantime, there came one of Brutus' men post-haste unto
him, and told him his wife was a-dying. For Porcia being very careful
and pensive for that which was to come, and being too weak to away
with so great and inward grief of mind: she could hardly keep within,
but was frightened with every little noise and cry she heard, as those
that art taken and possessed with the fury of the Bacchants, asking
every man that came from the market-place, what Brutus did, and still
sent messenger after messenger, to know what news. At length Caesar's
coming being prolonged as you have heard, Porcia's weakness was not
able to hold out any longer, and thereupon she suddenly swooned, that
she had no leisure to go to her chamber, but was taken in the midst of
her house, where her speech and senses failed her. Howbeit she soon
came to her self again, and so was laid in her bed, and tended by her
women. When Brutus heard these news, it grieved him, as it is to be
presupposed: yet he left not off the care of his country and
commonwealth, neither went home to his house for any news he heard.

Now, it was reported that Caesar was coming in his litter: for he
determined not to stay in the Senate all that day (because he was
afraid of the unlucky signs of the sacrifices) but to adjourn matters
of importance unto the next session and council holden, feigning
himself not to be well at ease. When Caesar came out of his litter:
Popilius Laenas, that had talked before with Brutus and Cassius, and
had prayed the gods they might bring this enterprise to pass: went
unto Caesar, and kept him a long time with a talk. Caesar gave good ear
unto him. Wherefore the conspirators (if so they should be called) not
hearing what he said to Caesar, but conjecturing by that he had told
them a little before, that his talk was none other but the very
discovery of their conspiracy: they were afraid every man of them, and
one looking in another's face, it was easy to see that they all were
of a mind, that it was no tarrying for them till they were
apprehended, but rather that they should kill themselves with their
own hands. And when Cassius and certain others clapped their hands on
their swords under their gowns to draw them: Brutus marking the
countenance and gesture of Laenas, and considering that he did use
himself rather like an humble and earnest suitor, than like an
accuser: he said nothing to his companion (because there were many
amongst them that were not of the conspiracy) but with a pleasant
countenance encouraged Cassius. And immediately after, Laenas went from
Caesar, and kissed his hand: which shewed plainly that it was for some
matter concerning himself, that he had held him so long in talk. Now
all the Senators being entered first into this place or chapter-house
where the council should be kept, all the other conspirators straight
stood about Caesar's chair, as if they had had something to have said
unto him. And some say, that Cassius casting his eyes upon Pompey's
image, made his prayer unto it, as if it had been alive. Trebonius on
the other side, drew Mark Antony aside, as he came into the house
where the Senate sat, and held him with a long talk without.

When Caesar was come into the house, all the Senate rose to honour him
at his coming in. So when he was set, the conspirators flocked about
him, and amongst them they presented one Metellus Cimber, who made
humble suit for the calling home again of his brother that was
banished. They all made as though they were intercessors for him, and
took him by the hands, and kissed his head and breast. Caesar at the
first simply refused their kindness and entreaties: but afterwards,
perceiving they still pressed on him, he violently thrust them from
him. Then Cimber with both his hands plucked Caesar's gown over his
shoulders, and Casca that stood behind him, drew his dagger first, and
struck Caesar upon the shoulder, but gave him no great wound. Caesar
feeling himself hurt, took him straight by the hand he held his dagger
in, and cried out in Latin: O traitor, Casca, what doest thou? Casca
on the other side cried in Greek, and called his brother to help him.
So divers running on a heap together to fly upon Caesar, he looking
about him to have fled, saw Brutus with a sword drawn in his hand
ready to strike at him: then he let Casca's hand go, and casting his
gown over his face, suffered every man to strike at him that would.

Then the conspirators thronging one upon another because every man was
desirous to have a cut at him, so many swords and daggers lighting
upon one body, one of them hurt another, and among them Brutus caught
a blow on his hand, because he would make one in murthering of him,
and all the rest also were every man of them bloodied. Caesar being
slain in this manner, Brutus standing in the midst of the house, would
have spoken, and stayed the other Senators that were not of the
conspiracy, to have told them the reason why they had done this fact.
But they as men both affrayed and amazed, fled one upon another's neck
in haste to get out at the door, and no man followed them. For it was
set down, and agreed between them, that they should kill no man but
Caesar only, and should entreat all the rest to defend their liberty.

All the conspirators, but Brutus, determining upon this matter,
thought it good also to kill Mark Antony,[102] because he was a wicked
man, and that in nature favoured tyranny: besides also, for that he
was in great estimation with soldiers, having been conversant of long
time amongst them: and specially having a mind bent to great
enterprises, he was also of great authority at that time, being Consul
with Caesar. But Brutus would not agree to it. First, for that he said
it was not honest: secondly, because he told them there was hope of
change in him. For he did not mistrust, but that Mark Antony being a
noble-minded and courageous man (when he should know that Caesar was
dead) would willingly help his country to recover her liberty, having
them an example unto him, to follow their courage and virtue. So
Brutus by this means saved Mark Antony's life, who at that present
time disguised himself, and stole away. But Brutus and his consorts,
having their swords bloody in their hands, went straight to the
Capitol, persuading the Romans, as they went, to take their liberty
again.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 96: From the "Life of Julius Caesar." Translated by North.]

[Footnote 97: Marcus Junius Brutus had originally been an adherent of
Pompey, but after the battle at Pharsalia in 48 B.C., went over to
Caesar, and in 46 became governor of Cisalpine Gaul.]

[Footnote 98: Gaius Cassius Longinus, general and politician, had won
distinction in the Parthian war of 53-51 B.C.]

[Footnote 99: Lucius Junius Brutus under whose leadership the Tarquins
were expelled and the republic established in 510 B.C.]

[Footnote 100: Brutus first married Claudia, daughter of Appius
Claudius, who was Consul in 54 B.C. It was probably in 55 B.C.,
after Cato's death, that he put away Claudia (for which he was much
blamed), and married Porcia, daughter of Cato. Portia was the widow of
Bibulus, a colleague of Caesar in the Consulship of 59 B.C.]

[Footnote 101: Daughter of Calpurnius Piso Caesonius and married to
Caesar in 59 B.C. She was his second wife, Pompeia, a relative of
Pompey the Great, being the first.]

[Footnote 102: Mark Antony was then about forty-four years old. He had
commanded the left wing of Caesar at Pharsalia and became Consul in
44.]




III

CLEOPATRA'S BARGE[103]


Mark Antony being thus inclined, the last and extremest mischief of
all other (to wit, the love of Cleopatra) lighted on him, who did
waken and stir up many vices yet hidden in him, and were never seen to
any: and if any spark of goodness or hope of rising were left him,
Cleopatra quenched it straight, and made it worse than before. The
manner how he fell in love with her was this. Antony going to make war
with the Parthians, sent to command Cleopatra to appear personally
before him, when he came into Cilicia, to answer unto such accusations
as were laid against her, being this: that she had aided Cassius and
Brutus in their war against him. The messenger sent unto Cleopatra to
make this summons unto her, was called Dellius: who when he had
thoroughly considered her beauty, the excellent grace and sweetness of
her tongue, he nothing mistrusted that Antony would do any hurt to so
noble a lady, but rather assured himself, that within few days she
should be in great favour with him. Thereupon he did her great honour,
and persuaded her to come into Cilicia, as honourably furnished as she
could possible, and bade her not to be afraid at all of Antony, for he
was a more courteous lord, than any one that she had ever seen.

Cleopatra on the other side believing Dellius' words, and guessing by
the former access and credit she had with Julius Caesar, and Cneius
Pompey (the son of Pompey the Great) only for her beauty: she began to
have good hope that she might more easily win Antony. For Caesar and
Pompey knew her when she was but a young thing, and knew not then what
the world meant: but now she went to Mark Antony at the age when a
woman's beauty is at the prime, and she also of best judgement. So,
she furnished herself with a world of gifts, store of gold and silver,
and of riches and other sumptuous ornaments, as is credible enough she
might bring from so great a house, and from so wealthy and rich a
realm as Egypt was. But yet she carried nothing with her wherein she
trusted more than in her self, and in the charms and enchantment of
her passing beauty and grace.

Therefore when she was sent unto by divers letters, both from Antony
himself, and also from his friends, she made so light of it and mocked
Antony so much, that she disdained to set forward otherwise, but to
take her barge in the river of Cydnus, the poop whereof was of gold,
the sails of purple, and the oars of silver, which kept stroke in
rowing after the sound of the music of flutes, howboys, citherns,
viols, and such other instruments as they played upon in the barge.
And now for the person of her self: she was laid under a pavilion of
cloth of gold of tissue, apparelled and attired like the goddess
Venus, commonly drawn in picture: and hard by her, on either hand of
her, pretty fair boys apparelled as painters do set forth god Cupid,
with little fans in their hands, with the which they fanned wind upon
her. Her ladies and gentlewomen also, the fairest of them were
apparelled like the nymphs nereids (which are the mermaids of the
waters) and like the Graces, some steering the helm, others tending
the tackle and ropes of the barge, out of the which there came a
wonderful passing sweet savour of perfumes, that perfumed the wharf's
side, pestered with innumerable multitudes of people. Some of them
followed the barge all alongst the river-side: others also ran out of
the city to see her coming in. So that in the end, there ran such
multitudes of people one after another to see her, that Antony was
left post alone in the market-place, in his imperial seat to give
audience: and there went a rumour in the people's mouths, that the
goddess Venus was come to play with the god Bacchus, for the general
good of all Asia.[104] When Cleopatra landed, Antony sent to invite
her to supper to him. But she sent him word again, he should do better
rather to come and sup with her. Antony therefore to shew himself
courteous unto her at her arrival, was contented to obey her, and went
to supper to her: where he found such passing sumptuous fare, that no
tongue can express it.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 103: From the "Life of Mark Antony." Translated by Sir
Thomas North.]

[Footnote 104: The following description of Cleopatra's barge, taken
from Shakespeare's "Antony and Cleopatra," when compared with the
foregoing paragraph, will illustrate to the reader the closeness with
which Shakespeare followed North:

    "The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
    Burn'd on the water. The poop was beaten gold;
    Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
    The winds were love-sick with them. The oars were silver,
    Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
    The water which they beat to follow faster,
    As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
    It beggar'd all description: she did lie
    In her pavilion--cloth-of-gold of tissue--
    O'er-picturing that Venus where we see
    The fancy outwork nature. On each side her
    Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
    With diverse colour'd fans, whose wind did seem
    To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
    And what they undid did.

    "Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
    So many mermaids, tended her i' the eyes,
    And made their bends adornings. At the helm
    A seeming mermaid steers; the silken tackle
    Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands,
    That yarely frame the office. From the barge
    A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
    Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
    Her people out upon her; and Antony
    Enthron'd i' the market-place, did sit alone,
    Whistling to the air, which, but for vacancy,
    Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too
    And made a gap in nature."]




IV

THE DEATH OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA[105]


When Mark Antony saw that his men did forsake him, and yielded unto
Caesar,[106] and that his footmen were broken and overthrown: he then
fled into the city, crying out that Cleopatra had betrayed him unto
them, with whom he had made war for her sake. Then she being afraid of
his fury, fled into the tomb which she had caused to be made, and
there locked the doors unto her, and shut all the springs of the locks
with great bolts, and in the meantime sent unto Antony to tell him
that she was dead. Antony believing it, said unto himself: What dost
thou look for further, Antony, sith spiteful fortune had taken from
thee the only joy thou hadst, for whom thou yet reservedst thy life?
when he had said these words, he went into a chamber and unarmed
himself, and being naked said thus: O Cleopatra, it grieveth me not
that I have lost thy company, for I will not be long from thee: but I
am sorry, that having been so great a captain and emperor, I am indeed
condemned to be judged of less courage and noble mind, than a woman.

Now he had a man of his called Eros, whom he loved and trusted much,
and whom he had long before caused to swear unto him, that he should
kill him when he did command him: and then he willed him to keep his
promise. His man drawing his sword, lift it up as though he had meant
to have stricken his master: but turning his head at one side he
thrust his sword into himself, and fell down dead at his master's
foot. Then said Antony, O noble Eros, I thank thee for this, and it is
valiantly done of thee, to shew me what I should do to my self, which
thou couldst not do for me. Therewithal he took his sword, and thrust
it into his belly, and so fell down upon a little bed. The wound he
had killed him not presently, for the blood stinted a little when he
was laid: and when he came somewhat to himself again, he prayed them
that were about him to despatch him. But they all fled out of the
chamber, and left him crying out and tormenting himself: until at last
there came a secretary unto him called Diomedes, who was commanded to
bring him unto the tomb or monument where Cleopatra was.

When he heard that she was alive, he very earnestly prayed his men to
carry his body thither, and so he was carried in his men's arms into
the entry of the monument. Notwithstanding, Cleopatra would not open
the gates, but came to the high windows, and cast out certain chains
and ropes, in the which Antony was trussed: and Cleopatra her own
self, with two women only, which she had suffered to come with her
into these monuments, triced Antony up. They that were present to
behold it, said they never saw so pitiful a sight. For, they plucked
