
"Is--is my face much scratched?"

"Hardly at all," said Ralph.

"Then thank you so for stopping him; I was so frightened.  Ah, look!
there's Master Rayburn."

She clapped her hands with delight, as she caught sight of the old man,
hatless, and with his white hair flying, running down the path.  Then
turning, back to Ralph, she said, naively:

"Please, who are you?  Oh, I know now.  I haven't seen you for two
years, and--"

She shrank away from him in a peculiarly cold and distant manner, and at
that moment Master Rayburn panted up.

"Much hurt, my dear?" he cried excitedly, as he caught the girl in his
arms.

"No, no, I think not," she said, beginning to sob anew.

"Thank God! thank God!" cried the old man fervently.--"Hah!  My heart
was in my mouth.  Why can't people be content to walk?  Come back home
with me, my child.  Here, Ralph Darley, how was it?  Did you stop the
brute?"

"I tried to," said the lad quietly, "but I couldn't hold him long."

"Long enough to save her, my lad," cried the old man, looking from one
to the other in a peculiar way.--"How strange--how strange!" he
muttered.

Then aloud, in an abrupt way:

"There, never mind the pony.  You be off home, sir.  I'll take care of
this lady."

Ralph coloured a little, and glanced at the girl, and as she met his
eyes, she drew herself up stiffly.

"Yes, sir," she said, "Master Rayburn will take care of me.  Thank you
for stopping my pony."

She bowed now, in the stately way of the period, clung closely to the
old man, turning her back upon her rescuer, who unnecessarily bowed, and
walked on up the steep path, wondering that the pony had not come down
headlong before.

Then he felt disposed to look back, but his angry indignation forbade
that, and he hurried on as fast as he could on his way home, passing
Master Rayburn's cottage, and then, a hundred yards farther on, coming
suddenly upon a riding-whip, which had evidently been dropped.  The lad
leaped at it to pick it up, but checked himself, and gave it a kick
which sent it off the path down the slope toward the river.

"I'm not going to pick up an Eden's whip," he said proudly.  "Just like
her brother," he muttered, as he went on faster and faster, to avoid the
temptation of running back to pick it up.  "They are a proud, evil
race," as father said.  "What did I want to interfere for, and stop the
pony?  It was looked upon as an insult, I suppose.  I don't like the
Edens, and I never shall."

Ralph's adventures for that day were not ended.  A quarter of a mile
farther on he heard footsteps in front.  Some one was running, and at a
turn of the track a lad came into sight, whom he recognised as Dummy
Rugg, one of the mine lads.  The pair came closer quickly, and Ralph saw
that he was recognised, and that the boy was scowling at him, passing
him with rather an evil look, but stopping the next minute, and running
back after him.  As soon as he heard the steps returning, Ralph faced
round, his left hand seeking the sheath of his sword, to bring it round
in case he should want to draw.  But the next minute he saw that the lad
had no evil intent.

"Look here," cried Dummy, "did you see a young lady on a pony?"

"Yes."

"Was it going fast?"

"As fast as it could go," said Ralph haughtily.

"Not running away wi' her?"

"Yes," said Ralph, rather enjoying the boy's anxiety, in his ruffled
state.

"I knowed it would: I knowed it would!" cried the boy wildly; "and she
would have it out.  Here! gone right on?"

"Yes."

"Ah!  And you never tried to stop it.  Oh, wait till I see you again!"

Ralph did not feel in the humour to stop and explain to one who had
threatened him so offensively, and he would have felt less so still if
he had known that Dummy Rugg had followed him that night through the
dark woods, till he met his father.

"Let him find out for himself," he muttered.  "I have nothing to do with
the Edens, and we can none of us ever be friends."



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

DUMMY TURNS STUNT.

Dummy Rugg caught the pony, after seeing that his young mistress was
unhurt at Master Rayburn's cottage; and, perfectly calm now, the girl
insisted upon remounting, the old man opposing her, until Dummy gave him
a curious look or two, and a nod of the head.

"And there is no need whatever for you to go up home with me, Master
Rayburn," she said.  "It is all uphill now, and the pony will not run
away again."

"Very well, Mistress Obstinacy," said the old man, smiling and patting
her cheek, before helping her on the pony; "but I feel as if I ought to
see you home safely."

"There is no need, indeed," cried the girl.  "Goodbye, and thank you.
I'm afraid I frightened you."

"You did, my child, terribly.  More than you frightened yourself.  I was
afraid that the little girl who used to ask for rides on _my_ foot would
be killed."

"But it was only a gallop, Master Rayburn," said the girl, leaning
forward to receive the old man's kiss.  "Please, if you see Mark, don't
say anything about it, or he will not lend me his pony again.--Now
Dummy, let go the rein."

"Come on!" growled the lad, leading the frisky little animal, and Master
Rayburn chuckled a little, for the boy bent his head, rounded his
shoulders, and paid not the slightest heed to the order he had received.

"Do you hear, Dummy?  Let go."

Dummy let go of the rein by passing his arm through, and thrust his hand
into his pocket.

"Do you hear me, sir?" cried the girl imperiously.  "Let go of that rein
directly."

"Have let go," grumbled the boy.

"Go away from his head, and walk behind."

"Run away agen if I do," said Dummy.

"He will not," cried the girl angrily.  "I shall hold him in more
tightly."

"Haven't got strength enough."

"I have, sir.  How dare you!  Let go."

"Nay: Master Mark would hit me if I did, and Sir Edward'd half-kill me."

"What nonsense, sir!  Let go directly."

Dummy shook his big head, and trudged on by the pony.

"Oh!" cried the girl, with the tears of vexation rising in her eyes.  "I
will not be led, as if I were a little child.  Go behind, sir,
directly."

"Nay," growled Dummy.

"Let go, sir, or I'll beat you with the whip.--Ah! where is it?"

"Beat away," said Dummy.

"I really will, sir, if you don't let go."

Dummy laughed softly, and Mary Eden could not see his face, but she saw
his shoulders shaking; and in her anger she leaned forward and tried to
drag the rein from the lad's arm.

"You'll have him off the path agen if you don't mind, Mistress Mary."

"Where is my whip?  I've lost my whip," cried the girl.

"Good job--for me," said the boy, with a little laugh.

"If you don't let go of that rein, directly, sir, I'll make my brother
beat you," cried Mary angrily.

"You won't tell him he ran away," said the boy, without turning his
head.

"Then my father shall, sirrah!"

"Won't tell him neither, mistress."

"Then I'll tell him you were rude and impertinent to me, sirrah, and
he'll have you horsewhipped for that."

"Master Mark's sister couldn't tell a lie with her pretty little lips,"
said the boy quietly, and never once looking round.  "Pony's too fresh,
and I won't see my young mistress get into trouble again--so there!"

Mary Eden flushed with annoyance, and tried to stamp her foot, but only
shook the stirrup, and sat still for a few moments, before trying
cajolery.

"The pony's quite quiet now, Dummy," she said gently.  "Let him have his
head again--there's a good boy."

Dummy shook his own, and Mary bit her red lip, and made it scarlet.

"But I shouldn't like to be seen led up home like this, Dummy," she said
softly.  "It looks as if I can't ride."

"Every one knows you can ride beautiful, mistress."

"But please let go now."

"Nay: won't."

"I'll give you some money, Dummy."

"Wouldn't for two donkey panniers full o' gold--there!" cried the lad.
"Come on."

This to the pony, and then the boy checked the cob.

"That your whip, mistress?" he said, turning and wagging his head
sidewise towards where, half-a-dozen yards down the steep slope, the
whip lay, where Ralph had kicked it on to a clump of brambles.

"Yes, yes; get it for me, please," cried the girl eagerly.

Dummy drew his arm from the pony's rein, leaped off the shelf path, and
lowered himself step by step toward the whip; and the girl, after
waiting a few seconds, with her eyes flashing with satisfaction, shook
the rein, kicked at her steed's ribs, and did all she could to urge it
forward.

"Go on--go on!" she whispered sharply.  Then, as this was of no avail,
she began to saw the bit to and fro in its mouth, but only made the
animal swing its head from side to side in response to each drag,
keeping all four legs planted out firmly like a mule's, and obstinately
refusing to move.

"Oh, you wicked wretch!" cried the girl angrily; "go on--go on!"

At the first efforts she made to force the pony on and leave him behind,
Dummy turned sharply, and made a bound to catch at the rein; but as soon
as he grasped the stubborn creature's mood--knowing its nature by
heart--he chuckled softly, and went on down to where the whip lay,
recovered it as deliberately as he could, and began to climb the slope
again.

"It aren't no good, Miss Mary," he said; "he won't go till I get back to
his head."

"Go on--go on, sir!" cried the girl angrily, as she saw her last chance
of escape dying away; and then, hardly able to restrain the tears of
vexation, for Dummy climbed back on to the track, went to his old place
by the pony's head, and handed her the whip.

Mary snatched it in an instant, and struck the pony a sharp blow, which,
instead of making it leap forward, had the opposite effect; for it
backed, and but for Dummy seizing the rein once more, its hind-legs
would have gone over the edge.

"Look at that, mistress," said the boy quietly; "see what you nearly
did;" and, slipping his arm through once more, he walked on, cheek by
jowl with the pony, which seemed on the most friendly terms with him,
swinging its nose round and making little playful bites at his stout
doublet.

"Now, sir," cried Mary angrily, "I have my whip, and if you do not leave
the pony's head directly, and come round to the back, I'll beat you."

"Nay, not you," said the boy, without looking round.  "Why, if I did,
the pony would only turn about and follow me."

"He would not."

"There, then, see," said the boy; and slipping out his arm, he turned
and walked back, the pony pivoting round directly.  "Told you so," said
Dummy, and he resumed his old place, with his arm through the rein.

"You told him to turn round, sir."

"Nay, never spoke to him, Miss Mary.--There, it aren't no good to be
cross with me; I shan't leave you till you're safe home."

The girl, flushed with passion, leaned forward, and struck the lad
sharply over the shoulders three times.

"There, sir," she cried; "what do you say to that?"

"Thank ye," replied the boy coolly.  "Frighten away the flies."

Whish-whish-whish, came the whip through the air.

"Now then," cried Mary; "what do you say now?"

"Hit harder, mistress," said the boy, with a chuckle; "that only
tickles."

"Oh!" cried Mary, in a burst of passion.  "I did like you, Dummy, but
you're a nasty, ugly old thing;" and she subsided in her saddle, sobbing
with vexation, while Dummy rounded his shoulders a little more, and
plodded on in silence, with the pony's shoes tapping the stony path, as
it playfully kept on making little bites at different parts of the boy's
clothes.

"'Taren't no use to be cross with me, mistress," said the boy at last.
"Can't help it.  You don't know, and I do.  S'pose he runs off again,
and Master Mark says to me, `Why didn't you lead her home?' what am I to
say?"

Mary sat gazing straight before her, and had to ride ignominiously back
to the zigzags leading up to the top of the Black Tor, where she
dismounted, and Dummy led the pony to its underground stable.

"I shan't tell Master Mark," said the boy to the pony, as he took off
bridle and saddle; "and you can't, Ugly; and she won't neither, so
nobody'll never know."



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

MASTER RAYBURN ADVISES.

Captain Purlrose and his merry men had found a place just to their
liking, where they lived like pigs in a hole of the earth, and as
voraciously.  He chuckled and crowed as they ate and drank, and waited
till their stock of provisions began to grow low, and then started off
upon a fresh expedition, to gather tribute, as he called it.  He did not
expose himself to any risks, but kept his ascendancy over his men by
sheer cunning and ability in making his plans, leading them to where
they could come quite unexpectedly upon some lonely cottage or
farmhouse, ill-use and frighten the occupants nearly to death, adding
insult to injury by loading the spoil of provisions, or whatever it
pleased them to take, on the farmer's horses, leading them away, and
after unloading them at the cave, setting them adrift.

The captain laughed at all threats, for he felt that no one would dare
to follow him to his stronghold; and if an attack were made, he knew
that he could easily beat it off.  The only two people near who were at
all likely to trouble him were his old captain, Sir Morton Darley, and
Sir Edward Eden.

"And they'll talk about it, and and threats, and never come."

He seemed to be right, for as report after report of raids being made,
here and there in the neighbourhood of the two strongholds reached their
owners, Sir Morton Darley would vow vengeance against the marauders, and
then go back to his books; and Sir Edward Eden would utter a vow that he
would hang Captain Purlrose from the machicolations over the gateway at
the Black Tor, and then he would go into his mining accounts, and hear
the reports of his foreman, Dan Rugg, about how many pigs there were in
the sty--that is to say, pigs of lead in the stone crypt-like place
where they were stored.

And so time went on, both knights having to listen to a good many
upbraidings from Master Rayburn, who visited and scolded them well for
not combining and routing out the gang from their hole.

"I wish you would not worry me, Rayburn," said Sir Morton one day, in
Ralph's presence.  "I don't want to engage upon an expedition which must
end in bloodshed.  I want to be at peace, with my books."

"But don't you see that bloodshed is going on, and that these ruffians
are making the place a desert?"

"Yes," said Sir Morton, "it is very tiresome.  I almost wish I had taken
them into my service."

"And made matters worse, for they would not have rested till you had
made war upon the Edens."

"Yes," said Sir Morton, "I suppose it would have been so."

"Why not get the men quietly together some night, father, and if I went
round, I'm sure I could collect a dozen who would come and help--men
whose places have been robbed."

"That's right, Ralph; there are people as much as twenty miles away--
twelve men?  Five-and-twenty, I'll be bound."

"Well, I'll think about it," said Sir Morton; and when Master Rayburn
walked home that day, Ralph bore him company part of the way, and
chatted the matter over with him.

"I'm getting ashamed of your father, Ralph, lad.  He has plenty of
