secrecy; but I must know from thee what thy cousin may have heard of our
doings?'

'I cannot tell, father,' replied Beranger; 'we played more than we
talked. Yet, Monsieur, you will not be angry with Eustacie if I tell you
what she said to me to-day?'

'Assuredly not, my son.'

'She said that her father would take her away if he knew what M. le
Baron read, and what he sung.'

'Thou hast done well to tell me, my son. Thinkest thou that this comes
from Diane, or from one of the servants?'

'Oh, from Diane, my father; none of the servants would dare to say such
a thing.'

'It is as I suspected then,' said the Baron. 'That child was sent
amongst us as a spy.' Tell me, Beranger, had she any knowledge of our
intended journey to England?'

'To England! But no, father, I did not even know it was intended. To
England--to that Walwyn which my mother takes such pains to make us
speak rightly. Are we then, going?'

'Listen, my son. Thou hast to-day proved thyself worthy of trust, and
thou shalt hear. My son, ere yet I knew the truth I was a reckless
disobedient youth, and I bore thy mother from her parents in England
without their consent. Since, by Heaven's grace, I have come to a better
mind, we have asked and obtained their forgiveness, and it has long been
their desire to see again their daughter and her son. Moreover, since
the accession of the present Queen, it has been a land where the light
is free to shine forth; and though I verily believe what Maitre Gardon
says, that persecution is a blessed means of grace, yet it is grievous
to expose one's dearest thereto when they are in no state to count
the cost. Therefore would I thither convey you all, and there amid thy
mother's family would we openly abjure the errors in which we have been
nurture. I have already sent to Paris to obtain from the Queen-mother
the necessary permission to take my family to visit thy grand-father,
and it must now be our endeavour to start immediately on the receipt of
the reply, before the Chevalier's information can lead to any hindrance
or detention of Eustacie.'

'Then Eustacie will go with us, Monsieur?'

'Certainly. Nothing is more important than that her faith should be the
same as yours! But discretion, my son: not a word to the little one.'

'And Landry, father? I had rather Landry went than Eustacie. And Follet,
dear father, pray take him.'

After M. de Ribaumont's grave confidence to his son and heir, he was
a little scandalized at the comparative value that the boy's voice
indicated for wife, foster-brother, and pony, and therefore received
it in perfect silence, which silence continued until they reached
the chateau, where the lady met them at the door with a burst of
exclamations.

'Ah, there you are, safe, my dear Baron. I have been in despair. Here
were the Count and his brother come to call on you to join them in
dispersing a meeting of those poor Huguenots and they would not permit
me to send out to call you in! I verily think they suspected that you
were aware of it.'

M. de Ribaumont made no answer, but sat wearily down and asked for his
little Eustacie.

'Little vixen!' exclaimed the Baroness, 'she is gone; her father took
her away with him.' And as her husband looked extremely displeased, she
added that Eustacie had been meddling with her jewel cabinet and had
been put in penitence. Her first impulse on seeing her father had been
to cling to him and poor out her complaints, whereupon he had declared
that he should take her away with him at once, and had in effect caused
her pony to be saddled, and he had ridden away with her to his old
tower, leaving his brother, the Chevalier, to conduct the attack on the
Huguenot conventicle.

'He had no power or right to remove her,' said the Baron. 'How could you
let him do so in my absence? He had made over her wardship to me, and
has no right to resume it!'

'Well, perhaps I might have insisted on his waiting till your return;
but, you see, the children have never done anything but quarrel and
fight, and always by Eustacie's fault; and if ever they are to endure
each other, it must be by being separated now.'

'Madame,' said the Baron, gravely, 'you have done your utmost to ruin
your son's chances of happiness.'

That same evening arrived the King's passport permitting the Baron
de Ribaumont and his family to pay a visit to his wife's friends in
England. The next morning the Baron was summoned to speak to one of
his farmers, a Huguenot, who had come to inform him that, through the
network of intelligence kept up by the members of the persecuted faith,
it had become known that the Chevalier de Ribaumont had set off for
court that night, and there was little doubt that his interference would
lead to an immediate revocation of the sanction to the journey, if to no
severer measures. At best, the Baron knew that if his own absence were
permitted, it would be only on condition of leaving his son in
the custody of either the Queen-mother or the Count. It had become
impossible to reclaim Eustacie. Her father would at once have pleaded
that she was being bred up in Huguenot errors. All that could be done
was to hasten the departure ere the royal mandate could arrive. A little
Norman sailing vessel was moored two evenings after in a lonely creek on
the coast, and into it stepped M. de Ribaumont, with his Bible, Marot's
Psalter, and Calvin's works, Beranger still tenderly kissing a lock of
Follet's mane, and Madame mourning for the pearls, which her husband
deemed too sacred an heirloom to carry away to a foreign land. Poor
little Eustacie, with her cousin Diane, was in the convent of Bellaise
in Anjou. If any one lamented her absence, it was her father-in-law.




CHAPTER III. THE FAMILY COUNCIL



     He counsels a divorce
            Shakespeare, KING HENRY VIII.


In the spring of the year 1572, a family council was assembled in Hurst
Walwyn Hall. The scene was a wainscoted oriel chamber closed off by a
screen from the great hall, and fitted on two sides by presses of books,
surmounted the one by a terrestrial, the other by a celestial globe, the
first 'with the addition of the Indies' in very eccentric geography, the
second with enormous stars studding highly grotesque figures, regarded
with great awe by most beholders.

A solid oaken table stood in the midst, laden with books and papers, and
in a corner, near the open hearth, a carved desk, bearing on one slope
the largest copy of the 'Bishops' Bible'; on the other, one of the
Prayer-book. The ornaments of the oaken mantelpiece culminated in a
shield bearing a cross _boutonnee_, i.e. with trefoil terminations. It
was supported between a merman with a whelk shell and a mermaid with a
comb, and another like Siren curled her tail on the top of the gaping
baronial helmet above the shield, while two more upheld the main weight
of the chimney-piece on either side of the glowing wood-fire.

In the seat of honour was an old gentleman, white-haired, and feeble
of limb, but with noble features and a keen, acute eye. This was
Sir William, Baron of Hurst Walwyn, a valiant knight at Guingate and
Boulogne, a statesman of whom Wolsey had been jealous, and a ripe
scholar who had shared the friendship of More and Erasmus. The lady who
sat opposite to him was several years younger, still upright, brisk and
active, though her hair was milk-white; but her eyes were of undimmed
azure, and her complexion still retained a beauteous pink and white. She
was highly educated, and had been the friend of Margaret Roper and her
sisters, often sharing their walks in the bright Chelsea garden. Indeed,
the musk-rose in her own favourite nook at Hurst Walwyn was cherished as
the gift of Sir Thomas himself.

Near her sat sister, Cecily St. John, a professed nun at Romsey till
her twenty-eight year, when, in the dispersion of convents, her sister's
home had received her. There had she continued, never exposed to tests
of opinion, but pursuing her quiet course according to her Benedictine
rule, faithfully keeping her vows, and following the guidance of the
chaplain, a college friend of Bishop Ridley, and rejoicing in the use of
the vernacular prayers and Scriptures. When Queen Mary had sent for her
to consider of the revival of convents, her views had been found to have
so far diverged from those of the Queen that Lord Walwyn was thankful
to have her safe at home again; and yet she fancied herself firm to
old Romsey doctrine. She was not learned, like Lady Walwyn, but her
knowledge in all needlework and confectionery was consummate, so that
half the ladies in Dorset and Wilts longed to send their daughters to
be educated at Hurst Walwyn. Her small figure and soft cheeks had
the gentle contour of a dove's form, nor had she lost the conventual
serenity of expression; indeed it was curious that, let Lady Walwyn
array her as she would, whatever she wore bore a nunlike air. Her silken
farthingales hung like serge robes, her ruffs looked like mufflers, her
coifs like hoods, even necklaces seemed rosaries, and her scrupulous
neatness enhanced the pure unearthly air of all belonging to her.

Eager and lively, fair and handsome, sat the Baronne de Ribaumont,
or rather, since the higher title had been laid aside, Dame Annora
Thistlewood. The health of M. de Ribaumont had been shattered at St.
Quentin, and an inclement night of crossing the Channel had brought on
an attack on the lungs, from which he only rallied enough to amaze
his English friends at finding the gay dissipated young Frenchman they
remembered, infinitely more strict and rigid than themselves. He was
never able to leave the house again after his first arrival at Hurst
Walwyn, and sank under the cold winds of the next spring, rejoicing
to leave his wife and son, not indeed among such strict Puritans as
he preferred, but at least where the pure faith could be openly avowed
without danger.

Sir Marmaduke Thistlewood, the husband to whom Annora Walwyn had been
destined before M. de Ribaumont had crossed her path, was about the same
time left a widower with one son and daughter, and as soon as a suitable
interval had passed, she became a far happier wife than she had been in
either the Baron's gay or grave days. Her son had continued under
the roof of his grandfather, to whose charge his father had specially
committed him, and thus had been scarcely separated from his mother,
since Combe Manor was not above three miles across the downs from Hurst
Walwyn, and there was almost daily intercourse between the families.
Lucy Thistlewood had been brought to Hurst Walwyn to be something
between a maid of honour and a pupil to the ladies there, and her
brother Philip, so soon as he was old enough, daily rode thither to
share with Berenger the instructions of the chaplain, Mr. Adderley, who
on the present occasion formed one of the conclave, sitting a little
apart as not quite familiar, though highly esteemed.

With an elbow on the table, and one hand toying with his long
riding-whip, sat, booted and spurred, the jovial figure of Sir
Marmaduke, who called out, in his hearty voice, 'A good riddance of an
outlandish Papist, say I! Read the letter, Berenger lad. No, no, no!
English it! I know nothing of your mincing French! 'Tis the worst fault
I know in you, boy, to be half a Frenchman, and have a French name'--a
fault that good Sir Marmaduke did his best to remedy by always terming
his step-son Berenger or Berry Ribmount, and we will so far follow
his example as henceforth to give the youth the English form of his
Christian name. He was by this time a tall lad of eighteen, with
straight features, honest deep blue eyes, very fair hair cut short and
brushed up to a crest upon the middle of his head, a complexion of red
and white that all the air of the downs and the sea failed to embrown,
and that peculiar openness and candour of expression which seems so much
an English birthright, that the only trace of his French origin was,
that he betrayed no unbecoming awkwardness in the somewhat embarrassing
position in which he was placed, literally standing, according to the
respectful discipline of the time, as the subject of discussion, before
the circle of his elders. His colour was indeed, deepened, but his
attitude was easy and graceful, and he used no stiff rigidity nor
restless movements to mask his anxiety. At Sir Marmaduke's desire, he
could not but redden a good deal more, but with a clear, unhesitating
voice, he translated, the letter that he had received from the Chevalier
de Ribaumont, who, by the Count's death, had become Eustacie's guardian.
It was a request in the name of Eustacie and her deceased father, that
Monsieur le Baron de Ribaumont--who, it was understood, had embraced
the English heresy--would concur with his spouse in demanding from his
Holiness the Pope a decree annulling the childish marriage, which could
easily be declared void, both on account of the consanguinity of the
parties and the discrepancy of their faith; and which would leave each
of them free to marry again.

'Nothing can be better,' exclaimed his mother. 'How I have longed to
free him from that little shrew, whose tricks were the plague of my
life! Now there is nothing between him and a worthy match!'

'We can make an Englishman of him now to the backbone,' added Sir
Marmaduke, 'and it is well that it should be the lady herself who wants
first to be off with it, so that none can say he has played her a scurvy
trick.'

'What say you, Berenger?' said Lord Walwyn. 'Listen to me, fair nephew.
You know that all my remnant of hope is fixed upon you, and that I have
looked to setting you in the room of the son of my own; and I think that
under our good Queen you will find it easier to lead a quiet God-fearing
life than in your father's vexed country, where the Reformed religion
lies under persecution. Natheless, being a born liegeman of the King of
France, and heir to estates in his kingdom, meseemeth that before you
are come to years of discretion it were well that you should visit them,
and become better able to judge for yourself how to deal in this matter
when you shall have attained full age, and may be able to dispose of
them by sale, thus freeing yourself from allegiance to a foreign prince.
And at the same time you can take measures, in concert with this young
lady, for loosing the wedlock so unhappily contracted.'

'O sir, sir!' cried Lady Thistlewood, 'send him not to France to be
burnt by the Papists!'

'Peace, daughter,' returned her mother. 'Know you not that there is
friendship between the court party and the Huguenots, and that the peace
is to be sealed by the marriage of the King's sister with the King of
Navarre? This is the most suitable time at which he could go.'

'Then, madam,' proceeded the lady, 'he will be running about to all the
preachings on every bleak moor and wet morass he can find, catching his
death with rheums, like his poor father.'

There was a general smile, and Sir Marmaduke laughed outright.

'Nay, dame,' he said, 'have you marked such a greed of sermons in our
Berry that you should fear his so untowardly running after them?'

'Tilly-vally, Sir Duke,' quoth Dame Annora, with a flirt of her fan,
learnt at the French court. 'Men will run after a preacher in a marshy
bog out of pure forwardness, when they will nod at a godly homily on a
well-stuffed bench between four walls.'

'I shall commit that matter to Mr. Adderley, who is good enough to
accompany him,' said Lord Walwyn, 'and by whose counsel I trust that he
will steer the middle course between the pope and Calvin.'

Mr. Adderley bowed in answer, saying he hoped that he should be enable
to keep his pupil's mind clear between the allurements of Popery and the
errors of the Reformed; but meanwhile Lady Thistlewood's mind had taken
a leap, and she exclaimed,--

'And, son, whatever you do, bring home the chaplet of pearls! I know
they have set their minds upon it. They wanted me to deck Eustacie with
it on that unlucky bridal-day, but I would not hear of trusting her with
it, and now will it rarely become our Lucy on your real wedding-day.'

'You travel swiftly, daughter,' said Lord Walwyn. 'Nor have we yet heard
the thoughts of one who ever thinks wisely. Sister,' he added, turning
to Cecily St. John, 'hold not you with us in this matter?'

'I scarce comprehend it, my Lord,' was the gentle reply. 'I knew not
that it was possible to dissolve the tie of wedlock.'

'The Pope's decree will suffice,' said Lord Walwyn.

'Yet, sir,' still said the ex-nun, 'methought you had shown me that the
Holly Father exceeded his power in the annulling of vows.'

'Using mine own lessons against me, sweet sister?' said Lord Walwyn,
smiling; 'yet, remember, the contract was rashly made between two
ignorant babes; and, bred up as they have severally been, it were surely
best for them to be set free from vows made without their true will or
knowledge.'

'And yet,' said Cecily, perplexed, 'when I saw my niece here wedded to
Sir Marmaduke, was it not with the words, 'What God hath joined let no
man put asunder'?'

'Good lack! aunt,' cried Lady Thistlewood, 'you would not have that poor
lad wedded to a pert, saucy, ill-tempered little moppet, bred up that
den of iniquity, Queen Catherine's court, where my poor Baron never
trusted me after he fell in with the religion, and had heard of King
Antony's calling me the Swan of England.'

At that moment there was a loud shriek, half-laugh, half-fright, coming
through the window, and Lady Thistlewood, starting up, exclaimed, 'The
child will be drowned! Box their ears, Berenger, and bring them in
directly.'

Berenger, at her bidding, hurried out of the room into the hall, and
thence down a flight of steps leading into a square walled garden, with
a couple of stone male and female marine divinities accommodating their
fishy extremities as best they might on the corners of the wall. The
square contained a bowling-green of exquisitely-kept turf, that looked
as if cut out of green velvet, and was edged on its four sides by a
raised broad-paved walk, with a trimming of flower-beds, where the
earliest blossoms were showing themselves. In the centre of each side
another paved path intersected the green lawn, and the meeting of these
two diameters was at a circular stone basin, presided over by another
merman, blowing a conch on the top of a pile of rocks. On the gravelled
margin stood two distressed little damsels of seven and six years
old, remonstrating with all their might against the proceedings of
a roguish-looking boy of fourteen of fifteen, who had perched their
junior--a fat, fair, kitten-like element of mischief, aged about
five--_en croupe_ on the merman, and was about, according to her
delighted request, to make her a bower of water, by extracting the plug
and setting the fountain to play; but as the fountain had been still
all the winter, the plug was hard of extraction, especially to a young
gentleman who stood insecurely, with his feet wide apart upon pointed
and slippery point of rock-work; and Berenger had time to hurry up,
exclaiming, 'Giddy pate! Dolly would Berenger drenched to the skin.'

'And she has on her best blue, made out of mother's French farthingale,'
cried the discreet Annora.

'Do you know, Dolly, I've orders to box your ears, and send you in?'
added Berenger, as he lifted his half-sister from her perilous position,
speaking, as he did so, without a shade of foreign accent, though with
much more rapid utterance than was usual in England. She clung to him
without much alarm, and retaliated by an endeavour to box his ears,
while Philip, slowly making his way back to the mainland, exclaimed, 'Ah
there's no chance now! Here comes demure Mistress Lucy, and she is the
worst mar-sport of all.'

A gentle girl of seventeen was drawing near, her fair delicately-tinted
complexion suiting well with her pale golden hair. It was a sweet face,
and was well set off by the sky-blue of the farthingale, which, with
her white lace coif and white ruff, gave her something the air of a
speedwell flower, more especially as her expression seemed to have
caught much of Cecily's air of self-restrained contentment. She held
a basketful of the orange pistils of crocuses, and at once seeing that
some riot had taken place, she said to the eldest little girl, 'Ah, Nan,
you had been safer gathering saffron with me.'

'Nay, brother Berry came and made all well,' said Annora; 'and he had
been shut up so long in the library that he must have been very glad to
get out.'

'And what came of it?' cried Philip. 'Are you to go and get yourself
unmarried?'

'Unmarried!' burst out the sisters Annora and Elizabeth.

'What, laughed Philip, 'you knew not that this is an ancient husband,
married years before your father and mother?'

'But, why? said Elizabeth, rather inclined to cry. 'What has poor Lucy
done that you should get yourself unmarried from her?'

There was a laugh from both brothers; but Berenger, seeing Lucy's
blushes, restrained himself, and said. 'Mine was not such good luck,
Bess, but they gave me a little French wife, younger than Dolly, and
saucier still; and as she seems to wish to be quit of me, why, I shall
be rid of her.'

'See there, Dolly,' said Philip, in a warning voice, 'that is the way
you'll be served if you do not mend your ways.'

'But I thought,' said Annora gravely, 'that people were married once for
all, and it could not be undone.'

'So said Aunt Cecily, but my Lord was proving to her out of all law
that a contract between such a couple of babes went for nought,' said
Berenger.

'And shall you, indeed, see Paris, and all the braveries there?' asked
Philip. 'I thought my Lord would never have trusted you out of his
sight.'

'And now it is to be only with Mr. Adderley,' said Berenger; 'but there
will be rare doings to be seen at this royal wedding, and maybe I shall
break a lance there in your honour, Lucy.'

'And you'll bring me a French fan?' cried Bess.

'And me a pouncet-box?' added Annora.

'And me a French puppet dressed Paris fashion?' said Dolly.

'And what shall he bring Lucy?' added Bess.

'I know,' said Annora; 'the pearls that mother is always talking about!
I heard her say that Lucy should wear them on her wedding-day.'

'Hush!' interposed Lucy, 'don't you see my father yonder on the step,
beckoning to you?'

The children flew towards Sir Marmaduke, leaving Berenger and Lucy
together.

'Not a word to wish me good speed, Lucy, now I have my wish?' said
Berenger.

'Oh, yes,' said Lucy, 'I am glad you should see all those brave French
gentlemen of whom you used to tell me.'

'Yes, they will be all at court, and the good Admiral is said to be in
high favour. He will surely remember my father.'

'And shall you see the lady?' asked Lucy, under her breath.

'Eustacie? Probably; but that will make no change. I have heard too much
of _l'escadron de la Reine-mere_ to endure the thought of a wife from
thence, were she the Queen of Beauty herself. And my mother says that
Eustacie would lose all her beauty as she grew up--like black-eyed Sue
on the down; nor did I ever think her brown skin and fierce black eyes
to compare with you, Lucy. I could be well content never to see her
more; but,' and here he lowered his voice to a tone of confidence, 'my
father, when near his death, called me, and told me that he feared my
marriage would be a cause of trouble and temptation to me, and that I
must deal with it after my conscience when I was able to judge in
the matter. Something, too, he said of the treaty of marriage being
a burthen on his soul, but I know not what he meant. If ever I saw
Eustacie again, I was to give her his own copy of Clement Marot's
Psalter, and to tell her that he had ever loved and prayed for her as a
daughter; and moreover, my father added,' said Berenger, much moved at
the remembrance it brought across him, 'that if this matter proved a
burthen and perplexity to me, I was to pardon him as one who repented of
it as a thing done ere he had learnt to weigh the whole world against a
soul.'

'Yes, you must see her,' said Lucy.

'Well, what more were you going to say, Lucy?'

'I was only thinking,' said Lucy, as she raised her eyes to him, 'how
sorry she will be that she let them write that letter.'

Berenger laughed, pleased with the simplicity of Lucy's admiration, but
with modesty and common sense enough to answer, 'No fear of that, Lucy,
for an heiress, with all the court gallants of France at her feet.'

'Ah, but you!'

'I am all very well here, when you have never seen anybody but lubberly
Dorset squires that never went to London, nor Oxford, nor beyond their
own furrows,' said Berenger; 'but depend upon it, she has been bred up
to care for all the airs and graces that are all the fashion at Paris
now, and will be as glad to be rid of an honest man and a Protestant
as I shall to be quit of a court puppet and a Papist. Shall you have
finished my point-cuffs next week, Lucy? Depend upon it, no gentleman of
them all will wear such dainty lace of such a fancy as those will be.'

And Lucy smiled, well pleased.

Coming from the companionship of Eustacie to that of gentle Lucy had
been to Berenger a change from perpetual warfareto perfect supremacy,
and his preference to his little sister, as he had been taught to call
her from the first, had been loudly expressed. Brother and sister they
had ever since considered themselves, and only within the last few
months had possibilities been discussed among the elders of the family,
which oozing out in some mysterious manner, had become felt rather than
known among the young people, yet without altering the habitual terms
that existed between them. Both were so young that love was the merest,
vaguest dream to them; and Lucy, in her quiet faith that Berenger was
the most beautiful, excellent, and accomplished cavalier the earth
could afford, was little troubled about her own future share in him. She
seemed to be promoted to belong to him just as she had grown up to curl
her hair and wear ruffs and farthingales. And to Berenger Lucy was
a very pleasant feature in that English home, where he had been far
happier than in the uncertainties of Chateau Leurre, between his naughty
playfellow, his capricious mother, and morose father. If in England his
lot was to be cast, Lucy was acquiesced in willingly as a portion of
that lot.




CHAPTER IV. TITHONUS



     A youth came riding towards a palace gate,
     And from the palace came a child of sin
     And took him by the curls and led him in!
     Where sat a company with heated eyes.
                     Tennyson, A VISION OF SIN


It was in the month of June that Berenger de Ribaumont first came in
sight of Paris. His grandfather had himself begun by taking him to
London and presenting him to Queen Elizabeth, from whom the lad's good
mien procured him a most favourable reception. She willingly promised
that on which Lord Walwyn's heart was set, namely, that his title and
rank should be continued to his grandson; and an ample store of letter
of recommendation to Sir Francis Walsingham, the Ambassador, and all
others who could be of service in the French court, were to do their
utmost to provide him with a favourable reception there.

Then, with Mr. Adderley and four or five servants, he had crossed the
Channel, and had gone first to Chateau Leurre, where he was rapturously
welcomed by the old steward Osbert. The old man had trained up his son
Landry, Berenger's foster-brother, to become his valet, and had him
taught all the arts of hair-dressing and surgery that were part of the
profession of a gentleman's body-servant; and the youth, a smart, acuter
young Norman, became a valuable addition to the suite, the guidance of
which, through a foreign country, their young master did not find very
easy. Mr. Adderley thought he knew French very well, through books, but
the language he spoke was not available, and he soon fell into a state
of bewilderment rather hard on his pupil, who, though a very good boy,
and crammed very full of learning, was still nothing more than a lad of
eighteen in all matters of prudence and discretion.

Lord Walwyn was, as we have seen, one of those whose Church principles
had altered very little and very gradually; and in the utter diversity
of practice that prevailed in the early years of Queen Elizabeth, his
chaplain as well as the rector of the parish had altered no more than
was absolutely enjoined of the old ceremonial. If the poor Baron de
Ribaumont had ever been well enough to go to church on a Sunday, he
would perhaps have thought himself still in the realms of what he
considered as darkness; but as he had never openly broken with the
Gallic Church, Berenger had gone at once from mass at Leurre to the
Combe Walwyn service. Therefore when he spent a Sunday at Rouen, and
attended a Calvinist service in the building that the Huguenots were
permitted outside the town, he was much disappointed in it; he thought
its very fervour familiar and irreverent, and felt himself much more at
home in the cathedral into which he strayed in the afternoon. And, on
the Sunday he was at Leurre, he went, as a part of his old home-habits,
to mass at the old round-arched church, where he and Eustacie had played
each other so many teasing tricks at his mother's feet, and had received
so many admonitory nips and strokes of her fan. All he saw there was
not congenial to him, but he liked it vastly better than the Huguenot
meeting, and was not prepared to understand or enter into Mr. Adderley's
vexation, when the tutor assured him that the reverent gestures that
came naturally to him were regarded by the Protestants as idolatry, and
that he would be viewed as a recreants from his faith. All Mr. Adderley
hoped was that no one would hear of it: and in this he felt himself
disappointed, when, in the midst of his lecture, there walked into the
room a little, withered, brown, dark-eyed man, in a gorgeous dress of
green and gold, who doffing a hat with an umbrageous plume, precipitated
himself, as far as he could reach, towards Berenger's neck, calling
him fair cousin and dear baron. The lad stood taken by surprise for
a moment, thinking that Tithonus must have looked just like this, and
skipped like this, just as he became a grasshopper; then he recollected
that this must be the Chevalier de Ribaumont, and tried to make up
for his want of cordiality. The old man had, it appeared, come out of
Picardy, where he lived on _soupe maigre_ in a corner of the ancestral
castle, while his son and daughter were at court, the one in Monsieur's
suite, the other in that of the Queen-mother. He had come purely to meet
his dear young cousin, and render him all the assistance is his power,
conduct him to Paris, and give him introductions.

Berenger, who had begun to find six Englishmen a troublesome charge in
France, was rather relieved at not being the only French scholar of
the party, and the Chevalier also hinted to him that he spoke with a
dreadful Norman accent that would never be tolerated at court, even if
it were understood by the way. Moreover, the Chevalier studied him all
over, and talked of Paris tailors and posture-masters, and, though the
pink of politeness, made it evident that there was immensely too much of
him. 'It might be the custom in England to be so tall; here no one
was of anything like such a height, but the Duke of Guise. He, in his
position, with his air, could carry it off, but we must adapt ourselves
as best we can.'

And his shrug and look of concern made Berenger for a moment almost
ashamed of that superfluous height of which they were all so proud at
home. Then he recollected himself, and asked, 'And why should not I be
tall as well as M. de Guise?'

'We shall see, fair cousin,' he answered, with an odd satirical bow;
'we are as Heaven made us. All lies in the management and if you had the
advantages of training, PERHAPS you could even turn your height into a
grace.'

'Am I such a great lubber?' wondered Berenger; 'they did not think so at
home. No; nor did the Queen. She said I was a proper stripling! Well,
it matters the less, as I shall not stay long to need their favour; and
I'll show them there is some use in my inches in the tilt-yard. But if
they think me such a lout, what would they say to honest Philip?'

The Chevalier seemed willing to take on him the whole management of his
'fair cousin.' He inquired into the amount of the rents and dues which
old Osbert had collected and held ready to meet the young Baron's
exigencies; and which would, it seemed, be all needed to make his dress
any way presentable at court. The pearls, too, were inquired for, and
handed over by Osbert to his young Lord's keeping, with the significant
intimation that they had been demanded when the young Madame la Baronne
went to court; but that he had buried them in the orchard, and made
answer that they were not in the chateau. The contract of marriage,
which Berenger could just remember signing, and seeing signed by his
father, the King, and the Count, was not forthcoming; and the Chevalier
explained that it was in the hands of a notary at Paris. For this
Berenger was not sorry. His grandfather had desired him to master the
contents, and he thought he had thus escaped a very dry and useless
study.

He did not exactly dislike the old Chevalier de Ribaumont. The system on
which he had been brought up had not been indulgent, so that compliments
and admiration were an agreeable surprise to him; and rebuffs and
rebukes from his elders had been so common, that hints, in the delicate
dressing of the old knight, came on him almost like gracious civilities.
There was no love lost between the Chevalier and the chaplain, that was
plain; but how could there be between an ancient French courtier and
a sober English divine? However, to Mr. Adderley's great relief, no
attempts were made on Berenger's faith, his kinsman even was disposed
to promote his attendance at such Calvinist places of worship as they
passed on the road, and treated him in all things as a mere guest, to
be patronized indeed, but as much an alien as if he had been born in
England. And yet there was a certain deference to him as head of the
family, and a friendliness of manner that made the boy feel him a real
relation, and all through the journey it came naturally that he should
be the entire manager, and Berenger the paymaster on a liberal scale.

Thus had the travellers reached the neighbourhood of Paris, when a
jingling of chains and a trampling of horses announced the advance of
riders, and several gentlemen with a troop of servants came in sight.
