
"Ay!  Even so.  How could we guard such an extent of wall with barely
five and twenty men?  Old Silverlocks and Jaques de l'Eure are slain
Martin badly wounded, and we all forced back into the inner court,
after doing all it was in a man to do."

"I heard your voice, bold and cheerful as ever, above the tumult," said
Eustace.  "But the inner court is fit for a long defence--that
staircase parapet, where so few can attack at once."

"Ay," said Gaston, "it was that and the darkness that stopped them.
There I can detain them long enough to give the chance of the succours,
so those knaves below do not fail in spirit--and they know well enough
what chance they have from yon grim-visaged Breton!  But as to those
succours, I no more expect them than I do to see the Prince at their
head!  A hundred to one that he never hears of our need, or, if he
should, that Pembroke and Clarenham do not delay the troops till too
late."

"And there will be the loss of the most important castle, and the most
faithful and kindest heart!" said Eustace.  "But go, Gaston--food and
rest you must need after this long day's fight--and the defences must
be looked to, and the men cheered!"

"Yes," said Gaston, slowly rising, and bending over the Knight; "but is
there nought I can do for you, Sir Eustace?"

"Nought, save to replenish my cup of water.  It is well for me that the
enemy have not cut us off from the Castle well."

Gaston's supper did not occupy him long.  He was soon again in
Eustace's room, talking over his plan of defence for the next day; but
with little, if any, hope that it would be other than his last
struggle.  At last, wearied out with the exertions of that day and the
preceding, he listened to Eustace's persuasions, and, removing the more
cumbrous portions of his armour, threw himself on his bed, and, in a
moment, his regular breathings announced that he was sound asleep.

It was in the pale early light of dawn that he awoke, and, starting up
while still half asleep, exclaimed, "Sir Eustace, are you there? I
should have relieved guard long since!"  Then, as he recalled his
situation, "I had forgot!  How is it with you, Sir Eustace?  Have you
slept?"

"No," said Eustace.  "I have not lost an hour of this last night I
shall ever see.  It will soon be over now--the sun is already reddening
the sky; and so, Gaston, ends our long true-hearted affection.  Little
did I think it would bring thee to thy death in the prime of they
strength and manhood!" and he looked mournfully on the lofty stature
and vigorous form of the Squire, as he stood over him.

"For that, Sir Eustace, there is little cause to grieve.  I have been a
wanderer, friendless and homeless, throughout my life; and save for
yourself, and, perhaps, poor little Arthur's kind heart, where is one
who would cast a second thought on me, beyond, perhaps, saying, 'He was
a brave and faithful Squire!'  But little, little did I think, when I
saw your spurs so nobly won, that this was to be the end of it--that
you were to die, defamed and reviled, in an obscure den, and by the
foul treachery of--"

"Speak not of that, Gaston," said Eustace.  "I have dwelt on it in the
long hours of the night, and I have schooled my mind to bear it.  Those
with whom we shall soon be, know that if I have sinned in many points,
yet I am guiltless in that whereof they accuse me--and, for the rest,
there are, at least, two who will think no shame of Eustace Lynwood.
And now, if there is yet time, Gaston, since no Priest is at hand, I
would pray thee to do me the last favour of hearing the confession of
my sins."

And Gaston kneeling down, the Knight and Squire, according to the
custom of warriors in extremity, confessed to each other, with the
crucifix raised between them.  Eustace then, with his weak and failing
voice, repeated several prayers and psalms appropriate to the occasion,
in which Gaston joined with hearty devotion.  By this time, a slight
stir was heard within the Castle; and Gaston, rising from his knees,
went to the loophole, which commanded a view of the court, where the
French had taken up their quarters for the night in some of the
outbuildings--and the lion rampant of Clisson was waving in triumph on
the gateway tower.

"All silent there," said he; "but I must go to rouse our knaves in time
to meet the first onset."  And, as he clasped on his armour, he
continued, "All that is in the power of man will we do!  Rest assured,
Sir Eustace, they reach you not save through my body; and let your
prayers be with me.  One embrace, Sir Eustace, and we meet no more--"

"In this world."  Eustace concluded the sentence, as Gaston hung over
him, and his tears dropped on his face.  "Farewell, most faithful and
most true-hearted!  Go, I command thee!  Think not on me--think on thy
duty--and good angels will be around us both. Farewell, farewell."

Gaston, for the first time in his life, felt himself unable to speak.
He crossed the room with slow and lingering step; then, with a great
effort, dashed out at the door, closing his visor as he did so, and,
after a short interval, during which he seemed to have stopped on the
stairs, Eustace could hear his gay bold tones, calling, "Up! up! my
merry men, all!  Let not the French dogs find the wolf asleep in his
den.  They will find our inner bartizan a hard stone for their
teeth--and it will be our own fault, if they crack it before the coming
of our brave comrades from Bordeaux!"




CHAPTER XIV


The open space beyond the walls of Bordeaux presented a bright and
lively scene.  It was here that the pages of the Black Prince were wont
to exercise those sports and pastimes for which the court of the palace
scarce offered sufficient space, or which were too noisy for the
neighbourhood of the ladies, and of the invalid Prince.

Of noble and often of princely birth were all who entered that school
of chivalry, and, for the most part, the fine open countenances, noble
bearing, and well-made figures of the boys, testified their high
descent, as completely as the armorial bearings embroidered on the back
and front of their short kirtles. Many different provinces had sent
their noblest to be there trained in the service of the bravest Knights
and Princes.  There, besides the brown-haired, fair-skinned English
boy, was the quick fiery Welsh child, who owned an especial allegiance
to the Prince; the broad blue-eyed Fleming, whose parents rejoiced in
the fame of the son of Philippa of Hainault; the pert, lively Gascon,
and the swarthy Navarrese mountaineer--all brought together in close
and ever-changing contrast of countenance, habits, and character.

Of all the merry groups scattered through that wide green space, the
most interesting was one formed by three boys, who stood beneath a
tree, a little from the rest.  The two eldest might be from ten to
eleven years old, the third two or three years younger, and his
delicate features, fair pale complexion, and slender limbs, made him
appear too weak and childish for such active sports as the rest were
engaged in, but that the lordly glance of his clear blue eye, his firm
tread, and the noble carriage of his shapely head, had in them
something of command, which attracted notice even before the exceeding
beauty of his perfectly moulded face, and long waving curls of golden
hair.

So like him, that they might have passed for brothers, was one of the
elder boys, who stood near--there was the same high white brow, proud
lip, regular features, and bright eye; but the complexion, though
naturally fair, was tanned to a healthy brown where exposed to the sun;
the frame was far stronger and more robust; and the glance of the eye
had more in it of pride and impatience, than of calm command so
remarkable in the little one.  The three boys were standing in
consultation over an arrow which they had just discovered, stuck deep
in the ground.

"'Tis my arrow, that I shot over the mark on Monday," said the elder.

"Nay, Harry," said the younger boy, "that cannot be; for remember
Thomas Holland said your arrow would frighten the good nuns of St.
Ursula in their garden."

"It must be mine," persisted Harry--"for none of you all can shoot as
far."

"Yes, English Arthur can," said the little boy.  "He shot a whole
cloth-yard beyond you the day--"

"Well, never mind, Edward," said Harry, sharply--"who cares for
arrows?--weapons for clowns, and not for Princes!"

"Nay, not so, Lord Harry," interrupted the third boy: "I have heard my
uncle say, many a time, that England's archery is half her
strength--and how it was our archers at the battle of Crecy--"

"I know all that--how the men of Genoa had wet bow-strings, and ours
dry ones," said Henry; "but they were peasants, after all!"

"Ay; but a King of England should know how to praise and value his good
yeomen."

Henry turned on his heel, and, saying, "Well, let the arrow be whose it
will, I care not for it," walked off.

"Do you know why Harry of Lancaster goes, Arthur?" said Edward, smiling.

"No, my Lord," replied Arthur.

"He cannot bear to hear aught of King of England," was the answer. "If
you love me, good Arthur, vex him not with speaking of it."

"Father Cyril would say, he ought to learn content with the rank where
he was born," said Arthur.

"Father Cyril, again!" said Prince Edward.  "You cannot live a day
without speaking of him, and of your uncle."

"I do not speak of them so much now," said Arthur, colouring, "It is
only you, Lord Edward, who never make game of me for doing so--though,
I trow, I have taught Pierre de Greilly to let my uncle's name alone."

"Truly, you did so," said Edward, laughing, "and he has scarce yet lost
his black eye.  But I love to hear your tales, Arthur, of that quiet
Castle, and the old Blanc Etoile, and your uncle, who taught you to
ride.  Sit down here on the grass, and tell me more.  But what are you
staring at so fixedly?  At the poor jaded horse, that yonder
man-at-arms is urging on so painfully?"

"'Tis--No, it is not--Yes, 'tis Brigliador, and John Ingram himself,"
cried Arthur.  "Oh, my uncle! my uncle!"  And, in one moment, he had
bounded across the ditch, which fenced in their exercising ground, and
had rushed to meet Ingram.  "Oh, John!" exclaimed he, breathlessly,
"have they done it?  Oh, tell me of Uncle Eustace! Is he alive?"

"Master Arthur!" exclaimed Ingram, stopping his wearied horse.

"Oh, tell me, Ingram," reiterated Arthur, "is my uncle safe?"

"He is alive, Master Arthur--that is, he was when I came away, but as
sore wounded as ever I saw a Knight.  And the butcher of Brittany is
upon them by this time!  And here I am sent to ask succours--and I know
no more whom to address myself, than the cock at the top of Lynwood
steeple!"

"But what has chanced, John?--make haste, and tell me."

And John, in his own awkward and confused style, narrated how he had
been entrapped by Sanchez, and the consequences of his excess. "But,"
said he, "I have vowed to our Lady of Taunton, and St. Joseph of
Glastonbury, that never again--"

Arthur had covered his face with his hands, and gave way to tears of
indignation and grief, as he felt his helplessness.  But one hand was
kindly withdrawn, and a gentle voice said, "Weep not, Arthur, but come
with me, and my father will send relief to the Castle, and save your
uncle."

"You here, Lord Edward?" exclaimed Arthur, who had not perceived that
the Prince had followed him.  "Oh yes, thanks, thanks!  None but the
Prince can save him.  Oh, let me see him myself, and that instantly!"

"Then, let us come," said Edward, still holding Arthur's hand.

Arthur set off at such a pace, as to press the little Prince into a
breathless trot by his side; but he, too, was all eagerness, and
scorned to complain.  They proceeded without interruption to the court
of the palace.  Edward, leading the way, hastened to his mother's
apartments.  He threw open the door, looked in, and, saying to Arthur,
"He must be in the council chamber," cut short an exclamation of Lady
Maude Holland, by shutting the door, and running down a long gallery to
an ante-chamber, where were several persons waiting for an audience,
and two warders, with halberts erect, standing on guard outside a
closed door.

"The Prince is in council, my Lord."

Edward drew up his head, and, waving them aside with a gesture that
became the heir of England, said, "I take it upon myself."  He then
opened the door, and, still holding Arthur fast by the hand, led him
into the chamber where the Prince of Wales sat in consultation.

There was a pause of amazement as the two boys advanced to the high
carved chair on which the Prince was seated--and Edward exclaimed,
"Father, save Arthur's uncle!"

"What means this, Edward?" demanded the Prince of Wales, somewhat
sternly.  "Go to your mother, boy--we cannot hear you now, and--"

"I cannot go, father," replied the child, "till you have promised to
save Arthur's uncle!  He is wounded!--the traitors have wounded
him!--and the French will take the Castle, and he will be slain! And
Arthur loves him so much!"

"Come here, Edward," said the Prince, remarking the flushed cheek and
tearful eye of his son, "and tell me what this means."

Edward obeyed, but without loosing his hold of his young friend's hand.
"The man-at-arms is come, all heat and dust, on the poor drooping,
jaded steed--and he said, the Knight would be slain, and the Castle
taken, unless you would send him relief.  It is Arthur's uncle that he
loves so well."

"Arthur's uncle?" repeated the Prince--and, turning his eyes on the
suppliant figure, he said, "Arthur Lynwood!  Speak, boy."

"Oh, my Lord," said Arthur, commanding his voice with difficulty, "I
would only pray you to send succour to my uncle at Chateau Norbelle,
and save him from being murdered by Oliver de Clisson."

It was a voice which boded little good to Arthur's suit that now spoke.
"If it be Sir Eustace Lynwood, at Chateau Norbelle, of whom the young
Prince speaks, he can scarce be in any strait, since the garrison is
more than sufficient."

The little page started to his feet, and, regarding the speaker with
flashing eyes, exclaimed, "Hearken not to him, my Lord Prince!  He is
the cause of all the treachery!--he is the ruin and destruction of my
uncle;--he has deceived you with his falsehoods!--and now he would be
his death!"

"How now, my young cousin!" said Clarenham, in a most irritating tone
of indifference--"you forget in what presence you are."

"I do not," replied Arthur, fiercely.  "Before the Prince, Fulk
Clarenham, I declare you a false traitor!--and, if you dare deny it,
there lies my gloves!"

Fulk only replied by a scornful laugh, and, addressing the Prince,
said, "May I pray of your Grace not to be over severe with my young
malapert relation."

The Captal de Buch spoke: "You do not know what an adversary you have
provoked, Fulk!  The other day, I met my nephew, little Pierre, with an
eye as black as the patch we used to wear in our young days of
knight-errantry.  'What wars have you been in, Master Pierre?' I asked.
It was English Arthur who had fought with him, for mocking at his
talking of nothing but his uncle.  But you need not colour, and look so
abashed, little Englishman!--I bear no more malice than I hope Pierre
does--I only wish I had as bold a champion! I remember thine uncle, if
he is the youth to whom the Constable surrendered at Navaretta, and of
whom we made so much."

"Too much then, and too little afterwards," said old Sir John Chandos.

"You do not know all, Chandos," said the Prince.

"You do not yourself know all, my Lord," said Arthur, turning eagerly.
"Lord de Clarenham has deceived you, and led you to imagine that my
uncle wished ill to me, and wanted to gain my lands; whereas it is he
himself who wants to have me in his hands to bend me to his will. It is
he who has placed traitors in Chateau Norbelle to slay my uncle and
deliver him to the enemy; they have already wounded him almost to
death"--here Arthur's lips quivered, and he could hardly restrain a
burst of tears--"and they have sent for Sir Oliver de Clisson, the
butcher.  Gaston will hold out as long as they can, but if you will not
send succours, my Lord, he will--will be slain; and kind Gaston too;"
and Arthur, unable to control himself any longer, covered his face with
his hands, and gave way to a silent suppressed agony of sobs and tears.

"Cheer thee, my boy," said the Prince, kindly; "we will see to thine
uncle."  Then, looking at his nobles, he continued, "It seems that
