the Augustan poets, as compared with the poets of the republic, they
are chiefly conspicuous for their absence, and it is equally certain, I
think, that a translator of an Augustan poet ought not to suffer them
to be a prominent feature of his style. I have, perhaps, indulged in
them too often myself to note them as a defect in others; but it seems
to me that they contribute, along with the Tennysonian metre, to
diminish the pleasure with which we read such a version as that of
which I have already spoken by "C. S. C." of "Justum et tenacem." I may
add, too, that I have occasionally allowed the desire of brevity to
lead me into an omission of the definite article, which, though perhaps
in keeping with the style of Milton, is certainly out of keeping with
that of the eighteenth century. It is one of a translator's many
refuges, and has been conceded so long that it can hardly he denied him
with justice, however it may remind the reader of a bald verbal
rendering.

A very few words will serve to conclude this somewhat protracted
Preface. I have not sought to interpret Horace with the minute accuracy
which I should think necessary in writing a commentary; and in general
I have been satisfied to consult two of the latest editions, those by
Orelli and Ritter. In a few instances I have preferred the views of the
latter; but his edition will not supersede that of the former, whose
commentary is one of the most judicious ever produced, within a
moderate compass, upon a classical author. In the few notes which I
have added at the end of this volume, I have noticed chiefly the
instances in which I have differed from him, in favour either of
Hitter's interpretation, or of some view of my own. At the same time it
must be said that my translation is not to be understood as always
indicating the interpretation I prefer. Sometimes, where the general
effect of two views of the construction of a passage has been the same,
I have followed that which I believed to be less correct, for reasons
of convenience. I have of course held myself free to deviate in a
thousand instances from the exact form of the Latin sentence; and it
did not seem reasonable to debar myself from a mode of expression which
appeared generally consistent with the original, because it happened to
be verbally consistent with a mistaken view of the Latin words. To take
an example mentioned in my notes, it may be better in Book III. Ode 3,
line 25, to make "adulterae" the genitive case after "hospes" than the
dative after "splendet;" but for practical purposes the two come to the
same thing, both being included in the full development of the thought;
and a translation which represents either is substantially a true
translation. I have omitted four Odes altogether, one in each Book, and
some stanzas of a fifth; and in some other instances I have been
studiously paraphrastic. Nor have I thought it worth while to extend my
translation from the Odes to the Epodes. The Epodes were the production
of Horace's youth, and probably would not have been much cared for
by posterity if they had constituted his only title to fame. A few of
them are beautiful, but some are revolting, and the rest, as pictures
of a roving and sensual passion, remind us of the least attractive
portion of the Odes. In the case of a writer like Horace it is not easy
to draw an exact line; but though in the Odes our admiration of much
that is graceful and tender and even true may balance our moral
repugnance to many parts of the poet's philosophy of life, it does not
seem equally desirable to dwell minutely on a class of compositions
where the beauties are fewer and the deformities more numerous and more
undisguised.

I should add that any coincidences that may be noticed between my
version and those of my predecessors are, for the most part, merely
coincidences. In some cases I may have knowingly borrowed a rhyme, but
only where the rhyme was too common to have created a right of
property.




PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.


I am very sensible of the favour which has carried this translation
from a first edition into a second. The interval between the two has
been too short to admit of my altering my judgment in any large number
of instances; but I have been glad to employ the present opportunity in
amending, as I hope, an occasional word or expression, and, in one or
two cases, recasting a stanza. The notices which my book has received,
and the opinions communicated by the kindness of friends, have been
gratifying to me, both in themselves, and as showing the interest which
is being felt in the subject of Horatian translation. It is not
surprising that there should be considerable differences of opinion
about the manner in which Horace is to be rendered, and also about the
metre appropriate to particular Odes; but I need not say that it is
through such discussion that questions like these advance towards
settlement. It would indeed be a satisfaction to me to think that the
question of translating Horace had been brought a step nearer to its
solution by the experiment which I again venture to submit to the
public.




PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION.


The changes which I have made in this impression of my translation are
somewhat more numerous than those which I was able to introduce into
the last, as might be expected from the longer interval between the
times of publication; but the work may still be spoken of as
substantially unaltered.






THE ODES OF HORACE.


BOOK I.

I.

MAECENAS ATAVIS.


     Maecenas, born of monarch ancestors,
       The shield at once and glory of my life!
       There are who joy them in the Olympic strife
     And love the dust they gather in the course;
     The goal by hot wheels shunn'd, the famous prize,
       Exalt them to the gods that rule mankind;
       This joys, if rabbles fickle as the wind
     Through triple grade of honours bid him rise,
     That, if his granary has stored away
       Of Libya's thousand floors the yield entire;
       The man who digs his field as did his sire,
     With honest pride, no Attalus may sway
     By proffer'd wealth to tempt Myrtoan seas,
       The timorous captain of a Cyprian bark.
       The winds that make Icarian billows dark
     The merchant fears, and hugs the rural ease
     Of his own village home; but soon, ashamed
       Of penury, he refits his batter'd craft.
       There is, who thinks no scorn of Massic draught,
     Who robs the daylight of an hour unblamed,
     Now stretch'd beneath the arbute on the sward,
       Now by some gentle river's sacred spring;
       Some love the camp, the clarion's joyous ring,
     And battle, by the mother's soul abhorr'd.
     See, patient waiting in the clear keen air,
       The hunter, thoughtless of his delicate bride,
       Whether the trusty hounds a stag have eyed,
     Or the fierce Marsian boar has burst the snare.
     To me the artist's meed, the ivy wreath
       Is very heaven: me the sweet cool of woods,
       Where Satyrs frolic with the Nymphs, secludes
     From rabble rout, so but Euterpe's breath
     Fail not the flute, nor Polyhymnia fly
       Averse from stringing new the Lesbian lyre.
       O, write my name among that minstrel choir,
     And my proud head shall strike upon the sky!




II.

JAM SATIS TERRIS.


     Enough of snow and hail at last
       The Sire has sent in vengeance down:
     His bolts, at His own temple cast,
         Appall'd the town,
     Appall'd the lands, lest Pyrrha's time
       Return, with all its monstrous sights,
     When Proteus led his flocks to climb
               The flatten'd heights,
     When fish were in the elm-tops caught,
       Where once the stock-dove wont to bide,
     And does were floating, all distraught,
               Adown the tide.
     Old Tiber, hurl'd in tumult back
       From mingling with the Etruscan main,
     Has threaten'd Numa's court with wrack
               And Vesta's fane.
     Roused by his Ilia's plaintive woes,
       He vows revenge for guiltless blood,
     And, spite of Jove, his banks o'erflows,
               Uxorious flood.
     Yes, Fame shall tell of civic steel
       That better Persian lives had spilt,
     To youths, whose minish'd numbers feel
               Their parents' guilt.
     What god shall Rome invoke to stay
       Her fall? Can suppliance overbear
     The ear of Vesta, turn'd away
               From chant and prayer?
     Who comes, commission'd to atone
       For crime like ours? at length appear,
     A cloud round thy bright shoulders thrown,
               Apollo seer!
     Or Venus, laughter-loving dame,
       Round whom gay Loves and Pleasures fly;
     Or thou, if slighted sons may claim
               A parent's eye,
     O weary--with thy long, long game,
       Who lov'st fierce shouts and helmets bright,
     And Moorish warrior's glance of flame
               Or e'er he smite!
     Or Maia's son, if now awhile
       In youthful guise we see thee here,
     Caesar's avenger--such the style
               Thou deign'st to bear;
     Late be thy journey home, and long
       Thy sojourn with Rome's family;
     Nor let thy wrath at our great wrong
               Lend wings to fly.
     Here take our homage, Chief and Sire;
       Here wreathe with bay thy conquering brow,
     And bid the prancing Mede retire,
               Our Caesar thou!




III.

SIC TE DIVA.


        Thus may Cyprus' heavenly queen,
     Thus Helen's brethren, stars of brightest sheen,
       Guide thee! May the Sire of wind
     Each truant gale, save only Zephyr, bind!
       So do thou, fair ship, that ow'st
     Virgil, thy precious freight, to Attic coast,
       Safe restore thy loan and whole,
     And save from death the partner of my soul!
       Oak and brass of triple fold
     Encompass'd sure that heart, which first made bold
       To the raging sea to trust
     A fragile bark, nor fear'd the Afric gust
       With its Northern mates at strife,
     Nor Hyads' frown, nor South-wind fury-rife,
       Mightiest power that Hadria knows,
     Wills he the waves to madden or compose.
       What had Death in store to awe
     Those eyes, that huge sea-beasts unmelting saw,
       Saw the swelling of the surge,
     And high Ceraunian cliffs, the seaman's scourge?
       Heaven's high providence in vain
     Has sever'd countries with the estranging main,
       If our vessels ne'ertheless
     With reckless plunge that sacred bar transgress.
       Daring all, their goal to win,
     Men tread forbidden ground, and rush on sin:
       Daring all, Prometheus play'd
     His wily game, and fire to man convey'd;
       Soon as fire was stolen away,
     Pale Fever's stranger host and wan Decay
       Swept o'er earth's polluted face,
     And slow Fate quicken'd Death's once halting pace.
       Daedalus the void air tried
     On wings, to humankind by Heaven denied;
       Acheron's bar gave way with ease
     Before the arm of labouring Hercules.
       Nought is there for man too high;
     Our impious folly e'en would climb the sky,
       Braves the dweller on the steep,
     Nor lets the bolts of heavenly vengeance sleep.




IV.

SOLVITUR ACRIS HIEMS.


     The touch of Zephyr and of Spring has loosen'd Winter's thrall;
       The well-dried keels are wheel'd again to sea:
     The ploughman cares not for his fire, nor cattle for their stall,
       And frost no more is whitening all the lea.
     Now Cytherea leads the dance, the bright moon overhead;
       The Graces and the Nymphs, together knit,
     With rhythmic feet the meadow beat, while Vulcan, fiery red,
       Heats the Cyclopian forge in Aetna's pit.
     'Tis now the time to wreathe the brow with branch of myrtle green,
       Or flowers, just opening to the vernal breeze;
     Now Faunus claims his sacrifice among the shady treen,
       Lambkin or kidling, which soe'er he please.
     Pale Death, impartial, walks his round; he knocks at cottage-gate
       And palace-portal. Sestius, child of bliss!
     How should a mortal's hopes be long, when short his being's date?
         Lo here! the fabulous ghosts, the dark abyss,
     The void of the Plutonian hall, where soon as e'er you go,
         No more for you shall leap the auspicious die
     To seat you on the throne of wine; no more your breast shall glow
       For Lycidas, the star of every eye.




V.

QUIS MULTA GRACILIS.


     What slender youth, besprinkled with perfume,
         Courts you on roses in some grotto's shade?
       Fair Pyrrha, say, for whom
         Your yellow hair you braid,
     So trim, so simple! Ah! how oft shall he
       Lament that faith can fail, that gods can change,
         Viewing the rough black sea
           With eyes to tempests strange,
     Who now is basking in your golden smile,
       And dreams of you still fancy-free, still kind,
         Poor fool, nor knows the guile
           Of the deceitful wind!
     Woe to the eyes you dazzle without cloud
       Untried! For me, they show in yonder fane
         My dripping garments, vow'd
           To Him who curbs the main.




VI.

SCRIBERIS VARIO.


     Not I, but Varius:--he, of Homer's brood
       A tuneful swan, shall bear you on his wing,
     Your tale of trophies, won by field or flood,
         Mighty alike to sing.
     Not mine such themes, Agrippa; no, nor mine
       To chant the wrath that fill'd Pelides' breast,
     Nor dark Ulysses' wanderings o'er the brine,
         Nor Pelops' house unblest.
     Vast were the task, I feeble; inborn shame,
       And she, who makes the peaceful lyre submit,
     Forbid me to impair great Caesar's fame
         And yours by my weak wit.
     But who may fitly sing of Mars array'd
       In adamant mail, or Merion, black with dust
     Of Troy, or Tydeus' son by Pallas' aid
         Strong against gods to thrust?
     Feasts are my theme, my warriors maidens fair,
       Who with pared nails encounter youths in fight;
     Be Fancy free or caught in Cupid's snare,
         Her temper still is light.




VII.

LAUDABUNT ALII.


     Let others Rhodes or Mytilene sing,
         Or Ephesus, or Corinth, set between
     Two seas, or Thebes, or Delphi, for its king
         Each famous, or Thessalian Tempe green;
     There are who make chaste Pallas' virgin tower
         The daily burden of unending song,
     And search for wreaths the olive's rifled bower;
         The praise of Juno sounds from many a tongue,
     Telling of Argos' steeds, Mycenaes's gold.
         For me stern Sparta forges no such spell,
     No, nor Larissa's plain of richest mould,
         As bright Albunea echoing from her cell.
     O headlong Anio! O Tiburnian groves,
         And orchards saturate with shifting streams!
     Look how the clear fresh south from heaven removes
         The tempest, nor with rain perpetual teems!
     You too be wise, my Plancus: life's worst cloud
         Will melt in air, by mellow wine allay'd,
     Dwell you in camps, with glittering banners proud,
         Or 'neath your Tibur's canopy of shade.
     When Teucer fled before his father's frown
         From Salamis, they say his temples deep
     He dipp'd in wine, then wreath'd with poplar crown,
         And bade his comrades lay their grief to sleep:
     "Where Fortune bears us, than my sire more kind,
         There let us go, my own, my gallant crew.
     'Tis Teucer leads, 'tis Teucer breathes the wind;
         No more despair; Apollo's word is true.
     Another Salamis in kindlier air
         Shall yet arise. Hearts, that have borne with me
     Worse buffets! drown to-day in wine your care;
         To-morrow we recross the wide, wide sea!"




VIII.

LYDIA, DIC PER OMNES.


         Lydia, by all above,
     Why bear so hard on Sybaris, to ruin him with love?
         What change has made him shun
     The playing-ground, who once so well could bear the dust and sun?
         Why does he never sit
     On horseback in his company, nor with uneven bit
         His Gallic courser tame?
     Why dreads he yellow Tiber, as 'twould sully that fair frame?
         Like poison loathes the oil,
     His arms no longer black and blue with honourable toil,
         He who erewhile was known
     For quoit or javelin oft and oft beyond the limit thrown?
         Why skulks he, as they say
     Did Thetis' son before the dawn of Ilion's fatal day,
         For fear the manly dress
     Should fling him into danger's arms, amid the Lycian press?




IX.

VIDES UT ALTA.


     See, how it stands, one pile of snow,
       Soracte! 'neath the pressure yield
     Its groaning woods; the torrents' flow
       With clear sharp ice is all congeal'd.
     Heap high the logs, and melt the cold,
       Good Thaliarch; draw the wine we ask,
     That mellower vintage, four-year-old,
       From out the cellar'd Sabine cask.
     The future trust with Jove; when He
       Has still'd the warring tempests' roar
     On the vex'd deep, the cypress-tree
       And aged ash are rock'd no more.
     O, ask not what the morn will bring,
       But count as gain each day that chance
     May give you; sport in life's young spring,
       Nor scorn sweet love, nor merry dance,
     While years are green, while sullen eld
       Is distant. Now the walk, the game,
     The whisper'd talk at sunset held,
       Each in its hour, prefer their claim.
     Sweet too the laugh, whose feign'd alarm
       The hiding-place of beauty tells,
     The token, ravish'd from the arm
       Or finger, that but ill rebels.




X.

MERCURI FACUNDE.


     Grandson of Atlas, wise of tongue,
             O Mercury, whose wit could tame
     Man's savage youth by power of song
             And plastic game!
     Thee sing I, herald of the sky,
       Who gav'st the lyre its music sweet,
     Hiding whate'er might please thine eye
             In frolic cheat.
     See, threatening thee, poor guileless child,
       Apollo claims, in angry tone,
     His cattle;--all at once he smiled,
             His quiver gone.
     Strong in thy guidance, Hector's sire
       Escaped the Atridae, pass'd between
     Thessalian tents and warders' fire,
             Of all unseen.
     Thou lay'st unspotted souls to rest;
      Thy golden rod pale spectres know;
     Blest power! by all thy brethren blest,
             Above, below!



XI

TU NE QUAESIERIS.


   Ask not ('tis forbidden knowledge), what our destined term of years,
   Mine and yours; nor scan the tables of your Babylonish seers.
   Better far to bear the future, my Leuconoe, like the past,
   Whether Jove has many winters yet to give, or this our last;
   THIS, that makes the Tyrrhene billows spend their strength against
        the shore.
   Strain your wine and prove your wisdom; life is short; should hope
        be more?
   In the moment of our talking, envious time has ebb'd away.
   Seize the present; trust to-morrow e'en as little as you may.




XII.

QUEMN VIRUM AUT HEROA.


     What man, what hero, Clio sweet,
       On harp or flute wilt thou proclaim?
     What god shall echo's voice repeat
       In mocking game
     To Helicon's sequester'd shade,
       Or Pindus, or on Haemus chill,
     Where once the hurrying woods obey'd
       The minstrel's will,
     Who, by his mother's gift of song,
       Held the fleet stream, the rapid breeze,
     And led with blandishment along
       The listening trees?
     Whom praise we first? the Sire on high,
       Who gods and men unerring guides,
     Who rules the sea, the earth, the sky,
       Their times and tides.
     No mightier birth may He beget;
       No like, no second has He known;
     Yet nearest to her sire's is set
       Minerva's throne.
     Nor yet shall Bacchus pass unsaid,
       Bold warrior, nor the virgin foe
     Of savage beasts, nor Phoebus, dread
       With deadly bow.
     Alcides too shall be my theme,
       And Leda's twins, for horses be,
     He famed for boxing; soon as gleam
       Their stars at sea,
     The lash'd spray trickles from the steep,
       The wind sinks down, the storm-cloud flies,
     The threatening billow on the deep
       Obedient lies.
     Shall now Quirinus take his turn,
       Or quiet Numa, or the state
     Proud Tarquin held, or Cato stern,
       By death made great?
     Ay, Regulus and the Scaurian name,
       And Paullus, who at Cannae gave
     His glorious soul, fair record claim,
       For all were brave.
     Thee, Furius, and Fabricius, thee,
       Rough Curius too, with untrimm'd beard,
     Your sires' transmitted poverty
        To conquest rear'd.
     Marcellus' fame, its up-growth hid,
       Springs like a tree; great Julius' light
     Shines, like the radiant moon amid
       The lamps of night.
     Dread Sire and Guardian of man's race,
       To Thee, O Jove, the Fates assign
