on yesterday,--what would not let me sleep last night,--and for what I
came here today?"

"Well?"

Rameri took a most beautiful white rose out of his robe and said:

"It is very childish, but I thought how it would be if I might put this
flower with my own hands into your shining hair.  May I?"

"It is a splendid rose!  I never saw such a fine one."

"It is for my haughty princess.  Do pray let me dress your hair!  It is
like silk from Tyre, like a swan's breast, like golden star-beams--there,
it is fixed safely!  Nay, leave it so.  If the seven Hathors could see
you, they would be jealous, for you are fairer than all of them."

"How you flatter!" said Uarda, shyly blushing, and looking into his
sparkling eyes.

"Uarda," said the prince, pressing her hand to his heart.  "I have now
but one wish.  Feel how my heart hammers and beats.  I believe it will
never rest again till you--yes, Uarda--till you let me give you one, only
one, kiss."

The girl drew back.

"Now," she said seriously.  "Now I see what you want.  Old Hekt knows
men, and she warned me."

"Who is Hekt, and what can she know of me?"

"She told me that the time would come when a man would try to make
friends with me.  He would look into my eyes, and if mine met his, then
he would ask to kiss me.  But I must refuse him, because if I liked him
to kiss me he would seize my soul, and take it from me, and I must
wander, like the restless ghosts, which the abyss rejects, and the storm
whirls before it, and the sea will not cover, and the sky will not
receive, soulless to the end of my days.  Go away--for I cannot refuse
you the kiss, and yet I would not wander restless, and without a soul!"

"Is the old woman who told you that a good woman?"  asked Rameri.

Uarda shook her head.

"She cannot be good," cried the prince.  "For she has spoken a falsehood.
I will not seize your soul; I will give you mine to be yours, and you
shall give me yours to be mine, and so we shall neither of us be poorer--
but both richer!"

"I should like to believe it," said Uarda thoughtfully, "and I have
thought the same kind of thing.  When I was strong, I often had to go
late in the evening to fetch water from the landing-place where the great
water-wheel stands.  Thousands of drops fall from the earthenware pails
as it turns, and in each you can see the reflection of a moon, yet there
is only one in the sky.  Then I thought to myself, so it must be with the
love in our hearts.  We have but one heart, and yet we pour it out into
other hearts without its losing in strength or in warmth.  I thought of
my grandmother, of my father, of little Scherau, of the Gods, and of
Pentaur.  Now I should like to give you a part of it too."

"Only a part?"  asked Rameri.

"Well, the whole will be reflected in you, you know," said Uarda, "as the
whole moon is reflected in each drop."

"It shall!"  cried the prince, clasping the trembling girl in his arms,
and the two young souls were united in their first kiss.

"Now do go!"  Uarda entreated.

"Let me stay a little while," said Rameri.  "Sit down here by me on the
bench in front of the house.  The hedge shelters us, and besides this
valley is now deserted, and there are no passers by."

"We are doing what is not right," said Uarda.  "If it were right we
should not want to hide ourselves."

"Do you call that wrong which the priests perform in the Holy of Holies?"
asked the prince.  "And yet it is concealed from all eyes."

"How you can argue!"  laughed Uarda.  "That shows you can write, and are
one of his disciples."

"His, his!"  exclaimed Rameri.  "You mean Pentaur.  He was always the
dearest to me of all my teachers, but it vexes me when you speak of him
as if he were more to you than I and every one else.  The poet, you said,
was one of the drops in which the moon of your soul finds a reflection--
and I will not divide it with many."

"How you are talking!"  said Uarda.  "Do you not honor your father, and
the Gods?  I love no one else as I do you--and what I felt when you
kissed me--that was not like moon-light, but like this hot mid-day sun.
When I thought of you I had no peace.  I will confess to you now, that
twenty times I looked out of the door, and asked whether my preserver--
the kind, curly-headed boy--would really come again, or whether he
despised a poor girl like me?  You came, and I am so happy, and I could
enjoy myself with you to my heart's content.  Be kind again--or I will
pull your hair!"

"You!"  cried Rameri.  "You cannot hurt with your little hands, though
you can with your tongue.  Pentaur is much wiser and better than I, you
owe much to him, and nevertheless I--"

"Let that rest," interrupted the girl, growing grave.  "He is not a man
like other men.  If he asked to kiss me, I should crumble into dust, as
ashes dried in the sun crumble if you touch them with a finger, and I
should be as much afraid of his lips as of a lion's.  Though you may
laugh at it, I shall always believe that he is one of the Immortals.
His own father told me that a great wonder was shown to him the very day
after his birth.  Old Hekt has often sent me to the gardener with a
message to enquire after his son, and though the man is rough he is kind.
At first he was not friendly, but when he saw how much I liked his
flowers he grew fond of me, and set me to work to tie wreaths and
bunches, and to carry them to his customers.  As we sat together, laying
the flowers side by side, he constantly told me something about his son,
and his beauty and goodness and wisdom.  When he was quite a little boy
he could write poems, and he learned to read before any one had shown him
how.  The high-priest Ameni heard of it and took him to the House of
Seti, and there he improved, to the astonishment of the gardener; not
long ago I went through the garden with the old man.  He talked of
Pentaur as usual, and then stood still before a noble shrub with broad
leaves, and said, My son is like this plant, which has grown up close to
me, and I know not how.  I laid the seed in the soil, with others that I
bought over there in Thebes; no one knows where it came from, and yet it
is my own.  It certainly is not a native of Egypt;  and is not Pentaur as
high above me and his mother and his brothers, as this shrub is above the
other flowers?  We are all small and bony, and he is tall and slim; our
skin is dark and his is rosy; our speech is hoarse, his as sweet as a
song.  I believe he is a child of the Gods that the Immortals have laid
in my homely house.  Who knows their decrees?'  And then I often saw
Pentaur at the festivals, and asked myself which of the other priests of
the temple came near him in height and dignity?  I took him for a God,
and when I saw him who saved my life overcome a whole mob with superhuman
strength must I not regard him as a superior Being?  I look up to him as
to one of them; but I could never look in his eyes as I do in yours.  It
would not make my blood flow faster, it would freeze it in my veins.  How
can I say what I mean! my soul looks straight out, and it finds you; but
to find him it must look up to the heavens.  You are a fresh rose-garland
with which I crown myself--he is a sacred persea-tree before which I
bow."

Rameri listened to her in silence, and then said, "I am still young, and
have done nothing yet, but the time shall come in which you shall look up
to me too as to a tree, not perhaps a sacred tree, but as to a sycamore
under whose shade we love to rest.  I am no longer gay; I will leave you
for I have a serious duty to fulfil.  Pentaur is a complete man, and I
will be one too.  But you shall be the rose-garland to grace me.  Men who
can be compared to flowers disgust me!"

The prince rose, and offered Uarda his hand.

"You have a strong hand," said the girl.  "You will be a noble man, and
work for good and great ends; only look, my fingers are quite red with
being held so tightly.  But they too are not quite useless.  They have
never done anything very hard certainly, but what they tend flourishes,
and grandmother says they are 'lucky.'  Look at the lovely lilies and the
pomegrenate bush in that corner.  Grandfather brought the earth here from
the Nile, Pentaur's father gave me the seeds, and each little plant that
ventured to show a green shoot through the soil I sheltered and nursed
and watered, though I had to fetch the water in my little pitcher, till
it was vigorous, and thanked me with flowers.  Take this pomegranate
flower.  It is the first my tree has borne; and it is very strange, when
the bud first began to lengthen and swell my grandmother said, 'Now your
heart will soon begin to bud and love.'  I know now what she meant, and
both the first flowers belong to you--the red one here off the tree, and
the other, which you cannot see, but which glows as brightly as this
does."

Rameri pressed the scarlet blossom to his lips, and stretched out his
hand toward Uarda; but she shrank back, for a little figure slipped
through an opening in the hedge.

It was Scherau.

His pretty little face glowed with his quick run, and his breath was
gone.  For a few minutes he tried in vain for words, and looked anxiously
at the prince.

Uarda saw that something unusual agitated him; she spoke to him kindly,
saying that if he wished to speak to her alone he need not be afraid of
Rameri, for he was her best friend.

"But it does not concern you and me," replied the child, "but the good,
holy father Pentaur, who was so kind to me, and who saved your life."

"I am a great friend of Pentaur," said the prince.  "Is it not true,
Uarda?  He may speak with confidence before me."

"I may?"  said  Scherau,  "that  is  well.  I  have slipped away; Hekt
may come back at any moment, and if she sees that I have taken myself off
I shall get a beating and nothing to eat."

"Who is this horrible Hekt?"  asked Rameri indignantly.

"That Uarda can tell you by and by," said the little one hurriedly.  "Now
only listen.  She laid me on my board in the cave, and threw a sack over
me, and first came Nemu, and then another man, whom she spoke to as
Steward.  She talked to him a long time.  At first I did not listen, but
then I caught the name of Pentaur, and I got my head out, and now I
understand it all.  The steward declared that the good Pentaur was
wicked, and stood in his way, and he said that Ameni was going to send
him to the quarries at Chennu, but that that was much too small a
punishment.  Then Hekt advised him to give a secret commission to the
captain of the ship to go beyond Chennu, to the frightful mountain-mines,
of which she has often told me, for her father and her brother were
tormented to death there."

"None ever return from thence," said the prince.  "But go on."

"What came next, I only half understood, but they spoke of some drink
that makes people mad.  Oh! what I see and hear!--I would he contentedly
on my board all my life long, but all else is too horrible--I wish that
I were dead."

And the child began to cry bitterly.

Uarda, whose cheeks had turned pale, patted him affectionately; but
Rameri exclaimed:

"It is frightful! unheard of!  But who was the steward? did you not hear
his name?  Collect yourself, little man, and stop crying.  It is a case
of life and death.  Who was the scoundrel?  Did she not name him?  Try to
remember."

Scherau bit his red lips, and tried for composure.  His tears ceased, and
suddenly he exclaimed, as he put his hand into the breast of his ragged
little garment: "Stay, perhaps you will know him again--I made him!"

