
"And you are as wicked as you are small," retorted the girl.

"Then my wickedness is small too," said the dwarf laughing, "for I am
little enough!  Good morning, girls--may Besa help your beauty.  Good
day, mother--you sent for me?"

The old woman nodded; the dwarf perched himself on the chest beside her,
and they began to whisper together.

How dusty and tired you are," said Hekt.  I do believe you have come on
foot in the burning sun."

"My ass is dead," replied Nemu, "and I have no money to hire a steed."

"A foretaste  of future splendor,"  said  the  old woman with a sneer.
"What have you succeeded in doing?"

"Paaker has saved us," replied Nemu, "and I have just come from a long
interview with the Regent."

"Well?"

"He will renew your letter of freedom, if you will put Paaker into his
power."

"Good-good.  I wish he would make up his mind to come and seek me--in
disguise, of course--I would--"

"He is very timid, and it would not suggest to him anything so
unpracticable."

"Hm--" said Hekt, "perhaps you are right, for when we have to demand a
good deal it is best only to ask for what is feasible.  One rash request
often altogether spoils the patron's inclination for granting favors."

"What else has occurred?"

"The Regent's army has conquered the Ethiopians, and is coming home with
rich spoils."

"People may be bought with treasure," muttered the old woman, "I good--
good!"

"Paaker's sword is sharpened; I would give no more for my master's life,
than I have in my pocket--and you know why I came on foot through the
dust."

"Well, you can ride home again," replied his mother, giving the little
man a small silver ring.  "Has the pioneer seen Nefert again?"

"Strange things have happened," said the dwarf, and he told his mother
what had taken place between Katuti and Nefert.  Nemu was a good
listener, and had not forgotten a word of what he had heard.

The old woman listened to his story with the most eager attention.

"Well, well," she muttered, "here is another extraordinary thing.  What
is common to all men is generally disgustingly similar in the palace and
in the hovel.  Mothers are everywhere she-apes, who with pleasure let
themselves be tormented to death by their children, who repay them badly
enough, and the wives generally open their ears wide if any one can tell
them of some misbehavior of their husbands!  But that is not the way with
your mistress."

The old woman looked thoughtful, and then she continued:

"In point of fact this can be easily explained, and is not at all more
extraordinary than it is that those tired girls should sit yawning.  You
told me once that it was a pretty sight to see the mother and daughter
side by side in their chariot when they go to a festival or the
Panegyrai; Katuti, you said, took care that the colors of their dresses
and the flowers in their hair should harmonize.  For which of them is the
dress first chosen on such occasions?"

"Always for the lady Katuti, who never wears any but certain colors,"
replied Nemu quickly.

"You see," said the witch laughing, "Indeed it must be so.  That mother
always thinks of herself first, and of the objects she wishes to gain;
but they hang high, and she treads down everything that is in her way--
even her own child--to reach them.  She will contrive that Paaker shall
be the ruin of Mena, as sure as I have ears to hear with, for that woman
is capable of playing any tricks with her daughter, and would marry her
to that lame dog yonder if it would advance her ambitious schemes."

"But Nefert!"  said Nemu.  "You should have seen her.  The dove became a
lioness."

"Because she loves Mena as much as her mother loves herself," answered
Hekt.  "As the poets say, 'she is full of him.'  It is really true of
her, there is no room for any thing else.  She cares for one only, and
woe to those who come between him and her!"

"I have seen other women in love," said Nemu, "but--"

"But," exclaimed the old witch with such a sharp laugh that the girls all
looked up, "they behaved differently to Nefert--I believe you, for there
is not one in a thousand that loves as she does.  It is a sickness that
gives raging pain--like a poisoned arrow in an open wound, and devours
all that is near it like a fire-brand, and is harder to cure than the
disease which is killing that coughing wench.  To be possessed by that
demon of anguish is to suffer the torture of the damned--or else," and
her voice sank to softness, "to be more blest than the Gods, happy as
they are.  I know--I know it all; for I was once one of the possessed,
one of a thousand, and even now--"

"Well?"  asked the dwarf.

"Folly!"  muttered the witch, stretching herself as if awaking from
sleep.  "Madness!  He--is long since dead, and if he were not it would
be all the same to me.  All men are alike, and Mena will be like the
rest."

"But Paaker surely is governed by the demon you describe?"  asked the
dwarf.

"May be," replied his mother; "but he is self-willed to madness.  He
would simply give his life for the thing because it is denied him.  If
your mistress Nefert were his, perhaps he might be easier; but what is
the use of chattering?  I must go over to the gold tent, where everyone
goes now who has any money in their purse, to speak to the mistress--"

"What do you want with her?"  interrupted Nemu.  "Little Uarda over
there," said the old woman, "will soon be quite well again.  You have
seen her lately; is she not grown beautiful, wonderfully beautiful?  Now
I shall see what the good woman will offer me if I take Uarda to her?
the girl is as light-footed as a gazelle, and with good training would
learn to dance in a very few weeks."

Nemu turned perfectly white.

"That you shall not do," said he positively.

"And why not?"  asked the old woman, "if it pays well."

"Because I forbid it," said the dwarf in a choked voice.

"Bless me," laughed the woman; "you want to play my lady Nefert, and
expect me to take the part of her mother Katuti.  But, seriously, having
seen the child again, have you any fancy for her?"

"Yes," replied Nemu.  "If we gain our end, Katuti will make me free, and
make me rich.  Then I will buy Pinem's grandchild, and take her for my
wife.  I will build a house near the hall of justice, and give the
complainants and defendants private advice, like the hunch-back Sent, who
now drives through the streets in his own chariot."

"Hm--" said his mother, "that might have done very well, but perhaps it
is too late.  When the child had fever she talked about the young priest
who was sent from the House of Seti by Ameni.  He is a fine tall fellow,
and took a great interest in her; he is a gardener's son, named Pentaur."

"Pentaur?"  said the dwarf.  "Pentaur?  He has the haughty air and the
expression of the old Mohar, and would be sure to rise; but they are
going to break his proud neck for him."

"So much the better," said the old woman.  "Uarda would be just the wife
for you, she is good and steady, and no one knows--"

"What?"  said Nemu.

"Who her mother was--for she was not one of us.  She came here from
foreign parts, and when she died she left a trinket with strange letters
on it.  We must show it to one of the prisoners of war, after you have
got her safe; perhaps they could make out the queer inscription.  She
comes of a good stock, that I am certain; for Uarda is the very living
image of her mother, and as soon as she was born, she looked like the
child of a great man.  You smile, you idiot!  Why thousands of infants
have been in my hands, and if one was brought to me wrapped in rags I
could tell if its parents were noble or base-born.  The shape of the foot
shows it--and other marks.  Uarda may stay where she is, and I will help
you.  If anything new occurs let me know."



CHAPTER XXI.

When Nemu, riding on an ass this time, reached home, he found neither his
mistress nor Nefert within.

The former was gone, first to the temple, and then into the town; Nefert,
obeying an irresistible impulse, had gone to her royal friend Bent-Anat.

The king's palace was more like a little town than a house.  The wing in
which the Regent resided, and which we have already visited, lay away
from the river; while the part of the building which was used by the
royal family commanded the Nile.

It offered a splendid, and at the same time a pleasing prospect to the
ships which sailed by at its foot, for it stood, not a huge and solitary
mass in the midst of the surrounding gardens, but in picturesque groups
of various outline.  On each side of a large structure, which contained
the state rooms and banqueting hall, three rows of pavilions of different
sizes extended in symmetrical order.  They were connected with each other
by colonnades, or by little bridges, under which flowed canals, that
watered the gardens and gave the palace-grounds the aspect of a town
built on islands.

The principal part of the castle of the Pharaohs was constructed of light
Nile-mud bricks and elegantly carved woodwork, but the extensive walls
which surrounded it were ornamented and fortified with towers, in front
of which heavily armed soldiers stood on guard.

The walls and pillars, the galleries and colonnades, even the roofs,
blazed in many colored paints, and at every gate stood tall masts, from
which red and blue flags fluttered when the king was residing there.  Now
they stood up with only their brass spikes, which were intended to
intercept and conduct the lightning.--[ According to an inscription first
interpreted by Dumichen.]

To the right of the principal building, and entirely surrounded with
thick plantations of trees, stood the houses of the royal ladies, some
mirrored in the lake which they surrounded at a greater or less distance.
In this part of the grounds were the king's storehouses in endless rows,
while behind the centre building, in which the Pharaoh resided, stood the
