headed by the Ephebi, over whom I still had some influence, stood by her
so steadfastly.  Whoever could still be classed as a youth glowed with
enthusiasm for her, and most of the Macedonian nobles in the body-guard
would have gone to death for her sake, though she had forced them to gaze
hopelessly up to her as if she were some unapproachable goddess.

"When her father died she was seventeen, but she knew how to resist
oppressors and foes as if she were a man.  My sister, Charmian, whom she
had appointed to a place in her service, loyally aided her.  At that time
she was a beautiful and lovable girl, but the spell exerted by the Queen
fettered her like chains and bonds.  She voluntarily resigned the love of
a noble man--he afterwards became your husband, Berenike--in order not to
leave her royal friend at a time when she so urgently needed her.  Since
then my sister has shut her heart against love.  It belonged to
Cleopatra.  She lives, thinks, cares for her alone.  She is fond of you,
Barine, because your father was so dear to her.  Iras, whose name is so
often associated with hers, is the daughter of my oldest sister, who was
already married when the King entrusted the princesses to our father's
care.  She is thirteen years younger than Cleopatra, but her mistress
holds the first place in her heart also.  Her father, the wealthy Krates,
made every effort to keep her from entering the service of the Queen, but
in vain.  A single conversation with this marvellous woman had bound her
forever.

"But I must be brief.  You have doubtless heard how completely Cleopatra
bewitched Pompey's son during his visit to Alexandria.  She had not been
so gracious to any man since her meeting with Antony, and it was not from
affection, but to maintain the independence of her beloved native land.
At that time the father of Gnejus was the man who possessed the most
power, and statecraft commanded her to win him through his son.  The
young Roman also took his leave 'full of her,' as the Egyptians say.
This pleased her, but the visit greatly aided her foes.  There was no
slander which was not disseminated against her.  The commanders of the
body-guard, whom she had always treated as a haughty Queen, had seen her
associate with Pompey's son in the theatre as if he were a friend of
equal rank; and on many other occasions the Alexandrians saw her repay
his courtesies in the same coin.  But in those days hatred of Rome surged
high.  The regents, leagued with Arsinoe, spread the rumour that
Cleopatra would deliver Egypt up to Pompey, if the senate would secure to
her the sole sovereignty of the new province, and leave her free to rid
herself of her royal brother and husband.

"She was compelled to fly, and went first to the Syrian frontier, to gain
friends for her cause among the Asiatic princes.  My brother Straton--you
remember the noble youth who won the prize for wrestling at Olympia,
Berenike--and I were commissioned to carry the treasure to her.  We
doubtless exposed ourselves to great peril, but we did so gladly, and
left Alexandria with a few camels, an ox-cart, and some trusted slaves.
We were to go to Gaza, where Cleopatra was already beginning to collect
an army, and had disguised ourselves as Nabataean merchants.  The
languages which I had learned, in order not to be distanced by Cleopatra,
were now of great service.

"Those were stirring times.  The names of Caesar and Pompey were in every
mouth.  After the defeat at Dyrrachium the cause of Julius seemed lost,
but the Pharsalian battle again placed him uppermost, unless the East
rose in behalf of Pompey.  Both seemed to be favourites of Fortune.  The
question now was to which the goddess would prove most faithful.

"My sister Charmian was with the Queen, but through one of Arsinoe's
maids, who was devoted to her, we had learned from the palace that
Pompey's fate was decided.  He had come a fugitive from the defeat of
Pharsalus, and begged the King of Egypt--that is, the men who were acting
in his name--for a hospitable reception.  Pothinus and his associates had
rarely confronted a greater embarrassment.  The troops and ships of the
victorious Caesar were close at hand; many of Gabinius' men were serving
in the Egyptian army.  To receive the vanquished Pompey kindly was to
make the victorious Caesar a foe.  I was to witness the terrible solution
of this dilemma.  The infamous words of Theodotus, 'Dead dogs no longer
bite,' had turned the scale.

"My brother and I reached Mount Casius with our precious freight, and
pitched our tents to await a messenger, when a large body of armed men
approached from the city.  At first we feared that we were pursued; but a
spy reported that the King himself was among the soldiery, and at the
same time a large Roman galley drew near the coast.  It must be Pompey's.
So they had changed their views, and the King was coming in person to
receive their guest.  The troops encamped on the flat shore on which
stood the Temple of the Casian Amon.

"The September sun shone brightly, and was reflected from the weapons.
From the high bank of the dry bed of the river, where we had pitched our
tent, we saw something scarlet move to and fro.  It was the King's
mantle.  The waves, stirred by the autumn breeze, rippled lightly, blue
as cornflowers, over the yellow sand of the dunes; but the King stood
still, shading his eyes with his hand as he gazed at the galley.
Meanwhile, Achillas, the commander of the troops, and Septimius, the
tribune, who belonged to the Roman garrison in Alexandria, and who, I
knew, had served under Pompey and owed him many favours, had entered a
boat and put off to the vessel, which could not come nearer the land on
account of the shallow water.

"The conference now began, and Achillas's offer of hospitality must have
been very warm and well calculated to inspire confidence, for a tall
lady--it was Cornelia, the wife of the Imperator--waved her hand to him
in token of gratitude."

Here the speaker paused, drew a long breath, and, pressing his hand to
his brow, continued "What follows--alas, that it was my fate to witness
the dreadful scene!  How often a garbled account has been given, and yet
the whole was so terribly simple!

"Fortune  makes  her  favourites  confiding.  Pompey was also.  Though
more than fifty years old--he lacked two years of sixty--he sprang into
the boat quickly enough, with merely a little assistance from a freedman.
A sailor--he was a negro--shoved the skiff off from the side of the huge
ship as violently as if the pole he used for the purpose was a spear, and
the galley his foe.  The boat, urged by his companions' oars, had already
moved forward, and he stumbled, the brown cap falling from his woolly
head in the act.

"It seems as if I could still see him.  Ere I clearly realized that this
was an evil omen, the boat stopped.

"The water was shallow.  I saw Achillas point to the shore.  It could be
reached by a single bound.  Pompey looked towards the King.  The freedman
put his hand under his arm to help him rise.  Septimius also stood up.  I
thought he intended to assist him.  But no!  What did this mean?
Something flashed  by the  Imperator's silver-grey hair as if a spark had
fallen from the sky.  Would Pompey defend himself, or why did he raise
his hand?  It was to draw around him the toga, with which he silently
covered his face.  The tribune's arm was again raised high into the air,
and then--what confusion!  Here, there, yonder, hands suddenly appeared
aloft, bright flashes darted through the clear air.  Achillas, the
general, dealt blows with his dagger as if he were skilled in murder.
The Imperator's stalwart figure sank forward.  The freedman supported
him.

"Then shouts arose, here a cry of fury, yonder a wail of grief, and,
rising above all, a woman's shriek of anguish.  It came from the lips of
Cornelia, the murdered man's wife.  Shouts of applause from the King's
camp followed, then the blast of a trumpet; the Egyptians drew back from
the shore.  The scarlet cloak again appeared.  Septimius, bearing in his
hand a bleeding head, went towards it and held the ghastly trophy aloft.

"The royal boy gazed into the dull eyes of the victim, who had guided the
destinies of many a battlefield, of Rome, of two quarters of the globe.
The sight was probably too terrible for the child upon the throne, for he
averted his head.  The ship moved away from the land, the Egyptians
formed into ranks and marched off.  Achillas cleansed his blood-stained
hands in the sea-water.  The freedman beside him washed his master's
headless trunk.  The general shrugged his shoulders as the faithful
fellow heaped reproaches on him."

Here Archibius paused, drawing a long breath.  Then he continued more
calmly:

"Achillas did not lead the troops back to Alexandria, but eastward,
towards Pelusium, as I learned later.

"My brother and I stood on the rocky edge of the ravine.  It was long ere
either spoke.  A cloud of dust concealed the King and his body-guard, the
sails of the galley disappeared.  Twilight closed in, and Straton pointed
westward towards Alexandria.  Then the sun set.  Red! red!  It seemed as
if a torrent of blood was pouring over the city.

"Night followed.  A scanty fire was glimmering on the strand.  Where had
the wood been gathered in this desert?  How had it been kindled?  A
wrecked, mouldering boat had lain close beside the scene of the murder.
The freedman and his companions had broken it up and fed the flames with
withered boughs, the torn garments of the murdered man, and dry sea-weed.
A blaze soon rose, and a body was carefully placed upon the wretched
funeral pyre.  It was the corpse of the great Pompey.  One of the
Imperator's veterans aided the faithful servant."

Here Archibius sank back again among the cushions, adding in explanation:

"Cordus, the man's name was Servius Cordus.  He fared well later.  The
Queen provided for him.  The others?  Fate overtook them all soon enough.
Theodotus was condemned by Brutus to a torturing death.  Amid his loud
shrieks of agony one of Pompey's veterans shouted, 'Dead dogs no longer
bite, but they howl when dying!'

"It was worthy of Caesar that he averted his face in horror from the head
of his enemy, which Theodotus sent to him.  Pothinus, too, vainly awaited
the reward of his infamous deed.

"Julius Caesar had cast anchor before Alexandria shortly after the King's
return.  Not until after his arrival in Egypt did he learn how Pompey had
been received there.  You know that he remained nine months.  How often I
have heard it said that Cleopatra understood how to chain him here!  This
is both true and false.  He was obliged to stay half a year; the
following three months he did indeed give to the woman whom he loved.
Ay, the heart of the man of fifty-four had again opened to a great
passion.  Like all wounds, those inflicted by the arrows of Eros heal
more slowly when youth lies behind the stricken one.  It was not only the
