"Is that true, really true?" asked Iras, whose cheeks and lips lost every
tinge of colour, though she succeeded in maintaining her composure.

"He confessed it yesterday in a letter to his uncle, the Keeper of the
Seal, in which he entreated him to do his utmost for his chosen bride,
whom he would never resign.  But Zeno has no liking for this niece.  Do
you wish to see the letter?"

"Then, of course, he cannot be set at liberty," replied Iras, and there
was additional shrillness in her voice.  "He will do everything in his
power for the woman he loves, and that is much--far more than you, who
are half a stranger here, suspect.  The Macedonian families stand by each
other.  He is a member of the council.  The bands of the Ephebi will
support him to a man.  And the populace?--He lately spoiled the game of
your brother, who was acting for me, in a way.  He was finally dragged
out of the basin of the fountain, dripping with water and overwhelmed
with shame."

"For that very reason his mouth must be closed."

Iras nodded assent, but after a short pause she exclaimed angrily:
"I will help you to silence him, but not forever.  Do you hear?
Theodotus's saying about the dead dogs which do not bite brought no
blessing to any one who followed it.  There are other ways of getting rid
of this man."

"A bird sang that you were not unfriendly to him."

"A bird?  Then it was probably an owl, which cannot see in the daylight.
His worst enemy, your brother, would probably sacrifice himself for his
welfare sooner than I."

"Then I shall begin to feel sympathy for this Dion."

"I saw recently that your  compassion  surpassed mine.  Death is not the
hardest punishment."

"Is that the cause of this gracious respite?"

"Perhaps so.  But there are other matters to be considered here.  First,
the condition of the times.  Everything is tottering, even the royal
power, which a short time ago was a wall which concealed many things and
afforded shelter from every assault.  Then Dion himself.  I have already
numbered those who will support him.  Since the defeat at Actium, the
Queen can no longer exclaim to that many-headed monster, the people,
'You must,' but 'I entreat.'  The others--"

"The first considerations are enough; but may I be permitted to know what
my wise friend has awarded to the hapless wight from whom she withdrew
her favour?"

"First, imprisonment here at Lochias.  He has stained his hands with the
blood of Caesarion, the King of kings.  That is high treason, even in the
eyes of the people.  Try to obtain the order for the arrest this very
day."

"Whenever I can disturb the Queen with such matters."

"Not for nay sake, but to save her from injury.  Away with everything
which can cloud her intellect in these decisive days!  First, away with
Barine, who spoiled her return home; and then let us take care of the man
who would be capable, for this woman's sake, of causing an insurrection
in Alexandria.  The great cares associated with the state and the throne
are hers; for the minor ones of the toilet and the heart I will provide."

Here she was interrupted by one of Cleopatra's waiting-maids.  The Queen
had awakened, and Iras hastened to her post.

As she passed Charmian's apartments and saw two handsome soldiers,
belonging to the Macedonian body-guard, pacing to and fro on duty before
them, her face darkened.  It was against her alone that Charmian was
protecting Barine.  She had been harshly reproved by the older woman on
account of the artist's daughter, who had been the source of so many
incidents which had caused her pain, and Iras regretted that she had ever
confided to her aunt her love for Dion.  But, no matter what might
happen, the upas-tree whence emanated all these tortures, anxieties, and
vexations, must be rooted out--stricken from the ranks of the living.

Ere she entered the Queen's anteroom she had mentally pronounced sentence
of death on her enemy.  Her inventive brain was now busy in devising
means to induce the Syrian to undertake its execution.  If this stone of
offence was removed it would again be possible to live in harmony with
Charmian.  Dion would be free, and then, much as he had wounded her, she
would defend him from the hatred of Philostratus and his brother.

She entered the Queen's presence with a lighter heart.  The death of a
condemned person had long since ceased to move her deeply.  While
rendering the first services to her mistress, who had been much refreshed
by her sleep, her face grew brighter and brighter; for Cleopatra
voluntarily told her that she was glad to have her attendance, and not
be constantly annoyed by the same disagreeable matter, which must soon
be settled.

In fact, Charmian, conscious that no one else at court would have
ventured to do so, had never grown weary, spite of many a rebuff, of
pleading Barine's cause until, the day before, Cleopatra, in a sudden
fit of anger, had commanded her not to mention the mischief-maker again.

When Charmian soon after requested permission to let Iras take her place
the following day, the Queen already regretted the harsh reproof she had
given her friend, and, while cordially granting the desired leave, begged
her to attribute her angry impatience to the cares which burdened her.
"And when you show me your kind, faithful face again," she concluded,
"you will have remembered that a true friend withholds from an unhappy
woman whom she loves whatever will shadow more deeply her already clouded
life.  This Barine's very name sounds like a jeer at the composure I
maintain with so much difficulty.  I do not wish to hear it again."

The words were uttered in a tone so affectionate and winning, that
Charmian's vexation melted like ice in the sun.  Yet she left the Queen's
presence anxious and troubled; for ere she quitted the room Cleopatra
remarked that she had committed the singer's affairs to Alexas.  She was
now doubly eager to obtain a day's freedom, for she knew the unprincipled
favourite's feelings towards the young beauty, and longed to discuss with
Archibius the best means of guarding her from the worst perils.

When at a late hour she went to rest, she was served by the Nubian maid,
who had accompanied her to the court from her parents' home.  She came
from the Cataract, where she had been bought when the family of Alypius
accompanied the child Cleopatra to the island of Philae.  Anukis was
given to Charmian, who at the time was just entering womanhood, as the
first servant who was her sole property, and she had proved so clever,
skilful, apt to learn, and faithful, that her mistress took her, as her
personal attendant, to the palace.

Charmian's warm, unselfish love for the Queen was equalled by Anukis's
devotion to the mistress who had long since made her free, and had become
so strongly attached to her that the Nubian's interests were little less
regarded than her own.  Her sound, keen judgment and natural wit had
gained a certain renown in the palace, and as Cleopatra often
condescended to rouse her to an apt answer, Antony had done so, too;
and since the slight crook in the back, which she had from childhood,
had grown into a hump, he gave her the name of Aisopion--the female
AEsop.  All the Queen's attendants now used it, and though others of
lower rank did the same, she permitted it, though her ready wit would
have supplied her tongue with a retort sharp enough to respond to any
word which displeased her.

But she knew the life and fables of AEsop, who had also once been a
slave, and deemed it an honour to be compared with him.

When Charmian had left Cleopatra and sought her chamber, she found Barine
sound asleep, but Anukis was awaiting her, and her mistress told her
with what deep anxiety for Barine she had quitted the presence of the
Queen.  She knew that the Nubian was fond of the young matron, whom in
her childhood she had carried in her arms, and whose father, Leonax, had
often jested with her.  The maid had watched her career with much
interest, and while Barine had been her mistress's guest her efforts to
amuse and soothe her were unceasing.

She had gone every morning to Berenike to ask tidings of Dion's health,
and always brought favourable news.  Anukis knew Philostratus and his
brother, too, and as she liked Antony, who jested with her so kindly, she
grieved to see an unprincipled fellow like Alexas his chief confidant.
She knew the plots with which the Syrian had persecuted Barine, and when
Charmian told her that the Queen had committed the young beauty's fate to
this man's keeping her dark face grew fairly livid; but she forced
herself to conceal the terror which the news inspired.  Her mistress was
also aware what this choice meant to Barine.  But Anukis would have
thought it wrong to disturb Charmian's sleep by revealing her own
distress.  It was fortunate that she was going early the next morning to
seek the aid of Archibius, whom Anukis believed to be the wisest of men;
but this by no means soothed her.  She knew the fable of the lion and the
mouse, which had been told in her home long before the time of the author
for whom she was nicknamed, and already more than once she had been in a
position to render far greater and more powerful persons an important
service.  To soothe Charmian to sleep and turn her thoughts in another
direction, she told her about Dion, whom she had found much better that
day, how tenderly he seemed to love Barine, and how touchingly patient
and worthy of her father the daughter of Leonax had been.

After her mistress had fallen asleep she went to the hall where, spite of
the late hour, she expected to meet some of the servants--sure of being
greeted as a welcome guest.  When, a short time later, Alexas's body-
slave appeared, she filled his wire cup, sat down by his side, and tried
with all the powers at her command to win his confidence.  And so well
did the elderly Nubian succeed that Marsyas, a handsome young Ligurian,
after she had gone, declared that Aisopion's jokes and stories were
enough to bring the dead to life, and it was as pleasant to talk
seriously with the brown-skinned monster as to dally with a fair-haired
sweetheart.

After Charmian had left the palace the following morning, Anukis again
