
Here she paused, for she thought she heard footsteps approaching, and
then exclaimed anxiously: "I am waiting--expecting.  Perhaps Antony
cannot escape from the paralyzing grasp of despair.  To fight the last
battle without him, and yet under the gaze of his wrathful, gloomy eyes,
once so full of sunshine, would be the greatest sorrow of my life.
Archibius, I may confess this to you, the friend who saw love for this
man develop in the breast of the child--But what does this mean?  An
uproar!  Have the people rebelled?  Yesterday the representatives  of the
priesthood, the members of the museum, and the leaders of the army
assured me of their changeless fidelity and love.  Dion belonged to the
Macedonian men of the Council; yet I have already declared, in accordance
with the truth, that I never intended to persecute him on Caesarion's
account.  I do not even know--and do not desire to know the refuge of the
lately wedded pair.  Or has the new tax levied, the command to seize the
treasures of the temple, driven them to extremities?  What am I to do?
We need gold to bid the foe defiance, to preserve the independence of the
throne, the country, and the people.  Or have tidings from Rome?  It is
becoming serious--and the noise is growing louder."

"Let me see what they want," Archibius anxiously interrupted, hastening
to the door; but just at that moment the Introducer opened it, crying,
"Mark Antony is approaching the Lochias, attended by half Alexandria!"

"The noble Imperator is returning!" fell from the bearded lips of the
commander of the guard, ere the courtier's words had died away; and even
while he spoke Iras pressed past him, shrieking as if half frantic: "He
is coming!  He is here!  I knew he would come!  How they are shouting and
cheering!  Out with you, men!  If you are willing, my royal mistress, we
will greet him from the balcony of Berenike.  If we only had--"

"The  twins--little Alexander!"  interrupted Cleopatra, with blanched
face and faltering voice.  "Put on their festal garments."

"Quick--the children, Zoe!" cried Iras, completing the order and clapping
her hands.  Then she turned to the Queen with the entreaty: "Be calm, my
royal mistress, be calm, I beseech you.  We have ample time.  Here is the
vulture crown of Isis, and here the other.  Antony's slave, Eros, has
just come in, panting for breath.  The Imperator, he says, will appear as
the new Dionysus.  It would certainly please his master--though he had
not commissioned him to request it--if you greeted him as the new Isis.
--Help me, Hathor.  Nephoris, tell the usher to see that the fan-bearers
and the other attendants, women and men, are in their places.--Here are
the pearl and diamond necklaces for your throat and bosom.  Take care
of the robe.  The transparent bombyx is as delicate as a cobweb, and if
you tear it  No, you must not refuse.  We all know how it pleases him to
see his goddess in divine majesty and beauty."  Cleopatra, with glowing
cheeks and throbbing heart, made no further objection to donning the
superb festal robe, strewn with glimmering pearls and glittering gems.
It would have been more in harmony with her feelings to meet the
returning Antony in the plain, dark garb which, since her arrival at
home, she had exchanged for a richer one only on festal occasions; but
Antony was coming as the new Dionysus, and Eros knew what would please
his master.

Eight nimble hands, which were often aided by Iras's skilful fingers,
toiled busily, and soon the latter could hold up the mirror before
Cleopatra, exclaiming from the very depths of her heart, "Like the foam-
born Aphrodite and the golden Hathor!"

Then Iras, who, in adorning her beloved mistress, had forgotten love,
hate, and envy, and amid her eager haste barely found time for a brief,
fervent prayer for a happy issue of this meeting, threw the broad
folding-doors as wide as if she were about to reveal to the worshippers
in the temple the image of the god in the innermost sanctuary.

A long, echoing shout of surprise and delight greeted the Queen, for the
courtiers, hastily summoned, were already awaiting her without, from the
grey-haired epistolograph to the youngest page.  Regally attired women in
her service raised the floating train of her cloak; others, in sacerdotal
robes, were testing the ease of movement of the rings on the sistrum
rods, men and boys were forming into lines according to the rank of each
individual, and the chief fan-bearer gave the signal for departure.
After a short walk through several halls and corridors, the train reached
the first court-yard of the palace, and there ascended the few steps
leading to the broad platform at the entrance-gate which overlooked the
whole Bruchium and the Street of the King, down which the expected hero
would approach.

The distant uproar of the multitude had sounded threatening, but now,
amid the deafening din, they could distinguish every shout of welcome,
every joyous greeting, every expression of delight, surprise, applause,
admiration, and homage, known to the Greek and Egyptian tongues.

Only the centre and end of the procession were visible.  The head had
reached the Corner of the Muses, where, concealed by the old trees in the
garden, it moved on between the Temple of Isis and the land owned by
Didymus.  The end still extended to the Choma, whence it had started.

All Alexandria seemed to have joined it.

Men large and small, of high and low degree, old and young, the lame and
the crippled, mingled with the throng, sweeping onward among horses and
carriages, carts and beasts of burden, like a mountain torrent dashing
wildly down to the valley.  Here a loud shriek rang from an overturned
litter, whose bearers had fallen.  Yonder a child thrown to the ground
screamed shrilly, there a dog trodden under the feet of the crowd howled
piteously.  So clear and resonant were the shouts of joy that they rose
high above the flutes and tambourines, the cymbals and lutes of the
musicians, who followed the man approaching in the robes of a god.

The head of the procession now passed beyond the Corner of the Muses and
came within view of the platform.

There could be no doubt to whom this ovation was given, for the returning
hero was in the van, high above all the other figures.  From the golden
throne borne on the shoulders of twelve black slaves he waved his long
thyrsus in greeting to the exulting multitude.  Before the bacchanalian
train which accompanied him, and behind the musicians who followed,
moved two elephants bearing between them, as a light burden, some
unrecognizable object covered with a purple cloth.  Now the column had
passed between the pylons through the lofty gateway which separated the
palace from the Street of the King, and stopped opposite to the platform.

While officials, Scythians, and body-guards of all shades of complexion,
on foot and on horseback, kept back the throng by force where friendly
warning did not avail, Cleopatra saw her lover descend from the throne
and give a signal to the Indian slave who guided the elephants.  The
cloth was flung aside, revealing to the astonished eyes of the spectators
a bouquet of flowers such as no Alexandrian had ever beheld.  It
consisted entirely of blossoming rose-bushes.  The red flowers formed a
circle in the centre, surrounded by a broad light garland of white ones.
The whole gigantic work rested like an egg in its cup in a holder of palm
fronds which, as it were, framed it in graceful curving outlines.  More
than a thousand blossoms were united in this peerless bouquet, and the
singular gigantic gift was characteristic of its giver.

He advanced on foot to the platform, his figure towering above the brown,
light-hued, and black freedmen and slaves who followed as, on the
monuments of the Pharaohs, the image of the sovereign dominates those of
the subjects and foes.

He could look down upon the tallest men, and the width of his shoulders
was as remarkable as his colossal height.  A long, gold-broidered purple
mantle, floating to his ancles, increased his apparent stature.  Powerful
arms, with the swelling muscles of an athlete, were extended from his
sleeveless robe towards the beloved Queen.

The well-formed head, thick dark hair, and magnificent beard corresponded
with the powerful figure.  Formerly these locks had adorned the head of
the youth with the blue-black hue of the raven's plumage; now the threads
of grey scattered abundantly through them were concealed by the aid of
dye.  A thick wreath of vine leaves rested on the Imperator's brow, and
leafy vine branches, to which clung several dark bunches of grapes, fell
over his broad shoulders and down his back, which was covered like a
cloak, not by a leopard-skin, but that of a royal Indian tiger of great
size--he had slain it himself in the arena.  The head and paws of the
animal were gold, the eyes two magnificent sparkling sapphires.  The
clasp of the chain, by which the skin was suspended, as well as that of
the gold belt which circled the Imperator's body above the hips, was
covered with rubies and emeralds.  The wide armlets above his elbows, the
ornaments on his broad breast, nay, even his red morocco boots, glittered
and flashed with gems.

Radiant magnificent as his former fortunes seemed the attire of this
mighty fallen hero, who but yesterday had shrunk timidly and sadly from
the eyes of his fellow-men.  His features, too, were large, noble, and
beautiful in outline; but, though his pale cheeks were adorned with the
borrowed crimson of youth, half a century of the maddest pursuit of
pleasure and the torturing excitement of the last few weeks had left
traces only too visible; for the skin hung in loose bags beneath the
large eyes; wrinkles furrowed his brow and radiated in slanting lines
from the corners of his eyes across his temples.

Yet not one of those whom this bedizened man of fifty was approaching
thought of seeing in him an aged, bedecked dandy; it was an instinct of
his nature to surround himself with pomp and splendour and, moreover, his
whole appearance was so instinct with power that scorn and mockery shrank
abashed before it.

How frank, gracious, and kindly was this man's face, how sincere the
heart-felt emotion which sparkled in his eyes, still glowing with the
fire of youth, at the sight of the woman from whom he had been so long
parted!  Every feature beamed with the most ardent tenderness for the
royal wife whom he was approaching, and the expression on the lips of the
giant varied so swiftly from humble, sorrowful anguish of mind to
gratitude and delight, that even the hearts of his foes were touched.
But when, pressing his hand on his broad breast, he advanced towards the
Queen, bending so low that it seemed as if he would fain kiss her feet,
when in fact the colossal figure did sink kneeling before her, and the
powerful arms were outstretched with fervent devotion like a child
beseeching help, the woman who had loved him throughout her whole life
with all the ardour of her passionate soul was overpowered by the feeling
that everything which stood between them, all their mutual offences, had
vanished.  He saw the sunny smile that brightened her beloved, ever-
beautiful face, and then--then his own name reached his ears from the
lips to which he owed the greatest bliss love had ever offered.  At last,
as if intoxicated by the tones of her voice, which seemed to him more
musical than the songs of the Muses; half smiling at the jest which, even
in the most serious earnest, he could not abandon; half moved to the
depths of his soul by the power of his newly awakening happiness after
such sore sorrow, he pointed to the gigantic bouquet, which three slaves
had lifted down from the elephant and were bearing to the Queen.
Cleopatra, too, was overwhelmed with emotion.

This floral gift imitated, on an immense scale, the little bouquet which
the famous young general had taken from her father's hand before the gate
of the garden of Epicurus to present to her as his first gift.  That had
also been composed of red roses, surrounded by white ones.  Instead of
palm fronds, it had been encircled only by fern leaves.  This was one of
the beautiful offerings which Antony's gracious nature so well understood
how to choose.  The bouquet was a symbol of the unprecedented generosity
natural to this large-minded man.  No magic goblet had compelled him to
approach her thus and with such homage.  Nothing had constrained him,
save his overflowing heart, his constant, fadeless love.

As if restored to youth, transported by some magic spell to the happy
days of early girlhood, she forgot her royal dignity and the hundreds of
eyes which rested upon him as if spell-bound; and, obedient to an
irresistible impulse of the heart, she sank upon the broad, heaving
breast of the kneeling hero.  Laughing joyously in the clear, silvery
tones which are usually heard only in youth, he clasped her in his strong
arms, raised her slender figure in its floating royal mantle from the
ground, kissed her lips and eyes, held her aloft in the soaring attitude
of the Goddess of Victory, as if to display his happiness to the eyes of
all, and at last placed her carefully on her feet again like some
treasured jewel.

Then, turning to the children, who were waiting at their mother's side,
he lifted first little Alexander, then the twins, to kiss them; and,
while holding Helios and Selene in his arms, as if the joy of seeing them
