j'ai oublie le mot Anglois; mais vous etes des braves gens, et me
comprenez tres bien.'

The Count next hastened to put the cavalry in motion. 'Gentilmans
cavalry, you must fall in. Ah! par ma foi, I did not say fall off!
I am a fear de little gross fat gentilman is moche hurt. Ah, mon
Dieu! c'est le Commissaire qui nous a apporte les premieres
nouvelles de ce maudit fracas. Je suis trop fache, Monsieur!'

But poor Macwheeble, who, with a sword stuck across him, and a
white cockade as large as a pancake, now figured in the character
of a commissary, being overturned in the bustle occasioned by the
troopers hastening to get themselves in order in the Prince's
presence, before he could rally his galloway, slunk to the rear
amid the unrestrained laughter of the spectators.

'Eh bien, Messieurs, wheel to de right. Ah! dat is it! Eh,
Monsieur de Bradwardine, ayez la bonte de vous mettre a la tete de
votre regiment, car, par Dieu, je n'en puis plus!'

The Baron of Bradwardine was obliged to go to the assistance of
Monsieur de Beaujeu, after he had fairly expended his few English
military phrases. One purpose of the Chevalier was thus answered.
The other he proposed was, that in the eagerness to hear and
comprehend commands issued through such an indistinct medium in
his own presence, the thoughts of the soldiers in both corps might
get a current different from the angry channel in which they were
flowing at the time.

Charles Edward was no sooner left with the Chieftain and Waverley,
the rest of his attendants being at some distance, than he said,
'If I owed less to your disinterested friendship, I could be most
seriously angry with both of you for this very extraordinary and
causeless broil, at a moment when my father's service so decidedly
demands the most perfect unanimity. But the worst of my situation
is, that my very best friends hold they have liberty to ruin
themselves, as well as the cause they are engaged in, upon the
slightest caprice.'

Both the young men protested their resolution to submit every
difference to his arbitration. 'Indeed,' said Edward, 'I hardly
know of what I am accused. I sought Colonel Mac-Ivor merely to
mention to him that I had narrowly escaped assassination at the
hand of his immediate dependent, a dastardly revenge which I knew
him to be incapable of authorising. As to the cause for which he
is disposed to fasten a quarrel upon me, I am ignorant of it,
unless it be that he accuses me, most unjustly, of having engaged
the affections of a young lady in prejudice of his pretensions.'

'If there is an error,' said the Chieftain, 'it arises from a
conversation which I held this morning with his Royal Highness
himself.'

'With me?' said the Chevalier; 'how can Colonel Mac-Ivor have so
far misunderstood me?'

He then led Fergus aside, and, after five minutes' earnest
conversation, spurred his horse towards Edward. 'Is it possible--
nay, ride up, Colonel, for I desire no secrets--is it possible,
Mr. Waverley, that I am mistaken in supposing that you are an
accepted lover of Miss Bradwardine? a fact of which I was by
circumstances, though not by communication from you, so absolutely
convinced that I alleged it to Vich Ian Vohr this morning as a
reason why, without offence to him, you might not continue to be
ambitious of an alliance which, to an unengaged person, even
though once repulsed, holds out too many charms to be lightly laid
aside.'

'Your Royal Highness,' said Waverley,'must have founded on
circumstances altogether unknown to me, when you did me the
distinguished honour of supposing me an accepted lover of Miss
Bradwardine. I feel the distinction implied in the supposition,
but I have no title to it. For the rest, my confidence in my own
merit is too justly slight to admit of my hoping for success in
any quarter after positive rejection.'

The Chevalier was silent for a moment, looking steadily at them
both, and then said, 'Upon my word, Mr. Waverley, you are a less
happy man than I conceived I had very good reason to believe you.
But now, gentlemen, allow me to be umpire in this matter, not as
Prince Regent but as Charles Stuart, a brother adventurer with you
in the same gallant cause. Lay my pretensions to be obeyed by you
entirely out of view, and consider your own honour, and how far it
is well or becoming to give our enemies the advantage and our
friends the scandal of showing that, few as we are, we are not
united. And forgive me if I add, that the names of the ladies who
have been mentioned crave more respect from us all than to be made
themes of discord.'

He took Fergus a little apart and spoke to him very earnestly for
two or three minutes, and then returning to Waverley, said, 'I
believe I have satisfied Colonel Mac-Ivor that his resentment was
founded upon a misconception, to which, indeed, I myself gave
rise; and I trust Mr. Waverley is too generous to harbour any
recollection of what is past when I assure him that such is the
case. You must state this matter properly to your clan, Vich Ian
Vohr, to prevent a recurrence of their precipitate violence.'
Fergus bowed. 'And now, gentlemen, let me have the pleasure to see
you shake hands.'

They advanced coldly, and with measured steps, each apparently
reluctant to appear most forward in concession. They did, however,
shake hands, and parted, taking a respectful leave of the
Chevalier.

Charles Edward [Footnote: See Note 12.] then rode to the head of
the MacIvors, threw himself from his horse, begged a drink out of
old Ballenkeiroch's cantine, and marched about half a mile along
with them, inquiring into the history and connexions of Sliochd
nan Ivor, adroitly using the few words of Gaelic he possessed, and
affecting a great desire to learn it more thoroughly. He then
mounted his horse once more, and galloped to the Baron's cavalry,
which was in front, halted them, and examined their accoutrements
and state of discipline; took notice of the principal gentlemen,
and even of the cadets; inquired after their ladies, and commended
their horses; rode about an hour with the Baron of Bradwardine,
and endured three long stories about Field-Marshal the Duke of
Berwick.

'Ah, Beaujeu, mon cher ami,' said he, as he returned to his usual
place in the line of march, 'que mon metier de prince errant est
ennuyant, par fois. Mais, courage! c'est le grand jeu, apres
tout.'





CHAPTER LIX

A SKIRMISH


Theeader need hardly be reminded that, after a council of war
held at Derby on the 5th of December, the Highlanders relinquished
their desperate attempt to penetrate farther into England, and,
greatly to the dissatisfaction of their young and daring leader,
positively determined to return northward. They commenced their
retreat accordingly, and, by the extreme celerity of their
movements, outstripped the motions of the Duke of Cumberland, who
now pursued them with a very large body of cavalry.

This retreat was a virtual resignation of their towering hopes.
None had been so sanguine as Fergus MacIvor; none, consequently,
was so cruelly mortified at the change of measures. He argued, or
rather remonstrated, with the utmost vehemence at the council of
war; and, when his opinion was rejected, shed tears of grief and
indignation. From that moment his whole manner was so much altered
that he could scarcely have been recognised for the same soaring
and ardent spirit, for whom the whole earth seemed too narrow but
a week before. The retreat had continued for several days, when
Edward, to his surprise, early on the 12th of December, received a
visit from the Chieftain in his quarters, in a hamlet about half-
way between Shap and Penrith.

Having had no intercourse with the Chieftain since their rupture,
Edward waited with some anxiety an explanation of this unexpected
visit; nor could he help being surprised, and somewhat shocked,
with the change in his appearance. His eye had lost much of its
fire; his cheek was hollow, his voice was languid, even his gait
seemed less firm and elastic than it was wont; and his dress, to
which he used to be particularly attentive, was now carelessly
flung about him. He invited Edward to walk out with him by the
little river in the vicinity; and smiled in a melancholy manner
when he observed him take down and buckle on his sword.

As soon as they were in a wild sequestered path by the side of the
stream, the Chief broke out--'Our fine adventure is now totally
ruined, Waverley, and I wish to know what you intend to do;--nay,
never stare at me, man. I tell you I received a packet from my
sister yesterday, and, had I got the information it contains
sooner, it would have prevented a quarrel which I am always vexed
when I think of. In a letter written after our dispute, I
acquainted her with the cause of it; and she now replies to me
that she never had, nor could have, any purpose of giving you
encouragement; so that it seems I have acted like a madman. Poor
Flora! she writes in high spirits; what a change will the news of
this unhappy retreat make in her state of mind!'

Waverley, who was really much affected by the deep tone of
melancholy with which Fergus spoke, affectionately entreated him
to banish from his remembrance any unkindness which had arisen
between them, and they once more shook hands, but now with sincere
cordiality. Fergus again inquired of Waverley what he intended to
do. 'Had you not better leave this luckless army, and get down
before us into Scotland, and embark for the Continent from some of
the eastern ports that are still in our possession? When you are
out of the kingdom, your friends will easily negotiate your
pardon; and, to tell you the truth, I wish you would carry Rose
Bradwardine with you as your wife, and take Flora also under your
joint protection.'--Edward looked surprised.--'She loves you, and
I believe you love her, though, perhaps, you have not found it
out, for you are not celebrated for knowing your own mind very
pointedly.' He said this with a sort of smile.

'How,' answered Edward, 'can you advise me to desert the
expedition in which we are all embarked?'

'Embarked?' said Fergus; 'the vessel is going to pieces, and it is
full time for all who can to get into the long-boat and leave
her.'

'Why, what will other gentlemen do?' answered Waverley, 'and why
did the Highland Chiefs consent to this retreat if it is so
ruinous?'

'O,' replied Mac-Ivor, 'they think that, as on former occasions,
the heading, hanging, and forfeiting will chiefly fall to the lot
of the Lowland gentry; that they will be left secure in their
poverty and their fastnesses, there, according to their proverb,
"to listen to the wind upon the hill till the waters abate." But
they will be disappointed; they have been too often troublesome to
be so repeatedly passed over, and this time John Bull has been too
heartily frightened to recover his good-humour for some time. The
Hanoverian ministers always deserved to be hanged for rascals; but
now, if they get the power in their hands,--as, sooner or later,
they must, since there is neither rising in England nor assistance
from France,--they will deserve the gallows as fools if they leave
a single clan in the Highlands in a situation to be again
troublesome to government. Ay, they will make root-and-branch-
work, I warrant them.'

'And while you recommend flight to me,' said Edward,--'a counsel
which I would rather die than embrace,--what are your own views?'

'O,' answered Fergus, with a melancholy air, 'my fate is settled.
Dead or captive I must be before tomorrow.'

'What do you mean by that, my friend?' said Edward. 'The enemy is
still a day's march in our rear, and if he comes up, we are still
strong enough to keep him in check. Remember Gladsmuir.'

'What I tell you is true notwithstanding, so far as I am
individually concerned.'

'Upon what authority can you found so melancholy a prediction?'
asked Waverley.

'On one which never failed a person of my house. I have seen,' he
said, lowering his voice, 'I have seen the Bodach Glas.'

'Bodach Glas?'

'Yes; have you been so long at Glennaquoich, and never heard of
the Grey Spectre? though indeed there is a certain reluctance
among us to mention him.'

'No, never.'

'Ah! it would have been a tale for poor Flora to have told you.
Or, if that hill were Benmore, and that long blue lake, which you
see just winding towards yon mountainous country, were Loch Tay,
or my own Loch an Ri, the tale would be better suited with
scenery. However, let us sit down on this knoll; even Saddleback
and Ulswater will suit what I have to say better than the English
hedgerows, enclosures, and farmhouses. You must know, then, that
when my ancestor, Ian nan Chaistel, wasted Northumberland, there
was associated with him in the expedition a sort of Southland
Chief, or captain of a band of Lowlanders, called Halbert Hall. In
their return through the Cheviots they quarrelled about the
division of the great booty they had acquired, and came from words
to blows. The Lowlanders were cut off to a man, and their chief
fell the last, covered with wounds by the sword of my ancestor.
Since that time his spirit has crossed the Vich Ian Vohr of the
day when any great disaster was impending, but especially before
approaching death. My father saw him twice, once before he was
made prisoner at Sheriff-Muir, another time on the morning of the
day on which he died.'

'How can you, my dear Fergus, tell such nonsense with a grave
face?'

' I do not ask you to believe it; but I tell you the truth,
ascertained by three hundred years' experience at least, and last
night by my own eyes.'

'The particulars, for heaven's sake!' said Waverley, with
eagerness.

'I will, on condition you will not attempt a jest on the subject.
Since this unhappy retreat commenced I have scarce ever been able
to sleep for thinking of my clan, and of this poor Prince, whom
they are leading back like a dog in a string, whether he will or
no, and of the downfall of my family. Last night I felt so
feverish that I left my quarters and walked out, in hopes the keen
frosty air would brace my nerves--I cannot tell how much I dislike
going on, for I know you will hardly believe me. However--I
crossed a small footbridge, and kept walking backwards and
forwards, when I observed with surprise by the clear moonlight a
tall figure in a grey plaid, such as shepherds wear in the south
of Scotland, which, move at what pace I would, kept regularly
about four yards before me.'

'You saw a Cumberland peasant in his ordinary dress, probably.'

'No; I thought so at first, and was astonished at the man's
audacity in daring to dog me. I called to him, but received no
answer. I felt an anxious throbbing at my heart, and to ascertain
what I dreaded, I stood still and turned myself on the same spot
successively to the four points of the compass. By Heaven, Edward,
turn where I would, the figure was instantly before my eyes, at
precisely the same distance! I was then convinced it was the
Bodach Glas. My hair bristled and my knees shook. I manned myself,
however, and determined to return to my quarters. My ghastly
visitant glided before me (for I cannot say he walked) until he
reached the footbridge; there he stopped and turned full round. I
must either wade the river or pass him as close as I am to you. A
desperate courage, founded on the belief that my death was near,
made me resolve to make my way in despite of him. I made the sign
of the cross, drew my sword, and uttered, "In the name of God,
Evil Spirit, give place!" "Vich Ian Vohr," it said, in a voice
that made my very blood curdle, "beware of to-morrow!" It seemed
at that moment not half a yard from my sword's point; but the
words were no sooner spoken than it was gone, and nothing appeared
further to obstruct my passage. I got home and threw myself on my
bed, where I spent a few hours heavily enough; and this morning,
as no enemy was reported to be near us, I took my horse and rode
forward to make up matters with you. I would not willingly fall
until I am in charity with a wronged friend.'

Edward had little doubt that this phantom was the operation of an
exhausted frame and depressed spirits, working on the belief
common to all Highlanders in such superstitions. He did not the
less pity Fergus, for whom, in his present distress, he felt all
his former regard revive. With the view of diverting his mind from
these gloomy images, he offered, with the Baron's permission,
which he knew he could readily obtain, to remain in his quarters
till Fergus's corps should come up, and then to march with them as
usual. The Chief seemed much pleased, yet hesitated to accept the
offer.

'We are, you know, in the rear, the post of danger in a retreat.'

'And therefore the post of honour.'

'Well,' replied the Chieftain, 'let Alick have your horse in
readiness, in case we should be overmatched, and I shall be
delighted to have your company once more.'

The rear-guard were late in making their appearance, having been
delayed by various accidents and by the badness of the roads. At
length they entered the hamlet. When Waverley joined the clan Mac-
Ivor, arm-in-arm with their Chieftain, all the resentment they had
entertained against him seemed blown off at once. Evan Dhu
received him with a grin of congratulation; and even Callum, who
was running about as active as ever, pale indeed, and with a great
patch on his head, appeared delighted to see him.

'That gallows-bird's skull,' said Fergus, 'must be harder than
marble; the lock of the pistol was actually broken.'

'How could you strike so young a lad so hard?' said Waverley, with
some interest.

'Why, if I did not strike hard sometimes, the rascals would forget
themselves.'

They were now in full march, every caution being taken to prevent
surprise. Fergus's people, and a fine clan regiment from Badenoch,
commanded by Cluny Mac-Pherson, had the rear. They had passed a
large open moor, and were entering into the enclosures which
surround a small village called Clifton. The winter sun had set,
and Edward began to rally Fergus upon the false predictions of the
Grey Spirit. 'The ides of March are not past,' said Mac-Ivor, with
a smile; when, suddenly casting his eyes back on the moor, a large
body of cavalry was indistinctly seen to hover upon its brown and
