many-branched feathery palm, but it does not shelter it from the piercing
rays of the sun of those latitudes; it seems only to protect the roots of
the tree itself; still the feathered boughs are strong enough to support
a small thread-bare blue cloth, which projects like a penthouse,
screening the face of a girl who lies dreaming, stretched at full-length
on the glowing stones, while a few yellowish mountain-goats spring from
stone to stone in search of pasture as gaily as though they found the
midday heat pleasant and exhilarating.  From time to time the girl seizes
the herdsman's crook that lies beside her, and calls the goats with a
hissing cry that is audible at a considerable distance.  A young kid
comes dancing up to her.  Few beasts can give expression to their
feelings of delight; but young goats can.

The girl puts out her bare slim foot, and playfully pushes back the
little kid who attacks her in fun, pushes it again and again each time it
skips forward, and in so doing the shepherdess bends her toes as
gracefully as if she wished some looker-on to admire their slender form.
Once more the kid springs forward, and this time with its bead down.  Its
brow touches the sole of her foot, but as it rubs its little hooked nose
tenderly against the girl's foot, she pushes it back so violently that
the little beast starts away, and ceases its game with loud bleating.

It was just as if the girl had been waiting for the right moment to hit
the kid sharply; for the kick was a hard one-almost a cruel one.  The
blue cloth hid the face of the maiden, but her eyes must surely have
sparkled brightly when she so roughly stopped the game.  For a minute she
remained motionless; but the cloth, which had fallen low over her face,
waved gently to and fro, moved by her fluttering breath.  She was
listening with eager attention, with passionate expectation; her
convulsively clenched toes betrayed her.

Then a noise became audible; it came from the direction of the rough
stair of unhewn blocks, which led from the steep wall of the ravine down
to the spring.  A shudder of terror passed through the tender, and not
yet fully developed limbs of the shepherdess; still she did not move; the
grey birds which were now sitting on a thorn-bush near her flew up, but
they had merely heard a noise, and could not distinguish who it was that
it announced.

The shepherdess's ear was sharper than theirs.  She heard that a man was
approaching, and well knew that one only trod with such a step.  She put
out her hand for a stone that lay near her, and flung it into the spring
so that the waters immediately became troubled; then she turned on her
side, and lay as if asleep with her head on her arm.  The heavy steps
became more and more distinctly audible.

A tall youth was descending the rocky stair; by his dress he was seen to
be one of the anchorites of Sinai, for he wore nothing but a shirt-shaped
garment of coarse linen, which he seemed to have outgrown, and raw
leather sandals, which were tied on to his feet with fibrous palm-bast.

No slave could be more poorly clothed by his owner and yet no one would
have taken him for a bondman, for he walked erect and self-possessed.  He
could not be more than twenty years of age; that was evident in the young
soft hair on his upper lip, chin, and cheeks; but in his large blue eyes
there shone no light of youth, only discontent, and his lips were firmly
closed as if in defiance.

He now stood still, and pushed back from his forehead the superabundant
and unkempt brown hair that flowed round his head like a lion's mane;
then he approached the well, and as he stooped to draw the water in the
large dried gourd-shell which he held, he observed first that the spring
was muddy, and then perceived the goats, and at last their sleeping
mistress.

He impatiently set down the vessel and called the girl loudly, but she
did not move till he touched her somewhat roughly with his foot.  Then
she sprang up as if stung by an asp, and two eyes as black as night
flashed at him out of her dark young face; the delicate nostrils of her
aquiline nose quivered, and her white teeth gleamed as she cried:

"Am I a dog that you wake me in this fashion?" He colored, pointed
sullenly to the well and said sharply: "Your cattle have troubled the
water again; I shall have to wait here till it is clear and I can draw
some."

"The day is long," answered the shepherdess, and while she rose she
pushed, as if by chance, another stone into the water.

Her triumphant, flashing glance as she looked down into the troubled
spring did not escape the young man, and he exclaimed angrily:

"He is right!  You are a venomous snake--a demon of hell."

She raised herself and made a face at him, as if she wished to show him
that she really was some horrible fiend; the unusual sharpness of her
mobile and youthful features gave her a particular facility for doing so.
And she fully attained her end, for he drew back with a look of horror,
stretched out his arms to repel her, and exclaimed as he saw her
uncontrollable laughter,

"Back, demon, back!  In the name of the Lord!  I ask thee, who art
thou?"

"I am Miriam--who else should I be?"  she answered haughtily.

He had expected a different reply, her vivacity annoyed him, and he said
angrily, "Whatever your name is you are a fiend, and I will ask Paulus to
forbid you to water your beasts at our well."

"You might run to your nurse, and complain of me to her if you had one,"
she answered, pouting her lips contemptuously at him.

He colored; she went on boldly, and with eager play of gesture.

"You ought to be a man, for you are strong and big, but you let yourself
be kept like a child or a miserable girl; your only business is to hunt
for roots and berries, and fetch water in that wretched thing there.  I
have learned to do that ever since I was as big as that!"  and she
indicated a contemptibly little measure, with the outstretched pointed
fingers of her two hands, which were not less expressively mobile than
her features.  "Phoh! you are stronger and taller than all the Amalekite
lads down there, but you never try to measure yourself with them in
shooting with a bow and arrows or in throwing a spear!"

"If I only dared as much as I wish!" he interrupted, and flaming scarlet
mounted to his face, "I would be a match for ten of those lean rascals."

"I believe you," replied the girl, and her eager glance measured the
youth's broad breast and muscular arms with an expression of pride.
"I believe you, but why do you not dare?  Are you the slave of that man
up there?"

"He is my father and besides--"

"What besides?" she cried, waving her hand as if to wave away a bat.
"If no bird ever flew away from the nest there would be a pretty swarm in
it.  Look at my kids there--as long as they need their mother they run
about after her, but as soon as they can find their food alone they seek
it wherever they can find it, and I can tell you the yearlings there have
quite forgotten whether they sucked the yellow dam or the brown one.  And
what great things does your father do for you?"

"Silence!" interrupted the youth with excited indignation.  "The evil one
speaks through thee.  Get thee from me, for I dare not hear that which I
dare not utter."

"Dare, dare, dare!"  she sneered.  "What do you dare then?  not even to
listen!"

"At any rate not to what you have to say, you goblin!" he exclaimed
vehemently.  "Your voice is hateful to me, and if I meet you again by the
well I will drive you away with stones."

While he spoke thus she stared speechless at him, the blood had left her
lips, and she clenched her small hands.  He was about to pass her to
fetch some water, but she stepped into his path, and held him spell-bound
with the fixed gaze of her eyes.  A cold chill ran through him when she
asked him with trembling lips and a smothered voice, "What harm have I
done you?"

"Leave me!" said he, and he raised his hand to push her away from the
water.

"You shall not touch me," she cried beside herself.  "What harm have I
done you?"

"You know nothing of God," he answered, "and he who is not of God is of
the Devil."

"You do not say that of yourself," answered she, and her voice recovered
its tone of light mockery.  "What they let you believe pulls the wires of
your tongue just as a hand pulls the strings of a puppet.  Who told you
that I was of the Devil?"

"Why should I conceal it from you?" he answered proudly.  "Our pious
Paulus, warned me against you and I will thank him for it.  'The evil
one,' he says, 'looks out of your eyes,' and he is right, a thousand
times right.  When you look at me I feel as if I could tread every thing
that is holy under foot; only last night again I dreamed I was whirling
in a dance with you--"

At these words all gravity and spite vanished from Miriam's eyes; she
clapped her hands and cried, "If it had only been the fact and not a
dream!  Only do not be frightened again, you fool!  Do you know then what
it is when the pipes sound, and the lutes tinkle, and our feet fly round
in circles as if they had wings?"

"The wings of Satan," Hermas interrupted sternly.  "You are a demon, a
hardened heathen."

"So says our pious Paulus," laughed the girl.

"So say I too," cried the young man.  "Who ever saw you in the
assemblies of the just?  Do you pray?  Do you ever praise the Lord and
our Saviour?"

"And what should I praise them for?"  asked Miriam.  "Because I am
regarded as a foul fiend by the most pious among you perhaps?"

"But it is because you are a sinner that Heaven denies you its blessing."

"No--no, a thousand times no!"  cried Miriam.  "No god has ever troubled
himself about me.  And if I am not good, why should I be when nothing but
evil ever has fallen to my share?  Do you know who I am and how I became
so?  I was wicked, perhaps, when both my parents were slain in their
pilgrimage hither?  Why, I was then no more than six years old, and what
is a child of that age?  But still I very well remember that there were
many camels grazing near our house, and horses too that belonged to us,
and that on a hand that often caressed me--it was my mother's hand--a
large jewel shone.  I had a black slave too that obeyed me; when she and
I did not agree I used to hang on to her grey woolly hair and beat her.
Who knows what may have become of her?  I did not love her, but if I had
her now, how kind I would be to her.  And now for twelve years I myself
have eaten the bread of servitude, and have kept Senator Petrus's goats,
and if I ventured to show myself at a festival among the free maidens,
they would turn me out and pull the wreath out of my hair.  And am I to
be thankful?  What for, I wonder?  And pious?  What god has taken any
care of me?  Call me an evil demon--call me so!  But if Petrus and your
Paulus there say that He who is up above us and who let me grow up to
such a lot is good, they tell a lie.  God is cruel, and it is just like
Him to put it into your heart to throw stones and scare me away from your
well."

With these words she burst out into bitter sobs, and her features worked
with various and passionate distortion.

Hermas felt compassion for the weeping Miriam.  He had met her a hundred
times and she had shown herself now haughty, now discontented, now
exacting and now wrathful, but never before soft or sad.  To-day, for the
first time, she had opened her heart to him; the tears which disfigured
her countenance gave her character a value which it had never before had
