
By the order of Monseigneur Cardinal Mazarin, first minister of the
crown, I enclose the last half year's rents of the estates of la Villar
received by me from the royal intendant in charge of the said estates
three weeks since, to defray the necessary expenses that must be
incurred by you between the period of your taking possession and, of
receiving the next half yearly payment of rents.

Enclosed with this was a formal permit, giving a month's leave of
absence to visit his estates, "To Colonel Campbell, Baron de la Villar,
commanding the Poitou regiment."

"Very nice and thoughtful on the part of the cardinal," Hector said,
"and, moreover, very seasonable, for I was wondering how I should pay
the retainers at the castle and my four troopers until the rents began
to come in. By the time I had paid the usual fees to the servants here,
and the expenses of the journey to Poitou and back, I should have been
almost penniless, and should have been obliged to borrow from someone
on the strength of my coming rents, which would have been a very bad
beginning."

After bidding farewell to Conde, and thanking him for his hospitality,
Hector started immediately the midday meal was concluded. His cavalcade
made a good show as he rode through the streets of Paris, with the four
orderlies behind him, splendidly mounted, followed by Paolo leading
another fine horse carrying baggage. The journey was an uneventful one,
and on arriving at the castle of Villar, Hector was received by the
royal intendant. It was still a place of considerable strength, standing
on the crest of a hill. It had been kept in a good state of repair by
the intendant, and could offer a stout resistance to anything short of
an army provided with a powerful battering train. On making a tour of
the estate Hector found that here, as throughout France, an immense
amount of distress existed, owing to the crushing taxation rendered
necessary by the war; he made minute inquiries of the intendant of the
circumstances of the various tenants of the estate.

The officer was about to return to Paris now that his commission was
ended, but as he had a son who had acted as his assistant, Hector
appointed him in his stead, charging him to press no one unduly. He
placed under his care the domestic arrangements of the castle, retaining
the servants who had been there under the royal officer. There was
only a permanent garrison of twelve men, but this could be raised to a
hundred were the tenants of the estates driven to take refuge within the
walls. The expenses of keeping up the castle were not large. The rivers
afforded an abundance of fish, and the forests on the mountainsides
sheltered an ample supply of game. Considerable numbers of half wild
sheep and two or three herds of cattle grazed on the domain round the
castle, and there were eight good horses in the stables, besides a score
of others on the hills. Most of the holdings had vineyards, and were
bound to furnish a certain amount of wine to the castle, and as the
consumption had been small since the estate was confiscated, the cellars
were full. Hector told the steward that the command of the castle itself
would be taken by an officer whom he would send down from Paris, who
would have control in all matters save in the management of the estate.

Before leaving, he called all the tenants together and told them that,
seeing how heavily the royal taxes pressed upon them, he should remit
half their annual payments until better times came, and also the fine of
a year's rent which they would in the ordinary course of things pay
on the appointment of a new lord. The news filled the poor people with
delight.

"I shall, however," he went on, "expect that you will render fully and
willingly the military service you are bound to give according to the
tenure of your holdings. In a short time my castellan will arrive here;
he will have instructions from me to make the service as little onerous
as possible, and that you shall each furnish your quota of men at times
when it may be most convenient for you. I shall, however, expect fifteen
men added to the strength of the garrison. These can be changed every
eight weeks. All the men capable of bearing arms will come up for
training one or two days in each month. I trust that you will never be
called upon to defend the castle, but I would have it always kept in
such a state that were troubles to arise you could all, with your wives
and families, find refuge here and be able to defend yourselves against
all attacks.

"Next winter I shall have the fortifications strengthened. I know that
you are bound to furnish horses and carts for so many days in the year.
I shall want this work performed, but you will be paid both for your own
work in building, and for your carts and horses; and as it will be done
at a time when there is little farm work on hand, this will be a benefit
to you, and the wages will be deducted from the payments that you have
to make."

Loud cheers rose from the men, who were overjoyed on learning that their
new lord was inclined to deal so generously with them, and especially
that the fine, which many of them would have found it impossible to pay,
was to be altogether remitted. Having completed all his arrangements
Hector returned to Paris, mounting his men on four of the horses he
found in the stables, and leaving at the castle two of those which
Enghien had given him, and the two Paolo had caught on the field of
battle. He arrived on the evening of the day before his leave expired,
put up at the auberge of the Pome d'Or, and early the next morning took
his way to The Scottish Soldier.



CHAPTER XII: THE POITOU REGIMENT


"Well, MacIntosh," Hector said as he entered the cabaret, "have you
made up your mind? The castle is a strong one, and I mean to make it
stronger. The air is good and so is the wine, and I am sure that you
will find the duties pleasant.

"If you go I think it would be as well that you should take a couple of
your old comrades--you said there were many of them in Paris--with you,
to act as your sergeants, drill the tenants, and see that all goes on in
order. It will be pleasant for you to have two of your old friends with
whom you can talk over past times."

"I had decided to accept your offer, Hector; but certainly this would
have decided me had I not already made up my mind. That was the one
drawback, that I should be among strangers, but with two of my old
friends I should not feel lonely. There is Sholto Macfarlane, he was in
my troop. He lost a hand from his musket bursting three years ago, and
now makes his living by helping the boatmen unload at the quays. Then
there is Kenneth Munroe. He was invalided after a bad attack of fever in
Flanders, and now teaches the broadsword exercise at a fencing master's
place at St. Denis. They would both jump at the offer if they only got
free lodgings and keep."

"Then that is settled, MacIntosh. I am heartily glad of it. Now the
sooner you get down there the better."

"Well, I can go at once. Sergeant Morrison is taking his discharge at
the end of the week. He is a married man with a helpful little wife. I
was telling him of the offer that you had made me, and he asked me what
I would take for the cabaret. It is a good business, and having a wife
he could manage it better than I can. I said that if he had a fancy for
it I would rather that he took it than another; and he would do better
than a Frenchman would, for the lads would not care for the place unless
it was kept by one of the regiment. He asked me what were the profits. I
told him.

"'Then I am afraid that you would want a bigger sum than I could pay,
MacIntosh,' he said. 'I have been a saving man, especially since I first
thought of marrying, and I have laid by half my pay for the last eight
years; but that would not go far towards the purchase of the place, for
your profits in a year are as much as my savings of eight years.' So I
said to him, 'Well, we will get the place valued. You will want half the
money that you have saved to stock it well, the other half you shall pay
me down; and I will give you five years to pay the rest, you paying me a
tenth part every half year.'

"Well, sir, we struck a bargain on that. The place has been valued, and
on Saturday evening Morrison will come straight in and take it over. He
is a popular man in the regiment; and as he is only just leaving it he
is known to them all, while there are not above a quarter of the men who
knew me as a comrade in the old days."

They then had a long talk over the sergeant's new duties, and Hector
gave him a plan of the new fortifications that he had drawn out,
together with full instructions how they were to be carried out.

"The steward will arrange all about the tenants coming to work, and the
proportion of labour that each will have to give. As I have told you, he
will manage all details of that kind, look after the indoor retainers,
and see to the food. You will have entire control of the garrison,
of the tenants who will come to drill, and of the works on the
fortifications. You will find the steward a very pleasant and agreeable
young man. He will take his meals with you. I have chosen a room for
you, and you can have another near it for your two sergeants. You can
pay them at the same rate as sergeants of the regiment receive, and
I need hardly say that the position will be a good deal better. As
commander of the garrison and castellan of the castle you will be called
Captain MacIntosh, and as such you will be named in my letter appointing
you to the post, and I propose that you shall receive the pay of
captain."

"The pay is immaterial, lad, I have been nigh twelve years here, and
have laid by enough to keep me comfortably all my life, and as, so far
as I can see, there will be nothing to spend down there, I don't know
what I should do with pay."

"That is nonsense, MacIntosh. You must draw the pay, and spend it as
you like, or save it. You must remember that I may be killed in the next
battle I go into, and as I have no heirs the king will give the fief
to someone else. The newcomer might like myself have some friend who he
might appoint castellan."

"It would make no difference," the other said. "In addition to what I
have saved I shall have the price of the cabaret."

"That is not to the point, MacIntosh. The steward has instructions to
hand you your money monthly, while the garrison will be paid weekly. If
you choose to throw the money into the fosse, that is your own business,
mine is to see that my castellan is paid. I am going over at noon
today to St. Denis, where my regiment is quartered, but will ride in on
Saturday. You must buy three horses for yourself and your sergeants; get
good serviceable animals.. I have told the steward to repay you their
cost when you arrive there; he has monies of mine in hand for all
purposes."

Hector then went round and had a chat with Colonel Maclvor, and returned
to the auberge, where the troopers and Paolo had the horses already
saddled. He mounted and rode with them to St. Denis, putting up at an
hotel. He found where the regiment of Poitou were stationed and at once
proceeded there on foot. Two or three officers were chatting together in
the barrack square, while some sergeants were drilling the companies.

He at once went up to them. "Gentlemen," he said, "I must introduce
myself to you. I am Colonel Campbell; I have the honour to command the
regiment. I shall be glad if you will order the officer's call to be
sounded and send orderlies off at once to the lodgings of the officers
and ask them to assemble. To whom have I the pleasure of speaking?"

The senior officer introduced himself and the others. Report had told
them that their new colonel was still a young man, and that he had
served with distinction under both Turenne and Enghien, but they were
not prepared for so young a commander as this. The French regiments had,
as a rule, two colonels, the one a veteran soldier, who had won his
way to the rank by long service and long fighting, the other a young
nobleman who had gained the post solely by family influence, but
possessed no knowledge whatever of military matters, and who was never
with the regiment except when it went upon a campaign, and even then
generally preferred the pleasures of Paris to the hardships of war. Had
Hector been appointed to what was called the second no surprise would
have been felt at his youth, but that anyone should have gained the
position of first colonel at his age by sheer merit was astonishing
indeed to them. In twenty minutes the officers were all assembled and
introduced by the senior captain to Hector.

"We will not begin business now," the latter said. "My leave of absence
does not terminate until tomorrow morning, and I think that it is much
more pleasant to talk over matters comfortably round a table than it is
to do so in a set manner. Therefore, gentlemen, if you will all sup with
me this evening at the Fleur de Lis, after we have finished our meal
we will talk over our wine. My opinion is that officers of a regiment
should be good comrades. The regiment benefits by it, and everything
goes on more smoothly and comfortably. This is specially so in a
newly raised regiment, where the officers either are altogether new to
military matters, or join from other regiments, and have no previous
knowledge of each other. In the same way the men are all new to each
other, and to their officers. Unless there is perfect harmony among the
officers, there cannot be perfect harmony in the regiment.

"If one officer looks after the comfort of his company, and treats them
as he should do, while another company is neglected and left solely
to the care of the sergeants, there will necessarily be envy and ill
feeling. The regiment will cease to be a unit. I may say, gentlemen,
that this is the dictum not of myself, but of Marshal Turenne, who was
my instructor in the art of war, and who followed out the better system
from the time that he was a boy of fourteen until now. The result is
that his regiment is the finest in the service. It will be my aim and
ambition to raise the Poitou regiment as nearly as possible to the same
condition, and I shall rely upon your assistance and cooperation to
bring this about.

"Supper will be served at six. I have only just returned from the
country, and have heard no news. I suppose that no intimation has been
received as to what is our destination and whither we shall march?"

"None whatever, colonel," de Thiou, the senior captain, said.

"All the better. I hope that they will give us a couple of months to get
into shape. There is but little time for drill and discipline when we
are once in the field."

So saying he saluted the officers and returned to the hotel.

"Who would have thought of seeing a mere lad placed at the head of the
regiment as colonel," one of the captains said. "I cannot imagine how
such a thing can have come about, for certainly he can have no family
influence. A newly raised regiment like ours wants a bright man, one
that all can look up to and respect."

"I fancy that you will find that this young gentleman will be
respected," de Thiou said. "He is young and pleasant looking, and
whatever he is I should say that he is levelheaded, and that he has
an infinite fund of firmness and resolution. I should certainly advise
nobody to take advantage of his youth. I have seen more service than
any of you, and had my family possessed any influence at court, I should
have been a colonel by this time. Unless I am greatly mistaken we shall
find that we have a man, a good man, and a strong one. Do you think
that he could have won his way to a regiment at the age of twenty unless
there had been something quite unusual? I was talking the other day with
one of Gassion's staff, who has come back until the wound that he got
at Rocroi is healed. He told me that Gassion--and France has no better
soldier--said publicly after the battle that the victory was largely due
to this young friend of ours, and that had it not been for him things
might have gone altogether differently; and he said that Enghien, proud
and ambitious as he is, frankly admitted the same thing. Of course I
can only go upon what I have seen of him, but from what he said, and
the manner in which he said it, I am convinced that we could not get a
better chief than this young colonel. I believe that he will make it a
comfortable regiment to be in, but I also believe that those who oppose
him will find that they make a grievous mistake."

The next day Hector took up in earnest the work of organizing the
regiment. In the first place he insisted that the officers should learn
their drill; then, that instead of handing over the practical command of
their companies to their sergeants, they should themselves command them
on the drill ground, look after the discipline and comfort of the men in
barracks, and become personally acquainted with the character of every
man under their command. Many of the sergeants were inefficient; these
were speedily deprived of their rank, and men of good conduct and
zeal appointed to their places. The regard of the men was won by his
insisting that the contractors for their food should send in meat and
bread and wine of the quality that they had guaranteed to supply.

Three officers were told off every day to examine the quality of all
food sent in; any reported as being bad was examined by Hector, and if
the complaint was well founded, was at once condemned. Great attention
was paid to the cooking, to the cleanliness of the barrack rooms, and
to many other details that had until then been entirely neglected. There
were at first some grumblers, not only among the men, but among the
officers as well; but the extraordinary and rapid improvement in the
efficiency of the regiment, its appearance and condition, was such that
these were not long in recognizing that although the work was hard, no
unnecessary labour was imposed upon them, while, as their knowledge of
drill increased the work became easier and less irksome. All recognized
that by far the hardest worker in the regiment was the colonel himself.
Every morning for the first month he himself drilled the officers in a
courtyard that was not overlooked, and when they all knew their work,
sent them to take charge of their companies. Until he considered the
officers competent, he drilled the companies by turn, and when drill was
over, made a tour of every room in the barracks, visited the kitchen,
and conversed freely with the men, listening to any complaints.

At first the number of men brought up for drunkenness was large. The
first offence he always condoned, giving the offender a lecture on
the folly of his conduct and of the discredit that it brought upon the
regiment. For the second offence a man was confined to barracks, and
forced to wear his coat inside out even at drill. The ridicule that the
men had to suffer was worse than any punishment inflicted upon them, and
no case occurred of a third offence. By turns the three officers of each
company dined with him, and, chatting with them as a friend, he not only
gained their liking but made himself acquainted with their individual
characters. Turenne came to Paris a short time after Hector assumed the
command of his regiment, and as soon as he heard of his arrival, the
latter called upon him.

"I heard from the cardinal of your good fortune," the viscount said,
"and congratulate you heartily upon it. Mazarin was good enough to
say that the discovery of the Spaniards' ambush was the result of my
teaching, and indeed I feel somewhat proud of my pupil. I am going to
the Rhine, as perhaps you may have heard."

"I hope to have the honour of serving under you with my regiment, sir."

"I shall be glad to have you, but I fear there is little chance of it.
I am to take the command of the Weimar troops. The death of the duke
has been a heavy blow to us, and it is thought that unless I go down
there--I say it because I have served there and am known by the Weimar
troops--that force will break up altogether. From what I hear, I hardly
think there is much chance of having any French regiments with me, and
those now being raised are likely to be sent to fight under Enghien in
Flanders. My position is, as you know, a painful one, owing to Bouillon
having gone to Italy to take the command of the Pope's troops. I believe
that is the reason why Mazarin has withdrawn me from the command of our
army in Savoy. However, as a soldier I accept the work he has given me,
not allowing family matters to interfere in any way with it, though it
is my opinion that Bouillon has been very hardly treated by the breaking
of the engagements that were given him when he surrendered Sedan to
France."

A week later Hector presented himself at the levee of Cardinal Mazarin.

"I was expecting to see you, baron. I received your note saying that you
had taken the command of your regiment, and would do yourself the honour
of presenting yourself as soon as you had put matters in trim. Are you
satisfied with your men and your officers?"

"With both, your eminence, and trust that in two or three months' time
you will do us the honour of inspecting us."

"And how did you find your barony?"

"I was delighted with it. The castle is a strong one, and I am taking
steps to add to its strength; and I believe when it is finished that it
will be almost impregnable save by an army, and that well commanded."

"Then you think," the cardinal said with a smile, but with a certain air
of seriousness, "that you could offer me a safe asylum if I needed one."

"I trust that such an event may never occur, your eminence, but if it
should, my castle is at your disposal, and I will guarantee that it will
resist for three months, whoever might attack it."

"One can never say," the cardinal said mournfully. "Oh, these nobles!
They are, as they have ever been, the curse of France. Each man thinks
only of himself and of increasing his domains. What France may suffer
matters nothing to them so that they are enriched. Were one of them
capable of ruling France I would gladly retire; but who is there?
Orleans, vain, empty headed, treacherous to his friends, a man whose
word is not to be relied upon. Conde, who thinks only of enriching
himself and adding to his possessions. Beaufort, a roistering trooper.
None of these men could maintain his position for a moment. The whole
country seethes with discontent at the heavy taxation necessitated by
the war; Paris, as is always the case when there is trouble in the
air, is restless and turbulent. I have good friends, but they are
insufficient to sustain me against the intrigues of my enemies. The
queen alone upholds me. Truly, the burden is too great for one man to
bear.

"You will wonder why I am speaking thus to you, Colonel Campbell, but it
is of the greatest necessity that her majesty should know upon whom
she can rely absolutely in case of trouble. You, sir, being altogether
unconnected with any of the great families of France, stand in a
different position from that of the great majority of officers of your
rank. Look where I will, I see our regiments officered by men connected
by birth and family with one or other of the men who are at present
intriguing against us, and were they ordered to take steps to arrest,
for example, one of those persons connected with them, they might,
without openly refusing, give such warning to them that they would be
able to escape. Now, sir, I ask you to tell me frankly whether, under
all contingencies, the queen can rely upon your services? I give you my
word that whatever your reply is, it shall in no way count against you.
There are cases in which it would doubtless be painful to you to carry
out such an order. You are a protege of Monsieur de Turenne. Monsieur de
Turenne is brother of the Duc de Bouillon, and, as I know, you yourself
were staying for some months in the castle of Sedan, where you went to
be cured of your wounds. Now, monsieur, frankly, were you ordered to
arrest the Duc de Bouillon, would you carry it out without fear or
favour?"

"Certainly I would, your excellency; and should you give such an order
to Marshal Turenne he would do so himself. He is a soldier of the
queen before all things, and has taught me that my duty is towards
the sovereign who represents France, regardless of all other
considerations."

The cardinal while speaking had watched the young soldier's face
scrutinizingly. Faithful as Turenne had always been to the crown, even
when his brother was in arms against it, Mazarin had still in his heart
some doubts as to his fidelity under all circumstances. He could not but
be conscious that faith had been absolutely broken with Bouillon, and,
accustomed to tortuous ways, he could scarce imagine that Turenne would
hold himself altogether above family interest. He saw by the manner
more than the words of Hector that he was speaking from a profound
conviction. In asking him the question, he had been thinking more of
Turenne's loyalty than of the young colonel's. Having been four years in
the closest connection with the marshal, he could not but know his real
sentiments, and he felt sure that had Turenne expressed any anger at the
treatment his brother had received, he would have seen it in the young
man's face. The answer was a reassuring one.
