"We shall soon earn it again.  Never a sesterce was won by fretting.
Enjoy to-day's gifts and the gods will provide for to-morrow."

"Indeed?" asked Karnis in an altered key.  "To be sure when a roast fowl
flies into one's mouth instead of a pigeon ...  But you are right as
usual, Herse, as usual, only--here am I battening like a senator while
you--I lay a wager you have drunk nothing but milk all day and eaten
nothing but bread and radishes.  I thought so?  Then the chicken must
pretend to be a pheasant and you, wife, will eat this leg.  The girls are
gone to bed?  Why here is some wine too!  Fill up your cup, boy.  A
libation to the God!  Glory to Dionysus !"  The two men poured the
libation on the floor and drank; then the father thrust his knife into
the breast of the bird and began his meal with a will, while Orpheus, the
son, went on with his story:

"Well, the temple of Dionysus was not to be found, for Bishop Theophilus
has had it destroyed; so to what divinity could we offer our wreath and
cake?  Here in Egypt there is none but the great Mother Isis.  Her
sanctuary is on the shore of Lake Mareotis and mother found it at once.
There she fell into conversation with a priestess who, as soon as she
learnt that my mother belonged to a family of musicians--though Dame
Herse was cautious in announcing this fact--and hoped to find employment
in Alexandria, led her away to a young lady who was closely veiled.  This
lady," Orpheus went on--he not only played the flute but took the higher
parts for a man's voice and could also strike the lyre--"desired us to go
to her later at her own house, where she would speak with us.  She drove
off in a fine carriage and we, of course followed her orders; Agne was
with us too.  A splendid house!  I never saw anything handsomer in Rome
or Antioch.  We were kindly received, and with the lady there were
another very old lady and a tall grave man, a priest I should fancy or a
philosopher, or something of that kind."

"Not some Christian trap?"  asked Karnis suspiciously.  "You do not know
this place, and since the edict. . ."

"Never fear, father!  There were images of the gods in the halls and
corridors, and in the room where we were received by Gorgo, the beautiful
daughter of Porphyrius, there was an altar before an image of Isis, quite
freshly anointed.--This Porphyrius is a very rich merchant; we learnt
that afterwards, and many other things.  The philosopher asked us at once
whether we were aware that Theodosius had lately promulgated a new edict
forbidding young maidens to appear in public as singers or flute-
players."

"And did Agne hear that?"  said the old man in a low voice as he pointed
to the curtain.

"No, she and Dada were in the garden on to which the room opened, and
mother explained at once that though Agne was a Christian she was a very
good girl, and that so long as she remained in our service she was bound
to sing with us whenever she was required.  The philosopher exclaimed at
once: 'The very thing!' and they whispered together, and called the girls
and desired them to show what they could do."

"And how did they perform?"  asked the old man, who was growing excited.

"Dada warbled like a lark, and Agne--well you know how it always is.  Her
voice sounded lovely but it was just as usual.  You can guess how much
there is in her and how deep her feeling is but she never quite brings
it out.  What has she to complain of with us?  And yet whatever she sings
has that mournful, painful ring which even you can do nothing to alter.
However, she pleased them better than Dada did, for I noticed that Gorgo
and the gentleman glanced at each other and at her, and whispered a word
now and then which certainly referred to Ague.  When they had sung two
songs the young lady came towards us and praised both the girls, and
asked whether we would undertake to learn something quite new.  I told
her that my father was a great musician who could master the most
difficult things at the first hearing."

"The most difficult!  Hm...  that depends," said the old man.  "Did she
show it you?"

"No; it is something in the style of Linus and she sang it to us."

"The daughter of the rich Porphyrius sang for your entertainment?
Yours?"  said Karnis laughing.  "By Sirius!  The world is turning upside
down.  Now that girls are forbidden to perform to the gentlefolks, art is
being cultivated by the upper classes; it cannot be killed outright.  For
the future the listeners will be paid to keep quiet and the singers pay
for the right of torturing their ears--our ears, our luckless ears will
be victimized."

Orpheus smiled and shook his head; then, again dropping his knife, he
went on eagerly:

"But if you could only hear her!  You would give your last copper piece
to hear her again."

"Indeed!"  muttered his father.  "Well, there are very good teachers
here.  Something by Linus did you say she sang?"

"Something of that kind; a lament for the dead of very great power:
'Return, oh! return my beloved, came back--come home!' that was the
burthen of it.  And there was a passage which said: 'Oh that each tear
had a voice and could join with me in calling thee!"  And how she sang
it, father!  I do not think I ever in my life heard anything like it.
Ask mother.  Even Dada's eyes were full of tears."

"Yes, it was beautiful," the mother agreed.  "I could not help wishing
that you were there."

Karnis rose and paced the little room, waving his arms and muttering:

"Ah! so that is how it is!  A friend of the Muses.  We saved the large
lute--that is well.  My chlamys has an ugly hole in it--if the girls were
not asleep...  but the first thing to-morrow Ague...  Tell me, is she
handsome, tall?"

Herse had been watching her excitable husband with much satisfaction and
now answered his question: "Not a Hera--not a Muse--decidedly not.
Hardly above the middle height, slightly made, but not small, black eyes,
long lashes, dark straight eyebrows.  I could hardly, like Orpheus, call
her beautiful. . ."

"Oh yes, mother.--Beautiful is a great word, and one my father has taught
me to use but rarely; but she--if she is not beautiful who is?--when she
raised her large dark eyes and threw back her head to bring out her
lament; tone after tone seemed to come from the bottom of her heart and
rise to the furthest height of heaven.  Ah, if Agne could learn to sing
like that!  'Throw your whole soul into your singing.'--You have told her
that again and again.  Now, Gorgo can and does.  And she stood there as
steady and as highly strung as a bow, every note came out with the ring
of an arrow and went straight to the heart, as clear and pure as
possible."

"Be silent!" cried the old man covering his ears with his hands.
"I shall not close an eye till daylight, and then...  Orpheus, take that
silver--take it all, I have no more--go early to market and buy flowers--
laurel branches, ivy, violets and roses.  But no lotuses though the
market here is full of them; they are showy, boastful things with no
scent, I cannot bear them.  We will go crowned to the Temple of the
Muses."

"Buy away, buy all you want!"  said Herse laughing, as she showed her
husband some bright gold pieces.  "We got that to-day, and if all is
well. . ."  Here she paused, pointed to the curtain, and went on again in
a lower tone: "It all depends of course, on Agne's playing us no trick."

"How so?  Why?  She is a good girl and I will. . ."

"No, no," said Herse holding him back.  "She does not know yet what the
business is.  The lady wants her. . ."

"Well?"

"To sing in the Temple of Isis."

Karnis colored.  He was suddenly called from a lovely dream back to the
squalid reality.  "In the Temple of Isis," he said gloomily.  "Agne?  In
the face of all the people?  And she knows nothing about it?"

"Nothing, father."

"No?  Well then, if that is the case . . .  Agne, the Christian, in the
Temple of Isis--here, here, where Bishop Theophilus is destroying all our
sanctuaries and the monks outdo their master.  Ah, children, children,
how pretty and round and bright a soap-bubble is, and how soon it bursts.
Do you know at all what it is that you are planning?  If the black flies
smell it out and it becomes known, by the great Apollo! we should have
fared better at the hands of the pirates.  And yet, and yet.--Do you know
at all how the girl...?"

"She wept at the lady's singing," interrupted Herse eagerly, "and, silent
as she generally is, on her way home she said: 'To sing like that!  She
is a happy girl!'"

Karnis looked up with renewed confidence.

"Ah!"  he exclaimed, "that is my Agne.  Yes, yes, she truly loves her
divine art.  She can sing, she will sing!  We will venture it, if you, I,
all of us die for it!

"Herse, Orpheus, what have we to lose?  Our gods, too, shall have their
martyrs.  It is a poor life that has no excitement.  Our art--why,
all I have ever had has been devoted to it.  I make no boast of having
sacrificed everything, and if gold and lands were again to be mine I
would become a beggar once more for the sake of art:  We have always held
the divine Muse sacred, but who can keep up a brave heart when he sees
her persecuted!  She may only be worshipped in darkness in these days,
and the Queen of Gods and men shuns the light like a moth, a bat, an owl.
If we must die let it be with and for Her!  Once more let pure and
perfect song rejoice this old heart, and if afterwards . . .  My
children, we have no place in this dim, colorless world.  While the Arts
lived there was Spring on the earth.  Now they are condemned to death and
it is Winter.  The leaves fall from all the trees, and we piping birds
need groves to sing in.  How often already has Death laid his hand on our
shoulder, every breath we draw is a boon of mercy--the extra length
given in by the weaver, the hour of grace granted by the hangman to his
victim!  Our lives are no longer our own, a borrowed purse with damaged
copper coins.  The hard-hearted creditor has already bent his knuckles,
and when he knocks the time is up.  Once more let us have one hour of
pure and perfect enjoyment, and then we will pay up capital and interest
when we must."

"It cannot and will not be yet," said Herse resolutely, but she wiped her
eyes with her band.  "If Agne sings even, so long as she does it without
