"I do not know," said Mary sadly.  "They were not chasing any one in
particular.  The dogs kept their noses to the ground, and we ran after
them."

"And only to catch a man, who certainly had nothing whatever to do with
the theft.--Reflect a little, Mary.  The shoes gave the dogs the scent
and they were set on to seize the man who had worn them, but whom no
judge had examined.  The shoes were found in the hall; perhaps he had
dropped them by accident, or some one else may have carried them there.
Now think of yourself in the place of an innocent man, a Christian like
ourselves, hunted with a pack of dogs like a wild beast.  Is it not
frightful?  No good heart should laugh at such a thing!"

Paula spoke with such impressive gravity and deep sorrow, and her whole
manner betrayed such great and genuine distress that the child looked tip
at her anxiously, with tearful eyes, threw herself against her, and
hiding her face in Paula's dress exclaimed: "I did not know that they
were hunting a poor man, and if it makes you so sad, I wish I had not
been there!  But is it really and truly so bad?  You are so often unhappy
when we others laugh!"  She gazed into Paula's face with wide, wondering
eyes through her tears, and Paula clasped her to her, kissed her fondly,
and replied with melancholy sweetness:

"I would gladly be as gay as you, but I have gone through so much to
sadden me.  Laugh and be merry to your heart's content; I am glad you
should.  But with regard to the poor hunted man, I fear he is my
father's freedman, the most faithful, honest soul!  Did your exciting
hunt drive any one out of the goldsmith's shop?"

Mary shook her head; then she asked:

"Is it Hiram, the stammerer, the trainer, that they are hunting?"

"I fear it is."

"Yes, yes," said the child.  "Stay--oh, dear!  it will grieve you again,
but I think--I think they said--the shoes belonged--but I did not attend.
However, they were talking of a groom--a freedman--a stammerer.  .  .  ."

"Then they certainly are hunting down an innocent man," cried Paula with
a deep sigh; and she sat down again in front of her toilet-table to
finish dressing.  Her hands still moved mechanically, but she was lost in
thought; she answered the child vaguely, and let her rummage in her open
trunk till Mary pulled out the necklace that had been bereft of its gem,
and hung it round her neck.  Just then there was a knock at the
door and Katharina, the widow Susannah's little daughter, came into the
room.  The young girl, to whom the governor's wife wished to marry her
tall son scarcely reached to Paula's shoulder, but she was plump and
pleasant to look upon; as neat as if she had just been taken out of a
box, with a fresh, merry lovable little face.  When she laughed she
showed a gleaming row of small teeth, set rather wide apart, but as white
as snow; and her bright eyes beamed on the world as gladly as though they
had nothing that was not pleasing to look for, innocent mischief to dream
of.  She too, tried to win Paula's favor; but with none of Mary's devoted
and unvarying enthusiasm.  Often, to be sure, she would devote herself to
Paula with such stormy vehemence that the elder girl was forced to be
repellent; then, on the other hand, if she fancied her self slighted, or
treated more coolly than Mary, she would turn her back on Paula with
sulky jealousy, temper and pouting.  It always was in Paula's power to
put an end to the "Water-wagtails tantrums"--which generally had their
comic side--by a kind word or kiss; but without some such advances
Katharina was quite capable of indulging her humors to the utmost.

On the present occasion she flew into Paula's arm, and when her friend
begged, more quietly than usual that she would allow her first to finish
dressing, she turned away without any display of touchiness and took
the necklace from Mary's hand to put it on herself.  It was of fine
workmanship, set with pearls, and took her fancy greatly; only the empty
medallion from which Hiram had removed the emerald with his knife spoiled
the whole effect.  Still, it was a princely jewel, and when she had also
taken from the chest a large fan of ostrich feathers she showed off to
her play-fellow, with droll, stiff dignity, how the empress and
princesses at Court curtsied and bowed graciously to their inferiors.
At this they both laughed a great deal.  When Paula had finished her
toilet and proceeded to take the necklace off Katharina, the empty
setting, which Hiram's knife had bent, caught in the thin tissue of her
dress.  Mary disengaged it, and Paula tossed the jewel back into the
trunk.

While she was locking the box she asked Katharina whether she had met
Orion.

"Orion!"  repeated the younger girl, in a tone which implied that she
alone had the right to enquire about him.  "Yes, we came upstairs
together; he went to see the wounded man.  Have you anything to say to
him?"

She crimsoned as she spoke and looked suspiciously at Paula, who simply
replied: "Perhaps," and then added, as she hung the ribbon with the key
round her neck: "Now, you little girls, it is breakfast time; I am not
going down to-day."

"Oh, dear!"  cried Mary disappointed, "my grandfather is ailing and
grandmother will stay with him; so if you do not come I shall have to sit
alone with Eudoxia; for Katharina's chariot is waiting and she must go
home at once.  Oh! do come.  Just to please me; you do not know how
odious Eudoxia can be when it is so hot."

"Yes, do go down," urged Katharina.  "What will you do up hereby
yourself?  And this evening mother and I will come again."

"Very well," said Paula.  "But first I must go to see the invalids."

"May I go with you?"  asked the Water wagtail, coaxingly stroking Paula's
arm.  But Mary clapped her hands, exclaiming:

"She only wants to go to Orion--she is so fond of him.  .  .  ."

Katharina put her hand over the child's mouth, but Paula, with quickened
breath, explained that she had very serious matters to discuss with
Orion; so Katharina, turning her back on her with a hasty gesture of
defiance, sulkily went down stairs, while Mary slipped down the bannister
rail.  Not many days since, Katharina, who was but just sixteen, would
gladly have followed her example.

Paula meanwhile knocked at the first of the sickrooms and entered it as
softly as the door was opened by a nursing-sister from the convent of St.
Katharine.  Orion, whom she was seeking, had been there, but had just
left.

In this first room lay the leader of the caravan; in that beyond was the
crazy Persian.  In a sitting-room adjoining the first room, which, being
intended for guests of distinction, was furnished with royal
magnificence, sat two men in earnest conversation: the Arab merchant and
Philippus the physician, a young man of little more than thirty, tall and
bony, in a dress of clean but very coarse stuff without any kind of
adornment.  He had a shrewd, pale face, out of which a pair of bright
black eyes shone benevolently but with keen vivacity.  His large cheek-
bones were much too prominent; the lower part of his face was small, ugly
and, as it were, compressed, while his high broad forehead crowned the
whole and stamped it as that of a thinker, as a fine cupola may crown an
insignificant and homely structure.

This man, devoid of charm, though his strongly-characterized
individuality made it difficult to overlook him even in the midst of
a distinguished circle, had been conversing eagerly with the Arab, who,
in the course of their two-days' acquaintance, had inspired him with a
regard which was fully reciprocated.  At last Orion had been the theme of
their discourse, and the physician, a restless toiler who could not like
any man whose life was one of idle enjoyment, though he did full justice
to his brilliant gifts and well-applied studies, had judged him far more
hardly than the older man.  To the leech all forms of human life were
sacred, and in his eyes everything that could injure the body or soul of
a man was worthy of destruction.  He knew all that Orion had brought upon
the hapless Mandane, and how lightly he had trifled with the hearts of
other women; in his eyes this made him a mischievous and criminal member
of society.  He regarded life as an obligation to be discharged by work
alone, of whatever kind, if only it were a benefit to society as a whole.
And such youths as Orion not only did not recognize this, but used the
whole and the parts also for base and selfish ends.  The old Moslem, on
the contrary, viewed life as a dream whose fairest portion, the time of
youth, each one should enjoy with alert senses, and only take care that
at the waking which must come with death he might hope to find admission
into Paradise.  How little could man do against the iron force of fate!
That could not be forefended by hard work; there was nothing for it but
to take up a right attitude, and to confront and meet it with dignity.
The bark of Orion's existence lacked ballast; in fine weather it drifted
wherever the breeze carried it,  He himself had taken care to equip it
well; and if only the chances of life should freight it heavily--very
heavily, and fling it on the rocks, then Orion might show who and what he
was; he, Haschim, firmly believed that his character would prove itself
admirable.  It was in the hour of shipwreck that a man showed his worth.

Here the physician interrupted him to prove that it was not Fate, as
imagined by Moslems, but man himself who guided the bark of life--but at
this moment Paula looked into the room, and he broke off.  The merchant
bowed profoundly, Philippus respectfully, but with more embarrassment
than might have been expected from the general confidence of his manner.
For some years he had been a daily visitor in the governor's house, and
after carefully ignoring Paula on her first arrival, since Dame Neforis
had taken to treating her so coolly he drew her out whenever he had the
opportunity.  Her conversations with him had now become dear and even
necessary to her, though at first his dry, cutting tone had displeased
her, and he had often driven her into a corner in a way that was hard to
bear.  They kept her mind alert in a circle which never busied itself
with anything but the trivial details of family life in the decayed city,
or with dogmatic polemics--for the Mukaukas seldom or never took part in
the gossip of the women.

The leech never talked of daily events, but expressed his views as to
other and graver subjects in life, or in books with which they were both
familiar; and he had the art of eliciting replies from her which he met
with wit and acumen.  By degrees she had become accustomed to his bold
mode of thought, sometimes, it is true, too recklessly expressed; and the
gifted girl now preferred a discussion with him to any other form of
conversation, recognizing that a childlike and supremely unselfish soul
animated this thoughtful reservoir of all knowledge.  Almost everything
she did displeased her uncle's wife, and so, of course, did her familiar
intercourse with this man, whose appearance certainly had in it nothing
to attract a young girl.--The physician to a family of rank was there to
keep its members in good health, and it was unbecoming in one of them to
converse with him on intimate terms as an equal.  She reproached Paula--
whose pride she was constantly blaming--for her unseemly condescension
to Philippus; but what chiefly annoyed her was that Paula took up many
a half-hour which otherwise Philippus would have devoted to her husband;
and in him and his health her life and thoughts were centred.

The Arab at once recognized his foe of the previous evening; but they
soon came to a friendly understanding--Paula confessing her folly in
holding a single and kindly-disposed man answerable for the crimes of a
whole nation.  Haschim replied that a right-minded spirit always came to
a just conclusion at last; and then the conversation turned on her
father, and the physician explained to the Arab that she was resolved
never to weary of seeking the missing man.

"Nay, it is the sole aim and end of my life," cried the girl.

"A great mistake, in my opinion," said the leech.  But the merchant
differed: there were things, he said, too precious to be given up for
lost, even when the hope of finding them seemed as feeble and thin as a
rotten reed.

"That is what I feel!"  cried Paula.  "And how can you think differently,
Philip?  Have I not heard from your own lips that you never give up all
hope of a sick man till death has put an end to it?  Well, and I cling to
mine--more than ever now, and I feel that I am right.  My last thought,
my last coin shall be spent in the search for my father, even without my
uncle and his wife, and in spite of their prohibition."

"But in such a task a young girl can hardly do without a man's succor,"
said the merchant.  "I wander a great deal about the world, I speak with
many foreigners from distant lands, and if you will do me the honor, pray
regard me as your coadjutor, and allow me to help you in seeking for the
lost hero."

"Thanks--I fervently thank you!"  cried Paula, grasping the Moslem's hand
with hearty pleasure.  "Wherever you go bear my lost father in mind; I am
but a poor, lonely girl, but if you find him.  .  ."

"Then you will know that even among the Moslems there are men.  .  ."

"Men who are ready to show compassion and to succor friendless women!"
interrupted Paula.

"And with good success, by the blessing of the Almighty," replied the
Arab.  "As soon as I find a clue you shall hear from me; now, however,
I must go across the Nile to see Amru the great general; I go in all
confidence for I know that my poor, brave Rustem is in good hands, friend
Philippus.  My first enquiries shall be made in Fostat, rely upon that,
my daughter."

"I do indeed," said Paula with pleased emotion.  "When shall we meet
again?"

"To-morrow, or the morning after at latest."

The young girl went up to him and whispered: "We have just heard of a
clue; indeed, I hope my messenger is already on his way.  Have you time
to hear about it now?"

"I ought long since to have been on the other shore; so not to-day, but
to-morrow I hope."  The Arab shook hands with her and the physician, and
hastily took his leave.

Paula stood still, thinking.  Then it struck her that Hiram was now on
the further side of the Nile, within the jurisdiction of the Arab ruler,
