for such a beast if it really answered his requirements; that is to say
if it were strong, surefooted, gentle, and light-colored.  His father and
grandfather, priests of Isis, had always ridden white asses, and so he
would do the same.

During the last few sultry weeks he had rarely gone out of doors, and
to-day he waited till the hour before sunset before starting to keep his
promise.

Robed in snowy-white linen, with new sandals on his feet, freshly shaven,
and protected from the sun's rays by a crisply curled, flowing wig, after
the manner of his fathers, as well as by an umbrella, he mounted his
beautiful white ass in the conviction that he had done his best for his
outer man, and set forth, followed by his black slave trotting on foot.

It was not yet dark when he stopped at the house of Rufinus.  His heart
had not beat so high for many a day.

"I feel as if I had come courting," said he, laughing at himself.  "Well,
and I really am come to propose an alliance for the rest of my life!
Still, curiosity, one would think, might be shed with the hair and the
teeth!"  However, it still clung to him, and he could not deny to himself
that he was very curious as to the person whom he hated, though he had
never seen her, simply because she was the daughter of a patrician and a
prefect, and had made his Philippus miserable.  As he was dismounting, a
graceful young girl and an older woman, in very costly though simple
dresses, came through the garden.  These must be the waterwagtail, and
Orion's Byzantine guest.--How annoying!  So many women at once!

Their presence here could only embarrass and disturb him--a lonely
student unused to the society of women.  However, there was no help for
it; and the new-comers were not so bad after all.

Katharina was a very attractive, pretty little mouse, and even without
her millions much too good for the libertine Orion.  The matron, who had
a kind, pleasant face, was exactly what Philippus had described her.  But
then--and this spoilt all--in their presence he must not allude to the
death of Rufinus, so that he could not mention his proposed arrangement.
He had swallowed all that dust, and borne that heat for nothing, and
to-morrow he must ignominiously go through it all again!

The first people he met were a handsome young couple: Rustem and Mandane.
There could be no doubt as to their identity; so he went up to them and
gave Rustem the merchant's message, offering in Philip's name to advance
the money for the journey.  But the Masdakite patted his sleeve, in which
he carried a good round sum in gold pieces, and exclaimed cheerily:

"It is all here, and enough for two travellers to the East.--My little
wife, by your leave; the time has come, little pigeon!  Off we go,
homeward bound!"

The huge fellow shouted it out in his deep voice with such effervescent
contentment, and the pretty girl, as she looked up at him, was so glad,
so much in love, and so grateful, that it quite cheered the old man; and
he, who read an omen in every incident, accepted this meeting as of good
augury at his first entering the house which was probably to be his home.

His visit went on as well as it had begun, for he was welcomed very
warmly both by the widow and daughter of Rufinus.  Pulcheria at once
pushed forward her father's arm-chair and placed a pillow behind his
back, and she did it so quietly, so simply, and so amiably that it warmed
his old heart, and he said to himself that it would be almost too much of
a good thing to have such care given him every day and every hour.

He could not forbear from a kindly jest with the young girl over her
attentions, and Martina at once entered into the joke.  She had seen him
coming on his fine ass; she praised the steed, and then refused to
believe that the rider was past eighty.  His news of Philip's departure
was regretted by all, and he was delighted to perceive that Pulcheria
seemed startled and presently shrank into the background.  What a sweet,
pure, kind face the child had--and pretty withal; she must and should be
his little daughter; and all the while he was talking, or listening to
Katharina's small jokes and a friendly catechism from Martina and Dame
Joanna, in his mind's eye he saw Philippus and that dear little creature
as man and wife, surrounded by pretty children playing all about him.

He had come to comfort and to condole, and lo!  he was having as pleasant
an hour as he had known in a long time.

He and the other visitors had been received in the vindarium, which was
now brightly lighted up, and now and then he glanced at the doors which
opened on this, the centre of the house, trying to imagine what the
different rooms should by-and-bye be used for.

But he heard a light step behind him; Martina rose, the water-wagtail
hurried to meet the new-comer, and there appeared on the scene the tall
figure of a girl dressed in mourning-robes.  She greeted the matron with
distinguished dignity, cast a cordial glance of sympathetic intelligence
to Joanna and Pulcheria, and when the mistress of the house told her who
the old man was, she went up to him and held out her hand--a cool,
slender hand, as white as marble; the true patrician hand.

Yes, she was beautiful, wonderfully beautiful!  He could hardly remember
ever to have seen her equal.  A spotless masterpiece of the Creator's
hand, made like some unapproachable goddess, to command the worship of
subject adorers; however, she must renounce all hope of his, for those
marble features, all the whiter by contrast with her black dress, had no
attraction for him.  No warming glow shone in those proud eyes; and under
that lordly bosom beat no loving or lovable heart; he shivered at the
touch of her fingers, and her presence, he thought, had a chilling and
paralyzing influence on all the party.

This was, in fact, the case.

Paula had been sent for to see the senator's wife and Katharina.
Martina, thought she, had come out of mere curiosity, and she had a
preconceived dislike to any one connected with Heliodora.  She had lost
her confidence in the water-wagtail, for only two days ago the acolyte in
personal attendance on the bishop--and whose child Rufinus had cured
of a lame foot--had been to the house to warn Joanna against the girl.
Katharina, he told her, had a short while since betrayed to Plotinus some
important secret relating to her husband, and the bishop had immediately
gone over to Fostat.  It was hard to believe such a thing of any friend,
still, the girl who, by her own confession, had been so ready to play the
part of spy in the neighboring garden, was the only person who would have
told the prelate what plan was in hand for the rescue of the sisters.
The acolyte's positive statement, indeed, left no room for doubt.

It was not in Paula's nature to think ill of others; but in this case her
candid spirit, incapable of falsehood, would not suffer her to be
anything but cool to the child; the more effusively Katharina clung to
her, the more icily Paula repelled her.

The old man saw this, and he concluded that this mien and demeanor were
natural to Paula at all times patrician haughtiness, cold-hearted
selfishness, the insolent and boundless pride of the race he loathed--
noble by birth alone--stood before him incarnate.  He hated the whole
class, and he hated this specimen of the class; and his aversion
increased tenfold as he remembered what woe this cold siren had wrought
for the son of his affections and might bring on him if she should thwart
his favorite project.  Sooner would he end his days in loneliness, parted
even from Philippus, than share his home, his table, and his daily life
with this woman, who could repel the sincerely-meant caresses of that
pretty, childlike, simple little Katharina with such frigid and
supercilious haughtiness.  The mere sight of her at meals would embitter
every mouthful; only to hear her domineering tones in the next room would
spoil his pleasure in working; the touch of her cold hand as she bid him
good-night would destroy his night's rest!

Here and now her presence was more than he could bear.  It was an offense
to him, a challenge; and if ever he had wished to clear her out of his
path and the physician's--by force, if need should be--the idea wholly
possessed him now.

Irritated and provoked, he took leave of all the others, carefully
avoiding a glance even at Paula, though, after he rose, she went up to
him on purpose to say a few pleasant words, and to assure him how highly
she esteemed his adopted son.

Pulcheria escorted him through the garden and he promised her to return
on the morrow, or the day after, and then she must take care that he
found her and her mother alone, for he had no fancy to allow Paula to
thrust her pride and airs under his nose a second time.

He angrily rejected Pulcheria's attempts to take her friend's part, and
he trotted home again, mumbling curses between his old lips.

Martina, meanwhile, had made friends with Paula in her genial, frank way.
She had met her parents in time past in Constantinople and spoke of them
with heart-felt warmth.  This broke the ice between them, and when
Martina spoke of Orion--her 'great Sesostris'--of the regard and
popularity he had enjoyed in Constantinople, and then, with due
recognition and sympathy, of his misfortune, Paula felt drawn towards her
indeed.  Her reserve vanished entirely, and the conversation between the
new acquaintances became more and more eager, intimate, and delightful.

When they parted both felt that they could only gain by further
intercourse.  Paula was called away at the very moment of leave-taking,
and left the room with warm expressions intended only for the matron:
"Not good-bye--we must meet again.  But of course it is my part, as the
younger, to go to you!"  And she was no sooner gone than Martina
exclaimed:

"What a lovely creature!  The worthy daughter of a noble father!  And her
mother!  O dame Joanna!  A sweeter being has rarely graced this
miserable world; she was born to die young, she was only made to bloom
and fade!"  Then, turning to Katharina, she went on: with kindly reproof.
"Evil tongues gave me a very false idea of this girl.  'A silver kernel
in a golden shell,' says the proverb, but in this case both alike are of
gold.--Between you two--good God!--But I know what has blinded your clear
eyes, poor little kitten.  After all, we all see things as we wish to see
them.  I would lay a wager, dame Joanna, that you are of my opinion in
thinking the fair Paula a perfectly noble creature.  Aye, a noble
creature; it is an expressive word and God knows!  How seldom is it a
true one?  It is one I am little apt to use, but I know no other for such
as she is, and on her it is not ill-bestowed."

"Indeed it is not!"  answered Joanna with warm assent; but Martina
sighed, for she was thinking to herself!  "Poor Heliodora!  I cannot but
confess that Paula is the only match for my 'great Sesostris.'  But what
in Heaven's name will become of that poor, unfortunate, love-sick little
woman?"

All this flashed through her quick brain while Katharina was trying to
justify herself, and asserting that she fully recognised Paula's great
qualities, but that she was proud, fearfully proud--she had given Martina
herself some evidence of that.

At this Pulcheria interposed in zealous defense of her friend.  She,
however, had hardly begun to speak when she, too, was interrupted, for
men's voices were heard in loud discussion in the vestibule, and Perpetua
suddenly rushed in with a terrified face, exclaiming, heedless of the
strangers:  "Oh Dame Joanna!  Here is another, dreadful misfortune!
Those Arab devils have come again, with an interpreter and a writer.  And
they have been sent--Merciful Saviour, is it possible?--they have brought
a warrant to take away my poor dear child, to take her to prison--to drag
