all the latest gossip, and complain of her little ailments when anything
went wrong with her usually sound health.  Philippus was indeed too much
overburdened to chatter, but his professional advice was good and helped
her to endure the fires of this pitiless sky.  She liked this incisive,
shrewd, plain-spoken man--often indeed sharp and abrupt in his freedom--
and he appreciated her bright, natural ways.  Now and then Martina even
succeeded in winning a smile from "Hermes  Trismegistus," who was
"generally  as solemn as though there was no such thing on earth as a
jest," and in spurring him to a rejoinder which showed that this dolorous
being had a particularly keen and ready wit.

Heliodora attracted him but little.  There was, to be sure, an
unmistakable likeness in her "imploring eves" to those of Pulcheria; but
the girl's spoke fervent yearning for the grace and love of God, while
the widow's expressed an eager desire for the admiration of the men she
preferred.  She was a graceful creature beyond all question, but such
softness, which never even attempted to assert a purpose or an opinion,
did not commend itself to his determined nature; it annoyed him, when
he had contradicted her, to hear her repeat his last statement and take
his side, as if she were ashamed of her own silliness.  Her society,
indeed, did not seem to satisfy the clever older woman, who at home, was
accustomed to a succession of visitors, and to whom the word "evening"
was synomynous with lively conversation and a large gathering.  She spoke
of the leech's visits as the oasis in the Egyptian desert, and little
Katharina even she regarded as a Godsend.

The water-wagtail was her daily visitant, and the girl's gay and often
spiteful gossip helped to beguile her during this terrific heat.
Katharina's mother made no difficulties; for Heliodora had gone to see
her in all her magnificence, and had offered her and her daughter
hospitality, some day, at Constantinople.  They were very likely going
thither; at any rate they would not remain in Memphis, and then it would
be a piece of good fortune to be introduced to the society of the capital
by such people as their new acquaintances.

Martina thus heard a great deal about Paula; and though it was all
adverse and colored to her prejudice she would have liked to see the
daughter of the great and famous Thomas whom she had known; besides,
after all she had heard, she could fear nothing from Paula for her niece:
uncommonly handsome, but haughty, repellent, unamiable, and--like
Heliodora herself--of the orthodox sect.--What could tempt "great
Sesostris" to give her the preference?

Katharina herself proposed to Martina to make them acquainted; but
nothing would have induced Dame Martina to go out of her rooms, protected
to the utmost from the torrid sunshine, so she left it to Heliodora to
pay the visit and give her a report of the hero's daughter.  Heliodora
had devoted herself heart and soul to the little heiress, and humored her
on many points.

This was carried out.  Katharina actually had the audacity to bring the
rivals together, even after she had reported to each all she knew of
Orion's position with regard to the other.  It was exquisite sport;
still, in one respect it did not fulfil her intentions, for Paula gave
no sign of suffering the agonies of jealousy which Katharina had hoped
to excite in her.  Heliodora, on the other hand, came home depressed and
uneasy; Paula had received her coldly and with polite formality, and the
young widow had remained fully aware that so remarkable a woman might
well cast her own image in Orion's heart into the shade, or supplant it
altogether.

Like a wounded man who, in spite of the anguish, cannot resist touching
the wound to assure himself of its state, Heliodora went constantly to
see Katharina in order to watch her rival from the garden or to be taken
to call on her, though she was always very coldly received.

At first Katharina had pitied the young woman whose superior in
intelligence she knew herself to be; but a certain incident had
extinguished this feeling; she now simply hated her, and pricked her with
needle-thrusts whenever she had a chance.  Paula seemed invulnerable;
but there was not a pang which Katharina would not gladly have given her
to whom she owed the deepest humiliation her young life had ever known.
How was it that Paula failed to regard Heliodora as a rival?  She had
reflected that, if Orion had really returned the widow's passion, he
could not have borne so long a separation.  It was on purpose to avoid
Heliodora, and to remain faithful to what he was and must always be to
Paula, that he had gone with the senator, far from Memphis.  Heliodora--
her instinct assured her--was the poor, forsaken woman with whom he had
trifled at Byzantium, and for whom he had committed that fatal theft of
the emerald.  If Fate would but bring him home to her, and if she then
yielded all he asked--all her own soul urged her to grant, then she would
be the sole mistress and queen of his heart--she must be, she was sure of
it!  And though, even as she thought of it, she bowed her head in care,
it was not from fear of losing him; it was only her anxiety about her
father, her good old friend, Rufinus, and his family, whom she had made
so entirely her own.

This was the state of affairs this morning, when to his old friend's
vexation, Philippus had so hastily and silently drunk off his after-
breakfast draught; just as he set down the cup, the black door-keeper
announced that a hump-backed man wished to see his master at once on
important business.

"Important business!" repeated the leech.  "Give me four more legs in
addition to my own two, or a machine to make time longer than it is, and
then I will take new patients-otherwise no!  Tell the fellow.  .  .  ."

"No, not sick.  .  .  ."  interrupted the negro.  "Come long way.
Gardener to Greek man Rufinus."

Philippus started: he could guess what this messenger had to say, and his
heart sank with dread as he desired that he might be shown in.

A glance at Gibbus told him what he had rightly feared.  The poor fellow
was hardly recognizable.  He was coated with dust from head to foot, and
this made him look like a grey-haired old man; his sandals hung to his
feet in strips; the sweat, pouring down his cheeks, had made gutters as
it were in the dust on his face, and his tears, as the physician held out
his hand to him, washed out other channels.

In reply to the leech's anxious, long drawn "Dead?"  he nodded silently;
and when Philippus, clasping his hands to his temples, cried out: "Dead!
My poor old Rufinus dead!  But how, in Heaven's name, did it happen?
Speak, man, speak!"--Gibbus pointed to the old philosopher and said:
"Come out then, with  me, Master.  No third person.  .  .  ."

Philippus, however, gave him to understand that Horapollo was his second
self; and the hunch-back went on to tell him what he had seen, and how
his beloved master had met his end.  Horapollo sat listening in
astonishment, shaking his head disapprovingly, while the physician
muttered curses.  But the bearer of evil tidings was not interrupted,
and it was not till he had ended that Philippus, with bowed head and
tearful eyes, said:

"Poor, faithful old man; to think that he should die thus--he who leaves
behind him all that is best in life, while I--I.  .  .  ."  And he
groaned aloud.  The old man glanced at him with reproachful displeasure.

While the leech broke the seals of the tablets, which the abbess had
carefully closed, and began to read the contents, Horapollo asked the
gardener: "And the nuns?  Did they all escape?"

"Yes, Master! on the morning after we reached Doomiat, a trireme took
them all out to sea."

And the old man grumbled to himself:  "The working bees killed and the
Drones saved!"

Gibbus, however, contradicted him, praising the laborious and useful life
of the sisters, in whose care he himself had once been.

Meanwhile Philippus had read his friend's last letter.  Greatly disturbed
by it he turned hither and thither, paced the room with long steps, and
finally paused in front of the gardener, exclaiming: "And what next?  Who
is to tell them the news?"

"You," replied Gibbus, raising his hands in entreaty.

"I-oh, of course, I!"  growled the physician.  "Whatever is difficult,
painful, intolerable, falls on my shoulders as a matter of course!  But I
cannot--ought not--I will not do it.  Had I any part or lot in devising
this mad expedition?  You observe, Father?--What he, the simpleton,
brewed, I--I again am to drink.  Fate has settled that!"

"It is hard, it is hard, child!"  replied the old man.  "Still, it is
your duty.  Only consider--if that man, as he stands before us now, were
to appear before the women...."

But Philippus broke in: "No, no, that would not do!  And you, Gibbus--
this very day there has been an Arab again to see Joanna; and if they
were to suspect that you had been with your master--for you look
strangely.--No, man; your devotion merits a better reward.  They shall
not catch you.  I release you from your service to the widow, and we--
what do you say, Father?--we will keep him here."

"Right, very right," said Horapollo.  "The Nile must some day rise again.
Stay with us; I have long had a fancy to eat vegetables of my own
growing."

But Gibbus firmly declined the offer, saying he wished to return to his
old mistress.  When the physician again pointed out to him how great a
danger he was running into, and the old man desired to know his reasons,
the hunch-back exclaimed:

"I promised my master to stay with the women; and now, while in all the
household I am the only free man, shall I leave them unprotected to
secure my own miserable life?  Sooner would I see a scimitar at my
throat.  When my head is off the rascals are welcome to all that is
left."

The words came hollow and broken from his parched tongue, and as he spoke
the faithful fellow's face changed.  Even under the dust he turned pale,
and Philippus had to support him, for his feet refused their office.  His
long tramp through the torrid heat had exhausted his strength; but a
draught of wine soon brought him to himself again and Horapollo ordered
the slave to lead him to the kitchen and desire the cook to take the best
care of him.

As soon as the friends were alone, the elder observed:

"That worthy, foolhardy, old child who is now dead, seems to have left
you some strange request.  I could see that as you were reading."

"There--take it!"  replied  Philippus;  and again he walked up and down
the room, while Horapollo took the letter.  Both faces of the tablets
were covered with irregular, up-and-down lines of writing to the
following effect:

