once as she listened to this speech.  But when Neforis finally pointed to
the door, she said, with all the cold pride she had at her command when
she was the object of unworthy suspicions:

"Your aim is easily seen through.  I should scorn to reply, but that you
are the wife of the man who, till you set him against me, was glad to
call himself my friend and protector, and who is also related to me.  As
usual, you attribute to me an unworthy motive.  In showing me the door of
this room consecrated by suffering, you are turning me out of your house,
which you and your son--for I must say it for once--have made a hell to
me."

"I!  And my--No! this is indeed--" exclaimed the matron in panting rage.
She clasped her hands over her heaving bosom and her pale face was dyed
crimson, while her eyes flashed wrathful lightnings.  "That is too much;
a thousand times too much--a thousand times--do you hear?--And I--I
condescend to answer you!  We picked her up in the street, and have
treated her like a daughter, spent enormous sums on her, and now. . . ."

This was addressed to the leech rather than to Paula; but she took up the
gauntlet and replied in a tone of unqualified scorn:

"And now I plainly declare, as a woman of full age, free to dispose of
myself, that to-morrow morning I leave this house with everything that
belongs to me, even if I should go as a beggar;--this house, where I have
been grossly insulted, where I and my faithful servant have been falsely
condemned, and where he is even now about to be murdered."

"And where you have been dealt with far too mildly," Neforis shrieked at
her audacious antagonist, "and preserved from sharing the fate of the
robber you smuggled into the house.  To save a criminal--it is unheard
of:--you dared to accuse the son of your benefactor of being a corrupt
judge."

"And so he is," exclaimed Paula furious.  "And what is more, he has
inveigled the child whom you destine to be his wife into bearing false
witness.  More--much more could I say, but that, even if I did not
respect the mother, your husband has deserved that I should spare him."

"Spare him-spare!"  cried Neforis contemptuously.  "You--you will spare
us!  The accused will be merciful and spare the judge!  But you shall be
made to speak;--aye, made to speak!  And as to what you, a slanderer, can
say about false witness. . ."

"Your own granddaughter," interrupted the leech, "will be compelled to
repeat it before all the world, noble lady, if you do not moderate
yourself."

Neforis laughed hysterically.

"So that is the way the wind blows!"  she exclaimed, quite beside
herself.  "The sick-room is a temple of Bacchus and Venus; and this
disgraceful conduct is not enough, but you must conspire to heap shame
and disgrace on this righteous house and its masters."

Then, resting her left hand which held the reliquary on her hip, she
added with hasty vehemence:

"So be it.  Go away; go wherever you please!  If I find you under this
roof to-morrow at noon, you thankless, wicked girl, I will have you
turned out into the streets by the guard.  I hate you--for once I will
ease my poor, tormented heart--I loathe you; your very existence is an
offence to me and brings misfortune on me and on all of us; and besides
--besides, I should prefer to keep the emeralds we have left."

This last and cruelest taunt, which she had brought out against her
better feelings, seemed to have relieved her soul of a hundred-weight of
care; she drew a deep breath, and turning to Philippus, went on far more
quietly and rationally:

"As for you, Philip, my husband needs you.  You know well what we have
offered you and you know George's liberal hand.  Perhaps you will think
better of it, and will learn to perceive. . ."

"I! . . ."  said the leech with a lofty smile.  "Do you really know me
so little?  Your husband, I am ready to admit, stands high in my esteem,
and when he wants me he will no doubt send for me.  But never again will
I cross this threshold uninvited, or enter a house where right is trodden
underfoot, where defenceless innocence is insulted and abandoned to
despair.

"You may stare in astonishment!  Your son has desecrated his father's
judgment-seat, and the blood of guiltless Hiram is on his head.--You--
well, you may still cling to your emeralds.  Paula will not touch them;
she is too high-souled to tell you who it is that you would indeed do
well to lock up in the deepest dungeon-cell!  What I have heard from your
lips breaks every tie that time had knit between us.  I do not demand
that my friends should be wealthy, that they should have any attractions
or charm, any special gifts of mind or body; but we must meet on common
ground: that of honorable feeling.  That you did not bring into the
world, or you have lost it; and from this hour I am a stranger to you and
never wish to see you again, excepting by the side of your husband when
he requires me."

He spoke the last words with such immeasurable dignity that Neforis was
startled and bereft of all self-control.  She had been treated as a
wretch worthy of utter scorn by a man beneath her in rank, but whom she
always regarded as one of the most honest, frank and pure-minded she had
ever known; a man indispensable to her husband, because he knew how to
mitigate his sufferings, and could restrain him from the abuse of his
narcotic anodyne.  He was the only physician of repute, far and wide.
She was to be deprived of the services of this valuable ally, to whom
little Mary and many of the household owed their lives, by this Syrian
girl; and she herself, sure that she was a good and capable wife and
mother, was to stand there like a thing despised and avoided by every
honest man, through this evil genius of her house!

It was too much.  Tortured by rage, vexation, and sincere distress, she
said in a complaining voice, while the tears started to her eyes:

"But what is the meaning of all this?  You, who know me, who have seen me
ruling and caring for my family, you turn your back upon me in my own
house and point the finger at me?  Have I not always been a faithful
wife, nursing my husband for years and never leaving his sick-bed, never
thinking of anything but how to ease his pain?  I have lived like a
recluse from sheer sense of duty and faithful lose, while other wives,
who have less means than I, live in state and go to entertainments.--And
whose slaves are better kept and more often freed than ours?  Where is
the beggar so sure of an alms as in our house, where I, and I alone,
uphold piety?--And now am I so fallen that the sun may not shine on me,
and that a worthy man like you should withdraw his friendship all in a
moment, and for the sake of this ungrateful, loveless creature--because,
because, what did you call it--because the mind is wanting in me--or what
did you call it that I must have before you....?"

"It is called feeling," interrupted the leech, who was sorry for the
unhappy woman, in whom he knew there was much that was good.  "Is the
word quite new to you, my lady Neforis?--It is born with us; but a firm
will can elevate the least noble feeling, and the best that nature can
bestow will deteriorate through self-indulgence.  But, in the day of
judgment, if I am not very much mistaken, it is not our acts but our
feeling that will be weighed.  It would ill-become me to blame you, but I
may be allowed to pity you, for I see the disease in your soul which,
like gangrene in the body. . ."

"What next!"  cried Neforis.

"This disease," the physician calmly went on--"I mean hatred, should be
far indeed from so pious a Christian.  It has stolen into your heart like
a thief in the night, has eaten you up, has made bad blood, and led you
to treat this heavily-afflicted orphan as though you were to put stocks
and stones in the path of a blind man to make him fall.  If, as it would
seem, my opinion still weighs with you a little, before Paula leaves
your house you will ask her pardon for the hatred with which you have
persecuted her for years, which has now led you to add an intolerable
insult--in which you yourself do not believe--to all the rest."

At this Paula, who had been watching the physician all through his
speech, turned to Dame Neforis, and unclasped her hands which were lying
in her lap, ready to shake hands with her uncle's wife if she only
offered hers, though she was still fully resolved to leave the house.

A terrible storm was raging in the lady's soul.  She felt that she had
often been unkind to Paula.  That a painful doubt still obscured the
question as to who had stolen the emerald she had unwillingly confessed
before she had come up here.  She knew that she would be doing her
husband a great service by inducing the girl to remain, and she would
only too gladly have kept the leech in the house;--but then how deeply
had she, and her son, been humiliated by this haughty creature!

Should she humble herself to her, a woman so much younger, offer her
hand, make....

At this moment they heard the tinkle of the silver bowl, into which her
husband threw a little ball when he wanted her.  His pale, suffering face
rose before her inward eye, she could hear him asking for his opponent
at draughts, she could see his sad, reproachful gaze when she told him
to-morrow that she, Neforis, had driven his niece, the daughter of the
noble Thomas, out of the house--, with a swift impulse she went towards
Paula, grasping the reliquary in her left hand and holding out her right,
and said in a low voice.

"Shake hands, girl.  I often ought to have behaved differently to you;
but why have you never in the smallest thing sought my love?  God is my
witness that at first I was fully disposed to regard you as a daughter,
but you--well, let it pass.  I am sorry now that I should--if I have
distressed you."

At the first words Paula had placed her hand in that of Neforis.  Hers
was as cold as marble, the elder woman's was hot and moist; it seemed as
though their hands were typical of the repugnance of their hearts.  They
both felt it so, and their clasp was but a brief one.  When Paula
withdrew hers, she preserved her composure better than the governor's
wife, and said quite calmly, though her cheeks were burning:

"Then we will try to part without any ill-will, and I thank you for
having made that possible.  To-morrow morning I hope I may be permitted
to take leave of my uncle in peace, for I love him; and of little Mary."

"But you need not go now!  On the contrary, I urgently request you to
stay," Neforis eagerly put in.

"George will not let you leave.  You yourself know how fond he is of
you."

"He has often been as a father to me," said Paula, and even her eyes
shone through tears.  "I would gladly have stayed with him till the end.
Still, it is fixed--I must go."

"And if your uncle adds his entreaties to mine?"

"It will be in vain."

Neforis took the maiden's hand in her own again, and tried with genuine
anxiety to persuade her,--but Paula was firm.  She adhered to her
determination to leave the governor's house in the morning.

"But where will you find a suitable house?"  cried Neforis.  "A residence
