the remedy which had so greatly mitigated her husband's distress?  It was
said to have a bad effect after long and frequent use, and she had often
checked the Mukaukas in taking it too freely; but could her sufferings be
greater?  Would she not, indeed, be thankful to the drug if it should
shorten her miserable existence?

So she took the familiar remedy, at first hesitatingly and then more
freely; and on the second day again, with real pleasure and happy
expectancy, for it had not merely procured her a good night but had
brought her joy in the morning: The dead had appeared to her, and for
the first time not in the act of cursing, but as a young and happy man.

No one in the house knew what comfort the widow had had recourse to; the
physician and her son had been glad yesterday to find her more composed.

When Orion returned home, after concluding his business with the money-
changer at Fostat, he had to make his way through a crowd of people, and
found the court-yard full of men, and the guards and servants in the
greatest excitement.  No less a personage than the Patriarch had arrived
on a visit, and was now in conference with Neforis.  Sebek, the steward,
informed Orion that he had asked for him, and that his mother wished that
he should immediately join them and pay his respects to the very reverend
Father.

"She wished it?"  asked the young man, as he tossed his riding-hat to a
slave, and he stood hesitating.

He was too much a son of his time, and the Church and her ministers had
exercised too marked influence on his education, for the great prelate's
visit to be regarded otherwise than as a high honor.  At the same time he
could not forget the insult done to his father's vanes, nor the Arab
general's warning to be on his guard against Benjamin's enmity; and
perhaps, he said to himself, it might be better to avoid a meeting with
the powerful priest than to expose himself to the danger of losing his
self-control and finding fresh food for his wrath.

However, he had in fact no choice, for the patriarch just now came out of
the fountain-hall into the viridarium.  The old man's tall figure was not
bent, his snowy hair flowed in abundance round his proud head, and a
white beard fell in soft waves far down his breast.  His fine eyes rested
on the young man with a keen glance, and though he had last seen Orion as
a boy he recognized him at once as the master of the house.  While Orion
bowed low before him, the patriarch, in his deep, rich voice, addressed
him with cheerful dignity.

"All hail, son of my never-to-be-forgotten friend!  The child I remember,
has, I see, grown to a fine man.  I have devoted a short time to the
mother, and now I must say what is needful to the son."

"In my father's study," Orion said to the steward; and he led the way
with the ceremonious politeness of a chamberlain of the imperial court.

The patriarch, as he followed him, signed to his escort to remain behind,
and as soon as the door was closed upon them, he went up to Orion and
exclaimed: "Again I greet you!  This, then, is the descendant of the
great Menas, the son of Mukaukas George, the adored ruler of my flock
at Memphis, who held the first place among the gilded youth of
Constantinople in their gay whirl!  A strange achievement for an Egyptian
and a Christian!  But first of all, child, first give me your hand!"
He held out his right hand and Orion accepted it, but not without
reserve, for he had suspected a scornful ring in the patriarch's address,
and he could not help asking himself whether this man honestly meant so
well by him, that he could address him thus paternally as "child" in all
sincerity of heart?  To refuse his hand was, however, impossible; still,
he found courage to reply:

"I can but obey your desire, holy Father; but, at the same time, I do not
know whether it becomes the son to grasp the hand of the foe who was not
to be appeased even by Death, the reconciler--who grossly insulted the
father, the noblest of men, and, in him, the son too, at the grave
itself."

The patriarch shook his head with a supercilious smile, and a hot thrill
shot through Orion as Benjamin laid his hand on his shoulder and said
with grave kindness:

"A Christian does not find it hard to forgive a sinner, an antagonist, an
enemy; and it is a joy to me to pardon the son who feels himself injured
through his lost father, blind and foolish as his indignation may be.
Your wrath can no more affect me, Child, than the Almighty in Heaven,
and it would not even be blameworthy, but that--and of this we must speak
presently--but that--well, I will be frank with you at once--but that
your manner clearly and unmistakably betrays what you lack to make you a
true Christian, and such a man as he must be who fills so conspicuous a
position in this land governed by infidels.  You know what I mean?"

The prelate let his hand slip from the young man's shoulder, looking
enquiringly in his face; and when Orion, finding no reply ready, drew
back a step or two, the old man went on with growing excitement:

"It is humility, pious and submissive faith, that I find you lack, my
friend.  Who, indeed, am I?  But as the Vicar, the representative of Him
before whom we all are as worms in the dust, I must insist that every man
who calls himself a Christian, a Jacobite, shall submit to my will and
orders, without hesitation or doubt, as obediently and unresistingly as
though salvation or woe had fallen on him from above.  What would become
of us, if individuals were to take upon themselves to defy me and walk in
their own way?  In one miserable generation, and with the death of the
elders who had grown up as true Christians, the doctrine of the Saviour
would be extinct on the shores of the Nile, the crescent would rise in
the place of the Cross, and our cry would go up to Heaven for so many
lost souls.  Learn, haughty youth, to bow humbly and submissively to the
will of the Most High and of His vicar on earth, and let me show you,
from your demeanor to myself especially, how far your own judgment is to
be relied on.  You regard me as your father's enemy?"

"Yes," said Orion firmly.

"And I loved him as a brother!"  replied the patriarch in a softer voice.
"How gladly would I have heaped his bier with palm branches of peace,
such as the Church alone can grow, wet with my own tears!"

"And yet," cried Orion, "you denied to him, whom you call your friend,
what the Church does not refuse to thieves and murderers, if only they
desire forgiveness and have received absolution from a priest;
and that.  .  .  ."

"And that your father did!"  interrupted the old man.  "Peace be to him!
He is now, no doubt, gazing on the glory of the Lord.  And nevertheless
I could forbid the priesthood here showing him honor at the grave.--Why?
For what urgent reason was such a prohibition spoken by a friend against
a friend?"

"Because you wished to brand him, in the eyes of the world, as the man
who lent his support to the unbelievers and helped them to victory," said
Orion gloomily.

"How well the boy can read the thoughts of men!"  exclaimed the prelate,
looking at the young man with approbation in which, however, there was
some irony and annoyance.  "Very good.  We will assume that my object
was to show the Christians of Memphis what fate awaits the man, who
surrenders his country to the enemy and walks hand-in-hand with
unbelievers?  And may I not possibly have been right?"

"Do you suppose my father invited the Arabs?"  interrupted the young man.

"No, Child," replied the patriarch, "the enemy came of his own free
will."

"And you," Orion went on, "after the Greeks had driven you into exile,
prophesied from the desert that they would come and overthrow the
Melchites, the Greek enemies of our faith, drive them out of the
country."

"It was revealed to me by the Lord!"  replied the old man, bowing his
head reverently.  "And yet other things were shown to me while I dwelt a
devout ascetic, mortifying my flesh under the scorching sun of the
desert.  Beware my son, beware!  Heed my warning, lest it should be
fulfilled and the house of Menas vanish like clouds swept before the
wind.--Your father, I know, regarded my prophecy as advice given by me
to receive the infidels as the instrument of the Almighty and to support
them in driving the Melchite oppressors out of the land."

"Your prophecy," replied Orion, "had, no doubt, a marked effect on my
father; and when the cause of the emperor and the Greeks was lost, your
opinion that the Melchites were unbelievers as much as the sons of Islam,
was of infinite comfort to him.  For he, if any one--as you know--had
good reason to hate the sectarians who killed his two sons in their
prime.  What followed, he did to rescue his and your unfortunate brethren
and dependants from destruction.  Here, here in this desk, lies his
answer to the emperor's accusations, as given to the Greek deputation
who had speech of him in this very room.  He wrote it down as soon as
they had left him.  Will you hear it?"

"I can guess its purport."

"No, no!"  cried the excited youth; he hastily opened his father's desk,
laid his hand at once on the wax tablet, and exclaimed: "This was his
reply!"  And he proceeded to read:

"These Arabs, few as they are, are stronger and more powerful than we
with all our numbers.  One man of them is equal to a hundred of us, for
they rush on death and love it better than life.  Each of them presses to
the front in battle, and they have no longing to return home and to their
families.  For every Christian they kill they look for a great reward in
Heaven, and they say that the gates of Paradise open at once for those
who fall in the fight.  They have not a wish in this world beyond the
satisfaction of their barest need of food and clothing.  We, on the
contrary, love life and dread death;--how can we stand against them?
I tell you that I will not break the peace I have concluded with the
Arabs.  .  .  ."

"And what is the upshot of all this reply?"  interrupted the patriarch
shrugging his shoulders.

"That my father found himself compelled to conclude a peace, and that--
but read on.--That as a wise man he was forced to ally himself with the
foe."

"The foe to whom he yielded more readily and paid much greater honor than
became him as a Christian!--Does not this discourse convey the idea that
the joys of Paradise solely and exclusively await our damned and blood-
thirsty oppressors?--And the Moslem Paradise!  What is it but a gulf
of iniquity, in which they are to wallow in sensual delight?  The false
prophet invented it to tempt his followers to force his lying creed,
by might of arms and in mad contempt of death, on nation after nation.
Our Lord, the Word made flesh, came down on earth to win hearts and souls
by the persuasive power of the living truth, one and eternal, which
