pleasant glance.  It was Frau Sophia, the widow of Herr Conrad Schurstab
of the Council, one of the richest and most aristocratic noblewomen in
the city.  Lienhard had told her about the charming prisoner who had been
released and begged her to help him bring her back to a respectable and
orderly life.  The lady needed an assistant who, now that it was hard for
her to stoop, would inspect the linen closets, manage the poultry yard-
her pride--and keep an eye on the children when they came to visit their
grandmother.  So she instantly accompanied Lienhard to the tavern, and
Kuni pleased her.  But it would have been difficult not to feel some
degree of sympathy for the charming young creature who, in great
embarrassment, yet joyously as though released from a heavy burden,
raised her large blue eyes to the kind stranger.

It was cold in the street, and as Kuni had come out without any wrap,
Frau Schurstab, in her friendly consideration, shortened the, conference.
Lienhard Uroland had helped her with a few words, and when the sedan
chair and the young Councillor moved down the street all the necessary
details were settled.  The vagrant had bound herself and assumed duties,
though they were very light ones.  She was to move that evening into the
distinguished widow's house, not as a servant, but as the old lady's
assistant.

Loni, the manager of the company of rope-dancers, had watched the
negotiations from the taproom.  During their progress each of the three
windows was filled with heads, but no one had been able to hear what was
whispered in the street.  Just as the curious spectators were hoping that
now they might perhaps guess what the aristocratic lady wanted with Kuni,
the sedan chair began to move, and the young girl entered the hot room to
tell Loni that she would leave the company that day forever.

"In-de-e-ed?"  Loni asked in astonishment, lifting the gold circlet which
rested on his head.  Then he passed his hand through the coal-black hair
which, parted in the middle, fell in smooth strands upon his neck, and
exerted all his powers of persuasion to convince her of the folly of her
plan.  After his arguments were exhausted he raised his voice louder.
As usual, when excited by anger, he swung his lower right arm to and fro,
feeling the prominent muscles with his left hand.  But Kuni remained
resolute, and when be at last perceived that his opposition only
increased her obstinacy, he exclaimed:

"Then rush on to your destruction!  The day will come when you will see
where you belong.  If only it doesn't arrive too late.  A man grows
twelve and a woman thirty-six months older every year."

With these words he turned his back upon her, and the clown brought the
amount of wages which was due.

Many an eye grew dim with tears when Kuni bade farewell to her
companions.  Shortly after sunset she was welcomed to Frau Schurstab's
house.

The first greeting was friendly, and she received nothing but kindness
and indulgent treatment afterward.  She had a sunny chamber of her own,
and how large and soft her bed was!  But while, when on the road with
Loni's band, if they could reach no town, she had often slept soundly and
sweetly on a heap of straw, here she spent one restless night after
another.

During the first a series of questions disturbed her slumber.  Was it
really only the desire to take her from her vagabond life which had
induced Lienhard to open this house to her?  Did he not perhaps also
cherish the wish to keep her near him?  He had certainly come to her with
Frau Schurstab to protect her reputation.  Had it not been so he might
have left the matron at home; for Loni and everybody in the company knew
that she never troubled herself about gossip.  Last year she had obtained
a leave of absence from Loni, who was making a tour of the little Frank
towns, and spent the carnival season in revelry with a sergeant of the
Nurembreg soldiers.  When the booty he had gained in Italy was
squandered, she gave him his dismissal.  Her reputation among her
companions was neither better nor worse than that of the other strolling
players who, like her, were born on the highway, yet she was glad that
Lienhard had tried to spare her.  Or had he only come with the old
noblewoman on account of his own fair name?

Perhaps--her pulses again throbbed faster at the thought--he had not
ventured to come alone because some feeling for her stirred in his own
heart, and, spite of his beautiful young wife, he did not feel safe from
her.  Then Fran Schurstab was to serve as a shield.  This conjecture
flattered her vanity and reconciled her to the step which she had taken
and already began to regret.

But suppose he really felt no more for her than the forester who finds a
child lost in the woods, and guides it into the right path?  How would
she endure that?  Yet, were it otherwise, if he was like the rest of men,
if he profited by what her whole manner must betray to him, how should
she face his wife, who undoubtedly would soon come to call on her aunt?

All these questions roused a tumult of unprecedented violence in her
young, ardent, inexperienced soul, which was renewed each successive
night.  It became more and more difficult for her to understand why she
had left Loni's band and entered into relations for which she was not
suited, and in which she could never, never be at ease or feel happy.

Nothing was lacking in this wealthy household, not even kindness and
love.  Frau Sophia was indulgent and friendly, even when Kuni, whose
heart and brain were occupied with so many other thoughts, neglected or
forgot anything.  The matron's grandchildren, of whom she often had
charge, soon became warmly attached to her.  While among the rope-dancers
she had been fond of children, and many a little one who journeyed with
the band held out its arms to her more joyously than to its own mother.
There was something in her nature that attracted them.  Besides, her
skilful hands could show them many a rare trick, and she could sing
numerous songs new to the Schurstab boys and girls, which she had picked
up here and there.  Then, too, she permitted many a prank which no one
else would have allowed.  Her duties connected with the household linen
and the poultry yard, its owner's pride, were so easily performed, that
in her leisure hours she often voluntarily helped the housekeeper.  At
first the latter eyed her askance, but she soon won her affection.  Both
she and her mistress showed her as much attention as the gardener bestows
upon a wild plant which he has transferred to good soil, where it thrives
under his care.

She kept aloof from the servants, and neither man nor maid molested her.
Perhaps this was due to foolish arrogance, for after they had learned
from rumour that Kuni had danced on the tight rope, they considered
themselves far superior.  The younger maids timidly kept out of her way,
and Kuni surpassed them in pride and looked down upon them, because her
free artist blood rebelled against placing herself on the plane of a
servitor.  She did not vouchsafe them a word, yet neither did she allow
any of them to render her even the most trivial service.  But she could
not escape Seifried, the equerry of her mistress's eldest son.  At first,
according to her custom, she had roused the handsome fellow's hopes by
fiery glances which she could not restrain.  Now he felt that she cared
for him, and in his honest fashion offered to make her his beloved wife;
but she refused his suit, at first kindly, then angrily.  As he still
persisted she begged the housekeeper, though she saw that matchmaking was
her delight, to keep him away.

Even in March Frau Sophia thanked Lienhard for the new inmate of her
household, who far exceeded her expectations.  In April her praise became
still warmer, only she regretted that Kuni's pretty face was losing its
fresh colour and her well-formed figure its roundness.  She was sorry,
too, that she so often seemed lost in thought, and appeared less merry
while playing with the children.

Lienhard and his young wife excused the girl's manner.  Comfortable as
she was now, she was still a prisoned bird.  It would be unnatural, nay,
suspicious, if she did not sometimes long for the old freedom and her
former companions.  She would also remember at times the applause of the
multitude.  The well-known Loni, her former employer, had besought him to
win her back to his company, complaining loudly of her loss, because it
was difficult to replace her with an equally skilful young artist.  It
was now evident how mistaken the juggler had been when he asserted that
Kuni, who was born among vagrants, would never live in a respectable
family.  He, Lienhard, had great pleasure in knowing that the girl, on
the road to ruin, had been saved by Frau Sophia's goodness.

Lienhard's father had died shortly after Kuni entered her new home.
Every impulse to love dalliance, she felt, must shrink before this great
sorrow.  The idea sustained her hopes.  She could not expect him to seek
her again until the first bitterness of grief for the loss of this
beloved relative had passed away.  She could wait, and she succeeded in
doing so patiently.

But week after week went by and there was no change in his conduct.  Then
a great anxiety overpowered her, and this did not escape his notice; for
one day, while his young wife hung on his arm and added a few brief words
of sympathy, he asked Kuni if she was ill or if she needed anything; but
she answered curtly in the negative and hurried into the garden, where
the children, with merry shouts, were helping the gardener to free the
beds of crocuses and budding tulips from the pine boughs which had
protected them from the frosts of winter.

Another sleepless night followed this incident.  It was useless to
deceive herself.  She might as well mistake black for white as to believe
that Lienhard cared for her.  To no one save his fair young wife would he
grant even the smallest ray of the love of which he was doubtless
capable, and in which she beheld the sun that dispensed life and light.
She had learned this, for he had often met her in Frau Sophia's house
since his father's funeral.  The child of the highway had never been
taught to conceal her feelings and maintain timid reserve.  Her eyes had
told him eloquently enough, first her deep sympathy, and afterward the
emotions which so passionately stirred her heart.  Had the feelings which
her glances were intended to reveal passed merely for the ardent
gratitude of an impassioned soul?

Gratitude!  For what?

His lukewarm interest had tempted her from a free, gay life, full of
constant excitement, into the oppressive, wearisome monotony of this
quiet house, where she was dying of ennui.  How narrow, how petty, how
tiresome everything seemed, and what she had bartered for it was the
world, the whole wide, wide world.  As the chicken lured the fox, the
hope of satisfying the fervent longing of her heart, though even once and
for a few brief moments, had brought her into the snare.  But the fire
which burned within had not been extinguished.  An icy wind had fanned
the flames till they blazed higher and higher, threatening her
destruction.

Frau Schurstab had made her attend church and go to the confessional.
But the mass, whose meaning she did not understand, offered no solace to
the soul which yearned for love alone.  Besides, it wearied her to remain
so long in the same place, and the confession forced the girl, who had
never shrunk from honestly expressing what she felt, into deception.  The
priest to whom she was taken was a frequent visitor at the Schurstab
house, and she would have died ere she would have confided to him the
secret of her heart.  Besides, to her the feeling which animated her was
no sin.  She had not summoned it.  It had taken possession of her against
