"Speak to him," said the Emperor, "and let us know what is passing in
his mind."

"It is at some risk," replied the physician, "but you shall be obeyed.
--Ursel," he said, approaching the bed of his blind patient, and then,
in a louder tone, he repeated again, "Ursel! Ursel!"

"Peace--Hush!" muttered the patient; "disturb not the blest in their
ecstacy--nor again recall the most miserable of mortals to finish the
draught of bitterness which his fate had compelled him to commence."

"Again, again," said the Emperor, aside to Douban, "try him yet again;
it is of importance for me to know in what degree he possesses his
senses, or in what measure they have disappeared from him."

"I would not, however," said the physician, "be the rash and guilty
person, who, by an ill-timed urgency, should produce a total alienation
of mind and plunge him back either into absolute lunacy, or produce a
stupor in which he might remain for a long period."

"Surely not," replied the Emperor: "my commands are those of one
Christian to another, nor do I wish them farther obeyed than as they
are consistent with the laws of God and man."

He paused for a moment after this declaration, and yet but few minutes
had elapsed ere he again urged the leech to pursue the interrogation of
his patient. "If you hold me not competent," said Douban, somewhat vain
of the trust necessarily reposed in him, "to judge of the treatment of
my patient, your Imperial Highness must take the risk and the trouble
upon yourself."

"Marry, I shall," said the Emperor, "for the scruples of leeches are
not to be indulged, when the fate of kingdoms and the lives of monarchs
are placed against them in the scales.--Rouse thee, my noble Ursel!
hear a voice, with which thy ears were once well acquainted, welcome
thee back to glory and command! Look around thee, and see how the world
smiles to welcome thee back from imprisonment to empire!"

"Cunning fiend!" said Ursel, "who usest the most wily baits in order to
augment the misery of the wretched! Know, tempter, that I am conscious
of the whole trick of the soothing images of last night--thy baths--thy
beds--and thy bowers of bliss.--But sooner shalt thou be able to bring
a smile upon the cheek of St. Anthony the Eremite, than induce me to
curl mine after the fashion of earthly voluptuaries."

"Try it, foolish man," insisted the Emperor, "and trust to the evidence
of thy senses for the reality of the pleasures by which thou art now
surrounded; or, if thou art obstinate in thy lack of faith, tarry as
thou art for a single moment, and I will bring with me a being so
unparalleled in her loveliness, that a single glance of her were worth
the restoration of thine eyes, were it only to look upon her for a
moment." So saying he left the apartment.

"Traitor," said Ursel, "and deceiver of old, bring no one hither! and
strive not, by shadowy and ideal forms of beauty, to increase the
delusion that gilds my prison-house for a moment, in order, doubtless,
to destroy totally the spark of reason, and then exchange this earthly
hell for a dungeon in the infernal regions themselves."

"His mind is somewhat shattered," mused the physician, "which is often
the consequence of a long solitary confinement. I marvel much," was his
farther thought, "if the Emperor can shape out any rational service
which this man can render him, after being so long immured in so
horrible a dungeon.--Thou thinkest, then," continued he, addressing the
patient, "that the seeming release of last night, with its baths and
refreshments, was only a delusive dream, without any reality?"

"Ay--what else?" answered Ursel.

"And that the arousing thyself, as we desire thee to do, would be but a
resigning to a vain temptation, in order to wake to more unhappiness
than formerly?"

"Even so," returned the patient.

"What, then, are thy thoughts of the Emperor by whose command thou
sufferest so severe a restraint?"

Perhaps Douban wished he had forborne this question, for, in the very
moment when he put it, the door of the chamber opened, and the Emperor
entered, with his daughter hanging upon his arm, dressed with
simplicity, yet with becoming splendour. She had found time, it seems,
to change her dress for a white robe, which resembled a kind of
mourning, the chief ornament of which was a diamond chaplet, of
inestimable value, which surrounded and bound the long sable tresses,
that reached from her head to her waist. Terrified almost to death, she
had been surprised by her father in the company of her husband the
Caesar, and her mother; and the same thundering mandate had at once
ordered Briennius, in the character of a more than suspected traitor,
under the custody of a strong guard of Varangians, and commanded her to
attend her father to the bedchamber of Ursel, in which she now stood;
resolved, however, that she would stick by the sinking fortunes of her
husband, even in the last extremity, yet no less determined that she
would not rely upon her own entreaties or remonstrances, until she
should see whether her father's interference was likely to reassume a
resolved and positive character. Hastily as the plans of Alexius had
been formed, and hastily as they had been disconcerted by accident,
there remained no slight chance that he might be forced to come round
to the purpose on which his wife and daughter had fixed their heart,
the forgiveness, namely, of the guilty Nicephorus Briennius. To his
astonishment, and not perhaps greatly to his satisfaction, he heard the
patient deeply engaged with the physician in canvassing his own
character.

"Think not," said Ursel in reply to him, "that though I am immured in
this dungeon, and treated as something worse than an outcast of
humanity--and although I am, moreover, deprived of my eyesight, the
dearest gift of Heaven--think not, I say, though I suffer all this by
the cruel will of Alexius Comnenus, that therefore I hold him to be
mine enemy; on the contrary, it is by his means that the blinded and
miserable prisoner has been taught to seek a liberty far more
unconstrained than this poor earth can afford, and a vision far more
clear than any Mount Pisgah on this wretched side of the grave can give
us: Shall I therefore account the Emperor among mine enemies? He who
has taught me the vanity of earthly things--the nothingness of earthly
enjoyments--and the pure hope of a better world, as a certain exchange
for the misery of the present? No!"

The Emperor had stood somewhat disconcerted at the beginning of this
speech, but hearing it so very unexpectedly terminate, as he was
willing to suppose, much in his own favour, he threw himself into an
attitude which was partly that of a modest person listening to his own
praises, and partly that of a man highly struck with the commendations
heaped upon him by a generous adversary.

"My friend," he said aloud, "how truly do you read my purpose, when you
suppose that the knowledge which men of your disposition can extract
from evil, was all the experience which I wished you to derive from a
captivity protracted by adverse circumstances, far, very far, beyond my
wishes! Let me embrace the generous man who knows so well how to
construe the purpose of a perplexed, but still faithful friend."

The patient raised himself in his bed.

"Hold there!" he said, "methinks my faculties begin to collect
themselves. Yes," he muttered, "that is the treacherous voice which
first bid me welcome as a friend, and then commanded fiercely that I
should be deprived of the sight of my eyes!--Increase thy rigour if
thou wilt, Comnenus--add, if thou canst, to the torture of my
confinement--but since I cannot see thy hypocritical and inhuman
features, spare me, in mercy, the sound of a voice, more distressing to
mine ear than toads, than serpents,--than whatever nature has most
offensive and disgusting!"

This speech was delivered with so much energy, that it was in vain that
the Emperor strove to interrupt its tenor; although he himself, as well
as Douban and his daughter, heard a great deal more of the language of
unadorned and natural passion than he had counted upon.

"Raise thy head, rash man," he said, "and charm thy tongue, ere it
proceed in a strain which may cost thee dear. Look at me, and see if I
have not reserved a reward capable of atoning for all the evil which
thy folly may charge to my account."

Hitherto the prisoner had remained with his eyes obstinately shut,
regarding the imperfect recollection he had of sights which had been
before his eyes the foregoing evening, as the mere suggestion of a
deluded imagination, if not actually presented by some seducing spirit.
But now when his eyes fairly encountered the stately figure of the
Emperor, and the graceful form of his lovely daughter, painted in the
tender rays of the morning dawn, he ejaculated faintly, "I see!--I
see!"--And with that ejaculation fell back on the pillow in a swoon,
which instantly found employment for Douban and his restoratives.

"A most wonderful cure indeed!" exclaimed the physician; "and the
height of my wishes would be to possess such another miraculous
restorative."

"Fool!" said the Emperor; "canst thou not conceive that what has never
been taken away is restored with little difficulty? He was made," he
said, lowering his voice, "to undergo a painful operation, which led
him to believe that the organs of sight were destroyed; and as light
scarcely ever visited him, and when it did, only in doubtful and
invisible glimmerings, the prevailing darkness, both physical and
mental, that surrounded him, prevented him from being sensible of the
existence of that precious faculty, of which he imagined himself
bereft. Perhaps thou wilt ask my reason for inflicting upon him so
strange a deception?--Simply it was, that being by it conceived
incapable of reigning, his memory might pass out of the minds of the
public, while, at the same time, I reserved his eyesight, that in case
occasion should call, it might be in my power once more to liberate him
from his dungeon, and employ, as I now propose to do, his courage and
talents in the service of the empire, to counterbalance those of other
conspirators."

"And can your imperial Highness," said Douban, "hope that you have
acquired this man's duty and affection by the conduct you have observed
to him?"

"I cannot tell," answered the Emperor; "that must be as futurity shall
determine. All I know is, that it is no fault of mine, if Ursel does
not reckon freedom and a long course of Empire--perhaps sanctioned by
an alliance with our own blood--and the continued enjoyment of the
precious organs of eyesight, of which a less scrupulous man would have
deprived him, against a maimed and darkened existence."

"Since such is your Highness's opinion and resolution," said Douban,
"it is for me to aid, and not to counteract it. Permit me, therefore,
to pray your Highness and the Princess to withdraw, that I may use such
remedies as may confirm a mind which has been so strangely shaken, and
restore to him fully the use of those eyes, of which he has been so
long deprived."

"I am content, Douban," said the Emperor; "but take notice, Ursel is
not totally at liberty until he has expressed the resolution to become
actually mine. It may behove both him and thee to know, that although
there is no purpose of remitting him to the dungeons of the Blacquernal
palace, yet if he, or any on his part, should aspire to head a party in
these feverish times,--by the honour of a gentleman, to swear a
Frankish oath, he shall find that he is not out of the reach of the
battle-axes of my Varangians. I trust to thee to communicate this fact,
which concerns alike him and all who have interest in his
fortunes.--Come, daughter, we will withdraw, and leave the leech with
his patient --Take notice, Douban, it is of importance that you
acquaint me the very first moment when the patient can hold rational
communication with me."

Alexius and his accomplished daughter departed accordingly.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-EIGHTH.

     Sweet are the uses of adversity,
     Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
     Bears yet a precious jewel in its head.
                             AS YOU LIKE IT.


From a terraced roof of the Blacquernal palace, accessible by a
sash-door, which opened from the bed-chamber of Ursel, there was
commanded one of the most lovely and striking views which the romantic
neighbourhood of Constantinople afforded.

After suffering him to repose and rest his agitated faculties, it was
to this place that the physician led his patient; for when somewhat
composed, he had of himself requested to be permitted to verify the
truth of his restored eyesight, by looking out once more upon the
majestic face of nature.

On the one hand, the scene which he beheld was a masterpiece of human
art. The proud city, ornamented with stately buildings, as became the
capital of the world, showed a succession of glittering spires and
orders of architecture, some of them chaste and simple, like those the
capitals of which were borrowed from baskets-full of acanthus; some
deriving the fluting of their shafts from the props made originally to
support the lances of the earlier Greeks--forms simple, yet more
graceful in their simplicity, than any which human ingenuity has been
able since to invent. With the most splendid specimens which ancient
art could afford of those strictly classical models were associated
those of a later age, where more modern taste had endeavoured at
improvement, and, by mixing the various orders, had produced such as
were either composite, or totally out of rule. The size of the
buildings in which they were displayed, however, procured them respect;
nor could even the most perfect judge of architecture avoid being
struck by the grandeur of their extent and effect, although hurt by the
incorrectness of the taste in which they were executed. Arches of
triumph, towers, obelisks, and spires, designed for various purposes,
rose up into the air in confused magnificence; while the lower view was
filled by the streets of the city, the domestic habitations forming
long narrow alleys, on either side of which the houses arose to various
and unequal heights, but, being generally finished with terraced
coverings, thick set with plants and flowers, and fountains, had, when
seen from an eminence, a more noble and interesting aspect than is ever
afforded by the sloping and uniform roofs of streets in the capitals of
the north of Europe.

It has taken us some time to give, in words, the idea which was at a
single glance conveyed to Ursel, and affected him at first with great
pain. His eyeballs had been long strangers to that daily exercise,
which teaches us the habit of correcting the scenes as they appear to
our sight, by the knowledge which we derive from the use of our other
senses. His idea of distance was so confused, that it seemed as if all
the spires, turrets, and minarets which he beheld, were crowded forward
upon his eyeballs, and almost touching them. With a shriek of horror,
Ursel turned himself to the further side, and cast his eyes upon a
different scene. Here also he saw towers, steeples, and turrets, but
they were those of the churches and public buildings beneath his feet,
reflected from the dazzling piece of water which formed the harbour of
Constantinople, and which, from the abundance of wealth which it
transported to the city, was well termed the Golden Horn. In one place,
this superb basin was lined with quays, where stately dromonds and
argosies unloaded their wealth, while, by the shore of the haven,
galleys, feluccas, and other small craft, idly flapped the singularly
shaped and snow-white pinions which served them for sails. In other
places the Golden Horn lay shrouded in a verdant mantle of trees, where
the private gardens of wealthy or distinguished individuals, or places
of public recreation, shot down upon and were bounded by the glassy
waters.

On the Bosphorus, which might be seen in the distance, the little fleet
of Tancred was lying in the same station they had gained during the
night, which was fitted to command the opposite landing; this their
general had preferred to a midnight descent upon Constantinople, not
knowing whether, so coming, they might be received as friends or
enemies. This delay, however, had given the Greeks an opportunity,
either by the orders of Alexius, or the equally powerful mandates of
some of the conspirators, to tow six ships of war, full of armed men,
and provided with the maritime offensive weapons peculiar to the Greeks
at that period, which they had moored so as exactly to cover the place
where the troops of Tancred must necessarily land.

This preparation gave some surprise to the valiant Tancred, who did not
know that such vessels had arrived in the harbour from Lemnos on the
preceding night. The undaunted courage of that prince was, however, in
no respect to be shaken by the degree of unexpected danger with which
his adventure now appeared to be attended.

This splendid view, from the description of which we have in some
degree digressed, was seen by the physician and Ursel from a terrace,
the loftiest almost on the palace of the Blacquernal. To the city-ward,
it was bounded by a solid wall, of considerable height, giving a
resting-place for the roof of a lower building, which, sloping outward,
broke to the view the vast height unobscured otherwise save by a high
and massy balustrade, composed of bronze, which, to the havenward, sunk
sheer down upon an uninterrupted precipice.

No sooner, therefore, had Ursel turned his eyes that way, than, though
placed far from the brink of the terrace, he exclaimed, with a shriek,
"Save me--save me! if you are not indeed the destined executors of the
Emperor's will."

"We are indeed such," said Douban, "to save, and if possible to bring
you to complete recovery; but by no means to do you injury, or to
suffer it to be offered by others."

"Guard me then from myself," said Ursel, "and save me from the reeling
and insane desire which I feel to plunge myself into the abyss, to the
edge of which you have guided me."

"Such a giddy and dangerous temptation is," said the physician, "common
to those who have not for a long time looked down from precipitous
heights, and are suddenly brought to them. Nature, however bounteous,
hath not provided for the cessation of our faculties for years, and for
their sudden resumption in full strength and vigour. An interval,
longer or shorter, must needs intervene. Can you not believe this
terrace a safe station while you have my support and that of this
faithful slave?"

"Certainly," said Ursel; "but permit me to turn my face towards this
stone wall, for I cannot bear to look at the flimsy piece of wire,
which is the only battlement of defence that interposes betwixt me and
the precipice." He spoke of the bronze balustrade, six feet high, and
massive in proportion. Thus saying, and holding fast by the physician's
arm, Ursel, though himself a younger and more able man, trembled, and
moved his feet as slowly as if made of lead, until he reached the
sashed-door, where stood a kind of balcony-seat, in which he placed
himself.--"Here," he said, "will I remain."

"And here," said Douban, "will I make the communication of the Emperor,
which it is necessary you should be prepared to reply to. It places
you, you will observe, at your own disposal for liberty or captivity,
but it conditions for your resigning that sweet but sinful morsel
termed revenge, which, I must not conceal from you, chance appears
willing to put into your hand. You know the degree of rivalry in which
you have been held by the Emperor, and you know the measure of evil you
have sustained at his hand. The question is, Can you forgive what has
taken place?"

"Let me wrap my head round with my mantle," said Ursel, "to dispel this
dizziness which still oppresses my poor brain, and as soon as the power
of recollection is granted me, you shall know my sentiments."

He sunk upon the seat, muffled in the way which he described, and after
a few minutes' reflection, with a trepidation which argued the patient
still to be under the nervous feeling of extreme horror mixed with
terror, he addressed Douban thus: "The operation of wrong and cruelty,
in the moment when they are first inflicted, excites, of course, the
utmost resentment of the sufferer; nor is there, perhaps, a passion
which lives so long in his bosom as the natural desire of revenge. If,
then, during the first month, when I lay stretched upon my bed of want
and misery, you had offered me an opportunity of revenge upon my cruel
oppressor, the remnant of miserable life which remained to me should
have been willingly bestowed to purchase it. But a suffering of weeks,
or even months, must not be compared in effect with that of years. For
a short space of endurance, the body, as well as the mind, retains that
vigorous habit which holds the prisoner still connected with life, and
teaches him to thrill at the long-forgotten chain of hopes, of wishes,
of disappointments, and mortifications, which affected his former
existence. But the wounds become callous as they harden, and other and
better feelings occupy their place, while they gradually die away in
forgetfulness. The enjoyments, the amusements of this world, occupy no
part of his time upon whom the gates of despair have once closed. I
tell thee, my kind physician, that for a season, in an insane attempt
to effect my liberty, I cut through a large portion of the living rock.
But Heaven cured me of so foolish an idea; and if I did not actually
come to love Alexius Comnenus--for how could that have been a possible
effect in any rational state of my intellects?--yet as I became
convinced of my own crimes, sins, and follies, the more and more I was
also persuaded that Alexius was but the agent through whom Heaven
exercised a dearly-purchased right of punishing me for my manifold
offences and transgressions; and that it was not therefore upon the
Emperor that my resentment ought to visit itself. And I can now say to
thee, that so far as a man who has undergone so dreadful a change can
be supposed to know his own mind, I feel no desire either to rival
Alexius in a race for empire, or to avail myself of any of the various
proffers which he proposes to me as the price of withdrawing my claim.
Let him keep unpurchased the crown, for which he has paid, in my
opinion, a price which it is not worth."

"This is extraordinary stoicism, noble Ursel," answered the physician
Douban. "Am I then to understand that you reject the fair offers of
Alexius, and desire, instead of all which he is willing--nay, anxious
to bestow--to be committed safely back to thy old blinded dungeon in
the Blacquernal, that you may continue at ease those pietistic
meditations which have already conducted thee to so extravagant a
conclusion?"

"Physician," said Ursel, while a shuddering fit that affected his whole
body testified his alarm at the alternative proposed--"one would
imagine thine own profession might have taught thee, that no mere
mortal man, unless predestined to be a glorified saint, could ever
prefer darkness to the light of day; blindness itself to the enjoyment
of the power of sight; the pangs of starving to competent sustenance,
or the damps of a dungeon to the free air of God's creation. No!--it
may be virtue to do so, but to such a pitch mine does not soar. All I
require of the Emperor for standing by him with all the power my name
can give him at this crisis is, that he will provide for my reception
as a monk in some of those pleasant and well endowed seminaries of
piety, to which his devotion, or his fears, have given rise. Let me not
be again the object of his suspicion, the operation of which is more
dreadful than that of being the object of his hate. Forgotten by power,
as I have myself lost the remembrance of those that wielded it, let me
find my way to the grave, unnoticed, unconstrained, at liberty, in
possession of my dim and disused organs of sight, and, above all, at
peace."

"If such be thy serious and earnest wish, noble Ursel," said the
physician, "I myself have no hesitation to warrant to thee the full
accomplishment of thy religious and moderate desires. But, bethink
thee, thou art once more an inhabitant of the court, in which thou
mayst obtain what thou wilt to-day; while to-morrow, shouldst thou
regret thy indifference, it may be thy utmost entreaty will not suffice
to gain for thee the slightest extension of thy present conditions."

"Be it so," said Ursel; "I will then stipulate for another condition,
which indeed has only reference to this day. I will solicit his
Imperial Majesty, with all humility, to spare me the pain of a personal
treaty between himself and me, and that he will be satisfied with the
solemn assurance that I am most willing to do in his favour all that he
is desirous of dictating; while, on the other hand, I desire only the
execution of those moderate conditions of my future aliment which I
have already told thee at length."

"But wherefore," said Douban, "shouldst thou be afraid of announcing to
the Emperor thy disposition to an agreement, which cannot be esteemed
otherwise than extremely moderate on thy part? Indeed, I fear the
Emperor will insist on a brief personal conference."

"I am not ashamed," said Ursel, "to confess the truth. It is true, that
I have, or think I have, renounced what the Scripture calls the pride
of life; but the old Adam still lives within us, and maintains against
the better part of our nature an inextinguishable quarrel, easy to be
aroused from its slumber, but as difficult to be again couched in
peace. While last night I but half understood that mine enemy was in my
presence, and while my faculties performed but half their duty in
recalling his deceitful and hated accents, did not my heart throb in my
bosom with all the agitation of a taken bird, and shall I again have to
enter into a personal treaty with the man who, be his general conduct
what it may, has been, the constant and unprovoked cause of my
unequalled misery? Douban, no!--to listen to his voice again, were to
hear an alarm sounded to every violent and vindictive passion, of my
heart; and though, may Heaven so help me as my intentions towards him
are upright, yet it is impossible for me to listen to his professions
with a chance of safety either to him or to myself."

"If you be so minded," replied Douban, "I shall only repeat to him your
stipulation, and you must swear to him that you will strictly observe
it. Without this being done, it must be difficult, or perhaps
impossible, to settle the league of which both are desirous."

"Amen!" said Ursel; "and as I am pure in my purpose, and resolved to
keep it to the uttermost, so may Heaven guard me from the influence of
precipitate revenge, ancient grudge, or new quarrel!"

An authoritative knock at the door of the sleeping chamber was now
heard, and Ursel, relieved by more powerful feelings, from the
giddiness of which he had complained, walked firmly into the bedroom,
and seating himself, waited with averted eyes the entrance of the
person who demanded admittance, and who proved to be no other than
Alexius Comnenus.

The Emperor appeared at the door in a warlike dress, suited for the
decoration of a prince who was to witness a combat in the lists fought
out before him.

"Sage Douban," he said, "has our esteemed prisoner, Ursel, made his
choice between our peace and enmity?"

"He hath, my lord," replied the physician, "embraced the lot of that
happy portion of mankind, whose hearts and lives are devoted to the
service of your Majesty's government."

"He will then this day," continued the Emperor, "render me the office
of putting down all those who may pretend to abet insurrection in his
name, and under pretext of his wrongs?"

"He will, my lord," replied the physician, "act to the fullest the part
which you require."

"And in what way," said the Emperor, adopting his most gracious tone of
voice, "would our faithful Ursel desire that services like these,
rendered in the hour of extreme need; should be acknowledged by the
Emperor?"

"Simply," answered Douban, "by saying nothing upon the subject. He
desires only that all jealousies between you and him may be henceforth
forgotten, and that he may be admitted into one of your Highness's
monastic institutions, with leave to dedicate the rest of his life to
the worship of Heaven and its saints."

"Hath he persuaded thee of this, Douban?"--said the Emperor, in a low
and altered voice. "By Heaven! when I consider from what prison he was
brought, and in what guise he inhabited it, I cannot believe in this
gall-less disposition. He must at least speak to me himself, ere I can
believe, in some degree, the transformation of the fiery Ursel into a
being so little capable of feeling the ordinary impulses of mankind."

"Hear me, Alexius Comnenus," said the prisoner; "and so may thine own
prayers to Heaven find access and acceptation, as thou believest the
words which I speak to thee in simplicity of heart. If thine empire of
Greece were made of coined gold, it would hold out no bait for my
acceptance; nor, I thank Heaven, have even the injuries I have
experienced at thy hand, cruel and extensive as they have been,
impressed upon me the slightest desire of requiting treachery with
treachery. Think of me as thou wilt, so thou seek'st not again to
exchange words with me; and believe me, that when thou hast put me
under the most rigid of thy ecclesiastical foundations, the discipline,
the fare, and the vigils, will be far superior to the existence falling
to the share of those whom the King delights to honour, and who
therefore must afford the King their society whenever they are summoned
to do so."

"It is hardly for me," said the physician, "to interpose in so high a
matter; yet, as trusted both by the noble Ursel, and by his Highness
the Emperor, I have made a brief abstract of these short conditions to
be kept by the high parties towards each other, _sub crimine falsi_."

The Emperor protracted the intercourse with Ursel, until he more fully
explained to him the occasion which he should have that very day for
his services. When they parted, Alexius, with a great show of
affection, embraced his late prisoner, while it required all the
self-command and stoicism of Ursel to avoid expressing in plain terms
the extent to which he abhorred the person who thus caressed him.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-NINTH.

     * * * * O, Conspiracy!
     Sham'st thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
     When evils are most free? O, then, by day,
     Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
     To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, Conspiracy;
     Hide it in smiles and affability;
     For if thou path thy native semblance on,
     Not Erebus itself were dim enough
     To hide thee from prevention.
                                  JULIUS CAESAR


The important morning at last arrived, on which, by the Imperial
proclamation, the combat between the Caesar and Count Robert of Paris
was appointed to take place. This was a circumstance in a great measure
foreign to the Grecian manners, and to which, therefore, the people
annexed different ideas from those which were associated with the same
solemn decision of God, as the Latins called it, by the Western
nations. The consequence was a vague, but excessive agitation among the
people, who connected the extraordinary strife which they were to
witness, with the various causes which had been whispered abroad as
likely to give occasion to some general insurrection of a great and
terrible nature.

By the Imperial order, regular lists had been prepared for the combat,
with opposite gates, or entrances, as was usual, for the admittance of
the two champions; and it was understood that the appeal was to be made
to the Divinity by each, according to the forms prescribed by the
Church of which the combatants were respectively members. The situation
of these lists was on the side of the shore adjoining on the west to
the continent. At no great distance, the walls of the city were seen,
of various architecture, composed of lime and of stone, and furnished
with no less than four-and-twenty gates, or posterns, five of which
regarded the land, and nineteen the water. All this formed a beautiful
prospect, much of which is still visible. The town itself is about
nineteen miles in circumference; and as it is on all sides surrounded
with lofty cypresses, its general appearance is that of a city arising
out of a stately wood of these magnificent trees, partly shrouding the
pinnacles, obelisks, and minarets, which then marked the site of many
noble Christian temples; but now, generally speaking, intimate the
position of as many Mahomedan mosques.

These lists, for the convenience of spectators, were surrounded on all
sides by long rows of seats, sloping downwards. In the middle of these
seats, and exactly opposite the centre of the lists, was a high throne,
erected for the Emperor himself; and which was separated from the more
vulgar galleries by a circuit of wooden barricades, which an
experienced eye could perceive, might, in case of need, be made
serviceable for purposes of defence.

The lists were sixty yards in length, by perhaps about forty in
breadth, and these afforded ample space for the exercise of the combat,
both on horseback and on foot. Numerous bands of the Greek citizens
began, with the very break of day, to issue from the gates and posterns
of the city, to examine and wonder at the construction of the lists,
pass their criticisms upon the purposes of the peculiar parts of the
fabric, and occupy places, to secure them for the spectacle. Shortly
after arrived a large band of those soldiers who were called the Roman
Immortals. These entered without ceremony, and placed themselves on
either hand of the wooden barricade which fenced the Emperor's seat.
Some of them took even a greater liberty; for, affecting to be pressed
against the boundary, there were individuals who approached the
partition itself, and seemed to meditate climbing over it, and placing
themselves on the same side with the Emperor. Some old domestic slaves
of the household now showed themselves, as if for the purpose of
preserving this sacred circle for Alexius and his court; and, in
proportion as the Immortals began to show themselves encroaching and
turbulent, the strength of the defenders of the prohibited precincts
seemed gradually to increase.

There was, though scarcely to be observed, besides the grand access to
the Imperial seat from without, another opening also from the outside,
secured by a very strong door, by which different persons received
admission beneath the seats destined for the Imperial party. These
persons, by their length of limb, breadth of shoulders, by the fur of
their cloaks, and especially by the redoubted battle-axes which all of
them bore, appeared to be Varangians; but, although neither dressed in
their usual habit of pomp, nor in their more effectual garb of war,
still, when narrowly examined, they might be seen to possess their
usual offensive weapons. These men, entering in separate and straggling
parties, might be observed to join the slaves of the interior of the
palace in opposing the intrusion of the Immortals upon the seat of the
Emperor, and the benches around. Two or three Immortals, who had
actually made good their frolic, and climbed over the division, were
flung back again, very unceremoniously, by the barbaric strength and
sinewy arms of the Varangians.

The people around, and in the adjacent galleries, most of whom had the
air of citizens in their holyday dresses, commented a good deal on
these proceedings, and were inclined strongly to make part with the
Immortals. "It was a shame to the Emperor," they said, "to encourage
these British barbarians to interpose themselves by violence between
his person and the Immortal cohorts of the city, who were in some sort
his own children."

Stephanos, the gymnastic, whose bulky strength and stature rendered him
conspicuous amid this party, said, without hesitation, "If there are
two people here who will join in saying that the Immortals are unjustly
deprived of their right of guarding the Emperor's person, here is the
hand that shall place them beside the Imperial chair."

"Not so," quoth a centurion of the Immortals, whom we have already
introduced to our readers by the name of Harpax; "Not so, Stephanos;
that happy time may arrive, but it is not yet come, my gem of the
circus. Thou knowest that on this occasion it is one of these Counts,
or western Franks, who undertakes the combat; and the Varangians, who
call these people their enemies, have some reason to claim a precedency
in guarding the lists, which it might not at this moment be convenient
to dispute with them. Why, man, if thou wert half so witty as thou art
long, thou wouldst be sensible that it were bad woodmanship to raise
the hollo upon the game, ere it had been driven within compass of the
nets."

While the athlete rolled his huge grey eyes as if to conjure out the
sense of this intimation, his little friend Lysimachus, the artist,
putting himself to pain to stand upon his tiptoe, and look intelligent,
said, approaching as near as he could to Harpax's ear, "Thou mayst
trust me, gallant centurion, that this man. of mould and muscle shall
neither start like a babbling hound on a false scent, nor become mute
and inert, when the general signal is given. But tell me," said he,
speaking very low, and for that purpose mounting a bench, which brought
him on a level with the centurion's ear, "would it not have been better
that a strong guard of the valiant Immortals had been placed in this
wooden citadel, to ensure the object of the day?"

"Without question," said the centurion, "it was so meant; but these
strolling Varangians have altered their station of their own authority."

"Were it not--well," said Lysimachus, "that you, who are greatly more
numerous than the barbarians, should begin a fray before more of these
strangers arrive?"

"Content ye, friend," said the centurion, coldly, "we know our time. An
attack commenced too early would be worse than thrown away, nor would
an opportunity occur of executing our project in the fitting time, if
an alarm were prematurely given at this moment."

So saying, he shuffled off among his fellow-soldiers, so as to avoid
suspicious intercourse with such persons as were only concerned with
the civic portion of the conspirators.

As the morning advanced, and the sun took a higher station in the
horizon, the various persons whom curiosity, or some more decided
motive, brought to see the proposed combat, were seen streaming from
different parts of the town, and rushing to occupy such accommodation
as the circuit round the lists afforded them. In their road to the
place where preparation for combat was made, they had to ascend a sort
of cape, which, in the form of a small hill, projected into the
Hellespont, and the butt of which, connecting it with the shore,
afforded a considerable ascent, and of course a more commanding view of
the strait between Europe and Asia, than either the immediate vicinity
of the city, or the still lower ground upon which the lists were
erected. In passing this height, the earlier visitants of the lists
made little or no halt; but after a time, when it became obvious that
those who had hurried forward to the place of combat were lingering
there without any object or occupation, they that followed them in the
same route, with natural curiosity, paid a tribute to the landscape,
bestowing some attention on its beauty, and paused to see what auguries
could be collected from the water, which were likely to have any
concern in indicating the fate of the events that were to take place.
Some straggling seamen were the first who remarked that a squadron of
the Greek small craft (being that of Tancred) were in the act of making
their way from Asia, and threatening a descent upon Constantinople.

"It is strange," said a person, by rank the captain of a galley, "that
these small vessels, which were ordered to return to Constantinople as
soon as they disembarked the Latins, should have remained so long at
Scutari, and should not be rowing back to the imperial city until this
time, on the second day after their departure from thence."

"I pray to Heaven," said another of the same profession, "that these
seamen may come alone. It seems to me as if their ensign-staffs,
bowsprits, and topmasts were decorated with the same ensigns, or nearly
the same, with those which the Latins displayed upon them, when, by the
Emperor's order, they were transported towards Palestine; so methinks
the voyage back again resembles that of a fleet of merchant vessels,
who have been prevented from discharging their cargo at the place of
their destination."

"There is little good," said one of the politicians whom we formerly
noticed, "in dealing with such commodities, whether they are imported
or exported. Yon ample banner which streams over the foremost galley,
intimates the presence of a chieftain of no small rank among the
Counts, whether it be for valour or for nobility."

The seafaring leader added, with the voice of one who hints alarming
tidings, "They seem to have got to a point in the straits as high as
will enable them to run down--with the tide, and clear the cape which
we stand on, although with what purpose they aim to land so close
beneath the walls of the city, he is a wiser man than I who pretends to
determine."

"Assuredly," returned his comrade, "the intention is not a kind one.
The wealth of the city has temptations to a poor people, who only value
the iron which they possess as affording them the means of procuring
the gold which they covet."

"Ay, brother," answered Demetrius the politician, "but see you not,
lying at anchor within this bay which is formed by the cape, and at the
very point where these heretics are likely to be carried by the tide,
six strong vessels, having the power of sending forth, not merely
showers of darts and arrows, but of Grecian fire, as it is called, from
their hollow decks? If these Frank gentry continue directing their
course upon the Imperial city, being, as they are,

                                    ------'propago
     Contemptrix Superum sane, saevaeque avidissima caedis
     Et violenta;' [Footnote: Ovid, Met.]

we shall speedily see a combat better worth witnessing than that
announced by the great trumpet of the Varangians. If you love me, let
us sit down here for a moment, and see how this matter is to end."

"An excellent motion, my ingenious friend," said Lascaris, which was
the name of the other citizen; "but bethink you, shall we not be in
danger from the missiles with which the audacious Latins will not fail
to return the Greek fire, if, according to your conjecture, it shall be
poured upon them by the Imperial squadron?"

"That is not ill argued, my friend," said Demetrius; "but know that you
have to do with a man who has been in such extremities before now; and
if such a discharge should open from the sea, I would propose to you to
step back some fifty yards inland, and thus to interpose the very crest
of the cape between us and the discharge of missiles; a mere child
might thus learn to face them without any alarm."

"You are a wise man, neighbour," said Lascaris, "and possess such a
mixture of valour and knowledge as becomes a man whom a friend might be
supposed safely to risk his life with. There be those, for instance,
who cannot show you the slightest glimpse of what is going on, without
bringing you within peril of your life; whereas you, my worthy friend
Demetrius, between your accurate knowledge of military affairs, and
your regard for your friend, are sure to show him all that is to be
seen without the least risk to a person, who is naturally unwilling to
think of exposing himself to injury. But, Holy Virgin! what is the
meaning of that red flag which the Greek Admiral has this instant
hoisted?"

"Why, you see, neighbour," answered Demetrius, "yonder western heretic
continues to advance without minding the various signs which our
Admiral has made to him to desist, and now he hoists the bloody
colours, as if a man should clench his fist and say, If you persevere
in your uncivil intention, I will do so and so."

"By St. Sophia," said Lascaris, "and that is giving him fair warning.
But what is it the Imperial Admiral is about to do?"

"Run! run! friend Lascaris," said Demetrius, "or you will see more of
that than perchance you have any curiosity for."

Accordingly, to add the strength of example to precept, Demetrius
himself girt up his loins, and retreated with the most edifying speed
to the opposite side of the ridge, accompanied by the greater part of
the crowd, who had tarried there to witness the contest which the
newsmonger promised, and were determined to take his word for their own
safety. The sound and sight which had alarmed Demetrius, was the
discharge of a large portion of Greek fire, which perhaps may be best
compared to one of those immense Congreve rockets of the present day,
which takes on its shoulders a small grapnel or anchor, and proceeds
groaning through the air, like a fiend overburdened by the mandate of
some inexorable magician, and of which the operation was so terrifying,
that the crews of the vessels attacked by this strange weapon
frequently forsook every means of defence, and ran themselves ashore.
One of the principal ingredients of this dreadful fire was supposed to
be naphtha, or the bitumen which is collected on the banks of the Dead
Sea, and which, when in a state of ignition, could only be extinguished
by a very singular mixture, and which it was not likely to come in
contact with. It produced a thick smoke and loud explosion, and was
capable, says Gibbon, of communicating its flames with equal vehemence
in descent or lateral progress, [Footnote: For a full account of the
Greek five, see Gibbon, chapter 53] In sieges, it was poured from the
ramparts, or launched like our bombs, in red-hot balls of stone or
iron, or it was darted in flax twisted round arrows and in javelins. It
was considered as a state secret of the greatest importance; and for
wellnigh four centuries it was unknown to the Mahomedans. But at length
the composition was discovered by the Saracens, and used by them for
repelling the crusaders, and overpowering the Greeks, upon whose side
it had at one time been the most formidable implement of defence. Some
exaggeration--we must allow for a barbarous period; but there seems no
doubt that the general description of the crusader Joinville should be
admitted as correct:--"It came flying through the air," says that good
knight, "like a winged dragon, about the thickness of a hogshead, with
the report of thunder and the speed of lightning, and the darkness of
the night was dispelled by this horrible illumination."

Not only the bold Demetrius and his pupil Lascaris, but all the crowd
whom they influenced, fled manfully when the commodore of the Greeks
fired the first discharge; and as the other vessels in the squadron
followed his example, the heavens were filled with the unusual and
outrageous noise, while the smoke was so thick as to darken the very
air. As the fugitives passed the crest of the hill, they saw the
seaman, whom we formerly mentioned as a spectator, snugly reclining
under cover of a dry ditch, where he managed so as to secure himself as
far as possible from any accident. He could not, however, omit breaking
his jest on the politicians.

"What, ho!" he cried, "my good friends," without raising himself above
the counterscarp of his ditch, "will you not remain upon your station
long enough to finish that hopeful lecture upon battle by sea and land,
which you had so happy an opportunity of commencing? Believe me, the
noise is more alarming than hurtful; the fire is all pointed in a
direction opposite to yours, and if one of those dragons which you see
does happen to fly landward instead of seaward, it is but the mistake
of some cabin-boy, who has used his linstock with more willingness than
ability."

Demetrius and Lascaris just heard enough of the naval hero's harangue,
to acquaint them with the new danger with which they might be assailed
by the possible misdirection of the weapons, and, rushing clown towards
the lists at the head of a crowd half-desperate with fear, they hastily
propagated the appalling news, that the Latins were coming back from
Asia with the purpose of landing in arms, pillaging, and burning the
city. The uproar, in the meantime, of this unexpected occurrence, was
such as altogether to vindicate, in public opinion, the reported cause,
however exaggerated. The thunder of the Greek fire came successively,
one hard upon the other, and each, in its turn, spread a blot of black
smoke upon the face of the landscape, which, thickened by so many
successive clouds, seemed at last, like that raised by a sustained fire
of modern artillery to overshadow the whole horizon.

The small squadron of Tancred were completely hid from view in the
surging volumes of darkness, which the breath of the weapons of the
enemy had spread around him; and it seemed by a red light, which began
to show itself among the thickest of the veil of darkness, that one of
the flotilla at least had caught fire. Yet the Latins resisted, with an
obstinacy worthy of their own courage, and the fame of their celebrated
leader. Some advantage they had, on account of their small size, and
their lowness in the water, as well as the clouded state of the
atmosphere, which rendered them difficult marks for the fire of the
Greeks.

To increase these advantages, Tancred, as well by boats as by the kind
of rude signals made use of at the period, dispersed orders to his
fleet, that each bark, disregarding the fate of the others, should
press forward individually, and that the men from each should be put on
shore wheresoever and howsoever they could effect that manoeuvre.
Tancred himself set a noble example; he was on board a stout vessel,
fenced in some degree against the effect of the Greek fire by being in
a great measure covered with raw hides, which hides had also been
recently steeped in water. This vessel contained upwards of a hundred
valiant warriors, several of them of knightly order, who had all night
toiled at the humble labours of the oar, and now in the morning applied
their chivalrous hands to the arblast and to the bow, which were in
general accounted the weapons of persons of a lower rank. Thus armed,
and thus manned. Prince Tancred bestowed upon his bark the full
velocity which wind, and tide, and oar, could enable her to obtain, and
placing her in the situation to profit by them as much as his maritime
skill could direct, he drove with the speed of lightning among the
vessels of Lemnos, plying on either side, bows, crossbows, javelins,
and military missiles of every kind, with the greater advantage that
the Greeks, trusting to their artificial fire, had omitted arming
themselves with other weapons; so that when the valiant Crusader bore
down on them with so much fury, repaying the terrors of their fire with
a storm of bolts and arrows no less formidable, they began to feel that
their own advantage was much less than they had supposed, and that,
like most other dangers, the maritime fire of the Greeks, when
undauntedly confronted, lost at least one-half of its terrors. The
Grecian sailors, too, when they observed the vessels approach so near,
filled with the steel-clad Latins, began to shrink from a contest to be
maintained hand to hand with so terrible an enemy.

By degrees, smoke began to issue from the sides of the great Grecian
argosy, and the voice of Tancred announced to his soldiers that the
Grecian Admiral's vessel had taken fire, owing to negligence in the
management of the means of destruction she possessed, and that all they
had now to do was to maintain such a distance as to avoid sharing her
fate. Sparkles and flashes of flame were next seen leaping from place
to place on board of the great hulk, as if the element had had the
sense and purpose of spreading wider the consternation, and disabling
the few who still paid attention to the commands of their Admiral, and
endeavoured to extinguish the fire. The consciousness of the
combustible nature of the freight, began to add despair to terror; from
the boltsprit, the rigging, the yards, the sides, and every part of the
vessel, the unfortunate crew were seen dropping themselves, to exchange
for the most part a watery death for one by the more dreadful agency of
fire. The crew of Tancred's bark, ceasing, by that generous prince's
commands, to offer any additional annoyance to an enemy who was at once
threatened by the perils of the ocean and of conflagration, ran their
vessel ashore in a smooth part of the bay, and jumping into the shallow
sea, made the land without difficulty; many of their steeds being, by
the exertions of the owners, and the docility of the animals, brought
ashore at the same time with their masters. Their commander lost no
time in forming their serried ranks into a phalanx of lancers, few
indeed at first, but perpetually increasing as ship after ship of the
little flotilla ran ashore, or, having more deliberately moored their
barks, landed their men, and joined their companions.

