
Women have invaded many of the trades and some of the professions.
Sewing, to the present killing extent, they cannot long bear.
Factories seem likely to afford them permanent employment. In the
culture of fruit, flowers, and vegetables, even in the sale of them,
we rejoice to see them engaged. In domestic service they will be
aided, but can never be supplanted, by machinery. As much room as
there is here for Woman's mind and Woman's labor, will always be
filled. A few have usurped the martial province, but these must always
be few; the nature of Woman is opposed to war. It is natural enough to
see "female physicians," and we believe that the lace cap and work-bag
are as much at home here as the wig and gold-headed cane. In the
priesthood, they have, from all time, shared more or less--in many
eras more than at the present. We believe there has been no female
lawyer, and probably will be none. The pen, many of the fine arts,
they have made their own; and in the more refined countries of the
world, as writers, as musicians, as painters, as actors, women occupy
as advantageous ground as men. Writing and music may be esteemed
professions for them more than any other.

But there are two others--where the demand must invariably be immense,
and for which they are naturally better fitted than men--for which we
should like to see them better prepared and better rewarded than they
are. These are the professions of nurse to the sick, and of the
teacher. The first of these professions we have warmly desired to see
dignified. It is a noble one, now most unjustly regarded in the light
of menial service. It is one which no menial, no servile nature can
fitly occupy. We were rejoiced when an intelligent lady of
Massachusetts made the refined heroine of a little romance select this
calling. This lady (Mrs. George Lee) has looked on society with
unusual largeness of spirit and healthiness of temper. She is well
acquainted with the world of conventions, but sees beneath it the
world of nature. She is a generous writer, and unpretending as the
generous are wont to be. We do not recall the name of the tale, but
the circumstance above mentioned marks its temper. We hope to see the
time when the refined and cultivated will choose this profession, and
learn it, not only through experience and under the direction of the
doctor, but by acquainting themselves with the laws of matter and of
mind, so that all they do shall be intelligently done, and afford them
the means of developing intelligence, as well as the nobler, tenderer
feelings of humanity; for even this last part of the benefit they
cannot receive if their work be done in a selfish or mercenary spirit.

The other profession is that of teacher, for which women are
peculiarly adapted by their nature, superiority in tact, quickness of
sympathy, gentleness, patience, and a clear and animated manner in
narration or description. To form a good teacher, should be added to
this, sincere modesty combined with firmness, liberal views, with a
power and will to liberalize them still further, a good method, and
habits of exact and thorough investigation. In the two last requisites
women are generally deficient, but there are now many shining examples
to prove that if they are immethodical and superficial as teachers,
it is because it is the custom so to teach them, and that when aware
of these faults, they can and will correct them.

The profession is of itself an excellent one for the improvement of
the teacher during that interim between youth and maturity when the
mind needs testing, tempering, and to review and rearrange the
knowledge it has acquired. The natural method of doing this for one's
self, is to attempt teaching others; those years also are the best of
the practical teacher. The teacher should be near the pupil, both in
years and feelings; no oracle, but the eldest brother or sister of the
pupil. More experience and years form the lecturer and director of
studies, but injure the powers as to familiar teaching.

These are just the years of leisure in the lives even of those women
who are to enter the domestic sphere, and this calling most of all
compatible with a constant progress as to qualifications for that.

Viewing the matter thus, it may well be seen that we should hail with
joy the assurance that sixty thousand _female_ teachers are
wanted, and more likely to be, and that a plan is projected which
looks wise, liberal and generous, to afford the means, to those whose
hearts answer to this high calling, of obeying their dictates.

The plan is to have Cincinnati as a central point, where teachers
shall be for a short time received, examined, and prepared for their
duties. By mutual agreement and cooperation of the various sects,
funds are to be raised, and teachers provided, according to the wants
and tendencies of the various locations now destitute. What is to be
done for them centrally, is for suitable persons to examine into the
various kinds of fitness, communicate some general views whose value
has been tested, and counsel adapted to the difficulties and
advantages of their new positions. The central committee are to have
the charge of raising funds, and finding teachers, and places where
teachers are wanted.

The passage of thoughts, teachers and funds, will be from East to
West--the course of sunlight upon this earth.

The plan is offered as the most extensive and pliant means of doing a
good and preventing ill to this nation, by means of a national
education; whose normal school shall have an invariable object in the
search after truth, and the diffusion of the means of knowledge, while
its form shall be plastic according to the wants of the time. This
normal school promises to have good effects, for it proposes worthy
aims through simple means, and the motive for its formation and
support seems to be disinterested philanthropy.

It promises to eschew the bitter spirit of sectarianism and
proselytism, else we, for one party, could have nothing to do with it.
Men, no doubt, have oftentimes been kept from absolute famine by the
wheat with which such tares are mingled; but we believe the time is
come when a purer and more generous food is to be offered to the
people at large. We believe the aim of all education to be to rouse
the mind to action, show it the means of discipline and of
information; then leave it free, with God, Conscience, and the love of
Truth, for its guardians and teachers. Woe be to those who sacrifice
these aims of universal and eternal value to the propagation of a set
of opinions! We can accept such doctrine as is offered by Rev. Colvin
E. Stowe, one of the committee, in the following passage:

"In judicious practice, I am persuaded there will seldom be any very
great difficulty, especially if there be excited in the community
anything like a whole-hearted and enlightened sincerity in the cause
of public instruction.

"It is all right for people to suit their own taste and convictions in
respect to sect; and by fair means, and at proper times, to teach
their children and those under their influence to prefer the
denominations which they prefer; but further than this no one has any
right to go. It is all wrong to hazard the well-being of the soul, to
jeopardize great public interests for the sake of advancing the
interests of a sect. People must learn to practise some self-denial,
on Christian principles, in respect to their denominational prejudices
as well as in respect to other things, before pure religion can ever
gain a complete victory over every form of human selfishness."

The persons who propose themselves to the examination and instruction
of the teachers at Cincinnati, till the plan shall be sufficiently
under way to provide regularly for the office, are Mrs. Stowe and Miss
Catharine Beecher, ladies well known to fame, as possessing unusual
qualifications for the task.

As to finding abundance of teachers, who that reads this little book
of Mr. Burdett's, or the account of the compensation of female labor
in New York, and the hopeless, comfortless, useless, pernicious lives
of those who have even the advantage of getting work must lead, with
the sufferings and almost inevitable degradation to which those who
cannot are exposed, but must long to snatch such as are capable of
this better profession (and among the multitude there must be many who
are or could be made so) from their present toils, and make them free,
and the means of freedom and growth in others?

To many books on such subjects--among others to "Woman in the
Nineteenth Century"--the objection has been made, that they exhibit
ills without specifying any practical means for their remedy. The
writer of the last-named essay does indeed think that it contains one
great rule which, if laid to heart, would prove a practical remedy for
many ills, and of such daily and hourly efficacy in the conduct of
life, that any extensive observance of it for a single year would
perceptibly raise the tone of thought, feeling and conduct, throughout
the civilized world. But to those who ask not only such a principle,
but an external method for immediate use, we say that here is one
proposed which looks noble and promising; the proposers offer
themselves to the work with heart and hand, with time and purse. Go ye
and do likewise.




GEORGE SAND.


When I first knew George Sand, I thought to have found tried the
experiment I wanted. I did not value Bettine so much. She had not
pride enough for me. Only now, when I am sure of myself, can I pour
out my soul at the feet of another. In the assured soul it is kingly
prodigality; in one which cannot forbear it is mere babyhood. I love
"abandon" only when natures are capable of the extreme reverse. I know
Bettine would end in nothing; when I read her book I knew she could
not outlive her love.

But in _"Les Sept Cordes de la Lyre,"_ which I read first, I saw
the knowledge of the passions and of social institutions, with the
celestial choice which rose above them. I loved Helene, who could hear
so well the terrene voices, yet keep her eye fixed on the stars. That
would be my wish also,--to know all, and then choose. I even revered
her, for I was not sure that I could have resisted the call of the
_now_; could have left the spirit and gone to God; and at a more
ambitious age I could not have refused the philosopher. But I hoped
much from her steadfastness, and I thought I heard the last tones of a
purified life. Gretchen, in the golden cloud, is raised above all past
delusions, worthy to redeem and upbear the wise man who stumbled into
the pit of error while searching for truth.

Still, in "Andre" and "Jacques," I trace the same high morality of one
who had tried the liberty of circumstance only to learn to appreciate
the liberty of law;--to know that license is the foe of freedom; and,
though the sophistry of Passion in these books disgusted me, flowers
of purest hue seemed to grow upon the dark and dirty ground. I thought
she had cast aside the slough of her past life, and begun a new
existence beneath the sun of a new ideal.

But here, in the _"Lettres d'un Voyageur,"_ what do I see? An
unfortunate, wailing her loneliness, wailing her mistakes, _writing
for money!_ She has genius, and a manly grasp of mind, but not a
manly heart. Will there never be a being to combine a man's mind and a
woman's heart, and who yet finds life too rich to weep over? Never?

When I read in _"Leon Leoni"_ the account of the jeweller's
daughter's life with her mother, passed in dressing, and learning to
be looked at when dressed, _"avec un front impassible,"_ it
reminded me of ---- and her mother. What a heroine she would be for
Sand! She has the same fearless softness with Juliet, and a sportive
_naivete_ a mixture of bird and kitten, unknown to the dupe of
Leoni.

If I were a man, and wished a wife, as many do, merely as an ornament,
a silken toy, I would take ---- as soon as any I know. Her fantastic,
impassioned and mutable nature would yield an inexhaustible amusement.
She is capable of the most romantic actions,--wild as the falcon,
voluptuous as the tuberose; yet she has not in her the elements of
romance, like a deeper or less susceptible nature. My cold and
reasoning ----, with her one love lying, perhaps never to be unfolded,
beneath such sheaths of pride and reserve, would make a far better
heroine.

---- and her mother differ from Juliet and _her_ mother by the
impulse a single strong character gave them. Even at this distance of
time there is a light but perceptible taste of iron in the water.

George Sand disappoints me, as almost all beings do, especially since
I have been brought close to her person by the _"Lettres d'un
Voyageur."_ Her remarks on Lavater seem really shallow, _a la
mode du genre feminin._ No self-ruling Aspasia she, but a frail
woman, mourning over her lot. Any peculiarity in her destiny seems
accidental; she is forced to this and to that to earn her bread,
forsooth!

Yet her style--with what a deeply smouldering fire it burns! Not
vehement, but intense, like Jean Jacques.




FROM A NOTICE OF GEORGE SAND.


It is probably known to a great proportion of readers that this writer
is a woman, who writes under the name, and frequently assumes the
dress and manners, of a man. It is also known that she has not only
broken the marriage-bond, and, since that, formed other connections,
independent of the civil and ecclesiastical sanction, but that she
first rose into notice through works which systematically assailed the
present institution of marriage, and the social bonds which are
connected with it.

No facts are more adapted to startle every feeling of our community;
but, since the works of Sand are read here, notwithstanding, and
cannot fail to be so while they exert so important an influence
abroad, it would be well they should be read intelligently, as to the
circumstances of their birth and their tendency.

George Sand we esteem to be a person of strong passions, but of
original nobleness and a love of right sufficient to guide them all to
the service of worthy aims. But she fell upon evil times. She was
given in marriage, according to the fashion of the old regime; she was
taken from a convent, where she had heard a great deal about the law
of God and the example of Jesus, into a society where no vice was
proscribed, if it would only wear the cloak of hypocrisy. She found
herself impatient of deception, and loudly appealed to by passion; she
yielded, but she could not do so, as others did, sinning against what
she owned to be the rule of right and the will of Heaven. She
protested, she examined, she "hacked into the roots of things," and
the bold sound of her axe called around her every foe that finds a
home amid the growths of civilization. Still she persisted. "If it be
real," thought she, "it cannot be destroyed; as to what is false, the
sooner it goes the better; and I, for one, would rather perish by its
fall, than wither in its shade."

Schiller puts into the mouth of Mary Stuart these words, as her only
plea: "The world knows the worst of me, and I may boast that, though I
have erred, I am better than my reputation." Sand may say the same.
All is open, noble; the free descriptions, the sophistry of passion,
are, at least, redeemed by a desire for truth as strong as ever beat
in any heart. To the weak or unthinking, the reading of such books may
not be desirable, for only those who take exercise as men can digest
strong meat. But to any one able to understand the position and
circumstances, we believe this reading cannot fail of bringing good
impulses, valuable suggestions; and it is quite free from that subtle
miasma which taints so large a portion of French literature, not less
since the Revolution than before. This we say to the foreign reader.
To her own country, Sand is a boon precious and prized, both as a
warning and a leader, for which none there can be ungrateful. She has
dared to probe its festering wounds; and if they be not past all
surgery, she is one who, most of any, helps towards a cure.

Would, indeed, the surgeon had come with quite clean hands! A woman of
Sand's genius--as free, as bold, and pure from even the suspicion of
error--might have filled an apostolic station among her people with
what force had come her cry, "If it be false, give it up; but if it be
true, keep to it,-- one or the other!"

But we have read all we wish to say upon this subject lately uttered
just from the quarter we could wish. It is such a woman, so
unblemished in character, so high in aim, so pure in soul, that should
address this other, as noble in nature, but clouded by error, and
struggling with circumstances. It is such women that will do such
others justice. They are not afraid to look for virtue, and reply to
aspiration, among those who have _not_ dwelt "in decencies
forever." It is a source of pride and happiness to read this address
from the heart of Elizabeth Barrett:--

  TO GEORGE SAND.

  A DESIRE.

  Thou large-brained woman and large-hearted man,
    Self-called George Sand! whose soul amid the lions
    Of thy tumultuous senses moans defiance,
  And answers roar for roar, as spirits can,--
  I would some wild, miraculous thunder ran
    Above the applauding circus, in appliance
    Of thine own nobler nature's strength and science,
  Drawing two pinions, white as wings of swan,
  From the strong shoulders, to amaze the place
    With holier light! That thou, to woman's claim,
  And man's, might join, beside, the angel's grace
    Of a pure genius, sanctified from blame,
  Till child and maiden pressed to thine embrace,
    To kiss upon thy lips a stainless fame!

     *       *       *       *      *

  TO THE SAME.

  A RECOGNITION.

  True genius, but true woman! dost deny
    Thy woman's nature with a manly scorn,
    And break away the gauds and armlets worn
  By weaker woman in captivity?
  Ah, vain denial! that revolted cry
  Is sobbed in by a woman's voice forlorn:--
  Thy woman's hair, my sister! all unshorn,
    Floats back dishevelled strength in agony,
  Disproving thy man's name; and while before
    The world thou burnest in a poet-fire,
  We see thy woman-heart beat evermore
    Through the large flame. Beat purer, heart! and higher,
  Till God unsex thee on the spirit-shore,
    To which, alone unsexing, purely aspire!

     *       *       *       *       *

This last sonnet seems to have been written after seeing the picture
of Sand, which represents her in a man's dress, but with long, loose
hair, and an eye whose mournful fire is impressive, even in the
caricatures.

For some years Sand has quitted her post of assailant. She has seen
that it is better to seek some form of life worthy to supersede the
old, than rudely to destroy it, heedless of the future. Her force is
bending towards philanthropic measures. She does not appear to possess
much of the constructive faculty; and, though her writings command a
great pecuniary compensation, and have a wide sway, it is rather for
their tendency than for their thought. She has reached no commanding
point of view from which she may give orders to the advanced corps.
She is still at work with others in the breach, though she works with
more force than almost any.

In power, indeed, Sand bears the palm above all other French
novelists. She is vigorous in conception, often great in the
apprehension and the contrast of characters. She knows passion, as has
been hinted, at a _white_ heat, when all the lower particles are
remoulded by its power. Her descriptive talent is very great, and her
poetic feeling exquisite. She wants but little of being a poet, but
that little is indispensable. Yet she keeps us always hovering on the
borders of enchanted fields. She has, to a signal degree, that power
of exact transcript from her own mind, in which almost all writers
fail. There is no veil, no half-plastic integument between us and the
thought; we vibrate perfectly with it.

This is her chief charm, and next to it is one in which we know no
French writer that resembles her, except Rousseau, though he, indeed,
is vastly her superior in it; that is, of concentrated glow. Her
nature glows beneath the words, like fire beneath ashes,--deep, deep!

Her best works are unequal; in many parts written hastily, or
carelessly, or with flagging spirits. They all promise far more than
they can perform; the work is not done masterly; she has not reached
that point where a writer sits at the helm of his own genius.

Sometimes she plies the oar,--sometimes she drifts. But what greatness
she has is genuine; there is no tinsel of any kind, no drapery
carefully adjusted, no chosen gesture about her. May Heaven lead her,
at last, to the full possession of her best self, in harmony with the
higher laws of life!

We are not acquainted with all her works, but among those we know,
mention "_La Roche Maupart_," "_Andre_," "_Jacques_," "_Les Sept Cordes
de la Lyre_," and "_Les Maitres Mosaistes_," as representing her higher
inspirations, her sincerity in expression, and her dramatic powers.
They are full of faults; still they show her scope and aim with some
fairness, which such of her readers as chance first on such of her books
as "_Leone Leoni_" may fail to find; or even such as "_Simon_," and
"_Spiridion_," though into the imperfect web of these are woven threads
of pure gold. Such is the first impression made by the girl Fiamma, so
noble, as she appears before us with the words "_E l'onore_;" such the
thought in _Spiridion_ of making the apparition the reward of virtue.

The work she is now publishing, "_Consuelo_" with its sequel,
"_Baroness de Rudolstadt_," exhibits her genius poised on a
firmer pedestal, breathing a serener air. Still it is faulty in
conduct, and shows some obliquity of vision. She has not reached the
Interpreter's house yet. But when she does, she will have clues to
guide many a pilgrim, whom one less tried, less tempted than herself
could not help on the way.




FROM A CRITICISM ON "CONSUELO."

