defray his charges, for indeed it is great honor to any court to have
within it so noble and gentle a cavalier. How say you, sire?" he
asked, turning to the Spanish refugee, while the herald of Navarre was
conducted from the chamber by the old warrior.

"It is not our custom in Spain to reward pertness in a messenger," Don
Pedro answered, patting the head of his greyhound. "Yet we have all
heard the lengths to which your royal generosity runs."

"In sooth, yes," cried the King of Majorca.

"Who should know it better than we?" said Don Pedro bitterly, "since we
have had to fly to you in our trouble as to the natural protector of all
who are weak."

"Nay, nay, as brothers to a brother," cried the prince, with sparkling
eyes. "We doubt not, with the help of God, to see you very soon restored
to those thrones from which you have been so traitorously thrust."

"When that happy day comes," said Pedro, "then Spain shall be to you as
Aquitaine, and, be your project what it may, you may ever count on every
troop and every ship over which flies the banner of Castile."

"And," added the other, "upon every aid which the wealth and power of
Majorca can bestow."

"Touching the hundred thousand crowns in which I stand your debtor,"
continued Pedro carelessly, "it can no doubt----"

"Not a word, sire, not a word!" cried the prince. "It is not now when
you are in grief that I would vex your mind with such base and sordid
matters. I have said once and forever that I am yours with every
bow-string of my army and every florin in my coffers."

"Ah! here is indeed a mirror of chivalry," said Don Pedro. "I think,
Sir Fernando, since the prince's bounty is stretched so far, that we
may make further use of his gracious goodness to the extent of fifty
thousand crowns. Good Sir William Felton, here, will doubtless settle
the matter with you."

The stout old English counsellor looked somewhat blank at this prompt
acceptance of his master's bounty.

"If it please you, sire," he said, "the public funds are at their
lowest, seeing that I have paid twelve thousand men of the companies,
and the new taxes--the hearth-tax and the wine-tax--not yet come in. If
you could wait until the promised help from England comes----"

"Nay, nay, my sweet cousin," cried Don Pedro. "Had we known that your
own coffers were so low, or that this sorry sum could have weighed one
way or the other, we had been loth indeed----"

"Enough, sire, enough!" said the prince, flushing with vexation. "If
the public funds be, indeed, so backward, Sir William, there is still,
I trust, my own private credit, which hath never been drawn upon for my
own uses, but is now ready in the cause of a friend in adversity. Go,
raise this money upon our own jewels, if nought else may serve, and see
that it be paid over to Don Fernando."

"In security I offer----" cried Don Pedro.

"Tush! tush!" said the prince. "I am not a Lombard, sire. Your kingly
pledge is my security, without bond or seal. But I have tidings for you,
my lords and lieges, that our brother of Lancaster is on his way for our
capital with four hundred lances and as many archers to aid us in our
venture. When he hath come, and when our fair consort is recovered in
her health, which I trust by the grace of God may be ere many weeks be
past, we shall then join the army at Dax, and set our banners to the
breeze once more."

A buzz of joy at the prospect of immediate action rose up from the group
of warriors. The prince smiled at the martial ardor which shone upon
every face around him.

"It will hearten you to know," he continued, "that I have sure advices
that this Henry is a very valiant leader, and that he has it in his
power to make such a stand against us as promises to give us much honor
and pleasure. Of his own people he hath brought together, as I learn,
some fifty thousand, with twelve thousand of the French free companies,
who are, as you know very valiant and expert men-at-arms. It is certain
also, that the brave and worthy Bertrand de Guesclin hath ridden into
France to the Duke of Anjou, and purposes to take back with him great
levies from Picardy and Brittany. We hold Bertrand in high esteem, for
he has oft before been at great pains to furnish us with an honorable
encounter. What think you of it, my worthy Captal? He took you at
Cocherel, and, by my soul! you will have the chance now to pay that
score."

The Gascon warrior winced a little at the allusion, nor were his
countrymen around him better pleased, for on the only occasion when they
had encountered the arms of France without English aid they had met with
a heavy defeat.

"There are some who say, sire," said the burly De Clisson, "that the
score is already overpaid, for that without Gascon help Bertrand had not
been taken at Auray, nor had King John been overborne at Poictiers."

"By heaven! but this is too much," cried an English nobleman. "Methinks
that Gascony is too small a cock to crow so lustily."

"The smaller cock, my Lord Audley, may have the longer spur," remarked
the Captal de Buch.

"May have its comb clipped if it make over-much noise," broke in an
Englishman.

"By our Lady of Rocamadour!" cried the Lord of Mucident, "this is more
than I can abide. Sir John Charnell, you shall answer to me for those
words!"

"Freely, my lord, and when you will," returned the Englishman
carelessly.

"My Lord de Clisson," cried Lord Audley, "you look somewhat fixedly in
my direction. By God's soul! I should be right glad to go further into
the matter with you."

"And you, my Lord of Pommers," said Sir Nigel, pushing his way to the
front, "it is in my mind that we might break a lance in gentle and
honorable debate over the question."

For a moment a dozen challenges flashed backwards and forwards at this
sudden bursting of the cloud which had lowered so long between the
knights of the two nations. Furious and gesticulating the Gascons, white
and cold and sneering the English, while the prince with a half smile
glanced from one party to the other, like a man who loved to dwell upon
a fiery scene, and yet dreaded least the mischief go so far that he
might find it beyond his control.

"Friends, friends!" he cried at last, "this quarrel must go no further.
The man shall answer to me, be he Gascon or English, who carries it
beyond this room. I have overmuch need for your swords that you should
turn them upon each other. Sir John Charnell, Lord Audley, you do not
doubt the courage of our friends of Gascony?"

"Not I, sire," Lord Audley answered. "I have seen them fight too often
not to know that they are very hardy and valiant gentlemen."

"And so say I," quoth the other Englishman; "but, certes, there is no
fear of our forgetting it while they have a tongue in their heads."

"Nay, Sir John," said the prince reprovingly, "all peoples have their
own use and customs. There are some who might call us cold and dull and
silent. But you hear, my lords of Gascony, that these gentlemen had no
thought to throw a slur upon your honor or your valor, so let all anger
fade from your mind. Clisson, Captal, De Pommers, I have your word?"

"We are your subjects, sire," said the Gascon barons, though with no
very good grace. "Your words are our law."

"Then shall we bury all cause of unkindness in a flagon of Malvoisie,"
said the prince, cheerily. "Ho, there! the doors of the banquet-hall!
I have been over long from my sweet spouse but I shall be back with you
anon. Let the sewers serve and the minstrels play, while we drain a
cup to the brave days that are before us in the south!" He turned away,
accompanied by the two monarchs, while the rest of the company, with
many a compressed lip and menacing eye, filed slowly through the
side-door to the great chamber in which the royal tables were set forth.



CHAPTER XX. HOW ALLEYNE WON HIS PLACE IN AN HONORABLE GUILD.


Whilst the prince's council was sitting, Alleyne and Ford had remained
in the outer hall, where they were soon surrounded by a noisy group of
young Englishmen of their own rank, all eager to hear the latest news
from England.

"How is it with the old man at Windsor?" asked one.

"And how with the good Queen Philippa?"

"And how with Dame Alice Perrers?" cried a third.

"The devil take your tongue, Wat!" shouted a tall young man, seizing
the last speaker by the collar and giving him an admonitory shake. "The
prince would take your head off for those words."

"By God's coif! Wat would miss it but little," said another. "It is as
empty as a beggar's wallet."

"As empty as an English squire, coz," cried the first speaker. "What a
devil has become of the maitre-des-tables and his sewers? They have not
put forth the trestles yet."

"Mon Dieu! if a man could eat himself into knighthood, Humphrey, you
had been a banneret at the least," observed another, amid a burst of
laughter.

"And if you could drink yourself in, old leather-head, you had been
first baron of the realm," cried the aggrieved Humphrey. "But how of
England, my lads of Loring?"

"I take it," said Ford, "that it is much as it was when you were there
last, save that perchance there is a little less noise there."

"And why less noise, young Solomon?"

"Ah, that is for your wit to discover."

"Pardieu! here is a paladin come over, with the Hampshire mud still
sticking to his shoes. He means that the noise is less for our being out
of the country."

"They are very quick in these parts," said Ford, turning to Alleyne.

"How are we to take this, sir?" asked the ruffling squire.

"You may take it as it comes," said Ford carelessly.

"Here is pertness!" cried the other.

"Sir, I honor your truthfulness," said Ford.

"Stint it, Humphrey," said the tall squire, with a burst of laughter.
"You will have little credit from this gentleman, I perceive. Tongues
are sharp in Hampshire, sir."

"And swords?"

"Hum! we may prove that. In two days' time is the vepres du tournoi,
when we may see if your lance is as quick as your wit."

"All very well, Roger Harcomb," cried a burly, bull-necked young man,
whose square shoulders and massive limbs told of exceptional personal
strength. "You pass too lightly over the matter. We are not to be so
easily overcrowed. The Lord Loring hath given his proofs; but we know
nothing of his squires, save that one of them hath a railing tongue.
And how of you, young sir?" bringing his heavy hand down on Alleyne's
shoulder.

"And what of me, young sir?"

"Ma foi! this is my lady's page come over. Your cheek will be browner
and your hand harder ere you see your mother again."

"If my hand is not hard, it is ready."

"Ready? Ready for what? For the hem of my lady's train?"

"Ready to chastise insolence, sir," cried Alleyne with flashing eyes.

"Sweet little coz!" answered the burly squire. "Such a dainty color!
Such a mellow voice! Eyes of a bashful maid, and hair like a three
years' babe! Voila!" He passed his thick fingers roughly through the
youth's crisp golden curls.

"You seek to force a quarrel, sir," said the young man, white with
anger.

"And what then?"

"Why, you do it like a country boor, and not like a gentle squire. Hast
been ill bred and as ill taught. I serve a master who could show you how
such things should be done."

"And how would he do it, O pink of squires?"

"He would neither be loud nor would he be unmannerly, but rather more
gentle than is his wont. He would say, 'Sir, I should take it as an
honor to do some small deed of arms against you, not for mine own glory
or advancement, but rather for the fame of my lady and for the upholding
of chivalry.' Then he would draw his glove, thus, and throw it on the
ground; or, if he had cause to think that he had to deal with a churl,
he might throw it in his face--as I do now!"

A buzz of excitement went up from the knot of squires as Alleyne, his
gentle nature turned by this causeless attack into fiery resolution,
dashed his glove with all his strength into the sneering face of his
antagonist. From all parts of the hall squires and pages came running,
until a dense, swaying crowd surrounded the disputants.

"Your life for this!" said the bully, with a face which was distorted
with rage.

"If you can take it," returned Alleyne.

"Good lad!" whispered Ford. "Stick to it close as wax."

"I shall see justice," cried Norbury, Sir Oliver's silent attendant.

"You brought it upon yourself, John Tranter," said the tall squire,
who had been addressed as Roger Harcomb. "You must ever plague the
new-comers. But it were shame if this went further. The lad hath shown a
proper spirit."

"But a blow! a blow!" cried several of the older squires. "There must be
a finish to this."

"Nay; Tranter first laid hand upon his head," said Harcomb. "How say
you, Tranter? The matter may rest where it stands?"

"My name is known in these parts," said Tranter, proudly, "I can let
pass what might leave a stain upon another. Let him pick up his glove
and say that he has done amiss."

"I would see him in the claws of the devil first," whispered Ford.

"You hear, young sir?" said the peacemaker. "Our friend will overlook
the matter if you do but say that you have acted in heat and haste."

"I cannot say that," answered Alleyne.

"It is our custom, young sir, when new squires come amongst us from
England, to test them in some such way. Bethink you that if a man have
a destrier or a new lance he will ever try it in time of peace, lest in
days of need it may fail him. How much more then is it proper to test
those who are our comrades in arms."

"I would draw out if it may honorably be done," murmured Norbury
in Alleyne's ear. "The man is a noted swordsman and far above your
strength."

Edricson came, however, of that sturdy Saxon blood which is very slowly
heated, but once up not easily to be cooled. The hint of danger which
Norbury threw out was the one thing needed to harden his resolution.

"I came here at the back of my master," he said, "and I looked on every
man here as an Englishman and a friend. This gentleman hath shown me a
rough welcome, and if I have answered him in the same spirit he has but
himself to thank. I will pick the glove up; but, certes, I shall abide
what I have done unless he first crave my pardon for what he hath said
and done."

Tranter shrugged his shoulders. "You have done what you could to save
him, Harcomb," said he. "We had best settle at once."

"So say I," cried Alleyne.

"The council will not break up until the banquet," remarked a
gray-haired squire. "You have a clear two hours."

"And the place?"

"The tilting-yard is empty at this hour."

"Nay; it must not be within the grounds of the court, or it may go hard
with all concerned if it come to the ears of the prince."

"But there is a quiet spot near the river," said one youth. "We have
but to pass through the abbey grounds, along the armory wall, past the
church of St. Remi, and so down the Rue des Apotres."

"En avant, then!" cried Tranter shortly, and the whole assembly flocked
out into the open air, save only those whom the special orders of their
masters held to their posts. These unfortunates crowded to the small
casements, and craned their necks after the throng as far as they could
catch a glimpse of them.

Close to the banks of the Garonne there lay a little tract of green
sward, with the high wall of a prior's garden upon one side and an
orchard with a thick bristle of leafless apple-trees upon the other. The
river ran deep and swift up to the steep bank; but there were few boats
upon it, and the ships were moored far out in the centre of the stream.
Here the two combatants drew their swords and threw off their doublets,
for neither had any defensive armor. The duello with its stately
etiquette had not yet come into vogue, but rough and sudden encounters
were as common as they must ever be when hot-headed youth goes abroad
with a weapon strapped to its waist. In such combats, as well as in
the more formal sports of the tilting-yard, Tranter had won a name for
strength and dexterity which had caused Norbury to utter his well-meant
warning. On the other hand, Alleyne had used his weapons in constant
exercise and practice on every day for many months, and being by nature
quick of eye and prompt of hand, he might pass now as no mean swordsman.
A strangely opposed pair they appeared as they approached each other:
Tranter dark and stout and stiff, with hairy chest and corded arms,
Alleyne a model of comeliness and grace, with his golden hair and his
skin as fair as a woman's. An unequal fight it seemed to most; but there
were a few, and they the most experienced, who saw something in the
youth's steady gray eye and wary step which left the issue open to
doubt.

"Hold, sirs, hold!" cried Norbury, ere a blow had been struck. "This
gentleman hath a two-handed sword, a good foot longer than that of our
friend."

"Take mine, Alleyne," said Ford.

"Nay, friends," he answered, "I understand the weight and balance of
mine own. To work, sir, for our lord may need us at the abbey!"

Tranter's great sword was indeed a mighty vantage in his favor. He stood
with his feet close together, his knees bent outwards, ready for a dash
inwards or a spring out. The weapon he held straight up in front of him
with blade erect, so that he might either bring it down with a swinging
blow, or by a turn of the heavy blade he might guard his own head and
body. A further protection lay in the broad and powerful guard which
crossed the hilt, and which was furnished with a deep and narrow notch,
in which an expert swordsman might catch his foeman's blade, and by
a quick turn of his wrist might snap it across. Alleyne, on the other
hand, must trust for his defence to his quick eye and active foot--for
his sword, though keen as a whetstone could make it, was of a light and
graceful build with a narrow, sloping pommel and a tapering steel.

Tranter well knew his advantage and lost no time in putting it to use.
As his opponent walked towards him he suddenly bounded forward and sent
in a whistling cut which would have severed the other in twain had he
not sprung lightly back from it. So close was it that the point ripped
a gash in the jutting edge of his linen cyclas. Quick as a panther,
Alleyne sprang in with a thrust, but Tranter, who was as active as he
was strong, had already recovered himself and turned it aside with a
movement of his heavy blade. Again he whizzed in a blow which made the
spectators hold their breath, and again Alleyne very quickly and swiftly
slipped from under it, and sent back two lightning thrusts which the
other could scarce parry. So close were they to each other that Alleyne
had no time to spring back from the next cut, which beat down his sword
and grazed his forehead, sending the blood streaming into his eyes and
down his cheeks. He sprang out beyond sword sweep, and the pair stood
breathing heavily, while the crowd of young squires buzzed their
applause.

"Bravely struck on both sides!" cried Roger Harcomb. "You have both
won honor from this meeting, and it would be sin and shame to let it go
further."

"You have done enough, Edricson," said Norbury.

"You have carried yourself well," cried several of the older squires.

"For my part, I have no wish to slay this young man," said Tranter,
wiping his heated brow.

"Does this gentleman crave my pardon for having used me despitefully?"
asked Alleyne.

"Nay, not I."

"Then stand on your guard, sir!" With a clatter and dash the two blades
met once more, Alleyne pressing in so as to keep within the full sweep
of the heavy blade, while Tranter as continually sprang back to have
space for one of his fatal cuts. A three-parts-parried blow drew blood
from Alleyne's left shoulder, but at the same moment he wounded Tranter
slightly upon the thigh. Next instant, however, his blade had slipped
into the fatal notch, there was a sharp cracking sound with a tinkling
upon the ground, and he found a splintered piece of steel fifteen inches
long was all that remained to him of his weapon.

"Your life is in my hands!" cried Tranter, with a bitter smile.

"Nay, nay, he makes submission!" broke in several squires.

"Another sword!" cried Ford.

"Nay, sir," said Harcomb, "that is not the custom."

"Throw down your hilt, Edricson," cried Norbury.

"Never!" said Alleyne. "Do you crave my pardon, sir?"

"You are mad to ask it."

"Then on guard again!" cried the young squire, and sprang in with a fire
and a fury which more than made up for the shortness of his weapon. It
had not escaped him that his opponent was breathing in short, hoarse
gasps, like a man who is dizzy with fatigue. Now was the time for the
purer living and the more agile limb to show their value. Back and back
gave Tranter, ever seeking time for a last cut. On and on came Alleyne,
his jagged point now at his foeman's face, now at his throat, now at
his chest, still stabbing and thrusting to pass the line of steel which
covered him. Yet his experienced foeman knew well that such efforts
could not be long sustained. Let him relax for one instant, and his
death-blow had come. Relax he must! Flesh and blood could not stand
the strain. Already the thrusts were less fierce, the foot less ready,
although there was no abatement of the spirit in the steady gray eyes.
Tranter, cunning and wary from years of fighting, knew that his chance
had come. He brushed aside the frail weapon which was opposed to him,
whirled up his great blade, sprang back to get the fairer sweep--and
vanished into the waters of the Garonne.

So intent had the squires, both combatants and spectators, been on
the matter in hand, that all thought of the steep bank and swift still
stream had gone from their minds. It was not until Tranter, giving back
before the other's fiery rush, was upon the very brink, that a general
cry warned him of his danger. That last spring, which he hoped would
have brought the fight to a bloody end, carried him clear of the edge,
and he found himself in an instant eight feet deep in the ice-cold
stream. Once and twice his gasping face and clutching fingers broke up
through the still green water, sweeping outwards in the swirl of the
current. In vain were sword-sheaths, apple-branches and belts linked
together thrown out to him by his companions. Alleyne had dropped his
shattered sword and was standing, trembling in every limb, with his rage
all changed in an instant to pity. For the third time the drowning man
came to the surface, his hands full of green slimy water-plants, his
eyes turned in despair to the shore. Their glance fell upon Alleyne,
and he could not withstand the mute appeal which he read in them. In an
instant he, too, was in the Garonne, striking out with powerful strokes
for his late foeman.

Yet the current was swift and strong, and, good swimmer as he was, it
was no easy task which Alleyne had set himself. To clutch at Tranter and
to seize him by the hair was the work of a few seconds, but to hold his
head above water and to make their way out of the current was another
matter. For a hundred strokes he did not seem to gain an inch. Then at
last, amid a shout of joy and praise from the bank, they slowly drew
clear into more stagnant water, at the instant that a rope, made of a
dozen sword-belts linked together by the buckles, was thrown by
Ford into their very hands. Three pulls from eager arms, and the two
combatants, dripping and pale, were dragged up the bank, and lay panting
upon the grass.

John Tranter was the first to come to himself, for although he had been
longer in the water, he had done nothing during that fierce battle with
the current. He staggered to his feet and looked down upon his rescuer,
who had raised himself upon his elbow, and was smiling faintly at the
buzz of congratulation and of praise which broke from the squires around
him.

"I am much beholden to you, sir," said Tranter, though in no very
friendly voice. "Certes, I should have been in the river now but for
you, for I was born in Warwickshire, which is but a dry county, and
there are few who swim in those parts."

"I ask no thanks," Alleyne answered shortly. "Give me your hand to rise,
Ford."

"The river has been my enemy," said Tranter, "but it hath been a good
friend to you, for it has saved your life this day."

"That is as it may be," returned Alleyne.

"But all is now well over," quoth Harcomb, "and no scath come of it,
which is more than I had at one time hoped for. Our young friend here
hath very fairly and honestly earned his right to be craftsman of
