his presence.'

'Nay, nay!' cried another. 'He is hot, but he loves a man that is a
man. Speak boldly and honestly to him, and he is more like to listen to
reason.'

'Speak as the Lord shall direct you,' said a Puritan. 'It is His message
which you bear as well as the King's.'

'Entice him out alone upon some excuse,' said Buyse, 'then up and away
mit him upon your crupper. Hagelsturm! that would be a proper game.'

'Leave him alone,' cried Saxon. 'The lad hath as much sense as any of
ye. He will see which way the cat jumps. Come, friend, let us make our
way back to our men.'

'I am sorry, indeed, to lose you,' he said, as we threaded our way
through the throng of peasants and soldiers upon the Castle Green. 'Your
company will miss you sorely. Lockarby must see to the two. If all goes
well you should be back in three or four days. I need not tell you that
there is a real danger. If the Duke wishes to prove to James that
he would not allow himself to be tampered with, he can only do it by
punishing the messenger, which as lieutenant of a county he hath power
to do in times of civil commotion. He is a hard man if all reports be
true. On the other hand, if you should chance to succeed it may lay the
foundations of your fortunes and be the means of saving Monmouth. He
needs help, by the Lord Harry! Never have I seen such a rabble as this
army of his. Buyse says that they fought lustily at this ruffle at
Axminster, but he is of one mind with me, that a few whiffs of shot and
cavalry charges would scatter them over the countryside. Have you any
message to leave?'

'None, save my love to my mother,' said I.

'It is well. Should you fall in any unfair way, I shall not forget his
Grace of Beaufort, and the next of his gentlemen who comes in my way
shall hang as high as Haman. And now you had best make for your chamber,
and have as good a slumber as you may, since to-morrow at cock-crow
begins your new mission.'



Chapter XXII. Of the News from Havant

Having given my orders that Covenant should be saddled and bridled by
daybreak, I had gone to my room and was preparing for a long night's
rest, when Sir Gervas, who slept in the same apartment, came dancing in
with a bundle of papers waving over his head.

'Three guesses, Clarke!' he cried. 'What would you most desire?'

'Letters from Havant,' said I eagerly.

'Right,' he answered, throwing them into my lap. 'Three of them, and not
a woman's hand among them. Sink me, if I can understand what you have
been doing all your life.

          "How can youthful heart resign
           Lovely woman, sparkling wine?"

But you are so lost in your news that you have not observed my
transformation.'

'Why, wherever did you get these?' I asked in astonishment, for he
was attired in a delicate plum-coloured suit with gold buttons and
trimmings, set off by silken hosen and Spanish leather shoes with roses
on the instep.

'It smacks more of the court than of the camp,' quoth Sir Gervas,
rubbing his hands and glancing down at himself with some satisfaction.
'I am also revictualled in the matter of ratafia and orange-flower
water, together with two new wigs, a bob and a court, a pound of the
Imperial snuff from the sign of the Black Man, a box of De Crepigny's
hair powder, my foxskin muff, and several other necessaries. But I
hinder you in your reading.'

'I have seen enough to tell me that all is well at home,' I answered,
glancing over my father's letter. 'But how came these things?'

'Some horsemen have come in from Petersfield, bearing them with them. As
to my little box, which a fair friend of mine in town packed for me,
it was to be forwarded to Bristol, where I am now supposed to be, and
should be were it not for my good fortune in meeting your party. It
chanced to find its way, however, to the Bruton inn, and the good woman
there, whom I had conciliated, found means to send it after me. It is a
good rule to go upon, Clarke, in this earthly pilgrimage, always to
kiss the landlady. It may seem a small thing, and yet life is made up
of small things. I have few fixed principles, I fear, but two there are
which I can say from my heart that I never transgress. I always carry a
corkscrew, and I never forget to kiss the landlady.'

'From what I have seen of you,' said I, laughing, 'I could be warranty
that those two duties are ever fulfilled.'

'I have letters, too,' said he, sitting on the side of the bed and
turning over a sheaf of papers. '"Your broken-hearted Araminta." Hum!
The wench cannot know that I am ruined or her heart would speedily be
restored. What's this? A challenge to match my bird Julius against my
Lord Dorchester's cockerel for a hundred guineas. Faith! I am too busy
backing the Monmouth rooster for the champion stakes. Another asking me
to chase the stag at Epping. Zounds! had I not cleared off I should
have been run down myself, with a pack of bandog bailiffs at my heels.
A dunning letter from my clothier. He can afford to lose this bill.
He hath had many a long one out of me. An offer of three thousand from
little Dicky Chichester. No, no, Dicky, it won't do. A gentleman can't
live upon his friends. None the less grateful. How now? From Mrs.
Butterworth! No money for three weeks! Bailiffs in the house! Now, curse
me, if this is not too bad!'

'What is the matter?' I asked, glancing up from my own letters. The
baronet's pale face had taken a tinge of red, and he was striding
furiously up and down the bedroom with a letter crumpled up in his hand.

'It is a burning shame, Clarke,' he cried. 'Hang it, she shall have my
watch. It is by Tompion, of the sign of the Three Crowns in Paul's
Yard, and cost a hundred when new. It should keep her for a few months.
Mortimer shall measure swords with me for this. I shall write villain
upon him with my rapier's point.'

'I have never seen you ruffled before,' said I.

'No,' he answered, laughing. 'Many have lived with me for years and
would give me a certificate for temper. But this is too much. Sir Edward
Mortimer is my mother's younger brother, Clarke, but he is not many
years older than myself. A proper, strait-laced, soft-voiced lad he has
ever been, and, as a consequence, he throve in the world, and joined
land to land after the scriptural fashion. I had befriended him from my
purse in the old days, but he soon came to be a richer man than I, for
all that he gained he kept, whereas all I got--well, it went off like
the smoke of the pipe which you are lighting. When I found that all was
up with me I received from Mortimer an advance, which was sufficient to
take me according to my wish over to Virginia, together with a horse and
a personal outfit. There was some chance, Clarke, of the Jerome acres
going to him should aught befall me, so that he was not averse to
helping me off to a land of fevers and scalping knives. Nay, never shake
your head, my dear country lad, you little know the wiles of the world.'

'Give him credit for the best until the worst is proved,' said I,
sitting up in bed smoking, with my letters littered about in front of
me.

'The worst _is_ proved,' said Sir Gervas, with a darkening face. 'I
have, as I said, done Mortimer some turns which he might remember,
though it did not become me to remind him of them. This Mistress
Butterworth is mine old wet-nurse, and it hath been the custom of the
family to provide for her. I could not bear the thought that in the ruin
of my fortune she should lose the paltry guinea or so a week which stood
between her and hunger. My only request to Mortimer, therefore, made on
the score of old friendship, was that he should continue this pittance,
I promising that should I prosper I would return whatever he should
disburse. The mean-hearted villain wrung my hand and swore that it
should be so. How vile a thing is human nature, Clarke! For the sake of
this paltry sum he, a rich man, hath broken his pledge, and left this
poor woman to starve. But he shall answer to me for it. He thinks that
I am on the Atlantic. If I march back to London with these brave boys
I shall disturb the tenor of his sainted existence. Meanwhile I shall
trust to sun-dials, and off goes my watch to Mother Butterworth. Bless
her ample bosoms! I have tried many liquors, but I dare bet that the
first was the most healthy. But how of your own letters? You have been
frowning and smiling like an April day.'

'There is one from my father, with a few words attached from my mother,'
said I. 'The second is from an old friend of mine, Zachariah Palmer, the
village carpenter. The third is from Solomon Sprent, a retired seaman,
for whom I have an affection and respect.'

'You have a rare trio of newsmen. I would I knew your father, Clarke, he
must, from what you say, be a stout bit of British oak. I spoke even now
of your knowing little of the world, but indeed it may be that in your
village you can see mankind without the varnish, and so come to learn
more of the good of human nature. Varnish or none, the bad will ever
peep through. Now this carpenter and seaman show themselves no doubt for
what they are. A man might know my friends of the court for a lifetime,
and never come upon their real selves, nor would it perhaps repay the
search when you had come across it. Sink me, but I wax philosophical,
which is the old refuge of the ruined man. Give me a tub, and I shall
set up in the Piazza of Covent Garden, and be the Diogenes of London. I
would not be wealthy again, Micah! How goes the old lilt?--

          "Our money shall never indite us
           Or drag us to Goldsmith Hall,
           No pirates or wrecks can affright us.
           We that have no estates
           Fear no plunder or rates,
           Nor care to lock gates.
           He that lies on the ground cannot fall!"

That last would make a good motto for an almshouse.'

'You will have Sir Stephen up,' said I warningly, for he was carolling
away at the pitch of his lungs.

'Never fear! He and his 'prentices were all at the broad-sword exercise
in the hall as I came by. It is worth something to see the old fellow
stamp, and swing his sword, and cry, "Ha!" on the down-cut. Mistress
Ruth and friend Lockarby are in the tapestried room, she spinning and he
reading aloud one of those entertaining volumes which she would have me
read. Methinks she hath taken his conversion in hand, which may end in
his converting her from a maid into a wife. And so you go to the Duke of
Beaufort! Well, I would that I could travel with you, but Saxon will not
hear of it, and my musqueteers must be my first care. God send you safe
back! Where is my jasmine powder and the patch-box? Read me your letters
if there be aught in them of interest. I have been splitting a flask
with our gallant Colonel at his inn, and he hath told me enough of your
home at Havant to make me wish to know more.'

'This one is somewhat grave,' said I.

'Nay, I am in the humour for grave things. Have at it, if it contain the
whole Platonic philosophy.'

''Tis from the venerable carpenter who hath for many years been my
adviser and friend. He is one who is religious without being sectarian,
philosophic without being a partisan, and loving without being weak.'

'A paragon, truly!' exclaimed Sir Gervas, who was busy with his eyebrow
brush.

'This is what he saith,' I continued, and proceeded to read the very
letter which I now read to you.

'"Having heard from your father, my dear lad, that there was some chance
of being able to send a letter to you, I have written this, and am
now sending it under the charge of the worthy John Packingham, of
Chichester, who is bound for the West. I trust that you are now safe
with Monmouth's army, and that you have received honourable appointment
therein. I doubt not that you will find among your comrades some who
are extreme sectaries, and others who are scoffers and disbelievers.
Be advised by me, friend, and avoid both the one and the other. For the
zealot is a man who not only defends his own right of worship, wherein
he hath justice, but wishes to impose upon the consciences of others,
by which he falls into the very error against which he fights. The mere
brainless scoffer is, on the other hand, lower than the beast of
the field, since he lacks the animal's self-respect and humble
resignation."'

'My faith!' cried the Baronet, 'the old gentleman hath a rough side to
his tongue.'

'"Let us take religion upon its broadest base, for the truth must be
broader than aught which we can conceive. The presence of a table doth
prove the existence of a carpenter, and so the presence of a universe
proves the existence of a universe Maker, call Him by what name
you will. So far the ground is very firm beneath us, without either
inspiration, teaching, or any aid whatever. Since, then, there _must_ be
a world Maker, let us judge of His nature by His work. We cannot observe
the glories of the firmament, its infinite extent, its beauty, and the
Divine skill wherewith every plant and animal hath its wants cared for,
without seeing that He is full of wisdom, intelligence, and power. We
are still, you will perceive, upon solid ground, without having to call
to our aid aught save pure reason."'

'"Having got so far, let us inquire to what end the universe was made,
and we put upon it. The teaching of all nature shows that it must be to
the end of improvement and upward growth, the increase in real virtue,
in knowledge, and in wisdom. Nature is a silent preacher which holds
forth upon week-days as on Sabbaths. We see the acorn grow into the oak,
the egg into the bird, the maggot into the butterfly. Shall we doubt,
then, that the human soul, the most precious of all things, is also
upon the upward path? And how can the soul progress save through the
cultivation of virtue and self-mastery? What other way is there? There
is none. We may say with confidence, then, that we are placed here to
increase in knowledge and in virtue."'

'"This is the core of all religion, and this much needs no faith in
the acceptance. It is as true and as capable of proof as one of those
exercises of Euclid which we have gone over together. On this common
ground men have raised many different buildings. Christianity, the creed
of Mahomet, the creed of the Easterns, have all the same essence. The
difference lies in the forms and the details. Let us hold to our own
Christian creed, the beautiful, often-professed, and seldom-practised
doctrine of love, but let us not despise our fellow-men, for we are all
branches from the common root of truth."'

'"Man comes out of darkness into light. He tarries awhile and then
passes into darkness again. Micah, lad, the days are passing, mine as
well as thine. Let them not be wasted. They are few in number. What says
Petrarch?' To him that enters, life seems infinite; to him that
departs, nothing.' Let every day, every hour, be spent in furthering the
Creator's end--in getting out whatever power for good there is in you.
What is pain, or work, or trouble? The cloud that passes over the sun.
But the result of work well done is everything. It is eternal. It lives
and waxes stronger through the centuries. Pause not for rest. The rest
will come when the hour of work is past."'

'"May God protect and guard you! There is no great news. The Portsmouth
garrison hath marched to the West. Sir John Lawson, the magistrate, hath
been down here threatening your father and others, but he can do little
for want of proofs. Church and Dissent are at each other's throats as
ever. Truly the stern law of Moses is more enduring than the sweet words
of Christ. Adieu, my dear lad! All good wishes from your grey-headed
friend, ZACHARIAH PALMER."'

'Od's fish!' cried Sir Gervas, as I folded up the letter, 'I have heard
Stillingfleet and Tenison, but I never listened to a better sermon. This
is a bishop disguised as a carpenter. The crozier would suit his hand
better than the plane. But how of our seaman friend? Is he a tarpaulin
theologian--a divine among the tarry-breeks?'

'Solomon Sprent is a very different man, though good enough in his way,'
said I. 'But you shall judge him from his letter.'

'"Master Clarke. Sir,--When last we was in company I had run in under
the batteries on cutting-out service, while you did stand on and off in
the channel and wait signals. Having stopped to refit and to overhaul my
prize, which proved to be in proper trim alow and aloft--"'

'What the devil doth he mean?' asked Sir Gervas.

'It is a maid of whom he talks--Phoebe Dawson, the sister of the
blacksmith. He hath scarce put foot on land for nigh forty years, and
can as a consequence only speak in this sea jargon, though he fancies
that he uses as pure King's English as any man in Hampshire.'

'Proceed, then,' quoth the Baronet.

'"Having also read her the articles of war, I explained to her the
conditions under which we were to sail in company on life's voyage,
namely:"'

'"First. She to obey signals without question as soon as received."'

'"Second. She to steer by my reckoning."'

'"Third. She to stand by me as true consort in foul weather, battle, or
shipwreck."'

'"Fourth. She to run under my guns if assailed by picaroons,
privateeros, or garda-costas."'

'"Fifth. Me to keep her in due repair, dry-dock her at intervals,
and see that she hath her allowance of coats of paint, streamers, and
bunting, as befits a saucy pleasure boat."'

'"Sixth. Me to take no other craft in tow, and if any be now attached,
to cut their hawsers."'

'"Seventh. Me to revictual her day by day."'

'"Eighth. Should she chance to spring a leak, or be blown on her beam
ends by the winds of misfortune, to stand by her and see her pumped out
or righted."'

'"Ninth. To fly the Protestant ensign at the peak during life's voyage,
and to lay our course for the great harbour, in the hope that moorings
and ground to swing may be found for two British-built crafts when laid
up for eternity."'

'"'Twas close on eight-bells before these articles were signed and
sealed. When I headed after you I could not so much as catch a glimpse
of your topsail. Soon after I heard as you had gone a-soldiering,
together with that lean, rakish, long-sparred, picaroon-like craft which
I have seen of late in the village. I take it unkind of you that you
have not so much as dipped ensign to me on leaving. But perchance
the tide was favourable, and you could not tarry. Had I not been
jury-rigged, with one of my spars shot away, I should have dearly loved
to have strapped on my hanger and come with you to smell gunpowder once
more. I would do it now, timber-toe and all, were it not for my consort,
who might claim it as a breach of the articles, and so sheer off. I must
follow the light on her poop until we are fairly joined."'

'"Farewell, mate! In action, take an old sailor's advice. Keep the
weather-gauge and board! Tell that to your admiral on the day of battle.
Whisper it in his ear. Say to him, 'Keep the weather-gauge and board!'
Tell him also to strike quick, strike hard, and keep on striking. That's
the word of Christopher Mings, and a better man has not been launched,
though he did climb in through the hawse-pipe.--Yours to command,
SOLOMON SPRENT."'

Sir Gervas had been chuckling to himself during the reading of this
epistle, but at the last part we both broke out a-laughing.

'Land or sea, he will have it that battles are fought in ships,'
said the Baronet. 'You should have had that sage piece of advice for
Monmouth's council to-day. Should he ever ask your opinion it must be,
"Keep the weather-gauge and board!"'

'I must to sleep,' said I, laying aside my pipe. 'I should be on the
road by daybreak.'

'Nay, I prythee, complete your kindness by letting me have a glimpse of
your respected parent, the Roundhead.'

''Tis but a few lines,' I answered. 'He was ever short of speech. But
if they interest you, you shall hear them. "I am sending this by a godly
man, my dear son, to say that I trust that you are bearing yourself as
becomes you. In all danger and difficulty trust not to yourself, but
ask help from on high. If you are in authority, teach your men to sing
psalms when they fall on, as is the good old custom. In action give
point rather than edge. A thrust must beat a cut. Your mother and the
others send their affection to you. Sir John Lawson hath been down
here like a ravening wolf, but could find no proof against me. John
Marchbank, of Bedhampton, is cast into prison. Truly Antichrist reigns
in the land, but the kingdom of light is at hand. Strike lustily for
truth and conscience.--Your loving father, JOSEPH CLARKE."'

'"Postscriptum (from my mother).--I trust that you will remember what I
have said concerning your hosen and also the broad linen collars, which
you will find in the bag. It is little over a week since you left, yet
it seems a year. When cold or wet, take ten drops of Daffy's elixir in a
small glass of strong waters. Should your feet chafe, rub tallow on the
inside of your boots. Commend me to Master Saxon and to Master Lockarby,
if he be with you. His father was mad at his going, for he hath a great
brewing going forward, and none to mind the mash-tub. Ruth hath baked a
cake, but the oven hath played her false, and it is lumpy in the inside.
A thousand kisses, dear heart, from your loving mother, M. C."'

'A right sensible couple,' quoth Sir Gervas, who, having completed his
toilet, had betaken him to his couch. 'I now begin to understand your
manufacture, Clarke. I see the threads that are used in the weaving of
you. Your father looks to your spiritual wants. Your mother concerns
herself with the material. Yet the old carpenter's preaching is,
methinks, more to your taste. You are a rank latitudinarian, man. Sir
Stephen would cry fie upon you, and Joshua Pettigrue abjure you! Well,
out with the light, for we should both be stirring at cock-crow. That is
our religion at present.'

'Early Christians,' I suggested, and we both laughed as we settled down
to sleep.



Chapter XXIII. Of the Snare on the Weston Road

Just after sunrise I was awoke by one of the Mayor's servants, who
brought word that the Honourable Master Wade was awaiting me downstairs.
Having dressed and descended, I found him seated by the table in the
sitting-room with papers and wafer-box, sealing up the missive which I
was to carry. He was a small, worn, grey-faced man, very erect in his
bearing and sudden in his speech, with more of the soldier than of the
lawyer in his appearance.

'So,' said he, pressing his seal above the fastening of the string, 'I
see that your horse is ready for you outside. You had best make your way
round by Nether Stowey and the Bristol Channel, for we have heard that
the enemy's horse guard the roads on the far side of Wells. Here is your
packet.'

I bowed and placed it in the inside of my tunic.

'It is a written order as suggested in the council. The Duke's reply may
be written, or it may be by word of mouth. In either case guard it well.
This packet contains also a copy of the depositions of the clergyman at
The Hague, and of the other witnesses who saw Charles of England marry
Lucy Walters, the mother of his Majesty. Your mission is one of such
importance that the whole success of our enterprise may turn upon it.
See that you serve the paper upon Beaufort in person, and not through
any intermediary, or it might not stand in a court of law.'

I promised to do so if possible.

'I should advise you also,' he continued, 'to carry sword and pistol as
a protection against the chance dangers of the road, but to discard your
head-piece and steel-front as giving you too warlike an aspect for a
peaceful messenger.'

'I had already come to that resolve,' said I.

'There is nothing more to be said, Captain,' said the lawyer, giving me
his hand. 'May all good fortune go with you. Keep a still tongue and a
quick ear. Watch keenly how all things go. Mark whose face is gloomy and
whose content. The Duke may be at Bristol, but you had best make for his
seat at Badminton. Our sign of the day is Tewkesbury.'

Thanking my instructor for his advice I went out and mounted Covenant,
who pawed and champed at his bit in his delight at getting started
once more. Few of the townsmen were stirring, though here and there
a night-bonneted head stared out at me through a casement. I took the
precaution of walking the horse very quietly until we were some distance
from the house, for I had told Reuben nothing of my intended journey,
and I was convinced that if he knew of it neither discipline, nor even
his new ties of love, would prevent him from coming with me. Covenant's
iron-shod feet rang sharply, in spite of my care, upon the cobblestones,
but looking back I saw that the blinds of my faithful friend's room
were undrawn, and that all seemed quiet in the house. I shook my bridle,
therefore, and rode at a brisk trot through the silent streets, which
were still strewn with faded flowers and gay with streamers. At the
north gate a guard of half a company was stationed, who let me pass upon
hearing the word. Once beyond the old walls I found myself out on the
country side, with my face to the north and a clear road in front of me.

It was a blithesome morning. The sun was rising over the distant hills,
and heaven and earth were ruddy and golden. The trees in the wayside
orchards were full of swarms of birds, who chattered and sang until the
air was full of their piping. There was lightsomeness and gladness in
every breath. The wistful-eyed red Somerset kine stood along by the
hedgerows, casting great shadows down the fields and gazing at me as
I passed. Farm horses leaned over wooden gates, and snorted a word of
greeting to their glossy-coated brother. A great herd of snowy-fleeced
sheep streamed towards us over the hillside and frisked and gambolled in
the sunshine. All was innocent life, from the lark which sang on high
to the little shrew-mouse which ran amongst the ripening corn, or the
martin which dashed away at the sound of my approach. All alive and all
innocent. What are we to think, my dear children, when we see the beasts
of the field full of kindness and virtue and gratitude? Where is this
superiority of which we talk?

From the high ground to the north I looked back upon the sleeping town,
with the broad edging of tents and waggons, which showed how suddenly
its population had outgrown it. The Royal Standard still fluttered
from the tower of St. Mary Magdalene, while close by its beautiful
brother-turret of St. James bore aloft the blue flag of Monmouth. As
I gazed the quick petulant roll of a drum rose up on the still morning
air, with the clear ringing call of the bugles summoning the troops from
their slumbers. Beyond the town, and on either side of it, stretched a
glorious view of the Somersetshire downs, rolling away to the distant
sea, with town and hamlet, castle turret and church tower, wooded coombe
and stretch of grain-land--as fair a scene as the eye could wish to rest
upon. As I wheeled my horse and sped upon my way I felt, my dears, that
this was a land worth fighting for, and that a man's life was a small
thing if he could but aid, in however trifling a degree, in working out
its freedom and its happiness. At a little village over the hill I fell
in with an outpost of horse, the commander of which rode some distance
with me, and set me on my road to Nether Stowey. It seemed strange to
my Hampshire eyes to note that the earth is all red in these parts--very
different to the chalk and gravel of Havant. The cows, too, are mostly
red. The cottages are built neither of brick nor of wood, but of some
form of plaster, which they call cob, which is strong and smooth so
long as no water comes near it. They shelter the walls from the rain,
therefore, by great overhanging thatches. There is scarcely a steeple in
the whole country-side, which also seems strange to a man from any other
part of England. Every church hath a square tower, with pinnacles upon
the top, and they are mostly very large, with fine peals of bells.

My course ran along by the foot of the beautiful Quantock Hills, where
heavy-wooded coombes are scattered over the broad heathery downs, deep
with bracken and whortle-bushes. On either side of the track steep
winding glens sloped downwards, lined with yellow gorse, which blazed
out from the deep-red soil like a flame from embers. Peat-coloured
streams splashed down these valleys and over the road, through which
Covenant ploughed fetlock deep, and shied to see the broad-backed trout
darting from between his fore feet.

All day I rode through this beautiful country, meeting few folk, for
I kept away from the main roads. A few shepherds and farmers, a
long-legged clergyman, a packman with his mule, and a horseman with a
great bag, whom I took to be a buyer of hair, are all that I can recall.
A black jack of ale and the heel of a loaf at a wayside inn were all my
refreshments. Near Combwich, Covenant cast a shoe, and two hours were
wasted before I found a smithy in the town and had the matter set right.
It was not until evening that I at last came out upon the banks of the
Bristol Channel, at a place called Shurton Bars, where the muddy Parret
makes its way into the sea. At this point the channel is so broad that
the Welsh mountains can scarcely be distinguished. The shore is flat
and black and oozy, flecked over with white patches of sea-birds, but
further to the east there rises a line of hills, very wild and rugged,
rising in places into steep precipices. These cliffs run out into the
sea, and numerous little harbours and bays are formed in their broken
surface, which are dry half the day, but can float a good-sized boat at
half-tide. The road wound over these bleak and rocky hills, which are
sparsely inhabited by a wild race of fishermen, or shepherds, who came
to their cabin doors on hearing the clatter of my horse's hoofs, and
shot some rough West-country jest at me as I passed. As the night drew
in the country became bleaker and more deserted. An occasional light
twinkling in the distance from some lonely hillside cottage was the only
sign of the presence of man. The rough track still skirted the sea, and
high as it was, the spray from the breakers drifted across it. The salt
prinkled on my lips, and the air was filled with the hoarse roar of the
surge and the thin piping of curlews, who flitted past in the darkness
like white, shadowy, sad-voiced creatures from some other world. The
wind blew in short, quick, angry puffs from the westward, and far out on
the black waters a single glimmer of light rising and falling, tossing
up, and then sinking out of sight, showed how fierce a sea had risen in
the channel.

Riding through the gloaming in this strange wild scenery my mind
naturally turned towards the past. I thought of my father and my mother,
of the old carpenter and of Solomon Sprent. Then I pondered over Decimus
Saxon, his many-faced character having in it so much to be admired and
so much to be abhorred. Did I like him or no? It was more than I could
say. From him I wandered off to my faithful Reuben, and to his love
passage with the pretty Puritan, which in turn brought me to Sir Gervas
and the wreck of his fortunes. My mind then wandered to the state of the
army and the prospects of the rising, which led me to my present mission
with its perils and its difficulties. Having turned over all these
things in my mind I began to doze upon my horse's back, overcome by the
fatigue of the journey and the drowsy lullaby of the waves. I had just
fallen into a dream in which I saw Reuben Lockarby crowned King of
England by Mistress Ruth Timewell, while Decimus Saxon endeavoured to
shoot him with a bottle of Daffy's elixir, when in an instant,
without warning, I was dashed violently from my horse, and left lying
half-conscious on the stony track.

So stunned and shaken was I by the sudden fall, that though I had a dim
knowledge of shadowy figures bending over me, and of hoarse laughter
sounding in my ears, I could not tell for a few minutes where I was nor
what had befallen me. When at last I did make an attempt to recover my
feet I found that a loop of rope had been slipped round my arms and my
legs so as to secure them. With a hard struggle I got one hand free, and
dashed it in the face of one of the men who were holding me down; but
the whole gang of a dozen or more set upon me at once, and while some
thumped and kicked at me, others tied a fresh cord round my elbows, and
deftly fastened it in such a way as to pinion me completely. Finding
that in my weak and dazed state all efforts were of no avail, I lay
sullen and watchful, taking no heed of the random blows which were still
showered upon me. So dark was it that I could neither see the faces of
