half-whispered voice "Daughter, listen to me! It is true, that Isabel of
Spain (whom the Mother of Mercy bless! for merciful to all is her secret
heart, if not her outward policy)--it is true that Isabel of Spain,
fearful that the path to Heaven might be made rougher to thy feet than
it well need be (there was a slight accent of irony in the monk's voice
as he thus spoke), selected a friar of suasive eloquence and gentle
manners to visit thee. He was charged with letters to yon abbess from
the queen. Soft though the friar, he was yet a hypocrite. Nay, hear me
out! he loved to worship the rising sun; and he did not wish always to
remain a simple friar, while the Church had higher dignities of this
earth to bestow. In the Christian camp, daughter, there was one who
burned for tidings of thee,--whom thine image haunted--who, stern as
thou wert to him, loved thee with a love he knew not of, till thou
wert lost to him. Why dost thou tremble, daughter? listen, yet! To that
lover, for he was one of high birth, came the monk; to that lover the
monk sold his mission. The monk will have a ready tale, that he was
waylaid amidst the mountains by armed men, and robbed of his letters
to the abbess. The lover took his garb, and he took the letters; and he
hastened hither. Leila! beloved Leila! behold him at thy feet!"

The monk raised his cowl; and, dropping on his knee beside her,
presented to her gaze the features of the Prince of Spain.

"You!" said Leila, averting her countenance, and vainly endeavouring to
extricate the hand which he had seized. "This is indeed cruel. You, the
author of so many sufferings--such calumny--such reproach!"

"I will repair all," said Don Juan, fervently. "I alone, I repeat it,
have the power to set you free. You are no longer a Jewess; you are one
of our faith; there is now no bar upon our loves. Imperious though my
father,--all dark and dread as is this new POWER which he is rashly
erecting in his dominions, the heir of two monarchies is not so poor in
influence and in friends as to be unable to offer the woman of his love
an inviolable shelter alike from priest and despot. Fly with me!--quit
this dreary sepulchre ere the last stone close over thee for ever! I
have horses, I have guards at hand. This night it can be arranged. This
night--oh, bliss!--thou mayest be rendered up to earth and love!"

"Prince," said Leila, who had drawn herself from Juan's grasp during
this address, and who now stood at a little distance erect and proud,
"you tempt me in vain; or, rather you offer me no temptation. I have
made my choice; I abide by it."

"Oh! bethink thee," said the prince, in a voice of real and imploring
anguish; "bethink thee well of the consequences of thy refusal. Thou
canst not see them yet; thine ardour blinds thee. But, when hour
after hour, day after day, year after year, steals on in the
appalling monotony of this sanctified prison; when thou shalt see thy
youth--withering without love--thine age without honour; when thy heart
shall grow as stone within thee, beneath the looks of you icy spectres;
when nothing shall vary the aching dulness of wasted life save a longer
fast or a severer penance: then, then will thy grief be rendered tenfold
by the despairing and remorseful thought, that thine own lips sealed
thine own sentence. Thou mayest think," continued Juan, with rapid
eagerness, "that my love to thee was at first light and dishonouring. Be
it so. I own that my youth has passed in idle wooings, and the mockeries
of affection. But for the first time in my life I feel that--I love. Thy
dark eyes--thy noble beauty--even thy womanly scorn, have fascinated me.
I--never yet disdained where I have been a suitor--acknowledge, at last,
that there is a triumph in the conquest of a woman's heart. Oh, Leila!
do not--do not reject me. You know not how rare and how deep a love you
cast away."

The novice was touched: the present language of Don Juan was so
different from what it had been before; the earnest love that breathed
in his voice--that looked from his eyes, struck a chord in her breast;
it reminded her of her own unconquered, unconquerable love for the lost
Muza. She was touched, then--touched to tears; but her resolves were not
shaken.

"Oh, Leila!" resumed the prince, fondly, mistaking the nature of her
emotion, and seeking to pursue the advantage he imagined he had gained,
"look at yonder sunbeam, struggling through the loophole of thy cell. Is
it not a messenger from the happy world? does it not plead for me? does
it not whisper to thee of the green fields and the laughing vineyards,
and all the beautiful prodigality of that earth thou art about to
renounce for ever? Dost thou dread my love? Are the forms around thee,
ascetic and lifeless, fairer to thine eyes than mine? Dost thou doubt
my power to protect thee? I tell thee that the proudest nobles of Spain
would flock around my banner, were it necessary to guard thee by force
of arms. Yet, speak the word--be mine--and I will fly hence with thee
to climes where the Church has not cast out its deadly roots, and,
forgetful of crowns and cares, live alone for thee: Ah, speak!"

"My lord," said Leila, calmly, and rousing herself to the necessary
effort, "I am deeply and sincerely grateful for the interest you
express--for the affection you avow. But you deceive yourself. I have
pondered well over the alternative I have taken. I do not regret nor
repent--much less would I retract it. The earth that you speak of, full
of affections and of bliss to others, has no ties, no allurements for
me. I desire only peace, repose, and an early death."

"Can it be possible," said the prince, growing pale, "that thou lovest
another? Then, indeed, and then only, would my wooing be in vain."

The cheek of the novice grew deeply flushed, but the color soon
subsided; she murmured to herself, "Why should I blush to own it now?"
and then spoke aloud: "Prince, I trust I have done with the world; and
bitter the pang I feel when you call me back to it. But you merit my
candour; I have loved another; and in that thought, as in an urn, lie
the ashes of all affection. That other is of a different faith. We may
never--never meet again below, but it is a solace to pray that we may
meet above. That solace, and these cloisters, are dearer to me than all
the pomp, all the pleasures, of the world."

The prince sank down, and, covering his face with his hands, groaned
aloud--but made no reply.

"Go, then, Prince of Spain," continued the novice; "son of the noble
Isabel, Leila is not unworthy of her cares. Go, and pursue the great
destinies that await you. And if you forgive--if you still cherish a
thought of--the poor Jewish maiden, soften, alleviate, mitigate,
the wretched and desperate doom that awaits the fallen race she has
abandoned for thy creed."

"Alas, alas!" said the prince, mournfully; "thee alone, perchance, of
all thy race, I could have saved from the bigotry that is fast covering
this knightly land like the rising of an irresistible sea--and thou
rejectest me! Take time, at least, to pause--to consider. Let me see
thee again tomorrow."

"No, prince, no--not again! I will keep thy secret only if I see thee no
more. If thou persist in a suit that I feel to be that of sin and shame,
then, indeed, mine honour--"

"Hold!" interrupted Juan, with haughty impatience, "I torment, I harass
you no more. I release you from my importunity. Perhaps already I
have stooped too low." He drew the cowl over his features, and strode
sullenly to the door; but, turning for one last gaze on the form that
had so strangely fascinated a heart capable of generous emotions, the
meek and despondent posture of the novice, her tender youth, her
gloomy fate, melted his momentary pride and resentment. "God bless and
reconcile thee, poor child!" he said, in a voice choked with contending
passions--and the door closed upon his form.

"I thank thee, Heaven, that it was not Muza!" muttered Leila, breaking
from a reverie in which she seemed to be communing with her own soul:
"I feel that I could not have resisted him." With that thought she knelt
down, in humble and penitent self-reproach, and prayed for strength.

Ere she had risen from her supplications, her solitude was again invaded
by Torquemada, the Dominican.

This strange man, though the author of cruelties at which nature
recoils, had some veins of warm and gentle feeling streaking, as it
were, the marble of his hard character; and when he had thoroughly
convinced himself of the pure and earnest zeal of the young convert, he
relaxed from the grim sternness he had at first exhibited towards her.
He loved to exert the eloquence he possessed, in raising her spirit,
in reconciling her doubts. He prayed for her, and he prayed beside her,
with passion and with tears.

He stayed long with the novice; and, when he left her, she was, if
not happy, at least contented. Her warmest wish now was to abridge the
period of her novitiate, which, at her desire, the Church had already
rendered merely a nominal probation. She longed to put irresolution
out of her power, and to enter at once upon the narrow road through the
strait gate.

The gentle and modest piety of the young novice touched the sisterhood;
she was endeared to all of them. Her conversion was an event that broke
the lethargy of their stagnant life. She became an object of general
interest, of avowed pride, of kindly compassion; and their kindness to
her, who from her cradle had seen little of her own sex, had a great
effect towards calming and soothing her mind. But, at night, her dreams
brought before her the dark and menacing countenance of her father.
Sometimes he seemed to pluck her from the gates of heaven, and to sink
with her into the yawning abyss below. Sometimes she saw him with her
beside the altar, but imploring her to forswear the Saviour, before
whose crucifix she knelt. Occasionally her visions were haunted, also,
with Muza--but in less terrible guise She saw his calm and melancholy
eyes fixed upon her; and his voice asked, "Canst thou take a vow that
makes it sinful to remember me?"

The night, that usually brings balm and oblivion to the sad, was thus
made more dreadful to Leila than the day.

Her health grew feebler, and feebler, but her mind still was firm. In
happier time and circumstance that poor novice would have been a great
character; but she was one of the countless victims the world knows
not of, whose virtues are in silent motives, whose struggles are in the
solitary heart.

Of the prince she heard and saw no more. There were times when she
fancied, from oblique and obscure hints, that the Dominican had been
aware of Don Juan's disguise and visit. But, if so, that knowledge
appeared only to increase the gentleness, almost the respect, which
Torquemada manifested towards her. Certainly, since that day, from some
cause or other the priest's manner had been softened when he addressed
her; and he who seldom had recourse to other arts than those of censure
and of menace, often uttered sentiments half of pity and half of praise.

Thus consoled and supported in the day,--thus haunted and terrified by
night, but still not repenting her resolve, Leila saw the time glide on
to that eventful day when her lips were to pronounce that irrevocable
vow which is the epitaph of life. While in this obscure and remote
convent progressed the history of an individual, we are summoned back to
witness the crowning fate of an expiring dynasty.




CHAPTER III. THE PAUSE BETWEEN DEFEAT AND SURRENDER.

The unfortunate Boabdil plunged once more amidst the recesses of the
Alhambra. Whatever his anguish or his despondency, none were permitted
to share, or even to witness, his emotions. But he especially resisted
the admission to his solitude, demanded by his mother, implored by his
faithful Amine, and sorrowfully urged by Muza: those most loved, or most
respected, were, above all, the persons from whom he most shrank.

Almamen was heard of no more. It was believed that he had perished in
the battle. But he was one of those who, precisely as they are effective
when present, are forgotten in absence. And, in the meanwhile, as the
Vega was utterly desolated, and all supplies were cut off, famine, daily
made more terrifically severe, diverted the attention of each humbler
Moor from the fall of the city to his individual sufferings.

New persecutions fell upon the miserable Jews. Not having taken any
share in the conflict (as was to be expected from men who had no stake
in the country which they dwelt in, and whose brethren had been taught
so severe a lesson upon the folly of interference), no sentiment of
fellowship in danger mitigated the hatred and loathing with which they
were held; and as, in their lust of gain, many of them continued, amidst
the agony and starvation of the citizens, to sell food at enormous
prices, the excitement of the multitude against them--released by the
state of the city from all restraint and law--made itself felt by the
most barbarous excesses. Many of the houses of the Israelites were
attacked by the mob, plundered, razed to the ground, and the owner
tortured to death, to extort confession of imaginary wealth. Not to
sell what was demanded was a crime; to sell it was a crime also. These
miserable outcasts fled to whatever secret places the vaults of their
houses or the caverns in the hills within the city could yet afford
them, cursing their fate, and almost longing even for the yoke of the
Christian bigots.

Thus passed several days; the defence of the city abandoned to its naked
walls and mighty gates. The glaring sun looked down upon closed shops
and depopulated streets, save when some ghostly and skeleton band of
the famished poor collected, in a sudden paroxysm of revenge or despair,
around the stormed and fired mansion of a detested Israelite.

At length Boabdil aroused himself from his seclusion; and Muza, to his
own surprise, was summoned to the presence of the king. He found Boabdil
in one of the most gorgeous halls of his gorgeous palace.

Within the Tower of Comares is a vast chamber, still called the hall
of the Ambassadors. Here it was that Boabdil now held his court. On the
glowing walls hung trophies and banners, and here and there an Arabian
portrait of some bearded king. By the windows, which overlooked the most
lovely banks of the Llarro, gathered the santons and alfaquis, a little
apart from the main crowd. Beyond, through half-veiling draperies, might
be seen the great court of the Alberca, whose peristyles were hung with
flowers; while, in the centre, the gigantic basin, which gives its name
to the court, caught the sunlight obliquely, and its waves glittered on
the eye from amidst the roses that then clustered over it.

In the audience hall itself, a canopy, over the royal cushions on which
Boabdil reclined, was blazoned with the heraldic insignia of Granada's
monarchs. His guard, and his mutes, and his eunuchs, and his courtiers,
and his counsellors, and his captains, were ranged in long files on
either side the canopy. It seemed the last flicker of the lamp of the
Moorish empire, that hollow and unreal pomp! As Muza approached the
monarch, he was startled by the change of his countenance: the young
and beautiful Boabdil seemed to have grown suddenly old; his eyes were
sunken, his countenance sown with wrinkles, and his voice sounded broken
and hollow on the ears of his kinsman.

"Come hither, Muza," said he; "seat thyself beside me, and listen as
thou best canst to the tidings we are about to hear."

As Muza placed himself on a cushion, a little below the king, Boabdil
motioned to one amongst the crowd. "Hamet," said he, "thou hast examined
the state of the Christian camp; what news dost thou bring?"

"Light of the Faithful," answered the Moor, "it is a camp no longer--it
has already become a city. Nine towns of Spain were charged with the
task; stone has taken the place of canvas; towers and streets arise like
the buildings of a genius; and the misbelieving king hath sworn that
this new city shall not be left until Granada sees his standard on its
walls."

"Go on," said Boabdil, calmly.

"Traders and men of merchandise flock thither daily; the spot is one
bazaar; all that should supply our famishing country pours its plenty
into their mart."

Boabdil motioned to the Moor to withdraw, and an alfaqui advanced in his
stead.

"Successor of the Prophet, and darling of the world!" said the reverend
man, "the alfaquis and seers of Granada implore thee on their knees to
listen to their voice. They have consulted the Books of Fate; thy have
implored a sign from the Prophet; and they find that the glory has left
thy people and thy crown. The fall of Granada is predestined; God is
great!"

"You shall have my answer forthwith," said Boabdil. "Abdelemic,
approach."

From the crowd came an aged and white-bearded man, the governor of the
city.

"Speak, old man," said the king.

"Oh, Boabdil!" said the veteran, with faltering tones, while the tears
rolled down his cheeks; "son of a race of kings and heroes! would that
thy servant had fallen dead on thy threshold this day, and that the
lips of a Moorish noble had never been polluted by the words that I
now utter! Our state is hopeless; our granaries are as the sands of the
desert: there is in them life neither for beast nor man. The war-horse
that bore the hero is now consumed for his food; the population of thy
city, with one voice, cry for chains and--bread! I have spoken."

"Admit the Ambassador of Egypt," said Boabdil, as Abdelmelic retired.
There was a pause: one of the draperies at the end of the hall was drawn
aside; and with the slow and sedate majesty of their tribe and land,
paced forth a dark and swarthy train, the envoys of the Egyptian soldan.
Six of the band bore costly presents of gems and weapons, and the
procession closed with four veiled slaves, whose beauty had been the
boast of the ancient valley of the Nile.

"Sun of Granada and day--star of the faithful!" said the chief of the
Egyptians, "my lord, the Soldan of Egypt, delight of the world, and
rose-tree of the East, thus answers to the letters of Boabdil. He
grieves that he cannot send the succour thou demandest; and informing
himself of the condition of thy territories, he finds that Granada no
longer holds a seaport by which his forces (could he send them) might
find an entrance into Spain. He implores thee to put thy trust in Allah,
who will not desert his chosen ones, and lays these gifts, in pledge of
amity and love, at the feet of my lord the king."

"It is a gracious and well-timed offering," said Boabdil, with a
writhing lip; "we thank him." There was now a long and dead silence as
the ambassadors swept from the hall of audience, when Boabdil suddenly
raised his head from his breast and looked around his hall with a kingly
and majestic look: "Let the heralds of Ferdinand of Spain approach."

A groan involuntarily broke from the breast of Muza: it was echoed by
a murmur of abhorrence and despair from the gallant captains who stood
around; but to that momentary burst succeeded a breathless silence, as
