himself was passive and unfortunate. Death swept away his sons, whose
success in life might have balanced his own bad luck and incapacity.
Debts increased and funds diminished, until ruin came. The estate was
sold; and the old man was about to remove from the house of his fathers
to go he knew not whither, when, like an old piece of furniture, which,
left alone in its wonted corner, may hold together for a long while, but
breaks to pieces on an attempt to move it, he fell down on his own
threshold under a paralytic affection.

The tutor awakened as from a dream. He saw his patron dead, and that his
patron's only remaining child, an elderly woman, now neither graceful nor
beautiful, if she ever had been either the one or the other, had by this
calamity become a homeless and penniless orphan. He addressed her nearly
in the words which Dominie Sampson uses to Miss Bertram, and professed
his determination not to leave her. Accordingly, roused to the exercise
of talents which had long slumbered, he opened a little school and
supported his patron's child for the rest of her life, treating her with
the same humble observance and devoted attention which he had used
towards her in the days of her prosperity.

Such is the outline of Dominie Sampson's real story, in which there is
neither romantic incident nor sentimental passion; but which, perhaps,
from the rectitude and simplicity of character which it displays, may
interest the heart and fill the eye of the reader as irresistibly as if
it respected distresses of a more dignified or refined character.

These preliminary notices concerning the tale of Guy Mannering and some
of the characters introduced may save the author and reader in the
present instance the trouble of writing and perusing a long string of
detached notes.

ABBOTSFORD, January, 1829.




ADDENDUM: I may add that the motto of this novel was taken from the Lay
of the Last Minstrel, to evade the conclusions of those who began to
think that, as the author of Waverley never quoted the works of Sir
Walter Scott, he must have reason for doing so, and that the
circumstances might argue an identity between them.

ABBOTSFORD, August 1, 1829.





ADDITIONAL NOTE


GALWEGIAN LOCALITIES AND PERSONAGES WHICH HAVE BEEN SUPPOSED TO BE
ALLUDED TO IN THE NOVEL


An old English proverb says, that more know Tom Fool than Tom Fool knows;
and the influence of the adage seems to extend to works composed under
the influence of an idle or foolish planet. Many corresponding
circumstances are detected by readers of which the Author did not suspect
the existence. He must, however, regard it as a great compliment that, in
detailing incidents purely imaginary, he has been so fortunate in
approximating reality as to remind his readers of actual occurrences. It
is therefore with pleasure he notices some pieces of local history and
tradition which have been supposed to coincide with the fictitious
persons, incidents, and scenery of Guy Mannering.

The prototype of Dirk Hatteraick is considered as having been a Dutch
skipper called Yawkins. This man was well known on the coast of Galloway
and Dumfriesshire, as sole proprietor and master of a buckkar, or
smuggling lugger, called the 'Black Prince.' Being distinguished by his
nautical skill and intrepidity, his vessel was frequently freighted, and
his own services employed, by French, Dutch, Manx, and Scottish smuggling
companies.

A person well known by the name of Buckkar-tea, from having been a noted
smuggler of that article, and also by that of Bogle Bush, the place of
his residence, assured my kind informant Mr. Train, that he had
frequently seen upwards of two hundred Lingtow men assemble at one time,
and go off into the interior of the country, fully laden with contraband
goods.

In those halcyon days of the free trade, the fixed price for carrying a
box of tea or bale of tobacco from the coast of Galloway to Edinburgh was
fifteen shillings, and a man with two horses carried four such packages.
The trade was entirely destroyed by Mr. Pitt's celebrated commutation
law, which, by reducing the duties upon excisable articles, enabled the
lawful dealer to compete with the smuggler. The statute was called in
Galloway and Dumfries-shire, by those who had thriven upon the contraband
trade, 'the burning and starving act.'

Sure of such active assistance on shore, Yawkins demeaned himself so
boldly that his mere name was a terror to the officers of the revenue. He
availed himself of the fears which his presence inspired on one
particular night, when, happening to be ashore with a considerable
quantity of goods in his sole custody, a strong party of excisemen came
down on him. Far from shunning the attack, Yawkins sprung forward,
shouting, 'Come on, my lads; Yawkins is before you.' The revenue officers
were intimidated and relinquished their prize, though defended only by
the courage and address of a single man. On his proper element Yawkins
was equally successful. On one occasion he was landing his cargo at the
Manxman's Lake near Kirkcudbright, when two revenue cutters (the 'Pigmy'
and the 'Dwarf') hove in sight at once on different tacks, the one coming
round by the Isles of Fleet, the other between the point of Rueberry and
the Muckle Ron. The dauntless freetrader instantly weighed anchor and
bore down right between the luggers, so close that he tossed his hat on
the deck of the one and his wig on that of the other, hoisted a cask to
his maintop, to show his occupation, and bore away under an extraordinary
pressure of canvass, without receiving injury. To account for these and
other hairbreadth escapes, popular superstition alleged that Yawkins
insured his celebrated buckkar by compounding with the devil for
one-tenth of his crew every voyage. How they arranged the separation of
the stock and tithes is left to our conjecture. The buckkar was perhaps
called the 'Black Prince' in honour of the formidable insurer.

The 'Black Prince' used to discharge her cargo at Luce, Balcarry, and
elsewhere on the coast; but her owner's favourite landing-places were at
the entrance of the Dee and the Cree, near the old Castle of Rueberry,
about six miles below Kirkcudbright. There is a cave of large dimensions
in the vicinity of Rueberry, which, from its being frequently used by
Yawkins and his supposed connexion with the smugglers on the shore, is
now called Dirk Hatteraick's Cave. Strangers who visit this place, the
scenery of which is highly romantic, are also shown, under the name of
the Gauger's Loup, a tremendous precipice, being the same, it is
asserted, from which Kennedy was precipitated.

Meg Merrilies is in Galloway considered as having had her origin in the
traditions concerning the celebrated Flora Marshal, one of the royal
consorts of Willie Marshal, more commonly called the Caird of Barullion,
King of the Gipsies of the Western Lowlands. That potentate was himself
deserving of notice from the following peculiarities:--He was born in the
parish of Kirkmichael about the year 1671; and, as he died at
Kirkcudbright 23d November 1792, he must then have been in the one
hundred and twentieth year of his age. It cannot be said that this
unusually long lease of existence was noted by any peculiar excellence of
conduct or habits of life. Willie had been pressed or enlisted in the
army seven times, and had deserted as often; besides three times running
away from the naval service. He had been seventeen times lawfully
married; and, besides, such a reasonably large share of matrimonial
comforts, was, after his hundredth year, the avowed father of four
children by less legitimate affections. He subsisted in his extreme old
age by a pension from the present Earl of Selkirk's grandfather. Will
Marshal is buried in Kirkcudbright church, where his monument is still
shown, decorated with a scutcheon suitably blazoned with two tups' horns
and two cutty spoons.

In his youth he occasionally took an evening walk on the highway, with
the purpose of assisting travellers by relieving them of the weight of
their purses. On one occasion the Caird of Barullion robbed the Laird of
Bargally at a place between Carsphairn and Dalmellington. His purpose was
not achieved without a severe struggle, in which the gipsy lost his
bonnet, and was obliged to escape, leaving it on the road. A respectable
farmer happened to be the next passenger, and, seeing the bonnet,
alighted, took it up, and rather imprudently put it on his own head. At
this instant Bargally came up with some assistants, and, recognising the
bonnet, charged the farmer of Bantoberick with having robbed him, and
took him into custody. There being some likeness between the parties,
Bargally persisted in his charge, and, though the respectability of the
farmer's character was proved or admitted, his trial before the Circuit
Court came on accordingly. The fatal bonnet lay on the table of the
court. Bargally swore that it was the identical article worn by the man
who robbed him; and he and others likewise deponed that they had found
the accused on the spot where the crime was committed, with the bonnet on
his head. The case looked gloomily for the prisoner, and the opinion of
the judge seemed unfavourable. But there was a person in court who knew
well both who did and who did not commit the crime. This was the Caird of
Barullion, who, thrusting himself up to the bar near the place where
Bargally was standing, suddenly seized on the bonnet, put it on his head,
and, looking the Laird full in the face, asked him, with a voice which
attracted the attention of the court and crowded audience--'Look at me,
sir, and tell me, by the oath you have sworn--Am not _I_ the man who
robbed you between Carsphairn and Dalmellington?' Bargally replied, in
great astonishment, 'By Heaven! you are the very man.' 'You see what sort
of memory this gentleman has,' said the volunteer pleader; 'he swears to
the bonnet whatever features are under it. If you yourself, my Lord, will
put it on your head, he will be willing to swear that your Lordship was
the party who robbed him between Carsphairn and Dalmellington.' The
tenant of Bantoberick was unanimously acquitted; and thus Willie Marshal
ingeniously contrived to save an innocent man from danger, without
incurring any himself, since Bargally's evidence must have seemed to
every one too fluctuating to be relied upon.

While the King of the Gipsies was thus laudably occupied, his royal
consort, Flora, contrived, it is said, to steal the hood from the judge's
gown; for which offence, combined with her presumptive guilt as a gipsy,
she was banished to New England, whence she never returned.

Now, I cannot grant that the idea of Meg Merrilies was, in the first
concoction of the character, derived from Flora Marshal, seeing I have
already said she was identified with Jean Gordon, and as I have not the
Laird of Bargally's apology for charging the same fact on two several
individuals. Yet I am quite content that Meg should be considered as a
representative of her sect and class in general, Flora as well as others.

The other instances in which my Gallovidian readers have obliged me by
assigning to

     Airy nothing
     A local habitation and a name,

shall also be sanctioned so far as the Author may be entitled to do so. I
think the facetious Joe Miller records a case pretty much in point; where
the keeper of a museum, while showing, as he said, the very sword with
which Balaam was about to kill his ass, was interrupted by one of the
visitors, who reminded him that Balaam was not possessed of a sword, but
only wished for one. 'True, sir,' replied the ready-witted cicerone; 'but
this is the very sword he wished for.' The Author, in application of this
story, has only to add that, though ignorant of the coincidence between
the fictions of the tale and some real circumstances, he is contented to
believe he must unconsciously have thought or dreamed of the last while
engaged in the composition of Guy Mannering.






EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

TO

GUY MANNERING.


The second essay in fiction of an author who has triumphed in his first
romance is a doubtful and perilous adventure. The writer is apt to become
self-conscious, to remember the advice of his critics,--a fatal
error,--and to tremble before the shadow of his own success. He knows
that he will have many enemies, that hundreds of people will be ready to
find fault and to vow that he is "written out." Scott was not
unacquainted with these apprehensions. After publishing "Marmion" he
wrote thus to Lady Abercorn:--

"No one acquires a certain degree of popularity without exciting an equal
degree of malevolence among those who, either from rivalship or from the
mere wish to pull down what others have set up, are always ready to catch
the first occasion to lower the favoured individual to what they call his
'real standard.' Of this I have enough of experience, and my political
interferences, however useless to my friends, have not failed to make me
more than the usual number of enemies. I am therefore bound, in justice
to myself and to those whose good opinion has hitherto protected me, not
to peril myself too frequently. The naturalists tell us that if you
destroy the web which the spider has just made, the insect must spend
many days in inactivity till he has assembled within his person the
materials necessary to weave another. Now, after writing a work of
imagination one feels in nearly the same exhausted state as the spider. I
believe no man now alive writes more rapidly than I do (no great
recommendation); but I never think of making verses till I have a
sufficient stock of poetical ideas to supply them,--I would as soon join
the Israelites in Egypt in their heavy task of making bricks without
clay. Besides, I know, as a small farmer, that good husbandry consists in
not taking the same crop too frequently from the same soil; and as
turnips come after wheat, according to the best rules of agriculture, I
take it that an edition of Swift will do well after such a scourging crop
as 'Marmiou.'"

[March 13, 1808. Copied from the Collection of Lady Napier and Ettrick.]

These fears of the brave, then, were not unfamiliar to Scott; but he
audaciously disregarded all of them in the composition of "Guy
Mannering." He had just spun his web, like the spider of his simile, he
had just taken off his intellectual fields the "scourging crop" of "The
Lord of the Isles," he had just received the discouraging news of its
comparative failure, when he "buckled to," achieved "Guy Mannering" in
six weeks, and published it. Moliere tells us that he wrote "Les Facheux"
in a fortnight; and a French critic adds that it reads indeed as if it
had been written in, a fortnight. Perhaps a self-confident censor might
venture a similar opinion about "Guy Mannering." It assuredly shows
traces of haste; the plot wanders at its own will; and we may believe
that the Author often--did not see his own way out of the wood. But there
is little harm in that. "If I do not know what is coming next," a modern
novelist has remarked, "how can the public know?" Curiosity, at least, is
likely to be excited by this happy-go-lucky manner of Scott's. "The worst
of it is;" as he wrote to Lady Abercorn about his poems (June 9,1808),
"that I am not very good or patient in slow and careful composition; and
sometimes I remind myself of the drunken man, who could run long after he
could not walk." Scott could certainly run very well, though averse to a
plodding motion.

[He was probably thinking of a famous Edinburgh character, "Singing Jamie
Balfour." Jamie was found very drunk and adhering to the pavement one
night. He could not raise himself; but when helped to his feet, ran his
preserver a race to the tavern, and won!]

The account of the year's work which preceded "Guy Mannering" is given by
Lockhart, and is astounding. In 1814 Scott had written, Lockhart
believes, the greater part of the "Life of Swift," most of "Waverley" and
the "Lord of the Isles;" he had furnished essays to the "Encyclopaedia,"
and had edited "The Memorie of the Somervilles." The spider might well
seem spun out, the tilth exhausted. But Scott had a fertility, a
spontaneity, of fancy equalled only, if equalled at all, by Alexandre
Dumas.

On November 7 of this laborious year, 1814, Scott was writing to Mr.
Joseph Train, thanking him for a parcel of legendary lore, including the
Galloway tale of the wandering astrologer and a budget of gypsy
traditions.  Falling in the rich soil of Scott's imagination, the tale of
the astrologer yielded a name and an opening to "Guy Mannering," while
the gypsy lore blossomed into the legend of Meg Merrilies. The seed of
the novel was now sown. But between November 11 and December 25 Scott was
writing the three last cantos of the "Lord of the Isles." Yet before the
"Lord of the Isles" was published (Jan. 18, 1815), two volumes of "Guy
Mannering" were in print  (Letter to Morritt, Jan. 17, 1815.) The novel
was issued on Feb. 14, 1815. Scott, as he says somewhere, was like the
turnspit dog, into whose wheel a hot cinder is dropped to encourage his
activity. Scott needed hot cinders in the shape of proof-sheets fresh
from the press, and he worked most busily when the printer's devil was
waiting. In this case, not only the printer's devil, but the wolf was at
the door. The affairs of the Ballantynes clamoured for moneys In their
necessity and his own, Scott wrote at the rate of a volume in ten days,
and for some financial reason published "Guy Mannering" with Messrs.
Longmans, not with Constable. Scott was at this moment facing creditors
and difficulties as Napoleon faced the armies of the Allies,--present
everywhere, everywhere daring and successful. True, his "Lord of the
Isles" was a disappointment, as James Ballantyne informed him. "'Well,
James, so be it; but you know we must not droop, for we cannot afford to
give over. Since one line has failed, we must just stick to something
else.' And so he dismissed me, and resumed his novel."

In these circumstances, far from inspiring, was "Guy Mannering" written
and hurried through the press. The story has its own history: one can
watch the various reminiscences and experiences of life that crystallized
together in Scott's mind, and grouped themselves fantastically into his
unpremeditated plot. Sir Walter gives, in the preface of 1829, the legend
which he heard from John MacKinlay, his father's Highland servant, and on
which he meant to found a tale more in Hawthorn's manner than in his own.
That plan he changed in the course of printing, "leaving only just enough
of astrology to annoy pedantic reviewers and foolish Puritans." Whence
came the rest of the plot,--the tale of the long-lost heir, and so on?
The true heir, "kept out of his own," and returning in disguise, has been
a favourite character ever since Homer sang of Odysseus, and probably
long before that. But it is just possible that Scott had a certain modern
instance in his mind. In turning over the old manuscript diary at
Branxholme Park (mentioned in a note to "Waverley"), the Editor lighted
on a singular tale, which, in the diarist's opinion, might have suggested
"Guy Mannering" to Sir Walter. The resemblance between the story of
Vanbeest Brown and the hero of the diarist was scanty; but in a long
letter of Scott's to Lady Abercorn (May 21, 1813), a the Editor finds Sir
Walter telling his correspondent the very narrative recorded in the
Branxholme Park diary. Singular things happen, Sir Walter says; and he
goes on to describe a case just heard in the court where he is sitting as
Clerk of Sessions. Briefly, the anecdote is this: A certain Mr.
Carruthers of Dormont had reason to suspect his wife's fidelity. While
proceedings for a divorce were pending, Mrs. Carruthers bore a daughter,
of whom her husband, of course, was legally the father. But he did not
believe in the relationship, and sent the infant girl to be brought up,
in ignorance of her origin and in seclusion, among the Cheviot Hills.
Here she somehow learned the facts of her own story. She married a Mr.
Routledge, the son of a yeoman, and "compounded" her rights (but not
those of her issue) for a small sung of ready money, paid by old Dormont.
She bears a boy; then she and her husband died in poverty. Their son was
sent by a friend to the East Indies, and was presented with a packet of
papers, which he left unopened at a lawyer's. The young man made a
fortune in India, returned to Scotland, and took a shooting in
Dumfriesshire, near bormont, his ancestral home. He lodged at a small inn
hard by, and the landlady, struck by his name, began to gossip with him
about his family history. He knew nothing of the facts which the landlady
disclosed, but, impressed by her story, sent for and examined his
neglected packet of papers. Then he sought legal opinion, and was
advised, by President Blair, that he had a claim worth presenting on the
estate of Dormont. "The first decision of the cause," writes Scott, "was
favourable." The true heir celebrated his legal victory by a
dinner-party, and his friends saluted him as "Dormont." Next morning he
was found dead. Such is the true tale. As it occupied Scott's mind in
1813, and as he wrote "Guy Mannering" in 1814-15, it is not impossible
that he may have borrowed his wandering heir, who returns by pure
accident to his paternal domains, and there learns his origin at a
woman's lips, from the Dormont case. The resemblance of the stories, at
least, was close enough to strike a shrewd observer some seventy years
ago.

Another possible source of the plot--a more romantic origin,
certainly--is suggested by Mr. Robert Chambers in "Illustrations of the
Author of 'Waverley.'" A Maxwell of Glenormiston, "a religious and
bigoted recluse," sent his only son and heir to a Jesuit College in
Flanders, left his estate in his brother's management, and died. The
wicked uncle alleged that the heir was also dead. The child, ignorant of
his birth, grew up, ran away from the Jesuits at the age of sixteen,
enlisted in the French army, fought at Fontenoy, got his colours, and,
later, landed in the Moray Firth as a French officer in 1745. He went
through the campaign, was in hiding in Lochaber after Drumossie, and in
making for a Galloway port, was seized, and imprisoned in Dumfries. Here
an old woman of his father's household recognized him by "a mark which
she remembered on his body." His cause was taken up by friends; but the
usurping uncle died, and Sir Robert Maxwell recovered his estates without
a lawsuit. This anecdote is quoted from the "New Monthly Magazine," June,
1819. There is nothing to prove that Scott was acquainted with this
adventure. Scott's own experience, as usual, supplied him with hints for
his characters. The phrase of Dominie Sampson's father, "Please God, my
bairn may live to wag his pow in a pulpit," was uttered in his own
hearing. There was a Bluegown, or Bedesman, like Edie Ochiltree, who had
a son at Edinburgh College. Scott was kind to the son, the Bluegown asked
him to dinner, and at this meal the old man made the remark about the
pulpit and the pow.' A similar tale is told by Scott in the Introduction
to "The Antiquary" (1830). As for the good Dominie, Scott remarks that,
for "certain particular reasons," he must say what he has to say about
his prototype "very generally." Mr. Chambers' finds the prototype in a
Mr. James Sanson, tutor in the house of Mr. Thomas Scott, Sir Walter's
uncle. It seems very unlike Sir Walter to mention this excellent man
almost by his name, and the tale about his devotion to his patron's
daughter cannot, apparently, be true of Mr. James Sanson. The prototype
of Pleydell, according to Sir Walter himself (Journal, June 19, 1830),
was "my old friend Adam Rolland, Esq., in external circumstances, but not
in frolic or fancy." Mr. Chambers, however, finds the original in Mr.
Andrew Crosbie, an advocate of great talents, who frolicked to ruin, and
died in 1785. Scott may have heard tales of this patron of "High Jinks,"
but cannot have known him much personally. Dandie Dinmont is simply the
typical Border farmer. Mr. Shortreed, Scott's companion in his Liddesdale
raids, thought that Willie Elliot, in Millburnholm, was the great
original. Scott did not meet Mr. James Davidson in Hindlee, owner of all
the Mustards and Peppers, till some years after the novel was written.
"Guy Mannering," when read to him, sent Mr. Davidson to sleep. "The kind
and manly character of Dandie, the gentle and delicious one of his wife,"
and the circumstances of their home, were suggested, Lockhart thinks, by
Scott's friend, steward, and amanuensis, Mr. William Laidlaw, by Mrs.
Laidlaw, and by their farm among the braes of Yarrow. In truth, the
Border was peopled then by Dandies and Ailies: nor is the race even now
extinct in Liddesdale and Teviotdale, in Ettrick and Yarrow. As for
Mustard and Pepper, their offspring too is powerful in the land, and is
the deadly foe of vermin. The curious may consult Mr. Cook's work on "The
Dandie Dinmont Terrier." The Duke of Buccleugh's breed still resembles
the fine example painted by Gainsborough in his portrait of the duke (of
Scott's time). "Tod Gabbie," again, as Lockhart says, was studied from
Tod Willie, the huntsman of the hills above Loch Skene. As for the
Galloway scenery, Scott did not know it well, having only visited "the
Kingdom" in 1793, when he was defending the too frolicsome Mr. McNaught,
Minister of Girthon. The beautiful and lonely wilds of the Glenkens, in
central Galloway, where traditions yet linger, were, unluckily, terra
incognita to Scott. A Galloway story of a murder and its detection by the
prints of the assassin's boots inspired the scene where Dirk Hatteraick
is traced by similar means. In Colonel Mannering, by the way, the Ettrick
Shepherd recognized "Walter Scott, painted by himself."

The reception of "Guy Mannering" was all that could be wished. William
Erskine and Ballantyne were "of opinion that it is much more interesting
than 'Waverley.'" Mr. Morritt (March, 1815) pronounced himself
to be "quite charmed with Dandie, Meg Merrilies, and Dirk
Hatteraick,--characters as original as true to nature, and as forcibly
conceived as, I had almost said, could have been drawn by Shakspeare
himself." The public were not less appreciative. Two thousand copies, at
a guinea, were sold the day after publication, and three thousand more
were disposed of in three months. The professional critics acted just as
Scott, speaking in general terms, had prophesied that they would. Let us
quote the "British Critic" (1815).

"There are few spectacles in the literary world more lamentable than to
view a successful author, in his second appearance before the public,
limping lamely after himself, and treading tediously and awkwardly in the
very same round, which, in his first effort, he had traced with vivacity
and applause. We would not be harsh enough to say that the Author of
'Waverley' is in this predicament, but we are most unwillingly compelled
to assert that the second effort falls far below the standard of the
first. In 'Waverley' there was brilliancy of genius.... In 'Guy
Mannering' there is little else beyond the wild sallies of an original
genius, the bold and irregular efforts of a powerful but an exhausted
mind. Time enough has not been allowed him to recruit his resources, both
of anecdote and wit; but, encouraged by the credit so justly, bestowed
upon one of then most finished portraits ever presented to the world, he
has followed up the exhibition with a careless and hurried sketch, which
betrays at once the weakness and the strength of its author.

"The character of Dirk Hatteraick is a faithful copy from nature,--it is
one of those moral monsters which make us almost ashamed of our kind.
Still, amidst the ruffian and murderous brutality of the smuggler, some
few feelings of our common nature are thrown in with no less ingenuity
than truth. . . . The remainder of the personages are very little above
the cast of a common lively novel. . . . The Edinburgh lawyer is perhaps
the most original portrait; nor are the saturnalia of the Saturday
evenings described without humour. The Dominie is overdrawn and
inconsistent; while the young ladies present nothing above par. . . .

"There are parts of this novel which none but one endowed with the
sublimity of genius could have dictated; there are others which any
ordinary character cobbler might as easily have stitched together. There
are sparks both of pathos and of humour, even in the dullest parts, which
could be elicited from none but the Author of 'Waverley.' . . . If,
indeed, we have spoken in a manner derogatory to this, his later effort,
our censure arises only from its comparison with the former. . .

"We cannot, however, conclude this article without remarking the absurd
influence which our Author unquestionably attributes to the calculations
of judicial astrology. No power of chance alone could have fulfilled the
joint predictions both of Guy Mannering and Meg Merrilies; we cannot
suppose that the Author can be endowed with sufficient folly to believe
in the influence of planetary conjunctions himself, nor to have so
miserable an idea of the understanding of his readers as to suppose them
capable of a similar belief. We must also remember that the time of this
novel is not in the dark ages, but scarcely forty years since; no aid,
therefore, can be derived from the general tendency of popular
superstition. What the clew may be to this apparent absurdity, we cannot
imagine; whether the Author be in jest or earnest we do not know, and we
are willing to suppose in this dilemma that he does not know himself."

The "Monthly Review" sorrowed, like the "British," over the encouragement
given to the follies of astrology. The "Critical Review" "must lament
that 'Guy Mannering' is too often written in language unintelligible to
all except the Scotch." The "Critical Monthly" also had scruples about
morality. The novel "advocates duelling, encourages a taste for peeping
into the future,--a taste by far too prevalent,--and it is not over nice
on religious subjects!"

The "Quarterly Review" distinguished itself by stupidity, if not by
spite. "The language of 'Guy Mannering,' though characteristic, is mean;
the state of society, though peculiar, is vulgar. Meg Merrilies is
swelled into a very unnatural importance." The speech of Meg Merrilies to
Ellangowan is "one of the few which affords an intelligible extract." The
Author "does not even scruple to overturn the laws of Nature"--because
Colonel Mannering resides in the neighbourhood of Ellangowan! "The Author
either gravely believes what no other man alive believes, or he has, of
malice prepense, committed so great an offence against good taste as to
build his story on what he must know to be a contemptible absurdity. . . .
The greater part of the characters, their manners and dialect, are at
once barbarous and vulgar, extravagant and mean. . . . The work would be,
on the whole, improved by being translated into English. Though we
cannot, on the whole, speak of the novel with approbation, we will not
affect to deny that we read it with interest, and that it repaid us with
amusement."

It is in reviewing "The Antiquary" that the immortal idiot of the
"Quarterly" complains about "the dark dialect of Anglified Erse."
Published criticism never greatly affected Scott's spirits,--probably, he
very seldom read it. He knew that the public, like Constable's friend
Mrs. Stewart, were "reading 'Guy Mannering' all day, and dreaming of it
all night."

Indeed, it is much better to read "Guy Mannering" than to criticise it. A
book written in six weeks, a book whose whole plot and conception was
changed "in the printing," must have its faults of construction. Thus, we
meet Mannering first as "a youthful lover," a wanderer at adventure, an
amateur astrologer, and suddenly we lose sight of him, and only recover
him as a disappointed, "disilluded," and weary, though still vigorous,
veteran. This is the inevitable result of a novel based on a prediction.
Either you have to leap some twenty years just when you are becoming
familiar with the persons, or you have to begin in the midst of the
events foreseen, and then make a tedious return to explain the prophecy.
Again, it was necessary for Scott to sacrifice Frank Kennedy, who is
rather a taking adventurer, like Bothwell in "Old Mortality." Readers
regret the necessity which kills Kennedy. The whole fortunes of Vanbeest
Brown, his duel with the colonel, and his fortunate appearance in the
nick of time, seem too rich in coincidences: still, as the Dormont case
and the Ormiston case have shown, coincidences as unlooked for do occur.
A fastidious critic has found fault with Brown's flageolet. It is a
modest instrument; but what was he to play upon,--a lute, a concertina, a
barrel-organ?

The characters of the young ladies have not always been applauded. Taste,
in the matter of heroines, varies greatly; Sir Walter had no high opinion
of his own skill in delineating them. But Julia Mannering is probably a
masterly picture of a girl of that age,--a girl with some silliness and
more gaiety, with wit, love of banter, and, in the last resort, sense and
good feeling. She is particularly good when, in fear and trembling, she
teases her imposing father.

"I expect," says Colonel Mannering, "that you will pay to this young lady
that attention which is due to misfortune and virtue." "Certainly, sir.
Is my future friend red-haired?" Miss Mannering is very capable of
listening to Brown's flageolet from the balcony, but not of accompanying
Brown, should he desire it, in the boat. As for Brown himself, he is one
of Sir Walter's usual young men,--"brave, handsome, not too clever,"--the
despair of their humorous creator. "Once you come to forty year," as
Thackeray sings, "then you'll know that a lad is an ass;" and Scott had
come to that age, and perhaps entertained that theory of a jeune premier
when he wrote "Guy Mannering." In that novel, as always, he was most
himself when dealing either with homely Scottish characters of everyday
life, with exaggerated types of humorous absurdity, and with wildly
adventurous banditti, who appealed to the old strain of the Border reiver
in his blood. The wandering plot of "Guy Mannering" enabled him to
introduce examples of all these sorts. The good-humoured, dull, dawdling
Ellangowan, a laird half dwindled to a yeoman, is a sketch absolutely
accurate, and wonderfully touched with pathos. The landladies, Mrs.
MacCandlish and Tib Mumps, are little masterpieces; so is Mac-Morlan, the
foil to Glossin; and so is Pleydell, allowing for the manner of the age.
Glossin himself is best when least villanous. Sir Robert Hazlewood is
hardly a success. But as to Jock Jabos, a Southern Scot may say that he
knows Jock Jabos in the flesh, so persistent is the type of that
charioteer. It is partly Scott's good fortune, partly it is his evil
luck, to be so inimitably and intimately true in his pictures of Scottish
character. This wins the heart of his countrymen, indeed; but the
stranger can never know how good Scott really is, any more than a
Frenchman can appreciate Falstaff. Thus the alien may be vexed by what he
thinks the mere clannish enthusiasm of praise, in Scott's countrymen.
Every little sketch of a passing face is exquisite in Scott's work, when
he is at his best. For example, Dandie Dinmont's children are only
indicated "with a dusty roll of the brush;" but we recognize at once the
large, shy, kindly families of the Border. Dandie himself, as the
"Edinburgh Review" said (1817), "is beyond all question the best rustic
portrait that has ever yet been exhibited to the public,--the most
honourable to rustics, and the most creditable to the heart as well as to
the genius of the Author, the truest to nature, the most complete in all
its lineaments." Dandie is always delightful,--whether at Mumps's Hall,
or on the lonely moor, or at home in Charlieshope, or hunting, or
leistering fish, or entering terriers at vermin, or fighting, or going to
law, or listening to the reading of a disappointing will, or entertaining
the orphan whom others neglect; always delightful he is, always generous,
always true, always the Border farmer. There is no better stock of men,
none less devastated by "the modern spirit." His wife is worthy of him,
and has that singular gentleness, kindliness, and dignity which prevail
on the Border, even in households far less prosperous than that of Dandie
Dinmont.--[Dr. John Brown's Ailie, in "Rab and his Friends," will
naturally occur to the mind of every reader.]

Among Scott's "character parts," or types broadly humorous, few have been
more popular than Dominie Sampson. His ungainly goodness, unwieldy
strength, and inaccessible learning have made great sport, especially
when "Guy Mannering" was "Terryfied" for the stage.

As Miss Bertram remarks in that singular piece,--where even Jock Jabos
"wins till his English," like Elspeth in the Antiquary,--the Dominie
"rather forces a tear from the eye of sentiment than a laugh from the
lungs of ribaldry." In the play, however, he sits down to read a folio on
some bandboxes, which, very naturally, "give way under him." As he has
just asked Mrs. Mac-Candlish after the health of both her husbands, who
are both dead, the lungs of ribaldry are more exercised than the fine eye
of sentiment. We scarcely care to see our Dominie treated thus. His
creator had the very lowest opinion of the modern playwright's craft, and
probably held that stage humour could not be too palpable and practical.
Lockhart writes (v. 130): "What share the novelist himself had in this
first specimen of what he used to call 'the art of Terryfying' I cannot
exactly say; but his correspondence shows that the pretty song of the
'Lullaby' was not his only contribution to it; and I infer that he had
taken the trouble to modify the plot and rearrange for stage purposes a
considerable part of the original dialogue." Friends of the Dominie may
be glad to know, perhaps on Scott's own testimony, that he was an alumnus
of St. Andrews. "I was boarded for twenty pence a week at Luckie
Sour-kail's, in the High Street of St. Andrews." He was also fortunate
enough to hold a bursary in St. Leonard's College, which, however, is a
blunder. St. Leonard's and St. Salvator's had already been merged in the
United College (1747). All this is in direct contradiction to the
evidence in the novel, which makes the Dominie a Glasgow man. Yet the
change seems to be due to Scott rather than to Terry. It is certain that
Colonel Mannering would not have approved of the treatment which the
Dominie undergoes, in a play whereof the plot and conduct fall little
short of the unintelligible.

Against the character of Pleydell "a few murmurs of pedantic criticism,"
as Lockhart says, were uttered, and it was natural that Pleydell should
seem an incredible character to English readers. But there is plenty of
evidence that his "High Jinks" were not exaggerated.

There remains the heroine of the novel, as Mr. Ruskin not incorrectly
calls her, Meg Merrilies, the sybil who so captivated the imagination of
Keats. Among Scott's many weird women, she is the most romantic, with her
loyal heart and that fiery natural eloquence which, as Scott truly
observed, does exist ready for moments of passion, even among the
reticent Lowlanders. The child of a mysterious wandering race, Meg has a
double claim to utter such speeches as she addresses to Ellangowan after
the eviction of her tribe. Her death, as Mr. Ruskin says, is
"self-devoted, heroic in the highest, and happy." The devotion of Meg
Merrilies, the grandeur of her figure, the music of her songs, more than
redeem the character of Dirk Hatteraick, even if we hold, with the
"Edinburgh" reviewer, that he is "a vulgar bandit of the German school,"
just as the insipidity and flageolet of the hero are redeemed by the
ballad sung in the moment of recognition.
         "Are these the Links of Forth, she said,
          Or are they the crooks of Dee,
          Or the bonnie woods of Warroch Head,
