disposition of this kind; for, from the instant I perceived the extreme
curiosity manifested on the subject, I felt a secret satisfaction in
baffling it, for which, when its unimportance is considered, I do not
well know how to account.

My desire to remain concealed, in the character of the Author of these
Novels, subjected me occasionally to awkward embarrassments, as it
sometimes happened that those who were sufficiently intimate with me
would put the question in direct terms. In this case, only one of three
courses could be followed. Either I must have surrendered my secret, or
have returned an equivocating answer, or, finally, must have stoutly and
boldly denied the fact. The first was a sacrifice which I conceive no one
had a right to force from me, since I alone was concerned in the matter.
The alternative of rendering a doubtful answer must have left me open to
the degrading suspicion that I was not unwilling to assume the merit (if
there was any) which I dared not absolutely lay claim to; or those who
might think more justly of me must have received such an equivocal answer
as an indirect avowal. I therefore considered myself entitled, like an
accused person put upon trial, to refuse giving my own evidence to my own
conviction, and flatly to deny all that could not be proved against me.
At the same time I usually qualified my denial by stating that, had I
been the Author of these works, I would have felt myself quite entitled
to protect my secret by refusing my own evidence, when it was asked for
to accomplish a discovery of what I desired to conceal.

The real truth is, that I never expected or hoped to disguise my
connection with these Novels from any one who lived on terms of intimacy
with me. The number of coincidences which necessarily existed between
narratives recounted, modes of expression, and opinions broached in these
Tales and such as were used by their Author in the intercourse of private
life must have been far too great to permit any of my familiar
acquaintances to doubt the identity betwixt their friend and the Author
of Waverley; and I believe they were all morally convinced of it. But
while I was myself silent, their belief could not weigh much more with
the world than that of others; their opinions and reasoning were liable
to be taxed with partiality, or confronted with opposing arguments and
opinions; and the question was not so much whether I should be generally
acknowledged to be the Author, in spite of my own denial, as whether even
my own avowal of the works, if such should be made, would be sufficient
to put me in undisputed possession of that character.

I have been often asked concerning supposed cases, in which I was said to
have been placed on the verge of discovery; but, as I maintained my point
with the composure of a lawyer of thirty years' standing, I never
recollect being in pain or confusion on the subject. In Captain Medwyn's
Conversations of Lord Byron the reporter states himself to have asked my
noble and highly gifted friend,' If he was certain about these Novels
being Sir Walter Scott's?' To which Lord Byron replied, 'Scott as much as
owned himself the Author of Waverley to me in Murray's shop. I was
talking to him about that Novel, and lamented that its Author had not
carried back the story nearer to the time of the Revolution. Scott,
entirely off his guard, replied, "Ay, I might have done so; but--" there
he stopped. It was in vain to attempt to correct himself; he looked
confused, and relieved his embarrassment by a precipitate retreat.' I
have no recollection whatever of this scene taking place, and I should
have thought that I was more likely to have laughed than to appear
confused, for I certainly never hoped to impose upon Lord Byron in a case
of the kind; and from the manner in which he uniformly expressed himself,
I knew his opinion was entirely formed, and that any disclamations of
mine would only have savoured of affectation. I do not mean to insinuate
that the incident did not happen, but only that it could hardly have
occurred exactly under the circumstances narrated, without my
recollecting something positive on the subject. In another part of the
same volume Lord Byron is reported to have expressed a supposition that
the cause of my not avowing myself the Author of Waverley may have been
some surmise that the reigning family would have been displeased with the
work. I can only say, it is the last apprehension I should have
entertained, as indeed the inscription to these volumes sufficiently
proves. The sufferers of that melancholy period have, during the last and
present reign, been honoured both with the sympathy and protection of the
reigning family, whose magnanimity can well pardon a sigh from others,
and bestow one themselves, to the memory of brave opponents, who did
nothing in hate, but all in honour.

While those who were in habitual intercourse with the real author had
little hesitation in assigning the literary property to him, others, and
those critics of no mean rank, employed themselves in investigating with
persevering patience any characteristic features which might seem to
betray the origin of these Novels. Amongst these, one gentleman, equally
remarkable for the kind and liberal tone of his criticism, the acuteness
of his reasoning, and the very gentlemanlike manner in which he conducted
his inquiries, displayed not only powers of accurate investigation, but a
temper of mind deserving to be employed on a subject of much greater
importance; and I have no doubt made converts to his opinion of almost
all who thought the point worthy of consideration. [Footnote: Letters on
the Author of Waverley; Rodwell and Martin, London, 1822.] Of those
letters, and other attempts of the same kind, the Author could not
complain, though his incognito was endangered. He had challenged the
public to a game at bo-peep, and if he was discovered in his
'hiding-hole,' he must submit to the shame of detection.

Various reports were of course circulated in various ways; some founded
on an inaccurate rehearsal of what may have been partly real, some on
circumstances having no concern whatever with the subject, and others on
the invention of some importunate persons, who might perhaps imagine that
the readiest mode of forcing the Author to disclose himself was to assign
some dishonourable and discreditable cause for his silence.

It may be easily supposed that this sort of inquisition was treated with
contempt by the person whom it principally regarded; as, among all the
rumours that were current, there was only one, and that as unfounded as
the others, which had nevertheless some alliance to probability, and
indeed might have proved in some degree true.

I allude to a report which ascribed a great part, or the whole, of these
Novels to the late Thomas Scott, Esq., of the 70th Regiment, then
stationed in Canada. Those who remember that gentleman will readily grant
that, with general talents at least equal to those of his elder brother,
he added a power of social humour and a deep insight into human character
which rendered him an universally delightful member of society, and that
the habit of composition alone was wanting to render him equally
successful as a writer. The Author of Waverley was so persuaded of the
truth of this, that he warmly pressed his brother to make such an
experiment, and willingly undertook all the trouble of correcting and
superintending the press. Mr. Thomas Scott seemed at first very well
disposed to embrace the proposal, and had even fixed on a subject and a
hero. The latter was a person well known to both of us in our boyish
years, from having displayed some strong traits of character. Mr. T.
Scott had determined to represent his youthful acquaintance as emigrating
to America, and encountering the dangers and hardships of the New World,
with the same dauntless spirit which he had displayed when a boy in his
native country. Mr. Scott would probably have been highly successful,
being familiarly acquainted with the manners of the native Indians, of
the old French settlers in Canada, and of the Brules or Woodsmen, and
having the power of observing with accuracy what I have no doubt he could
have sketched with force and expression. In short, the Author believes
his brother would have made himself distinguished in that striking field
in which, since that period, Mr. Cooper has achieved so many triumphs.
But Mr. T. Scott was already affected by bad health, which wholly
unfitted him for literary labour, even if he could have reconciled his
patience to the task. He never, I believe, wrote a single line of the
projected work; and I only have the melancholy pleasure of preserving in
the Appendix [Footnote: See Appendix No. III.] the simple anecdote on
which he proposed to found it.

To this I may add, I can easily conceive that there may have been
circumstances which gave a colour to the general report of my brother
being interested in these works; and in particular that it might derive
strength from my having occasion to remit to him, in consequence of
certain family transactions, some considerable sums of money about that
period. To which it is to be added that if any person chanced to evince
particular curiosity on such a subject, my brother was likely enough to
divert himself with practising on their credulity.

It may be mentioned that, while the paternity of these Novels was from
time to time warmly disputed in Britain, the foreign booksellers
expressed no hesitation on the matter, but affixed my name to the whole
of the Novels, and to some besides to which I had no claim.

The volumes, therefore, to which the present pages form a Preface are
entirely the composition of the Author by whom they are now acknowledged,
with the exception, always, of avowed quotations, and such unpremeditated
and involuntary plagiarisms as can scarce be guarded against by any one
who has read and written a great deal. The original manuscripts are all
in existence, and entirely written (horresco referens) in the Author's
own hand, excepting during the years 1818 and 1819, when, being affected
with severe illness, he was obliged to employ the assistance of a
friendly amanuensis.

The number of persons to whom the secret was necessarily entrusted, or
communicated by chance, amounted, I should think, to twenty at least, to
whom I am greatly obliged for the fidelity with which they observed their
trust, until the derangement of the affairs of my publishers, Messrs.
Constable and Co., and the exposure of their account books, which was the
necessary consequence, rendered secrecy no longer possible. The
particulars attending the avowal have been laid before the public in the
Introduction to the Chronicles of the Canongate.

The preliminary advertisement has given a sketch of the purpose of this
edition. I have some reason to fear that the notes which accompany the
tales, as now published, may be thought too miscellaneous and too
egotistical. It maybe some apology for this, that the publication was
intended to be posthumous, and still more, that old men may be permitted
to speak long, because they cannot in the course of nature have long time
to speak. In preparing the present edition, I have done all that I can do
to explain the nature of my materials, and the use I have made of them;
nor is it probable that I shall again revise or even read these tales. I
was therefore desirous rather to exceed in the portion of new and
explanatory matter which is added to this edition than that the reader
should have reason to complain that the information communicated was of a
general and merely nominal character. It remains to be tried whether the
public (like a child to whom a watch is shown) will, after having been
satiated with looking at the outside, acquire some new interest in the
object when it is opened and the internal machinery displayed to them.

That Waverley and its successors have had their day of favour and
popularity must be admitted with sincere gratitude; and the Author has
studied (with the prudence of a beauty whose reign has been rather long)
to supply, by the assistance of art, the charms which novelty no longer
affords. The publishers have endeavoured to gratify the honourable
partiality of the public for the encouragement of British art, by
illustrating this edition with designs by the most eminent living
artists. [Footnote: The illustrations here referred to were made for the
edition of 1829]

To my distinguished countryman, David Wilkie, to Edwin Landseer, who has
exercised his talents so much on Scottish subjects and scenery, to
Messrs. Leslie and Newton, my thanks are due, from a friend as well as an
author. Nor am I less obliged to Messrs. Cooper, Kidd, and other artists
of distinction to whom I am less personally known, for the ready zeal
with which they have devoted their talents to the same purpose.

Farther explanation respecting the Edition is the business of the
publishers, not of the Author; and here, therefore, the latter has
accomplished his task of introduction and explanation. If, like a spoiled
child, he has sometimes abused or trifled with the indulgence of the
public, he feels himself entitled to full belief when he exculpates
himself from the charge of having been at any time insensible of their
kindness.

ABBOTSFORD, 1st January, 1829.




APPENDIX
No. I.,

FRAGMENT OF A ROMANCE WHICH WAS TO HAVE BEEN ENTITLED

THOMAS THE RHYMER.


[It is not to be supposed that these fragments are given as possessing
any intrinsic value of themselves; but there may be some curiosity
attached to them, as to the first etchings of a plate, which are
accounted interesting by those who have, in any degree, been interested
in the more finished works of the artist.]






CHAPTER I.

The sun was nearly set behind the distant mountains of Liddesdale, when a
few of the scattered and terrified inhabitants of the village of
Hersildoun, which had four days before been burned by a predatory band of
English Borderers, were now busied in repairing their ruined dwellings.
One high tower in the centre of the village alone exhibited no appearance
of devastation. It was surrounded with court walls, and the outer gate
was barred and bolted. The bushes and brambles which grew around, and had
even insinuated their branches beneath the gate, plainly showed that it
must have been many years since it had been opened. While the cottages
around lay in smoking ruins, this pile, deserted and desolate as it
seemed to be, had suffered nothing from the violence of the invaders; and
the wretched beings who were endeavouring to repair their miserable huts
against nightfall, seemed to neglect the preferable shelter which it
might have afforded them, without the necessity of labour.

Before the day had quite gone down, a knight, richly armed, and mounted
upon an ambling hackney, rode slowly into the village. His attendants
were a lady, apparently young and beautiful, who rode by his side upon a
dappled palfrey; his squire, who carried his helmet and lance, and led
his battle-horse, a noble steed, richly caparisoned. A page and four
yeomen, bearing bows and quivers, short swords, and targets of a span
breadth, completed his equipage, which, though small, denoted him to be a
man of high rank.

He stopped and addressed several of the inhabitants whom curiosity had
withdrawn from their labour to gaze at him; but at the sound of his
voice, and still more on perceiving the St. George's Cross in the caps of
his followers, they fled, with a loud cry that the Southrons were
returned. The knight endeavoured to expostulate with the fugitives, who
were chiefly aged men, women, and children; but their dread of the
English name accelerated their flight, and in a few minutes, excepting
the knight and his attendants, the place was deserted by all. He paced
through the village to seek a shelter for the night, and despairing to
find one either in the inaccessible tower or the plundered huts of the
peasantry, he directed his course to the left hand, where he spied a
small, decent habitation, apparently the abode of a man considerably
above the common rank. After much knocking, the proprietor at length
showed himself at the window, and speaking in the English dialect, with
great signs of apprehension, demanded their business. The warrior replied
that his quality was an English knight and baron, and that he was
travelling to the court of the king of Scotland on affairs of consequence
to both kingdoms.

"Pardon my hesitation, noble Sir Knight," said the old man, as he
unbolted and unbarred his doors,--

"Pardon my hesitation, but we are here exposed to too many intrusions to
admit of our exercising unlimited and unsuspicious hospitality. What I
have is yours; and God send your mission may bring back peace and the
good days of our old Queen Margaret!"

"Amen, worthy franklin," quoth the knight,--"Did you know her?"

"I came to this country in her train," said the franklin; "and the care
of some of her jointure lands, which she devolved on me, occasioned my
settling here."

"And how do you, being an Englishman," said the knight, "protect your life
and property here, when one of your nation cannot obtain a single night's
lodging, or a draught of water, were he thirsty?"

"Marry, noble sir," answered the franklin, "use, as they say, will make a
man live in a lion's den; and as I settled here in a quiet time, and have
never given cause of offence, I am respected by my neighbours, and even,
as you see, by our forayers from England."

"I rejoice to hear it, and accept your hospitality. Isabella, my love,
our worthy host will provide you a bed. My daughter, good franklin, is
ill at ease. We will occupy your house till the Scottish king shall
return from his Northern expedition. Meanwhile call me Lord Lacy of
Chester."

The attendants of the baron, assisted by the franklin, were now busied in
disposing of the horses and arranging the table for some refreshment for
Lord Lacy and his fair companion. While they sat down to it, they were
attended by their host and his daughter, whom custom did not permit to
eat in their presence, and who afterwards withdrew to an outer chamber,
where the squire and page (both young men of noble birth) partook of
supper, and were accommodated with beds. The yeomen, after doing honour
to the rustic cheer of Queen Margaret's bailiff, withdrew to the stable,
and each, beside his favourite horse, snored away the fatigues of their
journey. Early on the following morning the travellers were roused by a
thundering knocking at the door of the house, accompanied with many
demands for instant admission, in the roughest tone. The squire and page,
of Lord Lacy, after buckling on their arms, were about to sally out to
chastise these intruders, when the old host, after looking out at a
private casement, contrived for reconnoitring his visitors, entreated
them, with great signs of terror, to be quiet, if they did not mean that
all in the house should be murdered. He then hastened to the apartment of
Lord Lacy, whom he met dressed in a long furred gown and the knightly cap
called a mortier, irritated at the noise, and demanding to know the cause
which had disturbed the repose of the household.

"Noble sir," said the franklin, "one of the most formidable and bloody of
the Scottish Border riders is at hand. He is never seen," added he,
faltering with terror, "so far from the hills, but with some bad purpose,
and the power of accomplishing it; so hold yourself to your guard, for--"

A loud crash here announced that the door was broken down, and the knight
just descended the stair in time to prevent bloodshed betwixt his
attendants and the intruders. They were three in number. Their chief was
tall, bony, and athletic, his spare and muscular frame, as well as the
hardness of his features, marked the course of his life to have been
fatiguing and perilous. The effect of his appearance was aggravated by
his dress, which consisted of a jack, or jacket, composed of thick buff
leather, on which small plates of iron of a lozenge form were stitched,
in such a manner as to overlap each other and form a coat of mail, which
swayed with every motion of the wearer's body. This defensive armour
covered a doublet of coarse gray cloth, and the Borderer had a few
half-rusted plates of steel on his shoulders, a two-edged sword, with a
dagger hanging beside it, in a buff belt; a helmet, with a few iron bars,
to cover the face instead of a visor, and a lance of tremendous and
uncommon length, completed his appointments. The looks of the man were as
wild and rude as his attire; his keen black eyes never rested one moment
fixed upon a single object, but constantly traversed all around, as if
they ever sought some danger to oppose, some plunder to seize, or some
insult to revenge. The latter seemed to be his present object, for,
regardless of the dignified presence of Lord Lacy, he uttered the most
incoherent threats against the owner of the house and his guests.

"We shall see--ay, marry shall we--if an English hound is to harbour and
reset the Southrons here. Thank the Abbot of Melrose and the good Knight
of Coldingnow that have so long kept me from your skirts. But those days
are gone, by St. Mary, and you shall find it!"

It is probable the enraged Borderer would not have long continued to vent
his rage in empty menaces, had not the entrance of the four yeomen, with
their bows bent, convinced him that the force was not at this moment on
his own side.

Lord Lacy now advanced towards him. "You intrude upon my privacy,
soldier; withdraw yourself and Your followers. There is peace betwixt our
nations, or my servants should chastise thy presumption."

"Such peace as ye give such shall you have," answered the moss-trooper,
first pointing with his lance towards the burned village, and then almost
instantly levelling it against Lord Lacy. The squire drew his sword, and
severed at one blow the steel head from the truncheon of the spear.

"Arthur Fitzherbert," said the baron, "that stroke has deferred thy
knighthood for one year; never must that squire wear the spurs whose
unbridled impetuosity can draw unbidden his sword in the presence of his
master. Go hence, and think on what I have said."

The squire left the chamber abashed.

"It were vain," continued Lord Lacy, "to expect that courtesy from a
mountain churl which even my own followers can forget. Yet before thou
drawest thy brand," for the intruder laid his hand upon the hilt of his
sword, "thou wilt do well to reflect that I came with a safe-conduct from
thy king, and have no time to waste in brawls with such as thou."

"From my king,--from my king!" re-echoed the mountaineer. "I care not
that rotten truncheon," striking the shattered spear furiously on the
ground, "for the king of Fife and Lothian. But Habby of Cessford will be
here belive; and we shall soon know if he will permit an English churl to
occupy his hostelry."

Having uttered these words, accompanied with a lowering glance from under
his shaggy black eyebrows, he turned on his heel and left the house with
his two followers; they mounted their horses, which they had tied to an
outer fence, and vanished in an instant.

"Who is this discourteous ruffian?" said Lord Lacy to the franklin, who
had stood in the most violent agitation during this whole scene.

"His name, noble lord, is Adam Kerr of the Moat, but he is commonly
called by his companions the Black Rider of Cheviot. I fear, I fear, he
comes hither for no good; but if the Lord of Cessford be near, he will
not dare offer any unprovoked outrage."

"I have heard of that chief," said the baron; "let me know when he
approaches. And do thou, Rodulph," to the eldest yeoman, "keep a strict
watch. Adelbert," to the page, "attend to arm me." The page bowed, and
the baron withdrew to the chamber of the lady Isabella, to explain the
cause of the disturbance.

No more of the proposed tale was ever written; but the Author's purpose
was that it should turn upon a fine legend of superstition which is
current in the part of the Borders where he had his residence, where, in
the reign of Alexander III. of Scotland, that renowned person, Thomas of
Hersildoune, called the Rhymer, actually flourished. This personage, the
Merlin of Scotland, and to whom some of the adventures which the British
bards assigned to Merlin Caledonius, or the Wild, have been transferred
by tradition, was, as is well known, a magician, as well as a poet and
prophet. He is alleged still to live in the land of Faery, and is
expected to return at some great convulsion of society, in which he is to
act a distinguished part,--a tradition common to all nations, as the
belief of the Mahomedans respecting their twelfth Imaum demonstrates.

Now, it chanced many years since that there lived on the Borders a jolly,
rattling horse-cowper, who was remarkable for a reckless and fearless
temper, which made him much admired, and a little dreaded, amongst his
neighbours. One moonlight night, as he rode over Bowden Moor, on the west
side of the Eildon Hills, the scene of Thomas the Rhymer's prophecies,
and often mentioned in his story, having a brace of horses along with him
which he had not been able to dispose of, he met a man of venerable
appearance and singularly antique dress, who, to his great surprise,
asked the price of his horses, and began to chaffer with him on the
subject. To Canobie Dick--(for so shall we call our Border dealer)--a
chap was a chap, and he would have sold a liaise to the devil himself,
without minding his cloven hoof, and would have probably cheated Old Nick
into the bargain. The stranger paid the price they agreed on; and all
that puzzled Dick in the transaction was that the gild which he received
was in unicorns, bonnet-pieces, and other ancient coins, which would have
been invaluable to collectors, but were rather troublesome, in modern
currency.

It was gold, however, and therefore Dick contrived to get better value
for the coin than he perhaps gave to his customer. By the command of so
good a merchant, he brought horses to the same slot more than once; the
purchaser only stipulating that he should always come by night, and
alone. I do not know whether it was from mere curiosity, or whether some
hope of gain mixed with it, but after Dick had sold several horses in
this way, he began to complain that dry-bargains were unlucky, and to
hint that since his chap must live in the neighbourhood, he ought, in the
courtesy of dealing, to treat him to half a mutchkin.

"You may see my dwelling if you will," said the stranger; "but if you
lose courage at what you see there, you will rue it all your life."

Dicken, however, laughed the warning to scorn, and having alighted to
secure his horse, he followed the stranger up a narrow foot-path, which
led them up the hills to the singular eminence stuck betwixt the most
southern and the centre peaks, and called, from its resemblance to such
an animal in its form, the Lucken Hare. At the foot of this eminence,
which is almost as famous for witch meetings as the neighbouring
wind-mill of Kippilaw, Dick was somewhat startled to observe that his
conductor entered the hill-side by a passage or cavern, of which he
himself, though well acquainted with the spot, had never seen or heard.

"You may still return," said his guide, looking ominously back upon him;
but Dick scorned to show the white feather, and on they went. They
entered a very long range of stables; in every stall stood a coal-black
horse; by every horse lay a knight in coal-black armour, with a drawn
sword in his hand; but all were as silent, hoof and limb, as if they had
been cut out of marble. A great number of torches lent a gloomy lustre to
the hall, which, like those of the Caliph Vathek, was of large
dimensions. At the upper end, however, they at length arrived, where a
sword and horn lay on an antique table.

"He that shall sound that horn and draw that sword," said the stranger,
who now intimated that he was the famous Thomas of Hersildoune, "shall,
if his heart fail him not, be king over all broad Britain. So speaks the
tongue that cannot lie. But all depends on courage, and much on your
taking the sword or the horn first." Dick was much disposed to take the
sword; but his bold spirit was quailed by the supernatural terrors of the
hall, and he thought to unsheathe the sword first, might be construed
into defiance, and give offence to the powers of the Mountain. He took
the bugle with a trembling hand, and a feeble note, but loud enough to
produce a terrible answer. Thunder rolled in stunning peals through the
immense hall; horses and men started to life; the steeds snorted,
stamped, grinned their bits, and tossed on high their heads; the warriors
sprung to their feet, clashed their armour, and brandished their swords.
Dick's terror was extreme at seeing the whole army, which had been so
lately silent as the grave, in uproar, and about to rush on him. He
dropped the horn, and made a feeble attempt to seize the enchanted sword;
but at the same moment a voice pronounced aloud the mysterious words,--

"Woe to the coward, that ever he was born,
Who did not draw the sword before he blew the horn!"

At the same time a whirlwind of irresistible fury howled through the long
hall, bore the unfortunate horse-jockey clear out of the mouth of the
cavern, and precipitated him over a steep bank of loose stones, where the
shepherds found him the next morning with just breath sufficient to tell
his fearful tale, after concluding which he expired.

This legend, with several variations, is found in many parts of Scotland
and England. The scene is sometimes laid in some favourite glen of the
Highlands, sometimes in the deep coal-mines of Northumberland and
Cumberland, which rim so far beneath the ocean. It is also to be found in
Reginald Scott's book on Witchcraft, which was written in the sixteenth
century. It would be in vain to ask what was the original of the
tradition. The choice between the horn and sword may, perhaps, include as
a moral that it is foolhardy to awaken danger before we have arms in our
hands to resist it.

Although admitting of much poetical ornament, it is clear that this
legend would have formed but an unhappy foundation for a prose story, and
must have degenerated into a mere fairy tale. Dr. John Leyden has
beautifully introduced the tradition in his "Scenes of Infancy":--

         "Mysterious Rhymer, doomed by fate's decree
          Still to revisit Eildon's fated tree,
          Where oft the swain, at dawn of Hallow-day,
          Hears thy fleet barb with wild impatience neigh,--
          Say, who is he, with summons long and high,
          Shall bid the charmed sleep of ages fly,
          Roll the long sound through Eildon's caverns vast,
          While each dark warrior kindles at the blast,
          The horn, the falchion, grasp with mighty hand,
          And peal proud Arthur's march from Fairy-land?"

In the same cabinet with the preceding fragment, the following occurred
among other 'disjecta membra'. It seems to be an attempt at a tale of a
different description from the last, but was almost instantly abandoned.
The introduction points out the time of the composition to have been
about the end of the eighteenth century.




THE LORD OF ENNERDALE.

IN A FRAGMENT OF A LETTER FROM JOHN B______, ESQ., OF THAT ILK, TO
WILLIAM G______, F.R.S.E.


"Fill a bumper," said the knight; "the ladies may spare us a little
longer. Fill a bumper to the Archduke Charles."

The company did due honour to the toast of their landlord.

"The success of the archduke," said the muddy vicar, "will tend to
further our negotiation at Paris; and if--"

"Pardon the interruption, Doctor," quoth a thin, emaciated figure, with
somewhat of a foreign accent; "but why should you connect those events,
unless to hope that the bravery and victories of our allies may supersede
the necessity of a degrading treaty?"

"We begin to feel, Monsieur L'Abbe," answered the vicar, with some
asperity, "that a Continental war entered into for the defence of an ally
who was unwilling to defend himself, and for the restoration of a royal
family, nobility, and priesthood who tamely abandoned their own rights,
is a burden too much even for the resources of this country."

"And was the war, then, on the part of Great Britain," rejoined the Abbe,
"a gratuitous exertion of generosity? Was there no fear of the
wide-wasting spirit of innovation which had gone abroad? Did not the
laity tremble for their property, the clergy for their religion, and
every loyal heart for the Constitution? Was it not thought necessary to
destroy the building which was on fire, ere the conflagration spread
around the vicinity?"

"Yet if upon trial," said the doctor, "the walls were found to resist our
utmost efforts, I see no great prudence in persevering in our labour amid
the smouldering ruins."

"What, Doctor," said the baronet, "must I call to your recollection your
own sermon on the late general fast? Did you not encourage us to hope
that the Lord of Hosts would go forth with our armies, and that our
enemies, who blasphemed him, should be put to shame?"

"It may please a kind father to chasten even his beloved children,"
answered the vicar.

"I think," said a gentleman near the foot of the table, "that the
Covenanters made some apology of the same kind for the failure of their
prophecies at the battle of Danbar, when their mutinous preachers
compelled the prudent Lesley to go down against the Philistines in
Gilgal."

The vicar fixed a scrutinizing and not a very complacent eye upon this
intruder. He was a young man, of mean stature and rather a reserved
appearance. Early and severe study had quenched in his features the
gaiety peculiar to his age, and impressed upon them a premature cast of
thoughtfulness. His eve had, however, retained its fire, and his gesture
its animation. Had he remained silent, he would have been long unnoticed;
but when he spoke, there was something in his manner which arrested
attention.

"Who is this young man?" said the vicar, in a low voice, to his
neighbour.

"A Scotchman called Maxwell, on a visit to Sir Henry," was the answer.

"I thought so, from his accent and his manner," said the vicar. It may be
here observed that the Northern English retain rather more of the ancient
hereditary aversion to their neighbors than their countrymen of the
South. The interference of other disputants, each of whom urged his
opinion with all the vehemence of wine and politics, rendered the summons
to the drawing-room agreeable to the more sober part of the company.

The company dispersed by degrees, and at length the vicar and the young
Scotchman alone remained, besides the baronet, his lady, daughters, and
myself. The clergyman had not, it would seem, forgot the observation
which ranked him with the false prophets of Dunbar, for he addressed Mr.
Maxwell upon the first opportunity.

"Hem! I think, sir, you mentioned something about the civil wars of last
century. You must be deeply skilled in them indeed, if you can draw any
parallel betwixt those and the present evil days,--davs which I am ready
to maintain are the most gloomy that ever darkened the prospects of
Britain."

"God forbid, Doctor, that I should draw a comparison between the present
times and those you mention; I am too sensible of the advantages we enjoy
over our ancestors. Faction and ambition have introduced division among
us; but we are still free from the guilt of civil bloodshed, and from all
the evils which flow from it. Our foes, sir, are not those of our own
household; and while we continue united and firm, from the attacks of a
foreign enemy, however artful, or however inveterate, we have, I hope,
little to dread."

"Have you found anything curious, Mr. Maxwell, among the dusty papers?"
said Sir Henry, who seemed to dread a revival of political discussion.

"My investigation amongst them led to reflection's which I have just now
hinted," said Maxwell; "and I think they are pretty strongly exemplified
by a story which I have been endeavouring to arrange from some of your
family manuscripts."

"You are welcome to make what use of them you please," said Sir Henry;
"they have been undisturbed for many a day, and I have often wished for
some person as well skilled as you in these old pothooks, to tell me
their meaning."

"Those I just mentioned," answered Maxwell, "relate to a piece of private
history savouring not a little of the marvellous, and intimately
connected with your family; if it is agreeable, I can read to you the
anecdotes in the modern shape into which I have been endeavouring to
throw them, and you can then judge of the value of the originals."

There was something in this proposal agreeable to all parties. Sir Henry
had family pride, which prepared him to take an interest in whatever
related to his ancestors. The ladies had dipped deeply into the
fashionable reading of the present day. Lady Ratcliff and her fair
daughters had climbed every pass, viewed every pine-shrouded ruin, heard
every groan, and lifted every trap-door, in company with the noted
heroine of "Udolpho." They had been heard, however, to observe that the
famous incident of the Black Veil singularly resembled the ancient
apologue of the Mountain in labour, so that they were unquestionably
critics, as well as admirers. Besides all this, they had valorously
mounted en croupe behind the ghostly horseman of Prague, through all his
seven translators, and followed the footsteps of Moor through the forest
of Bohemia. Moreover, it was even hinted (but this was a greater mystery
than all the rest) that a certain performance, called the "Monk," in
three neat volumes, had been seen by a prying eye, in the right-hand
drawer of the Indian cabinet of Lady Ratcliff's dressing-room. Thus
predisposed for wonders and signs, Lady Ratcliff and her nymphs drew
their chairs round a large blazing wood-fire, and arranged themselves to
listen to the tale. To that fire I also approached, moved thereunto
partly by the inclemency of the season, and partly that my deafness,
which you know, cousin, I acquired during my campaign under Prince
Charles Edward, might be no obstacle to the gratification of my
curiosity, which was awakened by what had any reference to the fate of
such faithful followers of royalty as you well know the house of Ratcliff
have ever been. To this wood-fire the vicar likewise drew near, and
reclined himself conveniently in his chair, seemingly disposed to testify
his disrespect for the narration and narrator by falling asleep as soon
as he conveniently could. By the side of Maxwell (by the way, I cannot
learn that he is in the least related to the Nithsdale family) was placed
a small table and a couple of lights, by the assistance of which he read
as follows:--

"Journal of Jan Von Eulen.

"On the 6th November, 1645, I, Jan Von Enlen, merchant in Rotterdam,
embarked with my only daughter on board of the good vessel 'Vryheid,' of
Amsterdam, in order to pass into the unhappy and disturbed kingdom of
England.--7th November. A brisk gale; daughter sea-sick; myself unable to
complete the calculation which I have begun, of the inheritance left by
Jane Lansache, of Carlisle, my late dear wife's sister, the collection of
which is the object of my voyage.--8th November. Wind still stormy and
adverse; a horrid disaster nearly happened,--my dear child washed
overboard as the vessel lurched to leeward.--Memorandum, to reward the
young sailor who saved her, out of the first moneys which I can recover
from the inheritance of her aunt Lansache.--9th November. Calm P.M. light
breezes front N. N. W. I talked with the captain about the inheritance of
my sister-in-law, Jane Lansache. He says he knows the principal subject,
which will not exceed L1000 in value.--N. B. He is a cousin to a family
of Petersons, which was the name of the husband of my sister-in-law; so
there is room to hope it may be worth more than be reports.--10th
November, 10 A.M. May God pardon all our sins! An English frigate,
bearing the Parliament flag, has appeared in the offing, and gives
chase.--11 A. M. She nears us every moment, and the captain of our vessel
prepares to clear for action. May God again have mercy upon us!"

"Here," said Maxwell, "the journal with which I have opened the narration
ends somewhat abruptly."

"I am glad of it," said Lady Ratcliff.

"But, Mr. Maxwell," said young Frank, Sir Henry's grandchild, "shall we
not hear how the battle ended?"

I do not know, cousin, whether I have not formerly made you acquainted
with the abilities of Frank Ratcliff. There is not a battle fought
between the troops of the Prince and of the government, during the years
1745-46, of which he is not able to give an account. It is true, I have
taken particular pains to fix the events of this important period upon
his memory by frequent repetition.

"No, my dear," said Maxwell, in answer to young Frank Itatcliff,--"No, my
dear, I cannot tell you the exact particulars of the engagement, but its
consequences appear from the following letter, despatched by Garbonete
Von Enlen, daughter of our journalist, to a relation in England, from
whom she implored assistance. After some general account of the purpose
of the voyage, and of the engagement, her narrative proceeds thus:--

"The noise of the cannon had hardly ceased, before the sounds of a
language to me but half known, and the confusion on board our vessel,
informed me that the captors had boarded us and taken possession of our
vessel. I went on deck, where the first spectacle that met my eyes was a
young man, mate of our vessel, who, though disfigured and covered with
blood, was loaded with irons, and whom they were forcing over the side of
the vessel into a boat. The two principal persons among our enemies
appeared to be a man of a tall, thin figure, with a high-crowned hat and
long neck band, and short-cropped head of hair, accompanied by a bluff,
open-looking elderly man in a naval uniform. 'Yarely! yarely! pull away,
my hearts,' said the latter, and the boat bearing the unlucky young man
soon carried him on board the frigate. Perhaps you will blame me for
mentioning this circumstance; but consider, my dear cousin, this man
saved my life, and his fate, even when my own and my father's were in the
balance, could not but affect me nearly.

"'In the name of him who is jealous, even to slaying,' said the first--"

Cetera desunt.




No. II.

CONCLUSION OF MR. STRUTT'S ROMANCE OF
QUEEN-HOO HALL.


BY THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY.


CHAPTER IV.

A HUNTING PARTY.--AN ADVENTURE.--A DELIVERANCE.
