even the Emperor himself--have had as great an effect upon the history
of the world as that silent American who looked so drab and so
commonplace among the gold-slashed uniforms and the Oriental dresses.

But suddenly our conversation was interrupted by a hush in the room--
such a cold, uncomfortable hush as comes over a roomful of happy,
romping children when a grave-faced elder comes amongst them.
The chatting and the laughter died away.  The sound of the rustling
cards and of the clicking counters had ceased in the other rooms.
Everyone, men and women, had risen to their feet with a constrained
expectant expression upon their faces.  And there in the doorway were
the pale face and the green coat with the red cordon across the white
waistcoat.

There was no saying how he might behave upon these occasions.
Sometimes he was capable of being the merriest and most talkative of the
company, but this was rather in his consular than in his imperial days.
On the other hand he might be absolutely ferocious, with an insulting
observation for everyone with whom he came in contact.  As a rule he was
between these two extremes, silent, morose, ill at ease, shooting out
curt little remarks which made everyone uncomfortable.  There was always
a sigh of relief when he would pass from one room into the next.

On this occasion he seemed to have not wholly recovered from the storm
of the afternoon, and he looked about him with a brooding eye and a
lowering brow.  It chanced that I was not very far from the door, and
that his glance fell upon me.

'Come here, Monsieur de Laval,' said he.  He laid his hand upon my
shoulder and turned to a big, gaunt man who had accompanied him into the
room.  'Look here, Cambaceres, you simpleton,' said he.  'You always
said that the old families would never come back, and that they would
settle in England as the Huguenots have done.  You see that, as usual,
you have miscalculated, for here is the heir of the de Lavals come to
offer his services.  Monsieur de Laval, you are now my aide-de-camp, and
I beg you to keep with me wherever I go.'

This was promotion indeed, and yet I had sense enough to know that it
was not for my own sweet sake that the Emperor had done it, but in order
to encourage others to follow me.  My conscience approved what I had
done, for no sordid motive and nothing but the love of my country had
prompted me; but now, as I walked round behind Napoleon, I felt
humiliated and ashamed, like a prisoner led behind the car of his
captor.

And soon there was something else to make me ashamed, and that was the
conduct of him whose servant I had become.  His manners were outrageous.
As he had himself said, it was his nature to be always first, and this
being so he resented those courtesies and gallantries by which men are
accustomed to disguise from women the fact that they are the weaker sex.
The Emperor, unlike Louis XIV., felt that even a temporary and
conventional attitude of humility towards a woman was too great a
condescension from his own absolute supremacy.  Chivalry was among those
conditions of society which he refused to accept.

To the soldiers he was amiable enough, with a nod and a joke for each of
them.  To his sisters also he said a few words, though rather in the
tone of a drill sergeant to a pair of recruits.  It was only when the
Empress had joined him that his ill-humour came to a head.

'I wish you would not wear those wisps of pink about your head,
Josephine,' said he, pettishly.  'All that women have to think about is
how to dress themselves, and yet they cannot even do that with
moderation or taste.  If I see you again in such a thing I will thrust
it in the fire as I did your shawl the other day.'

'You are so hard to please, Napoleon.  You like one day what you cannot
abide the next.  But I will certainly change it if it offends you,' said
Josephine, with admirable patience.

The Emperor took a few steps between the people, who had formed a lane
for us to pass through.  Then he stopped and looked over his shoulder at
the Empress.

'How often have I told you, Josephine, that I cannot tolerate fat
women.'

'I always bear it in mind, Napoleon.'

'Then why is Madame de Chevreux present?'

'But surely, Napoleon, madame is not very fat.'

'She is fatter than she should be.  I should prefer not to see her.
Who is this?'  He had paused before a young lady in a blue dress, whose
knees seemed to be giving way under her as the terrible Emperor
transfixed her with his searching eyes.

'This is Mademoiselle de Bergerot.'

'How old are you?'

'Twenty-three, sire.'

'It is time that you were married.  Every woman should be married at
twenty-three.  How is it that you are not married?'

The poor girl appeared to be incapable of answering, so the Empress
gently remarked that it was to the young men that that question should
be addressed.

'Oh, that is the difficulty, is it?' said the Emperor.  'We must look
about and find a husband for you.'  He turned, and to my horror I found
his eyes fixed with a questioning gaze upon my face.

'We have to find you a wife also, Monsieur de Laval,' said he.  'Well,
well, we shall see--we shall see.  What is your name?' to a quiet
refined man in black.

'I am Gretry, the musician.'

'Yes, yes, I remember you.  I have seen you a hundred times, but I can
never recall your name.  Who are you?'

'I am Joseph de Chenier.'

'Of course.  I have seen your tragedy.  I have forgotten the name of it,
but it was not good.  You have written some other poetry, have you not?'

'Yes, sire.  I had your permission to dedicate my last volume to you.'

'Very likely, but I have not had time to read it.  It is a pity that we
have no poets now in France, for the deeds of the last few years would
have given a subject for a Homer or a Virgil.  It seems that I can
create kingdoms but not poets.  Whom do you consider to be the greatest
French writer?'

'Racine, sire.'

'Then you are a blockhead, for Corneille was infinitely greater.  I have
no ear for metre or trivialities of the kind, but I can sympathise with
the spirit of poetry, and I am conscious that Corneille is far the
greatest of poets.  I would have made him my prime minister had he had
the good fortune to live in my epoch.  It is his intellect which I
admire, his knowledge of the human heart, and his profound feeling.
Are you writing anything at present?'

'I am writing a tragedy upon Henry IV., sire.'

'It will not do, sir.  It is too near the present day, and I will not
have politics upon the stage.  Write a play about Alexander.  What is
your name?'

He had pitched upon the same person whom he had already addressed.

'I am still Gretry, the musician,' said he meekly.

The Emperor flushed for an instant at the implied rebuke.  He said
nothing, however, but passed on to where several ladies were standing
together near the door of the card-room.

'Well, madame,' said he to the nearest of them, 'I hope you are behaving
rather better.  When last I heard from Paris your doings were furnishing
the Quartier St. Germain with a good deal of amusement and gossip.'

'I beg that your Majesty will explain what you mean,' said she with
spirit.

'They had coupled your name with that of Colonel Lasalle.'

'It is a foul calumny, sire.'

'Very possibly, but it is awkward when so many calumnies cluster round
one person.  You are certainly a most unfortunate lady in that respect.
You had a scandal once before with General Rapp's aide-de-camp.  This
must come to an end.  What is your name?' he continued, turning to
another.

'Mademoiselle de Perigord.'

'Your age?'

'Twenty.'

'You are very thin and your elbows are red.  My God, Madame Boismaison,
are we never to see anything but this same grey gown and the red turban
with the diamond crescent?'

'I have never worn it before, sire?'

'Then you had another the same, for I am weary of the sight of it.
Let me never see you in it again.  Monsieur de Remusat, I make you a
good allowance.  Why do you not spend it?'

'I do, sire.'

'I hear that you have been putting down your carriage.  I do not give
you money to hoard in a bank, but I give it to you that you may keep up
a fitting appearance with it.  Let me hear that your carriage is back in
the coach-house when I return to Paris.  Junot, you rascal, I hear that
you have been gambling and losing.'

'The most infernal run of luck, sire,' said the soldier, 'I give you my
word that the ace fell four times running.'

'Ta, ta, you are a child, with no sense of the value of money.  How much
do you owe?'

'Forty thousand, sire.'

'Well, well, go to Lebrun and see what he can do for you.  After all, we
were together at Toulon.'

'A thousand thanks, sire.'

'Tut!  You and Rapp and Lasalle are the spoiled children of the army.
But no more cards, you rascal!  I do not like low dresses, Madame
Picard.  They spoil even pretty women, but in you they are inexcusable.
Now, Josephine, I am going to my room, and you can come in half an hour
and read me to sleep.  I am tired to-night, but I came to your salon,
since you desired that I should help you in welcoming and entertaining
your guests.  You can remain here, Monsieur de Laval, for your presence
will not be necessary until I send you my orders.'

And so the door closed behind him, and with a long sigh of relief from
everyone, from the Empress to the waiter with the negus, the friendly
chatter began once more, with the click of the counters and the rustle
of the cards just as they had been before he came to help in the
entertainment.



CHAPTER XVI


THE LIBRARY OF GROSBOIS

And now, my friends, I am coming to the end of those singular adventures
which I encountered upon my arrival in France, adventures which might
have been of some interest in themselves had I not introduced the figure
of the Emperor, who has eclipsed them all as completely as the sun
eclipses the stars.  Even now, you see, after all these years, in an old
man's memoirs, the Emperor is still true to his traditions, and will not
brook any opposition.  As I draw his words and his deeds I feel that my
own poor story withers before them.  And yet if it had not been for that
story I should not have had an excuse for describing to you my first and
most vivid impressions of him, and so it has served a purpose after all.
You must bear with me now while I tell you of our expedition to the Red
Mill and of what befell in the library of Grosbois.

Two days had passed away since the reception of the Empress Josephine,
and only one remained of the time which had been allowed to my cousin
Sibylle in which she might save her lover, and capture the terrible
Toussac.  For my own part I was not so very anxious that she should save
this craven lover of hers, whose handsome face belied the poor spirit
within him.  And yet this lonely beautiful woman, with the strong will
and the loyal heart, had touched my feelings, and I felt that I would
help her to anything--even against my own better judgment, if she should
desire it.  It was then with a mixture of feelings that late in the
afternoon I saw her and General Savary enter the little room in which I
lodged at Boulogne.  One glance at her flushed cheeks and triumphant
eyes told me that she was confident in her own success.

'I told you that I would find him, Cousin Louis!' she cried; 'I have
come straight to you, because you said that you would help in the taking
of him.'

'Mademoiselle insists upon it that I should not use soldiers,' said
Savary, shrugging his shoulders.

'No, no, no,' she cried with vehemence.  'It has to be done with
discretion, and at the sight of a soldier he would fly to some
hiding-place, where you would never be able to follow him.  I cannot
afford to run a risk.  There is too much already at stake.'

'In such an affair three men are as useful as thirty,' said Savary.
'I should not in any case have employed more.  You say that you have
another friend, Lieutenant--?'

'Lieutenant Gerard of the Hussars of Bercheny.'

'Quite so.  There is not a more gallant officer in the Grand Army than
Etienne Gerard.  The three of us, Monsieur de Laval, should be equal to
any adventure.'

'I am at your disposal.'

'Tell us then, mademoiselle, where Toussac is hiding.'

'He is hiding at the Red Mill.'

'But we have searched it, I assure you that he is not there.'

'When did you search it?'

'Two days ago.'

'Then he has come there since.  I knew that Jeanne Portal loved him.
I have watched her for six days.  Last night she stole down to the Red
Mill with a basket of wine and fruit.  All the morning I have seen her
eyes sweeping the country side, and I have read the terror in them
whenever she has seen the twinkle of a bayonet.  I am as sure that
Toussac is in the mill as if I had seen him with my own eyes.'

'In that case there is not an instant to be lost,' cried Savary.  'If he
knows of a boat upon the coast he is as likely as not to slip away after
dark and make his escape for England.  From the Red Mill one can see all
the surrounding country, and Mademoiselle is right in thinking that a
large body of soldiers would only warn him to escape.'

'What do you propose then?' I asked.

'That you meet us at the south gate of the camp in an hour's time
dressed as you are.  You might be any gentleman travelling upon the high
road.  I shall see Gerard, and we shall adopt some suitable disguise.
Bring your pistols, for it is with the most desperate man in France we
have to do.  We shall have a horse at your disposal.'

The setting sun lay dull and red upon the western horizon, and the white
chalk cliffs of the French coast had all flushed into pink when I found
myself once more at the gate of the Boulogne Camp.  There was no sign of
my companions, but a tall man, dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons
like a small country farmer, was tightening the girth of a magnificent
black horse, whilst a little further on a slim young ostler was waiting
by the roadside, holding the bridles of two others.  It was only when I
recognised one of the pair as the horse which I had ridden on my first
coming to camp that I answered the smile upon the keen handsome face of
the ostler, and saw the swarthy features of Savary under the
broad-brimmed hat of the farmer.

'I think that we may travel without fearing to excite suspicion,' said
he.  'Crook that straight back of yours a little, Gerard!  And now we
shall push upon our way, or we may find that we are too late.'

My life has had its share of adventures, and yet, somehow, this ride
stands out above the others.

There over the waters I could dimly see the loom of the English coast,
with its suggestions of dreamy villages, humming bees, and the pealing
of Sunday bells.  I thought of the long, white High Street of Ashford,
with its red brick houses, and the inn with the great swinging sign.
All my life had been spent in these peaceful surroundings, and now, here
I was with a spirited horse between my knees, two pistols peeping out of
my holsters, and a commission upon which my whole future might depend,
to arrest the most redoubtable conspirator in France.  No wonder that,
looking back over many dangers and many vicissitudes, it is still that
evening ride over the short crisp turf of the downs which stands out
most clearly in my memory.  One becomes _blase_ to adventure, as one
becomes _blase_ to all else which the world can give, save only the
