well acquainted with the white men to credit all that Coubitant
asserted, they thought it either unsafe or unwise to express their
opinions any further.

Happily for the settlers, one such faithful and friendly spirit was
there to watch for their interests, and provide for their preservation.
Masasoyt had resumed all his kindly feelings towards his English
allies, since the misunderstanding occasioned by Squanto's meddling
propensities had been explained away by the trusty Hobomak. He had also
recently been visited by Edward Winslow, when he was afflicted with a
severe illness, and the Christian soldier had ministered to his relief
in a way that had excited both the wonder and the lively gratitude of
the Sagamore. When, therefore, he obeyed the summons of Coubitant to
join the general council of Chiefs, he had no intention of consenting
to any hostile measures being undertaken against his powerful and
beneficent friends. Weston's wild and disorderly crew had excited his
anger in common with that of all the other neighboring Sachems; and he
was quite willing to combine with his red brethren for their
chastisement--perhaps, even for their utter destruction: but he did not
confound the Pilgrim Fathers, who had never failed in truth and
honesty, with the deceitful and marauding vagabonds who wore white
faces, and called themselves Christian subjects of King James, while
they acted like heathen savages.

At first, Masasoyt met the malignant arguments and false assertions of
Coubitant with an open and generous statement of the upright conduct of
the strangers towards himself and his tribe, during the three years of
their residence in New England; and urged the assembled Chiefs to
beware how they attempted to molest men whose power to resist and
punish any such attempt was only equaled by their willingness and
ability to benefit those who treated them with confidence and
integrity. But he soon perceived that his arguments in favor of mercy
and justice were powerless, when opposed to the fierce and crafty
harangues of Coubitant; and he, therefore, forbore to make any further
reply, and even appeared to acquiesce in the decision of the council,
that the only means of securing the safety and independence of the
Indian tribes was utterly to exterminate the invaders.

The proposed plan for accomplishing this barbarous project, was first
to surround and fall on the miserable and sickly colony of
Wessagussett; and then, before the news of the massacre could reach New
Plymouth, to hasten thither, and wreak on its unsuspecting and
unprepared inhabitants the same fierce vengeance.

The day and hour were fixed, and every necessary preliminary was
minutely arranged; and then the council broke up, and the Chiefs
returned to their respective dwellings, to collect and fully arm their
followers, and prepare to meet again at the appointed time and place,
with both hands and hearts read to execute the bloody deed.

Masasoyt retired like the rest; and, attended by the little band of
warriors who formed his bodyguard, be took the forest path that led to
his dwelling at Packanokick. But he did not long pursue that path. When
he had proceeded such a distance through the forest as to feel sure
that he should not, by turning to the right, cross the route of any of
the other Chiefs, he dismissed all his followers, except two of the
most trusty and confidential. The rest he desired to proceed
immediately to Packanokick, and inform his people that they must
prepare for a warlike expedition, and that he was going to visit his
son, Mooanam, in order to give him directions to join in the enterprise
with that portion of the tribe that was under his authority.

This was very far from being the truth; but the Indian Sagamore
considered that every falsehood and stratagem was allowable, and even
meritorious, that could further a desired object, especially if that
object was so undoubtedly good in itself as that which now engrossed
his thoughts and wishes. He did not know that it is sin to 'do evil
that good may come'; and therefore we must judge him by his generous
motives, and not by his heathen practice.

Having thus freed himself from those on whose discretion and fidelity
he could not fully rely, he changed his course, and traveled straight
towards New Plymouth. There was no beaten track through the tangled
woods in that direction; but the position of the sun, and the
appearance of the trees, were sufficient guides for the sagacious
Indian Chief, and, in spite of his advanced age, he pursued his way
with vigor and activity. Frequently his path was obstructed by the
luxuriant growth of underwood, or by the cable-like creepers that hung
in every direction, crossing each other like the rigging of a ship, and
presenting obstacles that nothing but the tomahawks that hung from the
girdles of the natives enabled them to overcome.  With these weapons--
ever ready, in the hand of an Indian, either to cut his way through the
forest, to fell the timbers for his wigwam or his canoe, to slay the
game that his arrows have brought to the ground, or to cleave the skull
of his enemy--did old Masasoyt and his devoted followers divide the
large tough climbing plants that obstructed their passage. Sometimes,
also, when the sun was totally obscured and the necessary windings in
their course would hive rendered them uncertain whether they were
following the right direction, these useful tomahawks enabled them to
consult the Indian compass.

The manner in which these children of the wilderness supply to
themselves the want of that invaluable instrument is both curious and
ingenious, and it proved of essential use to the Wampanoge Chief on
this occasion. Whenever he found himself at fault from the absence of
the sun, or any other direct indication of the proper course, he raised
his battle-axe, and struck a heavy blow at some neighboring pine or
birch tree, on each side of which he cut a deep notch, and then, by
examining the grain of the wood, he could tell which was the north, and
which the south side--the former being easily ascertained by the
greater closeness of the concentric rings, and consequent hardness of
the fiber. The sap being more drawn to the south side by the action of
the sun, causes the rings on that side to swell more; and this
operation of nature has been observed by nature's children, and
employed by them as a sure guide in their long wanderings through the
pathless forests where they find a home.

The journey to New Plymouth was rather a long one; but the Sagamore and
his companions were each provided with a small quantity of their usual
travelling food, _nokake_--or meal made of parched maize--which they
carried, in true Indian fashion, in their hollow leathern girdles. When
they came to a pond, or brook, they paused to eat a few handsful of
this simple provision, which is so dry that it can only be swallowed
when either water or snow is at hand, ready to wash down each mouthful;
and, consequently, in summer the natives have sometimes to travel long
distances before they can avail themselves of the food that is already
in their hands.

Immediately on his arrival at New Plymouth, the Sagamore repaired to
the dwelling of Bradford; and, requesting a private interview--at which
no one was allowed to be present except the Wampanoge interpreter
Hobomak--he informed him of the conspiracy of the natives, and warned
him to be well prepared for the intended attack. Could he have given
this warning, and ensured the safety of his allies, without betraying
the whole of the conspirators' projects, he would gladly have done so;
for he both despised and hated the men of Wessagussett, and he was
willing that they should he treated as they seemed disposed to treat
such of his race as they could get into their power. He even made an
attempt to persuade Bradford to leave them to the fate they so well
deserved, and to connive at their destruction, which would remove an
increasing evil from the first colony.

But the President soon convinced him that such a course would be
altogether at variance with the precepts and principles of that
religion in which he gloried, and which it was his chief aim, and that
of all his Christian brethren, to exalt and make honorable in the eyes
of the natives: and that, therefore, no selfish considerations could
induce them to abandon their countrymen to destruction, notwithstanding
their ingratitude towards themselves, and their ill conduct towards the
Indians.

With this decision Masasoyt was extremely dissatisfied: but he could
not now withdraw the information he had imparted, even if he desired
it; and he also felt it to be most politic to secure the friendship of
the white men, even if it should involve the sacrifice of the lives of
some of his own countrymen, and interfere with their projects of
vengeance on their foes. This was most likely to be the case in the
present instance; for the Governor was excited to great indignation by
the intelligence f this second conspiracy, in which several of the
Chiefs who had signed the treaty with Captain Standish were concerned;
and he immediately summoned the gallant soldier, and the rest of his
council, to deliberate on the best means of defeating it.

It now only wanted three days of the time appointed for the gathering
of the red warriors, and the attack on Wessagussett. No time was,
therefore, to be lost; and it was soon determined that Standish, with a
band of eight men, should march the following morning at day-break, and
come stealthily upon the savages before they could he fully prepared
for the assault. It was a bold--perhaps a rash--measure, for so small a
party to go forth, and encounter the native forces thus combined. But
Standish, though a man of prudence and discretion, was a stranger to
fear; and he and his followers had already learnt the power of order
and discipline, in compensating for any disadvantage of numbers. It
was, therefore, with cheerful confidence that the military force of the
settlement prepared for their march and they plainly showed on what
that confidence was founded, by requesting the prayers of the
congregation for their success.

A great part of the night was, accordingly, spent in prayer; and the
blessing of the God of truth and mercy was solemnly asked upon an
enterprise that the leaders well knew was about to be carried out by
fraud and cruelty.

At sunrise, the soldiers met on 'the Burying Hill,' and the staff of
office was given, with much solemnity, to Captain Standish, by the
pious and venerable Brewster. They had already taken leave of their
wives and families, who did not altogether share the cheerful
exultation displayed by the Puritan warriors; and who were not
permitted to be present at this final ceremony, lest their anxious
fears should disturb the composure of their husbands and fathers.
Notwithstanding this characteristic prohibition, Helen, and her younger
daughter Edith, had ventured to station themselves in the path that led
down 'the Burying Hill,' in the direction in which Standish and his men
were to march, that they might take one more farewell of Rodolph before
he left them on an expedition which, to their minds, seemed fraught
with danger and uncertainty; and where they feared he might again be
exposed to the vengeance of his untiring foe.

The gallant little band marched down the hill, and came where Edith and
her child stood waiting, beneath a tree, for what might be their last
look on one most dearly loved; and when Rodolph saw them he forgot the
strictness of discipline and order required by his commander, and left
the ranks to indulge the feelings of his heart, by again embracing his
weeping wife and child.

The stern captain instantly recalled him; and when he saw a tear
glistening in the eye of the husband and father, a slight expression of
wonder and contempt passed over his countenance. He marveled that so
brave a soldier and so strict a Puritan as Rodolph Maitland should
still remain subject to so much worldly weakness. But Standish was not,
at that time, a married man; and he was very deeply imbued with all the
severe and unbending principles of his sect, which even went so far as
to demand the suppression of all natural feelings--making it a fault
for a mother to kiss her children on the Lord's day--and inflicting
actual punishment on the captain of a ship for having embraced his wife
on 5 Sunday, when, after a long separation, she hurried to meet him, as
he landed from the vessel! To such puerile littlenesses will even great
minds descend.

Rodolph was unmoved by the commander's contemptuous glance. He knew his
own unflinching Puritan principles, and his own undaunted courage; and
he knew his value in the eyes of Standish. The captain knew it also,
for he never liked to go on any enterprise that required bravery and
cool judgement without securing the aid of Maitland; and although the
tenderness of his friend's feelings, and the warmth of his domestic
attachments--so different to the coolness and apathy which was so
prevalent in the community--were a continual subject of surprise and
pity to the iron-hearted leader, yet he highly respected him, and even
loved him, as much as such a gentle feeling as love of any kind could
find admittance to his breast.

They journeyed on then--that stern captain, who had no tie to life, and
deemed it a privilege to die with 'the sword of the Lord and of Gideon'
in his hand, fighting for the cause of his own peculiar sect, in which
alone he thought salvation could be found; and that warm-hearted
husband and father, who felt that he had left behind him what was far
dearer than life itself--those who alone made life precious to him-and
who yet was willing to sacrifice all, if honor and duty demanded it.
Which was the braver man of the two?

Both were brave; but Standish was the most unscrupulous. He considered
that any stratagem was lawful which could place his heathen enemies in
his power; and no arguments of the high-minded and truthful Maitland
could convince him that deceit and treachery, even towards their
infidel foes, were unworthy of Christian warriors. Miles Standish was
resolved to use some device to get the chiefs of the conspiracy off
their guard, and, by destroying them, to break up the hostile
confederacy altogether: and as Maitland was bound to obey his orders,
and also knew the utter impossibility either of changing the resolves
of his captain or of deserting the enterprise, he was compelled to join
in proceedings that he could not approve.

When the little band had arrived at the spot indicated by Masasoyt, and
within a short distance of the Indian place of rendezvous, Standish
commanded his men to halt for rest and refreshment for the last time
before the expected encounter with the army of savages who were
assembling for their destruction. This halting-place was situated on
the summit of a considerable elevation, well covered with trees and
bushes, and overlooking a plain, on the further side of which the
Indian camp was formed. The advantageous position in which the
emigrants were posted enabled them to obtain a full view of their
enemies without being perceived by them; and Captain Standish resolved
to remain there quietly that night, in order to recruit the strength of
his men after their rapid and toilsome journey, and to mature his plans
for subduing the horde of natives before him with so small a band as
now surrounded him, and who waited but his orders to rush on to the
most desperate enterprise.

The Wampanoge interpreter, Hobomak, accompanied the party at his own
desire, and that, also, of his sovereign, Masasoyt. Standish was glad
of his assistance in his capacity of interpreter: he had already shown
such devoted attachment to the English, that they entertained no fears
of his either betraying or deserting their cause; and, on this
occasion, he fully justified their confidence.

Early in the morning, the leader announced his intention of going
himself to the Indian camp, to make overtures of peace, and to invite
the Chiefs to a conference; and he desired his men to construct a
strong and spacious wigwam for their reception, and to make a door to
it, which could be closed and fastened securely. He did not then
explain his project more clearly; but Rudolph understood it, and his
soul revolted from the treachery he suspected. 'Now,' said the
captain, having finished his directions to his well-disciplined
followers, 'who will volunteer to go down with me and Hobomak to the
heathen camp, and to carry the flag of truce before me? It may be a
service of danger to enter that hornet's nest; and no one who has left
his soldier's heart at home with his wife or his children, had better
attempt it.'

Rudolph felt the sarcasm, though it was uttered good humoredly, and he
instantly replied--

'I am ready, my chief, to attend you wherever you may go; and if I have
left my heart's affections at New Plymouth, you shall see that I have
brought with me none the less of courage and fidelity to my leaders and
my countrymen. The dearer my home, the more energetic shall be my
efforts to preserve it from desolation. Besides,' he added, In an
undertone, so that only Standish should hear: 'I much prefer going
boldly into the midst of the enemy, even at the risk of my life, to
remaining here to assist in constructing a trap for their destruction.'

'You are a brave fellow, Maitland,' said the captain, grasping his hand
with warmth and energy, 'but you have brought some peculiar prejudices
over from Europe with you, and do not yet perceive the difference of
warring on equal terms with civilized troops--as you were accustomed to
do in your youth--and contending with a horde of savages, who know
nothing of the laws of honor, and who are even now combined to destroy
us all, without either challenge or preparation. Come along with me,
and leave the rest to do as I have directed. Necessity has no law; and
if we do not meet those cunning natives with equal cunning, we shall
have no chance against them.'

'Truth and sincerity appear to me the strongest necessity; and the God
of truth will order the results as he pleases,' answered Rodolph. 'But
I have sworn to obey your orders, and you need not fear the constancy
of either my heart or hand. I know my duty as a soldier, and I will do
it.'

'I know you will, Maitland,' replied his commander; and his respect for
his conscientious friend rose higher than ever, while a slight
misgiving as to the righteousness of his own projected plan passed
through his breast. It did not abide there, however, for he was really
satisfied that he was acting in conformity to the will of God, and that
he was fully justified in asking for His blessing to crown his
murderous schemes with success.

Maitland took the flag of truce, which consisted of a long spear, with
a white handkerchief attached to the summit, and preceded the captain,
who followed in full uniform, attended by his swarthy interpreter.  As
soon as they emerged from the wood that covered the halting-place, and
entered the open plain, they were espied by the keen and watchful eyes
of the natives; and a messenger was dispatched to meet them, and bring
them to the presence of the Indian leader, Wattawamat, who was regarded
as the chief of the conspirators.

Captain Standish assumed a pacific air, and desired Hobomak to advance
before him, and inform the Chiefs that he came to propose terms of
reconciliation and peace. He then himself approached them; and, with
the aid of the interpreter, made to them a rather lengthy harangue on
the benefits that would accrue to them from preserving peace 	with
the white men; and his sorrow, and that of his employers, on having
accidentally discovered that the tribes of Massachusetts entertained
feelings of enmity towards the British settlers at Wessagussett.

Ever and anon, during the translations of the various paragraphs of
this speech, Rodolph observed the keen eyes of the captain, as they
carefully surveyed the surrounding force, and examined the individuals
who appeared to be their leaders. And once, when his own eye followed
the direction of his commander's, his glance encountered one that
instantly riveted it, and excited in his breast some sensations--not of
_fear,_ for Rodolph knew not the feeling--but of inquietude and
distrust. Yes; Coubitant was there, gazing at his supposed victim with
amazement and hatred; and half inclined to believe that some
supernatural power must belong to the man who could have been wounded
with his deadly arrow, and yet survive to confront him once more. There
he stood--with disappointed vengeance in his heart, and fury flashing
from that eye of fire.

But while he kept a continual watch on every movement of Rodolph's, his
quick ear lost not one word of the speech that Hobomak was rendering
into his native tongue. He heard when, in Standish's name, he invited
the Chiefs to meet him in the wigwam that his men were constructing on
the border of the thicket, and where, he said, he would smoke with them
the pipe of peace, and give to them the presents that the Governor had
sent, as pledges of his friendly intentions.

The moment this invitation had been delivered, Coubitant approached
Wattawamat, and whispered a few words in his ear, to which the
Chieftain gave a sign of acquiescence; and then the Nansett left the
assembly, and disappeared among the trees and bushes that bounded the
plain on every side.

Wattawamat gave no immediate reply to the proposal of the English
Chief; but, as is not unusual with the Indians, kept up a long
discourse, and contrived to lengthen the audience for a considerable
time.  Another Indian then approached the Sachem, and again whispered
to him some words that gave him evident satisfaction, for he smiled
grimly, and displayed his fine row of ivory teeth for a moment, as he
nodded approbation to the messenger. Then, resuming his wonted gravity
of demeanor, he replied to Captain Standish that he was satisfied, by
his assurances, of the good faith of the white men, and that he and his
brother Chiefs would avail themselves of his invitation, and meet in
the wigwam a little before sunset; where he hoped so to arrange all the
little disagreements that had occurred between the red men and the
mighty strangers, as to be able to establish between them and all his
countrymen the same friendship and alliance that appeared to exist with
the Wampanoge tribe, whose Chief, he observed, with a slight curl of
his lip, had failed in his promise to attend their meeting that day.

The cause of this favorable decision on the part of Wattawamat was the
report that Coubitant had just sent him of the insignificant force of
the English, which that crafty and swift-footed warrior had contrived
to ascertain, by running round the border of the weed to the place
where Standish's men were at work, and taking an accurate and
unobserved survey of their numbers.

He felt convinced that it would be easy for the Chiefs, and such of
their attendants as might be allowed to follow them to the place of
conference, to overpower and destroy every one of the little band of
whites, and then to prosecute their original intention of carrying fire
and slaughter into both the British settlements. In all this scheme
there was nothing so grateful to the ruthless heart of Coubitant as the
idea of Rodolph's death; and that too, as he trusted, by his own hand.
O, how he panted for the devilish joy of tearing off his scalp, and
carrying it back to throw it triumphantly at Henrich's feet! We shall
see whether such joy was accorded to him.

Standish and his companions took their leave, and returned to the hill,
where they found great progress had been made in building the wigwam;
and two hours before sunset it was completely wattled round, leaving
only a small aperture near the top to admit light, and a narrow place
of entrance, to which a strong door was affixed.

