swimming after the boat; he ceases to use the pole, but takes his
sword, kneels on the stern of the boat, and waits for the mastiff. It
gains the boat, and tries to mount, when the keen steel is driven
between the forepaws to its very heart. One loud howl, and it floats
down the stream, dyeing the waters with its life-blood.

"Cursed Dane!" shouts Higbald. "thou shalt pay with thy own life
blood."

"When you catch me; and even then you must fight for it. Meanwhile, if
you be an Englishman, warn the good people of Dorchester that the
Danes are upon them. Your Edric has betrayed them."

Reaching the other shore, Alfgar finds smooth meadows all covered with
snow. He knows his way now. A little higher up he strikes the main
road which leads to Clifton, and rushes on past field and grove, past
hedgerow and forest. Behind him the heavens are growing angry with
lurid light, before him the earth lies in stillness and silence; the
moonbeams slumbering on placid river, glittering on frozen pool, or
silvering happy homesteads--happy hitherto. He sees the lights in the
hall of Herstan yet burning, and casting their reflection abroad. He
is at the foot of the ascent leading up to it. One minute more and--

. . . . . .

Christmas day was almost over when the population of Herstan's village
of Clifton obeyed the summons with alacrity to spend the evening in
the hall in feasting and merriment. They had all duly performed the
religious duties of the day, and had been greatly edified by the
homily of Father Cuthbert at mass; and now innocent mirth was to close
the hallowed day--mirth which they well believed was not alien to the
birthday of Him who once sanctified the marriage festivities at Cana
by His first miracle.

So thither flocked the young and the old: the wood rangers and hunters
from the forests of Newenham, where Herstan had right of wood cutting;
the men who wove baskets and hurdles of osier work from the river
banks; the theows who cultivated the home farm; the ceorls who rented
a hide of land here and a hide there--all, the grandfather and the
grandson, accepted the invitation to feast. The rich and the poor met
together, for God was the Maker of them all.

The huge Yule log burnt upon the hearth as it had done since it was
lighted the night before; a profusion of torches turned night into
day; the tables groaned with the weight of the good cheer; in short,
all was there which could express joy and thanksgiving.

The supper was over; the wild boar roasted whole, the huge joints of
mutton and beef, the made dishes, the various preparations of milk,
had disappeared, the cheerful cup was handed round; after which the
tables were removed, the gleemen sang their Christmas carols, and all
went merry as a "marriage bell."

Father Cuthbert, seated in a corner near the Yule log, with his
brother-in-law and the Etheling, forgot all his apprehensions, and
shared in the universal joy around him; if his thoughts were sometimes
with those who had once made Christmas bright to him--if he thought
of the bright-haired Bertric, who had been the soul of last Yuletide
festivity at Aescendune, or of the desolated home there, he dismissed
the subject from his mind at once, and suffered no hint to drop which
could dim the mirth of his fellow guests.

Meanwhile, one of those whom he strove in vain to forget for the time
drew nearer and nearer; a haggard figure, wan and worn by painful
imprisonment, the garments dishevelled, the hair matted, the whole
figure wild with excitement, he drew near the outer gate.

He heard the song of joy and peace within as he paused one moment
before blowing the horn which hung at the outer gate.

Peace! Peace!
The whole wide world rejoiceth now,
Let war and discord cease;
Christ reigneth from the manger,
Away with strife and danger;
Our God, before whom angels bow,
Each taught this lesson by his birth,
Good will to men, and peace on earth.
Peace! Peace!
Hark, through the silent air
Angelic songs declare
God comes on earth to dwell
O hear the heavenly chorus swell,
Good will to men,
And on earth, peace.

He could bear it no longer, the contrast was too painful, he must
break the sweet charm, the hallowed song, for the sky was reddening
yet more luridly behind him, and each moment he expected to see
Dorchester burst forth into flames. O what a Christmas night!

He blew the horn, and had to blow it again and again before he was
heard.

At length a solitary serf came to the gate:

"Who is there?"

"A messenger for the Etheling; is Prince Edmund with you? I would see
him."

"All are welcome tonight, but I fear you will find the Etheling
ill-disposed to leave the feast."

"Let me in."

Astonished at the tone of the request, the porter reluctantly
complied, first looking around.

"Why, thou art wild and breathless; is aught amiss?"

"Step out and look over the hills; what dost thou see?"

"Why, the heaven is in fire; is it the northern lights?"

"Southern, you mean; the Danes are upon us."

Staggered by the tidings, the man no longer opposed his entrance, and
Alfgar staggered into the hall, forgetting that he was come amongst
them like one risen from the dead.

He entered the hall at first unnoticed, but the merry laughter and
cheerful conversation withered before his presence, as of one who came
to blast it.

Father Cuthbert and Edmund, amongst others, turned round to see what
caused the lull, and started from their seats as they beheld at the
end of the room Alfgar, his face pale as one risen from the dead, his
black locks hanging dishevelled around his neck, his garments torn,
his whole person disordered. At first they really believed he had
returned from the tomb.

They hesitated, but for one moment in speechless surprise, then rushed
forward.

"Alfgar!" cried the Prince.

"My son!" cried Father Cuthbert, "whence hast thou come? dost thou yet
live?"

"Father; Prince; I live to warn you--the Danes, the Danes!" and he
sank fainting into the arms of Herstan.

"Surely he raves," said they all.

The porter here ventured to speak.

"My lord, please go to the front of the house and look over the
water."

Father Cuthbert and Edmund at once left the hall, followed by several
others.

The mansion was seated on a considerable elevation; below them rolled
the Isis; across the river a couple of miles of flat meadow land lay
between them and the Synodune hills, and beyond the lessening range of
those hills, on the southeast, they looked, and behold the smoke of
the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.



CHAPTER XVII. FOR HEARTH AND HOME.


The inhabitants of Clifton stood on the terrace in front of the hall,
gazing upon the fiery horizon, wrapped in emotions of surprise and
alarm. Living as they did in an unsettled age, and far more prepared
than we should be for such a contingency, yet the sense of the rapid
approach of a cruel and remorseless foe struck terror into many
hearts.

But they had one amongst them to whom warfare and strife were a second
nature--one in whom the qualities which form the hero were very fully
developed. He gazed with sadness, but without fear, at the coming
storm, and to their late patient the inmates of the hall turned for
advice and aid in their dread emergency.

"What shall we do?" asked Herstan, gazing with indescribable feelings
at those who clung to him for support.

"The case is clear as the day," said the prince. "The storm I foretold
in vain has broken over the land, and the levies are not ready to meet
it. Listen; you may hear the sounds of alarm from Dorchester even
here. They see their danger."

The tolling of the alarm bells, the sound of distant shouts, the
blowing of trumpets rolled in a confused flood of noise across the
intervening space--a distance of between two and three miles--and
manifested the intense alarm of the city, so cruelly aroused from
dreams of peace.

"But what shall we do?"

"Defend the place if attacked; it is well adapted for defence. You
have the river on one side, and a cliff no Dane could scale in the
face of our battle-axes; on the other side, your earthworks and
palisades keep the foe at a distance from the main building. How many
able-bodied men are present now?"

"Happily we have all our force; the feast has brought them all here.
There would be from sixty to seventy men, besides a score of boys."

"And how are you provided with weapons?"

"Each man has a battle-axe, and there are scores of spears in the
armoury."

"And arrows?"

"Whole sheaves of them; and as good yew bows as were ever bent."

"Come, we shall do; and now about provisions?"

"You see we have bounteous fare now, but it would not last many days."

"Many days we shall not want it--many days? Why, the levies must all
be out within twenty-four hours, and the Danes are not strong enough
to maintain themselves here. It is but a raid; but they might all have
been taken or slain had my father but believed me. As it is, they have
shed much innocent blood by this time."

"You think, then, our buildings are capable of defence?"

"Assuredly; it would be madness to sacrifice such a position. If the
Danes are about in the neighbourhood, it would be far more dangerous
to expose your helpless ones without the fortifications. Have you all
your people here, or are there a few sick?"

"A few sick, only."

"Let them be sought at once; the heathen will be revelling like fiends
about the country. For the present I think Dorchester and Abingdon
safe. Wallingford, if I may judge by the light over the hills, has
utterly fallen. They were probably taken unawares; and their defences
were never good. Now we must at once to work."

"Prince, you have more experience of war than I; you will be our
commander."

"I accept the post. To tell the truth, it will be a treat for me after
the illness and confinement I have gone through; the thought of the
struggle makes me feel myself again."

And so this strangely constituted man went forth and spoke to the
assembled multitude, who stood passively gazing at the distant
conflagration.

"Now, Englishmen, a few words to you all. We shall have, I hope, to
fight these Danes; and for the honour of our country must even quit
ourselves like men. Why should not the Englishman be a match for the
Dane? ay, more than a match for the cutthroat heathen? Here we stand
on a rock with our defence secure; and here we will live or die in
defence of our women and children. What say you all?"

"We will live or die with you."

"Well said, men. Now, one good hearty cheer; no, stop, I should like
them to be caught in their own traps. I know their plan. If they find
the good people of Dorchester are awake, as the noise shows, they will
swarm all over the neighbourhood like wasps after honey, to plunder
the isolated houses and farms, and carry off all they can; and this
place is too conspicuous--too much of a city on a hill--to be hidden.
Well, we will be ready for them. Now, first of all, we must set our
outposts around to give us due warning of their approach; and then
every man must arm himself as best he can, and let me see what figure
you can all make."

He was interrupted by a childish voice, and saw Herstan's little son,
a boy of twelve years, touching his garment, and looking at him with
unfeigned admiration.

"May I not fight the Danes, Prince?"

"No, you are too young; you must go and take care of your mother and
sisters."

"I don't want to be shut up with the women. I have killed a wolf. I
shot him with my bow in Newenham wood."

"Well, we will see by and by, my brave boy. We shall have work for
all; go and arm with the rest.

"Well, Alfgar?"

"Let my post be near you."

"You will fight in this quarrel, then?"

"Yes; to save Christian blood."

"Then I adopt you as an Englishman--Dane no longer. I know your
courage and coolness, and will employ it where it is wanted. Now, you
know the place; come and place the outposts where they can retire
easily."

The small sally port, as it would have been called in later times, was
opened, and two men were in each case posted together all round the
building, under cover of trees, at convenient distances. The trees
immediately around the house had been cut down a few weeks earlier, by
order of Herstan, who saw they might afford cover to an enemy, in case
the prince's prophecies were fulfilled, as proved now to be the case.

The building was large and irregular, and had been added to at various
times, the hall, looking over the river, forming its most conspicuous
portion; but it had not originally been built for purposes of defence,
and could not have endured the Danish assault for a moment, but for
external defences, utterly independent of the building, which had been
recently added; a mound, surmounted by crossed palisades, skilfully
strengthened by osier bands, and a deep outer ditch, now full of snow,
surrounded the building on three sides. The fourth was defended by the
river, which, being full owing to the late rains, rushed impetuously
along below.

"Alfgar," said Edmund, "ask Father Cuthbert to see that all the
helpless ones--women and children--are safely shut up in an inner
apartment, where no Danish arrow can find them."

This was accomplished, and Father Cuthbert cheered them all with his
calm placid manner; reassuring this one and cheering that, seeming
quite insensible to fear himself: one moment all sympathy, then all
brightness, his presence was invaluable in the crisis.

"And now," said Edmund, "to the stables; the horses and cattle must be
turned loose tonight, or the Danes will burn them in their barns and
sheds."

The farm buildings lay some little distance without, and the Etheling
and Alfgar, with two or three farm servants, carried out the task
hastily but effectually. Duties were meanwhile assigned to all the
able-bodied women and boys: some provided buckets and ladders, that,
