echonta]. I therefore conclude that Cicero has striven, so far as the Latin
language allowed, to express the Stoic doctrine that, of the [Greek:
adiaphora], some have [Greek: axia] while others have [Greek: apaxia]. He
may fairly claim to have applied to his words the rule "_re intellecta in
verborum usu faciles esse debemus_" (_D.F._ III. 52). There is quite as
good ground for accusing Sextus and Stobaeus of misunderstanding the Stoics
as there is for accusing Cicero. There are difficulties connected with the
terms [Greek: hikane axia] and [Greek: hikane apaxia] which are not
satisfactorily treated in the ordinary sources of information; I regret
that my space forbids me to attempt the elucidation of them. The student
will find valuable aid in the notes of Madv. on the passages of the _D.F._
quoted in this note. _Non tam rebus quam vocabulis_: Cic. frequently
repeats this assertion of Antiochus, who, having stolen the clothes of the
Stoics, proceeded to prove that they had never properly belonged to the
Stoics at all. _Inter recte factum atque peccatum_: Stob. speaks II. 6, 6
of [Greek: ta metaxy aretes kai kakias]. (This does not contradict his
words a little earlier, II. 6, 5, [Greek: aretes de kai kakias ouden
metaxy], which have regard to divisions of men, not of actions. Diog.
Laert., however, VII. 127, distinctly contradicts Cic. and Stob., see R.
and P. 393.) _Recte factum_ = [Greek: katorthoma], _peccatum_ = [Greek:
hamartema], _officium_ = [Greek: kathekon] (cf. R. and P. 388--394, Zeller
238--248, 268--272). _Servata praetermissaque_: MSS. have _et_ before
_servata_, which all edd. since Lamb. eject. Where _et_ and _que_
correspond in Cic., the _que_ is always an afterthought, added in oblivion
of the _et_. With two nouns, adjectives, adverbs, or participles, this
oblivion is barely possible, but when the conjunctions go with separate
_clauses_ it is possible. Cf. 43 and _M.D.F._ V. 64.

Sec.38. _Sed quasdam virtutes_: see 20. This passage requires careful
construing: after _quasdam virtutes_ not the whole phrase _in ratione esse
dicerent_ must be repeated but _dicerent_ merely, since only the _virtutes
natura perfectae_, the [Greek: dianoetikai aretai] of Arist., could be said
to belong to the reason, while the _virtutes more perfectae_ are
Aristotle's [Greek: ethikai aretai]. Trans. "but spoke of certain
excellences as perfected by the reason, or (as the case might be) by
habit." _Ea genera virtutum_: both Plato and Arist. roughly divided the
nature of man into two parts, the intellectual and the emotional, the
former being made to govern, the latter to obey (cf. _T.D._ II. 47, and
Arist. [Greek: to men hos logon echon, to de epipeithes logoi]); Zeno
however asserted the nature of man to be one and indivisible and to consist
solely of Reason, to which he gave the name [Greek: hegemonikon] (Zeller
203 sq.). Virtue also became for him one and indivisible (Zeller 248,
_D.F._ III. _passim_). When the [Greek: hegemonikon] was in a perfect
state, there was virtue, when it became disordered there was vice or
emotion. The battle between virtue and vice therefore did not resemble a
war between two separate powers, as in Plato and Aristotle, but a civil war
carried on in one and the same country. _Virtutis usum_: cf. the
description of Aristotle's _finis_ in _D.F._ II. 19. _Ipsum habitum_: the
mere possession. So Plato, _Theaetet._ 197 B, uses the word [Greek: hexis],
a use which must be clearly distinguished from the later sense found in the
_Ethics_ of Arist. In this sense virtue is _not_ a [Greek: hexis],
according to the Stoics, but a [Greek: diathesis] (Stob. II. 6, 5, Diog.
VII. 89; yet Diog. sometimes speaks of virtue loosely as a [Greek: hexis],
VII. 92, 93; cf. Zeller 249, with footnotes). _Nec virtutem cuiquam adesse
... uteretur_: cf. Stob. II. 6, 6 [Greek: duo gene ton anthropon einai to
men ton spoudaion, to de ton phaulon, kai to men ton spoudaion dia pantos
tou biou chresthai tais aretais, to de ton phaulon tais kakiais].
_Perturbationem_: I am surprised that Halm after the fine note of
Wesenberg, printed on p. 324 of the same volume in which Halm's text of the
_Acad._ appears, should read the plural _perturbationes_, a conj. of
Walker. _Perturbationem_ means emotion in the abstract; _perturbationes_
below, particular emotions. There is exactly the same transition in _T.D._
III. 23, 24, IV. 59, 65, V. 43, while _perturbatio_ is used, in the same
sense as here, in at least five other passages of the _T.D._, i.e. IV. 8,
11, 24, 57, 82. _Quasi mortis_: a trans. of Stoic [Greek: pathesi], which
Cic. rejects in _D.F._ III. 35. _Voluit carere sapientem_: emotion being a
disturbance of equilibrium in the reason, and perfect reason being virtue
(20), it follows that the Stoic sapiens must be emotionless (Zeller 228
sq.). All emotions are reasonless; [Greek: hedone] or _laetitia_ for
instance is [Greek: alogos eparsis]. (_T.D._ Books III. and IV. treat
largely of the Stoic view of emotions.) Wesenberg, _Em._ to the _T.D._ III.
p. 8, says Cic. always uses _efferri laetitia_ but _ferri libidine_.

Sec.39. _Aliaque in parte_: so Plato, _Tim._ 69 C, _Rep._ 436, 441, Arist. _De
Anima_ II. 3, etc.; cf. _T.D._ I. 20. _Voluntarias_: the whole aim of the
Stoic theory of the emotions was to bring them under the predominance of
the will. How the moral freedom of the will was reconciled with the general
Stoic fatalism we are not told. _Opinionisque iudicio suscipi_: all emotion
arose, said the Stoics, from a false judgment about some external object;
cf. Diog. VII. 111. [Greek: ta pathe kriseis einai]. Instances of each in
Zeller 233. For _iudicio_ cf. _D.F._ III. 35, _T.D._ III. 61, IV. 14, 15,
18. _Intemperantiam_: the same in _T.D._ IV. 22, Gk. [Greek: akolasia], see
Zeller 232. _Quintam naturam_: the [Greek: pempte ousia] or [Greek: pempton
soma] of Aristotle, who proves its existence in _De Coelo_ I. 2, in a
curious and recondite fashion. Cic. is certainly wrong in stating that
Arist. derived _mind_ from this fifth element, though the finest and
highest of material substances. He always guards himself from assigning a
material origin to mind. Cic. repeats the error in _T.D._ I. 22, 41, 65,
_D.F._ IV. 12. On this last passage Madv. has an important note, but he
fails to recognise the essential fact, which is clear from Stob. I. 41, 33,
that the Peripatetics of the time were in the habit of deriving the mind
from [Greek: aither], which is the very name that Aristotle gives to the
fifth element ([Greek: soma aitherion] in the _De Coelo_), and of giving
this out to be Aristotle's opinion. The error once made, no one could
correct it, for there were a hundred influences at work to confirm it,
while the works of Aristotle had fallen into a strange oblivion. I cannot
here give an exhaustive account of these influences, but will mention a
few. Stoicism had at the time succeeded in powerfully influencing every
other sect, and it placed [Greek: nous en aitheri] (see Plutarch, qu. R.
and P. 375). It had destroyed the belief in immaterial existence The notion
that [Greek: nous] or [Greek: psyche] came from [Greek: aither] was also
fostered by the language of Plato. He had spoken of the soul as [Greek:
aeikinetos] in passages which were well known to Cic. and had taken great
hold on his mind One from the _Phaedrus_ 245 C is translated twice, in
_Somnium Scipionis_ (_De Rep._ VI.), and _T.D._ I. 53 sq. Now the only
thing with Aristotle which is [Greek: aeikinetos] in eternal perfect
circular motion (for to the ancients circular motion is alone perfect and
eternal), is the [Greek: aither] or [Greek: pempton soma], that fiery
external rim of the universe of which the stars are mere nodes, and with
which they revolve. How natural then, in the absence of Aristotle's works,
to conclude that the [Greek: aeikinetos psyche] of Plato came from the
[Greek: aeikinetos aither] of Aristotle! Arist. had guarded himself by
saying that the soul as an [Greek: arche kineseos] must be [Greek:
akinetos], but Cic. had no means of knowing this (see Stob. I. 41, 36).
Again, Plato had often spoken of souls at death flying away to the outer
circle of the universe, as though to their natural home, just where Arist.
placed his [Greek: pempton soma] Any one who will compare _T.D._ I. 43 with
the _Somn. Scipionis_ will see what power this had over Cicero. Further,
Cic. would naturally link the mind in its origin with the stars which both
Plato and Arist. looked on as divine (cf. _Somn. Scip._ 15) These
considerations will be enough to show that neither Cic. nor Antiochus, whom
Madv. considers responsible for the error, could have escaped it in any way
not superhuman except by the recovery of Aristotle's lost works, which did
not happen till too late. _Sensus_: we seem here to have a remnant of the
distinction drawn by Arist. between animal heat and other heat, the former
being [Greek: analogon to ton astron stoicheio] (_De Gen. An._ II. 3, qu.
R. and P. 299). _Ignem_: the Stoics made no difference, except one of
degree, between [Greek: aither] and [Greek: pyr], see Zeller 189, 190.
_Ipsam naturam_: [Greek: pyr] is [Greek: kat' exochen stoicheion] (Stob. I.
10, 16), and is the first thing generated from the [Greek: apoios hyle];
from it comes air, from air water, from water earth (Diog. Laert. VII. 136,
137) The fire is [Greek: logikon], from it comes the [Greek: hegemonikon]
of man, which comprises within it all powers of sensation and thought.
These notions came from Heraclitus who was a great hero of the Stoics
(Zeller ch. VIII. with notes) For his view of sensation and thought see
Sextus _Adv. Math._ VII. 127--129, qu. by R. and P. 21. The Stoics probably
misunderstood him; cf. R. and P. "Heraclitus," and Grote's _Plato_ I. 34
sq. _Expers corporis_: for Stoic materialism see Zeller, pp. 120 sq. The
necessity of a connection between the perceiving mind and the things
perceived followed from old physical principles such as that of Democritus
([Greek: ou gar enchorein ta hetera kai diapheronta paschein hyp' allelon],
qu. from Arist. _De Gen. et Corr._ I. 7, by R. and P. 43), the same is
affirmed loosely of all the old [Greek: physikoi], (Sextus _Adv. Math._
VII. 116), and by Empedocles in his lines [Greek: gaiai men gaian
opopamen], etc. Plato in the _Timaeus_ fosters the same notion, though in a
different way. The Stoics simply followed out boldly that line of thought.
_Xenocrates_: see II. 124, n. _Superiores_: merely the supposed old
Academico-Peripatetic school. _Posse esse non corpus_: there is no ultimate
difference between Force and Matter in the Stoic scheme, see Zeller, pp.
134, 135.

Sec.40. _Iunctos_: how can anything be a _compound_ of one thing? The notion
that _iunctos_ could mean _aptos_ (R. and P. 366) is untenable. I entirely
agree with Madv. (first Excursus to his _D.F._) that we have here an
anacoluthon. Cic. meant to say _iunctos e quadam impulsione et ex assensu
animorum_, but having to explain [Greek: phantasia] was obliged to break
off and resume at _sed ad haec_. The explanation of a Greek term causes a
very similar anacoluthon in _De Off._ I. 153. Schuppe, _De Anacoluthis
Ciceronianis_ p. 9, agrees with Madv. For the expression cf. _D.F._ II. 44
_e duplici genere voluptatis coniunctus_ Ernesti em. _cunctos_, Dav.
_punctos_, _ingeniose ille quidem_ says Halm, _pessime_ I should say.
[Greek: Phantasian]: a full and clear account of Stoic theories of
sensation is given by Zeller, ch. V., R. and P. 365 sq. _Nos appellemus
licet_: the same turn of expression occurs _D.F._ III. 21, IV. 74. _Hoc
verbum quidem hoc quidem_ probably ought to be read, see 18. _Adsensionem_
= [Greek: synkatathesin]. _In nobis positam_: the usual expression for
freedom of the will, cf. II. 37, _De Fato_, 42, 43 (a very important
passage). The actual sensation is involuntary ([Greek: akousion] Sext. Emp.
_Adv. Math._ VIII. 397). _Tironum causa_ I note that the Stoics sometimes
speak of the assent of the mind as _involuntary,_ while the [Greek:
kataleptike phantasia] _compels_ assent (see II. 38). This is, however,
only true of the healthy reason, the unhealthy may refuse assent.

Sec.41. _Visis non omnibus_: while Epicurus defended the truth of all
sensations, Zeno abandoned the weak positions to the sceptic and retired to
the inner citadel of the [Greek: kataleptike phantasia]. _Declarationem_:
[Greek: enargeian], a term alike Stoic, Epicurean, and Academic, see n. on
II. 17. _Earum rerum_: only this class of sensations gives correct
information of the _things_ lying behind. _Ipsum per se_: i.e. its whole
truth lies in its own [Greek: enargeia], which requires no corroboration
from without. _Comprehendibile_: this form has better MSS. authority than
the vulg _comprehensibile_. Goerenz's note on these words is worth reading
as a philological curiosity _Nos vero, inquit_: Halm with Manut. writes
_inquam_. Why change? Atticus answers as in 14, 25, 33. [Greek:
Katalepton]: strictly the _thing_ which emits the _visum_ is said to be
[Greek: katalepton], but, as we shall see in the _Lucullus_, the sensation
and the thing from which it proceeds are often confused. _Comprehensionem_:
this word properly denotes the process of perception in the abstract, not
the individual perception. The Greeks, however, themselves use [Greek:
katalepsis] for [Greek: kataleptike phantasia] very often. _Quae manu
prehenderentur_: see II. 145. _Nova enim dicebat_: an admission not often
made by Cic., who usually contends, with Antiochus, that Zeno merely
renamed old doctrines (cf. 43). _Sensum_: so Stob., I. 41, 25 applies the
term [Greek: aisthesis] to the [Greek: phantasia]. _Scientiam_: the word
[Greek: episteme] is used in two ways by the Stoics, (1) to denote a number
of coordinated or systematised perceptions ([Greek: katalepseis] or [Greek:
kataleptikai phantasiai]) sometimes also called [Greek: techne] (cf. Sext.
_Pyrrh. Hyp._ III. 188 [Greek: technen de einai systema ek katalepseon
syngegymnasmenon]); (2) to denote a single perception, which use is copied
by Cic. and may be seen in several passages quoted by Zeller 80. _Ut
convelli ratione non posset_: here is a trace of later Stoicism. To Zeno
all [Greek: kataleptikai phantasiai] were [Greek: asphaleis, ametaptotoi
hypo logou]. Later Stoics, however, allowed that some of them were not
impervious to logical tests; see Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 253, qu. Zeller
88. Thus every [Greek: kataleptike phantasia], instead of carrying with it
its own evidence, had to pass through the fire of sceptical criticism
before it could be believed. This was, as Zeller remarks, equivalent to
giving up all that was valuable in the Stoic theory. _Inscientiam: ex qua
exsisteret_: I know nothing like this in the Stoic texts; [Greek: amathia]
is very seldom talked of there. _Opinio_: [Greek: doxa], see Zeller and cf.
_Ac._ II. 52, _T.D._ II. 52, IV. 15, 26.

Sec.42. _Inter scientiam_: so Sextus _Adv. Math._ VII. 151 speaks of [Greek:
epistemen kai doxan kai ten en methopiai touton katalepsin]. _Soli_: Halm,
I know not why, suspects this and Christ gives _solum ei_. _Non quod
omnia_: the meaning is that the reason must generalize on separate
sensations and combine them before we can know thoroughly any one _thing_.
This will appear if the whole sentence be read _uno haustu_; Zeller p. 78
seems to take the same view, but I have not come across anything exactly
like this in the Greek. _Quasi_: this points out _normam_ as a trans. of
some Gk. word, [Greek: kriterion] perhaps, or [Greek: gnomon] or [Greek:
kanon]. _Notiones rerum_: Stoic [Greek: ennoiai]; Zeller 81--84, R. and P.
367, 368. _Quodque natura_: the omission of _eam_ is strange; Faber
supplies it. _Imprimerentur_: the terms [Greek: enapesphragismene,
enapomemagmene, entetypomene] occur constantly, but generally in relation
to [Greek: phantasiai], not to [Greek: ennoiai]. _Non principia solum_:
there seems to be a ref. to those [Greek: archai tes apodeixeos] of Arist.
which, induced from experience and incapable of proof, are the bases of all
proof. (See Grote's _Essay on the Origin of Knowledge_, first printed in
Bain's _Mental and Moral Science_, now re-published in Grote's
_Aristotle._) Zeno's [Greek: ennoiai] were all this and more.
_Reperiuntur_: two things vex the edd. (1) the change from _oratio obliqua_
to _recta_, which however has repeatedly taken place during Varro's
exposition, and for which see _M.D.F._ I. 30, III. 49; (2) the phrase
_reperire viam_, which seems to me sound enough. Dav., Halm give
_aperirentur_. There is no MSS. variant. _Aliena_: cf. _alienatos_ _D.F._
III. 18. _A virtute sapientiaque removebat_: cf. _sapiens numquam fallitur
in iudicando_ _D.F._ III. 59. The _firma adsensia_ is opposed to
_imbecilla_ 41. For the _adsensio_ of the _sapiens_ see Zeller 87. More
information on the subject-matter of this section will be found in my notes
on the first part of the _Lucullus_. _In his constitit_: cf. II. 134.

    Sec.Sec.43--END. Cicero's historical justification of the New Academy.
    Summary. Arcesilas' philosophy was due to no mere passion for victory
    in argument, but to the obscurity of phenomena, which had led the
    ancients to despair of knowledge (44). He even abandoned the one tenet
    held by Socrates to be certain; and maintained that since arguments of
    equal strength could be urged in favour of the truth or falsehood of
    phenomena, the proper course to take was to suspend judgment entirely
    (45). His views were really in harmony with those of Plato, and were
    carried on by Carneades (46).

Sec.43. _Breviter_: MSS. _et breviter;_ see 37. _Tunc_: rare before a
consonant; see Munro on _Lucr._ I. 130. _Verum esse [autem] arbitror_: in
deference to Halm I bracket _autem_, but I still think the MSS. reading
defensible, if _verum_ be taken as the neut. adj. and not as meaning _but_.
Translate: "Yet I think the truth to be ... that it is to be thought," etc.
The edd. seem to have thought that _esse_ was needed to go with _putandam_.
This is a total mistake; cf. _ait ... putandam_, without _esse_ II. 15,
_aiebas removendum_ II. 74; a hundred other passages might be quoted from
Cic.

Sec.44. _Non pertinacia aut studio vincendi_: for these words see n. on II.
14. The sincerity of Arcesilas is defended also in II. 76. _Obscuritate_: a
side-blow at _declaratio_ 41. _Confessionem ignorationis_: see 16. Socrates
was far from being a sceptic, as Cic. supposes; see note on II. 74. _Et iam
ante Socratem_: MSS. _veluti amantes Socratem;_ Democritus (460--357 B.C.)
was really very little older than Socrates (468--399) who died nearly sixty
years before him. _Omnis paene veteres_: the statement is audaciously
inexact, and is criticised II. 14. None of these were sceptics; for
Democritus see my note on II. 73, for Empedocles on II. 74, for Anaxagoras
on II. 72. _Nihil cognosci, nihil penipi, nihil sciri_: the verbs are all
equivalent; cf. _D.F._ III. 15 _equidem soleo etiam quod uno Graeci ...
idem pluribus verbis exponere_. _Angustos sensus_: Cic. is thinking of the
famous lines of Empedocles [Greek: steinopoi men gar palamai k.t.l.] R. and
P. 107. _Brevia curricula vitae_: cf. Empedocles' [Greek: pauron de zoes
abiou meros]. Is there an allusion in _curricula_ to Lucretius' _lampada
vitai tradunt_, etc.? _In profundo_: Dem. [Greek: en bytho], cf. II. 32.
The common trans. "well" is weak, "abyss" would suit better. _Institutis_:
[Greek: nomo] of Democritus, see R. and P. 50. Goerenz's note here is an
extraordinary display of ignorance. _Deinceps omnia_: [Greek: panta
ephexes] there is no need to read _denique_ for _deinceps_ as Bentl., Halm.
_Circumfusa tenebris_: an allusion to the [Greek: skotie gnosis] of
Democr., see II. 73. _Dixerunt_: Halm brackets this because of _dixerunt_
above, parts of the verb _dicere_ are however often thus repeated by Cic.

Sec.45. _Ne illud quidem_: cf. 16. _Latere censebat_ Goer. omitted _censebat_
though in most MSS. Orelli and Klotz followed as usual. For the sense II.
122. _Cohibereque_: Gk. [Greek: epechein], which we shall have to explain
in the _Lucullus_. _Temeritatem ... turpius_: for these expressions, see
II. 66, note. _Praecurrere_: as was the case with the dogmatists. _Paria
momenta_: this is undiluted scepticism, and excludes even the possibility
of the _probabile_ which Carneades put forward. For the doctrine cf. II.
124, for the expression Euseb. _Praep. Evan._ XIV. c. 4 (from Numenius) of
Arcesilas, [Greek: einai gar panta akatalepta kai tous eis ekatera logous
isokrateis allelois], Sextus _Adv. Math._ IX. 207 [Greek: isostheneis
logoi]; in the latter writer the word [Greek: isostheneia] very frequently
occurs in the same sense, e g _Pyrrhon. Hyp._ I. 8 (add _N.D._ I. 10,
_rationis momenta_)

Sec.46. _Platonem_: to his works both dogmatists and sceptics appealed, Sextus
_Pyrrhon. Hyp._ I. 221 [Greek: ton Platona oin hoi men dogmatikon ephasan
einai, hoi de apo etikon, hoi de kata men ti aporetikon, kata de ti
dogmatikon]. Stobaeus II. 6, 4 neatly slips out of the difficulty; [Greek:
Platon polyphonos on, ouch hos tines oiontai polydoxos]. _Exposuisti_:
Durand's necessary em., approved by Krische, Halm, etc. for MSS. _exposui_.
_Zenone_: see Introd. p. 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON THE FRAGMENTS.

BOOK I.

1. _Mnesarchus_: see II. 69, _De Or._ I. 45, and _Dict. Biogr._
'Antipater'; cf. II. 143, _De Off._ III. 50. Evidently this fragment
belongs to that historical justification of the New Academy with which I
suppose Cicero to have concluded the first book.

2. The word _concinere_ occurs _D.F._ IV. 60, _N.D._ I. 16, in both which
places it is used of the Stoics, who are said _re concinere, verbis
discrepare_ with the other schools. This opinion of Antiochus Cic. had
already mentioned 43, and probably repeated in this fragment. Krische
remarks that Augustine, _Cont. Acad._ II. 14, 15, seems to have imitated
that part of Cicero's exposition to which this fragment belongs. If so Cic.
must have condemned the unwarrantable verbal innovations of Zeno in order
to excuse the extreme scepticism of Arcesilas (Krische, p. 58).

BOOK II.

3. This fragm. clearly forms part of those anticipatory sceptical arguments
which Cic. in the first edition had included in his answer to Hortensius,
see Introd. p. 55. The argument probably ran thus: What seems so level as
the sea? Yet it is easy to prove that it is really not level.
