unsheathed. And that was because I looked on the penny and its
setting before belting on the scabbard.

Now I thought, when we were fairly on the road, that we would go to
Peterborough, to my good friend the Abbot Elfric, for I would fain
tell him all this, thinking that he might warn Eadmund of Streone
to more effect than could I. And inside the abbey walls would be a
safe place for the night. It was not so certain that we should not
be pursued, and so we went quickly, the horses rejoicing in the
road after their idleness, for we had been three weeks in Stamford,
waiting for the earl.

So we rode till we came to Castor, the old Roman town, and stayed
not there, but went to the ford over the Nene at Water Newton, the
road beyond the river being better than that on this side. It is
not an easy ford, for a horseman has to turn downstream when nearly
over, else he is over head and ears before he knows. One of my men
had known somewhat of the place, and was going through first, but
as his horse shied a little at the sparkling water and he was
urging it in, a man rode fast down the opposite bank, and into the
river, coming over to us. I heard his horse snorting, as if out of
breath.

"Watch how he comes," I said to my man.

But there was little use in that, for he went to ride straight
through, and next moment his horse was swimming, and he was crying
for help, being bewildered, for the river was full and current
strong.

Now, I was used to swimming my horse in our Stour fords, which are
often very deep in autumn and winter, and so I rode in and grasped
his horse's bridle, and told him to take heart, and so fetched him
to our side.

"Give me a fresh mount, in the king's name," he said, for his horse
was spent.

"Little thanks is that," said I. "What is the hurry?"

"I am sent with all speed to Redwald the thane, at Stamford, with
word for Eadmund the Atheling."

"I am Redwald," I said. "Who sent you?"

"Olaf the king. Show me your sword, master."

I held out the hilt of my sword, for that was a token which a
messenger should give and receive that Olaf and I had agreed on.

"Cnut the Dane has landed at Sandwich," the man said. "Eight
hundred ships he has, and men more than I can count. The Kentish
men have risen, and Olaf is with them; but he has not, and cannot
have enough men to stay the Dane. There must be a levy of all
England."

Then I was almost beside myself with rage, and could have wept, for
the levy that should have been waiting for this had not even had a
summons. And from the bottom of my heart I blamed Edric Streone for
all the woe that I saw must come on England.

There was but one thing for me to do, and that was to go back to
Stamford and see the Atheling. He would see me at midnight when no
one else dared wake him, maybe, for he would know that I had heavy
matters to speak of if I thus summoned him. The messenger would
have to wait till morning, and could but give his message. I could
reason with the Atheling, while this messenger would fall into
Streone's hands. And that I knew now was the worst that could
befall.

"Give the man a fresh horse," I said. "I must go back with him."

"Not so, lord," the men said. "You will be waylaid."

"I think my luck will serve me," I answered. "Do you find some barn
at Chesterton over the water, and leave two or three men to watch
for my coming. Thrand and Guthorm may come with me."

Then they grumbled at my running into danger, but I would be
obeyed, though I must let them bide on this side of the ford.

We were but seven miles from Stamford town, and we went back at a
hard gallop on the good turf alongside the paving of the Roman way.
It was in my mind to see Eadmund and leave him at once, before
Streone knew that any man had come into the town, if I could.

The bridge was barred, and the gates were too high to be leapt; but
the guards were sleepy, and would not let me through, until I bade
them open in the king's name. Then they did so, and we rode
clattering up the street to the great hall.

There was bustle enough when I beat on the courtyard gates, for the
place was stockaded, and there was a strong guard inside. Presently
they opened the wicket, and the captain looked out angrily enough.

He began to rate us, but I cut him short.

"I am Redwald," I said, "and I must see the Atheling without
delay."

The officer knew me well enough then, and let us in.

"You cannot see the Atheling, thane," he said. "It is as much as my
life is worth to disturb him."

"I will do it myself, then," I said. "Take me into the house."

"What is amiss?" he asked, hesitating. "Is the king dead?"

"Nay, worse than that," I answered shortly, and the officer stared
at me in horror.

"Oh, fool!" I said; "Cnut is landed, and it is Eadmund only who can
save our land. Let me to him."

The warrior clutched his sword hilt with a sort of groan, and
turned and took me into the house without a word. We went across
the great hall, where the housecarles slept around the walls, sword
under pillow, and spear at side. They raised their heads when their
captain spoke the watchword, and looked at me curiously, but did
not stir more than enough for that. They were not bidden.

We crossed a room where a few young thanes' sons slept, as I had
slept before the king's door when I was first at court, and these
leapt up, sword in hand.

"What will you?" one said in a low voice, setting his back against
the door.

"I must see Eadmund, our atheling, on king's business," I said
gently, remembering how I should have felt when on the same duty,
if one had come thus.

"He may not be waked," the boy said.

Then I spoke loudly, so as to end the business without troubling
these faithful guards.

"I am Redwald of Bures. I think that Eadmund will see me."

"Hush! hush! thane," the boy said.

But there was no need to say more, for the long camp life had
sharpened Eadmund's ears to aught unusual. Now I heard the bar of
the door thrown down, and Eadmund came out with a cloak round him
and his sheathed sword in his left hand.

"Redwald--friend--what is it?" he said.

"Even what we have feared, my prince," I answered, looking at him.

"Where has the blow fallen?"

"At Sandwich. Olaf is there, and the Kentishmen have risen. His
word is that he has not enough men."

"Surely Kent and London and Olaf--" he said.

"Eight hundred ships lie in Ebbsfleet. A ship may hold a hundred or
but twenty men--not less."

Then Eadmund made a sign to his people, and they went out and left
us together, and we looked on one another.

"Let me send for the earl," he said; but I put my hand on his arm.

"You are enough, my prince. But for sending for him your levies
would be here, and we should march together even now to London."

He groaned.

"You are right, and I am a fool," he said.

"Wait for the earl no longer," I urged; "raise your own levy, and
bid him follow you or the king as he will. There must be a raising
of all England. Send to the king tonight."

"What will Cnut do?" he asked me.

"Olaf thought that if he landed in Kent he would make for London
and besiege it. If so, you have time yet."

"There shall be no delay. Bide here and help me."

"I cannot," I said, and told him plainly of Edric's message to me,
and the way in which it was sent; and I ended: "Let me go to Olaf,
therefore, and take word from you that you come in haste. The earl
doubts me yet."

"I do not understand it," Eadmund said, "but it must be so. Go back
and tell Olaf to hold Cnut under London walls, and I will be there
in a day before he expects, gathering forces as I come."

I kissed his hand and went, and as I did so I heard him bid his
followers arm him. So I knew that he was roused, and that if he
were himself all might yet be well.

Then I got to horse, and I and my two men rode down the street as
fast as we had come. No man was about, and the bridge gates swung
open for us.

"They are in a hurry to get rid of us," said Thrand, as we went
through and passed the last houses of the town beyond the river.

Then the road lay white in the moonbeams before us until it ran
among the trees of the first woodland, and there in the black
shadow was a sparkle as of armour in the shafts of light that came
through the leaves into the over-arched hollow of the track.

If any man was there he could see us clearly, though we could not
well see him, for we were in full brightness.

Then Guthorm spoke, peering under his hand.

"Four men across the road, lord--horsemen standing still."

Then said I:

"If they are friends they will stand aside for us. If not, they
will expect us to halt and argue matters with them. Any way, they
have no right to the whole road, even if they mean us no harm. Ride
on steadily, one on either side of me, and when we are twenty paces
from them, if they yet bar our way, spur your horses and we will
clear the road."

"Swords out, master?" said Thrand.

"No, spear butts ready; maybe they are friends. But I am in a
hurry."

So we rode over those four men, and I fear they were hurt, for we
left two rolling horse and two men in the road. Nor did I ever know
if they were Edric's men or not. Howbeit, their swords were drawn,
and so I think we were not wrong in what we did, though the
Colchester men smote hard, and my spear shaft was badly sprung over
a helm.

After that we did not draw rein till we came to our comrades, and
they were halfway back to Stamford looking for me. Then we took the
road to London, for we would not tarry now at Peterborough.

Maybe my story would have had a different end had I gone there--but
it was not to be. Yet, though I knew it not, I was close to Hertha
at that time.



Chapter 10: The Flight From London.


I came back to Olaf while he gathered his ships in the Pool below
London Bridge, and I found him ill at ease and angry with Ethelred
and Eadmund, and when I told him all, most angry with Streone.

"Now you must stay with me, cousin, for that man will have you
slain if he can. There is no doubt that he works for Cnut. And this
word of his about a bribe for me is not his own invention; he has
been told to make it."

Then he told me of the vast host that had poured into Kent. It was
the greatest host that had ever landed on English shores--greater
even than had been ours when we Angles left our old home a desert,
and came over to this new land and took it. Olaf and the Kentish
levies had fought and had been driven back, and now day by day we
looked to see Cnut's armies before London, and also for the coming
of Eadmund with his men. But neither came, for the Mercian levies
would not fight unless the king himself headed them, and Cnut
passed through Surrey into Wessex and none could withstand him.

Aye, they fought him. Wessex is covered with nameless battlefields;
but ere long half of Cnut's fleet was sent round to the Severn, and
Ethelred, sick and despairing, came back to London with but a few
men.

It angers me even to think of what befell after that. Eadmund and
Streone gathered each a good force, and came together within touch
of Cnut. And then on the eve of battle, Edric made known his plan
to his Mercian thanes, and that was nothing more nor less than that
they should go over bodily to Cnut when the fight began. Which
treachery so wrought on the honest Mercians that they would fight
not at all, and so disbanded in sight of the enemy, leaving Eadmund
with but enough men to make good his retreat. And Cnut was master
of all the land from Kent to Severn shores, Ethelred's own country.
So Edric Streone went over to Cnut, and with him many thanes who
despaired of help from Ethelred, and chose rather peace under a
king who was strong enough to give it them. And one night forty of
the English ships slipped away from us down the tide and joined the
Danes at Sandwich. The men had been bribed by Streone, as we found.

Almost then did Olaf make up his mind to leave England, but he
pitied Ethelred, who turned to him again in this new trouble, and
he did not go.

"But my men will not bide patiently much longer," he told me; "here
is neither honour nor gold to be won, and I need them for my going
to Norway when the time comes."

For every day Olaf looked for some sign that should bid him go back
and take his own land from Cnut's hand.

Now Ethelred would not stir from London, fearing treachery
everywhere. And again Eadmund's levies melted away for want of
their king's presence, and at last we persuaded him to meet Eadmund
at Coventry, and I went with him. There was a good levy that would
have followed him, but some breath of suspicion came over him, and
suddenly he left them and fled back to London and the citizens,
whom he trusted alone of all England. And he would not suffer me to
bide with Eadmund, but I must go back with him. So the levies
melted, and Eadmund went north to Earl Utred of Northumbria for
help.

Then when the winter wore away, and April came in calm and bright,
the most awesome thing befell England that had been yet. For in the
north Eadmund and Utred marched across the country, laying waste
all as they went, lest the north should rise for Cnut; and going
east as they went west, Cnut ravaged and burnt all the southern
midlands. Then rose the wail of all England, for friend and foe
alike had turned on her, and her case was at its hardest. And from
that time forwards I know that none who chose Cnut for king should
be blamed.

Then Cnut fell on York, and Utred of Northumbria, whose wife was
Danish, submitted to him, and was slain by Streone's advice, as men
say, though some say that he was slain by Thorkel the Jarl when he
took the ships that tried to escape from the Humber. It may be
thus. The shipmen fought well, and were all slain--sixty ships'
crews.

Now all England was open to Cnut, and Eirik the jarl fell on
Norwich and drove Ulfkytel back on us, and from him we heard of
this trouble.

On the eve of St. George's day, Ethelred sent for me to his
chamber, for he would speak with me. I found him sitting in a great
chair before the fire, wrapped in furs, though the day was warm and
sunny, and he was very feeble, so that his thin hands had little
strength in them. The queen, Emma, was with him, looking young and
handsome as ever, and in the light of a narrow window sat Eadward
the Atheling, the sunshine falling on his strange white hair and on
the pages of a great book over which he pored. He just lifted his
pale eyes from his reading as I went in and saw who it was, and
smiled pleasantly at me, and then turned to his book again. I
thought that the troubles of the time passed lightly on the proud
lady and the boy, whose learning was all that she cared for.

"Come near, Redwald, my son," the king said, in his voice that had
grown so faint of late. "I have a charge to lay on you."

I went and knelt by him, and he put his hand on my shoulder, and
the tears came to my eyes at the kindly touch, for it was the same
as, and yet so unlike, that which had been a promise of friendship
to me at the first time that I saw him.

"All things are slipping from me, Redwald," the king said; "nor is
there aught that I grieve to lay down when the day comes on which I
must pass through the gate of death. Crown and sceptre have been
heavy burdens to me, for with them has been the weight of the sword
also. I have borne those ill, and used that cruelly. I am the
Unredy; but I have listened to ill counsels, having none of my own,
nor wit to see what was best."

He ceased for faintness, and my heart ached to hear him speak thus
to me, his servant. But Emma the queen turned half away from him,
her face growing hard and scornful as she heard. Then Eadward set
his book down gently, and, looking sadly at his mother, came and
stood over against me at the other side of the king, and took his
wan hand and said:

"There are laws which you have made, my father, which will live in
the hearts of men alongside those that Eadgar made--our best. There
will not be all blame to you in the days to come, when men see
clearly how things have gone with you."

Thereat Ethelred smiled faintly, and he answered:

"I pray that it may be so. But the good outweighs not the evil. I
may not count the one--I must confess the other."

He passed into thought, looking into the fire, and we were still
beside him. The queen moved away to the seat where Eadward had been
sitting and took his place, staring out of the window with unseeing
eyes. And I was glad that she was no longer beside us.

Presently the king raised his head and turned it a little towards
me.

"Redwald," he said, "you were our companion in Normandy, and you
