an order on the commander of Fort Pitt for such boats and ammunition as
he might need.

With great difficulty, Clark got together a force of about a hundred and
fifty men, one of whom was Simon Kenton. He could not get many
volunteers from Kentucky because the settlers there thought they had
all they could do to defend their own forts without going out to attack
the enemy's and only a few men could be spared. In May, 1778, this
little force started down the Ohio in flat boats, and landing just
before they reached the Mississippi, marched northward against
Kaskaskia, where the British commander of the entire district had his
headquarters. Clark knew that his force was outnumbered by the garrison
and that it would be necessary to surprise the town. After a six days'
march across country, he came to the outskirts of the village on the
evening of July 4th, and found a great dance in progress in the fort.
Waiting until the revelry was at its height, Clark advanced silently,
surprised the sentries, and surrounded the fort without causing any
alarm. Then with his men posted, Clark walked forward through the open
door, and leaning against the wall, watched the dancers, as they whirled
around by the light of the flaring torches.

Suddenly an Indian, after looking at him for a moment, raised the
war-whoop; the dancing ceased, but Clark, shouting at the top of his
voice to still the confusion, bade the dancers continue, asking them
only to remember that thereafter they were dancing under the flag of the
United States, instead of that of Great Britain. A few moments later,
the commandant was captured in his bed, and the investment was complete.
The other settlements in the neighborhood surrendered at once, so that
the Illinois country was captured without the firing of a gun.

But when the news reached the British governor, Hamilton, at Detroit, he
at once prepared to recapture the country. He had a much larger force at
his command than Clark could possibly muster, and in the fall of the
year he advanced against Vincennes at the head of over five hundred men.
The little American garrison was unable to oppose such a force and was
compelled to surrender. Instead of pushing on against Clark at
Kaskaskia, Hamilton disbanded his Indians and sent some of his troops
back to Detroit, and prepared to spend the winter at Vincennes. He
repaired the fort, strengthened the defenses, and then sat down for the
winter, confident that when spring came, he would again be master of the
whole Illinois country.

Clark, at Kaskaskia, realized that it was a question of his taking the
British or the British taking him, and that, if he waited for spring, he
would have no chance at all; so he gathered together the pick of his
men, one hundred and seventy all told, and early in February, 1779, set
out for Vincennes. The task before him was to capture a force nearly
equal to his own, protected by a strong fort well supplied for a siege.

At first the journey was easy enough, for they passed across the snowy
Illinois prairies, broken occasionally by great stretches of woodland,
but when they reached the drowned lands of the Wabash, the march became
almost incredibly difficult. The ice had just broken up and everything
was flooded; heavy rains set in, and when the men were not wading
through icy water, they were struggling through mud nearly knee-deep.
After twelve days of this, they came to the bank of the Embarass river,
only to find the country all under water, save one little hillock, where
they spent the night without food or fire. For four days they waited
there for the flood to retire, with practically nothing to eat; but the
rain continued and the flood increased, and Clark, finally, in
desperation, plunged into the water and called to his men to follow. All
day they waded, and toward evening reached a small patch of dry ground,
where they spent a miserable night. At sunrise Clark started on again,
through icy water waist-deep, this time with the stern command to shoot
the first laggard. Some of the men failed and sank beneath the waves, to
be rescued by the stronger ones, and by the middle of the afternoon they
had all got safe to land. By good fortune, they captured some Indian
squaws with a canoe-load of food, and had their first meal in two days.
Soon afterwards the sun came out, and they saw before them the walls of
the fort they had come to capture.

The British had no suspicion of their danger, and they thought the first
patter of bullets against the palisades the usual friendly salute from
an Indian hunting party. But they were soon undeceived, and answered the
rifles with ineffective fire from their two small cannon. All night the
fight continued, and at dawn an Indian war-party, which had been
ravaging the Kentucky settlements, entered the town, ignorant that the
Americans had captured it. Marching up to the fort, they suddenly found
themselves surrounded and seized. In their belts they carried the scalps
of the settlers--men, women and children--they had slain, and,
infuriated at the sight, the Americans tomahawked the savages, one after
another, before the eyes of the British.

Then Clark sent to the fort a peremptory summons to surrender, adding,
that "his men were eager to avenge the murder of their relatives and
friends and would welcome an excuse to storm the fort." To the British,
it seemed a choice between surrender and massacre. They had seen the
bloody vengeance wreaked upon their Indian allies, and they had every
reason to believe that they would be dealt with in the same manner,
since it was they who had set the Indians on. Clark was himself, of
course, in desperate straits, without means for carrying on a successful
siege, but the British were far from suspecting this, and at ten o'clock
on the morning of February 25, 1779, marched out and stacked arms, while
Clark fired a salute of thirteen guns in honor of the colonies, from
whose possession the Northwest was never again to pass.

For eight years longer, Clark devoted his life to protecting the border
from British and Indian invasion. The war over, he returned to Kentucky,
and took up his abode in a little log cabin on the Ohio near Louisville.
He was without means, and a horrible accident marred his last years,
for, while alone in his cabin, he was stricken with paralysis, and fell
with one of his legs in the old-fashioned fire-place. There was no one
to draw him out of danger, and before the pain brought him partially to
his senses, his leg was so badly burned that it had to be amputated.
There were no anaesthetics in those days, but while the leg was being
removed, a fife and drum corps played its hardest at the bedside, and
the doughty old warrior kept time to the music with his fingers.

He lived for ten years thereafter, though his paralysis never left him.
He felt keenly the ingratitude of the Republic which he had served so
well, and which yet, in his old age, abandoned him to want, and the
story is told that, when the state of Virginia sent him a sword of
honor, he thrust it into the ground and broke it with his crutch.

"I gave Virginia a sword when she needed one," he said; "but now, when I
need bread, she sends me a toy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In the settlement of the country north of the Ohio, one man, a veteran
of the Revolution, was foremost. His name was Rufus Putnam, and he was a
cousin of that Israel Putnam, some of whose exploits we will soon
relate. He has been well called the "Father of Ohio," for he was the
founder of the first permanent white settlement made within the borders
of the state. He was born in 1738, at Sutton, Massachusetts, and his
early life was a hard and rough one. Left an orphan while still a child,
he was put to work as soon as he was big enough to be of any use, and
received practically no education, although he managed to teach himself
to read and write. He earned a few pennies by watering horses for
travelers, and with this money purchased a spelling-book and arithmetic.

He served through the French war and the Revolution, rendering
distinguished service and retiring with the rank of brigadier-general;
and at its close, finding that Congress would be unable for a long time
to pay many of the soldiers for their services, he became interested in
the suggestion that payment be made in land along the Ohio river, and
offered to lead a band of settlers to their new homes. In March, 1786,
in Boston, he and some others formed the Ohio Company, and one of their
directors, Manasseh Cutler, a preacher of more than usual ability, was
selected to lay the company's plan before Congress. The result was the
famous ordinance of 1787, providing for the establishment and government
of the Northwest Territory, of which Arthur St. Clair was named
governor. Cutler also secured a large land grant for the new company,
and in the following year, Putnam started across the mountains with the
first band of emigrants.

They reached the vicinity of Pittsburg after a weary journey, and there
built a boat which they named the Mayflower, and in it floated down the
river, until they reached the mouth of the Muskingum. On April 17, 1788,
they began the erection of a blockhouse, which was to be the nucleus of
the new settlement, and a place of defense in case of Indian attack. The
settlement was named Marietta, in honor of Marie Antoinette, the Queen
of France; it prospered from the first, and in a few years was a lively
little village. There were Indian alarms at first, but General Wayne's
victory secured a lasting peace. Putnam served as a brigadier-general in
Wayne's campaign, and was one of the commissioners who negotiated the
peace treaty.

He lived for many years thereafter, and remained to the last the leading
man of the settlement. He was interested in every project for the
betterment of the new Commonwealth, helped to found the Ohio University
at Athens, was one of the drafters of the state constitution, and
founded the first Bible school west of the mountains. A venerable
figure, he died in 1824, having lived to see the valley which he had
entered a wilderness settled by hundreds of thousands, and the state
which he had helped to found become one of the greatest in the Union.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the end of the eighteenth century, the country between the
Alleghanies and the Mississippi was fairly well known, first through the
explorations of such pioneers as Boone and Clark and Kenton, and, later
on, through the steady advance of civilization, forever throwing new
outposts westward. But beyond the great river stretched a mighty
wilderness whose character and extent were only guessed at. The United
States, of course, had little interest in it, since it belonged to
France, and since, east of the river, there were millions of acres as
yet unsettled; but when, in 1803, President Jefferson purchased it of
Napoleon Bonaparte for the sum of fifteen million dollars, all that was
changed. By that purchase, the area of the United States was more than
doubled; but there were many people at the time who opposed the purchase
on the ground that the country east of the river would never be
thoroughly settled and that there would be no use whatever for the great
territory west of it. So mistaken, sometimes, is human foresight!

The President determined that this great addition to the Nation should
be explored without delay, and, securing from Congress the necessary
powers, he appointed his private secretary, Captain Meriwether Lewis, to
head an expedition to the Pacific.

Lewis was at that time twenty-nine years of age. He seems to have been
of an adventurous disposition for, despite the fact that he inherited a
fortune, he enlisted in the army as a private as soon as he was of age.
Five years later, he had risen to the rank of captain, and, attracting
the attention of President Jefferson, he was appointed his secretary. He
proved to be so capable and enterprising that the President selected him
for this dangerous and arduous task of exploration. With him was
associated Lieutenant William Clark, a brother of that hardy adventurer,
George Rogers Clark.

William Clark, who was eighteen years younger than his famous brother,
had joined him in Kentucky in 1784, at the age of fourteen, and soon
became acquainted with the perils of Indian warfare. He was appointed
ensign in the army four years later, and rose to the rank of adjutant,
but was compelled to resign, from the service in 1796, on account of
ill-health. He settled at the half-Spanish town of St. Louis, and in
March, 1804, was appointed by President Jefferson a second lieutenant of
artillery, with orders to join Captain Lewis in his journey to the
Pacific. Clark was really the military director of the expedition, and
his knowledge of Indian life and character had much to do with its
success.

The party consisted of twenty-eight men, and in the spring of 1804,
started up the Missouri, following it until late in October, when they
camped for the winter near the present site of Bismarck, North. Dakota.
They resumed the journey early in the spring, and in May, caught their
first glimpse of the Rocky Mountains. Reaching the headwaters of the
Columbia, at last, they floated down its current, and on the morning of
November 7, 1806, after a journey of a year and a half, full of every
sort of hardship and adventure, they saw ahead of them the blue expanse
of the Pacific. They spent the winter on the coast, and reached St.
Louis again in September, 1807, having traversed over nine thousand
miles of unbroken wilderness where no white man had ever before set
foot. It was largely because of this expedition that our government was
able, forty years later, to claim and maintain a title to the state of
Oregon.

Congress rewarded the members of the expedition with grants of land,
and Lewis was appointed governor of Missouri. But the strain of the
expedition to the Pacific had undermined his health; he became subject
to fits of depression, and on October 8, 1809, he put an end to his life
in a lonely cabin near Nashville, Tennessee, where he had stopped for a
night's lodging. Clark lived thirty years longer, serving as Indian
agent, governor of Missouri, and superintendent of Indian affairs.

While Lewis and Clark were struggling across the continent, another
young adventurer was conducting some explorations farther to the east.
Zebulon Pike, aged twenty-seven, a captain in the regular army, was, in
1805, appointed to lead an expedition to the source of the Mississippi.
He accomplished this, after a hard journey lasting nine months; and, a
year later, leading another expedition to the southwest, discovered a
great mountain which he named Pike's Peak, and, continuing southward,
came out on the Rio Grande. He was in Spanish territory, and was held
prisoner for a time, but was finally released upon representations from
the government at Washington. He rose steadily in the service, and in
1813, during the second war with England, led an assault upon Little
York, now Toronto. The town was captured, but the fleeing British
exploded a powder magazine, and General Pike was crushed and killed
beneath the flying fragments. He died with his head on the British flag,
which had been hauled down and brought to him.

The next step to be recorded in the growth of the United States is a
step variously regarded as infamous or glorious--but it was marked by
one of the most heroic incidents in history, and dominated by the
picturesque and remarkable personality of Sam Houston.

The purchase of Louisiana from the French brought the United States in
direct contact with Mexico, which claimed a great territory in the
southwest, and, finally, in 1819, a line between the possessions of the
two countries was agreed upon. It left Mexico in possession of the wide
stretch of country now included in the states of California, Nevada,
Utah, Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas. Most of this
country was practically unknown to Americans, and the great stretches of
arid land which comprised large portions of it were considered worthless
and uninhabitable. But a good many Americans had drifted across the
border into the fertile plains of Texas, and settled there. As time went
on, the stream of immigration increased, until there were in the country
enough American settlers to take a prominent part in the revolt of
Mexico against Spain in 1824. The revolt was successful, and the country
which had discovered the New World lost her last foothold there.

The settlers in Texas, coming as they did largely from the southern
states, were naturally slave-holders, but in 1829, Mexico abolished
slavery, an action which greatly enraged them. It is startling to
reflect that a country which we consider so inferior to ourselves should
have preceded us by over thirty years in this great step forward in
civilization. In other ways, the Mexican yoke was not a pleasant one to
the Texans, and within a few years, the whole country was in a state of
seething insurrection. President Jackson was eager to annex Texas, whose
value to the Union he fully recognized, and offered Mexico five million
dollars for the province, but the offer was refused. Such was the
condition of affairs when, in 1833, Sam Houston appeared upon the scene.

The story of the life of this extraordinary man reads like a fable. Born
in Virginia in 1793, he was taken to Tennessee at the age of thirteen,
and promptly began his career by running away from home and joining the
Cherokee Indians. When his family found him, he refused to return home,
and the next seven years were spent largely in the wilderness with his
savage friends. The wild life was congenial to him, and he grew up rough
and head-strong and healthy. Then the Creek war broke out, and Houston
enlisted with Andrew Jackson. One incident of that war gives a better
insight into Houston's character than volumes of description. At the
battle of the Horseshoe, where the Creeks made a desperate stand, a
barbed arrow struck Houston in the thigh and sank deep into the flesh.
He tried to pull it out and failed.

"Here," he called to a comrade, "pull out this arrow."

The other took hold of the shaft of the arrow and pulled with all his
might, but could not dislodge it.

"I can't get it out," he said, at last.

"Oh, yes, you can!" cried Houston, and raised his sword. "Pull it out,
or it'll be worse for you!"

The soldier saw he was in earnest, and, taking hold of the arrow again,
gave it a mighty wrench. It came out, but the barbs of the arrow tore
the flesh badly. Houston, however, paused only to tie up the wound
roughly, and hurried back into the fight, though Jackson ordered him to
the rear. Before long, two bullets struck him down, and he lay between
life and death for many days.

Such desperate valor was exactly after "Old Hickory's" heart, and from
that time forward, Jackson was Houston's friend and patron. In 1818, he
managed to gain admittance to the bar, and his rise was so rapid that
within five years he had been elected to Congress, and four years later
governor of Tennessee. Then came the strange catastrophe which nearly
wrecked his life.

Houston was, after Andrew Jackson, the most popular man in the state. He
resembled the hero of New Orleans in many ways, being rough, rude,
hot-headed and honest--just the sort of man to appeal to the people
among whom his lot was cast. When, therefore, in January, 1829, while
governor of the state, he married Miss Eliza Allen, a member of one of
the most prominent families in it, everybody wished him well, and the
wedding was a great affair. But scarcely was the honeymoon over, when he
sent his bride back to her parents, resigned the governorship, and,
refusing to give any explanation of his conduct, plunged into the
wilderness to the west.

Perhaps the most characteristic feature of frontier society is its
chivalry toward women, and Houston's conduct brought about his head a
perfect storm of indignation. No doubt he had many enemies who welcomed
the opportunity to wreck his fame, and who gladly added their voices to
the uproar. From the most popular man, he became the most hated, and it
would have been dangerous for him to venture back within the state's
borders. Not until after his death, did his wife give any explanation of
his conduct. She stated that he had discovered that she loved another,
and that he had deserted her so that she could secure a divorce on the
ground of abandonment. That explanation, lame as it is, is the only one
ever offered by either of the principals.

Meanwhile, Houston had joined his old friends, the Cherokees, now living
in Arkansas Territory, and asked to be admitted to the tribe. The
Indians expressed the opinion that he should have beaten his wife
instead of abandoning her, but nevertheless adopted him, and for three
years he lived their life, dressing, fighting, hunting and drinking
precisely like any Indian. The papers, meanwhile, were filled with
surmises concerning him. No one understood why he should have exiled
himself, and it was reported that he intended to lead the Cherokees into
