promised to do away with a government maintained by bayonets.

Charles II was received at Dover with the wildest demonstrations of
joy.  Bells pealed, flags waved, bonfires blazed all the way to
London, and the King said, with characteristic irony, "It must have
been my own fault that I did not come before, for I find no one but
declares that he is glad to see me."

The existence of the late Republic and the Protectorate (SS450, 455)
was as far as possible ignored.  The House of Lords was restored
(SS450, 455).  The new reign was dated, not when it actually began,
but from the day of Charles I's execution twelve years before.  The
troops of the Commonwealth were speedily disbanded, but the King
retained a picked guard of five thousand men, which became the nucleus
of a new standing army.

468. The King's Character.

The sovereign who now ascended the throne was in every respect the
opposite of Cromwell.  Charles II had no love of country, no sense of
duty, no belief in man, no respect for woman.  Evil circumstances and
evil companions had made him "a good-humored lad but hard-hearted
voluptuary."  For twelve years he had been a wanderer, and at times
almost a beggar.  Now the sole aim of his life was enjoyment.  He
desired to be King because he would then be able to accomplish that
aim.

469. Reaction from Puritanism.

In this purpose Charles had the sympathy of a considerable part of the
people.  The Puritan faith (S378), represented by such men as Hampden
(S436) and Milton (S450), was noble indeed; but unfortunately there
were many in its ranks who had no like grandeur of soul, but who
pushed Puritanism to its most injurious and offensive extreme.  That
attempt to reduce the whole of life to a narrow system of sour
self-denial had at last broken down.

Now, under the Restoration, the reaction set in, and the lower and
earthly side of human nature--none the less human because it is at the
bottom and not at the top--seemed determined to take its full
revenge.  Butler ridiculed religious zeal in his poem of "Hudibras"
(S457), which ever courtier had by heart.  Society was smitten with an
epidemic of immorality.  Profligacy became the fashion in both speech
and action, and much of the popular literature of that day will not
bear the light.

470. The Royal Favorites.

The King surrounded himself with men like himself.  This merry gang of
revelers vied with each other in dissipation and in jests on each
other.  Charles's two chief favorites were the Earl of Rochester, a
gifted but ribald poet, and Lord Shaftesbury, who became Lord
Chancellor.  Both have left on record their estimate of their royal
master.  The first wrote on the door of the King's bedchamber:

        "Here lies our sovereign lord, the King,
            Whose word no man relies on;
         He never says a foolish thing,
            Nor ever does a wise one."

To which Charles, on reading it, retorted, "'Tis true! because while
my words are my own, my acts are my ministers'."

A bright repartee tells us what the second favorite thought.  "Ah!
Shaftesbury," said the King to him one day, "I verily believe you are
the wickedest dog in my dominions." "Yes, your Majesty," replied
Shaftesbury, "for a SUBJECT I think perhaps I may be."

471. The Clarendon Ministry; Punishment of the Regicides.

From a political point of view, the new reign began decently and ably
under the direction of the Earl of Clarendon as leading minister or
adviser to the King.  The first act of Charles's first Parliament was
to proclaim a pardon to all who had fought against his father in the
civil war.  The only persons excepted wre the members of that high
court of justice (S448) which had sent Charles I to the block.  Of
these, ten were executed and nineteen imprisoned for life.  Most of
the other regicide judges were either already out of the country or
managed to escape soon after.

Among these, William Goffe, Edward Whalley, and Colonel John Dixwell
took refuge in Connecticut, where they remained concealed for several
years.  Eventually the first two went to Hadley, Massachusetts, where
they lived in seclusion in the house of a clergyman until their death.

The bodies of Oliver Cromwell, Ireton, Bradshaw, and Pride, all of
whom had served as judges in the trial and condemnation of Charles
(S448), were dug up from their graves in Westminster Abbey and hanged
in chains at Tyburn.[1] They were then buried at the foot of the
gallows along with he moldering remains of highway robbers and
criminals of the lowest sort, but Cromwell's head was cut off and set
up on a pinnacle of Westminster Hall.[2]

[1] Tyburn: near the northeast entrance to Hyde Park, London.  It was
for several centuries the chief place for the public execution of
felons.
[2] It has since been questioned whether Cromwell's body was disposed
of in this manner or whether another body, supposed at that time to be
his, was dealt with as here described.  See the "Dictionary of
National (British) Biography," under "Oliver Cromwell."

472. Religious Persecution; Covenanters; Bunyan.

The first Parliament that met (1661) commanded the common hangman to
publicly burn the Solemn League and Covenant (S444); it restored the
Episcopal form of worship and enacted four very severe laws, called
the "Clarendon Code," against those Nonconformists or Dissenters who
had ejected the Episcopal clergy (S444).[1]

[1] The chief Nonconformists then were: (1) the Presbyterians; (2) the
Independents, or Congregationalists; (3) the Baptists; (4) the Society
of Friends, or Quakers.  Originally the name "Nonconformist" was given
to those who refused to conform to the worship of the Church of
England, and who attempted to change it to suit their views or else
set up their own form of faith as an independent church.  The name
"Nonconformist" (or Dissenter) now applies to any Protestant outside
the Established Church of England (SS496, 498).

The first of these new laws was entitled the "Corporation Act"
(1661).  It ordered all holders of municipal offices to renounce the
Covenant[2] which had been put in force in 1647, and to take the
sacrament of the Church of England.  Next, a new Act of Uniformity
(1662) (S382) enforced the use of the Episcopal Prayer Book upon all
clergymen and congregations.  This was followed by the Conventicle
Act[3] (1664), which forbade the meeting of any religious assemblies
except such as worshiped according to the Established Church of
England.  Lastly, the Five-Mile Act (1665) forbade all dissenting
ministers to teach in schools, or to settle within five miles of an
incorporated town.

[2] Covenant: the oath or agreement to maintain the Presbyterian faith
and worship.  It originated in Scotland (S438).
[3] See, too, on these acts, the Summary of Constitutional History in
the Appendix, p. xix, S20.

The second of these stringent retaliatory statutes, the Act of
Uniformity, drove two thousand Presbyterian ministers from their
parishes in a single day, and reduced them to the direst distress.
The able-bodied among them might indeed pick up a precarious
livelihood by hard labor, but the old and the weak soon found their
refuge in the grave.

Those who dared to resist these intolerant and inhuman laws were
punished with fines, imprisonment, or slavery.  The Scottish
Parliament abolished Presbyterianism and restored Episcopacy.  It vied
with the Cavalier or King's party in England in persecution of the
Dissenters,[4] and especially of the Covenanters (S438).

[4] The Scottish Parliament granted what was called the "Indulgence"
to Presbyterian ministers who held moderate views.  The extreme
Covenanters regarded these "indulged Presbyterians" as deserters and
traitors who were both weak and wicked.  For this reason they hated
them worse than they did the Episcopalians.  See Burton's "Scotland,"
VII, 457-468.

Claverhouse, who figures as the "Bonny Dundee" of Sir Walter Scott,
hunted the Covenanters with bugle and bloodhound, like so many deer;
and his men hanged and drowned those who gathered secretly in glens
and caves to worship God.[1]  The father of a family would be dragged
from his cottage by the soldiers, asked if he would take the test of
conformity to the Church of England and the oath of allegiance to King
Charles II; if he refused, the officer in command gave the order,
"Make ready--take aim--fire!"--and there lay the corpse of the rebel.

[1] See the historical poem of the "Maiden Martyr of Scotland," in the
collection of "Heroic Ballads," Ginn and Company.

Among the multitudes who suffered in England for religion's sake was a
poor tinker and day laborer named John Bunyan.  He had served against
the King in the civil wars, and later had become converted to
Puritanism, and turned exhorter and itinerant preacher.  He was
arrested, while preaching in a farmhouse, and convicted of having
"devilishly and perniciously abstained from coming to church."

The judge sentenced him to the Bedford county jail, where he remained
a prisoner for twelve years (1660-1672).  Later on, he was again
arrested (1675) and sent to the town jail on Bedford Bridge.  It was,
he says, a squalid "Denn."[2]  But in his marvelous dream of "A
Pilgrimage from this World to the Next," which he wrote while shut up
within the narrow limits of that filthy prison house, he forgot the
misery of his surroundings.  Like Milton in his blindness, loneliness,
and poverty, he looked within and found that

        "The mind is its own place, and in itself
           Can make a heaven of hell."[3]

[2] "As I walk'd through the wilderness of this world, I lighted on a
certain place where there was a Denn, and I laid me down in that place
to sleep: and as I slept I dreamed a dream."--"The Pilgrim's
Progress," 1678.
[3] "Paradise Lost," Book I, 253.

473. Seizure of a Dutch Colony in America (1664).

While these things were going on in England, a strange event took
place abroad.  The Dutch had established a colony on the Hudson River.
It was on territory which the English claimed (S335), but which they
had never explored or settled.  The Dutch had built a town at the
mouth of the Hudson, which they called New Amsterdam.  They held the
place undisturbed for fifty years, and if "Possession is nine points
of the law," they seem to have acquired it.  Furthermore, during the
period of Cromwell's Protectorate (S455), England had made a treaty
with Holland and had recognized the claims of the Dutch in the New
World.

Charles had found shelter and generous treatment in Holland when he
needed it most.  But he now cooly repudiated the treaty, and, though
the two nations were at peace, he treacherously sent out a secret
expedition to capture the Dutch colony for his brother James, Duke of
York, to whom he had granted it.

One day a small English fleet suddenly appeared (1664) in the harbor
of the Dutch town, and demanded its immediate and unconditional
surrender.  The governor was unprepared to make any defense, and the
place was given up.  Thus, without so much as the firing of a gun, New
Amsterdam got the name of New York in honor of the man who had now
become its owner.  The acquisition of this territory, which had
separated the northern English colonies from the southern, gave
England complete control of the Atlantic coast from Maine to northern
Florida.

474. The Plague and the Fire, 1665, 1666.

The next year a terrible outbreak of the plague occurred in London,
1665, which spread throughout the kingdom (S244).  All who could, fled
from the city.  Hundreds of houses were left vacant, while on hundreds
more a cross marked on the doors in red chalk, with the words "Lord
have mercy on us," written underneath, told where the work of death
was going on.[1]

[1] Pepys writes in his "Diary," describing the beginning of the
plague: "The 7th of June, 1665, was the hottest day I ever felt in my
life.  This day, much against my will, I did in Drury Lane see two or
three houses with a red cross upon the door, and `Lord have mercy upon
us' writ there, which was a sad sight."--Pepys, "Diary," 1660-1669.
Defoe wrote a journal of the plague in 1722, based, probably, on the
reports of eyewitnesses.  It gives a vivid and truthful account of its
horrors.

The pestilence swept off over a hundred thousand victims within six
months.  Among the few brave men who voluntarily remained in the
stricken city were the Puritan ministers, who stayed to comfort and
console the sick and dying.  After the plague was over, they received
their reward through the enforcement of those acts of persecution
which drove them homeless and helpless from their parishes and friends
(S472).

The dead cart had hardly ceased to go its rounds, when a fire broke
out, 1666, of which Evelyn, a courtier who witnessed it, wrote that it
"was not to be outdone until the final conflagration of the world."[1]
By it the city of London proper was reduced to ruins, little more
being left than a fringe of houses on the northeast.

[1] Evelyn's "Diary," 1641-1705; also compare Dryden's poem "Annus
Mirabilis."

Great as the calamity was, yet from a sanitary point of view it did
immense good.  Nothing short of fire could have effectually cleansed
the London of that day, and so put a stop to the periodical ravages of
the plague.  By sweeping away miles of narrow streets crowded with
miserable buildings black with the encrusted filth of ages, the
conflagration in the end proved friendly to health and life.

A monument near London Bridge still marks the spot where the flames
first burst out.  For many years it bore an inscription affirming that
the Catholics kindled them in order to be revenged on their
persecutors.  The poet Pope, at a later period, exposed the falsehood
in the lines:

        "Where London's column pointing toward the skies
         Like a tall bully lifts its head and lies."[2]

[2] "Moral Essays," Epistle III.

Sir Christopher Wren, the most famous architect of the period, rebuilt
the city.  The greater part of it had been of wood, but it rose from
the ashes brick and stone.  One irreparable loss was the old Gothic
church of St. Paul.  Wren erected the present cathedral on the
foundations of the ancient structure.  On a tablet near the tomb of
the great master builder one reads the inscription in Latin, "Reader,
if you seek his monument, look around."[1]

[1] "Lector, si monumentum requiris, circumspice."

475. Invasion by the Dutch (1667).

The new city had not risen from the ruins of the old, when a third
calamity overtook it.  Charles was at war with France and Holland.
The contest with the latter nation grew out of the rivalry of the
English and the Dutch to get the exclusive possession of foreign trade
(S459).  Parliament granted the King large sums of money to build and
equip a navy, but the pleasure-loving monarch wasted it in
dissipation.  The few ships he had were rotten old hulks, but half
provisioned, with crews ready to mutiny because they could not get
their pay.

A Dutch fleet sailed up the Thames.  It was manned in part by English
sailors who had deserted in disgust because when they asked for cash
to support their families they got only worthless government tickets.
There was no force to oppose them.  They burned some half-built
men-of-war, blockaded London for several weeks, and then made their
own terms of peace.

476. The "Cabal" (1667-1673); Treaty of Dover, 1670; the King robs the
Exchequer (1672).

Shortly after this humiliating event the enemies of Clarendon drove
him from office (S471).  The fallen minister was accused of high
treason.  He had been guilty of certain arbitrary acts, and, rather
than stand trial, he fled to France, and was banished for life.  He
sent a humble petition to the Lords, but they promptly ordered the
hangman to burn it.  Six years later the old man begged piteously that
he might "come back and die in his own coutnry and among his own
children."  Charles refused to let him return, for Clarendon had
committed the unpardonable offense of daring to look "sourly" at the
vices of the King and his shameless companions flushed "with insolence
and wine."  Charles now formed a new ministry or "Cabal,"[1]
consisting of five of his most intimate friends.  Several of its
members were notorious for their depravity, and Macaulay calls it the
"most profligate administration ever known."[2]  The chief object of
its leaders was to serve their own private interests by making the
King's power supreme.  The "Cabal's" true spirit was not unlike that
of the council of the "infernal peers" which Milton portrays in
"Paradise Lost," first published at that time.  There he shows us the
five princes of evil, Moloch, Belial, Mammon, Beelzebub, and Satan,
meeting in the palace of Pandemonium to plot the ruin of the world.[3]
he chief ambition of Charles was to rule without a Parliament; he did
not like to have that body inquire too closely how he spent the money
which the taxpayers granted him.  But his lavish outlays on his
favorites made it more and more difficult for him to avoid summoning a
Parliament in order to get supplies of cash.  At length he hit on a
plan for securing the funds he wanted without begging help from
Parliament.

[1] This word was originally used to designate the confidential
members of the King's private council, and meant perhaps no more than
the word "cabinet" does to-day.  In 1667 it happened, however, by a
singular coincidence, that the initial letters of the five persons
comprising it, namely, (C)lifford, (A)shley-Cooper [Lord Shaftesbury],
(B)uckingham, (A)rlington, and (L)auderdale, formed the word "CABAL,"
which henceforth came to have the odious meaning of secret and
unscrupulous intrigue that it has ever since retained.  It was to
Charles II's time what the political "ring" is to our own.
[2] Macaulay's "Essay on Sir William Temple."
[3] Milton's "Paradise Lost," Book II.  The first edition was
published in 1667, the year the "Cabal" came into power, though its
members had long been favorites with the King.  It has been supposed
by some that the great Puritan poet had them in his mind when he
represented the Pandemonic debate.  Shaftesbury and Buckingham are
also two of the most prominent characters in Dryden's noted political
satire of "Absalom and Achitophel," published in 1681; and compare
Butler's "Hudibras."

Louis XIV of France, then the most powerful monarch in Europe, wished
to conquer Holland, with the double object of extending his own
kingdom and the power of Catholicism.  He saw in Charles the tool he
wanted to gain this end.  With the aid of two members of the "Cabal,"
Charles negotiated the secret Treaty of Dover, 1670.  Thereby Louis
bribed the English King with a gift of 300,000 pounds to help him
carry out his scheme.  Thus, without the knowledge of Parliament,
Charles deliberately sold himself to the French sovereign, who was
plotting to destroy the political liberty and Protestant faith of
Holland.

In addition to the above sum, it was furthermore agreed that Louis
should pay Charles a pension of 200,000 pounds a year from the date
when the latter should openly avow himself a Roman Catholic.  Later
(1671), Charles made a sham treaty with Louis XIV in which the article
about his avowing himself a Catholic was omitted in order to deceive
Parliament.[1]

[1] See Summary of Constitutional History in the Appendix, p. xix,
S21.

True to his infamous contract, Charles provoked a new war with the
Dutch, but found that he needed more money to prosecute it
successfully.  Not knowing where to borrow, he determined to steal
it.  Various London merchants, bankers, and also persons of moderate
means had lent to the government sums of money on promise of repayment
from the taxes.

A part of the national revenue amounting to about 1,300,000 pounds, a
sum equal to at least $10,000,000 now, had been deposited in the
exchequer, or government treasury, to meet the obligation.  The King
seized this money,[2] partly for his needs, but chiefly to squander on
his vices, and to satisfy the insatiate demands of his favorites,--of
whom a single one, the Duchess of Portsmouth, had spent 136,000 pounds
within the space of a twelvemonth! The King's treacherous act caused a
financial panic which shook London to its foundatyions and ruined
great numbers of people.

[2] "`Rob me the Exchequer, Hal,' said the King to his favorite
minister in the `Cabal'; then `all went merry as a marriage
bell.'"--Evelyn's "Diary."

477. More Money Schemes; Declaration of Indulgence; Test Act, 1673.

By declaring war against Holland Charles had now fulfilled the first
part of his secret treaty with Louis (S476), but he was afraid to
undertake the second part and openly declare himself a convert to the
Church of Rome.  He, however, did the next thing to it, by issuing a
cautiously worded Declaration of Indulgence, 1673, suspending all
penal laws affecting the religious liberty of Protestant Dissenters
(SS382, 472) and Roman Catholics.  Under cover of this act the King
could show especial favor to the Catholics.  Parliament issued such a
vigorous protest, however, that the King withdrew the Declaration.

Parliament next passed the Test Act,[1] 1673, requiring every
government officer to acknowledge himself a Protestant according to
the rites of the Church of England.  Charles became alarmed at this
decided stand, and now tried to conciliate Parliament, and coax from
it another grant of money by marrying his niece, the Princess Mary, to
William of Orange, President of the Dutch republic, and head of the
Protestant party on the Continent.

[2] See Summary of Constitutional History in the Appendix, p. xix,
S21.

478. The So-Called "Popish Plot"; the Exclusion Bill, and Disabling
Act, 1678.

While the King was playing this double part, a scoundrel, named Titus
Oates, whose hideous face was but the counterpart of a still more
hideous character, pretended that he had discovered a terrible plot.
He declared that the Catholics had formed a conspiracy to burn London,
massacre the inhabitants, kill the King, and restore the religion of
Rome.

The news of this alleged discovery caused an excitement which soon
grew into a sort of popular madness.  The memory of the great fire
(S474) was still fresh in people's minds.  In their imagination they
now saw those scenes of horror repeated, with wholesale murder added.
Great numbers of innocent persons were thrown into prison, and many
executed.

As time went on, the terror seemed to increase.  With its increase,
Oates grew bolder in his accusations.  Chief Justice Scroggs showed
himself an eager abettor of the miserable wretch who swore away men's
lives for the sake of the notoriety it gave him.  In the extravagance
of his presumption Oates even dared to accuse the Queen of an attempt
to poison Charles.  The craze, however, had at last begun to abate
somewhat, no action was taken, and in the next reign Oates got the
punishment he deserved--or at least a part of it (S485).

An attempt was now made (1679) to pass a law called the "Exclusion
Bill," debarring Charles's brother James, the Catholic Duke of York,
from succeeding to the crown; but though voted by the Commons, it was
defeated by the Lords.  Meanwhile a second measure, called the
"Disabling Act," had received the sanction of both Houses, 1678.  It
declared Catholics incapable of sitting in either House of Parliament
(S382); and from this date they remained shut out from all legislative
power and from all civil and corporate offices until 1829, a period of
over a century and a half (S573).

479. Rise of Permanent Political Parties, 1678; the King revokes City
Charters.

It was about this time that the names "Whig" and "Tory" (changed after
1832 to Liberal and Conservative) (S582) began to be given to two
political parties, which soon became very powerful, and practically
have ever since divided the government of the country between them.

The term "Whig" was originally given by way of reproach to the Scotch
Puritans, or Covenanters, who refused to accept the Episcopacy which
Charles I endeavored to impose upon them (S438).  "Tory," on the other
hand, was a nickname which appears to have first been applied to the
Roman Catholic outlaws of Ireland, who were regarded by Elizabeth and
by Cromwell as both robbers and rebels (S453).

The name of "Tory" was now given to those who supported the claims of
the King's brother James, the Roman Catholic Duke of York, as
successor to the throne; while that of "Whig" (or "Country Party") was
borne by those who were endeavoring to exclude him (S478), and secure
a Protestant successor.[1]

[1] Politically, the Whigs and Tories may perhaps be considered as the
successors of the Roundheads and Cavaliers of the civil war, the
former seeking to limit the power of the Crown, the latter to extend
it.  At the Restoration (1660), the Cavaliers were all-powerful; but
at the time of the dispute on the Exclusiiion Bill (1679), the
Roundhead, or People's party, had revived.  On account of their
petitioning the King to summon a new Parliament, by means of which
they hoped to carry the bill shutting out the Catholic Duke of York
from the throne, they were called "Petitioners," and later, "Whigs";
while those who expressed their abhorrence of their efforts were
called "Abhorrers," and afterwards, "Tories."  The more radical Whigs
came to be known as the "Country Party," and at least one of their
most prominent leaders, Algernon Sidney, was in favor of restoring the
republican form of government in England.

The excitement over this Exclusion Bill (S478) threatened at one
period to bring on another civil war.  In his fury against the Whigs,
Charles revoked the charters of London and many other cities, which
were regranted only on terms agreeable to the Tories.  An actual
outbreak against the government would probably have occurred had it
not been for the discovery of a new conspiracy, which resulted in a
reaction favorable to the Crown.

480. The Rye-House Plot (1683).

This conspiracy, known as the "Rye-House Plot," had for its object the
murder of Charles and his brother James at a place called the Rye
House in Hertfordshire, not far from London.  It was concocted by a
number of violent Whigs, who, in their disappointment at their failure
to secure the passage of the Exclusion Bill (S478), took this method
of gaining their ends.

It is said that they intended placing on the throne James, Duke of
Monmouth, a natural son of Charles, who was popularly known as the
"Protestant Duke."  Algernon Sidney, Lord Russell, and the Earl of
Essex, who were prominent advocates of the Exclusion Bill (S478), were
arrested for participating in the plot.  Essex committed suicide in
the Tower; Sidney and Russell were tried, convicted, and sentenced to
death on insufficient evidence.  They died martyrs to the cause of
liberty,--Russell, with the fortitude of a Christian; Sidney, with the
calmness of a philosopher.  The Duke of Monmouth, who was supposed to
be implicated in the plot, was banished to Holland (S486).

481. The Royal Society (1662).

Early in this reign the Royal Society was established for purposes of
scientific research.  In an age when thousands of well-informed people
still cherished a lingering belief that lead might be changed into
gold; that some medicine might be discovered which would cure every
disease, (including old age, that worst disease of all); when every
cross-grained old woman was suspected of witchcraft, and was liable to
be tortured and hanged on that suspicion,--the formation of an
association to study the physical facts was most significant.

It showed that the time had come when, instead of guessing what might
be, men were at last beginning to resolved to know what actually is.
In 1684 an English mathematician and philosopher demonstrated the
unity of the universe by proving that the same law which governs the
falling of an apple also governs the movements of the planets in their
orbits.  He published his great work on this subject a few years
later.

It was with reference to that wonderful discovery of the all-pervading
power of gravitation, which shapes and holds in its control the drop
of dew before our eyes, and the farthest star shining in the heavens,
that the poet Pope suggested the epitaph which should be graven on the
tomb of the great thinker in Westminster Abbey:

        "Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night;
         God said, `Let Newton be!' and all was light."

482. Chief Political Reforms; Abolition of Feudal Dues, 1660; the
Habeas Corpus Act, 1679.

As the age did not stand still with respect to progress in knowledge,
so it was not wholly unsuccessful in political progress.  A great
reform inaugurated in the outset of Charles's reign was the abolition,
1660, of the King's right to feudal dues and service, by which he was
accustomed to extort as much as possible from his subjects[1] (S150),
and the substitution of a fixed yearly allowance, raised by tax, of
1,200,000 pounds on beer and liquor.[2] This change may be considered
to have practically abolished the feudal system in England, so far as
the Crown is concerned, though the law still retains some remnants of
that system with respect to the relation of landlord and tenant.[3]

[1] See Blackstone's "Commentaries," II, 76.
[2] This tax should have been levied on the landed proprietors who had
been subject to the feudal dues, but they managed to put it on beer
and spirits; this compelled the body of the people to bear the burden
for them.
[3] See Summary of Constitutional History in the Appendix, p. xviii,
S20.

The second great reform measure was the Habeas Corpus Act,[4] 1679,
which provided that no subject should be detained in prison except by
due process of law, thus putting an end to the arbitrary confinement
of men for months, and years even, without conviction of guilt or even
form of trial.

[4] Habeas Corpus (1679) (you may have the body): This writ is
addressed by the judge to him who detains another in custody,
commanding him to bring him into court and show why he is restrained
of his liberty.  The right of Habeas Corpus was contained in germ in
the Great Charter (S199, Article 2); and see Summary of Constitutional
History in the Appendix, p. xix, S21, and p. xxxii.

483. Death of Charles.

The reign came suddenly to an end (1685).  Evelyn, one of the
courtiers of the day, tells us in his "Diary" that he was present at
the palace of Whitehall on Sunday morning, the last of January of that
year.  There he saw the King sitting in the grand banqueting room,
chatting gayly with three famous court beauties,--his special
favorites,--while a crowd of richly dressed nobles were gathered
around a gambling table heaped with gold.  Six days after, as he
expresses it, all was "in the dust."

Charles died a Roman Catholic, his Catholic brother James (S478)
having quietly brought a priest into the King's chamber in time to
hear his confession and grant him absolution.  Certainly few English
rulers ever stood in greater need of both.

484. Summary

The chief events of the period were the persecution of the Puritans,
the Plague and Great Fire of London, the Secret Treaty of Dover, the
Test Act, the Disabling Act, the so-called "Popish Plot," the
Rye-House Plot, the Dutch Wars, the Abolition of Feudal Dues, the
Habeas Corpus Act, the rise of permanent Political Parties, and
Newton's Discovery of the Law of Gravitation.  Aside from these, the
reign presents two leading points: (1) the policy of the King; (2)
that of the nation.

Charles II, as we have seen, lived solely to gratify his inordinate
love of pleasure.  For that, he wasted the revenue, robbed the
exchequer, and cheated the navy; for that, he secretly sold himself to
France, made war on Holland, and shamefully deceived both Parliament
and people.

In so far, then, as Charles II had an object, it began and ended with
himself.  Therein he stood lower than his father, who at least
conscientiously believed in the Divine Right of Kings (S429) and their
accountability to the Almighty.

The policy of the nation, on the other hand, was divided.  The Whigs
were determined to limit the power of the Crown, and secure at all
hazards a Protestant successor to the throne.  The Tories were equally
resolved to check the growing power of the people, and preserve the
hereditary order of succession (then in the Stuart family) without any
immediate regard to the religious question involved in the Exclusion
Bill (S478).

Beneath these issues both parties had a common object, which was to
maintain the National Episcopal Church and the monarchical system of
government.  Whigs and Tories alike detested the principles of the
late Commonwealth period.  They preferred to cherish patriotism
through loyalty to a personal sovereign rather than patriotism through
devotion to a democratic republic.

James II--1685-1689

485. James II; his Proclamation; his Two Objects; Titus Oates again.

James, Duke of York, brother of the late Charles II, now came to the
throne.  He at once issued a Proclamation pledging himself to
"preserve the government in both Church and State as it is now by law
established."  This solemn declaration was welcomed as "the word of a
king," but unfortunately that king did not keep his word.  His first
great ambition was to rule independently of Parliament, so that he
might have his own way in everything; his second, which was, if
possible, still nearer his heart, was to restore the Roman Catholic
religion in England (SS370, 382, 477).

He began that restoration at once; and on the Easter Sunday preceding
his coronation, "the worship of the Church of Rome was once more,
after an interval of a hundred and twenty-seven years, performed at
Westminster with royal splendor."[1]

[1] Macaulay's "England."

Not long afterwards James brought the miscreant Oates to trial for the
perjuries he had committed in connection with the so-called "Popish
Plot" (S478).  He was found guilty and sentenced to imprisonment for
life; in addition he was publicly whipped through London with such
terrible severity that a few more strokes of the lash would have ended
his worthless life (1685).  But in the next reign Oates was liberated
and a pension was granted him.

486. Monmouth's Rebellion; Sedgemoor, 1685.

At the time of the discovery of the Rye-House Plot (S480) a number of
Whigs (S479) who were implicated in the conspiracy fled to Holland,
where the Duke of Monmouth had gone when banished.  Four months after
the accession of James, the Duke, aided by these refugees and by a
small force which he had gathered in the Netherlands, resolved to
invade England and demand the crown.  He believed that a large part of
the nation would look upon him as representing the cause of
Protestantism, and would therefore rally to his support.  He landed at
Lyme on the coast of Dorsetshire (1685), and there issued an absurd
proclamation declaring James to be a usurper, tyrant, and murderer,
who had set the great fire of London (S474), cut the throat of Essex
(S480), and poisoned Charles II!

At Taunton, in Somersetshire, a procession of welcome, headed by a
lady carrying a Bible, met the Duke, and presented him with the book
in behalf of the Protestant faith.  He received it, saying, "I come to
defend the truths contained in this volume, and to seal them, if it
must be so, with my blood."  Shortly afterwards he proclaimed himself
sovereign of Great Britain.  He was popularly known as "King
Monmouth."  Many of the country people now joined him, but the Whig
nobles (S479), on whose help he had counted, stood aloof, alienated
doubtless by the ridiculous charges he had made against James.

At the battle of Sedgemoor, in Somersetshire (1685), "King Monmouth,"
with his hastily gathered forces, was utterly routed.  He himself was
soon afterwards captured, hiding in a ditch.  He desired to be taken
to the King.  His request was granted.  When he entered his uncle's
presence, he threw himself down and crawled to his feet, weeping and
begging piteously for life--only life--on any terms, however hard.

He denied that he had issued the lying proclamation published at Lyme;
he denied that he had sought the crown of his own free will; finally,
in an agony of supplication, he hinted that he would even renounce
Protestantism if thereby he might escape death.  James told him that
he should have the service of a Catholic priest, but would promise
nothing more.  Monmouth groveled and pleaded, but the King's heart was
like marble, and he turned away in silence.  Then the Duke, seeing
that all his efforts were vain, rose to his feet and regained his
manhood.

He was forthwith sent to the Tower, and shortly afterwards to
execution.  His headless body was buried under the communion table of
that little chapel of St. Peter within the Tower grounds, where the
remains of Anne Boleyn, Lady Jane Grey, Sir Thomas More, and many
other royal victimsf, are gathered.  No sadder spot exists on earth,
"since there death is associated with whatever is darkest in human
nature and human destiny."[1]

[1] Macaulay's "England."

After Monmouth's death there were no further attempts at insurrection,
and the struggle at Sedgemoor remains the last encounter worthy of the
name of battle fought on English soil.

487. The "Bloody Assizes" (1685).

The defeat of the insurgents who had rallied under Monmouth's flag was
followed by a series of trials known, from their results, as the
"Bloody Assizes" (1685).  They were conducted by Judge Jeffreys,
