up in the Gulf, far away from land."

"The Spaniards report that at certain seasons choirs of these nymphs
assemble in the sea, and with ravishing music sing their watery loves.
It may be so. For Nature, which has peopled the land with rational
souls, may not have left the sea altogether barren of them; above all,
when we remember that the ocean is as it were the very fount of all
fertility, and its slime (as the most learned hold with Thales of
Miletus) that prima materia out of which all things were one by one
concocted. Therefore, the ancients feigned wisely that Venus, the mother
of all living things, whereby they designed the plastic force of nature,
was born of the sea-foam, and rising from the deep, floated ashore upon
the isles of Greece."

"I don't know what plastic force is; but I wish I had had the luck to be
by when the pretty poppet came up: however, the nearest thing I ever saw
to that was maidens swimming alongside of us when we were in the South
Seas, and would have come aboard, too; but Drake sent them all off again
for a lot of naughty packs, and I verily believe they were no better.
Look at the butterflies, now! Don't you wish you were a boy again, and
not too proud to go catching them in your cap?"

And so the two wandered on together through the glorious tropic woods,
and then returned to the beach to find the sick already grown cheerful,
and many who that morning could not stir from their hammocks, pacing up
and down, and gaining strength with every step.

"Well done, lads!" cried Amyas, "keep a cheerful mind. We will have the
music ashore after dinner, for want of mermaids to sing to us, and those
that can dance may."

And so those four days were spent; and the men, like schoolboys on
a holiday, gave themselves up to simple merriment, not forgetting,
however, to wash the clothes, take in fresh water, and store up a
good supply of such fruit as seemed likely to keep; until, tired with
fruitless rambles after gold, which they expected to find in every bush,
in spite of Yeo's warnings that none had been heard of on the island,
they were fain to lounge about, full-grown babies, picking up shells and
sea-fans to take home to their sweethearts, smoking agoutis out of the
hollow trees, with shout and laughter, and tormenting every living thing
they could come near, till not a land-crab dare look out of his hole, or
an armadillo unroll himself, till they were safe out of the bay, and
off again to the westward, unconscious pioneers of all the wealth, and
commerce, and beauty, and science which has in later centuries made that
lovely isle the richest gem of all the tropic seas.



CHAPTER XVIII

HOW THEY TOOK THE PEARLS AT MARGARITA

     P. Henry.  Why, what a rascal art thou, then, to praise him so for
     running!
     Falstaff.  O' horseback, ye cuckoo! but a-foot, he will not budge a
     foot.
     P. Henry.  Yes, Jack, upon instinct.
     Falstaff.  I grant ye, upon instinct.

                                                  Henry IV.  Pt. I.

They had slipped past the southern point of Grenada in the night, and
were at last within that fairy ring of islands, on which nature had
concentrated all her beauty, and man all his sin. If Barbados had been
invested in the eyes of the newcomers with some strange glory, how much
more the seas on which they now entered, which smile in almost perpetual
calm, untouched by the hurricane which roars past them far to northward!
Sky, sea, and islands were one vast rainbow; though little marked,
perhaps, by those sturdy practical sailors, whose main thought was of
Spanish gold and pearls; and as little by Amyas, who, accustomed to the
scenery of the tropics, was speculating inwardly on the possibility of
extirpating the Spaniards, and annexing the West Indies to the domains
of Queen Elizabeth. And yet even their unpoetic eyes could not behold
without awe and excitement lands so famous and yet so new, around
which all the wonder, all the pity, and all the greed of the age had
concentrated itself. It was an awful thought, and yet inspiriting, that
they were entering regions all but unknown to Englishmen, where the
penalty of failure would be worse than death--the torments of the
Inquisition. Not more than five times before, perhaps, had those
mysterious seas been visited by English keels; but there were those
on board who knew them well, and too well; who, first of all British
mariners, had attempted under Captain John Hawkins to trade along those
very coasts, and, interdicted from the necessaries of life by Spanish
jealousy, had, in true English fashion, won their markets at the sword's
point, and then bought and sold honestly and peaceably therein. The old
mariners of the Pelican and the Minion were questioned all day long for
the names of every isle and cape, every fish and bird; while Frank stood
by, listening serious and silent.

A great awe seemed to have possessed his soul; yet not a sad one: for
his face seemed daily to drink in glory from the glory round him; and
murmuring to himself at whiles, "This is the gate of heaven," he stood
watching all day long, careless of food and rest, as every forward
plunge of the ship displayed some fresh wonder. Islands and capes hung
high in air, with their inverted images below them; long sand-hills
rolled and weltered in the mirage; and the yellow flower-beds, and huge
thorny cacti like giant candelabra, which clothed the glaring slopes,
twisted, tossed, and flickered, till the whole scene seemed one blazing
phantom-world, in which everything was as unstable as it was fantastic,
even to the sun itself, distorted into strange oval and pear-shaped
figures by the beds of crimson mist through which he sank to rest. But
while Frank wondered, Yeo rejoiced; for to the southward of that setting
sun a cluster of tall peaks rose from the sea; and they, unless his
reckonings were wrong, were the mountains of Macanao, at the western end
of Margarita, the Isle of Pearls, then famous in all the cities of
the Mediterranean, and at the great German fairs, and second only in
richness to that pearl island in the gulf of Panama, which fifteen years
before had cost John Oxenham his life.

The next day saw them running along the north side of the island, having
passed undiscovered (as far as they could see) the castle which the
Spaniards had built at the eastern end for the protection of the pearl
fisheries.

At last they opened a deep and still bight, wooded to the water's edge;
and lying in the roadstead a caravel, and three boats by her. And at
that sight there was not a man but was on deck at once, and not a mouth
but was giving its opinion of what should be done. Some were for sailing
right into the roadstead, the breeze blowing fresh toward the shore (as
it usually does throughout those islands in the afternoon). However,
seeing the billows break here and there off the bay's mouth, they
thought it better, for fear of rocks, to run by quietly, and then
send in the pinnace and the boat. Yeo would have had them show Spanish
colors, for fear of alarming the caravel; but Amyas stoutly refused,
"counting it," he said, "a mean thing to tell a lie in that way, unless
in extreme danger, or for great ends of state."

So holding on their course till they were shut out by the next point,
they started; Cary in the largest boat with twenty men, and Amyas in
the smaller one with fifteen more; among whom was John Brimblecombe,
who must needs come in his cassock and bands, with an old sword of his
uncle's which he prized mightily.

When they came to the bight's mouth, they found, as they had expected,
coral rocks, and too many of them; so that they had to run along the
edge of the reef a long way before they could find a passage for the
boats. While they were so doing, and those of them who were new to the
Indies were admiring through the clear element those living flower-beds,
and subaqueous gardens of Nereus and Amphitrite, there suddenly appeared
below what Yeo called "a school of sharks," some of them nearly as long
as the boat, who looked up at them wistfully enough out of their wicked
scowling eyes.

"Jack," said Amyas, who sat next to him, "look how that big fellow
eyes thee: he has surely taken a fancy to that plump hide of thine, and
thinks thou wouldst eat as tender as any sucking porker."

Jack turned very pale, but said nothing.

Now, as it befell, just then that very big fellow, seeing a parrot-fish
come out of a cleft of the coral, made at him from below, as did two or
three more; the poor fish finding no other escape, leaped clean into the
air, and almost aboard the boat; while just where he had come out of
the water, three or four great brown shagreened noses clashed together
within two yards of Jack as he sat, each showing its horrible rows of
saw teeth, and then sank sulkily down again, to watch for a fresh bait.
At which Jack said very softly, "In manus tuas, Domine!" and turning his
eyes in board, had no lust to look at sharks any more.

So having got through the reef, in they ran with a fair breeze, the
caravel not being now a musket-shot off. Cary laid her aboard before
the Spaniards had time to get to their ordnance; and standing up in the
stern-sheets, shouted to them to yield. The captain asked boldly enough,
in whose name? "In the name of common sense, ye dogs," cries Will; "do
you not see that you are but fifty strong to our twenty?" Whereon up the
side he scrambled, and the captain fired a pistol at him. Cary knocked
him over, unwilling to shed needless blood; on which all the crew
yielded, some falling on their knees, some leaping overboard; and the
prize was taken.

In the meanwhile, Amyas had pulled round under her stern, and boarded
the boat which was second from her, for the nearest was fast alongside,
and so a sure prize. The Spaniards in her yielded without a blow, crying
"Misericordia;" and the negroes, leaping overboard, swam ashore like
sea-dogs. Meanwhile, the third boat, which was not an oar's length
off, turned to pull away. Whereby befell a notable adventure: for John
Brimblecombe, casting about in a valiant mind how he should distinguish
himself that day, must needs catch up a boat-hook, and claw on to her
stern, shouting, "Stay, ye Papists! Stay, Spanish dogs!"--by which, as
was to be expected, they being ten to his one, he was forthwith pulled
overboard, and fell all along on his nose in the sea, leaving the hook
fast in her stern.

Where, I know not how, being seized with some panic fear (his lively
imagination filling all the sea with those sharks which he had just
seen), he fell a-roaring like any town-bull, and in his confusion never
thought to turn and get aboard again, but struck out lustily after the
Spanish boat, whether in hope of catching hold of the boat-hook which
trailed behind her, or from a very madness of valor, no man could
divine; but on he swam, his cassock afloat behind him, looking for all
the world like a great black monk-fish, and howling and puffing, with
his mouth full of salt water, "Stay, ye Spanish dogs! Help, all good
fellows! See you not that I am a dead man? They are nuzzling already at
my toes! He hath hold of my leg! My right thigh is bitten clean off!
Oh that I were preaching in Hartland pulpit! Stay, Spanish dogs! Yield,
Papist cowards, least I make mincemeat of you; and take me aboard!
Yield, I say, or my blood be on your heads! I am no Jonah; if he swallow
me, he will never cast me up again! it is better to fall into the hands
of man, than into the hands of devils with three rows of teeth apiece.
In manus tuas. Orate pro anima--!"

And so forth, in more frantic case than ever was Panurge in that his
ever-memorable seasickness; till the English, expecting him every minute
to be snapped up by sharks, or brained by the Spaniard's oars, let fly a
volley into the fugitives, on which they all leaped overboard like their
fellows; whereon Jack scrambled into the boat, and drawing sword with
one hand, while he wiped the water out of his eyes with the other, began
to lay about him like a very lion, cutting the empty air, and crying,
"Yield, idolaters! Yield, Spanish dogs!" However, coming to himself
after a while, and seeing that there was no one on whom to flesh his
maiden steel, he sits down panting in the sternsheets, and begins
stripping off his hose. On which Amyas, thinking surely that the good
fellow had gone mad with some stroke of the sun, or by having fallen
into the sea after being overheated with his rowing, bade pull
alongside, and asked him in heaven's name what he was doing with his
nether tackle. On which Jack, amid such laughter as may be conceived,
vowed and swore that his right thigh was bitten clean through, and to
the bone; yea, and that he felt his hose full of blood; and so would
have swooned away for imaginary loss of blood (so strong was the
delusion on him) had not his friends, after much arguing on their part,
and anger on his, persuaded him that he was whole and sound.

After which they set to work to overhaul their maiden prize, which they
found full of hides and salt-pork; and yet not of that alone; for in
the captain's cabin, and also in the sternsheets of the boat which
Brimblecombe had so valorously boarded, were certain frails of leaves
packed neatly enough, which being opened were full of goodly pearls,
though somewhat brown (for the Spaniards used to damage the color in
their haste and greediness, opening the shells by fire, instead of
leaving them to decay gradually after the Arabian fashion); with which
prize, though they could not guess its value very exactly, they went off
content enough, after some malicious fellow had set the ship on fire,
which, being laden with hides, was no nosegay as it burnt.

Amyas was very angry at this wanton damage, in which his model,
Drake, had never indulged; but Cary had his jest ready. "Ah!" said he,
"'Lutheran devils' we are, you know; so we are bound to vanish, like
other fiends, with an evil savor."

As soon, however, as Amyas was on board again, he rounded his friend
Mr. Brimblecombe in the ear, and told him he had better play the man a
little more, roaring less before he was hurt, and keeping his breath
to help his strokes, if he wished the crew to listen much to his
discourses. Frank, hearing this, bade Amyas leave the offender to him,
and so began upon him with--

"Come hither, thou recreant Jack, thou lily-livered Jack, thou
hysterical Jack. Tell me now, thou hast read Plato's Dialogues, and
Aristotle's Logic?"

To which Jack very meekly answered, "Yes."

"Then I will deal with thee after the manner of those ancient sages, and
ask whether the greater must not contain the less?"

Jack. Yes, sure.

Frank. And that which is more than a part, contain that part, more than
which it is?

Jack. Yes, sure.

Frank. Then tell me, is not a priest more than a layman?

Jack (who was always very loud about the dignity of the priesthood,
as many of his cloth are, who have no other dignity whereon to stand)
answered very boldly, "Of course."

Frank. Then a priest containeth a man, and is a man, and something
over--viz, his priesthood?

Jack (who saw whither this would lead). I suppose so.

Frank. Then, if a priest show himself no man, he shows himself all the
more no priest?

"I'll tell you what, Master Frank," says Jack, "you may be right by
logic; but sharks aren't logic, nor don't understand it neither."

Frank. Nay but, my recalcitrant Jack, my stiff-necked Jack, is it the
part of a man to howl like a pig in a gate, because he thinks that is
there which is not there?

Jack had not a word to say.

Frank. And still more, when if that had been there, it had been the duty
of a brave man to have kept his mouth shut, if only to keep salt water
out, and not add the evil of choking to that of being eaten?

"Ah!" says Jack, "that's all very fine; but you know as well as I that
it was not the Spaniards I was afraid of. They were Heaven's handiwork,
and I knew how to deal with them; but as for those fiends' spawn of
sharks, when I saw that fellow take the fish alongside, it upset me
clean, and there's an end of it!"

Frank. Oh, Jack, Jack, behold how one sin begets another! Just now thou
wert but a coward, and now thou art a Manichee. For thou hast imputed
to an evil creator that which was formed only for a good end, namely,
sharks, which were made on purpose to devour useless carcasses like
thine. Moreover, as a brother of the Rose, thou wert bound by the vow of
thy brotherhood to have leaped joyfully down that shark's mouth.

Jack. Ay, very likely, if Mistress Rose had been in his stomach; but I
wanted to fight Spaniards just then, not to be shark-bitten.

Frank. Jack, thy answer savors of self-will. If it is ordained that thou
shouldst advance the ends of the Brotherhood by being shark-bitten,
or flea-bitten, or bitten by sharpers, to the detriment of thy carnal
wealth, or, shortly, to suffer any shame or torment whatsoever, even to
strappado and scarpines, thou art bound to obey thy destiny, and not,
after that vain Roman conceit, to choose the manner of thine own death,
which is indeed only another sort of self-murder. We therefore consider
thee as a cause of scandal, and a rotten and creaking branch, to be
excised by the spiritual arm, and do hereby excise thee, and cut thee
off.

Jack. Nay faith, that's a little too much, Master Frank. How long have
you been Bishop of Exeter?

Frank. Jack, thy wit being blinded, and full of gross vapors, by reason
of the perturbations of fear (which, like anger, is a short madness,
and raises in the phantasy vain spectres,--videlicet, of sharks and
Spaniards), mistakes our lucidity. For thy Manicheeism, let his lordship
of Exeter deal with it. For thy abominable howling and caterwauling,
offensive in a chained cur, but scandalous in a preacher and a brother
of the Rose, we do hereby deprive thee of thine office of chaplain to
the Brotherhood; and warn thee, that unless within seven days thou do
some deed equal to the Seven Champions, or Ruggiero and Orlando's self,
thou shalt be deprived of sword and dagger, and allowed henceforth to
carry no more iron about thee than will serve to mend thy pen.

"And now, Jack," said Amyas, "I will give thee a piece of news. No
wonder that young men, as the parsons complain so loudly, will not
listen to the Gospel, while it is preached to them by men on whom they
cannot but look down; a set of softhanded fellows who cannot dig, and
are ashamed to beg; and, as my brother has it, must needs be parsons
before they are men.

"Frank. Ay, and even though we may excuse that in Popish priests and
friars, who are vowed not to be men, and get their bread shamefully
and rascally by telling sinners who owe a hundred measures to sit down
quickly and take their bill and write fifty: yet for a priest of the
Church of England (whose business is not merely to smuggle sinful souls
up the backstairs into heaven, but to make men good Christians by making
them good men, good gentlemen, and good Englishmen) to show the white
feather in the hour of need, is to unpreach in one minute all that he
had been preaching his life long.

"I tell thee," says Amyas, "if I had not taken thee for another guess
sort of man, I had never let thee have the care of a hundred brave lads'
immortal souls--"

And so on, both of them boarding him at once with their heavy shot,
larboard and starboard, till he fairly clapped his hands to his ears
and ran for it, leaving poor Frank laughing so heartily, that Amyas was
after all glad the thing had happened, for the sake of the smile which
it put into his sad and steadfast countenance.

The next day was Sunday; on which, after divine service (which they
could hardly persuade Jack to read, so shamefaced was he; and as for
preaching after it, he would not hear of such a thing), Amyas read
aloud, according to custom, the articles of their agreement; and then
seeing abreast of them a sloping beach with a shoot of clear water
running into the sea, agreed that they should land there, wash the
clothes, and again water the ship; for they had found water somewhat
scarce at Barbados. On this party Jack Brimblecombe must needs go,
taking with him his sword and a great arquebuse; for he had dreamed last
night (he said) that he was set upon by Spaniards, and was sure that the
dream would come true; and moreover, that he did not very much care if
they did, or if he ever got back alive; "for it was better to die than
be made an ape, and a scarecrow, and laughed at by the men, and badgered
with Ramus his logic, and Plato his dialectical devilries, to confess
himself a Manichee, and, for aught he knew, a turbaned Turk, or Hebrew
Jew," and so flung into the boat like a man desperate.

So they went ashore, after Amyas had given strict commands against
letting off firearms, for fear of alarming the Spaniards. There they
washed their clothes, and stretched their legs with great joy, admiring
the beauty of the place, and then began to shoot the seine which they
had brought on shore with them. "In which," says the chronicler, "we
caught many strange fishes, and beside them, a sea-cow full seven feet
long, with limpets and barnacles on her back, as if she had been a stick
of drift-timber. This is a fond and foolish beast: and yet pious withal;
for finding a corpse, she watches over it day and night until it decay
or be buried. The Indians call her manati; who carries her young
under her arm, and gives it suck like a woman; and being wounded, she
lamenteth aloud with a human voice, and is said at certain seasons to
sing very melodiously; which melody, perhaps, having been heard in those
seas, is that which Mr. Frank reported to be the choirs of the Sirens
and Tritons. The which I do not avouch for truth, neither rashly deny,
having seen myself such fertility of Nature's wonders that I hold him
who denieth aught merely for its strangeness to be a ribald and an
ignoramus. Also one of our men brought in two great black fowls which
he had shot with a crossbow, bodied and headed like a capon, but bigger
than any eagle, which the Spaniards call curassos; which, with that
sea-cow, afterwards made us good cheer, both roast and sodden, for the
cow was very dainty meat, as good as a four-months' calf, and tender and
fat withal."

After that they set to work filling the casks and barricos, having laid
the boat up to the outflow of the rivulet. And lucky for them it was,
as it fell out, that they were all close together at that work, and not
abroad skylarking as they had been half-an-hour before.

Now John Brimblecombe had gone apart as soon as they landed, with a
shamefaced and doleful countenance; and sitting down under a great tree,
plucked a Bible from his bosom, and read steadfastly, girded with his
great sword, and his arquebuse lying by him. This too was well for him,
and for the rest; for they had not yet finished their watering, when
there was a cry that the enemy was on them; and out of the wood,
not twenty yards from the good parson, came full fifty shot, with a
multitude of negroes behind them, and an officer in front on horseback,
with a great plume of feathers in his hat, and his sword drawn in his
hand.

"Stand, for your lives!" shouted Amyas: and only just in time; for there
was ten good minutes lost in running up and down before he could get his
men into some order of battle. But when Jack beheld the Spaniards, as if
he had expected their coming, he plucked a leaf and put it into the
page of his book for a mark, laid the book down soberly, caught up his
arquebuse, ran like a mad dog right at the Spanish captain, shot him
through the body stark dead, and then, flinging the arquebuse at the
head of him who stood next, fell on with his sword like a very Colbrand,
breaking in among the arquebuses, and striking right and left such ugly
strokes, that the Spaniards (who thought him a very fiend, or Luther's
self come to life to plague them) gave back pell-mell, and shot at him
five or six at once with their arquebuses: but whether from fear of him,
or of wounding each other, made so bad play with their pieces, that he
only got one shrewd gall in his thigh, which made him limp for many a
day. But as fast as they gave back he came on; and the rest by this time
ran up in good order, and altogether nearly forty men well armed. On
which the Spaniards turned, and went as fast as they had come, while
Cary hinted that, "The dogs had had such a taste of the parson, that
they had no mind to wait for the clerk and people."

"Come back, Jack! are you mad?" shouted Amyas.

But Jack (who had not all this time spoken one word) followed them
as fiercely as ever, till, reaching a great blow at one of the
arquebusiers, he caught his foot in a root; on which down he went, and
striking his head against the ground, knocked out of himself all the
breath he had left (which between fatness and fighting was not much),
and so lay. Amyas, seeing the Spaniards gone, did not care to pursue
them: but picked up Jack, who, staring about, cried, "Glory be! glory
be!--How many have I killed? How many have I killed?"

"Nineteen, at the least," quoth Cary, "and seven with one back
stroke;" and then showed Brimblecombe the captain lying dead, and two
arquebusiers, one of which was the fugitive by whom he came to his fall,
beside three or four more who were limping away wounded, some of them by
their fellows' shot.

"There!" said Jack, pausing and blowing, "will you laugh at me any more,
Mr. Cary; or say that I cannot fight, because I am a poor parson's son?"

Cary took him by the hand, and asked pardon of him for his scoffing,
saying that he had that day played the best man of all of them; and
Jack, who never bore malice, began laughing in his turn, and--

"Oh, Mr. Cary, we have all known your pleasant ways, ever since you used
to put drumble-drones into my desk to Bideford school." And so they went
to the boats, and pulled off, thanking God (as they had need to do) for
their great deliverance: while all the boats' crew rejoiced over Jack,
who after a while grew very faint (having bled a good deal without
knowing it), and made as little of his real wound as he made much the
day before of his imaginary one.

Frank asked him that evening how he came to show so cool and approved a
valor in so sudden a mishap.

"Well, my masters," said Jack, "I don't deny that I was very downcast on
account of what you said, and the scandal which I had given to the crew;
but as it happened, I was reading there under the tree, to fortify my
spirits, the history of the ancient worthies, in St. Paul his eleventh
chapter to the Hebrews; and just as I came to that, 'out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies
of the aliens,' arose the cry of the Spaniards. At which, gentlemen,
thinking in myself that I fought in just so good a cause as they, and,
as I hoped, with like faith, there came upon me so strange an assurance
of victory, that I verily believed in myself that if there had been
a ten thousand of them, I should have taken no hurt. Wherefore," said
Jack, modestly, "there is no credit due to me, for there was no valor
in me whatsoever, but only a certainty of safety; and any coward would
fight if he knew that he were to have all the killing and none of the
scratches."

Which words he next day, being Sunday, repeated in his sermon which he
made on that chapter, with which all, even Salvation Yeo himself, were
well content and edified, and allowed him to be as godly a preacher as
he was (in spite of his simple ways) a valiant and true-hearted comrade.

They brought away the Spanish officer's sword (a very good blade), and
also a great chain of gold which he wore about his neck; both of which
were allotted to Brimblecombe as his fair prize; but he, accepting the
sword, steadfastly refused the chain, entreating Amyas to put it into
the common stock; and when Amyas refused, he cut it into links and
distributed it among those of the boat's crew who had succored him,
winning thereby much good-will. "And indeed" (says the chronicler),
"I never saw in that worthy man, from the first day of our
school-fellowship till he was laid in his parish church of Hartland
(where he now sleeps in peace), any touch of that sin of covetousness
which has in all ages, and in ours no less than others, beset especially
(I know not why) them who minister about the sanctuary. But this man,
though he was ugly and lowly in person, and in understanding simple, and
of breeding but a poor parson's son, had yet in him a spirit so loving
and cheerful, so lifted from base and selfish purposes to the worship
of duty, and to a generosity rather knightly than sacerdotal, that all
through his life he seemed to think only that it was more blessed to
give than to receive. And all that wealth which he gained in the wars he
dispersed among his sisters and the poor of his parish, living unmarried
till his death like a true lover and constant mourner (as shall be said
in place), and leaving hardly wherewith to bring his body to the
grave. At whom if we often laughed once, we should now rather envy him,
desiring to be here what he was, that we may be hereafter where he is.
Amen."



CHAPTER XIX

WHAT BEFELL AT LA GUAYRA

       "Great was the crying, the running and riding,
     Which at that season was made in the place;
        The beacons were fired, as need then required,
     To save their great treasure they had little space."

                                       Winning of Cales.

The men would gladly have hawked awhile round Margarita and Cubagua for
another pearl prize. But Amyas having, as he phrased it, "fleshed his
dogs," was loth to hang about the islands after the alarm had been
given. They ran, therefore, south-west across the mouth of that great
bay which stretches from the Peninsula of Paria to Cape Codera, leaving
on their right hand Tortuga, and on their left the meadow-islands of the
Piritoos, two long green lines but a few inches above the tideless sea.
Yeo and Drew knew every foot of the way, and had good reason to know it;
for they, the first of all English mariners, had tried to trade along
this coast with Hawkins. And now, right ahead, sheer out of the sea from
base to peak, arose higher and higher the mighty range of the Caracas
mountains; beside which all hills which most of the crew had ever seen
seemed petty mounds. Frank, of course, knew the Alps; and Amyas the
Andes; but Cary's notions of height were bounded by M'Gillicuddy's
Reeks, and Brimblecombe's by Exmoor; and the latter, to Cary's infinite
amusement, spent a whole day holding on by the rigging, and staring
upwards with his chin higher than his nose, till he got a stiff neck.
Soon the sea became rough and chopping, though the breeze was fair and
gentle; and ere they were abreast of the Cape, they became aware of
that strong eastward current which, during the winter months, so often
baffles the mariner who wishes to go to the westward. All night long
they struggled through the billows, with the huge wall of Cape Codera a
thousand feet above their heads to the left, and beyond it again, bank
upon bank of mountain, bathed in the yellow moonlight.

Morning showed them a large ship, which had passed them during the night
upon the opposite course, and was now a good ten miles to the eastward.
Yeo was for going back and taking her. Of the latter he made a matter of
course; and the former was easy enough, for the breeze blowing dead off
the land, was a "soldier's wind, there and back again," for either ship;
but Amyas and Frank were both unwilling.

"Why, Yeo, you said that one day more would bring us to La Guayra."

"All the more reason, sir, for doing the Lord's work thoroughly, when He
has brought us safely so far on our journey."

"She can pass well enough, and no loss."

"Ah, sirs, sirs, she is delivered into your hands, and you will have to
give an account of her."

"My good Yeo," said Frank, "I trust we shall give good account enough
of many a tall Spaniard before we return: but you know surely that La
Guayra, and the salvation of one whom we believe dwells there, was our
first object in this adventure."

Yeo shook his head sadly. "Ah, sirs, a lady brought Captain Oxenham to
ruin."

"You do not dare to compare her with this one?" said Frank and Cary,
both in a breath.

"God forbid, gentlemen: but no adventure will prosper, unless there is a
single eye to the Lord's work; and that is, as I take it, to cripple
the Spaniard, and exalt her majesty the queen. And I had thought that
nothing was more dear than that to Captain Leigh's heart."

Amyas stood somewhat irresolute. His duty to the queen bade him follow
the Spanish vessel: his duty to his vow, to go on to La Guayra. It may
seem a far-fetched dilemma. He found it a practical one enough.

However, the counsel of Frank prevailed, and on to La Guayra he went. He
half hoped that the Spaniard would see and attack them. However, he went
on his way to the eastward; which if he had not done, my story had had a
very different ending.

About mid-day a canoe, the first which they had seen, came staggering
toward them under a huge three-cornered sail. As it came near, they
could see two Indians on board.

"Metal floats in these seas, you see," quoth Cary. "There's a fresh
marvel, for you, Frank."

"Expound," quoth Frank, who was really ready to swallow any fresh
marvel, so many had he seen already.

"Why, how else would those two bronze statues dare to go to sea in such
a cockleshell, eh? Have I given you the dor now, master courtier!"

"I am long past dors, Will. But what noble creatures they are! and how
fearlessly they are coming alongside! Can they know that we are English,
and the avengers of the Indians?"

"I suspect they just take us for Spaniards, and want to sell their
cocoa-nuts. See, the canoe is laden with vegetables."

"Hail them, Yeo!" said Amyas. "You talk the best Spanish, and I want
speech of one of them."

Yeo did so; the canoe, without more ado, ran alongside, and lowered her
felucca sail, while a splendid Indian scrambled on board like a cat.

He was full six feet high, and as bold and graceful of bearing as Frank
or Amyas's self. He looked round for the first moment smilingly, showing
his white teeth; but the next, his countenance changed; and springing to
the side, he shouted to his comrade in Spanish--

"Treachery! No Spaniard," and would have leaped overboard, but a dozen
strong fellows caught him ere he could do so.

It required some trouble to master him, so strong was he, and so
slippery his naked limbs; Amyas, meanwhile, alternately entreated the
men not to hurt the Indian, and the Indian to be quiet, and no harm
should happen to him; and so, after five minutes' confusion, the
stranger gave in sulkily.

"Don't bind him. Let him loose, and make a ring round him. Now, my man,
there's a dollar for you."

The Indian's eyes glistened, and he took the coin.

"All I want of you is, first, to tell me what ships are in La Guayra,
and next, to go thither on board of me, and show me which is the
governor's house, and which the custom-house."

The Indian laid the coin down on the deck, and crossing himself, looked
Amyas in the face.

"No, senor! I am a freeman and a cavalier, a Christian Guayqueria,
whose forefathers, first of all the Indians, swore fealty to the King of
Spain, and whom he calls to this day in all his proclamations his most
faithful, loyal, and noble Guayquerias. God forbid, therefore, that I
should tell aught to his enemies, who are my enemies likewise."

A growl arose from those of the men who understood him; and more than
one hinted that a cord twined round the head, or a match put between the
fingers, would speedily extract the required information.

"God forbid!" said Amyas; "a brave and loyal man he is, and as such
will I treat him. Tell me, my brave fellow, how do you know us to be his
Catholic majesty's enemies?"

The Indian, with a shrewd smile, pointed to half-a-dozen different
objects, saying to each, "Not Spanish."

"Well, and what of that?"

"None but Spaniards and free Guayquerias have a right to sail these
seas."

Amyas laughed.

"Thou art a right valiant bit of copper. Pick up thy dollar, and go thy
way in peace. Make room for him, men. We can learn what we want without
his help."

The Indian paused, incredulous and astonished. "Overboard with you!"
quoth Amyas. "Don't you know when you are well off?"

"Most illustrious senor," began the Indian, in the drawling sententious
fashion of his race (when they take the trouble to talk at all), "I
have been deceived. I heard that you heretics roasted and ate all true
Catholics (as we Guayquerias are), and that all your padres had tails."

"Plague on you, sirrah!" squeaked Jack Brimblecombe. "Have I a tail?
Look here!"

"Quien sabe? Who knows?" quoth the Indian through his nose.

"How do you know we are heretics?" said Amyas.

"Humph! But in repayment for your kindness, I would warn you,
illustrious senor, not to go on to La Guayra. There are ships of war
there waiting for you; and moreover, the governor Don Guzman sailed to
the eastward only yesterday to look for you; and I wonder much that you
did not meet him."

"To look for us! On the watch for us!" said Cary. "Impossible; lies!
Amyas, this is some trick of the rascal's to frighten us away."

"Don Guzman came out but yesterday to look for us? Are you sure you
spoke truth?"

"As I live, senor, he and another ship, for which I took yours."

Amyas stamped upon the deck: that then was the ship which they had
passed!

"Fool that I was to have been close to my enemy, and let my opportunity
slip! If I had but done my duty, all would have gone right!"

But it was too late to repine; and after all, the Indian's story was
likely enough to be false.

"Off with you!" said he; and the Indian bounded over the side into his
canoe, leaving the whole crew wondering at the stateliness and courtesy
of this bold sea-cavalier.

So Westward-ho they ran, beneath the mighty northern wall, the highest
cliff on earth, some seven thousand feet of rock parted from the sea
by a narrow strip of bright green lowland. Here and there a patch of
sugar-cane, or a knot of cocoa-nut trees, close to the water's edge,
reminded them that they were in the tropics; but above, all was savage,
rough, and bare as an Alpine precipice. Sometimes deep clefts allowed
the southern sun to pour a blaze of light down to the sea marge, and
gave glimpses far above of strange and stately trees lining the glens,
and of a veil of perpetual mist which shrouded the inner summits; while
up and down, between them and the mountain side, white fleecy clouds
hung motionless in the burning air, increasing the impression of
vastness and of solemn rest, which was already overpowering.

"Within those mountains, three thousand feet above our heads," said
Drew, the master, "lies Saint Yago de Leon, the great city which the
Spaniards founded fifteen years agone."

"Is it a rich place?" asked Cary.

"Very, they say."

"Is it a strong place?" asked Amyas.

"No forts to it at all, they say. The Spaniards boast, that Heaven has
made such good walls to it already, that man need make none."

"I don't know," quoth Amyas. "Lads, could you climb those hills, do you
think?"

"Rather higher than Harty Point, sir: but it depends pretty much on
what's behind them."

And now the last point is rounded, and they are full in sight of the
spot in quest of which they have sailed four thousand miles of sea. A
low black cliff, crowned by a wall; a battery at either end. Within, a
few narrow streets of white houses, running parallel with the sea, upon
a strip of flat, which seemed not two hundred yards in breadth; and
behind, the mountain wall, covering the whole in deepest shade. How that
wall was ever ascended to the inland seemed the puzzle; but Drew, who
had been off the place before, pointed out to them a narrow path, which
wound upwards through a glen, seemingly sheer perpendicular. That was
the road to the capital, if any man dare try it. In spite of the shadow
of the mountain, the whole place wore a dusty and glaring look. The
breaths of air which came off the land were utterly stifling; and no
wonder, for La Guayra, owing to the radiation of that vast fire-brick
of heated rock, is one of the hottest spots upon the face of the whole
earth.

Where was the harbor? There was none. Only an open roadstead, wherein
lay tossing at anchor five vessels. The two outer ones were small
merchant caravels. Behind them lay two long, low, ugly-looking craft, at
sight of which Yeo gave a long whew.

"Galleys, as I'm a sinful saint! And what's that big one inside of them,
Robert Drew? She has more than hawseholes in her idolatrous black sides,
I think."

"We shall open her astern of the galleys in another minute," said Amyas.
"Look out, Cary, your eyes are better than mine."

"Six round portholes on the main deck," quoth Will.

"And I can see the brass patararoes glittering on her poop," quoth
Amyas. "Will, we're in for it."

"In for it we are, captain.

     "Farewell, farewell, my parents dear.
     I never shall see you more, I fear.

"Let's go in, nevertheless, and pound the Don's ribs, my old lad of
Smerwick. Eh? Three to one is very fair odds."

"Not underneath those fort guns, I beg leave to say," quoth Yeo. "If the
Philistines will but come out unto us, we will make them like unto Zeba
and Zalmunna."

"Quite true," said Amyas. "Game cocks are game cocks, but reason's
reason."

"If the Philistines are not coming out, they are going to send a
messenger instead," quoth Cary. "Look out, all thin skulls!"

And as he spoke, a puff of white smoke rolled from the eastern fort, and
a heavy ball plunged into the water between it and the ship.

"I don't altogether like this," quoth Amyas. "What do they mean by
firing on us without warning? And what are these ships of war doing
here? Drew, you told me the armadas never lay here."

"No more, I believe, they do, sir, on account of the anchorage being so
bad, as you may see. I'm mortal afeared that rascal's story was true,
and that the Dons have got wind of our coming."

"Run up a white flag, at all events. If they do expect us, they must
have known some time since, or how could they have got their craft
hither?"

"True, sir. They must have come from Santa Marta, at the least; perhaps
from Cartagena. And that would take a month at least going and coming."

Amyas suddenly recollected Eustace's threat in the wayside inn. Could he
have betrayed their purpose? Impossible!

"Let us hold a council of war, at all events, Frank."

Frank was absorbed in a very different matter. A half-mile to the
eastward of the town, two or three hundred feet up the steep mountain
side, stood a large, low, white house embosomed in trees and gardens.
There was no other house of similar size near; no place for one. And was
not that the royal flag of Spain which flaunted before it? That must be
the governor's house; that must be the abode of the Rose of Torridge!
And Frank stood devouring it with wild eyes, till he had persuaded
himself that he could see a woman's figure walking upon the terrace
in front, and that the figure was none other than hers whom he sought.
Amyas could hardly tear him away to a council of war, which was a sad,
and only not a peevish one.

The three adventurers, with Brimblecombe, Yeo, and Drew, went apart upon
the poop; and each looked the other in the face awhile. For what was
to be done? The plans and hopes of months were brought to naught in an
hour.

"It is impossible, you see," said Amyas, at last, "to surprise the town
by land, while these ships are here; for if we land our men, we leave
our ship without defence."

"As impossible as to challenge Don Guzman while he is not here," said
Cary.

"I wonder why the ships have not opened on us already," said Drew.

"Perhaps they respect our flag of truce," said Cary. "Why not send in a
boat to treat with them, and to inquire for--

"For her?" interrupted Frank. "If we show that we are aware of her
existence, her name is blasted in the eyes of those jealous Spaniards."

"And as for respecting our flag of truce, gentlemen," said Yeo, "if you
will take an old man's advice, trust them not. They will keep the same
faith with us as they kept with Captain Hawkins at San Juan d'Ulloa, in
that accursed business which was the beginning of all the wars; when
we might have taken the whole plate-fleet, with two hundred thousand
pounds' worth of gold on board, and did not, but only asked license to
trade like honest men. And yet, after they had granted us license, and
deceived us by fair speech into landing ourselves and our ordnance, the
governor and all the fleet set upon us, five to one, and gave no quarter
to any soul whom he took. No, sir; I expect the only reason why they
don't attack us is, because their crews are not on board."

"They will be, soon enough, then," said Amyas. "I can see soldiers
coming down the landing-stairs."

And, in fact, boats full of armed men began to push off to the ships.

"We may thank Heaven," said Drew, "that we were not here two hours
agone. The sun will be down before they are ready for sea, and the
fellows will have no stomach to go looking for us by night."

"So much the worse for us. If they will but do that, we may give them
the slip, and back again to the town, and there try our luck; for I
cannot find it in my heart to leave the place without having one dash at
it."

Yeo shook his head. "There are plenty more towns along the coast more
worth trying than this, sir: but Heaven's will be done!"

And as they spoke, the sun plunged into the sea, and all was dark.

At last it was agreed to anchor, and wait till midnight. If the ships
of war came out, they were to try to run in past them, and, desperate
as the attempt might be, attempt their original plan of landing to the
westward of the town, taking it in flank, plundering the government
storehouses, which they saw close to the landing-place, and then
fighting their way back to their boats, and out of the roadstead. Two
hours would suffice if the armada and the galleys were but once out of
the way.

Amyas went forward, called the men together, and told them the plan. It
was not very cheerfully received: but what else was there to be done!

They ran down about a mile and a half to the westward, and anchored.

The night wore on, and there was no sign of stir among the shipping;
for though they could not see the vessels themselves, yet their lights
(easily distinguished by their relative height from those in the town
above) remained motionless; and the men fretted and fumed for weary
hours at thus seeing a rich prize (for of course the town was paved with
gold) within arm's reach, and yet impossible.

Let Amyas and his men have patience. Some short five years more, and the
great Armada will have come and gone; and then that avenging storm,
of which they, like Oxenham, Hawkins, and Drake, are but the
avant-couriers, will burst upon every Spanish port from Corunna to
Cadiz, from the Canaries to Havana, and La Guayra and St. Yago de Leon
will not escape their share. Captain Amyas Preston and Captain Sommers,
the colonist of the Bermudas, or Sommers' Islands, will land, with a
force tiny enough, though larger far than Leigh's, where Leigh dare not
land; and taking the fort of Guayra, will find, as Leigh found, that
their coming has been expected, and that the Pass of the Venta, three
thousand feet above, has been fortified with huge barricadoes, abattis,
and cannon, making the capital, amid its ring of mountain-walls,
impregnable--to all but Englishmen or Zouaves. For up that seven
thousand feet of precipice, which rises stair on stair behind the town,
those fierce adventurers will climb hand over hand, through rain and
