
Jean, the eldest son, was dead.  Pierre and Francois were with their
father.  Louis, the youngest, now seventeen years of age, had come up
with the supplies.  Pierre at once went to Lake Winnipeg, to prepare
Fort Maurepas for the reception of all the forces.  Winter set in.
Snow lay twelve feet deep in the forests now known as the Minnesota
Borderlands.  On February 8, 1737, in the face of a biting north wind,
with the thermometer at forty degrees below zero, M. de la Verendrye
left Fort St. Charles, Francois carrying the French flag, with ten
soldiers, wearing snow-shoes, in line behind, and two or three hundred
Crees swathed in furs bringing up a ragged rear.  The bright uniforms
of the soldiers were patches of red among the snowy everglades.
Bivouac was made on beds of pine boughs,--feet to the camp-fire, the
night frost snapping like a whiplash, the stars flashing with a steely
clearness known only in northern climes.  The march was at a swift
pace, for three weeks by canoe is short enough time to traverse the
Minnesota and Manitoba Borderlands northwest to Lake Winnipeg; and in
seventeen days M. de la Verendrye was at Fort Maurepas.

Fort Maurepas (in the region of the modern Alexander) lay on a tongue
of sand extending into the lake a few miles beyond the entrance of Red
River.  Tamarack and poplar fringe the shore; and in windy weather the
lake is lashed into a roughness that resembles the flux of ocean tides.
I remember once going on a steamer towards the site of Maurepas.  The
ship drew lightest of draft.  While we were anchored the breeze fell,
and the ship was stranded as if by ebb tide for twenty-four hours.  The
action of the wind explained the Indian tales of an ocean tide, which
had misled La Verendrye into expecting to find the Western Sea at this
point.  He found a magnificent body of fresh water, but not the ocean.
The fort was the usual pioneer fur post--a barracks of unbarked logs,
chinked up with frozen clay and moss, roofed with branches and snow,
occupying the centre of a courtyard, palisaded by slabs of pine logs.
M. de la Verendrye was now in the true realm of the explorer--in
territory where no other white man had trod.  With a shout his motley
forces emerged from the snowy tamaracks, and with a shout from Pierre
de la Verendrye and his tawny followers the explorer was welcomed
through the gateway of little Fort Maurepas.

[Illustration: Traders' Boats running the Rapids of the Athabasca
River.]

Pierre de la Verendrye had heard of a region to the south much
frequented by the Assiniboine Indians, who had conducted Radisson to
the Sea of the North fifty years before--the Forks where the
Assiniboine River joins the Red, and the city of Winnipeg stands
to-day.  It was reported that game was plentiful here.  Two hundred
tepees of Assiniboines were awaiting the explorer.  His forces were
worn with their marching, but in a few weeks the glaze of ice above the
fathomless drifts of snow would be too rotten for travel, and not until
June would the riverways be clear for canoes.  But such a scant supply
of goods had his partners sent up that poor De la Verendrye had nothing
to trade with the waiting Assiniboines.  Sending his sons forward to
reconnoitre the Forks of the Assiniboine,--the modern Winnipeg,--he set
out for Montreal as soon as navigation opened, taking with him fourteen
great canoes of precious furs.

The fourteen canoe loads proved his salvation.  As long as there were
furs and prospects of furs, his partners would back the enterprise of
finding the Western Sea.  The winter of 1738 was spent as the guest of
the governor at Chateau St. Louis.  The partners were satisfied, and
plucked up hope of their venture.  They would advance provisions in
proportion to earnings.  By September he was back at Fort Maurepas on
Lake Winnipeg, pushing for the undiscovered bourne of the Western Sea.
Leaving orders for trade with the chief clerk at Maurepas, De la
Verendrye picked out his most intrepid men; and in September of 1738,
for the first time in history, white men glided up the ochre-colored,
muddy current of the Red for the Forks of the Assiniboine.  Ten Cree
wigwams and two war chiefs awaited De la Verendrye on the low flats of
what are now known as South Winnipeg.  Not the fabled Western Sea, but
an illimitable ocean of rolling prairie--the long russet grass rising
and falling to the wind like waves to the run of invisible
feet--stretched out before the eager eyes of the explorer.  Northward
lay the autumn-tinged brushwood of Red River.  South, shimmering in the
purple mists of Indian summer, was Red River Valley.  Westward the sun
hung like a red shield, close to the horizon, over vast reaches of
prairie billowing to the sky-line in the tide of a boundless ocean.
Such was the discovery of the Canadian Northwest.

Doubtless the weary gaze of the tired _voyageurs_ turned longingly
westward.  Where was the Western Sea?  Did it lie just beyond the
horizon where skyline and prairie met, or did the trail of their quest
run on--on--on--endlessly?  The Assiniboine flows into the Red, the Red
into Lake Winnipeg, the Lake into Hudson Bay.  Plainly, Assiniboine
Valley was not the way to the Western Sea.  But what lay just beyond
this Assiniboine Valley?  An old Cree chief warned the boatmen that the
Assiniboine River was very low and would wreck the canoes; but he also
told vague yarns of "great waters beyond the mountains of the setting
sun," where white men dwelt, and the waves came in a tide, and the
waters were salt.  The Western Sea where the Spaniards dwelt had long
been known.  It was a Western Sea to the north, that would connect
Louisiana and Canada, that De la Verendrye sought.  The Indian fables,
without doubt, referred to a sea beyond the Assiniboine River, and
thither would De la Verendrye go at any cost.  Some sort of barracks or
shelter was knocked up on the south side of the Assiniboine opposite
the flats.  It was subsequently known as Fort Rouge, after the color of
the adjacent river, and was the foundation of Winnipeg.  Leaving men to
trade at Fort Rouge, De la Verendrye set out on September 26, 1738, for
the height of land that must lie beyond the sources of the Assiniboine.
De la Verendrye was now like a man hounded by his own Frankenstein.  A
thousand leagues--every one marked by disaster and failure and sinking
hopes--lay behind him.  A thousand leagues of wilderness lay before
him.  He had only a handful of men.  The Assiniboine Indians were of
dubious friendliness.  The white men were scarce of food.  In a few
weeks they would be exposed to the terrible rigors of Northern winter.
Yet they set their faces toward the west, types of the pioneers who
have carved empire out of wilderness.

[Illustration: The Ragged Sky-line of the Mountains.]

The Assiniboine was winding and low, with many sand bars.  On the
wooded banks deer and buffalo grazed in such countless multitudes that
the boatmen took them for great herds of cattle.  Flocks of wild geese
darkened the sky overhead.  As the boats wound up the shallows of the
river, ducks rose in myriad flocks.  Prairie wolves skulked away from
the river bank, and the sand-hill cranes were so unused to human
presence that they scarcely rose as the voyageurs poled past.  While
the boatmen poled, the soldiers marched in military order across
country, so avoiding the bends of the river.  Daily, Crees and
Assiniboines of the plains joined the white men.  A week after leaving
the Forks or Fort Rouge, De la Verendrye came to the Portage of the
Prairie, leading north to Lake Manitoba and from the lake to Hudson
Bay.  Clearly, northward was not the way to the Western Sea; but the
Assiniboines told of a people to the southwest--the Mandans--who knew a
people who lived on the Western Sea.  As soon as his baggage came up,
De la Verendrye ordered the construction of a fort--called De la
Reine--on the banks of the Assiniboine.  This was to be the forwarding
post for the Western Sea.  To the Mandans living on the Missouri, who
knew a people living on salt water, De la Verendrye now directed his
course.

[Illustration: Hungry Hall, 1870; near the site of the Verendrye Fort
in Rainy River Region.]

On the morning of October 18 drums beat to arms.  Additional men had
come up from the other forts.  Fifty-two soldiers and _voyageurs_ now
stood in line.  Arms were inspected.  To each man were given powder,
balls, axe, and kettle.  Pierre and Francois de la Verendrye hoisted
the French flag.  For the first time a bugle call sounded over the
prairie.  At the word, out stepped the little band of white men,
marking time for the Western Sea.  The course lay west-southwest, up
the Souris River, through wooded ravines now stripped of foliage, past
alkali sloughs ice-edged by frost, over rolling cliffs russet and bare,
where gopher and badger and owl and roving buffalo were the only signs
of life.  On the 21st of October two hundred Assiniboine warriors
joined the marching white men.  In the sheltered ravines buffalo grazed
by the hundreds of thousands, and the march was delayed by frequent
buffalo hunts to gather pemmican--pounded marrow and fat of the
buffalo--which was much esteemed by the Mandans.  Within a month so
many Assiniboines had joined the French that the company numbered more
than six hundred warriors, who were ample protection against the Sioux;
and the Sioux were the deadly terror of all tribes of the plains.  But
M.  de la Verendrye was expected to present ammunition to his
Assiniboine friends.

Four outrunners went speeding to the Missouri to notify the Mandans of
the advancing warriors.  The _coureurs_ carried presents of pemmican.
To prevent surprise, the Assiniboines marched under the sheltered
slopes of the hills and observed military order.  In front rode the
warriors, dressed in garnished buckskin and armed with spears and
arrows.  Behind, on foot, came the old and the lame.  To the rear was
another guard of warriors.  Lagging in ragged lines far back came a
ragamuffin brigade, the women, children, and dogs--squaws astride
cayuses lean as barrel hoops, children in moss bags on their mothers'
backs, and horses and dogs alike harnessed with the _travaille_--two
sticks tied into a triangle, with the shafts fastened to a cinch on
horse or dog.  The joined end of the shafts dragged on the ground, and
between them hung the baggage, surmounted by papoose, or pet owl, or
the half-tamed pup of a prairie-wolf, or even a wild-eyed young squaw
with hair flying to the wind.  At night camp was made in a circle
formed of the hobbled horses.  Outside, the dogs scoured in pursuit of
coyotes.  The women and children took refuge in the centre, and the
warriors slept near their picketed horses.  By the middle of November
the motley cavalcade had crossed the height of land between the
Assiniboine River and the Missouri, and was heading for the Mandan
villages.  Mandan _coureurs_ came out to welcome the visitors,
pompously presenting De la Verendrye with corn in the ear and tobacco.
At this stage, the explorer discovered that his bag of presents for his
hosts had been stolen by the Assiniboines; but he presented the Mandans
with what ammunition he could spare, and gave them plenty of pemmican
which his hunters had cured.  The two tribes drove a brisk trade in
furs, which the northern Indians offered, and painted plumes, which the
Mandans displayed to the envy of Assiniboine warriors.

On the 3d of December, De la Verendrye's sons stepped before the ragged
host of six hundred savages with the French flag hoisted.  The explorer
himself was lifted to the shoulders of the Mandan _coureurs_.  A gun
was fired and the strange procession set out for the Mandan villages.
In this fashion white men first took possession of the Upper Missouri.
Some miles from the lodges a band of old chiefs met De la Verendrye and
gravely handed him a grand calumet of pipestone ornamented with eagle
feathers.  This typified peace.  De la Verendrye ordered his fifty
French followers to draw up in line.  The sons placed the French flag
four paces to the fore.  The Assiniboine warriors took possession in
stately Indian silence to the right and left of the whites.  At a
signal three thundering volleys of musketry were fired.  The Mandans
fell back, prostrated with fear and wonder.  The command "forward" was
given, and the Mandan village was entered in state at four in the
afternoon of December 3, 1738.

The village was in much the same condition as a hundred years later
when visited by Prince Maximilian and by the artist Catlin.  It
consisted of circular huts, with thatched roofs, on which perched the
gaping women and children.  Around the village of huts ran a moat or
ditch, which was guarded in time of war with the Sioux.  Flags flew
from the centre poles of each hut; but the flags were the scalps of
enemies slain.  In the centre of the village was a larger hut.  This
was the "medicine lodge," or council hall, of the chiefs, used only for
ceremonies of religion and war and treaties of peace.  Thither De la
Verendrye was conducted.  Here the Mandan chiefs sat on buffalo robes
in a circle round the fire, smoking the calumet, which was handed to
the white man.  The explorer then told the Indians of his search for
the Western Sea.  Of a Western Sea they could tell him nothing
definite.  They knew a people far west who grew corn and tobacco and
who lived on the shores of water that was bitter for drinking.  The
people were white.  They dressed in armor and lived in houses of stone.
Their country was full of mountains.  More of the Western Sea, De la
Verendrye could not learn.

Meanwhile, six hundred Assiniboine visitors were a tax on the
hospitality of the Mandans, who at once spread a rumor of a Sioux raid.
This gave speed to the Assiniboines' departure.  Among the Assiniboines
who ran off in precipitate fright was De la Verendrye's interpreter.
It was useless to wait longer.  The French were short of provisions,
and the Missouri Indians could not be expected to support fifty white
men.  Though it was the bitter cold of midwinter, De la Verendrye
departed for Fort de la Reine.  Two Frenchmen were left to learn the
Missouri dialects.  A French flag in a leaden box with the arms of
France inscribed was presented to the Mandan chief; and De la Verendrye
marched from the village on the 8th of December.  Scarcely had he left,
when he fell terribly ill; but for the pathfinder of the wilderness
there is neither halt nor retreat.  M. de la Verendrye's ragged army
tramped wearily on, half blinded by snow glare and buffeted by prairie
blizzards, huddling in snowdrifts from the wind at night and uncertain
of their compass over the white wastes by day.  There is nothing so
deadly silent and utterly destitute of life as the prairie in
midwinter.  Moose and buffalo had sought the shelter of wooded ravines.
Here a fox track ran over the snow.  There a coyote skulked from cover,
to lope away the next instant for brushwood or hollow, and
snow-buntings or whiskey-jacks might have followed the marchers for
pickings of waste; but east, west, north, and south was nothing but the
wide, white wastes of drifted snow.  On Christmas Eve of 1738 low
curling smoke above the prairie told the wanderers that they were
nearing the Indian camps of the Assiniboines; and by nightfall of
February 10, 1739, they were under the shelter of Fort de la Reine.  "I
have never been so wretched from illness and fatigue in all my life as
on that journey," reported De la Verendrye.  As usual, provisions were
scarce at the fort.  Fifty people had to be fed.  Buffalo and deer meat
saved the French from starvation till spring.

[Illustration: A Monarch of the Plains.]

All that De la Verendrye had accomplished on this trip was to learn
that salt water existed west-southwest.  Anxious to know more of the
Northwest, he sent his sons to the banks of a great northern river.
This was the Saskatchewan.  In their search of the Northwest, they
constructed two more trading posts, Fort Dauphin near Lake Manitoba,
and Bourbon on the Saskatchewan.  Winter quarters were built at the
forks of the river, which afterwards became the site of Fort Poskoyac.
This spring not a canoe load of food came up from Montreal.  Papers had
been served for the seizure of all De la Verendrye's forts, goods,
property, and chattels to meet the claims of his creditors.  Desperate,
but not deterred from his quest, De la Verendrye set out to contest the
lawsuits in Montreal.


V

1740-1750

Which way to turn now for the Western Sea that eluded their quest like
a will-o'-the-wisp was the question confronting Pierre, Francois, and
Louis de la Verendrye during the explorer's absence in Montreal.  They
had followed the great Saskatchewan westward to its forks.  No river
was found in this region flowing in the direction of the Western Sea.
They had been in the country of the Missouri; but neither did any river
there flow to a Western Sea.  Yet the Mandans told of salt water far to
the west.  Thither they would turn the baffling search.

The two men left among the Mandans to learn the language had returned
to the Assiniboine River with more news of tribes from "the setting
sun" who dwelt on salt water.  Pierre de la Verendrye went down to the
Missouri with the two interpreters; but the Mandans refused to supply
guides that year, and the young Frenchman came back to winter on the
Assiniboine.  Here he made every preparation for another attempt to
find the Western Sea by way of the Missouri.  On April 29, 1742, the
two brothers, Pierre and Francois, left the Assiniboine with the two
interpreters.  Their course led along the trail that for two hundred
years was to be a famous highway between the Missouri and Hudson Bay.
Heading southwest, they followed the Souris River to the watershed of
the Missouri, and in three weeks were once more the guests of the smoky
Mandan lodges.  Round the inside walls of each circular hut ran berth
beds of buffalo skin with trophies of the chase,--hide-shields and
weapons of war, fastened to the posts that separated berth from berth.
A common fire, with a family meat pot hanging above, occupied the
centre of the lodge.  In one of these lodges the two brothers and their
men were quartered.  The summer passed feasting with the Mandans and
smoking the calumet of peace; but all was in vain.  The Missouri
Indians were arrant cowards in the matter of war.  The terror of their
existence was the Sioux.  The Mandans would not venture through Sioux
territory to accompany the brothers in the search for the Western Sea.
At last two guides were obtained, who promised to conduct the French to
a neighboring tribe that might know of the Western Sea.

[Illustration: Fur Traders' Boats towed down the Saskatchewan in the
Summer of 1900.]

The party set out on horseback, travelling swiftly southwest and along
the valley of the Little Missouri toward the Black Hills.  Here their
course turned sharply west toward the Powder River country, past the
southern bounds of the Yellowstone.  For three weeks they saw no sign
of human existence.  Deer and antelope bounded over the parched alkali
uplands.  Prairie dogs perched on top of their earth mounds, to watch
the lonely riders pass; and all night the far howl of grayish forms on
the offing of the starlit prairie told of prowling coyotes.  On the
11th of August the brothers camped on the Powder Hills.  Mounting to
the crest of a cliff, they scanned far and wide for signs of the
Indians whom the Mandans knew.  The valleys were desolate.  Kindling a
signal-fire to attract any tribes that might be roaming, they built a
hut and waited.  A month passed.  There was no answering signal.  One
of the Mandan guides took himself off in fright.  On the fifth week a
thin line of smoke rose against the distant sky.  The remaining Mandans
went to reconnoitre and found a camp of Beaux Hommes, or Crows, who
received the French well.  Obtaining fresh guides from the Crows and
dismissing the Mandans, the brothers again headed westward.  The Crows
guided them to the Horse Indians, who in turn took the French to their
next western neighbors, the Bows.  The Bows were preparing to war on
the Snakes, a mountain tribe to the west.  Tepees dotted the valley.
Women were pounding the buffalo meat into pemmican for the raiders.
The young braves spent the night with war-song and war-dance, to work
themselves into a frenzy of bravado.  The Bows were to march west; so
the French joined the warriors, gradually turning northwest toward what
is now Helena.

It was winter.  The hills were powdered with snow that obliterated all
traces of the fleeing Snakes.  The way became more mountainous and
dangerous.  Iced sloughs gave place to swift torrents and cataracts.
On New Year's day, 1743, there rose through the gray haze to the fore
the ragged sky-line of the Bighorn Mountains.  Women and children were
now left in a sheltered valley, the warriors advancing unimpeded.
Francois de la Verendrye remained at the camp to guard the baggage.
Pierre went on with the raiders.  In two weeks they were at the foot of
the main range of the northern Rockies.  Against the sky the snowy
heights rose--an impassable barrier between the plains and the Western
Sea.  What lay beyond--the Beyond that had been luring them on and on,
from river to river and land to land, for more than ten years?  Surely
on the other side of those lofty summits one might look down on the
long-sought Western Sea.  Never suspecting that another thousand miles
