
On the 1st of February the National Convention declared war against
Great Britain and the United Netherlands.

England at this time possessed nominally 135 ships of war in commission,
and 169 in ordinary or under repair; 21 building or ordering to be
built, and 86 harbour-ships; making in all 411 ships of 402,555 tons.
Of these there was one of 100 guns, 12-pounders, of 2091 tons, in
commission; two of 100 guns, 18-pounders, under repair; and two of 100
guns, 12-pounders, under repair.  Of second-rates there were four 98-gun
ships in commission, and eleven under repair; of 90-gun ships there was
one under repair.  Of two-deckers third-rate there was one 80-gun ship
in commission and one under repair.  Of seventy-fours there were 19 in
commission and 61 under repair.  Of sixty-fours there were only two in
commission and 30 under repair, making a total of 113 line-of-battle
ships.  There were 75 frigates either in commission or under repair; but
23 of these carried 28 guns only.  Of the most useless class of ships in
the service, the 24 and 20 gun post-ships, there were 12 in commission
or under repair.  Of 18-gun ship-sloops and gun brigs there were
altogether 40.  Besides these there were 25 bomb fire-ships and cutters,
either in commission or under repair, making a total of 304 vessels,
exclusive of those building; but of these probably some were
unseaworthy, and of those building or ordered to be built, many were not
in a state to be launched for two or more years.  However, in
consequence of the expected rupture between Spain and Russia, in the
previous two or three years upwards of 60 line-of-battle ships were in a
condition speedily to go to sea, while the dockyards were well-stocked
with imperishable stores.  Thus, in a few weeks, 200 cruisers were
commissioned and fit for use.

At that time we had admirals 17, vice-admirals 19, rear-admirals 19,
post-captains 446, commanders 136, lieutenants 1417, and masters 197.
The number of seamen and marines, including officers of all ranks, voted
by Parliament for the service of the current year, was 45,000.

Portugal and Naples, who joined England, had the first six ships of the
line and four frigates, and the latter four 74-gun ships.

The Spanish navy amounted to 204 vessels, 76 of which were of the line,
carrying from 112 to 60 guns.

The Dutch navy at this time, though amounting nominally to 119 vessels,
from a 74-gun ship to the smallest armed cutter, was of little use to
England, a large number of the ships lying rotting in the different
harbours, and those able to put to sea being of comparatively small
size, and carrying but light guns.

The navy of France amounted to 250 vessels, of which 82 were of the
line, nearly three-fourths in a serviceable state; and immediately on
the outbreak of war, 71 new ships were laid down, including 25 of the
line, and orders given to cast 400 brass 36-pounder carronades, the
first guns of the kind employed by the French.  One of the former was to
mount 130 guns, and several old small-class seventy-fours were cut-down
and converted into the most formidable frigates that had hitherto been
seen.

Such was the French navy, with which the fleet of England was about to
contend, not only for the dominion of the seas, but to protect the
hearths and homes of the people from foreign invasion.  Such, from the
aggressive character of the French people, was the danger, it was soon
seen, most to be apprehended.  Never had the royal dockyards been so
busy.  Squadrons had to be sent off to reinforce stations at a distance
from home, and to protect our colonies.  Some months, therefore, elapsed
before a fleet could be got ready to cope with the enemy.  As soon as
the ships could be fitted out, they were placed under the command of
Admiral Lord Howe, who, on the 24th of July, set sail from Spithead with
15 ships of the line and a few frigates and sloops.  For some weeks he
cruised about in search of the French fleet, being joined in the
meantime by more ships, till he had upwards of 30 under his command.
He, however, was compelled to return to Spithead without meeting them.

In the meantime Lord Hood had proceeded to the Mediterranean and taken
possession of Toulon.  Before, however, we describe the events which
took place there, we will follow Lord Howe, who, on the following May,
received information that a valuable French convoy was expected from the
West Indies, and guessing that the enemy's fleet would sail out for
their protection, put to sea in the hopes of intercepting them.  His
force now consisted of 26 sail of the line and 13 frigates and sloops.
On the morning of the 28th, being about 140 leagues west of Ushant, the
enemy were discovered at some distance to windward.  On their perceiving
the British fleet, they bore down in loose order, but soon after hauled
again to the wind, and began to form in order of battle.  Several of the
British ships, at a considerable distance to windward of the fleet,
approached the enemy's rear.  Lord Howe then made the signal for a
general chase, and to engage the enemy.  Rear-Admiral Pasley, of the
_Bellerophon_, towards the close of the day, got up with the rear-ship
of the enemy's line, a three-decker, on which he commenced a firm and
resolute attack, supported occasionally by the ships in his division.
The _Bellerophon_, being soon disabled, fell to leeward.  The
_Audacious_ came up just at that time, and continued to engage the same
ship for two hours without intermission, when the enemy's mizen-mast
fell overboard, her lower yards and main-topsail yards shot away, and
otherwise much shattered.  The _Audacious_, however, having her rigging
and sails cut to pieces, and the ship being for some time unmanageable,
was unable to follow the Frenchman, who put before the wind and escaped.
The night being dark, Captain Parker lost sight of the fleet, and being
in too disabled a state to rejoin, was compelled to bear away for the
channel.  The next day a partial engagement took place between the two
hostile fleets, which resulted in the British obtaining the
weather-gage.

On the morning of the 1st of June, both fleets being drawn up in order
of battle, at half-past seven Lord Howe made the signal for both fleets
to bear up, and for each ship to engage her opponent in the enemy's
line.  In a short time a tremendous cannonade commenced from van to
rear, which raged with unceasing fury for about an hour.  The enemy's
line having been forced through in many places, they began to give way,
and their admiral, vigorously attacked by the _Queen Charlotte_, bore
up, and was followed by all those of his ships that were able to carry
sail, leaving the rest, which were dismasted and crippled, at the mercy
of their enemies.  Upon the clearing up of the smoke, eight or ten
French ships were seen, some totally dismasted and others with only one
mast standing, endeavouring to make off under their sprit-sails.  Seven
of these were taken possession of; one, _Le Vengeur_, sank before the
whole of her crew could be taken out, not more than 280 being saved.  A
distant and irregular firing was continued at intervals between the
fugitive and British ships till about four in the afternoon, when the
French admiral, having collected most of his remaining ships, steered
off to the eastward.  The _Queen Charlotte_ had lost both her topmasts,
the _Marlborough_ and _Defence_ were wholly dismasted, and many of the
other ships materially damaged.  Earl Howe, therefore, brought to, in
order to secure the prizes and collect his ships before dark.  The loss
sustained by the British in this action amounted to 281 killed and 788
wounded.  Among the first was Captain James Montague of the _Montague_,
while three admirals and four captains were severely wounded.  The
killed on board the enemy's ships that were captured amounted to 690,
and 580 wounded, exclusive of 320 lost in _Le Vengeur_ when she sank,
the greater number of whom were wounded.

So important was this action considered, that on the return of the fleet
to Spithead, the king himself came down to Portsmouth and personally
presented Lord Howe with a sword; while various honours were bestowed
upon the principal officers engaged, gold medals being struck to
commemorate the glorious victory of the 1st of June; a liberal
subscription being opened likewise for the relief of the wounded
officers, seamen, and marines, and also the widows and children of those
who fell in the action.

This victory early in the war was of the greatest consequence, as it
raised the spirits and confidence of the British, while it
proportionably depressed the enemy, and proved the prelude of that
succession of victories which at length crushed the power of France and
secured the safety of England.

After the English had held Toulon for some time, in consequence of the
large force of republicans collected round the city, it was found
impossible to retain it.  Several thousand French royalists having been
embarked, it was resolved to destroy the arsenal and ships of war.  This
dangerous task was undertaken by Sir Sidney Smith, having under his
command three English and three Spanish gunboats and a tender, with the
_Vulcan_ fire-ship.  He proceeded into the harbour at dark; the
fire-ship was first placed across the outer men-of-war in such a
position that she was certain to do effectual execution.  Scarcely had
the signal been made for setting the trains on fire, than the flames
rose in all directions; a magazine, filled with pitch, tar, tallow, oil,
and hemp, was quickly in a blaze; while the guns of the fire-ship went
off in the direction the enemy were approaching.  The destruction would
have been more complete had not the Spaniards set fire to two ships
laden with powder, which they had been directed to sink; on board one of
them, the _Isis_ frigate, there were some thousand barrels.  In a few
moments the explosion took place; the air was filled with masses of
burning timber, which fell in all directions, and two of the British
boats were destroyed.  The crew of one was taken up, but in the other,
Lieutenant Young, with three men, perished, and many were badly wounded.

Notwithstanding this, Sir Sidney and his brave companions destroyed ten
of the enemy's ships of the line in the arsenal, with the mast-house,
the great storehouse and other buildings.

After this, Lord Hood proceeded to Hieres Bay, leaving a small squadron
to cruise before Toulon.  Unfortunately, the _Moselle_, Captain Bennet,
on her return from Gibraltar, passed through them, and not knowing that
the place was evacuated, entered the harbour and was captured.

Some time after this, Captain Samuel Hood, in the _Juno_ frigate of 32
guns, who had been sent to Malta for supernumeraries for the fleet--
having been detained by a succession of foul winds--also ignorant of
what had occurred, at ten in the evening stood into the outer road; not
perceiving the fleet at anchor there, and concluding that they had taken
shelter within the new harbour from a strong easterly gale which had
lately been blowing, steered for it.  Having no pilot on board, two
midshipmen were stationed at each cathead to look out.  Soon after,
several lights were seen, which were supposed to be those of the fleet.
The _Juno_ accordingly stood on under her topsails till she made out a
brig which lay off Point Grandtour, when the captain, finding that he
could not weather her, set more sail.  The brig, as he approached,
hailed; but no one understood what was said.  Captain Hood, in reply,
gave the name and nation of his ship, upon which the people on board the
brig shouted "Viva!" and soon after some one cried out "Luff."  The
_Juno's_ helm on this was put a-lee, but before the ship came head to
wind, she took the ground.  Directly afterwards, a boat was observed to
pull from the brig towards the town, but even then her object was not
suspected.  Happily, while the _Juno's_ people were still on the yards,
a sudden flaw of wind taking the ship, drove her astern.  To help her
off, the driver and mizen-staysail were hoisted, and directly the ship
lost her way, an anchor was let go, but she still touched the ground
abaft.  Accordingly, to get her off, the launch and cutter were ordered
to carry out a kedge-anchor ahead.  While the boats were still away, a
boat from the shore came alongside, out of which several officers
hurried on board.  One of them informed Captain Hood that it was the
commanding officer's orders that the ship should go into another branch
of the harbour to perform ten days' quarantine.  From some of the
remarks now made, suspicions were aroused, and they were confirmed when,
on a midshipman exclaiming, "Why, those are the national cockades," the
captain, looking at the Frenchmen's hats, discovered by the light of the
moon the tricolours of the republicans.  The captain again asking where
Lord Hood's squadron lay, one of the French officers replied, "Soyez
tranquilles.  Les Anglais sont des braves gens; nous les traiterons
bien.  L'Amiral Anglais est sorti il y a quelque temps."

"Be calm.  The English are brave people; we will treat them well.  The
English admiral sailed some time ago."

It may easily be conceived what were Captain Hood's feelings on hearing
this.  The alarming intelligence ran through the ship; some of the
officers hurried aft to inquire if it were true.  Happily, at this
moment a flaw of wind came down the harbour, when Mr Welby, the third
lieutenant, said to Captain Hood, "I believe, sir, that we shall be able
to fetch out if we can get under sail."  Captain Hood at once determined
to try what could be done, and with great presence of mind immediately
ordered the crew to their respective stations, and directed that the
Frenchmen should be taken below.  They at first began to bluster, but
the marines appearing with their half-pikes, soon forced them down
below.  Such was the alacrity of the officers and crew, that in less
than three minutes every sail in the ship was set, and the yards braced
for casting.  The cable, being hove short, was cut, the head sails
filled, and the ship glided forward down the harbour.  At the same time,
her own boats and that of the Frenchmen were cut adrift, that they might
not impede her progress.  A favourable flaw of wind now coming, she got
good way.  The instant the brig saw the _Juno_ under sail, she and one
of the forts began to fire on her, and presently all the other forts, as
their guns could be brought to bear, opened fire.  Still the frigate
stood undauntedly on; as she approached Cape Serpet, it was feared that
she would not be able to weather it without making a tack, but the wind
shifting so as to admit her lying up two points, she scraped clear of
the cape, under a heavy fire from the batteries.  As soon as Captain
Hood was able to keep the ship away, he opened a brisk fire on the
enemy, which he kept up till half-past twelve, when, being out of shot,
he ceased firing.

Notwithstanding the heavy cannonade the _Juno_ had passed through, not a
man on board her was hurt; and though two 36-pound shot had struck her,
no material damage had been inflicted, nor had her rigging and sails
suffered much injury.  Two days afterwards the _Juno_ joined Lord Hood's
fleet in the Bay of Hieres.  The coolness and presence of mind which
have been so often exhibited by British naval officers was signally
displayed on this occasion; and when we recollect that the _Juno_ was
actually within the enemy's port, full of armed vessels, with formidable
batteries on either side of her, we must acknowledge that the feat she
accomplished is unsurpassed in naval annals.

We must pass over the numerous gallant actions between small squadrons
and single ships.  Great difficulties were experienced at this time in
manning the navy; even the press-gangs failed to obtain a sufficient
number of men.  An Act was passed, therefore, on the 15th of March,
1795, for raising 10,000 men in the several counties of England, and on
the 16th of April another was passed for procuring a supply from the
several ports of Great Britain; and the more effectually to enforce the
Act, an embargo was laid on all British shipping until the quota of men
was raised.  To encourage men to come forward, enormous bounties were
offered by many of the counties and sea-ports, sometimes exceeding 30
pounds for each able seaman.  An Act was also passed to enable those who
came forward voluntarily to allot part of their pay to the maintenance
of their wives and families.  Seamen also were allowed to forward
letters home on the payment only of a penny; half-pay officers and
widows of officers were enabled to obtain their pay or pensions free of
charge.

Early in January of the next year Sir Sidney Smith, while in command of
the _Diamond_ frigate, performed one of those exploits which made his
name notorious.  While attached to the squadron of Sir John Borlase
Warren, he stood close into Brest, where he ascertained that the French
fleet were at sea.  As he was standing off, a corvette which was coming
out of the harbour hove to and made a signal, which not being answered
by the _Diamond_, she hauled her wind and worked in.  Soon after this
Sir Sidney passed within hail of a line-of-battle ship at anchor.  She
appeared to have no upper-deck guns mounted, and to be very leaky.  He
asked her commander in French if she wanted any assistance; to which he
answered, "No, that he had been dismasted in a heavy gale, and had
parted with the French fleet three days ago."  Some other conversation
passed, after which, Sir Sidney crowded sail and stood out to sea.  So
completely had he disguised his ship, that the Frenchman had not the
slightest suspicion of her being an English man-of-war.

The following year, however, being on a cruise off Havre-de-Grace, he
discovered a lugger in the outer road.  Having taken her with the boats
of his squadron, he attempted to tow her off, but the flood-tide setting
strong in, he was compelled to anchor.  In the night the cable either
parted or was cut by one of the prisoners, when the lugger, driving a
considerable way up the Seine, was attacked by several gunboats and
other armed vessels; and Sir Sidney, after making a gallant resistance,
was compelled to surrender.  He was carried to Paris, and for long shut
up in the Temple; but, with the aid of friends, he effected his escape
from prison, and reaching Havre-de-Grace, put off in an open boat, when
he was picked up by the _Argo_ frigate, and landed safe in Portsmouth on
the 5th of March, 1798.

On the 1st of June, 1795, an alteration was made in the uniform of naval
officers, which continued for many years afterwards.  Those who can
remember it can scarcely fail to consider it the most becoming worn at
any time in the service.  The rank of officers was now distinguished by
epaulettes.  An admiral wore two gold epaulettes, with three silver
stars on each; a vice-admiral had two stars, and a rear-admiral one; a
post-captain of above three years standing wore two gold epaulettes,
under three years, one on the right shoulder, a master and commander,
one on the left shoulder, captains wore blue lapels and cuffs, with lace
as before, but on the undress coat neither lace nor embroidery.

On the 4th of June his majesty appointed seven superannuated or disabled
lieutenants of the navy to be poor knights of Windsor.  This institution
was founded by Samuel Travers, who, in 1724, left a residuary estate in
trust for building or buying a house for their reception near the castle
of Windsor, bequeathing to each knight 60 pounds per annum, 26 pounds of
which is to be applied only for keeping them a constant table.  The
first knight was William Hogarth, whose commission bore the date of
1757, so that he had been nearly forty years a lieutenant; while the
next three had been thirty years lieutenants.

In the same year the masters in the navy received an increase of
half-pay, and their position was otherwise improved.

Towards the end of the year an improved system of telegraph, the
invention of Lord George Murray, was introduced on several heights
leading from the coast to London.

Post-captains were appointed as governors to the royal hospitals of
Haslar and Plymouth, and lieutenants to those of Deal and Great
Yarmouth.

One of the most gallant actions of the war was fought at the
commencement of this year in the West Indies.  The _Blanche_, a 32-gun
12-pounder frigate, commanded by Captain Robert Faulkner, was cruising
in the neighbourhood of Guadaloupe, when she chased a French armed
schooner, under a fort within a bay in the island of Desirade.  The
schooner brought up with springs to her cables; but, notwithstanding the
fire of the fort and some troops on shore, Captain Faulkner cut the
schooner out with his boats, and triumphantly carried her off.  Manning
his prize, he sent her away to an English port, and was next day joined
by the _Quebec_ frigate, which, however, parted company.  On the 4th at
daybreak Captain Faulkner discovered the French 32-gun frigate _Pique_,
lying at anchor just outside the harbour of Pointe-a-Petre in
Guadaloupe.  Finding the French frigate, however, did not appear
inclined to come out from under the protection of the batteries, the
_Blanche_ made sail towards a schooner, which she captured and took in
tow.  She then stood over for Dominico with her prize.  Late in the
evening, however, the French frigate was seen about two leagues astern,
upon which, Captain Faulkner, casting off the schooner, tacked and made
sail to meet her.  At a quarter-past twelve the _Blanche_ tacked and
came up with her.  When within musket-shot the enemy wore; Captain
Faulkner seeing his intention was to rake him, wore also, when the two
frigates closely engaged broadside to broadside.  A fierce action now
ensued for an hour and a-half, when, as the _Blanche_, shooting ahead,
was in the act of luffing up to rake the _Pique_, her main and
mizen-masts fell over the side.  Directly after this, the _Pique_
running foul of the _Blanche_ on her larboard quarter, the French made
several attempts to board.  They were, however, gallantly repulsed by
the British crew, and the larboard quarter-deck guns and such of those
on the main-deck as could be brought to bear, were fired into the
_Pique's_ starboard bow, she answering in return with musketry from her
tops, as also from some of her quarter-deck guns, which had been run in
amidships fore and aft.  The bowsprit of the _Pique_ passing over the
starboard-quarter of the _Blanche_, Captain Faulkner, aided by his
second lieutenant and two others of his crew, was in the act of lashing
the _Pique's_ bowsprit to her capstern, when he was shot by a
musket-ball through the heart.  Soon after this the lashings broke
loose, when the _Pique_, as she was crossing the stern of the _Blanche_,
which began to pay off for want of after-sail, again fell on board on
the starboard-quarter, her hawser having just before been got on deck,
the _Pique's_ bowsprit was lashed to the stump of the _Blanche's_
main-mast.  The first lieutenant, Mr Frederick Watkins, now took
command, and kept the _Blanche_ before the wind, towing her opponent,
while a hot fire was kept up by the British marines on the French seamen
who attempted to cut away the second lashing.  This was returned from
the forecastle and tops of the _Pique_, as well as from the latter's
quarter-deck guns pointed forward.  The _Blanche_ having no stern-ports
on the main-deck could only return the fire by two quarter-deck
6-pounders.  Lieutenant Watkins accordingly resolved to venture on the
somewhat hazardous experiment of blowing away part of the stern to allow
a couple of guns to be run out.  The firemen were called with their
buckets ready to extinguish the flames should they burst out, and two
12-pounders being pointed astern in the cabin, soon made a clear breach,
through which a tremendous fire was opened on the _Pique's_ decks.  The
French frigate had already lost her fore and mizen-mast, and about three
hours and a quarter after midnight, her main-mast fell over the side.
Thus the _Blanche_ continued towing along her antagonist, which,
notwithstanding the raking fire to which she was exposed, held out two
hours longer; when at length some of the French seamen who had climbed
on to the bowsprit cried out that they had struck.  Neither of the
frigates being able to put a boat in the water, Mr David Milne, the
second lieutenant, and ten men, endeavoured to gain the prize by means
of a hawser still attached to her.  Their weight, however, bringing it
down, they were compelled to swim on board.  When the _Blanche_
commenced the action, she had but 198 men and boys on board; of these,
besides her gallant commander, she lost a midshipman, 5 seamen, and I
marine killed, and I midshipman, 4 petty officers, and 12 seamen, and 4
marines wounded.  The _Pique_ had 279 men on board, of whom she lost 76
officers and men killed and 110 wounded, her brave captain, who soon
afterwards died from his hurts, being among the number.  The _Blanche_
measured 710 tons and the _Pique_ 906, while the weight of her guns was
slightly in excess of that of the victor.  The _Pique_ was added to the
British Navy, and Lieutenants Watkins and Milne were deservedly
promoted.  About a quarter-of-an-hour after the action had ceased, just
after daylight, a 64-gun ship, the _Veteran_, was seen approaching, and
the French officers afterwards refused to sign the usual head-money
certificate unless the _Veteran_ was named as one of their captors,
though they afterwards withdrew their objections, which were absurd,
considering that though she had seen the flashes of their guns, she had
not caught sight of the combatants until the _Pique_ was in possession
of her captors.

The change which had some time before been proposed in the armament of
British ships of war had now taken place, though at first, as has been
the case with other improvements, carronades were objected to on various
grounds, there were now few ships in the navy without them.  A whole
class of ships, carrying 44 guns, were armed on the main-deck with
32-pounder carronades, instead of the long 6-pounders which they would
otherwise have carried.  A considerable increase was also made in the
size of ships.  The largest launched at this date, the _Ville de Paris_,
to carry 110 guns, was somewhat smaller, however, than the French 80-gun
ships.  Fourteen ships of the line had been commissioned, and ten had
been purchased from the East India Company and armed with 54 guns, but,
though well fitted for merchantmen, were unsuitable for men-of-war.
With one of them, however, one of the most gallant actions on record was
fought, about the middle of this year, 1796.  The _Glatton_, one of the
purchased Indiamen, of 1256 tons, commanded by Captain Henry Trollope,
and fitted on the main-deck with 28 carronades, 68-pounders, the rest of
her guns being 32-pounders, making altogether 54 guns; but, as the ports
were too small to allow the larger guns to traverse properly, and she
had no bow or stern chasers, they could only be pointed right abeam.
Having been appointed to reinforce the North Sea Fleet, under Admiral
Duncan, she proceeded from Sheerness to Yarmouth Roads, whence, on the
14th of July, she was directed to sail to join a squadron of two sail of
the line and some frigates, under the command of Captain Savage, of the
_Albion_ 64, cruising off the Texel.  At one in the afternoon of the
16th, being about four or five leagues from Helvaetsluis, Captain
Trollope discovered a squadron of ships of war, consisting of six large
frigates, a brig, and a cutter.  One of these, as far as could be made
out, mounted 50 guns, two 36, and the other three 28.  He was soon
convinced, from the way in which they manoeuvred, and from not answering
the private signal, that they were enemies.  Not intimidated, however,
by their vast superiority, he at once cleared for action, and bore down
resolutely to attack them.  The strangers on this shortened sail,
backing their mizen-topsails, in order to keep their stations.  At 10
p.m. Captain Trollope having got alongside of the third ship in the
enemy's line, hailed her, and finding that she was French, ordered her
commander to strike his colours.  Instead of doing so, he immediately
fired a broadside, on which the _Glatton_ poured into her antagonist, at
a distance of thirty yards, such a shower of shot as perhaps no ship had
ever before received.  Her crew being insufficient to man her guns on
both sides, the allotment to each gun was divided into gangs.  One of
these having loaded and run out the gun, left the most experienced hands
to point and fire it, while they ran across and loaded and ran out the
gun on the opposite side.  The two headmost French ships then tacked,
one placing herself alongside to windward, and the other on the
_Glatton's_ bow, while the other ships engaged her on her lee-quarter
and stern.  A fierce cannonade was kept up, the _Glatton_ engaging on
both sides so near, that her yard-arms were nearly touching those of the
enemy; the shrieks and cries which arose from them showing the terrible
effect of the _Glatton's_ shot--though the French commodore, at all
events, exhibited no want of courage in the way he fought his ship.
Close to leeward was the Brill shoal, on which the van-ship of the
French, now tacking, endeavoured to drive the _Glatton_.  The French
commodore, with whom Captain Trollope had at first engaged, was still on
his lee bow, when the pilot exclaimed, that unless the _Glatton_ tacked
she would be on the Brill.  "When the Frenchman strikes the ground, do
you put the helm a-lee," was the answer.  Directly afterwards the
commodore tacked, when, while he was in stays, the _Glatton_ poured in a
heavy raking fire, and then endeavoured to come about, but so damaged
was she in her sails and rigging, that it was not without difficulty she
could do so.  Notwithstanding that her topmasts and yards were wounded,
her crew, when ordered to shorten sail, flew aloft with alacrity,
executing their task, in spite of the shot flying round them from the
nearest of the Frenchmen able to continue the action.  During this
interval the _Glatton's_ fire had ceased, and one of the French ships
stood towards her, in the hopes, probably, of making her their prize,
but the British crew hurrying to their guns, soon undeceived them, and
compelled their still remaining antagonists to follow their consorts.
In attempting to wear after them, Captain Trollope found his masts,
rigging, and sails so much injured that all his efforts were
ineffectual, or his gallantry would probably have been rewarded by a
complete victory.  The remainder of the night was spent in strengthening
masts and yards, and in bending fresh sails, and by seven o'clock the
next morning the ship was in a fit state to renew the action.  The enemy
were at this time seen steering for Flushing; Captain Trollope continued
to follow them till nine o'clock, when, as he had no hopes of being
joined by any other ships, and the wind was blowing fresh on shore, he
was compelled to haul off and steer for Yarmouth Roads, where he arrived
on the 21st.  It was afterwards discovered that the French ships had
all, more or less, suffered, some of those that had taken the chief part
in the action being tremendously knocked about, their decks being ripped
up by the _Glatton's_ shot; one of them, indeed, sank on reaching
Flushing harbour.  The largest, with which the _Glutton_ was chiefly
engaged, was supposed to be the _Brutus_, armed with 46 24-pounders on
the main-deck, and several 36-pounders on the quarter-deck and
forecastle, while she was fully 300 tons larger than the _Glatton_.
Though Captain Trollope might have relied on the weight of metal his
ship carried, yet his courage and decision in sailing into the midst of
six powerfully-armed opponents is worthy of all admiration, and justly
entitled him to the honour of knighthood, which was conferred on him
soon afterwards by the king, while the merchants of London presented him
with a handsome piece of plate, to show their appreciation of his
courage.

In September of this year, the _Amphion_ frigate, of 32 guns, commanded
by Captain Pellew, lay refitting at Plymouth.  Her captain and two other
officers were in the cabin at dinner, when a rumbling noise was heard.
The captain, followed by his lieutenant, rushed into the
quarter-gallery--the instant afterwards the ship blew up; the greater
number of persons on board, amounting to nearly 300, perished, they and
forty others only escaping with their lives, many of them being severely
injured.  Great as was the explosion, it had but a trifling effect on
the ships near her.  Her masts (excepting the mizen-mast) were shivered
to pieces and forced out of the ship; four of her main-deck guns were
cast upon the deck of the hulk alongside which she lay; and several
bodies, pieces of the wreck, etcetera, were thrown as high as her
main-topgallant mast-head.

Another gallant action was fought on the 13th of October by the
_Terpsichore_ frigate, of 32 guns and 215 men, commanded by Captain
Richard Bowen.  The _Terpsichore_ having left thirty men at the
hospital, the greater number being still dangerously ill on board, was
cruising off Carthagena, when at daylight Captain Bowen discovered a
large frigate to windward, apparently in chase of him.  Though so near
an enemy's port, that even in the event of a victory he could scarcely
hope to carry off his prize, trusting to his well-tried crew, he
determined to meet the foe.  At half-past nine the stranger came within
hail, and hauled up on the _Terpsichore's_ weather-beam.  A fierce
