    found a watery grave.'

At the reading of this paragraph, my heart turned over.  In a moment I
saw my castle in the air ruined; myself changed from a mere military
fugitive into a hunted murderer, fleeing from the gallows; my love, which
had a moment since appeared so near to me, blotted from the field of
possibility.  Despair, which was my first sentiment, did not, however,
endure for more than a moment.  I saw that my companions had indeed
succeeded in their unlikely design; and that I was supposed to have
accompanied and perished along with them by shipwreck--a most probable
ending to their enterprise.  If they thought me at the bottom of the
North Sea, I need not fear much vigilance on the streets of Edinburgh.
Champdivers was wanted: what was to connect him with St. Ives?  Major
Chevenix would recognise me if he met me; that was beyond bargaining: he
had seen me so often, his interest had been kindled to so high a point,
that I could hope to deceive him by no stratagem of disguise.  Well, even
so; he would have a competition of testimony before him: he knew Clausel,
he knew me, and I was sure he would decide for honour.  At the same time
the image of Flora shot up in my mind's eye with such a radiancy as
fairly overwhelmed all other considerations; the blood sprang to every
corner of my body, and I vowed I would see and win her, if it cost my
neck.

'Very annoying, no doubt,' said I, as I returned the paper to Mr.
Romaine.

'Is annoying your word for it?' said he.

'Exasperating, if you like,' I admitted.

'And true?' he inquired.

'Well, true in a sense,' said I.  'But perhaps I had better answer that
question by putting you in possession of the facts?'

'I think so, indeed,' said he.

I narrated to him as much as seemed necessary of the quarrel, the duel,
the death of Goguelat, and the character of Clausel.  He heard me through
in a forbidding silence, nor did he at all betray the nature of his
sentiments, except that, at the episode of the scissors, I could observe
his mulberry face to turn three shades paler.

'I suppose I may believe you?' said he, when I had done.

'Or else conclude this interview,' said I.

'Can you not understand that we are here discussing matters of the
gravest import?  Can you not understand that I feel myself weighed with a
load of responsibility on your account--that you should take this
occasion to air your fire-eating manners against your own attorney?
There are serious hours in life, Mr. Anne,' he said severely.  'A capital
charge, and that of a very brutal character and with singularly
unpleasant details; the presence of the man Clausel, who (according to
your account of it) is actuated by sentiments of real malignity, and
prepared to swear black white; all the other witnesses scattered and
perhaps drowned at sea; the natural prejudice against a Frenchman and a
runaway prisoner: this makes a serious total for your lawyer to consider,
and is by no means lessened by the incurable folly and levity of your own
disposition.'

'I beg your pardon!' said I.

'Oh, my expressions have been selected with scrupulous accuracy,' he
replied.  'How did I find you, sir, when I came to announce this
catastrophe?  You were sitting on the hearthrug playing, like a silly
baby, with a servant, were you not, and the floor all scattered with gold
and bank paper?  There was a tableau for you!  It was I who came, and you
were lucky in that.  It might have been any one--your cousin as well as
another.'

'You have me there, sir,' I admitted.  'I had neglected all precautions,
and you do right to be angry.  _Apropos_, Mr. Romaine, how did you come
yourself, and how long have you been in the house?' I added, surprised,
on the retrospect, not to have heard him arrive.

'I drove up in a chaise and pair,' he returned.  'Any one might have
heard me.  But you were not listening, I suppose? being so extremely at
your ease in the very house of your enemy, and under a capital charge!
And I have been long enough here to do your business for you.  Ah, yes, I
did it, God forgive me!--did it before I so much as asked you the
explanation of the paragraph.  For some time back the will has been
prepared; now it is signed; and your uncle has heard nothing of your
recent piece of activity.  Why?  Well, I had no fancy to bother him on
his death-bed: you might be innocent; and at bottom I preferred the
murderer to the spy.'

No doubt of it but the man played a friendly part; no doubt also that, in
his ill-temper and anxiety, he expressed himself unpalatably.

'You will perhaps find me over delicate,' said I.  'There is a word you
employed--'

'I employ the words of my brief, sir,' he cried, striking with his hand
on the newspaper.  'It is there in six letters.  And do not be so
certain--you have not stood your trial yet.  It is an ugly affair, a
fishy business.  It is highly disagreeable.  I would give my hand off--I
mean I would give a hundred pound down, to have nothing to do with it.
And, situated as we are, we must at once take action.  There is here no
choice.  You must at once quit this country, and get to France, or
Holland, or, indeed, to Madagascar.'

'There may be two words to that,' said I.

'Not so much as one syllable!' he retorted.  'Here is no room for
argument.  The case is nakedly plain.  In the disgusting position in
which you have found means to place yourself, all that is to be hoped for
is delay.  A time may come when we shall be able to do better.  It cannot
be now: now it would be the gibbet.'

'You labour under a false impression, Mr. Romaine,' said I.  'I have no
impatience to figure in the dock.  I am even as anxious as yourself to
postpone my first appearance there.  On the other hand, I have not the
slightest intention of leaving this country, where I please myself
extremely.  I have a good address, a ready tongue, an English accent that
passes, and, thanks to the generosity of my uncle, as much money as I
want.  It would be hard indeed if, with all these advantages, Mr. St.
Ives should not be able to live quietly in a private lodging, while the
authorities amuse themselves by looking for Champdivers.  You forget,
there is no connection between these two personages.'

'And you forget your cousin,' retorted Romaine.  'There is the link.
There is the tongue of the buckle.  He knows you are Champdivers.'  He
put up his hand as if to listen.  'And, for a wager, here he is himself!'
he exclaimed.

As when a tailor takes a piece of goods upon his counter, and rends it
across, there came to our ears from the avenue the long tearing sound of
a chaise and four approaching at the top speed of the horses.  And,
looking out between the curtains, we beheld the lamps skimming on the
smooth ascent.

'Ay,' said Romaine, wiping the window-pane that he might see more
clearly.  'Ay, that is he by the driving!  So he squanders money along
the king's highway, the triple idiot! gorging every man he meets with
gold for the pleasure of arriving--where?  Ah, yes, where but a debtor's
jail, if not a criminal prison!'

'Is he that kind of a man?' I said, staring on these lamps as though I
could decipher in them the secret of my cousin's character.

'You will find him a dangerous kind,' answered the lawyer.  'For you,
these are the lights on a lee shore!  I find I fall in a muse when I
consider of him; what a formidable being he once was, and what a
personable! and how near he draws to the moment that must break him
utterly! we none of us like him here; we hate him, rather; and yet I have
a sense--I don't think at my time of life it can be pity--but a
reluctance rather, to break anything so big and figurative, as though he
were a big porcelain pot or a big picture of high price.  Ay, there is
what I was waiting for!' he cried, as the lights of a second chaise swam
in sight.  'It is he beyond a doubt.  The first was the signature and the
next the flourish.  Two chaises, the second following with the baggage,
which is always copious and ponderous, and one of his valets: he cannot
go a step without a valet.'

'I hear you repeat the word big,' said I.  'But it cannot be that he is
anything out of the way in stature.'

'No,' said the attorney.  'About your height, as I guessed for the
tailors, and I see nothing wrong with the result.  But, somehow, he
commands an atmosphere; he has a spacious manner; and he has kept up, all
through life, such a volume of racket about his personality, with his
chaises and his racers and his dicings, and I know not what--that somehow
he imposes!  It seems, when the farce is done, and he locked in Fleet
prison--and nobody left but Buonaparte and Lord Wellington and the Hetman
Platoff to make a work about--the world will be in a comparison quite
tranquil.  But this is beside the mark,' he added, with an effort,
turning again from the window.  'We are now under fire, Mr. Anne, as you
soldiers would say, and it is high time we should prepare to go into
action.  He must not see you; that would be fatal.  All that he knows at
present is that you resemble him, and that is much more than enough.  If
it were possible, it would be well he should not know you were in the
house.'

'Quite impossible, depend upon it,' said I.  'Some of the servants are
directly in his interests, perhaps in his pay: Dawson, for an example.'

'My own idea!' cried Romaine.  'And at least,' he added, as the first of
the chaises drew up with a dash in front of the portico, 'it is now too
late.  Here he is.'

We stood listening, with a strange anxiety, to the various noises that
awoke in the silent house: the sound of doors opening and closing, the
sound of feet near at hand and farther off.  It was plain the arrival of
my cousin was a matter of moment, almost of parade, to the household.
And suddenly, out of this confused and distant bustle, a rapid and light
tread became distinguishable.  We heard it come upstairs, draw near along
the corridor, pause at the door, and a stealthy and hasty rapping
succeeded.

'Mr. Anne--Mr. Anne, sir!  Let me in!' said the voice of Rowley.

We admitted the lad, and locked the door again behind him.

'It's _him_, sir,' he panted.  'He've come.'

'You mean the Viscount?' said I.  'So we supposed.  But come, Rowley--out
with the rest of it!  You have more to tell us, or your face belies you!'

'Mr. Anne, I do,' he said.  'Mr. Romaine, sir, you're a friend of his,
ain't you?'

'Yes, George, I am a friend of his,' said Romaine, and, to my great
surprise, laid his hand upon my shoulder.

'Well, it's this way,' said Rowley--'Mr. Powl have been at me!  It's to
play the spy!  I thought he was at it from the first!  From the first I
see what he was after--coming round and round, and hinting things!  But
to-night he outs with it plump!  I'm to let him hear all what you're to
do beforehand, he says; and he gave me this for an arnest'--holding up
half a guinea; 'and I took it, so I did!  Strike me sky-blue scarlet?'
says he, adducing the words of the mock oath; and he looked askance at me
as he did so.

I saw that he had forgotten himself, and that he knew it.  The expression
of his eye changed almost in the passing of the glance from the
significant to the appealing--from the look of an accomplice to that of a
culprit; and from that moment he became the model of a well-drilled
valet.

'Sky-blue scarlet?' repeated the lawyer.  'Is the fool delirious?'

'No,' said I; 'he is only reminding me of something.'

'Well--and I believe the fellow will be faithful,' said Romaine.  'So you
are a friend of Mr. Anne's' too?' he added to Rowley.

'If you please, sir,' said Rowley.

''Tis something sudden,' observed Romaine; 'but it may be genuine enough.
I believe him to be honest.  He comes of honest people.  Well, George
Rowley, you might embrace some early opportunity to earn that
half-guinea, by telling Mr. Powl that your master will not leave here
till noon to-morrow, if he go even then.  Tell him there are a hundred
things to be done here, and a hundred more that can only be done properly
at my office in Holborn.  Come to think of it--we had better see to that
first of all,' he went on, unlocking the door.  'Get hold of Powl, and
see.  And be quick back, and clear me up this mess.'

Mr. Rowley was no sooner gone than the lawyer took a pinch of snuff, and
regarded me with somewhat of a more genial expression.

'Sir,' said he, 'it is very fortunate for you that your face is so strong
a letter of recommendation.  Here am I, a tough old practitioner, mixing
myself up with your very distressing business; and here is this farmer's
lad, who has the wit to take a bribe and the loyalty to come and tell you
of it--all, I take it, on the strength of your appearance.  I wish I
could imagine how it would impress a jury!' says he.

'And how it would affect the hangman, sir?' I asked

'_Absit omen_!' said Mr. Romaine devoutly.

We were just so far in our talk, when I heard a sound that brought my
heart into my mouth: the sound of some one slyly trying the handle of the
door.  It had been preceded by no audible footstep.  Since the departure
of Rowley our wing of the house had been entirely silent.  And we had
every right to suppose ourselves alone, and to conclude that the
new-comer, whoever he might be, was come on a clandestine, if not a
hostile, errand.

'Who is there?' asked Romaine.

'It's only me, sir,' said the soft voice of Dawson.  'It's the Viscount,
sir.  He is very desirous to speak with you on business.'

'Tell him I shall come shortly, Dawson,' said the lawyer.  'I am at
present engaged.'

'Thank you, sir!' said Dawson.

And we heard his feet draw off slowly along the corridor.

'Yes,' said Mr. Romaine, speaking low, and maintaining the attitude of
one intently listening, 'there is another foot.  I cannot be deceived!'

'I think there was indeed!' said I.  'And what troubles me--I am not sure
that the other has gone entirely away.  By the time it got the length of
the head of the stair the tread was plainly single.'

'Ahem--blockaded?' asked the lawyer.

'A siege _en regle_!' I exclaimed.

'Let us come farther from the door,' said Romaine, 'and reconsider this
damnable position.  Without doubt, Alain was this moment at the door.  He
hoped to enter and get a view of you, as if by accident.  Baffled in
this, has he stayed himself, or has he planted Dawson here by way of
sentinel?'

'Himself, beyond a doubt,' said I.  'And yet to what end?  He cannot
think to pass the night there!'

'If it were only possible to pay no heed!' said Mr. Romaine.  'But this
is the accursed drawback of your position.  We can do nothing openly.  I
must smuggle you out of this room and out of this house like seizable
goods; and how am I to set about it with a sentinel planted at your very
door?'

'There is no good in being agitated,' said I.

'None at all,' he acquiesced.  'And, come to think of it, it is droll
enough that I should have been that very moment commenting on your
personal appearance, when your cousin came upon this mission.  I was
saying, if you remember, that your face was as good or better than a
letter of recommendation.  I wonder if M. Alain would be like the rest of
us--I wonder what he would think of it?'

Mr. Romaine was sitting in a chair by the fire with his back to the
windows, and I was myself kneeling on the hearthrug and beginning
mechanically to pick up the scattered bills, when a honeyed voice joined
suddenly in our conversation.

'He thinks well of it, Mr. Romaine.  He begs to join himself to that
circle of admirers which you indicate to exist already.'




CHAPTER XIX--THE DEVIL AND ALL AT AMERSHAM PLACE


Never did two human creatures get to their feet with more alacrity than
the lawyer and myself.  We had locked and barred the main gates of the
citadel; but unhappily we had left open the bath-room sally-port; and
here we found the voice of the hostile trumpets sounding from within, and
all our defences taken in reverse.  I took but the time to whisper Mr.
Romaine in the ear: 'Here is another tableau for you!' at which he looked
at me a moment with a kind of pathos, as who should say, 'Don't hit a man
when he's down.'  Then I transferred my eyes to my enemy.

He had his hat on, a little on one side: it was a very tall hat, raked
extremely, and had a narrow curling brim.  His hair was all curled out in
masses like an Italian mountebank--a most unpardonable fashion.  He
sported a huge tippeted overcoat of frieze, such as watchmen wear, only
the inside was lined with costly furs, and he kept it half open to
display the exquisite linen, the many-coloured waistcoat, and the profuse
jewellery of watch-chains and brooches underneath.  The leg and the ankle
were turned to a miracle.  It is out of the question that I should deny
the resemblance altogether, since it has been remarked by so many
different persons whom I cannot reasonably accuse of a conspiracy.  As a
matter of fact, I saw little of it and confessed to nothing.  Certainly
he was what some might call handsome, of a pictorial, exuberant style of
beauty, all attitude, profile, and impudence: a man whom I could see in
fancy parade on the grand stand at a race-meeting or swagger in
Piccadilly, staring down the women, and stared at himself with admiration
by the coal-porters.  Of his frame of mind at that moment his face
offered a lively if an unconscious picture.  He was lividly pale, and his
lip was caught up in a smile that could almost be called a snarl, of a
sheer, arid malignity that appalled me and yet put me on my mettle for
the encounter.  He looked me up and down, then bowed and took off his hat
to me.

'My cousin, I presume?' he said.

'I understand I have that honour,' I replied.

'The honour is mine,' said he, and his voice shook as he said it.

'I should make you welcome, I believe,' said I.

'Why?' he inquired.  'This poor house has been my home for longer than I
care to claim.  That you should already take upon yourself the duties of
host here is to be at unnecessary pains.  Believe me, that part would be
