
But Wolf was not quite satisfied with the share of attention which he
thus attracted; he persisted in whining and pawing upon his mistress,
his caresses rendered still more troublesome by his long shaggy hair
being so much and thoroughly wetted, till she desired one of the
domestics, with whom he was familiar, to call the animal out of the
apartment. Wolf resisted every invitation to this purpose, until his
mistress positively commanded him to be gone, in an angry tone; when,
turning towards the bed on which the body still lay, half awake to
sensation, half drowned in the meanders of fluctuating delirium, he
uttered a deep and savage growl, curled up his nose and lips, showing
his full range of white and sharpened teeth, which might have matched
those of an actual wolf, and then, turning round, sullenly followed the
domestic out of the apartment.

"It is singular," said the Lady, addressing Warden; "the animal is not
only so good-natured to all, but so particularly fond of children. What
can ail him at the little fellow whose life he has saved?"

"Dogs," replied the preacher, "are but too like the human race in their
foibles, though their instinct be less erring than the reason of poor
mortal man when relying upon his own unassisted powers. Jealousy, my
good lady, is a passion not unknown to them, and they often evince it,
not only with respect to the preferences which they see given by their
masters to individuals of their own species, but even when their rivals
are children. You have caressed that child much and eagerly, and the dog
considers himself as a discarded favourite."

"It is a strange instinct," said the Lady; "and from the gravity with
which you mention it, my reverend friend, I would almost say that you
supposed this singular jealousy of my favourite Wolf, was not only well
founded, but justifiable. But perhaps you speak in jest?"

"I seldom jest," answered the preacher; "life was not lent to us to
be expended in that idle mirth which resembles the crackling of thorns
under the pot. I would only have you derive, if it so please you,
this lesson from what I have said, that the best of our feelings, when
indulged to excess, may give pain to others. There is but one in which
we may indulge to the utmost limit of vehemence of which our bosom is
capable, secure that excess cannot exist in the greatest intensity to
which it can be excited--I mean the love of our Maker."

"Surely," said the Lady of Avenel, "we are commanded by the same
authority to love our neighbour?"

"Ay, madam," said Warden, "but our love to God is to be unbounded--we
are to love him with our whole heart, our whole soul, and our whole
strength. The love which the precept commands us to bear to our
neighbour, has affixed to it a direct limit and qualification--we are to
love our neighbour as ourself; as it is elsewhere explained by the great
commandment, that we must do unto him as we would that he should do unto
us. Here there is a limit, and a bound, even to the most praiseworthy of
our affections, so far as they are turned upon sublunary and terrestrial
objects. We are to render to our neighbour, whatever be his rank or
degree, that corresponding portion of affection with which we could
rationally expect we should ourselves be regarded by those standing in
the same relation to us. Hence, neither husband nor wife, neither son
nor daughter, neither friend nor relation, are lawfully to be made the
objects of our idolatry. The Lord our God is a jealous God, and will not
endure that we bestow on the creature that extremity of devotion which
He who made us demands as his own share. I say to you, Lady, that even
in the fairest, and purest, and most honourable feelings of our nature,
there is that original taint of sin which ought to make us pause and
hesitate, ere we indulge them to excess."

"I understand not this, reverend sir," said the Lady; "nor do I guess
what I can have now said or done, to draw down on me an admonition which
has something a taste of reproof."

"Lady," said Warden, "I crave your pardon, if I have urged aught beyond
the limits of my duty. But consider, whether in the sacred promise to be
not only a protectress, but a mother, to this poor child, your purpose
may meet the wishes of the noble knight your husband. The fondness which
you have lavished on the unfortunate, and, I own, most lovely child,
has met something like a reproof in the bearing of your household
dog.--Displease not your noble husband. Men, as well as animals, are
jealous of the affections of those they love."

"This is too much, reverend sir," said the Lady of Avenel, greatly
offended. "You have been long our guest, and have received from the
Knight of Avenel and myself that honour and regard which your character
and profession so justly demand. But I am yet to learn that we have at
any time authorized your interference in our family arrangements, or
placed you as a judge of our conduct towards each other. I pray this may
be forborne in future."

"Lady," replied the preacher, with the boldness peculiar to the clergy
of his persuasion at that time, "when you weary of my admonitions--when
I see that my services are no longer acceptable to you, and the noble
knight your husband, I shall know that my Master wills me no longer to
abide here; and, praying for a continuance of his best blessings on your
family I will then, were the season the depth of winter, and the hour
midnight, walk out on yonder waste, and travel forth through these wild
mountains, as lonely and unaided, though far more helpless, than when
I first met your husband in the valley of Glendearg. But while I
remain here, I will not see you err from the true path, no, not a
hair's-breadth, without making the old man's voice and remonstrance
heard."

"Nay, but," said the Lady, who both loved and respected the good man,
though sometimes a little offended at what she conceived to be an
exuberant degree of zeal, "we will not part this way, my good friend.
Women are quick and hasty in their feelings; but, believe me, my wishes
and my purposes towards this child are such as both my husband and
you will approve of." The clergyman bowed, and retreated to his own
apartment.




Chapter the Second.


  How steadfastly he fix'd his eyes on me--
  His dark eyes shining through forgotten tears--
  Then stretch'd his little arms, and call'd me mother!
  What could I do? I took the bantling home--
  I could not tell the imp he had no mother.
                         COUNT BASIL.

When Warden had left the apartment, the Lady of Avenel gave way to the
feelings of tenderness which the sight of the boy, his sudden danger,
and his recent escape, had inspired; and no longer awed by the
sternness, as she deemed it, of the preacher, heaped with caresses the
lovely and interesting child. He was now, in some measure, recovered
from the consequences of his accident, and received passively, though
not without wonder, the tokens of kindness with which he was thus
loaded. The face of the lady was strange to him, and her dress different
and far more sumptuous than any he remembered. But the boy was naturally
of an undaunted temper; and indeed children are generally acute
physiognomists, and not only pleased by that which is beautiful in
itself, but peculiarly quick in distinguishing and replying to the
attentions of those who really love them. If they see a person in
company, though a perfect stranger, who is by nature fond of children,
the little imps seem to discover it by a sort of free-masonry, while the
awkward attempts of those who make advances to them for the purpose of
recommending themselves to the parents, usually fail in attracting their
reciprocal attention. The little boy, therefore, appeared in some degree
sensible of the lady's caresses, and it was with difficulty she withdrew
herself from his pillow, to afford him leisure for necessary repose.

"To whom belongs our little rescued varlet?" was the first question
which the Lady of Avenel put to her handmaiden Lilias, when they had
retired to the hall.

"To an old woman in the hamlet," said Lilias, "who is even now come so
far as the porter's lodge to inquire concerning his safety. Is it your
pleasure that she be admitted?"

"Is it my pleasure?" said the Lady of Avenel, echoing the question with
a strong accent of displeasure and surprise; "can you make any doubt
of it? What woman but must pity the agony of the mother, whose heart is
throbbing for the safety of a child so lovely!"

"Nay, but, madam," said Lilias, "this woman is too old to be the mother
of the child; I rather think she must be his grandmother, or some more
distant relation."

"Be she who she will, Lilias," replied the Lady, "she must have an
aching heart while the safety of a creature so lovely is uncertain.
Go instantly and bring her hither. Besides, I would willingly learn
something concerning his birth."

Lilias left the hall, and presently afterwards returned, ushering in a
tall female very poorly dressed, yet with more pretension to decency
and cleanliness than was usually combined with such coarse garments. The
Lady of Avenel knew her figure the instant she presented herself. It was
the fashion of the family, that upon every Sabbath, and on two evenings
in the week besides, Henry Warden preached or lectured in the chapel at
the castle. The extension of the Protestant faith was, upon principle,
as well as in good policy, a primary object with the Knight of Avenel.
The inhabitants of the village were therefore invited to attend upon the
instructions of Henry Warden, and many of them were speedily won to
the doctrine which their master and protector approved. These sermons,
homilies, and lectures, had made a great impression on the mind of the
Abbot Eustace, or Eustatius, and were a sufficient spur to the severity
and sharpness of his controversy with his old fellow-collegiate;
and, ere Queen Mary was dethroned, and while the Catholics still had
considerable authority in the Border provinces, he more than once
threatened to levy his vassals, and assail and level with the earth
that stronghold of heresy the Castle of Avenel. But notwithstanding the
Abbot's impotent resentment, and notwithstanding also the disinclination
of the country to favour the new religion, Henry Warden proceeded
without remission in his labours, and made weekly converts from the
faith of Rome to that of the reformed church. Amongst those who gave
most earnest and constant attendance on his ministry, was the aged
woman, whose form, tall, and otherwise too remarkable to be forgotten,
the Lady had of late observed frequently as being conspicuous among the
little audience. She had indeed more than once desired to know who
that stately-looking woman was, whose appearance was so much above the
poverty of her vestments. But the reply had always been, that she was an
Englishwoman, who was tarrying for a season at the hamlet, and that
no one knew more concerning her. She now asked her after her name and
birth.

"Magdalen Graeme is my name," said the woman; "I come of the Graemes of
Heathergill, in Nicol Forest, [Footnote: A district of Cumberland, lying
close to the Scottish border.] a people of ancient blood."

"And what make you," continued the Lady, "so far distant from your
home?"

"I have no home," said Magdalen Graeme, "it was burnt by your
Border-riders--my husband and my son were slain--there is not a drop's
blood left in the veins of any one which is of kin to mine."

"That is no uncommon fate in these wild times, and in this unsettled
land," said the Lady; "the English hands have been as deeply dyed in our
blood as ever those of Scotsmen have been in yours."

"You have right to say it, Lady," answered Magdalen Graeme; "for men
tell of a time when this castle was not strong enough to save your
father's life, or to afford your mother and her infant a place of
refuge. And why ask ye me, then, wherefore I dwell not in mine own home,
and with mine own people?"

"It was indeed an idle question," answered the Lady, "where misery so
often makes wanderers; but wherefore take refuge in a hostile country?"

"My neighbours were Popish and mass-mongers," said the old woman; "it
has pleased Heaven to give me a clearer sight of the gospel, and I have
tarried here to enjoy the ministry of that worthy man Henry Warden, who,
to the praise and comfort of many, teacheth the Evangel in truth and in
sincerity."

"Are you poor?" again demanded the Lady of Avenel.

"You hear me ask alms of no one," answered the Englishwoman.

Here there was a pause. The manner of the woman was, if not
disrespectful, at least much less than gracious; and she appeared to
give no encouragement to farther communication. The Lady of Avenel
renewed the conversation on a different topic.

"You have heard of the danger in which your boy has been placed?"

"I have, Lady, and how by an especial providence he was rescued from
death. May Heaven make him thankful, and me!"

"What relation do you bear to him?"

"I am his grandmother, lady, if it so please you; the only relation he
hath left upon earth to take charge of him."

"The burden of his maintenance must necessarily be grievous to you in
your deserted situation?" pursued the Lady.

"I have complained of it to no one," said Magdalen Graeme, with the same
unmoved, dry, and unconcerned tone of voice, in which she had answered
all the former questions.

"If," said the Lady of Avenel, "your grandchild could be received into a
noble family, would it not advantage both him and you?"

"Received into a noble family!" said the old woman, drawing herself up,
and bending her brows until her forehead was wrinkled into a frown of
unusual severity; "and for what purpose, I pray you?--to be my lady's
page, or my lord's jackman, to eat broken victuals, and contend with
other menials for the remnants of the master's meal? Would you have
him to fan the flies from my lady's face while she sleeps, to carry
her train while she walks, to hand her trencher when she feeds, to ride
before her on horseback, to walk after her on foot, to sing when she
lists, and to be silent when she bids?--a very weathercock, which,
though furnished in appearance with wings and plumage, cannot soar into
the air--cannot fly from the spot where it is perched, but receives all
its impulse, and performs all its revolutions, obedient to the changeful
breath of a vain woman? When the eagle of Helvellyn perches on the tower
of Lanercost, and turns and changes his place to show how the wind sits,
Roland Graeme shall be what you would make him."

The woman spoke with a rapidity and vehemence which seemed to have in it
a touch of insanity; and a sudden sense of the danger to which the child
must necessarily be exposed in the charge of such a keeper, increased
the Lady's desire to keep him in the castle if possible.

"You mistake me, dame," she said, addressing the old woman in a soothing
manner; "I do not wish your boy to be in attendance on myself, but upon
the good knight my husband. Were he himself the son of a belted earl,
he could not better be trained to arms, and all that befits a gentleman,
than by the instructions and discipline of Sir Halbert Glendinning."

"Ay," answered the old woman, in the same style of bitter irony, "I know
the wages of that service;--a curse when the corslet is not sufficiently
brightened,--a blow when the girth is not tightly drawn,--to be beaten
because the hounds are at fault,--to be reviled because the foray is
unsuccessful,--to stain his hands for the master's bidding in the blood
alike of beast and of man,--to be a butcher of harmless deer, a murderer
and defacer of God's own image, not at his own pleasure, but at that of
his lord,--to live a brawling ruffian, and a common stabber--exposed to
heat, to cold, to want of food, to all the privations of an anchoret,
not for the love of God, but for the service of Satan,--to die by the
gibbet, or in some obscure skirmish,--to sleep out his brief life
in carnal security, and to awake in the eternal fire, which is never
quenched."

"Nay," said the Lady of Avenel, "but to such unhallowed course of life
your grandson will not be here exposed. My husband is just and kind to
those who live under his banner; and you yourself well know, that youth
have here a strict as well as a good preceptor in the person of our
chaplain."

The old woman appeared to pause.

"You have named," she said, "the only circumstance which can move me. I
must soon onward, the vision has said it--I must not tarry in the same
spot--I must on,--I must on, it is my weird.--Swear, then, that you will
protect the boy as if he were your own, until I return hither and claim
him, and I will consent for a space to part with him. But especially
swear, he shall not lack the instruction of the godly man who hath
placed the gospel-truth high above those idolatrous shavelings, the
monks and friars."

"Be satisfied, dame," said the Lady of Avenel; "the boy shall have as
much care as if he were born of my own blood. Will you see him now?"

"No," answered the old woman sternly; "to part is enough. I go forth
on my own mission. I will not soften my heart by useless tears and
wailings, as one that is not called to a duty."

"Will you not accept of something to aid you in your pilgrimage?" said
the Lady of Avenel, putting into her hands two crowns of the sun. The
old woman flung them down on the table.

"Am I of the race of Cain," she said, "proud Lady, that you offer me
gold in exchange for my own flesh and blood?"

"I had no such meaning," said the Lady, gently; "nor am I the proud
woman you term me. Alas! my own fortunes might have taught me humility,
even had it not been born with me."

The old woman seemed somewhat to relax her tone of severity.

"You are of gentle blood," she said, "else we had not parleyed thus long
together.--You are of gentle blood, and to such," she added, drawing up
her tall form as she spoke, "pride is as graceful as is the plume upon
the bonnet. But for these pieces of gold, lady, you must needs resume
them. I need not money. I am well provided; and I may not care for
myself, nor think how, or by whom, I shall be sustained. Farewell, and
keep your word. Cause your gates to be opened, and your bridges to be
lowered. I will set forward this very night. When I come again, I will
demand from you a strict account, for I have left with you the jewel of
my life! Sleep will visit me but in snatches, food will not refresh me,
rest will not restore my strength, until I see Roland Graeme. Once more,
farewell."

"Make your obeisance, dame," said Lilias to Magdalen Graeme, as she
retired, "make your obeisance to her ladyship, and thank her for her
goodness, as is but fitting and right."

The old woman turned short around on the officious waiting-maid. "Let
her make her obeisance to me then, and I will return it. Why should
I bend to her?--is it because her kirtle is of silk, and mine of blue
lockeram?--Go to, my lady's waiting-woman. Know that the rank of the man
rates that of the wife, and that she who marries a churl's son, were she
a king's daughter, is but a peasant's bride."

Lilias was about to reply in great indignation, but her mistress imposed
silence on her, and commanded that the old woman should be safely
conducted to the mainland.

"Conduct her safe!" exclaimed the incensed waiting-woman, while Magdalen
Graeme left the apartment; "I say, duck her in the loch, and then we
will see whether she is witch or not, as every body in the village of
Lochside will say and swear. I marvel your ladyship could bear so long
with her insolence." But the commands of the Lady were obeyed, and the
old dame, dismissed from the castle, was committed to her fortune. She
kept her word, and did not long abide in that place, leaving the hamlet
on the very night succeeding the interview, and wandering no one asked
whither. The Lady of Avenel inquired under what circumstances she had
appeared among them, but could only learn that she was believed to
be the widow of some man of consequence among the Graemes who then
inhabited the Debateable Land, a name given to a certain portion of
territory which was the frequent subject of dispute betwixt Scotland
and England--that she had suffered great wrong in some of the frequent
forays by which that unfortunate district was wasted, and had been
driven from her dwelling-place. She had arrived in the hamlet no one
knew for what purpose, and was held by some to be a witch, by others a
zealous Protestant, and by others again a Catholic devotee. Her language
was mysterious, and her manners repulsive; and all that could be
collected from her conversation seemed to imply that she was under the
influence either of a spell or of a vow,--there was no saying which,
since she talked as one who acted under a powerful and external agency.

Such were the particulars which the Lady's inquiries were able
to collect concerning Magdalen Graeme, being far too meagre and
contradictory to authorize any satisfactory deduction. In truth, the
miseries of the time, and the various turns of fate incidental to a
frontier country, were perpetually chasing from their habitations those
who had not the means of defence or protection. These wanderers in the
land were too often seen, to excite much attention or sympathy. They
received the cold relief which was extorted by general feelings of
humanity; a little excited in some breasts, and perhaps rather chilled
in others, by the recollection that they who gave the charity to-day
might themselves want it to-morrow. Magdalen Graeme, therefore, came and
departed like a shadow from the neighbourhood of Avenel Castle.

The boy whom Providence, as she thought, had thus strangely placed
under her care, was at once established a favourite with the Lady of
the castle. How could it be otherwise? He became the object of those
affectionate feelings, which, finding formerly no object on which to
expand themselves, had increased the gloom of the castle, and imbittered
the solitude of its mistress. To teach him reading and writing as far as
her skill went, to attend to his childish comforts, to watch his boyish
sports, became the Lady's favourite amusement. In her circumstances,
where the ear only heard the lowing of the cattle from the distant
hills, or the heavy step of the warder as he walked upon his post,
or the half-envied laugh of her maiden as she turned her wheel, the
appearance of the blooming and beautiful boy gave an interest which
can hardly be conceived by those who live amid gayer and busier scenes.
Young Roland was to the Lady of Avenel what the flower, which occupies
the window of some solitary captive, is to the poor wight by whom it is
nursed and cultivated,--something which at once excited and repaid
her care; and in giving the boy her affection, she felt, as it were,
grateful to him for releasing her from the state of dull apathy in
which she had usually found herself during the absence of Sir Halbert
Glendinning.

But even the charms of this blooming favourite were unable to chase the
recurring apprehensions which arose from her husband's procrastinated
return. Soon after Roland Graeme became a resident at the castle, a
groom, despatched by Sir Halbert, brought tidings that business still
delayed the Knight at the Court of Holyrood. The more distant period
which the messenger had assigned for his master's arrival at length
glided away, summer melted into autumn, and autumn was about to give
place to winter, and yet he came not.




Chapter the Third.


 The waning harvest-moon shone broad and bright,
 The warder's horn was heard at dead of night,
 And while the portals-wide were flung,
 With trampling hoofs the rocky pavement rung.
                                         LEYDEN.

"And you, too, would be a soldier, Roland?" said the Lady of Avenel
to her young charge, while, seated on a stone chair at one end of the
battlements, she saw the boy attempt, with a long stick, to mimic the
motions of the warder, as he alternately shouldered, or ported, or
sloped pike.

"Yes, Lady," said the boy,--for he was now familiar, and replied to her
questions with readiness and alacrity,-"a soldier will I be; for there
ne'er was gentleman but who belted him with the brand."

"Thou a gentleman!" said Lilias, who, as usual, was in attendance; "such
a gentleman as I would make of a bean-cod with a rusty knife."

"Nay, chide him not, Lilias," said the Lady of Avenel, "for, beshrew me,
but I think he comes of gentle blood--see how it musters in his face at
your injurious reproof."

"Had I my will, madam," answered Lilias, "a good birchen wand should
make his colour muster to better purpose still."

"On my word, Lilias," said the Lady, "one would think you had received
harm from the poor boy--or is he so far on the frosty side of your
favour because he enjoys the sunny side of mine?"

"Over heavens forbode, my Lady!" answered Lilias; "I have lived too long
with gentles, I praise my stars for it, to fight with either follies or
fantasies, whether they relate to beast, bird, or boy."

Lilias was a favourite in her own class, a spoiled domestic, and often
accustomed to take more licence than her mistress was at all times
willing to encourage. But what did not please the Lady of Avenel, she
did not choose to hear, and thus it was on the present occasion. She
resolved to look more close and sharply after the boy, who had hitherto
been committed chiefly to the management of Lilias. He must, she
thought, be born of gentle blood; it were shame to think otherwise of
a form so noble, and features so fair;--the very wildness in which
he occasionally indulged, his contempt of danger, and impatience of
restraint, had in them something noble;--assuredly the child was born of
high rank. Such was her conclusion, and she acted upon it accordingly.
The domestics around her, less jealous, or less scrupulous than Lilias,
acted as servants usually do, following the bias, and flattering, for
their own purposes, the humour of the Lady; and the boy soon took on him
those airs of superiority, which the sight of habitual deference seldom
fails to inspire. It seemed, in truth, as if to command were his natural
sphere, so easily did he use himself to exact and receive compliance
with his humours. The chaplain, indeed, might have interposed to check
the air of assumption which Roland Graeme so readily indulged, and
most probably would have willingly rendered him that favour; but the
necessity of adjusting with his brethren some disputed points of church
discipline had withdrawn him for some time from the castle, and detained
him in a distant part of the kingdom.

Matters stood thus in the castle of Avenel, when a winded bugle sent its
shrill and prolonged notes from the shore of the lake, and was replied
to cheerily by the signal of the warder. The Lady of Avenel knew the
sounds of her husband, and rushed to the window of the apartment in
which she was sitting. A band of about thirty spearmen, with a pennon
displayed before them, winded along the indented shores of the lake,
and approached the causeway. A single horseman rode at the head of the
party, his bright arms catching a glance of the October sun as he moved
steadily along. Even at that distance, the Lady recognized the lofty
plume, bearing the mingled colours of her own liveries and those of
Glendonwyne, blended with the holly-branch; and the firm seat and
dignified demeanour of the rider, joined to the stately motion of the
dark-brown steed, sufficiently announced Halbert Glendinning.

The Lady's first thought was that of rapturous joy at her husband's
return--her second was connected with a fear which had sometimes
intruded itself, that he might not altogether approve the peculiar
distinction with which she had treated her orphan ward. In this fear
there was implied a consciousness, that the favour she had shown him was
excessive; for Halbert Glendinning was at least as gentle and indulgent,
as he was firm and rational in the intercourse of his household; and to
her in particular, his conduct had ever been most affectionately tender.

Yet she did fear, that, on the present occasion, her conduct might incur
Sir Halbert's censure; and hastily resolving that she would not mention,
the anecdote of the boy until the next day, she ordered him to be
withdrawn from the apartment by Lilias.

"I will not go with Lilias, madam," answered the spoiled child, who
had more than once carried his point by perseverance, and who, like his
betters, delighted in the exercise of such authority,--"I will not go to
Lilias's gousty room--I will stay and see that brave warrior who comes
riding so gallantly along the drawbridge."

"You must not stay, Roland," said the Lady, more positively than she
usually spoke to her little favourite.

"I will," reiterated the boy, who had already felt his consequence, and
the probable chance of success.

"You _will_, Roland!" answered the Lady, "what manner of word is that? I
tell you, you must go."

"_Will_," answered the forward boy, "is a word for a man, and _must_ is
no word for a lady."

"You are saucy, sirrah," said the Lady--"Lilias, take him with you
instantly."

"I always thought," said Lilias, smiling, as she seized the reluctant
boy by the arm, "that my young master must give place to my old one."

"And you, too, are malapert, mistress!" said the Lady; "hath the moon
changed, that ye all of you thus forget yourselves?"

Lilias made no reply, but led off the boy, who, too proud to offer
unavailing resistance, darted at his benefactress a glance, which
intimated plainly, how willingly he would have defied her authority, had
he possessed the power to make good his point.

The Lady of Avenel was vexed to find how much this trifling circumstance
had discomposed her, at the moment when she ought naturally to have
been entirely engrossed by her husband's return. But we do not recover
composure by the mere feeling that agitation is mistimed. The glow of
displeasure had not left the Lady's cheek, her ruffled deportment was
not yet entirely composed, when her husband, unhelmeted, but still
wearing the rest of his arms, entered the apartment. His appearance
banished the thoughts of every thing else; she rushed to him, clasped
his iron-sheathed frame in her arms, and kissed his martial and manly
face with an affection which was at once evident and sincere. The
warrior returned her embrace and her caress with the same fondness; for
the time which had passed since their union had diminished its romantic
ardour, perhaps, but it had rather increased its rational tenderness,
and Sir Halbert Glendinning's long and frequent absences from his castle
had prevented affection from degenerating by habit into indifference.

When the first eager greetings were paid and received, the Lady
gazed fondly on her husband's face as she remarked, "You are altered,
Halbert--you have ridden hard and far to-day, or you have been ill?"

"I have been well, Mary," answered the Knight, "passing well have
I been; and a long ride is to me, thou well knowest, but a thing of
constant custom. Those who are born noble may slumber out their lives
within the walls of their castles and manor-houses; but he who hath
achieved nobility by his own deeds must ever be in the saddle, to show
that he merits his advancement."

While he spoke thus, the Lady gazed fondly on him, as if endeavouring
to read his inmost soul; for the tone in which he spoke was that of
melancholy depression.

Sir Halbert Glendinning was the same, yet a different person from what
he had appeared in his early years. The fiery freedom of the aspiring
youth had given place to the steady and stern composure of the approved
soldier and skilful politician. There were deep traces of care on those
noble features, over which each emotion used formerly to pass, like
light clouds across a summer sky. That sky was now, not perhaps clouded,
but still and grave, like that of the sober autumn evening. The forehead
was higher and more bare than in early youth, and the locks which still
clustered thick and dark on the warrior's head, were worn away at the
temples, not by age, but by the constant pressure of the steel cap, or
helmet. His beard, according to the fashion of the time, grew short and
thick, and was turned into mustaches on the upper lip, and peaked at the
extremity. The cheek, weather-beaten and embrowned, had lost the glow
of youth, but showed the vigorous complexion of active and confirmed
manhood. Halbert Glendinning was, in a word, a knight to ride at a
king's right hand, to bear his banner in war, and to be his counsellor
in time of peace; for his looks expressed the considerate firmness which
can resolve wisely and dare boldly. Still, over these noble features,
there now spread an air of dejection, of which, perhaps, the owner was
not conscious, but which did not escape the observation of his anxious
and affectionate partner.

"Something has happened, or is about to happen," said the Lady of
Avenel; "this sadness sits not on your brow without cause--misfortune,
national or particular, must needs be at hand."

"There is nothing new that I wot of," said Halbert Glendinning; "but
there is little of evil which can befall a kingdom, that may not be
apprehended in this unhappy and divided realm."

"Nay, then," said the Lady, "I see there hath really been some fatal
work on foot. My Lord of Murray has not so long detained you at
Holyrood, save that he wanted your help in some weighty purpose."

"I have not been at Holyrood, Mary," answered the Knight; "I have been
several weeks abroad."

"Abroad! and sent me no word?" replied the Lady.

"What would the knowledge have availed, but to have rendered you
unhappy, my love?" replied the Knight; "your thoughts would have
converted the slightest breeze that curled your own lake, into a tempest
raging in the German ocean."

"And have you then really crossed the sea?" said the Lady, to whom the
very idea of an element which she had never seen conveyed notions of
terror and of wonder,--"really left your own native land, and trodden
distant shores, where the Scottish tongue is unheard and unknown?"

"Really, and really," said the Knight, taking her hand in affectionate
playfulness, "I have done this marvellous deed--have rolled on the ocean
for three days and three nights, with the deep green waves dashing by
the side of my pillow, and but a thin plank to divide me from it."

"Indeed, my Halbert," said the Lady, "that was a tempting of Divine
Providence. I never bade you unbuckle the sword from your side, or lay
the lance from your hand--I never bade you sit still when your honour
called you to rise and ride; but are not blade and spear dangers enough
for one man's life, and why would you trust rough waves and raging
seas?"

"We have in Germany, and in the Low Countries, as they are called,"
answered Glendinning, "men who are united with us in faith, and with
whom it is fitting we should unite in alliance. To some of these I was
despatched on business as important as it was secret. I went in safety,
and I returned in security; there is more danger to a man's life betwixt
this and Holyrood, than are in all the seas that wash the lowlands of
Holland."

