HOWE, a hollow.

HOULERYING AND POULERYING, hustling and pulling.

HURLEY-HOUSE, a brokendown manor house.

ILK, same; of that ilk, of the same name or place.

ILKA, each, every.

IN THE BEES, stupefied.

INTROMIT, meddle with.

KEN, know.

KITTLE, tickle, ticklish.

KNOBBLER, a male deer in its second year.

KYLOE, a small Highland cow.

LAIRD, squire, lord of the manor.

LANG-LEGGIT, long-legged.

LAWING, a tavern reckoning.

LEE LAND, pasture land.

LIE, a word used in old Scottish legal documents to call attention to
the following word or phrase.

LIFT, capture, carry off by theft.

LIMMER, a jade.

LOCH, a lake.

LOON, an idle fellow, a lout, a rogue.

LUCKIE, an elderly woman.

LUG, an ear, a handle.

LUNZIE, the loins, the waist.

MAE, mair, more.

MAINS, the chief farm of an estate.

MALT ABUNE THE MEAL, the drink above the food, half-seas over.

MAUN, must.

MEAL ARK, a meal chest.

MERK, 13 1/3 pence in English money.

MICKLE, much, great.

MISGUGGLED, mangled, rumpled.

MONY, many.

MORN, the morn, tomorrow.

MORNING, a morning dram.

MUCKLE, much, great.

MUIR, moor.

NA, nae, no, not.

NAINSELL, own self.

NICE, simple.

NOLT, black cattle. ony, any.

ORRA, odd, unemployed.

ORRA-TIME, occasionally.

OWER, over.

PEEL-HOUSE, a fortified tower.

PENDICLE, a small piece of ground.

PINGLE, a fuss, trouble.

PLENISHING, furnishings.

PLOY, sport, entertainment.

PRETTY MEN, stout, warlike fellows.

REIFS, robberies.

REIVERS, robbers.

RIGGS, ridges, ploughed ground.

ROKELAY, a short cloak.

RUDAS, coarse, hag-like.

SAIN, mark with the sign of the cross, bless.

SAIR, sore, very.

SAUMON, salmon.

SAUT, salt.

SAY, a sample.

SCHELLUM, a rascal.

SCOUPING, scowping, skipping, leaping, running.

SEANNACHIE, a Highland antiquary.

SHEARING, reaping, harvest.

SHILPIT, weak, sickly.

SHOON, shoes.

SIC, siccan, such.

SIDIER DHU, black soldiers, independent companies raised to keep peace
in the Highlands; named from the tartans they wore.

SIDIER ROY, red soldiers, King George's men.

SIKES, small brooks.

SILLER, silver, money.

SIMMER, summer.

SLIVER, slice, slit.

SMOKY, suspicious.

SNECK, cut.

SNOOD, a fillet worn by young women.

SOPITE, quiet a brawl.

SORNERS, sornars, sojourners, sturdy beggars, especially those
unwelcome visitors who exact lodgings and victuals by force.

SORTED, arranged, adjusted.

SPEIR, ask, investigate.

SPORRAN-MOLLACH, a Highland purse of goatskin.

SPRACK, animated, lively.

SPRING, a cheerful tune.

SPURRZIE, spoil.

STIEVE, stiff, firm.

STIRK, a young steer or heifer.

STOT, a bullock.

STOUP, a jug, a pitcher.

STOUTHREEF, robbery.

STRAE, straw.

STRATH, a valley through which a river runs.

SYBOES, onions.

TA, the. TAIGLIT, harassed, loitered.

TAILZIE, taillie, a deed of entail.

TAPPIT-HEN, a pewter pot that holds three English quarts.

TAYOUT, tailliers-hors; in modern phrase, Tally-ho!

TEIL, the devil.

TEINDS, tithes.

TELT, told.

TILL, to. TOUN, a hamlet, a farm.

TREWS, trousers.

TROW, believe, suppose.

TWA, two.

TYKE, a dog, a snarling fellow.

UNCO, strange, very.

UNKENN'D, unknown.

USQUEBAUGH, whiskey.

WA', wall.

WARE, spend.

WEEL, well.

WHA, who.

WHAR, where.

WHAT FOR, why.

WHILK, which.

WISKE, whisk, brandish.





END OF VOLUME I WAVERLEY

BY SIR WALTER SCOTT

VOLUME II





WAVERLEY

OR 'TIS SIXTY YEARS SINCE





CHAPTER XXXVI

AN INCIDENT


The dinner hour of Scotland Sixty Years Since was two o'clock. It was
therefore about four o'clock of a delightful autumn afternoon that Mr.
Gilfillan commenced his march, in hopes, although Stirling was eighteen
miles distant, he might be able, by becoming a borrower of the night
for an hour or two, to reach it that evening. He therefore put forth
his strength, and marched stoutly along at the head of his followers,
eyeing our hero from time to time, as if he longed to enter into
controversy with him. At length, unable to resist the temptation, he
slackened his pace till he was alongside of his prisoner's horse, and
after marching a few steps in silence abreast of him, he suddenly
asked--'Can ye say wha the carle was wi' the black coat and the mousted
head, that was wi' the Laird of Cairnvreckan?'

'A Presbyterian clergyman,' answered Waverley.

'Presbyterian!' answered Gilfillan contemptuously; 'a wretched
Erastian, or rather an obscure Prelatist, a favourer of the black
indulgence, ane of thae dumb dogs that canna bark; they tell ower a
clash o' terror and a clatter o' comfort in their sermons, without ony
sense, or savour, or life. Ye've been fed in siccan a fauld, belike?'

'No; I am of the Church of England,' said Waverley.

'And they're just neighbour-like,' replied the Covenanter; 'and nae
wonder they gree sae weel. Wha wad hae thought the goodly structure of
the Kirk of Scotland, built up by our fathers in 1642, wad hae been
defaced by carnal ends and the corruptions of the time;--ay, wha wad
hae thought the carved work of the sanctuary would hae been sae soon
cut down!'

To this lamentation, which one or two of the assistants chorussed with
a deep groan, our hero thought it unnecessary to make any reply.
Whereupon Mr. Gilfillan, resolving that he should be a hearer at least,
if not a disputant, proceeded in his Jeremiade.

'And now is it wonderful, when, for lack of exercise anent the call to
the service of the altar and the duty of the day, ministers fall into
sinful compliances with patronage, and indemnities, and oaths, and
bonds, and other corruptions,--is it wonderful, I say, that you, sir,
and other sic-like unhappy persons, should labour to build up your auld
Babel of iniquity, as in the bluidy persecuting saint-killing times? I
trow, gin ye werena blinded wi' the graces and favours, and services
and enjoyments, and employments and inheritances, of this wicked world,
I could prove to you, by the Scripture, in what a filthy rag ye put
your trust; and that your surplices, and your copes and vestments, are
but cast-off garments of the muckle harlot that sitteth upon seven
hills and drinketh of the cup of abomination. But, I trow, ye are deaf
as adders upon that side of the head; ay, ye are deceived with her
enchantments, and ye traffic with her merchandise, and ye are drunk
with the cup of her fornication!'

How much longer this military theologist might have continued his
invective, in which he spared nobody but the scattered remnant of
HILL-FOLK, as he called them, is absolutely uncertain. His matter was
copious, his voice powerful, and his memory strong; so that there was
little chance of his ending his exhortation till the party had reached
Stirling, had not his attention been attracted by a pedlar who had
joined the march from a cross-road, and who sighed or groaned with
great regularity at all fitting pauses of his homily.

'And what may ye be, friend?' said the Gifted Gilfillan.

'A puir pedlar, that's bound for Stirling, and craves the protection of
your honour's party in these kittle times. Ah' your honour has a
notable faculty in searching and explaining the secret,--ay, the secret
and obscure and incomprehensible causes of the backslidings of the
land; ay, your honour touches the root o' the matter.'

'Friend,' said Gilfillan, with a more complacent voice than he had
hitherto used, 'honour not me. I do not go out to park-dikes and to
steadings and to market-towns to have herds and cottars and burghers
pull off their bonnets to me as they do to Major Melville o'
Cairnvreckan, and ca' me laird or captain or honour. No; my sma' means,
whilk are not aboon twenty thousand merk, have had the blessing of
increase, but the pride of my heart has not increased with them; nor do
I delight to be called captain, though I have the subscribed commission
of that gospel-searching nobleman, the Earl of Glencairn, fa whilk I am
so designated. While I live I am and will be called Habakkuk Gilfillan,
who will stand up for the standards of doctrine agreed on by the ance
famous Kirk of Scotland, before she trafficked with the accursed Achan,
while he has a plack in his purse or a drap o' bluid in his body.'

'Ah,' said the pedlar, 'I have seen your land about Mauchlin. A fertile
spot! your lines have fallen in pleasant places! And siccan a breed o'
cattle is not in ony laird's land in Scotland.'

'Ye say right,--ye say right, friend' retorted Gilfillan eagerly, for
he was not inaccessible to flattery upon this subject,--'ye say right;
they are the real Lancashire, and there's no the like o' them even at
the mains of Kilmaurs'; and he then entered into a discussion of their
excellences, to which our readers will probably be as indifferent as
our hero. After this excursion the leader returned to his theological
discussions, while the pedlar, less profound upon those mystic points,
contented himself with groaning and expressing his edification at
suitable intervals.

'What a blessing it would be to the puir blinded popish nations among
whom I hae sojourned, to have siccan a light to their paths! I hae been
as far as Muscovia in my sma' trading way, as a travelling merchant,
and I hae been through France, and the Low Countries, and a' Poland,
and maist feck o' Germany, and O! it would grieve your honour's soul to
see the murmuring and the singing and massing that's in the kirk, and
the piping that's in the quire, and the heathenish dancing and dicing
upon the Sabbath!'

This set Gilfillan off upon the Book of Sports and the Covenant, and
the Engagers, and the Protesters, and the Whiggamore's Raid, and the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and the Longer and Shorter
Catechism, and the Excommunication at Torwood, and the slaughter of
Archbishop Sharp. This last topic, again, led him into the lawfulness
of defensive arms, on which subject he uttered much more sense than
could have been expected from some other parts of his harangue, and
attracted even Waverley's attention, who had hitherto been lost in his
own sad reflections. Mr. Gilfillan then considered the lawfulness of a
private man's standing forth as the avenger of public oppression, and
as he was labouring with great earnestness the cause of Mas James
Mitchell, who fired at the Archbishop of Saint Andrews some years
before the prelate's assassination on Magus Muir, an incident occurred
which interrupted his harangue.

The rays of the sun were lingering on the very verge of the horizon as
the party ascended a hollow and somewhat steep path which led to the
summit of a rising ground. The country was uninclosed, being part of a
very extensive heath or common; but it was far from level, exhibiting
in many places hollows filled with furze and broom; in others, little
dingles of stunted brushwood. A thicket of the latter description
crowned the hill up which the party ascended. The foremost of the band,
being the stoutest and most active, had pushed on, and, having
surmounted the ascent, were out of ken for the present. Gilfillan, with
the pedlar and the small party who were Waverley's more immediate
guard, were near the top of the ascent, and the remainder straggled
after them at a considerable interval.

Such was the situation of matters when the pedlar, missing, as he said,
a little doggie which belonged to him, began to halt and whistle for
the animal. This signal, repeated more than once, gave offence to the
rigour of his companion, the rather because it appeared to indicate
inattention to the treasures of theological and controversial knowledge
which were pouring out for his edification. He therefore signified
gruffly that he could not waste his time in waiting for an useless cur.

'But if your honour wad consider the case of Tobit--'

'Tobit!' exclaimed Gilffflan, with great heat; 'Tobit and his dog baith
are altogether heathenish and apocryphal, and none but a prelatist or a
papist would draw them into question. I doubt I hae been mista'en in
you, friend.'

'Very likely,' answered the pedlar, with great composure; 'but
ne'ertheless, I shall take leave to whistle again upon puir Bawty.'

This last signal was answered in an unexpected manner; for six or eight
stout Highlanders, who lurked among the copse and brushwood, sprung
into the hollow way and began to lay about them with their claymores.
Gilfillan, unappalled at this undesirable apparition, cried out
manfully, 'The sword of the Lord and of Gideon!' and, drawing his
broadsword, would probably have done as much credit to the good old
cause as any of its doughty champions at Drumclog, when, behold! the
pedlar, snatching a musket from the person who was next him bestowed
the butt of it with such emphasis on the head of his late instructor in
the Cameronian creed that he was forthwith levelled to the ground. In
the confusion which ensued the horse which bore our hero was shot by
one of Gilfillan's party, as he discharged his firelock at random.
Waverley fell with, and indeed under, the animal, and sustained some
severe contusions. But he was almost instantly extricated from the
fallen steed by two Highlanders, who, each seizing him by the arm,
hurried him away from the scuffle and from the highroad. They ran with
great speed, half supporting and half dragging our hero, who could,
however, distinguish a few dropping shots fired about the spot which he
had left. This, as he afterwards learned, proceeded from Gilfillan's
party, who had now assembled, the stragglers in front and rear having
joined the others. At their approach the Highlanders drew off, but not
before they had rifled Gilfillan and two of his people, who remained on
the spot grievously wounded. A few shots were exchanged betwixt them
and the Westlanders; but the latter, now without a commander, and
apprehensive of a second ambush, did not make any serious effort to
recover their prisoner, judging it more wise to proceed on their
journey to Stirling, carrying with them their wounded captain and
comrades.





CHAPTER XXXVII

WAVERLEY IS STILL IN DISTRESS


The velocity, and indeed violence, with which Waverley was hurried
along nearly deprived him of sensation; for the injury he had received
from his fall prevented him from aiding himself so effectually as he
might otherwise have done. When this was observed by his conductors,
they called to their aid two or three others of the party, and,
swathing our hero's body in one of their plaids, divided his weight by
that means among them, and transported him at the same rapid rate as
before, without any exertion of his own. They spoke little, and that in
Gaelic; and did not slacken their pace till they had run nearly two
miles, when they abated their extreme rapidity, but continued still to
walk very fast, relieving each other occasionally.

Our hero now endeavoured to address them, but was only answered with
'Cha n'eil Beurl agam' i.e. 'I have no English,' being, as Waverley
well knew, the constant reply of a Highlander when he either does not
understand or does not choose to reply to an Englishman or Lowlander.
He then mentioned the name of Vich lan Vohr, concluding that he was
indebted to his friendship for his rescue from the clutches of Gifted
Gilfillan, but neither did this produce any mark of recognition from
his escort.

The twilight had given place to moonshine when the party halted upon
the brink of a precipitous glen, which, as partly enlightened by the
moonbeams, seemed full of trees and tangled brushwood. Two of the
Highlanders dived into it by a small foot-path, as if to explore its
recesses, and one of them returning in a few minutes, said something to
his companions, who instantly raised their burden and bore him, with
great attention and care, down the narrow and abrupt descent.
Notwithstanding their precautions, however, Waverley's person came more
than once into contact, rudely enough, with the projecting stumps and
branches which overhung the pathway.

At the bottom of the descent, and, as it seemed, by the side of a brook
(for Waverley heard the rushing of a considerable body of water,
although its stream was invisible in the darkness), the party again
stopped before a small and rudely-constructed hovel. The door was open,
and the inside of the premises appeared as uncomfortable and rude as
its situation and exterior foreboded. There was no appearance of a
floor of any kind; the roof seemed rent in several places; the walls
were composed of loose stones and turf, and the thatch of branches of
trees. The fire was in the centre, and filled the whole wigwam with
smoke, which escaped as much through the door as by means of a circular
aperture in the roof. An old Highland sibyl, the only inhabitant of
this forlorn mansion, appeared busy in the preparation of some food. By
the light which the fire afforded Waverley could discover that his
attendants were not of the clan of Ivor, for Fergus was particularly
strict in requiring from his followers that they should wear the tartan
striped in the mode peculiar to their race; a mark of distinction
anciently general through the Highlands, and still maintained by those
Chiefs who were proud of their lineage or jealous of their separate and
exclusive authority.

Edward had lived at Glennaquoich long enough to be aware of a
distinction which he had repeatedly heard noticed, and now satisfied
that he had no interest with, his attendants, he glanced a disconsolate
eye around the interior of the cabin. The only furniture, excepting a
washing-tub and a wooden press, called in Scotland an ambry, sorely
decayed, was a large wooden bed, planked, as is usual, all around, and
opening by a sliding panel. In this recess the Highlanders deposited
Waverley, after he had by signs declined any refreshment. His slumbers
were broken and unrefreshing; strange visions passed before his eyes,
and it required constant and reiterated efforts of mind to dispel them.
Shivering, violent headache, and shooting pains in his limbs succeeded
these symptoms; and in the morning it was evident to his Highland
attendants or guard, for he knew not in which light to consider them,
that Waverley was quite unfit to travel.

After a long consultation among themselves, six of the party left the
hut with their arms, leaving behind an old and a young man. The former
addressed Waverley, and bathed the contusions, which swelling and livid
colour now made conspicuous. His own portmanteau, which the Highlanders
had not failed to bring off, supplied him with linen, and to his great
surprise was, with all its undiminished contents, freely resigned to
his use. The bedding of his couch seemed clean and comfortable, and his
aged attendant closed the door of the bed, for it had no curtain, after
a few words of Gaelic, from which Waverley gathered that he exhorted
him to repose. So behold our hero for a second time the patient of a
Highland Esculapius, but in a situation much more uncomfortable than
when he was the guest of the worthy Tomanrait.

The symptomatic fever which accompanied the injuries he had sustained
did not abate till the third day, when it gave way to the care of his
attendants and the strength of his constitution, and he could now raise
himself in his bed, though not without pain. He observed, however, that
there was a great disinclination on the part of the old woman who acted
as his nurse, as well as on that of the elderly Highlander, to permit
the door of the bed to be left open, so that he might amuse himself
with observing their motions; and at length, after Waverley had
repeatedly drawn open and they had as frequently shut the hatchway of
his cage, the old gentleman put an end to the contest by securing it on
the outside with a nail so effectually that the door could not be drawn
till this exterior impediment was removed.

While musing upon the cause of this contradictory spirit in persons
whose conduct intimated no purpose of plunder, and who, in all other
points, appeared to consult his welfare and his wishes, it occurred to
our hero that, during the worst crisis of his illness, a female figure,
younger than his old Highland nurse, had appeared to flit around his
couch. Of this, indeed, he had but a very indistinct recollection, but
his suspicions were confirmed when, attentively listening, he often
heard, in the course of the day, the voice of another female conversing
in whispers with his attendant. Who could it be? And why should she
apparently desire concealment? Fancy immediately aroused herself and
turned to Flora Mac-Ivor. But after a short conflict between his eager
desire to believe she was in his neighbourhood, guarding, like an angel
of mercy, the couch of his sickness, Waverley was compelled to conclude
that his conjecture was altogether improbable; since, to suppose she
had left her comparatively safe situation at Glennaquoich to descend
into the Low Country, now the seat of civil war, and to inhabit such a
lurking-place as this, was a thing hardly to be imagined. Yet his heart
bounded as he sometimes could distinctly hear the trip of a light
female step glide to or from the door of the hut, or the suppressed
sounds of a female voice, of softness and delicacy, hold dialogue with
the hoarse inward croak of old Janet, for so he understood his
antiquated attendant was denominated.

Having nothing else to amuse his solitude, he employed himself in
contriving some plan to gratify his curiosity, in despite of the
sedulous caution of Janet and the old Highland janizary, for he had
never seen the young fellow since the first morning. At length, upon
accurate examination, the infirm state of his wooden prison-house
appeared to supply the means of gratifying his curiosity, for out of a
spot which was somewhat decayed he was able to extract a nail. Through
this minute aperture he could perceive a female form, wrapped in a
plaid, in the act of conversing with Janet. But, since the days of our
grandmother Eve, the gratification of inordinate curiosity has
generally borne its penalty in disappointment. The form was not that of
Flora, nor was the face visible; and, to crown his vexation, while he
laboured with the nail to enlarge the hole, that he might obtain a more
complete view, a slight noise betrayed his purpose, and the object of
his curiosity instantly disappeared, nor, so far as he could observe,
did she again revisit the cottage.

All precautions to blockade his view were from that time abandoned, and
he was not only permitted but assisted to rise, and quit what had been,
in a literal sense, his couch of confinement. But he was not allowed to
leave the hut; for the young Highlander had now rejoined his senior,
and one or other was constantly on the watch. Whenever Waverley
approached the cottage dooi the sentinel upon duty civilly, but
resolutely, placed himself against it and opposed his exit,
accompanying his action with signs which seemed to imply there was
danger in the attempt and an enemy in the neighbourhood. Old Janet
appeared anxious and upon the watch; and Waverley, who had not yet
recovered strength enough to attempt to take his departure in spite of
the opposition of his hosts, was under the necessity of remaining
patient His fare was, in every point of view, better than he could have
conceived, for poultry, and even wine, were no strangers to his table.
The Highlanders never presumed to eat with him, and, unless in the
circumstance of watching him, treated him with great respect. His sole
amusement was gazing from the window, or rather the shapeless aperture
which was meant to answer the purpose of a window, upon a large and
rough brook, which raged and foamed through a rocky channel, closely
canopied with trees and bushes, about ten feet beneath the site of his
house of captivity.

Upon the sixth day of his confinement Waverley found himself so well
that he began to meditate his escape from this dull and miserable
prison-house, thinking any risk which he might incur in the attempt
preferable to the stupefying and intolerable uniformity of Janet's
retirement. The question indeed occurred, whither he was to direct his
course when again at his own disposal. Two schemes seemed practicable,
yet both attended with danger and difficulty. One was to go back to
Glennaquoich and join Fergus Mac-Ivor, by whom he was sure to be kindly
received; and in the present state of his mind, the rigour with which
he had been treated fully absolved him, in his own eyes, from his
allegiance to the existing government. The other project was to
endeavour to attain a Scottish seaport, and thence to take shipping for
England. His mind wavered between these plans, and probably, if he had
effected his escape in the manner he proposed, he would have been
finally determined by the comparative facility by which either might
have been executed. But his fortune had settled that he was not to be
left to his option.

Upon the evening of the seventh day the door of the hut suddenly
opened, and two Highlanders entered, whom Waverley recognised as having
been a part of his original escort to this cottage. They conversed for
a short time with the old man and his companion, and then made Waverley
understand, by very significant signs, that he was to prepare to
accompany them. This was a joyful communication. What had already
passed during his confinement made it evident that no personal injury
was designed to him; and his romantic spirit, having recovered during
his repose much of that elasticity which anxiety, resentment,
disappointment, and the mixture of unpleasant feelings excited by his
late adventures had for a time subjugated, was now wearied with
inaction. His passion for the wonderful, although it is the nature of
such dispositions to be excited by that degree of danger which merely
gives dignity to the feeling of the individual exposed to it, had sunk
under the extraordinary and apparently insurmountable evils by which he
appeared environed at Cairnvreckan. In fact, this compound of intense
curiosity and exalted imagination forms a peculiar species of courage,
which somewhat resembles the light usually carried by a
miner--sufficiently competent, indeed, to afford him guidance and
comfort during the ordinary perils of his labour, but certain to be
extinguished should he encounter the more formidable hazard of earth
damps or pestiferous vapours. It was now, however, once more rekindled,
and with a throbbing mixture of hope, awe, and anxiety, Waverley
watched the group before him, as those who were just arrived snatched a
hasty meal, and the others assumed their arms and made brief
preparations for their departure.

As he sat in the smoky hut, at some distance from the fire, around
which the others were crowded, he felt a gentle pressure upon his arm.
He looked round; it was Alice, the daughter of Donald Bean Lean. She
showed him a packet of papers in such a manner that the motion was
remarked by no one else, put her finger for a second to her lips, and
passed on, as if to assist old Janet in packing Waverley's clothes in
his portmanteau. It was obviously her wish that he should not seem to
recognise her, yet she repeatedly looked back at him, as an opportunity
occurred of doing so unobserved, and when she saw that he remarked what
she did, she folded the packet with great address and speed in one of
his shirts, which she deposited in the portmanteau.

Here then was fresh food for conjecture. Was Alice his unknown warden,
and was this maiden of the cavern the tutelar genius that watched his
bed during his sickness? Was he in the hands of her father? and if so,
what was his purpose? Spoil, his usual object, seemed in this case
neglected; for not only Waverley's property was restored, but his
purse, which might have tempted this professional plunderer, had been
all along suffered to remain in his possession. All this perhaps the
packet might explain; but it was plain from Alice's manner that she
desired he should consult it in secret. Nor did she again seek his eye
after she had satisfied herself that her manoeuvre was observed and
understood. On the contrary, she shortly afterwards left the hut, and
it was only as she tript out from the door, that, favoured by the
obscurity, she gave Waverley a parting smile and nod of significance
ere she vanished in the dark glen.

The young Highlander was repeatedly despatched by his comrades as if to
collect intelligence. At length, when he had returned for the third or
fourth time, the whole party arose and made signs to our hero to
accompany them. Before his departure, however, he shook hands with old
Janet, who had been so sedulous in his behalf, and added substantial
marks of his gratitude for her attendance.

'God bless you! God prosper you, Captain Waverley!' said Janet, in good
Lowland Scotch, though he had never hithero heard her utter a syllable,
save in Gaelic. But the impatience of his attendants prohibited his
asking any explanation.





CHAPTER XXXVIII

A NOCTURNAL ADVENTURE


There was a moment's pause when the whole party had got out of the hut;
and the Highlander who assumed the command, and who, in Waverley's
awakened recollection, seemed to be the same tall figure who had acted
as Donald Bean Lean's lieutenant, by whispers and signs imposed the
strictest silence. He delivered to Edward a sword and steel pistol,
and, pointing up the track, laid his hand on the hilt of his own
claymore, as if to make him sensible they might have occasion to use
force to make good their passage. He then placed himself at the head of
the party, who moved up the pathway in single or Indian file, Waverley
being placed nearest to their leader. He moved with great precaution,
as if to avoid giving any alarm, and halted as soon as he came to the
verge of the ascent. Waverley was soon sensible of the reason, for he
heard at no great distance an English sentinel call out 'All's well.'
The heavy sound sunk on the night-wind down the woody glen, and was
answered by the echoes of its banks. A second, third, and fourth time
the signal was repeated fainter and fainter, as if at a greater and
greater distance. It was obvious that a party of soldiers were near,
and upon their guard, though not sufficiently so to detect men skilful
in every art of predatory warfare, like those with whom he now watched
their ineffectual precautions.

When these sounds had died upon the silence of the night, the
Highlanders began their march swiftly, yet with the most cautious
silence. Waverley had little time, or indeed disposition, for
observation, and could only discern that they passed at some distance
from a large building, in the windows of which a light or two yet
seemed to twinkle. A little farther on the leading Highlander snuffed
the wind like a setting spaniel, and then made a signal to his party
again to halt. He stooped down upon all fours, wrapped up in his plaid,
so as to be scarce distinguishable from the heathy ground on which he
moved, and advanced in this posture to reconnoitre. In a short time he
returned, and dismissed his attendants excepting one; and, intimating
to Waverley that he must imitate his cautious mode of proceeding, all
three crept forward on hands and knees.

After proceeding a greater way in this inconvenient manner than was at
all comfortable to his knees and shins, Waverley perceived the smell of
smoke, which probably had been much sooner distinguished by the more
acute nasal organs of his guide. It proceeded from the corner of a low
and ruinous sheep-fold, the walls of which were made of loose stones,
as is usual in Scotland. Close by this low wall the Highlander guided
Waverley, and, in order probably to make him sensible of his danger, or
perhaps to obtain the full credit of his own dexterity, he intimated to
him, by sign and example, that he might raise his head so as to peep
into the sheep-fold. Waverley did so, and beheld an outpost of four or
five soldiers lying by their watch-fire. They were all asleep except
the sentinel, who paced backwards and forwards with his firelock on his
shoulder, which glanced red in the light of the fire as he crossed and
re-crossed before it in his short walk, casting his eye frequently to
that part of the heavens from which the moon, hitherto obscured by
mist, seemed now about to make her appearance.

In the course of a minute or two, by one of those sudden changes of
atmosphere incident to a mountainous country, a breeze arose and swept
before it the clouds which had covered the horizon, and the night
planet poured her full effulgence upon a wide and blighted heath,
skirted indeed with copse-wood and stunted trees in the quarter from
which they had come, but open and bare to the observation of the
sentinel in that to which their course tended. The wall of the
