world beyond, and search for victims there; like a demon he went back
into his own place. So at least it seemed to Lysbeth.

"Come, come," she muttered and, drawing the girl with her, passed out of
the crowd.

Elsa began to talk in a strained voice that from time to time broke into
a sob.

"That is the man," she said. "He hounded down my father; it was his
wealth he wanted, but my father swore that he would die before he should
win it, and he is dead--dead in the Inquisition, and that man is his
murderer."

Lysbeth made no answer, never a word she uttered, till presently they
halted at a mean and humble door. Then she spoke for the first time in
cold and constrained accents.

"I am going in here to visit the Vrouw Jansen; you have heard of her,
the wife of him whom they burned. She sent to me to say that she is
sick, I know not of what, but there is smallpox about; I have heard of
four cases of it in the city, so, cousin, it is wisest that you should
not enter here. Give me the basket with the food and wine. Look, yonder
is the factory, quite close at hand, and there you will find Foy. Oh!
never mind Ramiro. What is done is done. Go and walk with Foy, and for a
while forget--Ramiro."

At the door of the factory Elsa found Foy awaiting her, and they walked
together through one of the gates of the city into the pleasant meadows
that lay beyond. At first they did not speak much, for each of them was
occupied with thoughts which pressed their tongues to silence. When they
were clear of the town, however, Elsa could contain herself no more;
indeed, the anguish awakened in her mind by the sight of Ramiro working
upon nerves already overstrung had made her half-hysterical. She began
to speak; the words broke from her like water from a dam which it has
breached. She told Foy that she had seen the man, and more--much more.
All the misery which she had suffered, all the love for the father who
was lost to her.

At last Elsa ceased outworn, and, standing still there upon the river
bank she wrung her hands and wept. Till now Foy had said nothing, for
his good spirits and cheerful readiness seemed to have forsaken him.
Even now he said nothing. All he did was to put his arms about this
sweet maid's waist, and, drawing her to him, to kiss her upon brow and
eyes and lips. She did not resist; it never seemed to occur to her to
show resentment; indeed, she let her head sink upon his shoulder like
the head of a little child, and there sobbed herself to silence. At last
she lifted her face and asked very simply:

"What do you want with me, Foy van Goorl?"

"What?" he repeated; "why I want to be your husband."

"Is this a time for marrying and giving in marriage?" she asked again,
but almost as though she were speaking to herself.

"I don't know that it is," he replied, "but it seems the only thing to
do, and in such days two are better than one."

She drew away and looked at him, shaking her head sadly. "My father,"
she began----

"Yes," he interrupted brightening, "thank you for mentioning him, that
reminds me. He wished this, so I hope now that he is gone you will take
the same view."

"It is rather late to talk about that, isn't it, Foy?" she stammered,
looking at his shoulder and smoothing her ruffled hair with her small
white hand. "But what do you mean?"

So word for word, as nearly as he could remember it, he told her all
that Hendrik Brant had said to him in the cellar at The Hague before
they had entered upon the desperate adventure of their flight to the
Haarlemer Meer. "He wished it, you see," he ended.

"My thought was always his thought, and--Foy--I wish it also."

"Priceless things are not lightly won," said he, quoting Brant's words
as though by some afterthought.

"There he must have been talking of the treasure, Foy," she answered,
her face lightening to a smile.

"Ay, of the treasure, sweet, the treasure of your dear heart."

"A poor thing, Foy, but I think that--it rings true."

"It had need, Elsa, yet the best of coin may crack with rough usage."

"Mine will wear till death, Foy."

"I ask no more, Elsa. When I am dead, spend it elsewhere; I shall find
it again above where there is no marrying or giving in marriage."

"There would be but small change left to spend, Foy, so look to your own
gold and--see that you do not alter its image and superscription, for
metal will melt in the furnace, and each queen has her stamp."

"Enough," he broke in impatiently. "Why do you talk of such things, and
in these riddles which puzzle me?"

"Because, because, we are not married yet, and--the words are not
mine--precious things are dearly won. Perfect love and perfect peace
cannot be bought with a few sweet words and kisses; they must be earned
in trial and tribulation."

"Of which I have no doubt we shall find plenty," Foy replied cheerfully.
"Meanwhile, the kisses make a good road to travel on."

After this Elsa did not argue any more.

At length they turned and walked homeward through the quiet evening
twilight, hand clasped in hand, and were happy in their way. It was not
a very demonstrative way, for the Dutch have never been excitable, or
at least they do not show their excitement. Moreover, the conditions
of this betrothal were peculiar; it was as though their hands had been
joined from a deathbed, the deathbed of Hendrik Brant, the martyr of
The Hague, whose new-shed blood cried out to Heaven for vengeance. This
sense pressing on both of them did not tend towards rapturous outbursts
of youthful passion, and even if they could have shaken it off and
let their young blood have rein, there remained another sense--that of
dangers ahead of them.

"Two are better than one," Foy had said, and for her own reasons she
had not wished to argue the point, still Elsa felt that to it there was
another side. If two could comfort each other, could help each other,
could love each other, could they not also suffer for each other?
In short, by doubling their lives, did they not also double their
anxieties, or if children should come, treble and quadruple them? This
is true of all marriage, but how much more was it true in such days and
in such a case as that of Foy and Elsa, both of them heretics, both of
them rich, and, therefore, both liable at a moment's notice to be haled
to the torment and the stake? Knowing these things, and having but just
seen the hated face of Ramiro, it is not wonderful that although she
rejoiced as any woman must that the man to whom her soul turned had
declared himself her lover, Elsa could only drink of this joyful cup
with a chastened and a fearful spirit. Nor is it wonderful that even in
the hour of his triumph Foy's buoyant and hopeful nature was chilled by
the shadow of her fears and the forebodings of his own heart.



When Lysbeth parted from Elsa that afternoon she went straight to
the chamber of the Vrouw Jansen. It was a poor place, for after the
execution of her husband his wretched widow had been robbed of all
her property and now existed upon the charity of her co-religionists.
Lysbeth found her in bed, an old woman nursing her, who said that she
thought the patient was suffering from a fever. Lysbeth leant over the
bed and kissed the sick woman, but started back when she saw that the
glands of her neck were swollen into great lumps, while the face was
flushed and the eyes so bloodshot as to be almost red. Still she knew
her visitor, for she whispered:

"What is the matter with me, Vrouw van Goorl? Is it the smallpox coming
on? Tell me, friend, the doctor would not speak."

"I fear that it is worse; it is the plague," said Lysbeth, startled into
candour.

The poor girl laughed hoarsely. "Oh! I hoped it," she said. "I am glad,
I am glad, for now I shall die and go to join him. But I wish that I
had caught it before," she rambled on to herself, "for then I would have
taken it to him in prison and they couldn't have treated him as they
did." Suddenly she seemed to come to herself, for she added, "Go away,
Vrouw van Goorl, go quickly or you may catch my sickness."

"If so, I am afraid that the mischief is done, for I have kissed you,"
answered Lysbeth. "But I do not fear such things, though perhaps if I
took it, this would save me many a trouble. Still, there are others to
think of, and I will go." So, having knelt down to pray awhile by the
patient, and given the old nurse the basket of soup and food, Lysbeth
went.

Next morning she heard that the Vrouw Jansen was dead, the pest that
struck her being of the most fatal sort.

Lysbeth knew that she had run great risk, for there is no disease more
infectious than the plague. She determined, therefore, that so soon as
she reached home she would burn her dress and other articles of clothing
and purify herself with the fumes of herbs. Then she dismissed the
matter from her mind, which was already filled with another thought, a
dominant, soul-possessing thought.

Oh God, Montalvo had returned to Leyden! Out of the blackness of the
past, out of the gloom of the galleys, had arisen this evil genius of
her life; yes, and, by a strange fatality, of the life of Elsa Brant
also, since it was her, she swore, who had dragged down her father.
Lysbeth was a brave woman, one who had passed through many dangers, but
her whole heart turned sick with terror at the sight of this man, and
sick it must remain till she, or he, were dead. She could well guess
what he had come to seek. It was that cursed treasure of Hendrik Brant's
which had drawn him. She knew from Elsa that for a year at least the man
Ramiro had been plotting to steal this money at The Hague. He had failed
there, failed with overwhelming and shameful loss through the bravery
and resource of her son Foy and their henchman, Red Martin. Now he had
discovered their identity; he was aware that they held the secret of
the hiding-place of that accursed hoard, they and no others, and he had
established himself in Leyden to wring it out of them. It was clear,
clear as the setting orb of the red sun before her. She knew the
man--had she not lived with him?--and there could be no doubt about
it, and--he was the new governor of the Gevangenhuis. Doubtless he has
purchased that post for his own dark purposes and--to be near them.

Sick and half blind with the intensity of her dread, Lysbeth staggered
home. She must tell Dirk, that was her one thought; but no, she had been
in contact with the plague, first she must purify herself. So she went
to her room, and although it was summer, lit a great fire on the hearth,
and in it burned her garments. Then she bathed and fumigated her hair
and body over a brazier of strong herbs, such as in those days of
frequent and virulent sickness housewives kept at hand, after which she
dressed herself afresh and went to seek her husband. She found him at
a desk in his private room reading some paper, which at her approach he
shuffled into a drawer.

"What is that, Dirk?" she asked with sudden suspicion.

He pretended not to hear, and she repeated the query.

"Well, wife, if you wish to know," he answered in his blunt fashion, "it
is my will."

"Why are you reading your will?" she asked again, beginning to tremble,
for her nerves were afire, and this simple accident struck her as
something awful and ominous.

"For no particular reason, wife," he replied quietly, "only that we
all must die, early or late. There is no escape from that, and in these
times it is more often early than late, so it is as well to be sure that
everything is in order for those who come after us. Now, since we are on
the subject, which I have never cared to speak about, listen to me."

"What about, husband?"

"Why, about my will. Look you, Hendrik Brant and his treasure have
taught me a lesson. I am not a man of his substance, or a tenth of it,
but in some countries I should be called rich, for I have worked hard
and God has prospered me. Well, of late I have been realising where I
could, also the bulk of my savings is in cash. But the cash is not here,
not in this country at all. You know my correspondents, Munt and Brown,
of Norwich, in England, to whom we ship our goods for the English
market. They are honest folk, and Munt owes me everything, almost to his
life. Well, they have the money, it has reached them safely, thanks be
to God, and with it a counterpart of this my will duly attested, and
here is their letter of acknowledgment stating that they have laid it
out carefully at interest upon mortgage on great estates in Norfolk
where it lies to my order, or that of my heirs, and that a duplicate
acknowledgment has been filed in their English registries in case this
should go astray. Little remains here except this house and the factory,
and even on those I have raised money. Meanwhile the business is left to
live on, and beyond it the rents which will come from England, so that
whether I be living or dead you need fear no want. But what is the
matter with you, Lysbeth? You look strange."

"Oh! husband, husband," she gasped, "Juan de Montalvo is here again. He
has appeared as the new governor of the gaol. I saw him this afternoon,
I cannot be mistaken, although he has lost an eye and is much changed."

Dirk's jaw dropped and his florid face whitened. "Juan de Montalvo!" he
said. "I heard that he was dead long ago."

"You are mistaken, husband, a devil never dies. He is seeking Brant's
treasure, and he knows that we have its secret. You can guess the rest.
More, now that I think of it, I have heard that a strange Spaniard is
lodging with Hague Simon, he whom they call the Butcher, and Black Meg,
of whom we have cause to know. Doubtless it is he, and--Dirk, death
overshadows us."

"Why should he know of Brant's treasure, wife?"

"Because _he is Ramiro_, the man who dogged him down, the man who
followed the ship _Swallow_ to the Haarlemer Meer. Elsa was with me this
afternoon, she knew him again."

Dirk thought a while, resting his head upon his hand. Then he lifted it
and said:

"I am very glad that I sent the money to Munt and Brown, Heaven gave me
that thought. Well, wife, what is your counsel now?"

"My counsel is that we should fly from Leyden--all of us, yes, this very
night before worse happens."

He smiled. "That cannot be; there are no means of flight, and under the
new laws we could not pass the gates; that trick has been played too
often. Still, in a day or two, when I have had time to arrange, we might
escape if you still wish to go."

"To-night, to-night," she urged, "or some of us stay for ever."

"I tell you, wife, it is not possible. Am I a rat that I should be
bolted from my hole thus by this ferret of a Montalvo? I am a man of
peace and no longer young, but let him beware lest I stop here long
enough to pass a sword through him."

"So be it, husband," she replied, "but I think it is through my heart
that the sword will pass," and she burst out weeping.



Supper that night was a somewhat melancholy meal. Dirk and Lysbeth sat
at the ends of the table in silence. On one side of fit were placed
Foy and Elsa, who were also silent for a very different reason, while
opposite to them was Adrian, who watched Elsa with an anxious and
inquiring eye.

That the love potion worked he was certain, for she looked confused and
a little flushed; also, as would be natural under the circumstances, she
avoided his glance and made pretence to be interested in Foy, who seemed
rather more stupid than usual. Well, so soon as he could find his
chance all this would be cleared up, but meanwhile the general gloom and
silence were affecting his nerves.

"What have you been doing this afternoon, mother?" Adrian asked
presently.

"I, son?" she replied with a start, "I have been visiting the unhappy
Vrouw Jansen, whom I found very sick."

"What is the matter with her, mother?"

Lysbeth's mind, which had wandered away, again returned to the subject
at hand with an effort.

"The matter? Oh! she has the plague."

"The plague!" exclaimed Adrian, springing to his feet, "do you mean to
say you have been consorting with a woman who has the plague?"

"I fear so," she answered with a smile, "but do not be frightened,
Adrian, I have burnt my clothes and fumigated myself."

Still Adrian was frightened. His recent experience of sickness had
been ample, and although he was no coward he had a special dislike of
infectious diseases, which at the time were many.

"It is horrible," he said, "horrible. I only hope that we--I mean
you--may escape. The house is unbearably close. I am going to walk
in the courtyard," and away he went, for the moment, at any rate,
forgetting all about Elsa and the love potion.



CHAPTER XVIII

FOY SEES A VISION

Never since that day when, many years before, she had bought the safety
of the man she loved by promising herself in marriage to his rival, had
Lysbeth slept so ill as she did upon this night. Montalvo was alive.
Montalvo was here, here to strike down and destroy those whom she loved,
and triple armed with power, authority, and desire to do the deed. Well
she knew that when there was plunder to be won, he would not step aside
or soften until it was in his hands. Yet there was hope in this; he was
not a cruel man, as she knew also, that is to say, he had no pleasure
in inflicting suffering for its own sake; such methods he used only as a
means to an end. If he could get the money, all of it, she was sure that
he would leave them alone. Why should he not have it? Why should all
their lives be menaced because of this trust which had been thrust upon
them?

Unable to endure the torments of her doubts and fears, Lysbeth woke her
husband, who was sleeping peacefully at her side, and told him what was
passing in her mind.

"It is a true saying," answered Dirk with a smile, "that even the best
of women are never quite honest when their interest pulls the other way.
What, wife, would you have us buy our own peace with Brant's fortune,
and thus break faith with a dead man and bring down his curse upon us?"

"The lives of men are more than gold, and Elsa would consent," she
answered sullenly; "already this pelf is stained with blood, the blood
of Hendrik Brant himself, and of Hans the pilot."

"Yes, wife, and since you mention it, with the blood of a good many
Spaniards also, who tried to steal the stuff. Let's see; there must have
been several drowned at the mouth of the river, and quite twenty went
up with the _Swallow_, so the loss has not been all on our side. Listen,
Lysbeth, listen. It was my cousin, Hendrik Brant's, belief that in the
end this great fortune of his would do some service to our people or our
country, for he wrote as much in his will and repeated it to Foy. I know
not when or in what fashion this may come about; how can I know? But
first will I die before I hand it over to the Spaniard. Moreover, I
cannot, since its secret was never told to me."

"Foy and Martin have it."

"Lysbeth," said Dirk sternly, "I charge you as you love me not to work
upon them to betray their trust; no, not even to save my life or your
own--if we must die, let us die with honour. Do you promise?"

"I promise," she answered with dry lips, "but on this condition only,
that you fly from Leyden with us all, to-night if maybe."

"Good," answered Dirk, "a halfpenny for a herring; you have made your
promise, and I'll give you mine; that's fair, although I am old to seek
a new home in England. But it can't be to-night, wife, for I must make
arrangements. There is a ship sailing to-day, and we might catch her
to-morrow at the river's mouth, after she has passed the officers, for
her captain is a friend of mine. How will that do?"

"I had rather it had been to-night," said Lysbeth. "While we are in
Leyden with that man we are not safe from one hour to the next."

"Wife, we are never safe. It is all in the hands of God, and, therefore,
we should live like soldiers awaiting the hour to march, and rejoice
exceedingly when it pleases our Captain to sound the call."

"I know," she answered; "but, oh! Dirk, it would be hard--to part."

He turned his head aside for a moment, then said in a steady voice,
"Yes, wife, but it will be sweet to meet again and part no more."



While it was still early that morning Dirk summoned Foy and Martin to
his wife's chamber. Adrian for his own reasons he did not summon, making
the excuse that he was still asleep, and it would be a pity to disturb
him; nor Elsa, since as yet there was no necessity to trouble her.
Then, briefly, for he was given to few words, he set out the gist of
the matter, telling them that the man Ramiro whom they had beaten on the
Haarlemer Meer was in Leyden, which Foy knew already, for Elsa had told
him as much, and that he was no other than the Spaniard named the Count
Juan de Montalvo, the villain who had deceived Lysbeth into a mock
marriage by working on her fears, and who was the father of Adrian. All
this time Lysbeth sat in a carved oak chair listening with a stony
face to the tale of her own shame and betrayal. She made no sign at all
beyond a little twitching of her fingers, till Foy, guessing what she
suffered in her heart, suddenly went to his mother and kissed her. Then
she wept a few silent tears, for an instant laid her hand upon his head
as though in blessing, and, motioning him back to his place, became
herself again--stern, unmoved, observant.

Next Dirk, taking up his tale, spoke of his wife's fears, and of her
belief that there was a plot to wring out of them the secret of Hendrik
Brant's treasure.

"Happily," he said, addressing Foy, "neither your mother nor I, nor
Adrian, nor Elsa, know that secret; you and Martin know it alone, you
and perhaps one other who is far away and cannot be caught. We do not
know it, and we do not wish to know it, and whatever happens to any of
us, it is our earnest hope that neither of you will betray it, even if
our lives, or your lives, hang upon the words, for we hold it better
that we should keep our trust with a dead man at all costs than that we
should save ourselves by breaking faith. Is it not so, wife?"

"It is so," answered Lysbeth hoarsely.

"Have no fear," said Foy. "We will die before we betray."

"We will try to die before we betray," grumbled Martin in his deep
voice, "but flesh is frail and God knows."

"Oh! I have no doubt of you, honest man," said Dirk with a smile, "for
you have no mother and father to think of in this matter."

"Then, master, you are foolish," replied Martin, "for I repeat it--flesh
is frail, and I always hated the look of a rack. However, I have a
handsome legacy charged upon this treasure, and perhaps the thought of
that would support me. Alive or dead, I should not like to think of my
money being spent by any Spaniard."

While Martin spoke the strangeness of the thing came home to Foy. Here
were four of them, two of whom knew a secret and two who did not, while
those who did not implored those who did to impart to them nothing of
the knowledge which, if they had it, might serve to save them from a
fearful doom. Then for the first time in his young and inexperienced
life he understood how great erring men and women can be and what
patient majesty dwells in the human heart, that for the sake of a trust
it does not seek can yet defy the most hideous terrors of the body
and the soul. Indeed, that scene stamped itself upon his mind in such
fashion that throughout his long existence he never quite forgot it for
a single day. His mother, clad in her frilled white cap and grey gown,
seated cold-faced and resolute in the oaken chair. His father, to whom,
although he knew it not, he was now speaking for the last time, standing
by her, his hand resting upon her shoulder and addressing them in his
quiet, honest voice. Martin standing also but a little to one side and
behind, the light of the morning playing upon his great red beard; his
round, pale eyes glittering as was their fashion when wrathful, and
himself, Foy, leaning forward to listen, every nerve in his body strung
tight with excitement, love, and fear.

Oh! he never forgot it, which is not strange, for so great was the
strain upon him, so well did he know that this scene was but the prelude
to terrible events, that for a moment, only for a moment, his steady
reason was shaken and he saw a vision. Martin, the huge, patient,
ox-like Martin, was changed into a red Vengeance; he saw him, great
sword aloft, he heard the roar of his battle cry, and lo! before him
men went down to death, and about him the floor seemed purple with their
blood. His father and his mother, too; they were no longer human, they
were saints--see the glory which shone over them, and look, too, the
dead Hendrik Brant was whispering in their ears. And he, Foy, he was
beside Martin playing his part in those red frays as best he might, and
playing it not in vain.

Then all passed, and a wave of peace rolled over him, a great sense of
duty done, of honour satisfied, of reward attained. Lo! the play was
finished, and its ultimate meaning clear, but before he could read and
understand--it had gone.

He gasped and shook himself, gripping his hands together.

"What have you seen, son?" asked Lysbeth, watching his face.

"Strange things, mother," Foy answered. "A vision of war for Martin and
me, of glory for my father and you, and of eternal peace for us all."

"It is a good omen, Foy," she said. "Fight your fight and leave us to
fight ours. 'Through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of
God,' where at last there is a rest remaining for us all. It is a good
omen. Your father was right and I was wrong. Now I have no more to fear;
I am satisfied."

None of them seemed to be amazed or to find these words wonderful and
out of the common. For them the hand of approaching Doom had opened the
gates of Distance, and they knew everyone that through these some light
had broken on their souls, a faint flicker of dawn from beyond the
clouds. They accepted it in thankfulness.

"I think that is all I have to say," said Dirk in his usual voice. "No,
it is not all," and he told them of his plan for flight. They listened
and agreed to it, yet to them it seemed a thing far off and unreal. None
of them believed that this escape would ever be carried out. All of them
believed that here in Leyden they would endure the fiery trial of their
faith and win each of them its separate crown.

When everything was discussed, and each had learned the lesson of what
he must do that day, Foy asked if Adrian was to be told of the scheme.
To this his father answered hastily that the less it was spoken of the
better, therefore he proposed to tell Adrian late that night only, when
he could make up his mind whether he would accompany them or stay in
Leyden.

"Then he shan't go out to-night, and will come with us as far as the
ship only if I can manage it," muttered Martin beneath his breath, but
aloud he said nothing. Somehow it did not seem to him to be worth while
to make trouble about it, for he knew that if he did his mistress and
Foy, who believed so heartily in Adrian, would be angry.

"Father and mother," said Foy again, "while we are gathered here there
is something I wish to say to you."

"What is it, son?" asked Dirk.

"Yesterday I became affianced to Elsa Brant, and we wish to ask your
consent and blessing."

"That will be gladly given, son, for I think this very good news. Bring
her here, Foy," answered Dirk.

But although in his hurry Foy did not notice it, his mother said
nothing. She liked Elsa well indeed--who would not?--but oh! this
brought them a step nearer to that accursed treasure, the treasure which
from generation to generation had been hoarded up that it might be a
doom to men. If Foy were affianced to Elsa, it was his inheritance as
well as hers, for those trusts of Hendrik Brant's will were to Lysbeth
things unreal and visionary, and its curse would fall upon him as well
as upon her. Moreover it might be said that he was marrying her to win
the wealth.

"This betrothal does not please you; you are sad, wife," said Dirk,
looking at her quickly.

"Yes, husband, for now I think that we shall never get out of Leyden. I
pray that Adrian may not hear of it, that is all."

"Why, what has he to do with the matter?"

"Only that he is madly in love with the girl. Have you not seen it?
And--you know his temper."

"Adrian, Adrian, always Adrian," answered Dirk impatiently. "Well, it is
a very fitting match, for if she has a great fortune hidden somewhere in
a swamp, which in fact she has not, since the bulk of it is bequeathed
to me to be used for certain purposes; he has, or will have, moneys
also--safe at interest in England. Hark! here they come, so, wife, put
on a pleasant face; they will think it unlucky if you do not smile."
