that instructions should be sent to Lord Rivers to raise an army to
escort the young King safely to London.  But, Lord Hastings, who was of
the Court party opposed to the Woodvilles, and who disliked the thought
of giving them that power, argued against the proposal, and obliged the
Queen to be satisfied with an escort of two thousand horse.  The Duke of
Gloucester did nothing, at first, to justify suspicion.  He came from
Scotland (where he was commanding an army) to York, and was there the
first to swear allegiance to his nephew.  He then wrote a condoling
letter to the Queen-Mother, and set off to be present at the coronation
in London.

Now, the young King, journeying towards London too, with Lord Rivers and
Lord Gray, came to Stony Stratford, as his uncle came to Northampton,
about ten miles distant; and when those two lords heard that the Duke of
Gloucester was so near, they proposed to the young King that they should
go back and greet him in his name.  The boy being very willing that they
should do so, they rode off and were received with great friendliness,
and asked by the Duke of Gloucester to stay and dine with him.  In the
evening, while they were merry together, up came the Duke of Buckingham
with three hundred horsemen; and next morning the two lords and the two
dukes, and the three hundred horsemen, rode away together to rejoin the
King.  Just as they were entering Stony Stratford, the Duke of
Gloucester, checking his horse, turned suddenly on the two lords, charged
them with alienating from him the affections of his sweet nephew, and
caused them to be arrested by the three hundred horsemen and taken back.
Then, he and the Duke of Buckingham went straight to the King (whom they
had now in their power), to whom they made a show of kneeling down, and
offering great love and submission; and then they ordered his attendants
to disperse, and took him, alone with them, to Northampton.

A few days afterwards they conducted him to London, and lodged him in the
Bishop's Palace.  But, he did not remain there long; for, the Duke of
Buckingham with a tender face made a speech expressing how anxious he was
for the Royal boy's safety, and how much safer he would be in the Tower
until his coronation, than he could be anywhere else.  So, to the Tower
he was taken, very carefully, and the Duke of Gloucester was named
Protector of the State.

Although Gloucester had proceeded thus far with a very smooth
countenance--and although he was a clever man, fair of speech, and not
ill-looking, in spite of one of his shoulders being something higher than
the other--and although he had come into the City riding bare-headed at
the King's side, and looking very fond of him--he had made the King's
mother more uneasy yet; and when the Royal boy was taken to the Tower,
she became so alarmed that she took sanctuary in Westminster with her
five daughters.

Nor did she do this without reason, for, the Duke of Gloucester, finding
that the lords who were opposed to the Woodville family were faithful to
the young King nevertheless, quickly resolved to strike a blow for
himself.  Accordingly, while those lords met in council at the Tower, he
and those who were in his interest met in separate council at his own
residence, Crosby Palace, in Bishopsgate Street.  Being at last quite
prepared, he one day appeared unexpectedly at the council in the Tower,
and appeared to be very jocular and merry.  He was particularly gay with
the Bishop of Ely: praising the strawberries that grew in his garden on
Holborn Hill, and asking him to have some gathered that he might eat them
at dinner.  The Bishop, quite proud of the honour, sent one of his men to
fetch some; and the Duke, still very jocular and gay, went out; and the
council all said what a very agreeable duke he was!  In a little time,
however, he came back quite altered--not at all jocular--frowning and
fierce--and suddenly said,--

'What do those persons deserve who have compassed my destruction; I being
the King's lawful, as well as natural, protector?'

To this strange question, Lord Hastings replied, that they deserved
death, whosoever they were.

'Then,' said the Duke, 'I tell you that they are that sorceress my
brother's wife;' meaning the Queen: 'and that other sorceress, Jane
Shore.  Who, by witchcraft, have withered my body, and caused my arm to
shrink as I now show you.'

He then pulled up his sleeve and showed them his arm, which was shrunken,
it is true, but which had been so, as they all very well knew, from the
hour of his birth.

Jane Shore, being then the lover of Lord Hastings, as she had formerly
been of the late King, that lord knew that he himself was attacked.  So,
he said, in some confusion, 'Certainly, my Lord, if they have done this,
they be worthy of punishment.'

'If?' said the Duke of Gloucester; 'do you talk to me of ifs?  I tell you
that they _have_ so done, and I will make it good upon thy body, thou
traitor!'

With that, he struck the table a great blow with his fist.  This was a
signal to some of his people outside to cry 'Treason!'  They immediately
did so, and there was a rush into the chamber of so many armed men that
it was filled in a moment.

'First,' said the Duke of Gloucester to Lord Hastings, 'I arrest thee,
traitor!  And let him,' he added to the armed men who took him, 'have a
priest at once, for by St. Paul I will not dine until I have seen his
head of!'

Lord Hastings was hurried to the green by the Tower chapel, and there
beheaded on a log of wood that happened to be lying on the ground.  Then,
the Duke dined with a good appetite, and after dinner summoning the
principal citizens to attend him, told them that Lord Hastings and the
rest had designed to murder both himself and the Duke if Buckingham, who
stood by his side, if he had not providentially discovered their design.
He requested them to be so obliging as to inform their fellow-citizens of
the truth of what he said, and issued a proclamation (prepared and neatly
copied out beforehand) to the same effect.

On the same day that the Duke did these things in the Tower, Sir Richard
Ratcliffe, the boldest and most undaunted of his men, went down to
Pontefract; arrested Lord Rivers, Lord Gray, and two other gentlemen; and
publicly executed them on the scaffold, without any trial, for having
intended the Duke's death.  Three days afterwards the Duke, not to lose
time, went down the river to Westminster in his barge, attended by divers
bishops, lords, and soldiers, and demanded that the Queen should deliver
her second son, the Duke of York, into his safe keeping.  The Queen,
being obliged to comply, resigned the child after she had wept over him;
and Richard of Gloucester placed him with his brother in the Tower.  Then,
he seized Jane Shore, and, because she had been the lover of the late
King, confiscated her property, and got her sentenced to do public
penance in the streets by walking in a scanty dress, with bare feet, and
carrying a lighted candle, to St. Paul's Cathedral, through the most
crowded part of the City.

Having now all things ready for his own advancement, he caused a friar to
preach a sermon at the cross which stood in front of St. Paul's
Cathedral, in which he dwelt upon the profligate manners of the late
King, and upon the late shame of Jane Shore, and hinted that the princes
were not his children.  'Whereas, good people,' said the friar, whose
name was SHAW, 'my Lord the Protector, the noble Duke of Gloucester, that
sweet prince, the pattern of all the noblest virtues, is the perfect
image and express likeness of his father.'  There had been a little plot
between the Duke and the friar, that the Duke should appear in the crowd
at this moment, when it was expected that the people would cry 'Long live
King Richard!'  But, either through the friar saying the words too soon,
or through the Duke's coming too late, the Duke and the words did not
come together, and the people only laughed, and the friar sneaked off
ashamed.

The Duke of Buckingham was a better hand at such business than the friar,
so he went to the Guildhall the next day, and addressed the citizens in
the Lord Protector's behalf.  A few dirty men, who had been hired and
stationed there for the purpose, crying when he had done, 'God save King
Richard!' he made them a great bow, and thanked them with all his heart.
Next day, to make an end of it, he went with the mayor and some lords and
citizens to Bayard Castle, by the river, where Richard then was, and read
an address, humbly entreating him to accept the Crown of England.
Richard, who looked down upon them out of a window and pretended to be in
great uneasiness and alarm, assured them there was nothing he desired
less, and that his deep affection for his nephews forbade him to think of
it.  To this the Duke of Buckingham replied, with pretended warmth, that
the free people of England would never submit to his nephew's rule, and
that if Richard, who was the lawful heir, refused the Crown, why then
they must find some one else to wear it.  The Duke of Gloucester
returned, that since he used that strong language, it became his painful
duty to think no more of himself, and to accept the Crown.

Upon that, the people cheered and dispersed; and the Duke of Gloucester
and the Duke of Buckingham passed a pleasant evening, talking over the
play they had just acted with so much success, and every word of which
they had prepared together.




CHAPTER XXV--ENGLAND UNDER RICHARD THE THIRD


King Richard the Third was up betimes in the morning, and went to
Westminster Hall.  In the Hall was a marble seat, upon which he sat
himself down between two great noblemen, and told the people that he
began the new reign in that place, because the first duty of a sovereign
was to administer the laws equally to all, and to maintain justice.  He
then mounted his horse and rode back to the City, where he was received
by the clergy and the crowd as if he really had a right to the throne,
and really were a just man.  The clergy and the crowd must have been
rather ashamed of themselves in secret, I think, for being such
poor-spirited knaves.

The new King and his Queen were soon crowned with a great deal of show
and noise, which the people liked very much; and then the King set forth
on a royal progress through his dominions.  He was crowned a second time
at York, in order that the people might have show and noise enough; and
wherever he went was received with shouts of rejoicing--from a good many
people of strong lungs, who were paid to strain their throats in crying,
'God save King Richard!'  The plan was so successful that I am told it
has been imitated since, by other usurpers, in other progresses through
other dominions.

While he was on this journey, King Richard stayed a week at Warwick.  And
from Warwick he sent instructions home for one of the wickedest murders
that ever was done--the murder of the two young princes, his nephews, who
were shut up in the Tower of London.

Sir Robert Brackenbury was at that time Governor of the Tower.  To him,
by the hands of a messenger named JOHN GREEN, did King Richard send a
letter, ordering him by some means to put the two young princes to death.
But Sir Robert--I hope because he had children of his own, and loved
them--sent John Green back again, riding and spurring along the dusty
roads, with the answer that he could not do so horrible a piece of work.
The King, having frowningly considered a little, called to him SIR JAMES
TYRREL, his master of the horse, and to him gave authority to take
command of the Tower, whenever he would, for twenty-four hours, and to
keep all the keys of the Tower during that space of time.  Tyrrel, well
knowing what was wanted, looked about him for two hardened ruffians, and
chose JOHN DIGHTON, one of his own grooms, and MILES FOREST, who was a
murderer by trade.  Having secured these two assistants, he went, upon a
day in August, to the Tower, showed his authority from the King, took the
command for four-and-twenty hours, and obtained possession of the keys.
And when the black night came he went creeping, creeping, like a guilty
villain as he was, up the dark, stone winding stairs, and along the dark
stone passages, until he came to the door of the room where the two young
princes, having said their prayers, lay fast asleep, clasped in each
other's arms.  And while he watched and listened at the door, he sent in
those evil demons, John Dighton and Miles Forest, who smothered the two
princes with the bed and pillows, and carried their bodies down the
stairs, and buried them under a great heap of stones at the staircase
foot.  And when the day came, he gave up the command of the Tower, and
restored the keys, and hurried away without once looking behind him; and
Sir Robert Brackenbury went with fear and sadness to the princes' room,
and found the princes gone for ever.

You know, through all this history, how true it is that traitors are
never true, and you will not be surprised to learn that the Duke of
Buckingham soon turned against King Richard, and joined a great
conspiracy that was formed to dethrone him, and to place the crown upon
its rightful owner's head.  Richard had meant to keep the murder secret;
but when he heard through his spies that this conspiracy existed, and
that many lords and gentlemen drank in secret to the healths of the two
young princes in the Tower, he made it known that they were dead.  The
conspirators, though thwarted for a moment, soon resolved to set up for
the crown against the murderous Richard, HENRY Earl of Richmond, grandson
of Catherine: that widow of Henry the Fifth who married Owen Tudor.  And
as Henry was of the house of Lancaster, they proposed that he should
marry the Princess Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of the late King, now
the heiress of the house of York, and thus by uniting the rival families
put an end to the fatal wars of the Red and White Roses.  All being
settled, a time was appointed for Henry to come over from Brittany, and
for a great rising against Richard to take place in several parts of
England at the same hour.  On a certain day, therefore, in October, the
revolt took place; but unsuccessfully.  Richard was prepared, Henry was
driven back at sea by a storm, his followers in England were dispersed,
and the Duke of Buckingham was taken, and at once beheaded in the market-
place at Salisbury.

The time of his success was a good time, Richard thought, for summoning a
Parliament and getting some money.  So, a Parliament was called, and it
flattered and fawned upon him as much as he could possibly desire, and
declared him to be the rightful King of England, and his only son Edward,
then eleven years of age, the next heir to the throne.

Richard knew full well that, let the Parliament say what it would, the
Princess Elizabeth was remembered by people as the heiress of the house
of York; and having accurate information besides, of its being designed
by the conspirators to marry her to Henry of Richmond, he felt that it
would much strengthen him and weaken them, to be beforehand with them,
and marry her to his son.  With this view he went to the Sanctuary at
Westminster, where the late King's widow and her daughter still were, and
besought them to come to Court: where (he swore by anything and
everything) they should be safely and honourably entertained.  They came,
accordingly, but had scarcely been at Court a month when his son died
suddenly--or was poisoned--and his plan was crushed to pieces.

In this extremity, King Richard, always active, thought, 'I must make
another plan.'  And he made the plan of marrying the Princess Elizabeth
himself, although she was his niece.  There was one difficulty in the
way: his wife, the Queen Anne, was alive.  But, he knew (remembering his
nephews) how to remove that obstacle, and he made love to the Princess
Elizabeth, telling her he felt perfectly confident that the Queen would
die in February.  The Princess was not a very scrupulous young lady, for,
instead of rejecting the murderer of her brothers with scorn and hatred,
she openly declared she loved him dearly; and, when February came and the
Queen did not die, she expressed her impatient opinion that she was too
long about it.  However, King Richard was not so far out in his
prediction, but, that she died in March--he took good care of that--and
then this precious pair hoped to be married.  But they were disappointed,
for the idea of such a marriage was so unpopular in the country, that the
King's chief counsellors, RATCLIFFE and CATESBY, would by no means
undertake to propose it, and the King was even obliged to declare in
public that he had never thought of such a thing.

He was, by this time, dreaded and hated by all classes of his subjects.
His nobles deserted every day to Henry's side; he dared not call another
Parliament, lest his crimes should be denounced there; and for want of
money, he was obliged to get Benevolences from the citizens, which
exasperated them all against him.  It was said too, that, being stricken
by his conscience, he dreamed frightful dreams, and started up in the
night-time, wild with terror and remorse.  Active to the last, through
all this, he issued vigorous proclamations against Henry of Richmond and
all his followers, when he heard that they were coming against him with a
Fleet from France; and took the field as fierce and savage as a wild
boar--the animal represented on his shield.

Henry of Richmond landed with six thousand men at Milford Haven, and came
on against King Richard, then encamped at Leicester with an army twice as
great, through North Wales.  On Bosworth Field the two armies met; and
Richard, looking along Henry's ranks, and seeing them crowded with the
English nobles who had abandoned him, turned pale when he beheld the
powerful Lord Stanley and his son (whom he had tried hard to retain)
among them.  But, he was as brave as he was wicked, and plunged into the
thickest of the fight.  He was riding hither and thither, laying about
him in all directions, when he observed the Earl of Northumberland--one
of his few great allies--to stand inactive, and the main body of his
troops to hesitate.  At the same moment, his desperate glance caught
Henry of Richmond among a little group of his knights.  Riding hard at
him, and crying 'Treason!' he killed his standard-bearer, fiercely
unhorsed another gentleman, and aimed a powerful stroke at Henry himself,
to cut him down.  But, Sir William Stanley parried it as it fell, and
before Richard could raise his arm again, he was borne down in a press of
numbers, unhorsed, and killed.  Lord Stanley picked up the crown, all
bruised and trampled, and stained with blood, and put it upon Richmond's
head, amid loud and rejoicing cries of 'Long live King Henry!'

That night, a horse was led up to the church of the Grey Friars at
Leicester; across whose back was tied, like some worthless sack, a naked
body brought there for burial.  It was the body of the last of the
Plantagenet line, King Richard the Third, usurper and murderer, slain at
the battle of Bosworth Field in the thirty-second year of his age, after
a reign of two years.




CHAPTER XXVI--ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SEVENTH


King Henry the Seventh did not turn out to be as fine a fellow as the
nobility and people hoped, in the first joy of their deliverance from
Richard the Third.  He was very cold, crafty, and calculating, and would
do almost anything for money.  He possessed considerable ability, but his
chief merit appears to have been that he was not cruel when there was
nothing to be got by it.

The new King had promised the nobles who had espoused his cause that he
would marry the Princess Elizabeth.  The first thing he did, was, to
direct her to be removed from the castle of Sheriff Hutton in Yorkshire,
where Richard had placed her, and restored to the care of her mother in
London.  The young Earl of Warwick, Edward Plantagenet, son and heir of
the late Duke of Clarence, had been kept a prisoner in the same old
Yorkshire Castle with her.  This boy, who was now fifteen, the new King
placed in the Tower for safety.  Then he came to London in great state,
and gratified the people with a fine procession; on which kind of show he
often very much relied for keeping them in good humour.  The sports and
feasts which took place were followed by a terrible fever, called the
Sweating Sickness; of which great numbers of people died.  Lord Mayors
and Aldermen are thought to have suffered most from it; whether, because
they were in the habit of over-eating themselves, or because they were
very jealous of preserving filth and nuisances in the City (as they have
been since), I don't know.

The King's coronation was postponed on account of the general ill-health,
and he afterwards deferred his marriage, as if he were not very anxious
that it should take place: and, even after that, deferred the Queen's
coronation so long that he gave offence to the York party.  However, he
set these things right in the end, by hanging some men and seizing on the
rich possessions of others; by granting more popular pardons to the
followers of the late King than could, at first, be got from him; and, by
employing about his Court, some very scrupulous persons who had been
employed in the previous reign.

As this reign was principally remarkable for two very curious impostures
which have become famous in history, we will make those two stories its
principal feature.

There was a priest at Oxford of the name of Simons, who had for a pupil a
handsome boy named Lambert Simnel, the son of a baker.  Partly to gratify
his own ambitious ends, and partly to carry out the designs of a secret
party formed against the King, this priest declared that his pupil, the
boy, was no other than the young Earl of Warwick; who (as everybody might
have known) was safely locked up in the Tower of London.  The priest and
the boy went over to Ireland; and, at Dublin, enlisted in their cause all
ranks of the people: who seem to have been generous enough, but
exceedingly irrational.  The Earl of Kildare, the governor of Ireland,
declared that he believed the boy to be what the priest represented; and
the boy, who had been well tutored by the priest, told them such things
of his childhood, and gave them so many descriptions of the Royal Family,
that they were perpetually shouting and hurrahing, and drinking his
health, and making all kinds of noisy and thirsty demonstrations, to
express their belief in him.  Nor was this feeling confined to Ireland
alone, for the Earl of Lincoln--whom the late usurper had named as his
successor--went over to the young Pretender; and, after holding a secret
correspondence with the Dowager Duchess of Burgundy--the sister of Edward
the Fourth, who detested the present King and all his race--sailed to
Dublin with two thousand German soldiers of her providing.  In this
promising state of the boy's fortunes, he was crowned there, with a crown
taken off the head of a statue of the Virgin Mary; and was then,
according to the Irish custom of those days, carried home on the
shoulders of a big chieftain possessing a great deal more strength than
sense.  Father Simons, you may be sure, was mighty busy at the
coronation.

Ten days afterwards, the Germans, and the Irish, and the priest, and the
boy, and the Earl of Lincoln, all landed in Lancashire to invade England.
The King, who had good intelligence of their movements, set up his
standard at Nottingham, where vast numbers resorted to him every day;
while the Earl of Lincoln could gain but very few.  With his small force
he tried to make for the town of Newark; but the King's army getting
between him and that place, he had no choice but to risk a battle at
Stoke.  It soon ended in the complete destruction of the Pretender's
forces, one half of whom were killed; among them, the Earl himself.  The
priest and the baker's boy were taken prisoners.  The priest, after
confessing the trick, was shut up in prison, where he afterwards
died--suddenly perhaps.  The boy was taken into the King's kitchen and
made a turnspit.  He was afterwards raised to the station of one of the
King's falconers; and so ended this strange imposition.

There seems reason to suspect that the Dowager Queen--always a restless
and busy woman--had had some share in tutoring the baker's son.  The King
was very angry with her, whether or no.  He seized upon her property, and
shut her up in a convent at Bermondsey.

One might suppose that the end of this story would have put the Irish
people on their guard; but they were quite ready to receive a second
impostor, as they had received the first, and that same troublesome
Duchess of Burgundy soon gave them the opportunity.  All of a sudden
there appeared at Cork, in a vessel arriving from Portugal, a young man
of excellent abilities, of very handsome appearance and most winning
manners, who declared himself to be Richard, Duke of York, the second son
of King Edward the Fourth.  'O,' said some, even of those ready Irish
believers, 'but surely that young Prince was murdered by his uncle in the
Tower!'--'It _is_ supposed so,' said the engaging young man; 'and my
brother _was_ killed in that gloomy prison; but I escaped--it don't
matter how, at present--and have been wandering about the world for seven
long years.'  This explanation being quite satisfactory to numbers of the
Irish people, they began again to shout and to hurrah, and to drink his
health, and to make the noisy and thirsty demonstrations all over again.
And the big chieftain in Dublin began to look out for another coronation,
and another young King to be carried home on his back.

Now, King Henry being then on bad terms with France, the French King,
Charles the Eighth, saw that, by pretending to believe in the handsome
young man, he could trouble his enemy sorely.  So, he invited him over to
the French Court, and appointed him a body-guard, and treated him in all
respects as if he really were the Duke of York.  Peace, however, being
soon concluded between the two Kings, the pretended Duke was turned
adrift, and wandered for protection to the Duchess of Burgundy.  She,
after feigning to inquire into the reality of his claims, declared him to
be the very picture of her dear departed brother; gave him a body-guard
at her Court, of thirty halberdiers; and called him by the sounding name
of the White Rose of England.

The leading members of the White Rose party in England sent over an
agent, named Sir Robert Clifford, to ascertain whether the White Rose's
claims were good: the King also sent over his agents to inquire into the
Rose's history.  The White Roses declared the young man to be really the
Duke of York; the King declared him to be PERKIN WARBECK, the son of a
merchant of the city of Tournay, who had acquired his knowledge of
England, its language and manners, from the English merchants who traded
in Flanders; it was also stated by the Royal agents that he had been in
the service of Lady Brompton, the wife of an exiled English nobleman, and
that the Duchess of Burgundy had caused him to be trained and taught,
expressly for this deception.  The King then required the Archduke
Philip--who was the sovereign of Burgundy--to banish this new Pretender,
or to deliver him up; but, as the Archduke replied that he could not
control the Duchess in her own land, the King, in revenge, took the
market of English cloth away from Antwerp, and prevented all commercial
intercourse between the two countries.

He also, by arts and bribes, prevailed on Sir Robert Clifford to betray
his employers; and he denouncing several famous English noblemen as being
secretly the friends of Perkin Warbeck, the King had three of the
foremost executed at once.  Whether he pardoned the remainder because
they were poor, I do not know; but it is only too probable that he
refused to pardon one famous nobleman against whom the same Clifford soon
afterwards informed separately, because he was rich.  This was no other
than Sir William Stanley, who had saved the King's life at the battle of
Bosworth Field.  It is very doubtful whether his treason amounted to much
more than his having said, that if he were sure the young man was the
Duke of York, he would not take arms against him.  Whatever he had done
he admitted, like an honourable spirit; and he lost his head for it, and
the covetous King gained all his wealth.

Perkin Warbeck kept quiet for three years; but, as the Flemings began to
complain heavily of the loss of their trade by the stoppage of the
Antwerp market on his account, and as it was not unlikely that they might
even go so far as to take his life, or give him up, he found it necessary
to do something.  Accordingly he made a desperate sally, and landed, with
only a few hundred men, on the coast of Deal.  But he was soon glad to
get back to the place from whence he came; for the country people rose
against his followers, killed a great many, and took a hundred and fifty
prisoners: who were all driven to London, tied together with ropes, like
a team of cattle.  Every one of them was hanged on some part or other of
the sea-shore; in order, that if any more men should come over with
Perkin Warbeck, they might see the bodies as a warning before they
landed.

Then the wary King, by making a treaty of commerce with the Flemings,
drove Perkin Warbeck out of that country; and, by completely gaining over
the Irish to his side, deprived him of that asylum too.  He wandered away
to Scotland, and told his story at that Court.  King James the Fourth of
Scotland, who was no friend to King Henry, and had no reason to be (for
King Henry had bribed his Scotch lords to betray him more than once; but
had never succeeded in his plots), gave him a great reception, called him
his cousin, and gave him in marriage the Lady Catherine Gordon, a
beautiful and charming creature related to the royal house of Stuart.

Alarmed by this successful reappearance of the Pretender, the King still
undermined, and bought, and bribed, and kept his doings and Perkin
