"How many men were there in the diligence?"

"Four, including the conductor."

"And they didn't defend themselves?"

"No, general."

"The police report says, however, that two shots were fired."

"Yes, general, but those two shots--"

"Well?"

"Were fired by my son."

"Your son? Why, he is in Vendee!"

"Roland, yes; but Edouard was with me."

"Edouard! Who is Edouard?"

"Roland's brother."

"True, he spoke of him; but he is only a child."

"He is not yet twelve, general."

"And it was he who fired the two shots?"

"Yes, general."

"Why didn't you bring him with you?"

"I did."

"Where is he?"

"I left him with Madame Bonaparte."

Bonaparte rang, and an usher appeared.

"Tell Josephine to bring the boy to me." Then, walking up and down his
study, he muttered, "Four men! And a child taught them courage! Were any
of the robbers wounded?"

"There were no balls in the pistols."

"What! no balls?"

"No; they belonged to the conductor, and he had taken the precaution to
load them with powder only."

"Very good; his name shall be known."

Just then the door opened, and Madame Bonaparte entered, leading the boy
by the hand.

"Come here," Bonaparte said to him.

Edouard went up to him without hesitation and made a military salute.

"So you fired at the robbers twice, did you?"

"There, you see, mamma, they were robbers!" interrupted the child.

"Of course they were robbers; I should like to hear any one declare they
were not! Was it you who fired at them, when the men were afraid?"

"Yes, it was I, general. But unfortunately that coward of a conductor
had loaded his pistols only with powder; otherwise I should have killed
their leader."

"Then you were not afraid?"

"I?" replied the boy. "No, I am never afraid."

"You ought to be named Cornelia, madame," exclaimed Bonaparte, turning
to Madame de Montrevel, who was leaning on Josephine's arm. Then he said
to the child, kissing him: "Very good; we will take care of you. What
would you like to be?"

"Soldier first."

"What do you mean by first?"

"Why, first a soldier, then later a colonel like my brother, and then a
general like my father."

"It won't be my fault if you are not," answered the First Consul.

"Nor mine," retorted the boy.

"Edouard!" exclaimed Madame de Montrevel, timidly.

"Now don't scold him for answering properly;" and Bonaparte, lifting the
child to the level of his face, kissed him.

"You must dine with us," said he, "and to-night Bourrienne, who met you
at the hotel, will install you in the Rue de la Victoire. You must stay
there till Roland gets back; he will then find you suitable lodgings.
Edouard shall go to the Prytanee, and I will marry off your daughter."

"General!"

"That's all settled with Roland." Then, turning to Josephine, he
said: "Take Madame de Montrevel with you, and try not to let her be
bored.--And, Madame de Montrevel, if _your friend_ (he emphasized the
words) wishes to go to a milliner, prevent it; she can't want bonnets,
for she bought thirty-eight last month."

Then, giving Edouard a friendly tap, he dismissed the two women with a
wave of the hand.




CHAPTER XXXI. THE SON OF THE MILLER OF LEGUERNO

We have said that at the very moment when Morgan and his three
companions stopped the Geneva diligence between Bar-sur-Seine and
Chatillon, Roland was entering Nantes.

If we are to know the result of his mission we must not grope our way,
step by step, through the darkness in which the Abbe Bernier wrapped
his ambitious projects, but we must join him later at the village of
Muzillac, between Ambon and Guernic, six miles above the little bay into
which the Vilaine River falls.

There we find ourselves in the heart of the Morbihan; that is to say, in
the region that gave birth to the Chouannerie. It was close to Laval, on
the little farm of the Poiriers, that the four Chouan brothers were
born to Pierre Cottereau and Jeanne Moyne. One of their ancestors, a
misanthropical woodcutter, a morose peasant, kept himself aloof from the
other peasants as the _chat-huant_ (screech-owl) keeps aloof from the
other birds; hence the name Chouan, a corruption of _chat-huant_.

The name became that of a party. On the right bank of the Loire they
said Chouans when they meant Bretons, just as on the left bank they said
brigands when they meant Vendeans.

It is not for us to relate the death and destruction of that heroic
family, nor follow to the scaffold the two sisters and a brother, nor
tell of battlefields where Jean and Rene, martyrs to their faith, lay
dying or dead. Many years have elapsed since the executions of Perrine,
Rene and Pierre, and the death of Jean; and the martyrdom of the
sisters, the exploits of the brothers have passed into legends. We have
now to do with their successors.

It is true that these gars (lads) are faithful to their traditions. As
they fought beside la Rouerie, Bois-Hardy and Bernard de Villeneuve, so
did they fight beside Bourmont, Frotte, and Georges Cadoudal. Theirs
was always the same courage, the same devotion--that of the Christian
soldier, the faithful royalist. Their aspect is always the same, rough
and savage; their weapons, the same gun or cudgel, called in those
parts a "ferte." Their garments are the same; a brown woollen cap, or a
broad-brimmed hat scarcely covering the long straight hair that fell in
tangles on their shoulders, the old _Aulerci Cenomani_, as in Caesar's
day, _promisso capillo_; they are the same Bretons with wide breeches of
whom Martial said:

  _Tam laxa est..._
  _Quam veteres braccoe Britonis pauperis._

To protect themselves from rain and cold they wore goatskin garments,
made with the long hair turned outside; on the breasts of which, as
countersign, some wore a scapulary and chaplet, others a heart, the
heart of Jesus; this latter was the distinctive sign of a fraternity
which withdrew apart each day for common prayer.

Such were the men, who, at the time we are crossing the borderland
between the Loire-Inferieure and Morbihan, were scattered from La
Roche-Bernard to Vannes, and from Quertemberg to Billiers, surrounding
consequently the village of Muzillac.

But it needed the eye of the eagle soaring in the clouds, or that of the
screech-owl piercing the darkness, to distinguish these men among the
gorse and heather and underbrush where they were crouching.

Let us pass through this network of invisible sentinels, and after
fording two streams, the affluents of a nameless river which flows into
the sea near Billiers, between Arzal and Dangau, let us boldly enter the
village of Muzillac.

All is still and sombre; a single light shines through the blinds of
a house, or rather a cottage, which nothing distinguishes from its
fellows. It is the fourth to the right on entering the village.

Let us put our eye to one of these chinks and look in.

We see a man dressed like the rich peasants of Morbihan, except that
gold lace about a finger wide stripes the collar and buttonholes of his
coat and also the edges of his hat. The rest of his dress consists of
leathern trousers and high-topped boots. His sword is thrown upon a
chair. A brace of pistols lies within reach of his hand. Within the
fireplace the barrels of two or three muskets reflect the light of a
blazing fire.

The man is seated before a table; a lamp lights some papers which he is
reading with great attention, and illuminates his face at the same time.

The face is that of a man of thirty. When the cares of a partisan
warfare do not darken it, its expression must surely be frank and
joyous. Beautiful blond hair frames it; great blue eyes enliven it;
the head, of a shape peculiarly Breton, seems to show, if we believe in
Gall's system, an exaggerated development of the organs of self-will.
And the man has two names. That by which he is known to his soldiers,
his familiar name, is Round-head; and his real name, received from
brave and worthy parents, Georges Cadudal, or rather Cadoudal, tradition
having changed the orthography of a name that is now historic.

Georges was the son of a farmer of the parish of Kerleano in the commune
of Brech. The story goes that this farmer was once a miller. Georges had
just received at the college of Vannes--distant only a few leagues from
Brech--a good and solid education when the first appeals for a royalist
insurrection were made in Vendee. Cadoudal listened to them, gathered
together a number of his companions, and offered his services to
Stofflet. But Stofflet insisted on seeing him at work before he accepted
him. Georges asked nothing better. Such occasions were not long to seek
in the Vendean army. On the next day there was a battle; Georges went
into it with such determination and made so desperate a rush that M. de
Maulevrier's former huntsman, on seeing him charge the Blues, could not
refrain from saying aloud to Bonchamp, who was near him:

"If a cannon ball doesn't take off that _Big Round Head_, it will roll
far, I warrant you."

The name clung to Cadoudal--a name by which, five centuries earlier, the
lords of Malestroit, Penhoel, Beaumanoir and Rochefort designated the
great Constable, whose ransom was spun by the women of Brittany.

"There's the Big Round Head," said they; "now we'll exchange some good
sword-play with the English."

Unfortunately, at this time it was not Breton sword-thrusts against
English, but Frenchmen against Frenchmen.

Georges remained in Vendee until after the defeat of Savenay. The whole
Vendean army was either left upon the battlefield or vanished in smoke.
For three years, Georges had performed prodigies of valor, strength and
dexterity; he now crossed the Loire and re-entered Morbihan with only
one man left of all who had followed him.

That man became his aide-de-camp, or rather his brother-in-arms.
He never left him, and in memory of the hard campaign they had made
together he changed his name from Lemercier to Tiffauges. We have seen
him at the ball of the Victims charged with a message to Morgan.

As soon as Cadoudal returned to his own part of the country, he fomented
insurrection on his own responsibility. Bullets respected that big
round head, and the big round head justified Stofflet's prediction. He
succeeded La Rochejacquelin, d'Elbee, Bonchamp, Lescure, even Stofflet
himself, and became their rival for fame, their superior in power; for
it happened (and this will give an idea of his strength) that Cadoudal,
almost single-handed, had been able to resist the government of
Bonaparte, who had been First Consul for the last three months. The two
leaders who continued with him, faithful to the Bourbon dynasty, were
Frotte and Bourmont.

At the time of which we are now speaking, that is to say, the 26th of
January, 1800, Cadoudal commanded three or four thousand men with whom
he was preparing to blockade General Hatry in Vannes.

During the time that he awaited the First Consul's answer to the letter
of Louis XVIII. he had suspended hostilities; but Tiffauges had arrived
a couple of days before with it.

That letter was already on the way to England, whence it would be sent
to Mittau; and since the First Consul would not accept peace on the
terms dictated by Louis XVIII., Cadoudal, commander-in-chief of Louis
XVIII. in the West, renewed his warfare against Bonaparte, intending
to carry it on alone, if necessary, with his friend Tiffauges. For
the rest, the latter was at Pouance, where conferences were being
held between Chatillon, d'Autichamp, the Abbe Bernier, and General
Hedouville.

He was reflecting--this last survivor of the great warriors of the civil
war--and the news he had just received was indeed a matter for deep
reflection.

General Brune, the conqueror of Alkmaar and Castricum, the savior of
Holland, had just been appointed to the command of the Republican forces
in the West. He had reached Nantes three days previous, intending, at
any cost, to annihilate Cadoudal and his Chouans.

At any cost, therefore, Cadoudal and his Chouans must prove to the
commander-in-chief that they knew no fear, and had nothing to expect
from intimidation.

Just then the gallop of a horse was heard; the rider no doubt had
the countersign, for he passed without difficulty the various patrols
stationed along the toad to La Roche-Bernard, and entered the village of
Muzillac, also without difficulty.

He stopped before the door of the cottage in which Georges was sitting.
The latter raised his head, listened, and, by way of precaution, laid
his hands on his pistols, though it was probable that the new-comer was
a friend.

The rider dismounted, strode up the path, and opened the door of the
room where Georges was waiting.

"Ah! it's you, Coeur-de-Roi," said Cadoudal. "Where do you come from?"

"From Pouance, general."

"What news?"

"A letter from Tiffauges."

"Give it to me."

Georges snatched the letter hastily from Coeur-de-Roi's hand and read
it.

"Ah!" he exclaimed.

Then he read it a second time,

"Have you seen the man whose coming he speaks of?" inquired Cadoudal.

"Yes, general," replied the courier.

"What sort of a man is he?"

"A handsome young fellow of twenty-six or seven."

"What manner?"

"Determined."

"That's it. When does he arrive?"

"Probably to-night."

"Did you safe-guard him along the road?"

"Yes; he'll come safely."

"Do it again. Nothing must happen to him; he is protected by Morgan."

"That's understood, general."

"Anything more to say?"

"The advanced guard of the Republicans has reached La Roche-Bernard."

"How many men?"

"About a thousand. They have a guillotine with them, and the
commissioner of the executive power, Milliere."

"Are you sure?"

"I met them on the road. The commissioner was riding near the colonel,
and I recognized him perfectly. He executed my brother, and I have sworn
he shall die by my own hand."

"And you'll risk your life to keep your oath?"

"At the first opportunity."

"Perhaps it won't be long coming."

The gallop of a horse echoed through the street.

"Ah!" said Coeur-de-Roi, "that is probably the man you expect."

"No," replied Cadoudal, "this rider comes from the direction of Vannes."

The sound became more distinct, and it proved that Cadoudal was right.

The second horseman, like the first, halted at the gate, dismounted, and
came into the room. The royalist leader recognized him at once, in spite
of the large cloak in which he was wrapped.

"Is it you, Benedicite?" he asked.

"Yes, general."

"Where do you come from?"

"From Vannes, where you sent me to watch the Blues.

"Well, what are the Blues doing?"

"Scaring themselves about dying of hunger if you blockade the town.
In order to procure provisions General Hatry intends to carry off the
supplies at Grandchamp. The general is to command the raid in person;
and, to act more quickly, only a hundred men are to go."

"Are you tired, Benedicite?"

"Never, general."

"And your horse?"

"He came fast, but he can do twelve or fifteen miles more without
killing himself."

"Give him two hours' rest, a double feed of oats, and make him do
thirty."

"On those conditions he can do them."

"Start in two hours. Be at Grandchamp by daybreak. Give the order in my
name to evacuate the village. I'll take care of General Hatry and his
column. Is that all you have to say?"

"No, I heard other news."

"What is it?"

"That Vannes has a new bishop."

"Ha! so they are giving us back our bishops?"

"So it seems; but if they are all like this one, they can keep them."

"Who is he?"

"Audrein!"

"The regicide?"

"Audrein the renegade."

"When is he coming?"

"To-night or to-morrow."

"I shall not go to meet him; but let him beware of falling into my men's
hands."

Benedicite and Coeur-de-Roi burst into a laugh which completed
Cadoudal's thought.

"Hush!" cried Cadoudal.

The three men listened.

"This time it is probably he," observed Georges.

The gallop of a horse could be heard coming from the direction of La
Roche-Bernard.

"It is certainly he," repeated Coeur-de-Roi.

"Then, my friends, leave me alone. You, Benedicite, get to Grandchamp as
soon as possible. You, Coeur-de-Roi, post thirty men in the courtyard;
I want messengers to send in different directions. By the way, tell some
one to bring the best that can be got for supper in the village."

"For how many, general?"

"Oh! two."

"Are you going out?"

"No, only to meet the man who is coming."

Two or three men had already taken the horses of the messengers into the
courtyard. The messengers themselves disappeared.

Georges reached the gate on the street just as a horseman, pulling up
his horse, looked about him and seemed to hesitate.

"He is here, sir," said Georges.

"Who is here?"

"He whom you seek."

"How do you know whom I am seeking?"

"I presume it is Georges Cadoudal, otherwise called Round-head."

"Exactly."

"Then I bid you welcome, Monsieur Roland de Montrevel, for I am the
person you seek."

"Ah, ah!" exclaimed the young man, amazed.

Then, dismounting, he looked about as if for some one to take his mount.

"Throw the bridle over your horse's neck, and don't be uneasy about him.
You will find him when you want him. Nothing is ever lost in Brittany;
you are in the land of honesty."

The young man made no remark, threw the bridle over his horse's neck as
he had been told, and followed Cadoudal, who walked before him.

"Only to show you the way, colonel," said the leader of the Chouans.

They both entered the cottage, where an invisible hand had just made up
the fire.




CHAPTER XXXII. WHITE AND BLUE

Roland entered, as we have said, behind Georges, and as he entered cast
a glance of careless curiosity around him. That glance sufficed to show
him that they were alone.

"Are these your quarters, general?" asked Roland with a smile, turning
the soles of his boots to the blaze.

"Yes, colonel."

"They are singularly guarded."

Georges smiled in turn.

"Do you say that because you found the road open from La Roche-Bernard
here?" he asked.

"I did not meet a soul."

"That does not prove that the road was not guarded."

"Unless by the owls, who seemed to fly from tree to tree, and
accompanied me all the way, general. In that case, I withdraw my
assertion."

"Exactly," replied Cadoudal. "Those owls were my sentinels, sentinels
with good eyes, inasmuch as they have this advantage over the eyes of
men, they can see in the dark."

"It is not the less true that I was fortunate in having inquired my way
at La Roche-Bernard; for I didn't meet even a cat who could have told me
where to find you."

"But if you had raised your voice at any spot on the road and asked:
'Where shall I find Georges Cadoudal?' a voice would have answered: 'At
the village of Muzillac, fourth house to the right.' You saw no one,
colonel; but at that very moment fifteen hundred men, or thereabout,
knew that Colonel Roland, the First Consul's aide-de-camp, was on his
way to a conference with the son of the miller of Leguerno."

"But if they knew that I was a colonel in the Republican service and
aide-de-camp to the First Consul, how came they to let me pass?"

"Because they were ordered to do so."

"Then you knew that I was coming?"

"I not only knew that you were coming, but also why you have come."

Roland looked at him fixedly.

"Then it is useless for me to tell you; and you will answer me even
though I say nothing?"

"You are about right."

"The deuce! I should like to have a proof of this superiority of your
police over ours."

"I will supply it, colonel."

"I shall receive it with much satisfaction, especially before this
excellent fire, which also seems to have been expecting me."

"You say truer than you know, colonel; and it is not the fire only that
is striving to welcome you warmly."

"Yes, but it does not tell me, any more than you have done, the object
of my mission."

"Your mission, which you do me the honor to extend to me, was primarily
intended for the Abbe Bernier alone. Unhappily the Abbe Bernier, in
the letter he sent his friend Martin Duboys, presumed a little on his
strength. He offered his mediation to the First Consul."

"Pardon me," interrupted Roland, "you tell me something I did not know;
namely that the Abbe Bernier had written to General Bonaparte."

"I said he wrote to his friend Martin Duboys, which is very different.
My men intercepted the letter and brought it to me. I had it copied, and
forwarded the original, which I am certain reached the right hands. Your
visit to General Hedouville proves it."

"You know that General Hedouville is no longer in command at Nantes.
General Brune has taken his place."

"You may even say that General Brune commands at La Roche-Bernard, for
a thousand Republican soldiers entered that town to-night about
six o'clock, bringing with them a guillotine and the citizen
commissioner-general Thomas Milliere. Having the instrument, it was
necessary to have the executioner."

"Then you say, general, that I came to see the Abbe Bernier?"

"Yes; the Abbe Bernier had offered his mediation. But he forgot that at
the present there are two Vendees--the Vendee of the left bank, and the
Vendee of the right bank--and that, after treating with d'Autichamp,
Chatillon, and Suzannet at Pouance, it would still be necessary to
negotiate with Frotte, Bourmont and Cadoudal--and where? That no one
could tell--"

"Except you, general."

"So, with the chivalry that is the basis of your nature, you
undertook to bring me the treaty signed on the 25th. The Abbe Bernier,
d'Autichamp, Chatillon, and Suzannet signed your pass, and here you
are."

"On my word, general, I must admit that you are perfectly well-informed.
The First Consul desires peace with all his heart. He knows that in you
he has a brave and honorable adversary, and being unable to meet you
himself, since you were not likely to come to Paris, he expedited me to
you in his behalf."

"That is to say, to the Abbe Bernier."

"That can hardly matter to you, general, if I bind myself to make the
First Consul ratify what may be agreed upon between you and me. What are
your conditions of peace?"

"They are very simple, colonel: that the First Consul shall restore
his Majesty Louis XVIII. to the throne; that he himself be constable,
lieutenant-general, general-in-chief by land and sea, and I his first
subordinate."

"The First Consul has already replied to that demand."

"And that is why I have decided to reply myself to his response."

"When?"

"This very night, if occasion offers."

"In what way?"

"By resuming hostilities."

"But are you aware that Chatillon, d'Autichamp and Suzannet have laid
down their arms?"

"They are the leaders of the Vendeans, and in the name of the Vendeans
they can do as they see fit. I am the leader of the Chouans, and in the
name of the Chouans I shall do what suits me."

"Then you condemn this unhappy land to a war of extermination, general!"

"It is a martyrdom to which I summon all Christians and royalists."

"General Brune is at Nantes with the eight thousand prisoners just
returned to us by the English after their defeats at Alkmaar and
Castricum."

"That is the last time they will have the chance. The Blues have taught
us the bad habit of not making prisoners. As for the number of our
enemies, we don't care for that; it is a mere detail."

"If General Brune with his eight thousand men, joined to the twenty
thousand he has received from General Hedouville, is not sufficient, the
First Consul has decided to march against you in person with one hundred
thousand men."

Cadoudal smiled.

"We will try to prove to him," he said, "that we are worthy to fight
against him."

"He will burn your towns."

"We shall retire to our huts."

"He will burn your huts."

"We will live in the woods."

"Reflect, general."

"Do me the honor to remain here forty-eight hours, colonel, and you will
see that my reflections are already made."

"I am tempted to accept."

"Only, colonel, don't ask for more than I can give; a night's sleep
beneath a thatched roof or wrapped in a cloak under an oak tree, a horse
to follow me, and a safe-guard when you leave me."

"I accept."

"Have I your word, colonel, that you will not interfere with any orders
I give, and will do nothing to defeat the surprises I may attempt?"

"I am too curious to see for that. You have my word, general."

"Whatever takes place before your eyes?"

"Whatever takes place before my eyes, I renounce the role of actor and
confine myself wholly to that of spectator. I wish to say to the First
Consul: 'I have seen.'"

Cadoudal smiled.

"Well, you shall see," said he.

At that moment the door opened, and two peasants brought in a table all
laid, on which stood a smoking bowl of cabbage-soup and a piece of lard;
an enormous pot of cider, just drawn from the cask, was foaming over the
edges of the jug between two glasses. A few buckwheat cakes served as a
desert to this modest repast. The table was laid for two.

"You see, Monsieur de Montrevel, that my lads hoped you would do me the
honor to sup with me."

"Faith! they were not far wrong. I should have asked for supper, had you
not invited me; and I might have been forced to seize some had you not
invited me."

"Then fall to!"

The young colonel sat down gayly.

"Excuse the repast I offer you," said Cadoudal; "unlike your generals, I
don't make prize money; my soldiers feed me. Have you anything else for
us, Brise-Bleu?"

"A chicken fricassee, general."

"That's your dinner, Monsieur de Montrevel."

"A feast! Now, I have but one fear, general."

"What is it?"

"All will go well for the eating, but when it comes to drinking--"

"Don't you like cider? The devil! I'm sorry; cider or water, that's my
cellar."

"Oh! that's not it; but whose health are we going to drink?"

"Is that all, sir?" said Cadoudal, with great dignity. "We will drink
to the health of our common mother, France. We are serving her with
different minds, but, I hope, the same hearts. To _France_, Monsieur,"
said Cadoudal, filling the two glasses.

"To _France_, general!" replied Roland, clinking his glass against that
of Georges.

And both gayly reseated themselves, their consciences at rest, and
attacked the soup with appetites that were not yet thirty years old.




CHAPTER XXXIII. THE LAW OF RETALIATION

"Now, general," said Roland, when supper was over and the two young men,
with their elbows on the table and their legs stretched out before the
blazing fire, began to feel that comfortable sensation that comes of a
meal which youth and appetite have seasoned. "Now for your promise to
show me things which I can report to the First Consul."

"You promised, remember, not to object to them."

"Yes, but I reserve the right, in case you wound my conscience too
severely, to withdraw."

"Only give time to throw a saddle on the back of your horse, or of mine,
if yours is too tired, colonel, and you are free."

"Very good."

"As it happens," said Cadoudal, "events will serve you. I am here, not
only as general, but as judge, though it is long since I have had a case
to try. You told me, colonel, that General Brune was at Nantes; I knew
it. You told me his advanced guard was only twelve miles away, at La
Roche-Bernard; I knew that also. But a thing you may not know is that
this advanced guard is not commanded by a soldier like you and me, but
by citizen Thomas Milliere, Commissioner of the Executive authorities.
Another thing of which you may perhaps be ignorant is that citizen
Thomas Milliere does not fight like us with cannon, guns, bayonets,
pistols and swords, but with an instrument invented by your Republican
philanthropists, called the guillotine."

"It is impossible, sir," cried Roland, "that under the First Consul any
one can make that kind of war."

"Ah! let us understand each other, colonel. I don't say that the First
Consul makes it; I say it is made in his name."

"And who is the scoundrel that abuses the authority given him, to make
war with a staff of executioners?"

"I have told you his name; he is called Thomas Milliere. Question whom
you please, colonel, and throughout all Vendee and Brittany you'll hear
but one voice on that man. From the day of the rising in Vendee and
Brittany, now six years ago, Milliere has been, always and everywhere,
the most active agent of the Terror. For him the Terror did not end with
Robespierre. He denounced to his superiors, or caused to be denounced
to himself, the Breton and Vendean soldiers, their parents, friends,
brothers, sisters, wives, even the wounded and dying; he shot or
guillotined them all without a trial. At Daumeray, for instance, he left
a trail of blood behind him which is not yet, can never be, effaced.
More than eighty of the inhabitants were slaughtered before his eyes.
Sons were killed in the arms of their mothers, who vainly stretched
those bloody arms to Heaven imploring vengeance. The successive
pacifications of Brittany and Vendee have never slaked the thirst for
murder which burns his entrails. He is the same in 1800 that he was in
1793. Well, this man--"

Roland looked at the general.

"This man," continued the general, with the utmost calmness, "is to die.
Seeing that society did not condemn him, I have condemned him."

"What! Die at La Roche-Bernard, in the midst of the Republicans; in
spite of his bodyguard of assassins and executioners?"

"His hour has struck; he is to die."

Cadoudal pronounced these words with such solemnity that no doubt
remained in Roland's mind, not only as to the sentence, but also the
execution of it. He was thoughtful for an instant.

"And you believe that you have, the right to judge and condemn that man,
guilty as he is?"

"Yes; for that man has judged and condemned, not the guilty but the
innocent."

"If I said to you: 'On my return to Paris I will demand the arrest and
trial of that man,' would you not trust my word?"

"I would trust your word; but I should say to you: 'A maddened wild
beast escapes from its cage, a murderer from his prison; men are men,
subject to error. They have sometimes condemned the innocent, they might
spare the guilty.' My justice is more certain than yours, colonel, for
it is the justice of God. The man will die."

"And by what right do you claim that your justice, the justice of a man
liable to error like other men, is the justice of God?"

"Because I have made God a sharer in that justice. Oh! my condemnation
of that man is not of yesterday."

"How do you mean?"

"In the midst of a storm when thunder roared without cessation, and the
lightning flashed from minute to minute, I raised my arms to heaven, and
