transport it by boats--no easy matter--to Lynn in Norfolk, as his
nearest point of attack. And as the time went on, Earl Warren and Ralph
de Guader would have gathered their forces between him and the Danes,
and a landing at Lynn might become impossible. Meanwhile there were
bruits of great doings in the north of Lincolnshire. Young Earl Waltheof
was said to be there, and Edgar the Atheling with him; but what it
portended, no man knew. Morcar was said to have raised the centre of
Mercia, and to be near Stafford; Edwin to have raised the Welsh, and to
be at Chester with Alfgiva, his sister, Harold Godwinsson's widow. And
Hereward sent spies along the Roman Watling Street--the only road, then,
toward the northwest of England--and spies northward along the Roman
road to Lincoln. But the former met the French in force near Stafford,
and came back much faster than they went. And the latter stumbled on
Gilbert of Ghent, riding out of Lincoln to Sleaford, and had to flee
into the fens, and came back much slower than they went.

At last news came. For into Bourne stalked Wulfric the Heron, with axe
and bow, and leaping-pole on shoulder, and an evil tale he brought.

The Danes had been beaten utterly at Norwich. Ralph de Guader and his
Frenchmen had fought like lions. They had killed many Danes in the
assault on the castle. They had sallied out on them as they recoiled,
and driven them into the river, drowning many more. The Danes had gone
down the Yare again, and out to sea northward, no man knew whither. He,
the Heron, prowling about the fenlands of Norfolk to pick off straggling
Frenchmen and looking out for the Danes, had heard all the news from
the landsfolk. He had watched the Danish fleet along the shore as far as
Blakeney. But when they came to the isle, they stood out to sea, right
northwest. He, the Heron, believed that they were gone for Humber Mouth.

After a while, he had heard how Hereward was come again and sent round
the war-arrow, and thought that a landless man could be in no better
company; wherefore he had taken boat, and come across the deep fen. And
there he was, if they had need of him.

"Need of you?" said Hereward, who had heard of the deed at Wrokesham
Bridge. "Need of a hundred like you. But this is bitter news."

And he went in to ask counsel of Torfrida, ready to weep with rage. He
had disappointed, deceived his men. He had drawn them into a snare. He
had promised that the Danes should come. How should he look them in the
face?

"Look them in the face? Do that at once--now--without losing a moment.
Call them together and tell them all. If their hearts are staunch, you
may do great things without the traitor earl. If their hearts fail them,
you would have done nothing with them worthy of yourself, had you had
Norway as well as Denmark at your back. At least, be true with them, as
your only chance of keeping them true to you."

"Wise, wise wife," said Hereward, and went out and called his band
together, and told them every word, and all that had passed since he
left Calais Straits.

"And now I have deceived you, and entrapped you, and I have no right
to be your captain more. He that will depart in peace, let him depart,
before the Frenchmen close in on us on every side and swallow us up at
one mouthful."

Not a man answered.

"I say it again: He that will depart, let him depart."

They stood thoughtful.

Ranald, the Monk of Ramsey, drove the White-Bear banner firm into the
earth, tucked up his monk's frock, and threw his long axe over his
shoulder, as if preparing for action.

Winter spoke at last.

"If all go, there are two men here who stay, and fight by Hereward's
side as long as there is a Frenchman left on English soil; for they have
sworn an oath to Heaven and to St. Peter, and that oath will they keep.
What say you, Gwenoch, knighted with us at Peterborough?"

Gwenoch stepped to Hereward's side.

"None shall go!" shouted a dozen voices. "With Hereward we will live and
die. Let him lead us to Lincoln, to Stafford, where he will. We can save
England for ourselves without the help of Danes."

"It is well for one at least of you, gentlemen, that you are in this
pleasant mind," quoth Ranald the monk.

"Well for all of us, thou valiant purveyor of beef and beer."

"Well for one. For the first man that had turned to go, I would have
brained him with this axe."

"And now, gallant gentlemen," said Hereward, "we must take new counsel,
as our old has failed. Whither shall we go? For stay here, eating up the
country, we must not do."

"They say that Waltheof is in Lindsay, raising the landsfolk. Let us go
and join him."

"We can, at least, find what he means to do. There can be no better
counsel. Let us march. Only we must keep clear of Lincoln as yet. I hear
that Gilbert has a strong garrison there, and we are not strong enough
yet to force it."

So they rode north, and up the Roman road toward Lincoln, sending out
spies as they went; and soon they had news of Waltheof,--news, too, that
he was between them and Lincoln.

"Then the sooner we are with him, the better, for he will find himself
in trouble ere long, if old Gilbert gets news of him. So run your best,
footmen, for forward we must get."

And as they came up the Roman road, they were aware of a great press of
men in front of them, and hard fighting toward.

Some of the English would have spurred forward at once. But Hereward
held them back with loud reproaches.

"Will you forget all I have told you in the first skirmish, like so many
dogs when they see a bull? Keep together for five minutes more, the pot
will not be cool before we get our sup of it. I verily believe that it
is Waltheof, and that Gilbert has caught him already."

As he spoke, one part of the combatants broke up, and fled right and
left; and a knight in full armor galloped furiously down the road right
at them, followed by two or three more.

"Here comes some one very valiant, or very much afeared," said Hereward,
as the horseman rode right upon him, shouting,--

"I am the King!"

"The King?" roared Hereward, and dropping his lance, spurred his horse
forward, kicking his feet clear of the stirrups. He caught the knight
round the neck, dragged him over his horse's tail, and fell with him to
the ground.

The armor clashed; the sparks flew from the old gray Roman flints; and
Hereward, rolling over once, rose, and knelt upon his prisoner.

"William of Normandy, yield or die!"

The knight lay still and stark.

"Ride on!" roared Hereward from the ground. "Ride at them, and strike
hard! You will soon find out which is which. This booty I must pick for
myself. What are you at?" roared he, after his knights. "Spread off the
road, and keep your line, as I told you, and don't override each other!
Curse the hot-headed fools! The Normans will scatter them like sparrows.
Run on, men-at-arms, to stop the French if we are broken. And don't
forget Guisnes field and the horses' legs. Now, King, are you come to
life yet?"

"You have killed him," quoth Leofric the deacon, whom Hereward had
beckoned to stop with him.

"I hope not. Lend me a knife. He is a much slighter man than I fancied,"
said Hereward, as they got his helmet off.

And when it was off, both started and stared. For they had uncovered,
not the beetling brow, Roman nose, and firm curved lip of the Ulysses
of the middle age, but the face of a fair lad, with long straw-colored
hair, and soft blue eyes staring into vacancy.

"Who are you?" shouted Hereward, saying very bad words, "who come here
aping the name of king?"

"Mother! Christina! Margaret! Waltheof Earl!" moaned the lad, raising
his head and letting it fall again.

"It is the Atheling!" cried Leofric.

Hereward rose, and stood over the boy.

"Ah! what was I doing to handle him so tenderly? I took him for the
Mamzer, and thought of a king's ransom."

"Do you call that tenderly? You have nigh pulled the boy's head off."

"Would that I had! Ah," went on Hereward, apostrophizing the unconscious
Atheling,--"ah, that I had broken that white neck once and for all! To
have sent thee feet foremost to Winchester, to lie by thy grandfathers
and great-grandfathers, and then to tell Norman William that he must
fight it out henceforth, not with a straw malkin like thee, which
the very crows are not afraid to perch on, but with a cock of a very
different hackle,--Sweyn Ulfsson, King of Denmark."

And Hereward drew Brain-biter.

"For mercy's sake! you will not harm the lad?"

"If I were a wise man now, and hard-hearted as wise men should be, I
should--I should--" and he played the point of the sword backwards and
forwards, nearer and nearer to the lad's throat.

"Master! master!" cried Leofric, clinging to his knees; "by all the
saints! What would the Blessed Virgin say to such a deed!"

"Well, I suppose you are right. And I fear what my lady at home might
say; and we must not do anything to vex her, you know. Well, let us do
it handsomely, if we must do it. Get water somewhere, in his helmet. No,
you need not linger. I will not cut his throat before you come back."

Leofric went off in search of water, and Hereward knelt with the
Atheling's head on his knee, and on his lip a sneer at all things
in heaven and earth. To have that lad stand between him and all his
projects, and to be forced, for honor's sake, to let him stand!

But soon his men returned, seemingly in high glee, and other knights
with them.

"Hey, lads!" said he, "I aimed at the falcon and shot the goose. Here is
Edgar Atheling prisoner. Shall we put him to ransom?"

"He has no money, and Malcolm of Scotland is much too wise to lend him
any," said some one. And some more rough jokes passed.

"Do you know, sirs, that he who lies there is your king?" asked a very
tall and noble-looking knight.

"That do we not," said Hereward, sharply. "There is no king in England
this day, as far as I know. And there will be none north of the Watling
Street, till he be chosen in full husting, and anointed at York, as well
as Winchester or London. We have had one king made for us in the last
forty years, and we intend to make the next ourselves."

"And who art thou, who talkest so bold, of king-making?"

"And who art thou, who askest so bold who I am?"

"I am Waltheof Siwardsson, the Earl, and yon is my army behind me."

"And I am Hereward Leofricsson, the outlaw, and yon is my army behind
me."

If the two champions had flown at each other's throats, and their armies
had followed their example, simply as dogs fly at each other, they know
not why, no one would have been astonished in those unhappy times.

But it fell not out upon that wise; for Waltheof, leaping from his
horse, pulled off his helmet, and seizing Hereward by both hands,
cried,--

"Blessed is the day which sees again in England Hereward, who has upheld
throughout all lands and seas the honor of English chivalry!"

"And blessed is the day in which Hereward meets the head of the house
of Siward where he should be, at the head of his own men, in his own
earldom. When I saw my friend, thy brother Osbiorn, brought into the
camp at Dunsinane with all his wounds in front, I wept a young man's
tears, and said, 'There ends the glory of the White-Bear's house!'
But this day I say, the White-Bear's blood is risen from the grave
in Waltheof Siwardsson, who with his single axe kept the gate of York
against all the army of the French; and who shall keep against them all
England, if he will be as wise as he is brave."

Was Hereward honest in his words? Hardly so. He wished to be honest. As
he looked upon that magnificent young man, he hoped and trusted that his
words were true. But he gave a second look at the face, and whispered
to himself: "Weak, weak. He will be led by priests; perhaps by William
himself. I must be courteous; but confide I must not."

The men stood round, and looked with admiration on the two most splendid
Englishmen then alive. Hereward had taken off his helmet likewise, and
the contrast between the two was as striking as the completeness of
each of them in his own style of beauty. It was the contrast between
the slow-hound and the deer-hound; each alike high bred; but the former,
short, sturdy, cheerful, and sagacious; the latter tall, stately,
melancholy, and not over-wise withal.

Waltheof was a full head and shoulders taller than Hereward,--one of the
tallest men of his generation, and of a strength which would have been
gigantic, but for the too great length of neck and limb, which made him
loose and slow in body, as he was somewhat loose and slow in mind. An
old man's child, although that old man was as one of the old giants,
there was a vein of weakness in him, which showed in the arched eyebrow,
the sleepy pale blue eye, the small soft mouth, the lazy voice, the
narrow and lofty brain over a shallow brow. His face was not that of
a warrior, but of a saint in a painted window; and to his own place he
went, and became a saint, in his due time. But that he could outgeneral
William, that he could even manage Gospatrick and his intrigues Hereward
expected as little as that his own nephews Edwin and Morcar could do it.

"I have to thank you, noble sir," said Waltheof, languidly, "for sending
your knights to our rescue when we were really hard bested,--I fear
much by our own fault. Had they told me whose men they were, I should
not have spoken to you so roughly as I fear I did."

"There is no offence. Let Englishmen speak their minds, as long as
English land is above sea. But how did you get into trouble, and with
whom?"

Waltheof told him how he was going round the country, raising forces in
the name of the Atheling, when, as they were straggling along the Roman
road, Gilbert of Ghent had dashed out on them from a wood, cut their
line in two, driven Waltheof one way, and the Atheling another, and that
the Atheling had only escaped by riding, as they saw, for his life.

"Well done, old Gilbert!" laughed Hereward. "You must beware, my Lord
Earl, how you venture within reach of that old bear's paw!"

"Bear? By the by, Sir Hereward," asked Waltheof, whose thoughts ran
loosely right and left, "why is it that you carry the white bear on your
banner?"

"Do you not know? Your house ought to have a blood-feud against me. I
slew your great-uncle, or cousin, or some other kinsman, at Gilbert's
house in Scotland long ago; and since then I sleep on his skin every
night, and carry his picture in my banner all day."

"Blood-feuds are solemn things," said Waltheof, frowning. "Karl killed
my grandfather Aldred at the battle of Settrington, and his four sons
are with the army at York now--"

"For the love of all saints and of England, do not think of avenging
that! Every man must now put away old grudges, and remember that he has
but one foe,--William and his Frenchmen."

"Very nobly spoken. But those sons of Karl--and I think you said you had
killed a kinsman of mine?"

"It was a bear, Lord Earl, a great white bear. Cannot you understand a
jest? Or are you going to take up the quarrels of all white bears that
are slain between here and Iceland? You will end by burning Crowland
minster then, for there are twelve of your kinsmen's skins there, which
Canute gave forty years ago."

"Burn Crowland minster? St. Guthlac and all saints forbid!" said
Waltheof, crossing himself devoutly.

"Are you a monk-monger into the bargain, as well as a dolt? A bad
prospect for us, if you are," said Hereward to himself.

"Ah, my dear Lord King!" said Waltheof, "and you are recovering?"

"Somewhat," said the lad, sitting up, "under the care of this kind
knight."

"He is a monk, Sir Atheling, and not a knight," said Hereward. "Our
fenmen can wear a mail-shirt as easily as a frock, and handle a twybill
as neatly as a breviary."

Waltheof shook his head. "It is contrary to the canons of Holy Church."

"So are many things that are done in England just now. Need has no
master. Now, Sir Earl and Sir Atheling, what are you going to do?"

Neither of them, it seemed, very well knew. They would go to York if
they could get there, and join Gospatrick and Marlesweyn. And certainly
it was the most reasonable thing to be done.

"But if you mean to get to York, you must march after another fashion
than this," said Hereward. "See, Sir Earl, why you were broken by
Gilbert; and why you will be broken again, if this order holds. If you
march your men along one of these old Roman streets--By St. Mary! these
Romans had more wits than we; for we have spoilt the roads they left us,
and never made a new one of our own--"

"They were heathens and enchanters,"--and Waltheof crossed himself.

"And conquered the world. Well,--if you march along one of these
streets, you must ride as I rode, when I came up to you. You must not
let your knights go first, and your men-at-arms straggle after in a tail
a mile long, like a scratch pack of hounds, all sizes but except each
others'. You must keep your footmen on the high street, and make your
knights ride in two bodies, right and left, upon the wold, to protect
their flanks and baggage."

"But the knights won't. As gentlemen, they have a right to the best
ground."

"Then they may go to--whither they will go, if the French come upon
them. If they are on the flanks, and you are attacked then they can
charge in right and left on the enemy's flank, while the footmen make a
stand to cover the wagons."

"Yes,--that is very good; I believe that is your French fashion?"

"It is the fashion of common-sense, like all things which succeed."

"But, you see, the knights would not submit to ride in the mire."

"Then you must make them. What else have they horses for, while honester
men than they trudge on foot?"

"Make them?" said Waltheof, with a shrug and a smile. "They are all free
gentlemen, like ourselves."

"And, like ourselves, will come to utter ruin, because every one of them
must needs go his own way."

"I am glad," said Waltheof, as they rode along, "that you called this my
earldom. I hold it to be mine of course, in right of my father; but the
landsfolks, you know, gave it to your nephew Morcar."

"I care not to whom it is given. I care for the man who is on it, to
raise these landsfolk and make them fight. You are here: therefore you
are earl."

"Yes, the powers that be are ordained by God."

"You must not strain that text too far, Lord Earl; for the only power
that is, whom I see in England--worse luck for it!--is William the
Mamzer."

"So I have often thought."

"You have? As I feared!" (To himself:) "The pike will have you next,
gudgeon!"

"He has with him the Holy Father at Rome, and therefore the blessed
Apostle St. Peter of course. And is a man right, in the sight of Heaven,
who resists them? I only say it. But where a man looks to the salvation
of his own soul, he must needs think thereof seriously, at least."

"O, are you at that?" thought Hereward. "_Tout est perdu_. The question
is, Earl," said he aloud, "simply this: How many men can you raise off
this shire?"

"I have raised--not so many as I could wish. Harold and Edith's men have
joined me fairly well; but your nephew, Morcar's--"

"I can command them. I have half of them here already."

"Then,--then we may raise the rest?"

"That depends, my Lord Earl, for whom we fight!"

"For whom?--I do not understand."

"Whether we fight for that lad, Child Edgar, or for Sweyn of Denmark,
the rightful king of England."

"Sweyn of Denmark! Who should be the rightful king but the heir of the
blessed St. Edward?"

"Blessed old fool! He has done harm to us enough on earth, without
leaving his second-cousins' aunts' malkins to harm us after he is in
Heaven."

"Sir Hereward, Sir Hereward, I fear thou art not as good a Christian as
so good a knight should be."

"Christian or not, I am as good a one as my neighbors. I am Leofric's
son. Leofric put Harthacanute on the throne, and your father, who was a
man, helped him. You know what has befallen England since we Danes left
the Danish stock at Godwin's bidding, and put our necks under the yoke
of Wessex monks and monk-mongers. You may follow your father's track
or not, as you like. I shall follow my father's, and fight for Sweyn
Ulfsson, and no man else."

"And I," said Waltheof, "shall follow the anointed of the Lord."

"The anointed of Gospatrick and two or three boys!" said Hereward.
"Knights! Turn your horses' heads. Right about face, all! We are going
back to the Bruneswold, to live and die free Danes."

And to Waltheof's astonishment, who had never before seen discipline,
the knights wheeled round; the men-at-arms followed them; and Waltheof
and the Atheling were left to themselves on Lincoln Heath.




CHAPTER XXIV.

HOW ARCHBISHOP ALDRED DIED OF SORROW.


In the tragedies of the next few months Hereward took no part; but they
must be looked at near, in order to understand somewhat of the men who
were afterwards mixed up with him for weal or woe.

When William went back to the South, the confederates, Child Edgar
the Atheling, Gospatrick, and their friends, had come south again from
Durham. It was undignified; a confession of weakness. If a Norman had
likened them to mice coming out when the cat went away, none could
blame him. But so they did; and Osbiorn and his Danes, landing in
Humber-mouth, "were met" (says the Anglo-Saxon chronicle) "by Child
Edgar and Earl Waltheof and Marlesweyn, and Earl Gospatrick with the men
of Northumberland, riding and marching joyfully with an immense army";
not having the spirit of prophecy, or foreseeing those things which were
coming on the earth.

To them repaired Edwin and Morcar, the two young Earls, Arkill and Karl,
"the great Thanes," or at least the four sons of Karl,--for accounts
differ,--and what few else of the northern nobility Tosti had left
unmurdered.

The men of Northumberland received the Danes with open arms. They would
besiege York. They would storm the new Norman Keep. They would proclaim
Edgar king at York.

In that Keep sat two men, one of whom knew his own mind, the other did
not. One was William Malet, knight, one of the heroes of Hastings, a
noble Norman, and chatelain of York Castle. The other was Archbishop
Aldred.

Aldred seems to have been a man like too many more,--pious and virtuous
and harmless enough, and not without worldly prudence; but his prudence
was of that sort which will surely swim with the stream, and "honor the
powers that be," if they be but prosperous enough. For after all, if
success be not God, it is like enough to Him in some men's eyes to
do instead. So Archbishop Aldred had crowned Harold Godwinsson, when
Harold's star was in the ascendant. And who but Archbishop Aldred should
crown William, when his star had cast Harold's down from heaven? He
would have crowned Satanas himself, had he only proved himself king _de
facto_--as he asserts himself to be _de jure_--of this wicked world.

So Aldred, who had not only crowned William, but supported his power
north of Humber by all means lawful, sat in York Keep, and looked at
William Malet, wondering what he would do.

Malet would hold it to the last. As for the new keep, it was surely
impregnable. The old walls--the Roman walls on which had floated the
flag of Constantine the Great--were surely strong enough to keep out
men without battering-rams, balistas, or artillery of any kind. What
mattered Osbiorn's two hundred and forty ships, and their crews of some
ten or fifteen thousand men? What mattered the tens of thousands of
Northern men, with Gospatrick at their head? Let them rage and rob round
the walls. A messenger had galloped in from William in the Forest of
Dean, to tell Malet to hold out to the last. He had galloped out again,
bearing for answer, that the Normans could hold York for a year.

But the Archbishop's heart misgave him, as from north and south at once
came up the dark masses of two mighty armies, broke up into columns,
and surged against every gate of the city at the same time. They had no
battering-train to breach the ancient walls; but they had--and none knew
it better than Aldred--hundreds of friends inside, who would throw open
to them the gates.

One gate he could command from the Castle tower. His face turned pale
as he saw a mob of armed townsmen rushing down the street towards it; a
furious scuffle with the French guards; and then, through the gateway,
the open champaign beyond, and a gleaming wave of axes, helms, and
spears, pouring in, and up the street.

"The traitors!" he almost shrieked, as he turned and ran down the ladder
to tell Malet below.

Malet was firm, but pale as Aldred.

"We must fight to the last," said he, as he hurried down, commanding his
men to sally at once _en masse_ and clear the city.

The mistake was fatal. The French were entangled in the narrow streets.
The houses, shut to them, were opened to the English and Danes; and,
overwhelmed from above, as well as in front, the greater part of the
Norman garrison perished in the first fight. The remnant were shut up in
the Castle. The Danes and English seized the houses round, and shot
from the windows at every loophole and embrasure where a Norman showed
himself.

"Shoot fire upon the houses!" said Malet.

"You will not burn York? O God! is it come to this?"

"And why not York town, or York minster, or Rome itself, with the Pope
inside it, rather than yield to barbarians?"

Archbishop Aldred went into his room, and lay down on his bed. Outside
was the roar of the battle; and soon, louder and louder, the roar of
flame. This was the end of his time-serving and king-making. And he said
many prayers, and beat his breast; and then called to his chaplain for
blankets, for he was very cold. "I have slain my own sheep!" he moaned,
"slain my own sheep!"

His chaplain hapt him up in bed, and looked out of the window at the
fight. There was no lull, neither was there any great advantage on
either side. Only from the southward he could see fresh bodies of Danes
coming across the plain.

"The carcass is here, and the eagles are gathered together. Fetch me
the holy sacrament, Chaplain, and God be merciful to an unfaithful
shepherd."

The chaplain went.

"I have slain my own sheep!" moaned the archbishop. "I have given them
up to the wolves,--given my own minster, and all the treasures of the
saints; and--and--I am very cold."

When the chaplain came back with the blessed sacrament, Archbishop
Aldred was more than cold; for he was already dead and stiff.

But William Malet would not yield. He and his Normans fought, day after
day, with the energy of despair. They asked leave to put forth the body
of the archbishop; and young Waltheof, who was a pious man, insisted
that leave should be given.

So the archbishop's coffin was thrust forth of the castle-gate, and
the monks from the abbey came and bore it away, and buried it in the
Cathedral church.

And then the fight went on, day after day, and more and more houses
burned, till York was all aflame. On the eighth day the minster was in
a light low over Archbishop Aldred's new-made grave. All was
burnt,--minster, churches, old Roman palaces, and all the glories of
Constantine the Great and the mythic past.

The besiegers, hewing and hammering gate after gate, had now won all
but the Keep itself. Then Malet's heart failed him. A wife he had, and
children; and for their sake he turned coward and fled by night, with a
few men-at-arms, across the burning ruins.

Then into what once was York the confederate Earls and Thanes marched in
triumph, and proclaimed Edgar king,--a king of dust and ashes.

And where were Edwin and Morcar the meanwhile? It is not told. Were they
struggling against William at Stafford, or helping Edric the Wild
and his Welshmen to besiege Chester? Probably they were aiding the
insurrection,--if not at these two points, still at some other of their
great earldoms of Mercia and Chester. They seemed to triumph for a
while: during the autumn of 1069 the greater part of England seemed
lost to William. Many Normans packed up their plunder and went back to
France; and those whose hearts were too stout to return showed no mercy
to the English, even as William showed none. To crush the heart of the
people by massacres and mutilations and devastations was the only hope
of the invader; and thoroughly he did his work whenever he had a chance.




CHAPTER XXV.

HOW HEREWARD FOUND A WISER MAN IN ENGLAND THAN HIMSELF.


There have been certain men so great, that he who describes them in
words, much more pretends to analyze their inmost feelings, must be a
very great man himself, or incur the accusation of presumption. And
such a great man was William of Normandy,--one of those unfathomable
master-personages who must not be rashly dragged on any stage. The
genius of a Bulwer, in attempting to draw him, took care, with a wise
modesty, not to draw him in too much detail,--to confess always that
there was much beneath and behind in William's character which none,
even of his contemporaries, could guess. And still more modest than
Bulwer is this chronicler bound to be.

But one may fancy, for once in a way, what William's thoughts were, when
they brought him the evil news of York. For we know what his acts were;
and he acted up to his thoughts.

Hunting he was, they say, in the forest of Dean, when first he heard
that all England, north of the Watling Street, had broken loose, and
that he was king of only half the isle.

Did he--as when, hunting in the forest of Rouen, he got the news of
Harold's coronation--play with his bow, stringing and unstringing it
nervously, till he had made up his mighty mind? Then did he go home to
his lodge, and there spread on the rough oak board a parchment map of
England, which no child would deign to learn from now, but was then good
enough to guide armies to victory, because the eyes of a great general
looked upon it?

As he pored over the map, by the light of bog-deal torch or rush candle,
what would he see upon it?

Three separate blazes of insurrection, from northwest to east, along the
Watling Street.

At Chester, Edric, "the wild Thane," who, according to Domesday-book,
had lost vast lands in Shropshire; Algitha, Harold's widow, and
Blethwallon and all his Welsh,--"the white mantles," swarming along
Chester streets, not as usually, to tear and ravage like the wild-cats
