river-side. 'Tis a wonder how I ever survived. But for the goodness of
a half-breed woman in the fort, who took pity on me, and tended me, I
never should have recovered, and my poor Harry would be what he fancied
himself yesterday, our grandfather's heir, our mother's only son.

"I remembered how, when Florac laid me in his bed, he put under my
pillow my money, my watch, and a trinket or two which I had. When I
woke to myself these were all gone; and a surly old sergeant, the only
officer left in the quarter, told me, with a curse, that I was lucky
enough to be left with my life at all; that it was only my white cockade
and coat had saved me from the fate which the other canaille of Rosbifs
had deservedly met with.

"At the time of my recovery the fort was almost emptied of the garrison.
The Indians had retired enriched with British plunder, and the chief
part of the French regulars were gone upon expeditions northward. My
good Florac had left me upon his service, consigning me to the care of
an invalided sergeant. Monsieur de Contrecoeur had accompanied one of
these expeditions, leaving an old lieutenant, Museau by name, in command
at Duquesne.

"This man had long been out of France, and serving in the colonies. His
character, doubtless, had been indifferent at home; and he knew that,
according to the system pursued in France, where almost all promotion is
given to the noblesse, he never would advance in rank. And he had made
free with my guineas, I suppose, as he had with my watch, for I saw it
one day on his chest when I was sitting with him in his quarter.

"Monsieur Museau and I managed to be pretty good friends. If I could be
exchanged, or sent home, I told him that my mother would pay liberally
for my ransom; and I suppose this idea excited the cupidity of the
commandant, for a trapper coming in the winter, whilst I still lay very
ill with fever, Museau consented that I should write home to my mother,
but that the letter should be in French, that he should see it, and
that I should say I was in the hands of the Indians, and should not be
ransomed under ten thousand livres.

"In vain I said I was a prisoner to the troops of his Most Christian
Majesty, that I expected the treatment of a gentleman and an officer.
Museau swore that letter should go, and no other; that if I hesitated,
he would fling me out of the fort, or hand me over to the tender mercies
of his ruffian Indian allies. He would not let the trapper communicate
with me except in his presence. Life and liberty are sweet. I resisted
for a while, but I was pulled down with weakness, and shuddering with
fever; I wrote such a letter as the rascal consented to let pass, and
the trapper went away with my missive, which he promised, in three
weeks, to deliver to my mother in Virginia.

"Three weeks, six, twelve, passed. The messenger never returned. The
winter came and went, and all our little plantations round the fort,
where the French soldiers had cleared corn-ground and planted gardens
and peach- and apple-trees down to the Monongahela, were in full
blossom. Heaven knows how I crept through the weary time! When I was
pretty well, I made drawings of the soldiers of the garrison, and of the
half-breed and her child (Museau's child), and of Museau himself, whom,
I am ashamed to say, I flattered outrageously; and there was an old
guitar left in the fort, and I sang to it, and played on it some French
airs which I knew, and ingratiated myself as best I could with my
gaolers; and so the weary months passed, but the messenger never
returned.

"At last news arrived that he had been shot by some British Indians in
Maryland: so there was an end of my hope of ransom for some months more.
This made Museau very savage and surly towards me; the more so as his
sergeant inflamed his rage by telling him that the Indian woman was
partial to me--as I believe, poor thing, she was. I was always gentle
with her, and grateful to her. My small accomplishments seemed wonders
in her eyes; I was ill and unhappy, too, and these are always claims to
a woman's affection.

"A captive pulled down by malady, a ferocious gaoler, and a young woman
touched by the prisoner's misfortunes--sure you expect that, with these
three prime characters in a piece, some pathetic tragedy is going to be
enacted? You, Miss Hetty, are about to guess that the woman saved me?"

"Why, of course she did!" cries mamma.

"What else is she good for?" says Hetty.

"You, Miss Theo, have painted her already as a dark beauty--is it not
so? A swift huntress--"

"Diana with a baby," says the Colonel.

"--Who scours the plain with her nymphs, who brings down the game with
her unerring bow, who is queen of the forest--and I see by your looks
that you think I am madly in love with her?"

"Well, I suppose she is an interesting creature, Mr. George?" says Theo,
with a blush.

"What think you of a dark beauty, the colour of new mahogany with long
straight black hair, which was usually dressed with a hair-oil or
pomade by no means pleasant to approach, with little eyes, with high
cheek-bones, with a flat nose, sometimes ornamented with a ring, with
rows of glass beads round her tawny throat, her cheeks and forehead
gracefully tattooed, a great love of finery, and inordinate passion
for--oh! must I own it?"

"For coquetry. I know you are going to say that!" says Miss Hetty.

"For whisky, my dear Miss Hester--in which appetite my gaoler partook;
so that I have often sate by, on the nights when I was in favour with
Monsieur Museau, and seen him and his poor companion hob-and-nobbing
together until they could scarce hold the noggin out of which they
drank. In these evening entertainments, they would sing, they would
dance, they would fondle, they would quarrel, and knock the cans and
furniture about; and, when I was in favour, I was admitted to share
their society, for Museau, jealous of his dignity, or not willing that
his men should witness his behaviour, would allow none of them to be
familiar with him.

"Whilst the result of the trapper's mission to my home was yet
uncertain, and Museau and I myself expected the payment of my ransom, I
was treated kindly enough, allowed to crawl about the fort, and even to
go into the adjoining fields and gardens, always keeping my parole, and
duly returning before gun-fire. And I exercised a piece of hypocrisy,
for which, I hope, you will hold me excused. When my leg was sound (the
ball came out in the winter, after some pain and inflammation, and the
wound healed up presently), I yet chose to walk as if I was disabled
and a cripple; I hobbled on two sticks, and cried Ah! and Oh! at every
minute, hoping that a day might come when I might treat my limbs to a
run.

"Museau was very savage when he began to give up all hopes of the first
messenger. He fancied that the man might have got the ransom-money and
fled with it himself. Of course he was prepared to disown any part in
the transaction, should my letter be discovered. His treatment of me
varied according to his hopes or fears, or even his mood for the time
being. He would have me consigned to my quarters for several days at a
time; then invite me to his tipsy supper-table, quarrel with me there,
and abuse my nation; or again break out into maudlin sentimentalities
about his native country of Normandy, where he longed to spend his old
age, to buy a field or two, and to die happy.

"'Eh, Monsieur Museau!' says I, 'ten thousand livres of your money would
buy a pretty field or two in your native country? You can have it for
the ransom of me, if you will but let me go. In a few months you must
be superseded in your command here, and then adieu the crowns and
the fields in Normandy! You had better trust a gentleman and a man of
honour. Let me go home, and I give you my word the ten thousand livres
shall be paid to any agent you may appoint in France or in Quebec.'

"'Ah, young traitor!' roars he, 'do you wish to tamper with my honour?
Do you believe an officer of France will take a bribe? I have a mind to
consign thee to my black-hole, and to have thee shot in the morning.'

"'My poor body will never fetch ten thousand livres,' says I; 'and a
pretty field in Normandy with a cottage...'

"'And an orchard. Ah, sacre bleu!' says Museau, whimpering, 'and a dish
of tripe a la mode du pays!..."

"This talk happened between us again and again, and Museau would order
me to my quarters, and then ask me to supper the next night, and return
to the subject of Normandy, and cider, and trippes a la mode de Caen. My
friend is dead now--"

"He was hung, I trust?" breaks in Colonel Lambert.

"--And I need keep no secret about him. Ladies, I wish I had to offer
you the account of a dreadful and tragical escape; how I slew all the
sentinels of the fort; filed through the prison windows, destroyed a
score or so of watchful dragons, overcame a million of dangers, and
finally effected my freedom. But, in regard of that matter, I have no
heroic deeds to tell of, and own that, by bribery and no other means, I
am where I am."

"But you would have fought, Georgy, if need were," says Harry; "and you
couldn't conquer a whole garrison, you know!" And herewith Mr. Harry
blushed very much.

"See the women, how disappointed they are!" says Lambert. "Mrs. Lambert,
you bloodthirsty woman, own that you are balked of a battle; and look at
Hetty, quite angry because Mr. George did not shoot the commandant."

"You wished he was hung yourself, papa!" cries Miss Hetty, "and I am
sure I wish anything my papa wishes."

"Nay, ladies," says George, turning a little red, "to wink at a
prisoner's escape was not a very monstrous crime; and to take money?
Sure other folks besides Frenchmen have condescended to a bribe before
now. Although Monsieur Museau set me free, I am inclined, for my part,
to forgive him. Will it please you to hear how that business was done?
You see, Miss Hetty, I cannot help being alive to tell it."

"Oh, George!--that is, I mean, Mr. Warrington!--that is, I mean, I beg
your pardon!" cries Hester.

"No pardon, my dear! I never was angry yet or surprised that any one
should like my Harry better than me. He deserves all the liking that
any man or woman can give him. See, it is his turn to blush now," says
George.

"Go on, Georgy, and tell them about the escape out of Duquesne!" cries
Harry, and he said to Mrs. Lambert afterwards in confidence, "You know
he is always going on saying that he ought never to have come to life
again, and declaring that I am better than he is. The idea of my being
better than George, Mrs. Lambert! a poor, extravagant fellow like me!
It's absurd!"




CHAPTER LII. Intentique Ora tenebant


"We continued for months our weary life at the fort, and the commandant
and I had our quarrels and reconciliations, our greasy games at cards,
our dismal duets with his asthmatic flute and my cracked guitar. The
poor Fawn took her beatings and her cans of liquor as her lord and
master chose to administer them; and she nursed her papoose, or her
master in the gout, or her prisoner in the ague; and so matters went on
until the beginning of the fall of last year, when we were visited by a
hunter who had important news to deliver to the commandant, and such as
set the little garrison in no little excitement. The Marquis de Montcalm
had sent a considerable detachment to garrison the forts already in the
French hands, and to take up further positions in the enemy's--that is,
in the British--possessions. The troops had left Quebec and Montreal,
and were coming up the St. Lawrence and the lakes in bateaux, with
artillery and large provisions of warlike and other stores. Museau would
be superseded in his command by an officer of superior rank, who might
exchange me, or who might give me up to the Indians in reprisal for
cruelties practised by our own people on many and many an officer
and soldier of the enemy. The men of the fort were eager for the
reinforcements; they would advance into Pennsylvania and New York; they
would seize upon Albany and Philadelphia; they would drive the Rosbifs
into the sea, and all America should be theirs from the Mississippi to
Newfoundland.

"This was all very triumphant: but yet, somehow, the prospect of the
French conquest did not add to Mr. Museau's satisfaction.

"'Eh, commandant!' says I, ''tis fort bien, but meanwhile your farm in
Normandy, the pot of cider, and the trippes a la mode de Caen, where are
they?'

"'Yes; 'tis all very well, my garcon,' says he. 'But where will you
be when poor old Museau is superseded? Other officers are not good
companions like me. Very few men in the world have my humanity. When
there is a great garrison here, will my successors give thee the
indulgences which honest Museau has granted thee? Thou wilt be kept in
a sty like a pig ready for killing. As sure as one of our officers falls
into the hands of your brigands of frontier-men, and evil comes to him,
so surely wilt thou have to pay with thy skin for his. Thou wilt be
given up to our red allies--to the brethren of La Biche yonder. Didst
thou see, last year, what they did to thy countrymen whom we took in
the action with Braddock? Roasting was the very smallest punishment, ma
foi--was it not, La Biche?'

"And he entered into a variety of jocular descriptions of tortures
inflicted, eyes burned out of their sockets, teeth and nails wrenched
out, limbs and bodies gashed--You turn pale, dear Miss Theo! Well, I
will have pity, and will spare you the tortures which honest Museau
recounted in his pleasant way as likely to befall me.

"La Biche was by no means so affected as you seem to be, ladies, by the
recital of these horrors. She had witnessed them in her time. She came
from the Senecas, whose villages lie near the great cataract between
Ontario and Erie; her people made war for the English, and against them:
they had fought with other tribes; and, in the battles between us
and them, it is difficult to say whether whiteskin or redskin is most
savage.

"'They may chop me into cutlets and broil me, 'tis true, commandant,'
says I, coolly. 'But again, I say, you will never have the farm in
Normandy.'

"'Go get the whisky-bottle, La Biche,' says Museau.

"'And it is not too late, even now. I will give the guide who takes me
home a large reward. And again I say, I promise, as a man of honour,
ten thousand livres to--whom shall I say? to one who shall bring me any
token--who shall bring me, say, my watch and seal with my grandfather's
arms--which I have seen in a chest somewhere in this fort.'

"'Ah, scelerat!' roars out the commandant, with a hoarse yell of
laughter. 'Thou hast eyes, thou! All is good prize in war.'

"'Think of a house in your village, of a fine field hard by with a
half-dozen of cows--of a fine orchard all covered with fruit.'

"'And Javotte at the door with her wheel, and a rascal of a child,
or two, with cheeks as red as the apples! O my country! O my mother!"
whimpers out the commandant. 'Quick, La Biche, the whisky!'

"All that night the commandant was deep in thought, and La Biche, too,
silent and melancholy. She sate away from us, nursing her child, and
whenever my eyes turned towards her I saw hers were fixed on me. The
poor little infant began to cry, and was ordered away by Museau, with
his usual foul language, to the building which the luckless Biche
occupied with her child. When she was gone, we both of us spoke our
minds freely; and I put such reasons before monsieur as his cupidity
could not resist.

"'How do you know,' he asked, 'that this hunter will serve you?'

"'That is my secret,' says I. But here, if you like, as we are not on
honour, I may tell it. When they come into the settlements for their
bargains, the hunters often stop a day or two for rest and drink and
company, and our new friend loved all these. He played at cards with
the men: he set his furs against their liquor: he enjoyed himself at
the fort, singing, dancing, and gambling with them. I think I said they
liked to listen to my songs, and for want of better things to do, I was
often singing and guitar-scraping: and we would have many a concert,
the men joining in chorus, or dancing to my homely music, until it was
interrupted by the drums and the retraite.

"Our guest the hunter was present at one or two of these concerts, and I
thought I would try if possibly he understood English. After we had had
our little stock of French songs, I said, 'My lads, I will give you an
English song,' and to the tune of 'Over the hills and far away,' which
my good old grandfather used to hum as a favourite air in Marlborough's
camp, I made some doggerel words:--'This long, long year, a prisoner
drear; Ah, me! I'm tired of lingering here: I'll give a hundred guineas
gay, To be over the hills and far away.'

"'What is it?' says the hunter. 'I don't understand.'

"''Tis a girl to her lover,' I answered; but I saw by the twinkle in the
man's eye that he understood me.

"The next day, when there were no men within hearing, the trapper showed
that I was right in my conjecture, for as he passed me he hummed in a
low tone, but in perfectly good English, 'Over the hills and far away,'
the burden of my yesterday's doggerel.

"'If you are ready,' says he, 'I am ready. I know who your people are,
and the way to them. Talk to the Fawn, and she will tell you what to
do. What! You will not play with me?' Here he pulled out some cards, and
spoke in French as two soldiers came up. 'Milor est trop grand seigneur?
Bonjour, my lord!'

"And the man made me a mock bow, and walked away, shrugging up his
shoulders, to offer to play and drink elsewhere.

"I knew now that the Biche was to be the agent in the affair, and that
my offer to Museau was accepted. The poor Fawn performed her part very
faithfully and dexterously. I had not need of a word more with Museau;
the matter was understood between us. The Fawn had long been allowed
free communication with me. She had tended me during my wound and in my
illnesses, helped to do the work of my little chamber, my cooking, and
so forth. She was free to go out of the fort, as I have said, and to
the river and the fields whence the corn and garden-stuff of the little
garrison were brought in.

"Having gambled away most of the money which he received for his
peltries, the trapper now got together his store of flints, powder, and
blankets, and took his leave. And, three days after his departure, the
Fawn gave me the signal that the time was come for me to make my little
trial for freedom.

"When first wounded, I had been taken by my kind Florac and placed on
his bed in the officers' room. When the fort was emptied of all officers
except the old lieutenant left in command, I had been allowed to remain
in my quarters, sometimes being left pretty free, sometimes being locked
up and fed on prisoners' rations, sometimes invited to share his mess by
my tipsy gaoler.

"This officers' house, or room, was of logs like the half-dozen others
within the fort, which mounted only four guns of small calibre, of which
one was on the bastion behind my cabin. Looking westward over this gun,
you could see a small island at the confluence of the two rivers Ohio
and Monongahela whereon Duquesne is situated. On the shore opposite this
island were some trees.

"'You see those trees?' my poor Biche said to me the day before, in her
French jargon. 'He wait for you behind those trees.'

"In the daytime the door of my quarters was open, and the Biche free to
come and go. On the day before she came in from the fields with a pick
in her hand and a basketful of vegetables and potherbs for soup. She sat
down on a bench at my door, the pick resting against it, and the basket
at her side. I stood talking to her for a while: but I believe I was so
idiotic that I never should have thought of putting the pick to any use
had she actually pushed it into my open door, so that it fell into my
room. 'Hide it' she said; 'want it soon.' And that afternoon it was, she
pointed out the trees to me.

"On the next day, she comes, pretending to be very angry, and calls out,
'My lord! my lord! why you not come to commandant's dinner? He very bad!
Entendez-vows?' And she peeps into the room as she speaks, and flings a
coil of rope at me.

"'I am coming, La Biche,' says I, and hobbled after her on my crutch.
As I went in to the commandant's quarters she says, 'Pour ce soir.' And
then I knew the time was come.

"As for Museau, he knew nothing about the matter. Not he! He growled at
me, and said the soup was cold. He looked me steadily in the face, and
talked of this and that; not only whilst his servant was present, but
afterwards as we smoked our pipes and played our game at piquet; whilst
according to her wont, the poor Biche sate cowering in a corner.

"My friend's whisky-bottle was empty; and he said, with rather a knowing
look, he must have another glass--we must both have a glass that night.
And rising from the table he stumped to the inner room where he kept his
fire-water under lock and key, and away from the poor Biche, who could
not resist that temptation.

"As he turned his back the Biche raised herself; and he was no sooner
gone but she was at my feet, kissing my hand, pressing it to her heart,
and bursting into tears over my knees. I confess I was so troubled by
this testimony of the poor creature's silent attachment and fondness,
the extent of which I scarce had suspected before, that when Museau
returned, I had not recovered my equanimity, though the poor Fawn was
back in her corner again and shrouded in her blanket.

"He did not appear to remark anything strange in the behaviour of
either. We sate down to our game, though my thoughts were so preoccupied
that I scarcely knew what cards were before me.

"'I gain everything from you to-night, milor,' says he, grimly. 'We play
upon parole.'

"'And you may count upon mine,' I replied.

"'Eh! 'tis all that you have!' says he.

"'Monsieur,' says I, 'my word is good for ten thousand livres;' and we
continued our game.

"At last he said he had a headache, and would go to bed, and I
understood the orders too, that I was to retire. 'I wish you a good
night, mon petit milor,' says he,--'stay, you will fall without your
crutch,'--and his eyes twinkled at me, and his face wore a sarcastic
grin. In the agitation of the moment I had quite forgotten that I was
lame, and was walking away at a pace as good as a grenadier's.

"'What a vilain night!' says he, looking out. In fact there was a
tempest abroad, and a great roaring, and wind. 'Bring a lanthorn, La
Tulipe, and lock my lord comfortably into his quarters!' He stood a
moment looking at me from his own door, and I saw a glimpse of the poor
Biche behind him.

"The night was so rainy that the sentries preferred their boxes, and did
not disturb me in my work. The log-house was built with upright posts,
deeply fixed in the ground, and horizontal logs laid upon it. I had to
dig under these, and work a hole sufficient to admit my body to pass. I
began in the dark, soon after tattoo. It was some while after midnight
before my work was done, when I lifted my hand up under the log and felt
the rain from without falling upon it. I had to work very cautiously for
two hours after that, and then crept through to the parapet and silently
flung my rope over the gun; not without a little tremor of heart, lest
the sentry should see me and send a charge of lead into my body.

"The wall was but twelve feet, and my fall into the ditch easy enough. I
waited a while there, looking steadily under the gun, and trying to see
the river and the island. I heard the sentry pacing up above and humming
a tune. The darkness became more clear to me ere long, and the moon
rose, and I saw the river shining before me, and the dark rocks and
trees of the island rising in the waters.

"I made for this mark as swiftly as I could, and for the clump of trees
to which I had been directed. Oh, what a relief I had when I heard a low
voice humming there, 'Over the hills and far away'!"

When Mr. George came to this part of his narrative, Miss Theo, who was
seated by a harpsichord, turned round and dashed off the tune on the
instrument, whilst all the little company broke out into the merry
chorus.

"Our way," the speaker went on, "lay through a level tract of
forest with which my guide was familiar, upon the right bank of the
Monongahela. By daylight we came to a clearer country, and my trapper
asked me--Silverheels was the name by which he went--had I ever seen
the spot before? It was the fatal field where Braddock had fallen, and
whence I had been wonderfully rescued in the summer of the previous
year. Now, the leaves were beginning to be tinted with the magnificent
hues of our autumn."

"Ah, brother!" cries Harry, seizing his brother's hand. "I was gambling
and making a fool of myself at the Wells and in London, when my
George was flying for his life in the wilderness! Oh, what a miserable
spendthrift I have been!"

"But I think thou art not unworthy to be called thy mother's son," said
Mrs. Lambert, very softly, and with moistened eyes. Indeed, if Harry
had erred, to mark his repentance, his love, his unselfish joy and
generosity, was to feel that there was hope for the humbled and kind
young sinner.

"We presently crossed the river" George resumed, "taking our course
along the base of the western slopes of the Alleghanies; and through a
grand forest region of oaks and maple, and enormous poplars that grow
a hundred feet high without a branch. It was the Indians whom we had
to avoid, besides the outlying parties of French. Always of doubtful
loyalty, the savages have been specially against us, since our
ill-treatment of them, and the French triumph over us two years ago.

"I was but weak still, and our journey through the wilderness lasted a
fortnight or more. As we advanced, the woods became redder and redder.
The frost nipped sharply of nights. We lighted fires at our feet, and
slept in our blankets as best we might. At this time of year the hunters
who live in the mountains get their sugar from the maples. We came upon
more than one such family, camping near their trees by the mountain
streams; and they welcomed us at their fires, and gave us of their
venison. So we passed over the two ranges of the Laurel Hills and the
Alleghanies. The last day's march of my trusty guide and myself took us
down that wild, magnificent pass of Will's Creek, a valley lying between
cliffs near a thousand feet high--bald, white, and broken into towers
like huge fortifications, with eagles wheeling round the summits of the
rocks, and watching their nests among the crags.

"And hence we descended to Cumberland, whence we had marched in the year
before, and where there was now a considerable garrison of our people.
Oh! you may think it was a welcome day when I saw English colours again
on the banks of our native Potomac!"




CHAPTER LIII. Where we remain at the Court End of the Town


George Warrington had related the same story, which we have just heard,
to Madame de Bernstein on the previous evening--a portion, that is, of
the history; for the old lady nodded off to sleep many times during
the narration, only waking up when George paused, saying it was most
interesting, and ordering him to continue. The young gentleman hem'd and
ha'd, and stuttered, and blushed, and went on, much against his will,
and did not speak half so well as he did to his friendly little auditory
in Hill Street, where Hetty's eyes of wonder and Theo's sympathising
looks, and mamma's kind face, and papa's funny looks, were applause
sufficient to cheer any modest youth who required encouragement for his
eloquence. As for mamma's behaviour, the General said, 'twas as good as
Mr. Addison's trunk-maker, and she would make the fortune of any tragedy
by simply being engaged to cry in the front boxes. That is why we chose
my Lord Wrotham's house as the theatre where George's first piece should
be performed, wishing that he should speak to advantage, and not as when
he was heard by that sleepy, cynical old lady, to whom he had to narrate
his adventures.

"Very good and most interesting, I am sure, my dear sir," says Madame
Bernstein, putting up three pretty little fingers covered with a lace
mitten, to hide a convulsive movement of her mouth. "And your mother
must have been delighted to see you."

George shrugged his shoulders ever so little, and made a low bow, as his
aunt looked up at him for a moment with her keen old eyes.

"Have been delighted to see you" she continued drily, "and killed the
fatted calf, and--and that kind of thing. Though why I say calf, I don't
know, nephew George, for you never were the prodigal. I may say calf to
thee, my poor Harry! Thou hast been amongst the swine sure enough. And
evil companions have robbed the money out of thy pocket and the coat off
thy back.

"He came to his family in England, madam," says George, with some heat,
"and his friends were your ladyship's."

"He could not have come to worse advisers, nephew Warrington, and so I
should have told my sister earlier, had she condescended to write to me
by him, as she has done by you," said the old lady, tossing up her head.
"Hey! hey!" she said, at night, as she arranged herself for the rout to
which she was going, to her waiting-maid: "this young gentleman's mother
is half sorry that he has come to life again, I could see that in his
face. She is half sorry, and I am perfectly furious! Why didn't he
lie still when he dropped there under the tree, and why did that young
Florac carry him to the fort? I knew those Floracs when I was at Paris,
in the time of Monsieur le Regent. They were of the Floracs of Ivry. No
great house before Henri IV. His ancestor was the king's favourite.
His ancestor--he! he!--his ancestress! Brett! entendez-vous? Give me my
card-purse. I don't like the grand airs of this Monsieur George; and yet
he resembles, very much, his grandfather--the same look and sometimes
the same tones. You have heard of Colonel Esmond when I was young? This
boy has his eyes. I suppose I liked the Colonel's because he loved me."

Being engaged, then, to a card-party,--an amusement which she never
missed, week-day or Sabbath, as long as she had strength to hold trumps
or sit in a chair,--very soon after George had ended his narration the
old lady dismissed her two nephews, giving to the elder a couple of
fingers and a very stately curtsey; but to Harry two hands and a kindly
pat on the cheek.

"My poor child, now thou art disinherited, thou wilt see how differently
the world will use thee!" she said. "There is only, in all London, a
wicked, heartless old woman who will treat thee as before. Here is a
pocket-book for you, child! Do not lose it at Ranelagh to-night. That
suit of yours does not become your brother half so well as it sat upon
you! You will present your brother to everybody, and walk up and down
the room for two hours at least, child. Were I you, I would then go to
the Chocolate-House, and play as if nothing had happened. Whilst you are
there, your brother may come back to me and eat a bit of chicken
with me. My Lady Flint gives wretched suppers, and I want to talk his
mother's letter over with him. Au revoir, gentlemen!" and she went away
to her toilette. Her chairmen and flambeaux were already waiting at the
door.

The gentlemen went to Ranelagh, where but a few of Mr. Harry's
acquaintances chanced to be present. They paced the round, and met Mr.
Tom Claypool with some of his country friends; they heard the music;
they drank tea in a box; Harry was master of ceremonies, and introduced
his brother to the curiosities of the place; and George was even more
excited than his brother had been on his first introduction to this
palace of delight. George loved music much more than Harry ever did;
he heard a full orchestra for the first time, and a piece of Mr. Handel
satisfactorily performed; and a not unpleasing instance of Harry's
humility and regard for his elder brother was, that he could even hold
George's love of music in respect at a time when fiddling was voted
effeminate and unmanly in England, and Britons were, every day, called
upon by the patriotic prints to sneer at the frivolous accomplishments
of your Squallinis, Monsieurs, and the like. Nobody in Britain is proud
of his ignorance now. There is no conceit left among us. There is no
such thing as dulness. Arrogance is entirely unknown... Well, at any
rate, Art has obtained her letters of naturalisation, and lives here on
terms of almost equality. If Mrs. Thrale chose to marry a music-master
now, I don't think her friends would shudder at the mention of her name.
If she had a good fortune and kept a good cook, people would even go and
dine with her in spite of the misalliance, and actually treat Mr. Piozzi
with civility.

After Ranelagh, and pursuant to Madam Bernstein's advice, George
returned to her ladyship's house, whilst Harry showed himself at the
club, where gentlemen were accustomed to assemble at night to sup, and
then to gamble. No one, of course, alluded to Mr. Warrington's little
temporary absence, and Mr. Ruff, his ex-landlord, waited upon him with
the utmost gravity and civility, and as if there had never been any
difference between them. Mr. Warrington had caused his trunks and
habiliments to be conveyed away from Bond Street in the morning, and he
and his brother were now established in apartments elsewhere.

But when the supper was done, and the gentlemen, as usual, were about to
seek the macco-table upstairs, Harry said he was not going to play
any more. He had burned his fingers already, and could afford no more
extravagance.

"Why," says Mr. Morris, in a rather flippant manner, "you must have won
more than you have lost, Mr. Warrington, after all is said and done."

"And of course I don't know my own business as well as you do, Mr.
Morris," says Harry sternly, who had not forgotten the other's behaviour
on hearing of his arrest; "but I have another reason. A few months
or days ago, I was heir to a great estate, and could afford to lose
a little money. Now, thank God, I am heir to nothing." And he looked
round, blushing not a little, to the knot of gentlemen, his gaming
associates, who were lounging at the tables or gathered round the fire.

"How do you mean, Mr. Warrington?" cries my Lord March, "Have you lost
Virginia, too? Who has won it? I always had a fancy to play you myself
for that stake."

"And grow an improved breed of slaves in the colony," says another.

"The right owner has won it. You have heard me tell of my twin elder
brother?"

"Who was killed in that affair of Braddock's two years ago! Yes.
Gracious goodness, my dear sir, I hope in heaven he has not come to life
again?"

"He arrived in London two days since. He has been a prisoner in a French
fort for eighteen months; he only escaped a few months ago, and left our
house in Virginia very soon after his release."

"You haven't had time to order mourning, I suppose, Mr. Warrington?"
asks Mr. Selwyn very good-naturedly, and simple Harry hardly knew the
meaning of his joke until his brother interpreted it to him.

"Hang me, if I don't believe the fellow is absolutely glad of the
reappearance of his confounded brother!" cries my Lord March, as they
continued to talk of the matter when the young Virginian had taken his
leave.

"These savages practise the simple virtues of affection--they are barely
civilised in America yet," yawns Selwyn.

"They love their kindred, and they scalp their enemies," simpers Mr.
Walpole. "It's not Christian, but natural. Shouldn't you like to be
present at a scalping-match, George, and see a fellow skinned alive?"

"A man's elder brother is his natural enemy," says Mr. Selwyn, placidly
ranging his money and counters before him.

"Torture is like broiled bones and pepper. You wouldn't relish simple
hanging afterwards, George!" continues Horry.

"I'm hanged if there's any man in England who would like to see his
elder brother alive," says my lord.

"No, nor his father either, my lord!" cries Jack Morris.

"First time I ever knew you had one, Jack. Give me counters for five
hundred."

"I say, 'tis all mighty fine about dead brothers coming to life again,"
continues Jack. "Who is to know that it wasn't a scheme arranged between
these two fellows? Here comes a young fellow who calls himself the
Fortunate Youth, who says he is a Virginian Prince and the deuce knows
what, and who gets into our society----"

A great laugh ensues at Jack's phrase of "our society."

"Who is to know that it wasn't a cross?" Jack continues. "The young one
is to come first. He is to marry an heiress, and, when he has got her,
up is to rise the elder brother! When did this elder brother show? Why,
when the younger's scheme was blown, and all was up with him! Who shall
tell me that the fellow hasn't been living in Seven Dials, or in a
cellar dining off tripe and cow-heel until my younger gentleman was
disposed of? Dammy, as gentlemen, I think we ought to take notice of it:
and that this Mr. Warrington has been taking a most outrageous liberty
with the whole club."

"Who put him up? It was March, I think, put him up?" asks a bystander.

"Yes. But my lord thought he was putting up a very different person.
Didn't you, March?"

"Hold your confounded tongue, and mind your game!" says the nobleman
addressed: but Jack Morris's opinion found not a few supporters in the
world. Many persons agreed that it was most indecorous of Mr. Harry
Warrington to have ever believed in his brother's death: that there
was something suspicious about the young man's first appearance and
subsequent actions, and, in fine, that regarding these foreigners,
adventurers, and the like, we ought to be especially cautious.

Though he was out of prison and difficulty; though he had his aunt's
liberal donation of money in his pocket; though his dearest brother
was restored to him, whose return to life Harry never once thought of
deploring, as his friends at White's supposed he would do; though Maria
had shown herself in such a favourable light by her behaviour during
his misfortune: yet Harry, when alone, felt himself not particularly
cheerful, and smoked his pipe of Virginia with a troubled mind. It was
not that he was deposed from his principality; the loss of it never once
vexed him; he knew that his brother would share with him as he would
have done with his brother; but after all those struggles and doubts
in his own mind, to find himself poor, and yet irrevocably bound to his
elderly cousin! Yes, she was elderly, there was no doubt about it. When
she came to that horrible den in Cursitor Street and the tears washed
her rouge off, why, she looked as old as his mother! her face was all
wrinkled and yellow, and as he thought of her he felt just such a qualm
as he had when she was taken ill that day in the coach on their road
to Tunbridge. What would his mother say when he brought her home, and,
Lord, what battles there would be between them! He would go and live on
one of the plantations--the farther from home the better--and have a
few negroes, and farm as best he might, and hunt a good deal; but at
Castlewood or in her own home, such as he could make it for her, what a
life for poor Maria, who had been used to go to court and to cards and
balls and assemblies every night! If he could be but the overseer of the
estates--oh, he would be an honest factor, and try and make up for his
useless life and extravagance in these past days! Five thousand pounds,
all his patrimony and the accumulations of his long minority squandered
in six months! He a beggar, except for dear George's kindness, with
nothing in life left to him but an old wife,--a pretty beggar, dressed
out in velvet and silver lace forsooth--the poor lad was arrayed in his
best clothes--a pretty figure he had made in Europe, and a nice end he
was come to! With all his fine friends at White's and Newmarket, with
all his extravagance, had he been happy a single day since he had been
in Europe? Yes, three days, four days, yesterday evening, when he had
been with dear dear Mrs. Lambert, and those affectionate kind girls, and
that brave good Colonel. And the Colonel was right when he rebuked him
for his spendthrift follies, and he had been a brute to be angry as he
had been, and God bless them all for their generous exertions in his
behalf! Such were the thoughts which Harry put into his pipe, and he
smoked them whilst he waited his brother's return from Madame Bernstein.




CHAPTER LIV. During which Harry sits smoking his Pipe at Home


The maternal grandfather of our Virginians, the Colonel Esmond of whom
frequent mention has been made, and who had quitted England to reside in
the New World, had devoted some portion of his long American leisure
to the composition of the memoirs of his early life. In these volumes,
Madame de Bernstein (Mrs. Beatrice Esmond was her name as a
spinster) played a very considerable part; and as George had read his
grandfather's manuscript many times over, he had learned to know his
kinswoman long before he saw her,--to know, at least, the lady, young,
beautiful, and wilful, of half a century since, with whom he now became
acquainted in the decline of her days. When cheeks are faded and eyes
are dim, is it sad or pleasant, I wonder, for the woman who is a beauty
no more, to recall the period of her bloom! When the heart is withered,
do the old love to remember how it once was fresh and beat with warm
emotions? When the spirits are languid and weary, do we like to think
how bright they were in other days, the hope how buoyant, the sympathies
how ready, the enjoyment of life how keen and eager? So they fall--the
buds of prime, the roses of beauty, the florid harvests of summer,--fall
and wither, and the naked branches shiver in the winter.

"And that was a beauty once!" thinks George Warrington, as his aunt,
in her rouge and diamonds, comes in from her rout, "and that ruin was
a splendid palace. Crowds of lovers have sighed before those decrepit
feet, and been bewildered by the brightness of those eyes." He
remembered a firework at home, at Williamsburg, on the King's birthday,
and afterwards looking at the skeleton-wheel and the sockets of the
exploded Roman candles. The dazzle and brilliancy of Aunt Beatrice's
early career passed before him, as he thought over his grandsire's
journals. Honest Harry had seen them, too, but Harry was no bookman,
and had not read the manuscript very carefully: nay, if he had, he would
probably not have reasoned about it as his brother did, being by no
means so much inclined to moralising as his melancholy senior.

Mr. Warrington thought that there was no cause why he should tell his
aunt how intimate he was with her early history, and accordingly held
his peace upon that point. When their meal was over, she pointed with
her cane to her escritoire, and bade her attendant bring the letter
which lay under the inkstand there; and George, recognising the
superscription, of course knew the letter to be that of which he had
been the bearer from home.

"It would appear by this letter," said the old lady, looking hard at her
nephew, "that ever since your return, there have been some differences
between you and my sister."

"Indeed? I did not know that Madam Esmond had alluded to them," George
said.

The Baroness puts a great pair of glasses upon eyes which shot fire and
kindled who knows how many passions in old days, and, after glancing
over the letter, hands it to George, who reads as follows:--


"RICHMOND, VIRGINIA, December 26th, 1756.

"HONOURED MADAM! AND SISTER!--I have received, and thankfully
acknowledge, your ladyship's favour, per Rose packet, of October 23
ult.; and straightway answer you at a season which should be one of
goodwill and peace to all men: but in which Heaven hath nevertheless
decreed we should still bear our portion of earthly sorrow and trouble.
My reply will be brought to you by my eldest son, Mr. Esmond Warrington,
who returned to us so miraculously out of the Valley of the Shadow of
Death (as our previous letters have informed my poor Henry), and who is
desirous, not without my consent to his wish, to visit Europe, though he
has been amongst us so short a while. I grieve to think that my dearest
Harry should have appeared at home--I mean in England--under false
colours, as it were; and should have been presented to his Majesty, to
our family, and his own, as his father's heir, whilst my dear son George
was still alive, though dead to us. Ah, madam! During the eighteen
months of his captivity, what anguish have his mother's, his brother's,
hearts undergone! My Harry's is the tenderest of any man's now alive. In
the joy of seeing Mr. Esmond Warrington returned to life, he will
forget the worldly misfortune which befalls him. He will return to
(comparative) poverty without a pang. The most generous, the most
obedient of human beings, of sons, he will gladly give up to his elder
brother that inheritance which had been his own but for the accident of
birth, and for the providential return of my son George.

"Your beneficent intentions towards dearest Harry will be more than ever
welcome, now he is reduced to a younger brother's slender portion! Many
years since, an advantageous opportunity occurred of providing for him
in this province, and he would by this time have been master of a noble
estate and negroes, and have been enabled to make a figure with most
here, could his mother's wishes have been complied with, and his
father's small portion, now lying at small interest in the British
funds, have been invested in this most excellent purchase. But the forms
of the law, and, I grieve to own, my elder son's scruples, prevailed,
and this admirable opportunity was lost to me! Harry will find the
savings of his income have been carefully accumulated--long, long may
he live to enjoy them! May Heaven bless you, dear sister, for what your
ladyship may add to his little store! As I gather from your letter, that
the sum which has been allowed to him has not been sufficient for his
expenses in the fine company which he has kept (and the grandson of the
Marquis of Esmond--one who had so nearly been his lordship's heir--may
sure claim equality with any other nobleman in Great Britain), and
having a sum by me which I had always intended for the poor child's
establishment, I entrust it to my eldest son, who, to do him justice,
hath a most sincere regard for his brother, to lay it out for Harry's
best advantage."


"It took him out of prison yesterday, madam. I think that was the best
use to which we could put it," interposed George, at this stage of his
mother's letter.

"Nay, sir, I don't know any such thing! Why not have kept it to buy
a pair of colours for him, or to help towards another estate and some
negroes, if he has a fancy for home?" cried the old lady. "Besides, I
had a fancy to pay that debt myself."

"I hope you will let his brother do that. I ask leave to be my brother's
banker in this matter, and consider I have borrowed so much from my
mother, to be paid back to my dear Harry."

"Do you say so, sir? Give me a glass of wine! You are an extravagant
fellow! Read on, and you will see your mother thinks so. I drink to your
health, nephew George! 'Tis good Burgundy. Your grandfather never loved
Burgundy. He loved claret, the little he drank."

And George proceeded with the letter:


"This remittance will, I trust, amply cover any expenses which, owing to
the mistake respecting his position, dearest Harry may have incurred.
I wish I could trust his elder brother's prudence as confidently as
my Harry's! But I fear that, even in his captivity, Mr. Esmond W. has
learned little of that humility which becomes all Christians, and which
I have ever endeavoured to teach to my children. Should you by chance
show him these lines, when, by the blessing of Heaven on those who go
down to the sea in ships, the Great Ocean divides us! he will know that
a fond mother's blessing and prayers follow both her children, and
that there is no act I have ever done, no desire I have ever expressed
(however little he may have been inclined to obey it!) but hath been
dictated by the fondest wishes for my dearest boys' welfare."


"There is a scratch with a penknife, and a great blot upon the letter
there, as if water had fallen on it. Your mother writes well, George. I
suppose you and she had a difference?" said George's aunt, not unkindly.

"Yes, ma'am, many," answered the young man, sadly. "The last was about
a question of money--of ransom which I promised to the old lieutenant of
the fort who aided me to make my escape. I told you he had a mistress, a
poor Indian woman, who helped me, and was kind to me. Six weeks after my
arrival at home, the poor thing made her appearance at Richmond, having
found her way through the wood by pretty much the same track which I had
followed, and bringing me the token which Museau had promised to send me
when he connived to my flight. A commanding officer and a considerable
reinforcement had arrived at Duquesne. Charges, I don't know of what
peculation (for his messenger could not express herself very clearly),
had been brought against this Museau. He had been put under arrest, and
had tried to escape; but, less fortunate than myself, he had been
shot on the rampart, and he sent the Indian woman to me, with my
grandfather's watch, and a line scrawled in his prison on his deathbed,
begging me to send ce que je scavais to a notary at Havre de Grace in
France to be transmitted to his relatives at Caen in Normandy. My friend
Silverheels, the hunter, had helped my poor Indian on her way. I don't
know how she would have escaped scalping else. But at home they received
the poor thing sternly. They hardly gave her a welcome. I won't say
what suspicions they had regarding her and me. The poor wretch fell to
drinking whenever she could find means. I ordered that she should have
food and shelter, and she became the jest of our negroes, and formed the
subject of the scandal and tittle-tattle of the old fools in our little
town. Our Governor was, luckily, a man of sense, and I made interest
with him, and procured a pass to send her back to her people. Her very
grief at parting with me only served to confirm the suspicions against
her. A fellow preached against me from the pulpit, I believe; I had
to treat another with a cane. And I had a violent dispute with Madam
Esmond--a difference which is not healed yet--because I insisted upon
paying to the heirs Museau pointed out the money I had promised for
my deliverance. You see that scandal flourishes at the borders of the
wilderness, and in the New World as well as the Old."

"I have suffered from it myself, my dear!" said Madame Bernstein,
demurely. "Fill thy glass, child! A little tass of cherry-brandy! 'Twill
do thee all the good in the world."


"As for my poor Harry's marriage," Madam Esmond's letter went on,
"though I know too well, from sad experience, the dangers to which youth
is subject, and would keep my boy, at any price, from them, though I
should wish him to marry a person of rank, as becomes his birth, yet my
Lady Maria Esmond is out of the question. Her age is almost the same as
mine; and I know my brother Castlewood left his daughters with the very
smallest portions. My Harry is so obedient that I know a desire from me
will be sufficient to cause him to give up this imprudent match. Some
foolish people once supposed that I myself once thought of a second
union, and with a person of rank very different from ours. No! I knew
what was due to my children. As succeeding to this estate after me, Mr.
Esmond W. is amply provided for. Let my task now be to save for his less
fortunate younger brother: and, as I do not love to live quite alone,
let him return without delay to his fond and loving mother.

"The report which your ladyship hath given of my Harry fills my heart
with warmest gratitude. He is all indeed a mother may wish. A year in
Europe will have given him a polish and refinement which he could
not acquire in our homely Virginia. Mr. Stack, one of our invaluable
ministers in Richmond, hath a letter from Mr. Ward--my darlings' tutor
of early days--who knows my Lady Warrington and her excellent family,
and saith that my Harry has lived much with his cousins of late. I am
grateful to think that my boy has the privilege of being with his good
aunt. May he follow her counsels, and listen to those around him who
will guide him on the way of his best welfare! Adieu, dear madam and
sister! For your kindness to my boy accept the grateful thanks of a
mother's heart. Though we have been divided hitherto, may these kindly
ties draw us nearer and nearer. I am thankful that you should speak of
my dearest father so. He was, indeed, one of the best of men! He, too,
thanks you, I know, for the love you have borne to one of his children;
and his daughter subscribes herself,--With sincere thanks, your
ladyship's most dutiful and grateful sister and servant, RACHEL ESMOND
WN.

"P.S.--I have communicated with my Lady Maria; but there will no need to
tell her and dear Harry that his mother or your ladyship hope to be able
to increase his small fortune. The match is altogether unsuitable."


"As far as regards myself, madam," George said, laying down the paper,
"my mother's letter conveys no news to me. I always knew that Harry was
the favourite son with Madam Esmond, as he deserves indeed to be. He has
a hundred good qualities which I have not the good fortune to possess.
He has better looks----"

"Nay, that is not your fault," said the old lady, slily looking at him;
"and, but that he is fair and you are brown, one might almost pass for
the other."

Mr. George bowed, and a faint blush tinged his pale cheek.

"His disposition is bright, and mine is dark," he continued; "Harry
is cheerful, and I am otherwise, perhaps. He knows how to make himself
beloved by every one, and it has been my lot to find but few friends."

"My sister and you have pretty little quarrels. There were such in old
days in our family," the Baroness said; "and if Madam Esmond takes after
our mother----"

"My mother has always described hers as an angel upon earth," interposed
George.

"Eh! That is a common character for people when they are dead!" cried
the Baroness; "and Rachel Castlewood was an angel, if you like--at least
your grandfather thought so. But let me tell you, sir, that angels are
sometimes not very commodes a vivre. It may be they are too good to live
with us sinners, and the air down below here don't agree with them. My
poor mother was so perfect that she never could forgive me for being
otherwise. Ah, mon Dieu! how she used to oppress me with those angelical
airs!"

George cast down his eyes, and thought of his own melancholy youth.
He did not care to submit more of his family secrets to the cynical
inquisition of this old worldling, who seemed, however, to understand
him in spite of his reticence.

"I quite comprehend you, sir, though you hold your tongue," the Baroness
continued. "A sermon in the morning: a sermon at night: and two or three
of a Sunday. That is what people call being good. Every pleasure cried
fie upon; all us worldly people excommunicated; a ball an abomination of
desolation; a play a forbidden pastime; and a game of cards perdition!
What a life! Mon Dieu, what a life!"

"We played at cards every night, if we were so inclined," said George,
smiling; "and my grandfather loved Shakspeare so much, that my mother
had not a word to say against her father's favourite author."

"I remember. He could say whole pages by heart; though, for my part,
I like Mr. Congreve a great deal better. And then, there was that
dreadful, dreary Milton, whom he and Mr. Addison pretended to admire!"
cried the old lady, tapping her fan.

"If your ladyship does not like Shakspeare, you will not quarrel with
my mother for being indifferent to him, too," said George. "And indeed I
think, and I am sure, that you don't do her justice. Wherever there are
any poor she relieves them; wherever there are any sick she----"

"She doses them with her horrible purges and boluses!" cried the
Baroness. "Of course, just as my mother did!"

"She does her best to cure them! She acts for the best, and performs her
duty as far as she knows it."

"I don't blame you, sir, for doing yours, and keeping your own counsel
about Madam Esmond," said the old lady. "But at least there is one
point upon which we all three agree--that this absurd marriage must be
prevented. Do you know how old the woman is? I can tell you, though she
has torn the first leaf out of the family Bible at Castlewood."

"My mother has not forgotten her cousin's age, and is shocked at the
disparity between her and my poor brother. Indeed, a city-bred lady of
her time of life, accustomed to London gaiety and luxury, would find but
a dismal home in our Virginian plantation. Besides, the house, such as
it is, is not Harry's. He is welcome there, Heaven knows; more welcome,
perhaps, than I, to whom the property comes in natural reversion; but,
as I told him, I doubt how his wife would--would like our colony,"
George said, with a blush, and a hesitation in his sentence.

The old lady laughed shrilly. "He, he! nephew Warrington!" she said,
"you need not scruple to speak your mind out. I shall tell no tales to
your mother: though 'tis no news to me that she has a high temper, and
loves her own way. Harry has held his tongue, too; but it needed no
conjurer to see who was the mistress at home, and what sort of a life
my sister led you. I love my niece, my Lady Molly, so well, that I could
wish her two or three years of Virginia, with your mother reigning over
her. You may well look alarmed, sir! Harry has said quite enough to show
me who governs the family."

"Madam," said George, smiling, "I may say as much as this, that I don't
envy any woman coming into our house against my mother's will: and my
poor brother knows this perfectly well."

"What? You two have talked the matter over? No doubt you have. And the
foolish child considers himself bound in honour--of course he does, the
gaby!"

"He says Lady Maria has behaved most nobly to him. When he was sent to
prison, she brought him her trinkets and jewels, and every guinea she
had in the world. This behaviour has touched him so, that he feels more
deeply than ever bound to her ladyship. But I own my brother seems bound
by honour rather than love--such at least is his present feeling."

"My good creature," cries Madame Bernstein, "don't you see that Maria
brings a few twopenny trinkets and a half-dozen guineas to Mr. Esmond,
the heir of the great estate in Virginia,--not to the second son, who is
a beggar, and has just squandered away every shilling of his fortune?
I swear to you, on my credit as a gentlewoman, that, knowing Harry's
obstinacy, and the misery he had in store for himself, I tried to bribe
Maria to give up her engagement with him, and only failed because I
could not bribe high enough! When he was in prison, I sent my lawyer to
him, with orders to pay his debts immediately, if he would but part from
her, but Maria had been beforehand with us, and Mr. Harry chose not to
go back from his stupid word. Let me tell you what has passed in the
last month!" And here the old lady narrated at length the history which
we know already, but in that cynical language which was common in her
times, when the finest folks and the most delicate ladies called things
and people by names which we never utter in good company nowadays. And
so much the better on the whole. We mayn't be more virtuous, but it
is something to be more decent: perhaps we are not more pure, but of a
surety we are more cleanly.

Madame Bernstein talked so much, so long, and so cleverly, that she was
quite pleased with herself and her listener; and when she put herself
into the hands of Mrs. Brett to retire for the night, informed the
waiting-maid that she had changed her opinion about her eldest nephew,
and that Mr. George was handsome, that he was certainly much wittier
than poor Harry (whom Heaven, it must be confessed, had not furnished
with a very great supply of brains), and that he had quite the bel
air--a something melancholy--a noble and distinguished je ne scais
quoy--which reminded her of the Colonel. Had she ever told Brett about
the Colonel? Scores of times, no doubt. And now she told Brett about the
Colonel once more. Meanwhile, perhaps, her new favourite was not quite
so well pleased with her as she was with him. What a strange picture of
life and manners had the old lady unveiled to her nephew! How she railed
at all the world round about her! How unconsciously did she paint her
own family--her own self; how selfish, one and all; pursuing what
mean ends; grasping and scrambling frantically for what petty prizes;
ambitious for what shabby recompenses; trampling--from life's beginning
to its close--through what scenes of stale dissipations and faded
pleasures! "Are these the inheritors of noble blood?" thought George, as
he went home quite late from his aunt's house, passing by doors whence
the last guests of fashion were issuing, and where the chairmen were
yawning over their expiring torches. "Are these the proud possessors of
ancestral honours and ancient names, and were their forefathers, when in
life, no better? We have our pedigree at home with noble coats-of-arms
emblazoned all over the branches, and titles dating back before the
Conquest and the Crusaders. When a knight of old found a friend in want,
did he turn his back upon him, or an unprotected damsel, did he delude
her and leave her? When a nobleman of the early time received a young
kinsman, did he get the better of him at dice, and did the ancient
chivalry cheat in horseflesh? Can it be that this wily woman of the
world, as my aunt has represented, has inveigled my poor Harry into an
engagement, that her tears are false, and that as soon as she finds him
poor she will desert him? Had we not best pack the trunks and take a
cabin in the next ship bound for home?" George reached his own door
revolving these thoughts, and Gumbo came up yawning with a candle, and
Harry was asleep before the extinguished fire, with the ashes of his
emptied pipe on the table beside him.

He starts up; his eyes, for a moment dulled by sleep, lighten with
pleasure as he sees his dear George. He puts his arm round his brother
with a boyish laugh.

"There he is in flesh and blood, thank God!" he says; "I was dreaming of
thee but now, George, and that Ward was hearing us our lesson! Dost
thou remember the ruler, Georgy? Why, bless my soul, 'tis three o'clock!
Where have you been a-gadding, Mr. George? Hast thou supped? I supped at
White's, but I'm hungry again. I did not play, sir,--no, no; no more of
that for younger brothers! And my Lord March paid me fifty he lost to
me. I bet against his horse and on the Duke of Hamilton's! They both
rode the match at Newmarket this morning, and he lost because he was
under weight. And he paid me, and he was as sulky as a bear. Let us have
one pipe, Georgy!--just one."

And after the smoke the young men went to bed, where I, for one, wish
them a pleasant rest, for sure it is a good and pleasant thing to see
brethren who love one another.




CHAPTER LV. Between Brothers


Of course our young men had had their private talk about home, and all
the people and doings there, and each had imparted to the other full
particulars of his history since their last meeting. How were Harry's
dogs, and little Dempster, and good old Nathan, and the rest of the
household? Was Mountain well, and Fanny grown to be a pretty girl? So
Parson Broadbent's daughter was engaged to marry Tom Barker of Savannah,
and they were to go and live in Georgia! Harry owns that at one period
he was very sweet upon Parson Broadbent's daughter, and lost a
great deal of pocket-money at cards, and drank a great quantity of
strong-waters with the father, in order to have a pretext for being near
the girl. But, Heaven help us! Madam Esmond would never have consented
to his throwing himself away upon Polly Broadbent. So Colonel G.
Washington's wife was a pretty woman, very good-natured and pleasant,
and with a good fortune? He had brought her into Richmond, and paid a
visit of state to Madam Esmond. George described, with much humour, the
awful ceremonials at the interview between these two personages, and the
killing politeness of his mother to Mr. Washington's young wife. "Never
mind, George, my dear!" says Mrs. Mountain. "The Colonel has taken
another wife, but I feel certain that at one time two young gentlemen I
know of ran a very near chance of having a tall stepfather six feet two
in his boots." To be sure, Mountain was for ever match-making in her
mind. Two people could not play a game at cards together, or sit down
to a dish of tea, but she fancied their conjunction was for life. It was
