[Clark, November 24, 1805]
November 24th Sunday 1805
Several of the Chenn nook N. Came, one of them brought an Sea orter
Skin for which we gave Some blue Beeds--This day proved to be fair and
we dried our wet articles bedding &c. The hunters killed only 1 brant
no Deer or any thing else

The old chief of Chinn-nook nation and Several men & women Came to our
camp this evening & Smoked the pipe

     Serjt J. Ordway
     Cross & examine
     S
     Serjt. N. Pryor
     do do
     S
     Sgt. P. Gass
     do do
     S
     Jo. Shields
     proceed to Sandy R

     Go. Shannon
     Examn. Cross
     falls
     T. P. Howard
     do do
     falls
     P. Wiser
     do do
     S. R
     J. Collins
     do do
     S. R
     Jo Fields
     do do
     up
     Al. Willard
     do do
     up
     R Willard
     do do
     up
     J. Potts
     do do
     falls
     R. Frasure
     do do
     up
     Wm. Bratten
     do do
     up
     R. Fields
     do do
     falls
     J. B. Thompson
     do do
     up
     J. Colter
     do do
     up
     H. Hall
     do do
     S. R.
     Labeech
     do do
     S R
     Peter Crusatte
     do do
     S R
     J. B. Depage
     do do
     up
     Shabono
     ---
     -
     S. Guterich
     do do
     falls
     W. Werner
     do do
     up
     Go. Gibson
     do do
     up
     Jos. Whitehouse
     do do
     up
     Geo Drewyer
     Examn other side
     falls
     McNeal
     do do
     up
     York
     " "
     lookout

         falls         Sandy River         lookout up
         6                10                 12

Janey in favour of a place where there is plenty of Potas.

Cp L Proceed on to morrow & examine The other side if good hunting to
winter there, as Salt is an objt. if not to proceed on to Sandy it is
probable that a vestle will come in this winter, & that by proceeding
on at any distance would not inhance our journey in passing the Rockey
mountains, &c.

W C. In favour of proceding on without delay to the opposit Shore &
there examine, and find out both the disposition of the Indians, &
probibilaty of precureing Subsistance, and also enquire if the Tradeing
vestles will arrive before the time we Should depart in the Spring, and
if the Traders, Comonly arive in a Seasonable time, and we Can Subsist
without a depends. on our Stores of goods, to Continue as the Climent
would be more favourable on the Sea Coast for our naked men than higher
up the Countrey where the Climate must be more Severe--The advantage of
the arival of a vestle from whome we Can precure goods will be more
than an over ballance, for the bad liveing we Shall have in liveing on
Pore deer & Elk we may get in this neighbourhood. If we Cannot subsist
on the above terms to proceed on, and make Station Camps, to
neighbourhood of the Frendly village near the long narrows & delay
untill we Can proceed up the river. Salt water I view as an evil in as
much as it is not helthy--I am also of opinion that one two or three
weeks Exemination on the opposide if the propects are any wise
favourable, would not be too long

Variation of the Compass is 16 deg. East




[Clark, November 24, 1805]
Sunday November 24th 1805.
A fair morning Sent out 6 hunters, and we proceeded to make the
following observations a Chief and Several men of the Chin nook nation
Came to Smoke with us this evening one of the men brought a Small Sea
otter Skin for which we gave Some blue beads--this day proved fair
which gave us an oppertunity of drying our wet articles, bedding &c.
&c. nothing killed to day except one Brant. the variation of the
Compass is 16 deg. East.

being now determined to go into Winter quarters as Soon as possible, as
a convenient Situation to precure the Wild animals of the forest which
must be our dependance for Subsisting this Winter, we have every reason
to believe that the nativs have not provisions Suffient for our
Consumption, and if they had, their price's are So high that it would
take ten times as much to purchase their roots & Dried fish as we have
in our possesion, encluding our Small remains of merchindz and Clothes
&c. This Certinly enduces every individual of the party to make
diligient enquiries of the nativs the part of the Countrey in which the
wild Animals are most plenty. They generaly agree that the most Elk is
on the opposit Shore, and that the greatest numbers of Deer is up the
river at Some distance above

The Elk being an animal much larger than Deer, easier to kiled better
meat (in the winter when pore) and Skins better for the Clothes of our
party; added to-, a convenient Situation to the Sea coast where we
Could make Salt, and a probibility of vessels Comeing into the mouth of
Columbia ("which the Indians inform us would return to trade with them
in 3 months") from whome we might precure a fresh Supply of Indian
trinkets to purchase provisions on our return home; together with the
Solicitations of every individual, except one of our party induced us
Conclude to Cross the river and examine the opposit Side, and if a
Sufficent quantity of Elk could probebly be precured to fix on a
Situation as convenient to the Elk & Sea Coast as we Could find--added
to the above advantagies in being near the Sea Coast one most Strikeing
one occurs to me i e, the Climate which must be from every appearance
much milder than that above the 1st range of Mountains, The Indians are
Slightly Clothed and give an account of but little Snow, and the
weather which we have experiened Since we arrived in the neighbourhood
of the Sea Coast has been verry warm, and maney of the fiew days past
disagreeably So. if this Should be the Case it will most Certainly be
the best Situation of our naked party dressed as they are altogether in
leather.




[Clark, November 25, 1805]
November 25th Munday 1805
a fine day Several Indians Come up from below, we loaded and Set out up
the river, and proceeded on to the Shallow Bay, landed to dine, The
Swells too high to cross the river, agreeabley to our wish which is to
examine if game Can be precured Sufficent for us to winter on that
Side, after dinner which was on Drid pounded fish we proceeded on up on
the North Side to near the place of our Encampment of the 7th Instant
and encamped after night The evening cloudy wind of to day Generally
from the E S. E, Saw from near of last Campment Mount Ranier bearing
____




[Clark, November 25, 1805]
Monday 25th November 1805
The Wind being high rendered it impossible for us to Cross the river
from our Camp, we deturmind to proceed on up where it was narrow, we
Set out early accompanied by 7 Chit Sops for a fiew miles, they left us
and Crossed the river through emence high waves; we Dined in the
Shallow Bay on Dried pounded fish, after which we proceeded on near the
North Side of the Columbia, and encamp a little after night near our
Encampment of the 7th instant near a rock at Some distance in the
river. evening Cloudy the Winds of to day is generally E. S. E which
was a verry favourable point for us as the highlands kept it from us
Mt. St. Hilians Can be Seen from the mouth of this river.




[Clark, November 26, 1805]
November 26th Tuesday 1805
Cloudy and Some rain this morning at daylight wind blew from the E N.
E, we Set out and proceeded on up on the North Side of this great river
to a rock in the river from thence we Crossed to the lower point of an
____ Island passed between 2 Islands to the main Shore, and proceeded
down the South Side, passed 2 Inlets & halted below the 2d at a Indian
village of 9 large houses--those Indians live on an emenence behind a
Island or a Channel of the river not more than 300 yds wide, they live
on fish & Elk and Wapto roots, of which we bought a few at a high price
they Call them Selves Cat-tar-bets description

We proceeded on about 8 miles and Encamped in a deep bend to the South,
we had not been Encamped long ere 3 Indians Came in a Canoe to trade
the Wapto roots--we had rain all the day all wet and disagreeable a bad
place to Camp all around this great bend is high land thickly timbered
brushey & almost impossible to penetrate we Saw on an Island below the
village a place of deposit for the dead in Canoes

Great numbers of Swan Geese Brant Ducks & Gulls in this great bend
which is Crouded with low Islands covered with weeds grass &c. and
overflowed every flood tide The people of the last village is-____
they ask emence prices for what they have to Sel Blue Beeds is their
great trade they are fond of Clothes or blankits of Blue red or brown
We are now decending to see if a favourable place should offer on the
So Side to winter &c.

from a high Point opsd. a high Isd down the South Side is S. 30 deg. W 6 mis
to a point of low land opsd. upr. pt of Isd. passed lowr. pt. 1st Isd.
marshey. at the upr. pt. Of 2 low Isd. opsd. each other at 4 miles




[Clark, November 26, 1805]
Tuesday 26th November 1805
Cloudy and Some rain this morning from 6 oClock. wind from the E. N. E,
we Set out out early and crossed a Short distance above the rock out in
the river, & between Some low marshey Islands to the South Side of the
Columbia at a low bottom about 3 miles below Point Samuel and proceeded
near the South Side leaveing the Seal Islands to our right and a
marshey bottom to the left 5 Miles to the Calt-har-mar Village of 9
large wood houses on a handsom elivated Situation near the foot of a
Spur of the high land behind a large low Island Seperated from the
Southerly Shore by a Chanel of about 200 yards Wide, This nation appear
to differ verry little either in language, Customs dress or appearance
from the Chin nooks & War-ci a cum live principally on fish and pappato
they have also other roots, and Some Elk meat.

We purchased Some green fish, & wap pa to for which we gave Imoderate
pricie's. after dining on the fresh fish which we purchased, we
proceeded on through a Deep bend to the South and encamped under a high
hill, where we found much difficuelty in precureing wood to burn, as it
was raining hard, as it had been the greater part of the day. Soon
after we encamped 3 Indians of the last town Came in a Canoe with
wappato roots to Sell to us Some of which we purchased with fish
hooksfrom the Village quite around this bend to the West the land is
high and thickly timbered with pine balsom &c. a Short distance below
the Calt har mer Village on the Island which is Opposit I observed
Several Canoes Scaffold in which Contained their dead, as I did not
examine this mode of deposing the dead, must refer it to a discription
hereafter.




[Clark, November 27, 1805]
November 27th Wednesday 1805
Some rain all the last night & this morning at day light 3 Canoes and
11 men Came down with roots meat, Skins &c. to Sill, they asked Such
high prices we were unable to purchase any thing, and as we were about
Setting out, discovered that one of those Indians had Stole an ax, we
Serched and found it under the roabe of one man whome we Shamed verry
much

we proceeded on, around Point William th Swells became high and rained
so hard we Concluded to halt and dry our Selves, Soon after our landing
the wind rose from the East and blew hard accompanied with rain, this
rain obliged us to unload & draw up our Canoes, one of which was Split
to feet before we got her out of the river, this place the Peninsoley
is about 50 yards and 3 miles around this point of Land. water Salt
below not Salt above.




[Clark, November 27, 1805]
Wednesday 27th November 1805
Rained all the last night and this morning it Continues moderatelyat
day light 3 Canoes and 11 Indians Came from the Village with roots
mats, Skins &c. to Sell, they asked Such high prices that we were
unable to purchase any thing of them, as we were about to Set out
missed one of our axes which was found under an Indians roab I shamed
this fellow verry much and told them they should not proceed with us-
we proceded on between maney Small Islands passing a Small river of
____ yds wide which the Indians Call ____ and around a verry remarkable
point which projects about 11/2 Miles directly towards the Shallow bay
the isthmus which joins it to the main land is not exceding 50 yards
and about 4 Miles around. we call this Point William

below this point the waves became So high we were Compelled to land
unload and traw up the Canoes, here we formed a Camp on the neck of
Land which joins Point William to the main at an old indian hut. The
rain Continued hard all day we are all Wet and disagreeable. one Canoe
Split before we Got her out of the Water 2 feet--The water at our Camp
Salt that above the isthmus fresh and fine




[Clark, November 28, 1805]
November 28th Thursday 1805
Wind Shifted about to the S. W. and blew hard accompanied with hard
rain all last night, we are all wet bedding and Stores, haveing nothing
to keep our Selves or Stores dry, our Lodge nearly worn out, and the
pieces of Sales & tents So full of holes & rotten that they will not
keep any thing dry, we Sent out the most of the men to drive the point
for deer, they Scattered through the point; Some Stood on the pensolu,
we Could find no deer, Several hunters attempted to penetrate the thick
woods to the main South Side without Suckcess, the Swan & gees wild and
Cannot be approached, and wind to high to go either back or forward,
and we have nothing to eate but a little Pounded fish which we
purchasd. at the Great falls, This is our present Situation,! truly
disagreeable. aded to this the robes of our Selves and men are all
rotten from being Continually wet, and we Cannot precure others, or
blankets in their places. about 12 oClock the wind Shifted about to the
N. W and blew with great violence for the remainder of the day at maney
times it blew for 15 or 20 minits with Such violence that I expected
every moment to See trees taken up by the roots, Some were blown down.
Those Squals were Suckceeded by rain,! O how Tremendious is the day.
This dredfull wind and rain Continued with intervales of fair weather,
the greater part of the evening and night.




[Clark, November 28, 1805]
Thursday 28th November 1805
Wind Shifted about to the S. W. and blew hard accompanied with hard
rain. rained all the last night we are all wet our bedding and Stores
are also wet, we haveing nothing which is Sufficient to keep ourselves
bedding or Stores dry Several men in the point hunting deer without
Suckcess, the Swan and brant which are abundant Cannot be approached
Sufficently near to be killed, and the wind and waves too high to
proceed on to the place we expect to find Elk, & we have nothing to
eate except pounded fish which we brought from the Great falls, this is
our present Situation; truly disagreeable. about 12 oClock the wind
Shifted around to the N W. and blew with Such violence that I expected
every moment to See trees taken up by the roots, maney were blown down.
This wind and rain Continued with Short intervales all the latter part
of the night. O! how disagreeable is our Situation dureing this
dreadfull weather.




[Lewis, November 29, 1805]
November 29th 1805.
the wind being so high the party were unable to proceed with the
perogues. I determined therefore to proceed down the river on it's E.
side in surch of an eligible place for our winters residence and
accordingly set out early this morning in the small canoe accompanyed
by 5 men. drewyer R. Fields, Shannon, Colter & labiesh. proceeded along
the coast.

send out the hunters they killed 4 deer 2 brant a goos and seven ducks,
it rained upon us by showers all day. left three of these deer and took
with us one encamped at an old Indian hunting lodge which afforded us a
tolerable shelter from the rain, which continued by intervales
throughout the night.




[Clark, November 29, 1805]
November 29th Friday 1805
Blew hard and rained the greater part of the last night and this
morning, Capt Lewis and 5 men Set out in our Small Indian canoe (which
is made in the Indian fashion Calculated ride the waves) down the South
Side of the river to the place the Indians informed us by Signs that
numbers of Elk were to be found near the river--The Swells and waves
being too high for us to proceed down in our large Canoes, in Safty

I Sent out two hunters to hunt deer, & one to hunt fowl, all the others
employed in drying their leather and prepareing it for use, as but fiew
of them have many other Clothes to boste of at this time, we are Smoked
verry much in this Camp The Shore on the Side next the Sea is Covered
with butifull pebble of various Colours--our diat at this time and for
Severall days past is the dried pounded fish we purchased at the falls
boiled in a little Salt water




[Clark, November 29, 1805]
Friday 29th of November 1805
The wind and rain Continued all the last night, this morning much more
moderate. the waves Still high and rain Continues. Capt Lewis and 5
hunters Set out in our Indian Canoe (which is Calculated to ride wave)
dow to the place we expected to find Elk from the Inds. information,
they pointed to a Small Bay which is yet below us--I Sent out 2 men to
hunt Deer which I expected might be on the open hill Sides below,
another to hunt fowl in the deep bend above the point, all the others
engaged drying their leather before the fire, and prepareing it for
usethey haveing but fiew other Species of Clothing to ware at this time

The winds are from Such points that we cannot form our Camp So as to
provent the Smoke which is emencely disagreeable, and painfull to the
eyes--The Shore below the point at our Camp is formed of butifull
pebble of various colours. I observe but fiew birds of the Small kind,
great numbers of wild fowls of Various kinds, the large Buzzard with
white wings, grey and bald eagle's, large red tailed Hawks, ravens &
Crows in abundance, the blue Magpie, a Small brown bird which frequents
logs & about the roots of trees--Snakes, Lizards, Small bugs, worms,
Spiders, flyes & insects of different kinds are to be Seen in abundance
at this time.




[Lewis, November 30, 1805]
November 30th 1805.
cloudy morning set out before sun rise and continued our rout up the bey

Sent out three men to examin the country to the S. & W. they returned
after about 2 hours and informed me that the wood was so thick and
obstructed by marrasses & lakes that they were unable to proceed to the
ocean which could not be at any considerable distance fom the apparent
sound of the waves breaking on the Coast. we now returned and asscended
the inlet which we had last passd no fresh appearance of Elk or deer in
our rout so far. asscend the inlet as we intended about 1 m. found it
became much smaller and that it did not keep it's direction to the high
land which boar S. 10 W. but inclined West. therefore returned to the
large arm of the bay which we passed this morning. here we expect to
meet with the Clat-sop Indians, who have tantilized us with there being
much game in their neighbourhood. this information in fact was the
cause of my present resurch, for where there is most game is for us the
most eliguble winter station.--continued our rout up the large arm of
the bay about 6 miles and encamped on the Stard. side on the highland.
the water was quite sweet. therefore concluded that it must be supplyed
from a large crick. at our camp it is 120 yds. wide, tho it gets
narrower above. it rained but little on us today tho it was cloudy
generally.--Wind from N. E.--saw a great abundance of fowls, brant,
large geese, white brant sandhill Cranes, common blue crains,
cormarants, haulks, ravens, crows, gulls and a great variety of ducks,
the canvas back, duckinmallard, black and white diver, brown duck--&c &c




[Clark, November 30, 1805]
November 30th Saturday 1805
Some rain and hail with intervales of fair weather for 1 and 2 hours
dureing the night and untill 9 oClock this morning at which time it
Cleared up fair and the Sun Shown, I Send 5 men in a Canoe in the Deep
bend above the Peninsulear to hunt fowles, & 2 men in the thick woods
to hunt Elk had all our wet articles dried & the men all employed
dressing their Skins, I observe but few birds in this Countrey of the
Small kindsgreat numbers of wild fowl, The large Buzzard with white
under their wings Grey & Bald eagle large red tailed hawk, ravins,
Crows, & a small brown bird which is found about logs &c. but fiew
small hawks or other smaller birds to be seen at this time Snakes,
Lizzards, Snales bugs worms Spiders, flies & insects of different kinds
are to be Seen in plenty at this time. The Squar, gave me a piece of
Bread to day made of Some flower She had Cearfully kept for her child,
and had unfortunately got wet The hunters killed only 3 hawks, saw 3
Elk but Could not git a Shot at them, The fowlers, killed 3 black
ducks, with white Sharp bills, a brown Spot in their foward, Some white
under the tail, which Short, and a fiew of the tips of the wing
feathers white, Their toes are long Seperated and flaped, no Craw, keep
in emence large flocks in the Shallow waters & feed on Grass &c.-
Several men Complaining of being unwell to day--a Broock comes in to
the bend above the 1st point above, and a river falls in the next nitch
above this river is Small,--I observe rose bushes Pine, a kind of ash a
Species of Beech and a Species of Maple, in addition to the pine Lorrel
and under groth Common to the woods in this Lower Countrey the hills
are not high & Slope to the river




[Clark, November 30, 1805]
Saturday 30th of November 1805
Some rain and hail with intervales of fair weather for the Space of one
or two hours at a time dureing the night untill 9 oClock this morning,
at which time it Cleared away and the Sun Shewn for ____ hours, Several
men out hunting I Send 5 men in the bend above to hunt fowl &c. in a
Canoe, employ all the others in drying our wet articles by the fire
Several men Complain of a looseness and gripeing which I contribute to
the diet, pounded fish mixed with Salt water, I derect that in future
that the party mix the pounded fish with fresh water--The Squar gave me
a piece of bread made of flour which She had reserved for her child and
carefully Kept untill this time, which has unfortunately got wet, and a
little Sour--this bread I eate with great Satisfaction, it being the
only mouthfull I had tasted for Several months past. my hunters killed
three Hawks, which we found fat and delicious, they Saw 3 Elk but Could
not get a Shot at them. The fowlers killed 3 black Ducks with Sharp
White beeks keep in large flocks & feed on Grass, they have no Craw and
their toes are Seperate, Common in the U. States

The Chinnooks Cath ldh mah & others in this neighbourhood bury their
dead in their Canoes. for this purpose 4 pieces of Split timber are Set
erect on end, and sunk a fiew feet in the ground, each brace having
their flat Sides opposit to each other and Sufficiently far assunder to
admit the width of the Canoe in which the dead are to be deposited;
through each of those perpindicular posts, at the hight of 6 feet a
mortice is Cut, through which two bars of wood are incerted; on those
Cross bars a Small Canoe is placed, in which the body is laid after
beaing Carefully roled in a robe of Some dressed Skins; a paddle is
also deposited with them; a larger Canoe is now reversed, overlaying
and imbracing the Small one, and resting with its gunnals on the Cross
bars; one or more large mats of flags or rushes are then rold. around
the Canoe and the whole Securely lashed with a long Cord usially made
of the bark of the arbar vita or white Cedar. on the Cross bars which
Support the Canoes is frequently hung or laid various articles of
Clothing Culinary utensils &c. we cannot understand them Sufficiently
to make any enquiries relitive to their religious opinions, from their
depositing Various articles with their dead, beleve in a State of
future ixistance.

I walked on the point and observed rose bushes different Species of
pine, a Spcies of ash, alder, a Species of wild Crab Loral and Several
Species of under Broth Common to this lower part of the Columbia river-
The hills on this Coast rise high and are thickly covered with lofty
pine maney of which are 10 & 12 feet through and more than 200 feet
high. hills have a Steep assent.




[Lewis, December 1, 1805]
December 1st 1805
Cloudy morning wind from the S. E. sent out the men to hunt and examin
the country, they soon returned all except Drewyer and informed me that
the wood was so thick it was almost impenetrable and that there was but
little appearance of game; they had seen the track of one deer only and
a few small grey squirrels. these suirrels are about the size of the
red squirrel of the lakes and eastern Atlantic States, their bellies
are of a redish yellow, or tanners ooze colour the tale flat and as
long as the body eyes black and moderately large back and sides of a
greyish brown the brier with a brown bark and three laves which put
forth at the extremety of the twigs like the leaves of the blackbury
brier, tho is a kind of shrub and rises sometimes to the hight of 10
feet the green brier yet in leaf; the ash with a remarkable large leaf;
the large black alder. the large elder with skey blue buries. the broad
leave shrub which grows something like the quill wood but has no
joints, the leaf broad and deeply indented the bark peals hangs on the
stem and is of a yelowish brown colour. the seven bark is also found
here as is the common low cramburry-there is a wild crab apple which
the natives eat this growth differs but little in appearance from that
of the wild crab of the Atlantic States. but the fruit consists of
little oval hurries which grow in clusters at the extremities of the
twigs like the black haws. the fruit is of a brown colour, oval form
and about double as large as the black haw; the rind is smoth and tough
somewhat hard; the seed is like that of the wild crab and nearly as
large; the pulp is soft of a pale yellow coulour; and when the fruit
has been touched by the frost is not unpleasant, being an agreeable
assed. the tree which bears a red burry in clusters of a round form and
size of a red haw. the leaf like that of the small magnolia, and brark
smoth and of a brickdust red coulour it appears to be of the evergreen
kind.--half after one oclock Drewyer not yet arrived. heard him shoot 5
times just above us and am in hopes he has fallen in with a gang of elk.




[Clark, December 1, 1805]
December 1st Sunday 1805
Cloudy windey morning wind from the East, Sent out 2 hunters in the
woods, I intended to take 5 men in a Canoe and hunt the marshey Islands
above, found the wind too high & returned to partake of the dried fish,
The day Some what Cooler than usial, but Scercely perceveable. began to
rain at Sun Set and Continued half the night. my hunters returned
without any thing Saw 2 gang of Elk a disagreeable Situation, men all
employed in mending their leather Clothes, Socks &c. and Dressing Some
Leather. The Sea which is imedeately in front roars like a repeeted
roling thunder and have rored in that way ever Since our arrival in its
borders which is now 24 Days Since we arrived in Sight of the Great
Western Ocian, I cant Say Pasific as Since I have Seen it, it has been
the reverse. Elegant Canoes




[Clark, December 1, 1805]
Sunday December 1st 1805
A cloudy windey morning wind from the East, dispatched two hunters, I
deturmined to take a Canoe & a fiew men and hunt the marshey Islands
above Point William, the Wind rose So high that I could not proceed,
and returned to partake the dried fish, which is our Standing friend,
began to rain hard at Sun Set and Continud. my hunters returned without
any thing haveing Seen 2 parcels of elk men all employed to day in
mending their leather Clothes, Shoes &c. and Dressing leather.

The emence Seas and waves which breake on the rocks & Coasts to the S
W. & N W roars like an emence fall at a distance, and this roaring has
continued ever Since our arrival in the neighbourhood of the Sea Coast
which has been 24 days Since we arrived in Sight of the Great Western;
(for I cannot Say Pacific) Ocian as I have not Seen one pacific day
Since my arrival in its vicinity, and its waters are forming and
petially perpetually breake with emenc waves on the Sands and rockey
Coasts, tempestous and horiable. I have no account of Capt. Lewis Since
he left me.




[Clark, December 2, 1805]
December 2nd Monday 1805
Cloudy and Some little rain this morning I despatched 3 men to hunt and
2 and my Servent in a Canoe to a Creek above to try & Catch Some fish-
I am verry unwell the drid fish which is my only diet does not agree
with me and Several of the men Complain of a lax, and weakness--I
expect Capt. Lewis will return to day with the hunters and let us know
if Elk or deer Can be found Sufficent for us to winter on, If he does
not come I Shall move from this place, to one of better prospects for
game &c. Joseph Fields came home with the marrow bones of an Elk which
he had killed 6 miles distant, I sent out 6 men in a canoe for the
meat, the evening being late they did not return this night, which
proved fair moon Shineing night--This is the first Elk we have killed
on this Side the rockey mounts a great deal of Elk Sign in the
neighbourhood




[Clark, December 2, 1805]
Monday 2nd December 1805
Cloudy with Some rain this morning I Send out three men to hunt & 2 &
my man york in a Canoe up the Ke-ke-mar-que Creek in Serch of fish and
fowl--I feel verry unwell, and have entirely lost my appetite for the
Dried pounded fish which is in fact the cause of my disorder at
present--The men are generally Complaining of a lax and gripeing--In
the evening Joseph Field came in with the Marrow bones of a elk which
he killed at 6 miles distant, this welcome news to us. I dispatched Six
men in a empty Canoe with Jo. mediately for the elk which he Said was
about 3 miles from the water this is the first Elk which has been
killd. on this Side of the rockey mountains--Jo Fields givs me an
account of a great deel of Elk Sign & Says he Saw 2 Gangs of those
Animals in his rout, but it rained So hard that he could not Shoot
them--The party up the Creek returned without any thing and informs me
they could not See any fish in the Creek to kill and the fowls were too
wild to be killed, this must




[Clark, December 3, 1805]
December 3rd Tuesday 1805
a fair windey morning wind from the East, the men Sent after an Elk
yesterday returnd. with an Elk which revived the Sperits of my men
verry much, I am unwell and cannot Eate, the flesh O! how disagreeable
my Situation, a plenty of meat and incaple of eateing any--an Indian
Canoe Came down with 8 Indians in it from the upper village, I gave a
fish hook for a fiew Wap-e-to roots, which I eate in a little Elk Supe,
The Indians proceeded on down. wind Confines to blow, and Serjt. Pryor
& Gibson who went to hunt yesterday has not returnd. as yet I marked my
name & the day of the month and year on a large Pine tree on this
Peninsella & by land Capt William Clark December 3rd 1805. By Land. U
States in 1804 & 1805"--The Squar Broke the two Shank bones of the Elk
after the marrow was taken out, boiled them & extracted a Pint of
Greese or tallow from them--Serjt. Pryor & Gibson returned after night
and informed me they had been lost the greater part of the time they
were out, and had killed 6 Elk which they left lying haveing taken out
their interals. Some rain this afternoon




[Clark, December 3, 1805]
Tuesday 3d December 1805
a fair windey morning wind from the East the men returned with the Elk
which revived the Spirits of my party verry much I am Still unwell and
Can't eate even the flesh of the Elk. an Indian Canoe of 8 Indians Came
too, those Inds. are on their way down to the Chit Sops with Wap pa to
to barter with that nation, I purchasd. a fiew of those roots for which
I gave Small fish hooks, those roots I eate with a little Elks Soupe
which I found gave me great relief I found the roots both nurishing and
as a check to my disorder. The Indians proceeded on down through emence
high waves maney times their Canoe was entirely out of Sight before
they were 1/2 a mile distance. Serjt. Pryor & Gibson who went hunting
yesterday has not returned untill after night, they informed me that
they had killed 6 Elk at a great distance which they left lying,
haveing taken out their interals that they had been lost and in their
ramble saw a great deel of Elk Sign. after eateing the marrow out of
two Shank bones of an Elk, the Squar choped the bones fine boiled them
and extracted a pint of Grease, which is Superior to the tallow of the
animal. Some rain this evening I marked my name on a large pine tree
imediately on the isthmus William Clark December 3rd 1805. By Land from
the U. States in 1804 & 1805.




[Clark, December 4, 1805]
December 4th Wednesday 180151
Some little rain all the last night and this morning after day the rain
increased and Continued

I despatched Serjt. Pryer & 6 men to the Elk which he had killed
yesterday, with directions to Save the meet and take loads to the River
below in the next great bend--a Spring tide which rose 2 feet higher
than Common flud tides, and high water at 11 oClock to day--wind from
the S. E in the after noon hard wind from South--rained all day,
moderately the Swells too high for me to proceed down, as I intended, I
feel my self Something better and have an appetite to eate Something




[Clark, December 4, 1805]
Wednesday 4th December 1805
Some rain all the last night, this morning it increased with the wind
from the S. E. I Set out Sergiant Pryor and 6 men to the Elk he had
killed with directions to Carry the meat to a bay which he informed me
was below and as he believed at no great distance from the Elk, and I
Should proceed on to that bay as Soon as the wind would lay a little
and the tide went out in the evening--the Smoke is exceedingly
disagreeable and painfull to my eyes, my appetite has returned and I
feel much better of my late complaint--a Spring tide to day rose 2 feet
higher than Common flood tides and high water at 11 oClock--Hard wind
from the South this evening, rained moderately all day and the waves
too high for me to proceed in Safty to the bay as I intended, in Some
part of which I expected would be convenient for us to make winter
quarters, the reports of seven huntes agreeing that elke were in great
abundance about the Bay below. no account of Capt. Lewis. I fear Some
accident has taken place in his craft or party




[Clark, December 5, 1805]
December 5th Thursday 1805
Som hard Showers of rain last night, this morn Cloudy and drisley rain,
in the bay above the Showers appear harder. High water to day at 12
oClock this tide is 2 Ins. higher than that of yesterday all our Stores
again wet by the hard Showers of last night Capt Lewis's long delay
below has been the cause of no little uneasiness on my part for him, a
1000 conjectures has crouded into my mind respecting his probable
Situation & Safty---rained hard. Capt Lewis returned haveing found a
good Situation and Elk Suffient to winter on, his party killed 6 Elk &
5 Deer in their absence in Serch of a Situation and game

Rain continued all the after pt. of the day accompanied with hard wind
from the S W. which provents our moveing from this Camp.




[Clark, December 5, 1805]
Thursday 5th of December 1805
Some hard Showers of rain last night, this morning Cloudy and drisley
at Some little distant above the isthmus the rain is much harder. high
water to day at 12 this tide is 2 inches higher than that of yesterday.
all our Stores and bedding are again wet by the hard rain of last
night. Capt. Lewis's long delay below, has been the Sorce of no little
uneasness on my part of his probable Situation and Safty, the repeeted
rains and hard winds which blows from the S, W. renders it impossible
for me to move with loaded Canoes along an unknown Coast we are all wet
& disagreeable; the party much better of indispositions-. Capt. Lewis
returned with 3 men in the Canoe and informs me that he thinks that a
Sufficient number of Elk may be prcured Convenient to a Situation on a
Small river which falls into a Small bay a Short distance below, that
his party had Killed 6 Elk & 5 Deer in his rout, two men of his party
left behind to Secure the Elk this was verry Satisfactory information
to all the party. we accordingly deturmined to proceed on to the
Situation which Capt. Lewis had Viewed as Soon as the wind and weather
Should permit and Comence building huts &c.




[Clark, December 6, 1805]
December 6th Friday 1805
Wind blew hard all the last night, and a moderate rain, the waves verry
high, This morning the wind which is Still from the S W increased and
rained Continued all day, at Dusk wind Shifted to the North and it
Cleared up and became fare, High water to day at 12 oClock & 13 Inches
higher than yesterday. we were obliged to move our Camp out of the
Water on high grown all wet.




[Clark, December 6, 1805]
Friday 6th of December 1805
The wind blew hard all the last night with a moderate rain, the waves
verry high, the wind increased & from the S. W. and the rain Continued
all day, about Dark the wind Shifted to the North cleared away and
became fair weather.

The high tide of today is 13 inches higher than yesterday, and obliged
us to move our Camp which was in a low Situation, on higher ground
Smoke exceedingly disagreeable.




[Clark, December 7, 1805]
December 7th Saturday 1805
Some rain from 10 to 12 last night this morning fair, we Set out at 8
oClock down to the place Capt Lewis pitched on for winter quarters,
when he was down proceeded on against the tide at the point No. 2 we
met our men Sent down after meet

To point Adams is West

To pt. Disapointment N 75 W

They informed me that they found the Elk after being lost in the woods
for one Day and part of another, the most of the meat was Spoiled, they
distance was So great and uncertain and the way bad, they brought only
the Skins, york was left behind by Some accident which detained us Some
time eer he Came up after passing round the pt. No. 2 in verry high
swells, we Stopd & Dined in the commencement of a bay, after which
proceeded on around the bay to S E. & assended a Creek 8 miles to a
high pt. & Camped haveing passed arm makeing up to our left into the
countrey

Mt. St. Helens is the mountain we mistook for Mt. Reeaneer

receved 2 Small Brooks on the East, extencive marshes at this place of
Encampment We propose to build & pass the winter, The situation is in
the Center of as we conceve a hunting Countrey--This day is fair except
about 12 oClock at which time Some rain and a hard wind imedeately
after we passed the point from the N. E which Continued for a about 2
hours and Cleared up. no meat




[Clark, December 7, 1805]
Saturday 7th of December 1805
Some rain from 10 to 12 last night, this morning fair, have every thing
put on board the Canoes and Set out to the place Capt Lewis had viewed
and thought well Situated for winter quarters--we proceeded on against
the tide to a point about ____ miles here we met Sergt Pryor and his
party returning to the Camp we had left without any meat, the waves
verry verry high, as much as our Canoes Could bear rendered it
impossible to land for the party, we proceeded on around the point into
the bay and landed to take brackfast on 2 Deer which had been killed &
hung up, one of which we found the other had been taken off by some
wild animal probably Panthors or the Wildcat of this Countrey here all
the party of Serjt Pryors joined us except my man york, who had Stoped
to rite his load and missed his way, Sergt Pryor informed us that he
had found the Elk, which was much further from the bay than he
expected, that they missed the way for one day and a half, & when he
found the Elk they were mostly Spoiled, and they only brought the Skins
of 4 of the Elk after brackfast I delayed about half an hour before
York Came up, and then proceeded around this Bay which I have taken the
liberty of calling Meriwethers Bay the Cristian name of Capt. Lewis who
no doubt was the 1st white man who ever Surveyed this Bay, we assended
a river which falls in on the South Side of this Bay 3 miles to the
first point of high land on the West Side, the place Capt. Lewis had
viewed and formed in a thick groth of pine about 200 yards from the
river, this situation is on a rise about 30 feet higher than the high
tides leavel and thickly Covered with lofty pine. this is certainly the
most eligable Situation for our purposes of any in its neighbourhood.

Meriwethers Bay is about 4 miles across deep & receves 2 rivers the Kil
how-d-nah-kle and the Ne tul and Several Small Creeks--we had a hard
wind from the N. E. and Some rain about 12 oClock to day which lasted 2
hours and Cleared away. From the Point above Meriwethers Bay

to Point Adams is West

to point Disapointment is N. 75 deg. W




[Clark, December 8, 1805]
December 8th Sunday 1805
a Cloudy morning, I took 5 men and Set out to the Sea to find the
nearest place & make a way, to prevent our men getting lost and find a
place to make Salt, Steered S 62 deg. W at 2 miles passed the head of a Brook
running to the right, the lands good roleing much falling timber, lofty
Pine of the Spruce kind, & Some fur, passed over a high hill & to a
Creek which we kept down 11/2 miles and left it to our right, Saw fish
in this Creek & Elk & Bear tracks on it, passed over a ridge to a low
marshey bottom which we Crossed thro water & thick brush for 1/2 a mile
to the Comencement of a Prarie which wavers, Covered with grass &
Sackay Commis, at 1/2 Crossed a marsh 200 yds wide, boggey and arrived
at a Creek which runs to the right. Saw a gange of Elk on the opposit
Side below, rafted the Creek, with much dificulty & followed the Elk
thro, emence bogs, & over 4 Small Knobs in the bogs about 4 miles to
the South & Killed an Elk, and formed a Camp, Covered our Selves with
the Elk Skins. the left of us Bogs & a lake or pond those bogs Shake,
much Cramberry growing amongst the moss. Some rain this evening we made
a harty Supper of the Elk & hung up the balsa




[Clark, December 8, 1805]
Sunday December 8th 1805 Fort Clatsop
We haveing fixed on this Situation as the one best Calculated for our
Winter quarters I deturmin'd to go as direct a Course as I could to the
Sea Coast which we Could here roar and appeared to be at no great
distance from us, my principal object is to look out a place to make
Salt, blaze the road or rout that they men out hunting might find the
direction to the fort if they Should get lost in cloudy weather-and See
the probibillity of game in that direction, for the Support of the Men,
we Shall Send to make Salt, I took with me five men and Set out on a
Course S 60 W proceeded on a dividing ridge through lofty piney land
much falling timber. passed the heads of 2 brooks one of them had wide
bottoms which was over flown & we waded to our knees crossed 2 Slashes
and arrived at a Creek in a open ridgey prarie covered with Sackacomma
this Creek we were obliged to raft, which is about 60 yards over and
runs in a direction to Point adams, we discovered a large gange of Elk
in the open lands, and we prosued them through verry bad Slashes and
Small ponds about 3 miles, Killed one and camped on a Spot Scercely
large enough to lie Clear of the Water. it is almost incredeable to
assurt the bogs which those animals Can pass through, I prosue'd this
gang of Elk through bogs which the wate of a man would Shake for 1/2 an
Acre, and maney places I Sunk into the mud and water up to my hips
without finding any bottom on the trale of those Elk. Those bogs are
Covered with a kind of moss among which I observe an ebundance of
Cramberries. in those Slashes Small Knobs are promisquisly Scattered
about which are Steep and thickly Covered with pine Common to the
Countrey & Lorel. we made a Camp of the Elk Skin to keep off the rain
which Continued to fall, the Small Knob on which we Camped did not
afford a Sufficiency of dry wood for our fire, we collected what dry
wood we Could and what Sticks we Could Cut down with the Tomahawks,
which made us a tolerable fire.




[Clark, December 9, 1805]
December 9th Monday 1805
rained all the last night we are all wet, Send 2 men in pursute of the
Elk & with the other 3 I Set out with a view to find the Ocian in our
first direction, which Can be at no great Distance, I crossed 3 Slashes
by wadeing to my knees & was prevented proceeding by the 4th which was
a pond of 200 yds. we. I went around, and was Stoped by a 5th which
apd. to be a rung Stream to the right. I then returned to the raft and
recrossd. & proceeded down the Stream I first Struck about 2 miles &
met 3 Indians, who informed me they lived on the See cost at a Short
distance, I de-termd. to accompany them to their vilg. & we Set out,
crossed the Stream, and 2 of the Indians took the Canoe over the
wavering open rich plains for 1/2 a mile and we Crossed the same stream
which run to the left, we then left the canoe and proceeded to the Same
Stream which runs to the right and empties its Self into the See here I
found their vilg. 4 Lodges on the west bank of this little river which
is here 70 yards wide, Crossed in a Canoe & was invited to a lodge by a
young Chief was treated great Politeness, we had new mats to Set on,
and himself and wife produced for us to eate, fish, Lickorish, & black
roots, on neet Small mats, and Cramberries & Sackacomey berris, in
bowls made of horn, Supe made of a kind of bread made of berries common
to this Countrey which they gave me in a neet wooden trencher, with a
Cockle Shell to eate it with It began to rain and with a tremendious
storm from the S. W. which lasted untill 10 oClock P M--when I was
disposd to go to Sleep 2 neet mats was produced & I lay on them but the
flees were So troublesom that I Slept but little Those people has 2
plays which they are fond of one is with a Been which they pass from
one hand into the other, and the oponent guess on this game the
resquist nubr of the white Beeds which is the principal property--they
other game is with round Pieces of wood much the Shape of the ____
Backgammon which they role thro between 2 pins.




[Clark, December 9, 1805]
Monday 9th December 1805
rained all the last night we are all wet, I directed 2 hunters Drewyer
& Shannon to go in pursute of the Elk, with the other 3 men I
determined to proceed on to the Ocian, & Set out on a Westerley
direction Crossed 3 Slashes and arived at a Creek which I could not
Cross as it was deep and no wood to make a raft, I proceeded down this
Creek a Short distance and found that I was in a fork of the Creek, I
then returned to raft on which we had Crossed the day. crossed and kept
down about one mile and met 3 Indians loaded with fresh Salmon which
they had Giged in the Creek I crossed yesterday in the hills, those
indians made Signs that they had a town on the Seacoast at no great
distance, and envited me to go to their town which envitation I
axcepted and accompand. them, they had a Canoe hid in the Creek which I
had just before rafted which I had not observed, we crossed in this
little Canoe just large enough to carry 3 men an their loads after
Crossing 2 of the Indians took the Canoe on theire Sholders and Carried
it across to the other Creek about 1/4 of a mile, we Crossed the 2d
Creek and proceeded on to the mouth of the Creek which makes a great
bend above the mouth of this Creek or to the S. is 3 houses and about
12 families of the Clat Sop Nation, we cross to those houses, which
were built on the S. exposur of the hill, Sunk into the ground about 4
feet the walls roof & gable ends are of Split pine boards, the dotes
Small with a ladder to decend to the iner part of the house, the fires
are 2 in the middle of the house their beads ar all around raised about
21/2 feet from the bottom flore all covered with mats and under those
beads was Stored their bags baskets and useless mats, those people
treated me with extrodeanary friendship, one man attached himself to me
as Soon as I entered the hut, Spred down new mats for me to Set on,
gave me fish berries rutes &c. on Small neet platteers of rushes to
eate which was repeated, all the Men of the other houses Came and
Smoked with me Those people appeared much neeter in their diat than
Indians are Comonly, and frequently wash theer faces and hands--in the
eveng an old woman presented a bowl made of a light Coloured horn a
kind of Surup made of Dried berries which is common to this Countrey
which the natives Call Shele wele this Surup I though was pleasent,
they Gave me Cockle Shells to eate a kind of Seuip made of bread of the
Shele well berries mixed with roots in which they presented in neet
trenchers made of wood. a flock of Brant lit in the Creek which was 70
yds wide I took up my Small rifle and Shot one which astonished those
people verry much, they plunged into the Creek and brought the brant on
Shorein the evening it began to rain and Continud accompanied with a
Violent wind from the S. W. untill 10 oClock P.M. those people have a
Singular game which they are verry fond of and is performed with
Something about the Size of a large been which they pass from, one hand
into the other with great dexterity dureing which time they Sing, and
ocasionally, hold out their hands for those who Chuse to risque their
property to guess which hand the been is in-; the individual who has
the been is a banker & opposed to all in the room. on this game they
risque their beeds & other parts of their most valuable effects--this
amusement has occupied about 3 hours of this evening, Several of the
lodge in which I am in have lost all the beeds which they had about
them--they have one other game which a man attempted to Show me, I do
not properly understand it, they make use of maney peces about the
Shape and size of Backgammon Pices which they role through between two
pins Stuck up at certain distancies &.--when I was Disposed to go to
Sleep the man who had been most attentive named Cus-ka-lah producd 2
new mats and Spred them near the fire, and derected his wife to go to
his bead which was the Signal for all to retire which they did
emediately. I had not been long on my mats before I was attacked most
violently by the flees and they kept up a close Siege dureing the night




[Clark, December 10, 1805]
December 10th 1805 Tusday
A Cloudey rainy morning those people was Some what astonished, at three
Shot I made with my little riffle to day, a gangu of Brant Set in the
little river, I Killd. 2 of them as they Set, and on my return Saw a
Duck which I took the head off of, the men plunged into the water like
Spaniards Dogs after those fowls, after eateing a brackfast which was
Similar to my Suppar, I attempted to purchase Some fiew roots which I
offered red beeds for, they would give Scercely any thing for Beeds of
that Colour, I then offered Small fish hooks which they were fond of
and gave me Some roots for them, I then Set out on my return by the
Same road I had went out accompd. by my young Chief by name Cus-ca-lar
who Crossed me over the 3 Creek, and returned I proceeded on to my Camp
thro a heavy Cold rain, Saw no game--at the Sea Cost near those Indins
I found various kinds of Shells, a kind of Bay opsd. those people with
a high pt. about 4 miles below, out from which at Some dists I Saw
large rocks, as the day was Cloudy I could not See distinctly--found
Capt Lewis with all hands felling trees, to build with, rained nearly
all day, in my absence they men had bt. in the 6 Elk which was Killed
Some days past 4 men complaining of being unwell from various causes




[Clark, December 10, 1805]
Tuesday 10th December 1805
a Cloudy rainey morning verry early I rose and walked on the Shore of
the Sea coast and picked up Several Curious Shells. I Saw Indians
walking up and down the beech which I did not at first understand the
Cause of, one man came to where I was and told me that he was in Serch
of fish which is frequently thrown up on Shore and left by the tide,
and told me the "Sturgion was verry good" and that the water when it
retired left fish which they eate this was Conclusive evedance to me
that this Small band depended in Some Measure for their winters
Subsistance on the fish which is thrown on Shore and left by the tide-
after amuseing my Self for about an hour on the edge of the rageing
Seas I returned to the houses, one of the Indians pointed to a flock of
Brant Sitting in the creek at Short distance below and requested me to
Shute one, I walked down with my Small rifle and killed two at about 40
yds distance, on my return to the houses two Small ducks Set at about
30 Steps from me the Indians pointed at the ducks they were near
together, I Shot at the ducks and accidently Shot the head of one off,
this Duck and brant was Carried to the house and every man Came around
examined the Duck looked at the gun the Size of the ball which was 100
to the pound and Said in their own language Clouch Musket, wake, com
ma-tax Musket which is, a good Musket do not under Stand this kind of
Musket &c. I entered the Same house I Slept in, they imediately Set
before me their best roots, fish and Surup-, I attempted to purchase a
Small Sea otter Skin for read beeds which I had in my pockets, they
would not trade for those beeds not priseing any other Colour than Blue
or White, I purchased a little of the berry bread and a fiew of their
roots for which I gave Small fish hooks, which they appeared fond of--I
then Set out on my return by the Same rout I had Come out accompanied
by Cus-ka lah and his brother as far as the 3d Creek, for the purpose
of Setting me across, from which place they returned, and I proceeded
on through a heavy rain to the Camp at our intended fort, Saw a bears
track & the tracks of 2 Elk in the thick woods--found Capt Lewis with
all the men out Cutting down trees for our huts &c. in my absence the
Men brought in the Six Elk which was killed Several days ago-. 4 men
Complaining of violent Coalds. three Indians in a Canoe Came up from
the Clat Sop Village yesterday and returned to day. The Sea Coast is
about 7 miles distant Nearly West about 5 miles of the distance through
a thick wood with reveens hills and Swamps the land, rich black moald 2
miles in a open wavering Sandy prarie, ridge runing parrelal to the
river, Covered with Green Grass.




[Clark, December 11, 1805]
December 11th Wednesday
rained all last night moderately, we are all employed putting up the
huts, rained at intervales all day moderately employed in putting up
Cabins for our winter quarters, one man with Turners, one with a
Strained Knee, one Sick with Disentary & Serjt. Pryor unwell from
haveing his Sholder out of place




[Clark, December 11, 1805]
Wednesday 11th December 1805
rained all the last night moderately we are all employed putting up
huts or Cabins for our winters quarters. Sergeant Pryor unwell from a
dislocation of his Sholder, Gibson with the disentary, Jo. Fields with
biles on his legs, & Werner with a Strained Knee. The rained Continued
moderately all day.




[Clark, December 12, 1805]
December 12th Thursday 1805
Some moderate Showers last night and this morning all hands who are
well employed in building Cabins, despatched 2 men to get board timber,
The flees so bad last night that, I made but a broken nights rest we
can't get them out of our robes & Skins, which we are obliged to make
use of for bedding Some rain to day at Intervales--all at work, in the
evening 2 Canoe of Indians Came from the 2 villages of Clotsop below, &
brought Wapitoo roots a black root they call Si-ni-tor and a Small Sea
orter Skin all of which we purchased for a fiew fishing hooks & Some
Snake Indian Tobacco. Those Indians appeare well disposed, I made a
Chief of one & gave him a Small medel, his name is Conyear we treated
those people well--they are tite Deelers, value Blu & white beeds verry
highly, and Sell their roots also highly as they purchase them from the
Indians abov for a high price




[Clark, December 12, 1805]
Thursday 12th December 1805
All hands that are well employ'd in Cutting logs and raising our winter
Cabins, detached two men to Split boards--Some rain at intervales all
last night and to day--The flees were So troublesom last night that I
made but a broken nights rest, we find great dificuelty in getting
those trouble insects out of our robes and blankets--in the evening two
Canoes of Chit Sops Visit us they brought with them Wap pa to, a black
Sweet root they Call Sha-na toe qua, and a Small Sea Otter Skin, all of
which we purchased for a fiew fishing hooks and a Small Sack of Indian
tobacco which was given by the Snake Inds.

Those Indians appear well disposed we gave a Medal to the principal
Chief named Con-ny-au or Com mo-wol and treated those with him with as
much attention as we could--I can readily discover that they are Close
deelers, & Stickle for a verry little, never close a bargin except they
think they have the advantage Value Blue beeds highly, white they also
prise but no other Colour do they Value in the least--the Wap pa to
they Sell high, this root the purchase at a high price from the nativs
above.




[Clark, December 13, 1805]
December 13th Friday 1805 The Indians left us to day after brackfast,
haveing Sold us 2 of the robes of a Small animal for which I intend
makeing a Capot, and Sold Capt Lewis 2 Loucirvia Skins for the Same
purpose. Drewyer & Shannon returned from hunting havg. killed 18 Elk
and butchered all except 2 which they Could not get as night provented
ther finding them & they Spoild.

3 Indians in a Canoe Came and offered us for Sale Sinutor roots, fish &
2 Sea otter Skins for Sale none of which we Could purchase. Some rain
last night and this day at Several times, light Showers. we Continue
building our houses of the Streightest & _____ logs, Sent out 2 men to
Split timber to Covet the Cabins, and I am glad to find the timber
Splits butifully, and of any width




[Clark, December 13, 1805]
Friday 13th December 1805
The Clatsops leave us to day after a brackfast on Elk which they
appeared to be very fond of before they left us they Sold me two robes
of the Skins of a Small animal about the Size of a Cat, and to Captain
Lewis 2 Cat or Loucirva Skins for the purpose of makeing a Coat.
Drewyer & Shannon returned from hunting, haveing killed 18 Elk & left
them boochered in the woods near the right fork of the river about 6
miles above this place--in the evining 3 Indians came in a Canoe, and
offered to us for Sale roots & 2 Sea otter Skins, neither of which we
Could purchase this evening. Some Showers of rain last night, and to
day Several verry hard Showers--we Continue to put up the Streight
butifull balsom pine on our houses-and we are much pleased to find that
the timber Splits most butifully and to the width of 2 feet or more.




[Clark, December 14, 1805]
December 14th Saturday 1805
a cloudy day & rained moderately all day we finish the log works of our
building, the Indians leave us to day after Selling a Small Sea otter
Skin and a roabe, Send 4 men to Stay at the Elk which is out in the
woods &c.




[Clark, December 14, 1805]
Saturday 14th December 1805
The Day Cloudy and rained moderately all day we finish the log work of
our building, the Indians leave us to day after Selling a Small Sea
otter Skin and a roab, dispatch 4 men to the Elk out in the woods with
derections to delay untill the party goes up tomorrow. all employd in
finishing a house to put meat into. all our last Supply of Elk has
Spoiled in the repeeted rains which has been fallen ever Since our
arrival at this place, and for a long time before, Scerce one man in
Camp Can host of being one day dry Since we landed at this point, the
Sick getting better, my man York Sick with Cholick & gripeing




[Clark, December 15, 1805]
December 15th Sunday 1805
I Set out with 16 men in 3 Canoes for the Elk proced up the 1st right
hand fork 4 miles & pack the meat from the woods to the Cano from 4
mile to 3 miles distance all hands pack not one man exempted from this
labour I also pack my Self Some of this meat, and Cook for those out in
packing Some rain in the evening Cloudy all day, the last load of meat
all the party got out of the road or Direction and did not get to the
Canoe untill after night, 5 did not join to night




[Clark, December 15, 1805]
Sunday the 15th December 1805.
I Set out early with 16 men and 3 Canoes for the Elk, proceed up the
River three miles and thence up a large Creek from the right about 3
miles the hite of the tide water drew up the Canoes and all hands went
out in three different parties and brought in to the Canoe each Man a
quarter of Elk, I Sent them out for a Second load and had Some of the
first Cooked against their return, after eateing a harty diner
dispatched the party for a third and last load, about half the men
missed their way and did not get to the Canoes untill after Dark, and
Serjt. Ordway Colter, Colins Whitehouse & McNeal Staid out all night
without fire and in the rain--Cloudy all day Some rain in the evening.




[Clark, December 16, 1805]
December 16th Monday 1805
rained all the last night we Covered our Selves as well as we Could
with Elk Skins, & Set up the greater part of the night, all wet I lay
in the water verry Cold, the 5 men who Stayed out all night joined me
this morning Cold & wet, Ordway Colter Collens, Jo Whitehouse J McNeal,
I had the two Canoes loaded with the 11 Elk which was brought to the
Canoes, despatched 12 men to meet me below with 2 Elk, The rain
Contines, with Tremendious gusts of wind, which is Tremds. I proceeded
on and took in the 2 Elk which was brought to the Creek, & Send back 7
men to Carrey to the Canoe & take down to Camp 3 Elk which was left in
the woods, and I proceeded on to Camp thro the Same Chanel I had assd.
The winds violent Trees falling in every derection, whorl winds, with
gusts of rain Hail & Thunder, this kind of weather lasted all day,
Certainly one of the worst days that ever was! I found 3 Indeans with
Capt Lewis in camp they had brought fish to Sell, we had a house
Covered with Punchen & our meat hung up. Several men Complaining of
hurting themselves Carry meet, &c.




[Clark, December 16, 1805]
Monday 16th December 1805
I as also the party with me experiencd a most dreadfull night rain and
wet without any Couvering, indeed we Set up the greater part of the
Night, when we lay down the water Soon Came under us and obliged us to
rise. the five men who Stayed out all night joind me this morning wet
and Cold, haveing Stayed out without fire or Shelter and the rain
poreing down upon them all night their appearance was truly
distressingthey had left all their loads near the place they Spent the
night--I dispatched 12 men for 2 Elk which was reather below on the
opposit Side of the Creak, with directions to meet me at the 2d bend in
the Creek below, had all the meat which had been brought in yesterday
put into 2 Canoes and proceeded down to the 2d bend where I met the 12
men with the 2 Elk, dispatchd 6 men with one of those who Staid out
last night for the meet left in the woods & the remainder an elk at
Some distance and proceeded on my Self with 3 Canoes to the fort. wind
violent from the S E

trees falling, rain and hail, we with Some risque proceeded on thro the
high waves in the river, a tempestious disagreeable day.

I found 3 indians at our Camp, they brought fish to Sell which were
pore & not fit for use, had the meet house coverd and the meat all hung
up, Several men complain of haveing hurt themselves heavy loads of meat.




[Clark, December 17, 1805]
December 17th Tuesday 1805
rained Some last night and this morning, all hands at work about the
huts Chinking them, The 7 men left to bring in the Elk left in the
woods Come with 2 the 3rd they Could not find, as it was that left by
the party that got lost night before last

The after part of the Day fair & Cool, fore part of the Day rain hailed
& blew hard, The mountain which lies S. E of this is covered with Snow
to day we fleece all the meat and hang it up over a Small Smoke The
trees are hard to Split for Punchens to Cover our houses &c.




[Clark, December 17, 1805]
Tuesday 17th of December 1805
Some rain last night and a continuation of it this morning. all the men
at work about the houses, Some Chinking, Dobbing Cutting out dores &c.
&c. The 7 men left to bring in the Elk arrived and informed that they
Could not find the meat that the party who Stayed out all night had
left--the forepart of this day rained hailed and blew hard, the after
part is fair and Cool--a Mountain which is S. ____ deg. E. about 10 miles
distant has got Snow on its top which is ruged and uneavin

Cause a Small fire & Smoke to be made under the meat which is hung up
in Small peaces. The trees which our men have fallen latterly Split
verry badly into boards. The most of our Stores are wet. our Leather
Lodge has become So rotten that the Smallest thing tares it into holes
and it is now Scrcely Sufficent to keep off the rain off a Spot
Sufficiently large for our bead.




[Clark, December 18, 1805]
December 18th Wednesday 1805
rained and Snowed alturnitely all the last night and the gusts of Snow
and hail continue untill 12 oClock, Cold and a dreadfull day wind hard
and unsettled, we continue at work at our huts, the men being but
thinly dressed, and no Shoes causes us to doe but little--at 12 the
Snow & hail Seased & the after part of the day was Cloudy with Some
rain.




[Clark, December 18, 1805]
Wednesday 18th December 1805
rained and Snowed alternetly all the last night, and Spurts of Snow and
Hail Continued untill 12 oClock, which has chilled the air which is
Cool and disagreeable, the wind hard & unsettled--The men being thinly
Dressed and mockersons without Socks is the reason that but little can
be done at the Houses to day--at 12 the Hail & Snow Seased, and rain
Suckceeded for the latter part of the day




[Lewis, December 18, 1805]
Fort Clatsop, December 18th 1805.
This day one of the men shot a bird of the Corvus genus, which was
feeding on some fragments of meat near the camp. this bird is about the
size of the kingbird or bee martin, and not unlike that bird in form.
the beak is 3/4 of an inch long, wide at the base, of a convex, and
cultrated figure, beset with some small black hairs near it's base. the
chaps are of nearly equal lengths tho the upper exceeds the under one a
little, and has a small nich in the upper chap near the extremity
perceptable only by close examineation. the colour of the beak is
black. the eye is large and prominent, the puple black, and iris of a
dark yellowish brown. the legs and feet are black and imbricated. has
four toes on each foot armed with long sharp tallons; the hinder toe is
nearly as long as the middle toe in front and longer than the two
remaining toes. the tale is composed of twelve fathers the longest of
which are five inches, being six in number placed in the center. the
remaining six are placed 3 on either side and graduly deminish to four
inches which is the shortest and outer feathers. the tail is half the
length of the bird, the whole length from the extremity of the beak to
the extremity of the tale being 10 Inches. the head from it's joining
the nect forward as far as the eyes nearly to the base of the beak and
on each side as low as the center of the eye is black. arround the base
of the beak the throat jaws, neck, brest and belley are of a pale
bluish white. the wings back and tale are of a bluish black with a
small shade of brown. this bird is common to this piny country are also
found in the rockey mountains on the waters of the columbia river or
woody side of those mountains, appear to frequent the highest sumits of
those mountains as far as they are covered with timber. their note is
que, quit-it, que-hoo; and tah, tah, &--there is another bird of
reather larger size which I saw on the woddy parts of the rockey
mountains and on the waters of the Missouri, this bird I could never
kill tho I made several attempts, the predominate colour is a dark blue
the tale is long and they are not crested; I believe them to be of the
corvus genus also. their note is char, char, char-ar, char; the large
blue crested corvus of the Columbia river is also




[Lewis, December 19, 1805]
Discription of the blue Crested corvus bird common to the woody and
western side of the Rockey mountains, and all the woody country from
thence to the Pacific Ocean It's beak is black convex, cultrated, wide
at its base where it is beset with hairs, and is 11 inches from the
opening of the chaps to their extremity, and from the joining of the
head to the extremity of the upper chap 1 1/8 Inches, the upper exceeds
the under chap a little; the nostrils are small round unconnected and
placed near the base of the beak where they lye concealed by the hairs
or hairy feathers which cover the base of the upper chap. the eye
reather large and full but not prominent and of a deep bluefish black,
there being no difference in the colour of the puple and the iris. the
crest is very full the feathers from 1 to 11/2 Inches long and occupye
the whole crown of the head. the head neck, the whole of the body
including the coverts of the wings, the upper disk of the tail and
wings are of a fine gossey bright indigo blue Colour the under disk of
the tail and wings are of a dark brown nearly black. the leg and first
joint of the tye are 41/4 In. long, the legs and feet are black and the
front covered with 6 scales the hinder part smothe, the toes are also
imbrecated, four in number long and armed with long sharp black
tallons. the upper disk of the first four or five feathers of the wing
next to the boddy, are marked with small transverse stripes of black as
are also the upper side of the two center feathers of the tail; the
tail is five inches long & is composed of twelve feathers of equal
length. the tail 1 & 1/2 as long as the boddy. the whole length from
the point of the beak to extremity of the tail 1 Foot 1 Inch; from the
tip of one to the tip of the other wing 1 Foot 51/2 Inches. the Conta.
the size & the whole Contour of this bird resembles very much the blue
jay or jaybird as they are called in the U States. like them also they
seldom rest in one place long but are in constant motion hoping from
spra to spray. what has been said is more immediately applicable to the
male, the colours of the female are somewhat different in her the head
crest neck half the back downwards and the converts of the wings are of
a dark brown, but sometimes there is a little touch of the Indigo on
the short feathers on the head at the base of the upper chap. this bird
feeds on flesh when they can procure it, also on bugs flies and buries.
I do not know whether they distroy little birds but their tallons
indicate their capacity to do so if nature, has directed it. their note
is loud and frequently repeated cha'--a cha'--a' &c.--also twat twat
twat, very quick




[Clark, December 19, 1805]
December 19th Thursday 1805
Some rain with intervales of fair weather last night, The morning Clear
and wind from S W. I despatched Sjt. Pryer with 8 men in 2 Canoes
across the bay for the boads of an Indian house which is abandoned, the
other part of the men continue to doe a little at the huts, the after
part of the day Cloudy with hail & rain, Sgt. Pryer and party returned
with 2 Canoe loads of Boards, two Indians Came & Stayed but a Short time




[Clark, December 19, 1805]
Thursday 19th December 1805
Some rain with intervales of fair weather last night, this morning
Clear & the wind from the S, W. we dispatched Sjt. Pryor with 8 men in
2 Canoes across Meriwethers Bay for the boards of an old Indian house
which is vacant, the residue of the men at work at their huts--the
after part of the Day Cloudy with Hail and rain, Serjt. Pryor & party
returned in the evening with a load of old boards which was found to be
verry indifferent

2 Indians Cam and Stayed a Short time to day




[Clark, December 20, 1805]
December 20th Friday 1805
Some rain and hail last night and this morning it rained hard untill 10
oClock, men all employd Carrying Punchens and Covering Cabins 4 of
which we had Covered, & Set Some to Dobing--the after part of the day
Cloudy and Some Showers of rain. 3 Indians came with Lickorish
Sackacomie berries & mats to Sell, for which they asked Such high
prices that we did not purchase any of them,--Those people ask double &
tribble the value of everry thing they have to Sell, and never take
less than the full value of any thing, they prise only Blue & white
heeds, files fish hooks and Tobacco--Tobacco and Blue beeds principally




[Clark, December 20, 1805]
Friday 20th of December 1805
Some rain and hail last night and the rained Continued untill 10 oClock
a,m, Men all employd in Carrying punchens or boards & Covering the
houses, 4 of which were Covered to day, the after part of the day
Cloudy with Several Showers of rain--3 Indians arrive in a Canoe. they
brought with them mats, roots & Sackacome berries to Sell for which
they asked Such high prices that we did not purchase any of them. Those
people ask generally double and tribble the value of what they have to
Sell, and never take less than the real value of the article in Such
things as is calculated to do them Service. Such as Blue & white heeds,
with which they trade with the nativs above; files which they make use
of to Sharpen their tools, fish hooks of different Sises and tobacco-
Tobacco and blue beeds they do prefur to every thing.




[Clark, December 21, 1805]
December 21st Saturday 1805
rain as usial last night and all day to day moderately. we Continued at
the Cabins dobbing & Shinking of them, fall Several trees which would
not Split into punchins--the Indians were detected in Stealing a Spoon
& a Bone, and left us, our Sackey Commy out Send 2 men to gather Some
at the ocian, Saw Elk Sign




[Clark, December 21, 1805]
Saturday 21st December 1805
rained as useal all the last night, and contd. moderately all day to
day without any intermition, men employd at the houses. one of the
indians was detected Stealing a horn Spoon, and leave the Camp.
dispatched two men to the open lands near the Ocian for Sackacome,
which we make use of to mix with our tobacco to Smoke which has an
agreeable flavour.




[Clark, December 22, 1805]
December 22nd Sunday 1805
rained all the last night & to day without much intermition we finish
dobbig 4 huts which is all we have Covered, the Punchin floor & Bunks
finished Drewyer go out to trap--Sjt. J. Ordway, Gibson & my Servent
Sick Several with Biles on them & bruses of different kinds, much of
our meat Spoiled.




[Clark, December 22, 1805]
Sunday 22nd December 1805
rained Continued all the last night and to day without much
intermition, men employd doeing what they can at the houses. Drewyer
Set out up the Creek to Set his traps for beaver, Sergt. ordway, Gibson
& my Servent Sick, Several men Complain of biles and bruses of
differant kinds.

We discover that part of our last Supply of meat is Spoiling from the
womph of the weather not withstanding a constant Smoke kept under it
day and night.




[Clark, December 23, 1805]
December 23rd Monday 1805
rained without intermition all last night, and this day much Thunder in
the morning and evening with rain and Some hail to day, we are all
employd about our huts have ours Covered and Dobed & we move into it, 2
Canoes of Indians Came up to day. I purchased 3 mats verry neetly made,
2 bags made with Flags verry neetly made, those the Clotsops Carry ther
fish in. also a Panthor Skin and Some Lickorish roots, for which I gave
a worn out file, 6 fish hooks & Some Pounded fish which to us was
Spoiled, but those people were fond of--in the evining those people
left us I also gave a String of wompom to a Chief, and Sent a Small
pice of Simimon to a Sick Indian in the Town who had attached himself
to me




[Clark, December 23, 1805]
Monday 23rd December 1805
Rained without intermition all the last night and to day with Thunder
and Hail the fore and after part of this day Capt Lewis and my Self
move into our hut to day unfinished--two Canoes with Indians of the
Clat Sop nation Came up to day. I purchased 3 mats and bags all neetly
made of flags and rushes, those bags are nearly Square of different
size's open on one Side, I also purchased a panthor Skin 71/2 feet long
including the tail, all of which I gave 6 Small fish hooks, a Small
worn out file & Some pounded fish which we Could not use as it was So
long wet that it was Soft and molded, the Indians of this neighbourhood
prize the pound'd fish verry highly, I have not observed this method of
Secureing fish on any other part of the Columbian waters then that
about the Great falls. I gave a 2d Chief a String of wampom, and Sent a
little pounded fish to Cus-ca-lah who was Sick in the village & could
not come to See us.




[Clark, December 24, 1805]
December 24th Tuesday-5
Some hard rain at different times last night, and moderately this
morning without intermition all hands employed in Carrying Punchens &
finishing Covering the huts, and the greater part of the men move into
them a hard rain in the evening.

Cuscalar the young Clot Sop Chief Came with a young brother and 2 young
Squar, they gave or laid before Capt Lewis and my Self a mat and each a
large Parsel of roots, Some time after he demanded 2 files for his
Present we returned the present as we had no files to Speare which
displeased them a little they then offered a woman to each which we
also declined axcpting which also displeased them. Jo Fields finish for
Capt Lewis and my Self each a wide Slab hued to write on, I gave a
handkerchief &c




[Clark, December 24, 1805]
Tuesday 24th December 1805
hard rain at Different times last night and all this day without
intermition. men all employd in finishing their huts and moveing into
them.

Cuscalah the Indian who had treated me So politely when I was at the
Clatsops village, come up in a Canoe with his young brother & 2 Squars
he laid before Capt Lewis and my Self each a mat and a parcel of roots
Some time in the evening two files was demanded for the presents of
mats and roots, as we had no files to part with, we each returned the
present which we had received, which displeased Cuscalah a little. he
then offered a woman to each of us which we also declined axcepting of,
which displeased the whole party verry much--the female part appeared
to be highly disgusted at our refuseing to axcept of their favours &c.

our Store of Meat entirely Spoiled, we are obliged to make use of it as
we have nothing else except a little pounded fish, the remains of what
we purchased near the great falls of the Columbia, and which we have
ever found to be a convenient resort, and a portable method of curing
fish




[Clark, December 25, 1805]
December 25th Christmas 1805 Wednesday
Some rain at different times last night and Showers of hail with
intervales of fair Starr light, This morning at day we were Saluted by
all our party under our winders, a Shout and a Song--after brackfast we
divided our tobacco which amounted to 2 Carrots, one half we gave to
the party who used Tobacco those who did not we gave a Handkerchief as
a present, The day proved Showery all day, the Inds. left us this
eveningall our party moved into their huts. we dried Some of our wet
goods. I rcved a present of a Fleeshe Hoserey vest draws & Socks of
Capt Lewis, pr. Mockerson of Whitehouse, a Small Indian basket of
Guterich, & 2 Doz weasels tales of the Squar of Shabono, & Some black
roots of the Indians G. D. Saw a Snake passing across the parth

Our Diner to day Consisted of pore Elk boiled, Spilt fish & Some roots,
a bad Christmass diner worm Day




[Clark, December 25, 1805]
Christmas Wednesday 25th December 1805
at day light this morning we were awoke by the discharge of the fire
arm of all our party & a Selute, Shoute and a Song which the whole
party joined in under our windows, after which they retired to their
rooms were Chearfull all the morning--after brackfast we divided our
Tobacco which amounted to 12 carrots one half of which we gave to the
men of the party who used tobacco, and to those who doe not use it we
make a present of a handkerchief, The Indians leave us in the evening
all the party Snugly fixed in their huts--I recved a presnt of Capt L.
of a fleece hosrie Shirt Draws and Socks-, a pr. mockersons of
Whitehouse a Small Indian basket of Gutherich, two Dozen white weazils
tails of the Indian woman, & Some black root of the Indians before
their departure--Drewyer informs me that he Saw a Snake pass across the
parth to day. The day proved Showerey wet and disagreeable.

we would have Spent this day the nativity of Christ in feasting, had we
any thing either to raise our Sperits or even gratify our appetites,
our Diner concisted of pore Elk, So much Spoiled that we eate it thro
mear necessity, Some Spoiled pounded fish and a fiew roots.




[Clark, December 26, 1805]
December 26th Thursday 1805
rained and blew hard last night Some hard Thunder, The rain continued
as usial all day and wind blew hard from the S. E, Joseph Fields finish
a Table & 2 Seats for us. we dry our wet articles and have the blankets
fleed, The flees are So troublesom that I have Slept but little for 2
nights past and we have regularly to kill them out of our blankets
every day for Several past--maney of the men have ther Powder wet by
the horns being repeetdly wet, hut Smoke verry bad.




[Clark, December 26, 1805]
Thursday 26th December 1805
rained and blew with great Violence S E all the last night, Some hard
Claps of Thunder, the rain as usial Continued all day--we dry our wet
articles before the fire, and have our blankets fleed, great numbers
were Caught out of the blankets, those trouble insects are So abundant
that we have to have them killd. out of our blankets every day or get
no Sleep at night--The powder in maney of the mens horns are wet from
their being so long exposed to the rain &c.




[Clark, December 27, 1805]
December 27th Friday 1805.
rained last night as usial and the greater part of this day, the men
Complete Chimneys & Bunks to day, in the evening a Chief and 4 men Come
of the Clotsop nation, Chief Co-ma wool we Sent out R. Fields & Collins
to hunt and order Drewyer, Shannon & Labiach to Set out early to morrow
to hunt,--Jo Fields, Bratten, & Gibson to make Salt at Point Addams,-
Willard & Wiser, to assist them in carrying the Kitties &c to the
Ocian, and all the others to finish the Pickets and gates. worm weather
I Saw a Musquetor which I Showed Capt. Lewis--Those Indians gave is, a
black root they Call Shan-na-tah que a kind of Licquerish which they
rost in embers and Call Cul ho-mo, a black berry the Size of a Cherry &
Dried which they call Shel-well,--all of which they prise highly and
make use of as food to live on, for which Capt Lewis gave the chief a
Cap of Sheep Skin and I his Son, ear bobs, Piece of riben, a pice of
brass, and 2 Small fishing hooks, of which they were much pleased Those
roots & berres, are greatfull to our Stomcks as we have nothing to eate
but Pore Elk meet, nearly Spoiled; & this accident of Spoiled meet, is
owing to wormth & the repeeted rains, which cause the meet to tante
before we Can get it from the woods Musquetors troublesorn




[Clark, December 27, 1805]
Friday 27th December 1805
rained last night as usial and the greater part of this day. In the
evening Co-mo wool the Chief and 4 men of the Clat Sop nation they
presented us a root which resembles the licquirish in Size and taste,
which they roste like a potato which they Call Cul ho-mo, also a black
root which is cured in a kill like the pash-a-co above; this root has a
Sweet taste and the natives are verry fond of it--they Call this root
Shaw-na-tah-que. also a dried berry about the size of a Chery which
they Call Shele well all those roots those Indians value highly and
give them verry Spearingly. in return for the above roots Capt Lewis
gave the Chief a Small piece of Sheap Skin to Ware on his head, I gave
his Son a par of ear bobs and a pece of ribon, and a Small piece of
brass for which they were much pleased.

Those roots and berries are timely and extreamly greatfull to our
Stomachs, as we have nothing to eate but Spoiled Elk meat, I Showed
Capt L. 2 Musquetors to day, or an insect So much the Size Shape and
appearance of a Musquetor that we Could observe no kind of differance.




[Clark, December 28, 1805]
December 28th Saturday 1805
rained as usial, a great part of the last night, and this morning
rained and the wind blew hard from the S. E. Sent out the hunters and
Salt makers, & employd the baleanc of the men Carrying the Pickets &c.
&c. hunters Sent out yesterday returned, haveing killed one deer near
the Sea cost, my boy york verry unwell from violent Colds & Strains
Carrying in meet and lifting logs on the huts to build them, This day
is worm, and rained all day moderately without intermition.




[Clark, December 28, 1805]
Saturday the 28th December 1805
rained as usial the greater part of the last night and a continuation
this morning accompanied with wind from the S East Derected Drewyer,
Shannon, Labeash, Reuben Field, and Collins to hunt; Jos. Fields,
Bratten, Gibson to proceed to the Ocean at Some Convenient place form a
Camp and Commence makeing Salt with 5 of the largest Kittles, and
Willard and Wiser to assist them in Carrying the Kittles to the Sea
Coastall the other men to be employed about putting up pickets &
makeing the gates of the fort. my man Y. verry unwell from a violent
Coald and Strain by Carrying meet from the woods and lifting the heavy
logs on the works &c. rained all Day without intermition. the Weather
verry worm.




[Clark, December 29, 1805]
December 29th Sunday 1805
rained last night as usial, this morning Cloudy without rain a hard
wind from the S. E. The Inds. left us this morning and returned to
their village, after begging for maney things which they did not secure
as we Could not Spare them I gave the Chief Canio a Razor, Sent out 3
men across the river to hunt, all others employd putting up pickets
Pete Crusat Sick with a violent Cold My Servent better--we are told by
the Indians that a whale has foundered on the Coast to the N. W and
their nations is collecting fat of him, the wind is too high for us to
See it, Capt Lewis is been in readiness 2 days to go and Collect Some
of the whale oyle the wind has proved too high as yet for him to Set
out in Safty In the evening a young Chief 4 men and 2 womin of the
War-ci-a-cum tribe came in a large canoe with Wapto roots, Dressed Elk
Skins &c. to Sell, the Chief made me a present of about a half a bushel
of those roots--we gave him a medal of a Small Size and a piece of red
ribin to tie around the top of his Hat which was made with a double
Cone, the diameter of the upper about 3 Inches the lower a about 1 foot

We purchased about 11/2 bushels of those roots for which we gave Some
few red beeds, Small pices of brass wire and old Check--those roots
proved greatfull to us as we are now liveing on Spoiled Elk which is
extreamly disagreeable to the Smel. as well as the taste, I can plainly
discover that a considerable exchange of property is Continually
Carried on between the Tribes and villages of those people they all
dress litely ware nothing below the waste, a pice of fur abt. around
the body, and a Short robe which Composes the total of their dress,
except a few Split hats, and heeds around ther necks wrists and
anckles, and a few in their ears. They are small and not handsom
generally Speaking women perticularly.

The Chin nook womin are lude and Carry on Sport publickly the Clotsop
and others appear deffidend, and reserved The flees are So noumerous in
this Countrey and difficult to get Cleare of that the Indians have
difft. houses & villages to which they remove frequently to get rid of
them, and not withstanding all their precautions, they never Step into
our hut without leaveing Sworms of those troublesom insects. Indeed I
Scercely get to Sleep half the night Clear of the torments of those
flees, with the precaution of haveing my blankets Serched and the flees
killed every day--The 1 s of those insects we Saw on the Collumbia
River was at the 1 s Great falls--I have the Satisfaction to Say that
we had but little rain in the Course of this day, not as much as would
wet a person. but hard wind and Cloudy all day.




[Clark, December 29, 1805]
Sunday 29th December 1805
rained all the last night a usial, this morning Cloudy without rain, a
hard wind from the S. E I gave the Cheif a razor, and himself and party
left us after begging us for maney articles none of which they recvied
as we Could not Spare the articles they were most in want of. Peter
Crusat

Sick with a violent Cold, my man Y. better. all hands employed about
the Pickets & gates of the fort. we were informed day before yesterday
that a whale had foundered on the coast to the S. W. near the Kil a mox
N. and that the greater part of the Clat Sops were gorn for the oile &
blubber, the wind proves too high for us to proceed by water to See
this monster, Capt Lewis has been in readiness Since we first heard of
the whale to go and see it and collect Some of its Oil, the wind has
proved too high as yet for him to proceed--this evining a young Chief 4
Men and 2 womin of the War ci a cum Nation arrived, and offered for
Sale Dressed Elk Skins and Wap pa to, the Chief made us a preasent of
about 1/2 a bushel of those roots. and we purchased about 11/2 bushels
of those roots for which we gave Some fiew red beeds Small peaces of
brass wire & old Check those roots proved a greatfull addition to our
Spoiled Elk, which has become verry disagreeable both to the taste &
Smell we gave this Chief a Medal of a Small Size and a piece of red
riben to tie around the top of his hat which was of a Singular
Construction Those people will not Sell all their Wap pa to to us they
inform us that they are on their way to trade with the Chit Sops. The
nations above Carry on a verry Considerable interchange of property
with those in this neighbourhood. they pass altogether by water, they
have no roads or pathes through the Countrey which we have observed,
except across portages from one Creek to another, all go litely dressed
ware nothing below the waste in the Coaldest of weather, a piece of fur
around their bodies and a Short roabe Composes the Sum total of their
dress, except a few hats, and heeds about their necks arms and legs
Small badly made and homely generally. The flees are So noumerous and
hard to get rid of; that the Indians have different houses which they
resort to occasionally, not withstanding all their precautions they
never Step into our house without leaveing Sworms of those tormenting
insects; and they torment us in Such a manner as to deprive us of half
the nights Sleep frequently--the first of those insects which we saw on
the Columbian waters was at the Canoe portage at the great falls. Hard
winds & Cloudy all day but verry little rain to day.




[Clark, December 30, 1805]
December 30th Monday 1805
Hard wind and Some rain last night, this morning fair and the Sun Shown
for a Short time 4 Indians Came from the upper Villages they offered us
roots which we did not Chuse to axcept of, as their expectations for
those presents of a fiew roots is 3 or 4 times their real worth, those
Indians with those of yesterday Continued all day. Drewyer & party of
hunters returned and informed they had killed 4 Elk, a party of 6 men
was imediately Sent for the meet, they returned at Dusk, with the 4
Elk, of which we had a Sumptious Supper of Elk Tongues & marrow bones
which was truly gratifying.

The fort was Completed this evening and at Sun Set we let The Indians
know that, our Custom will be to Shut the gates at Sun Set, at which
time, they must all go out of the fort those people who are verry
foward and disegreeable, left the huts with reluctiance--This day
proved the best we have had Since at this place, only 3 Showers of rain
to day, Cloudy nearly all day, in the evening the wind luled and the
fore part of the night fair and clear. I Saw flies & different kinds of
insects in motion to day Snakes are yet to be seen, and Snales without
Cover is Common and large, fowls of every kind Common to this quarter
abound in the Creek & Bay near us




[Clark, December 30, 1805]
Monday 30th December 1805
Hard wind and Some rain last night. this morning the Sun Shown for a
Short time--four Indians came down from the War cia cum Village, they
offered us roots which we did not think proper to accept of as in
return they expect 3 or 4 times as much as the roots as we Could
purchase the Roots for, and are never Satisfied with what they receive,
those 4 Indians & these that Came yesterday Stayed all day. Drewyer
returned and informed that he had killed 4 Elk at no great distance
off, a party of 6 men was imediately dispatched for the meat, and
returned at Dusk with the 4 Elk--we had a Sumptious Supper of Elks
tongues & marrow bones which was truly gratifying--our fortification is
Completed this evening-and at Sun Set we let the nativs know that our
Custom will be in future, to Shut the gates at Sun Set at which time
all Indians must go out of the fort and not return into it untill next
morning after Sunrise at which time the gates will be opened, those of
the War ci a cum Nation who are very foward left the houses with
reluctianc this day proved to be the fairest and best which we have had
since our arrival at this place, only three Showers dureing this whole
day, wind the fore part of the day.




[Clark, December 31, 1805]
December 31st Tuesday 1805
A Cloudy night & Some rain, this day proved Cloudy and Some Showers of
rain to day all the Indians Continued at their Camp near us, 2 others
Canoes Came one from the War-ci-a-cum Village, with three Indians, and
the other from higher up the river of the Skil-lute nation with three
men and a Squar; Those people brought with them Some Wapto roots, mats
made of flags, & rushes, dried fish and Some fiew Shene-tock-we (or
black) roots & Dressed Elk Skins, all of which they asked enormous
prices for, particularly the Dressed Elk Skins; I purchased of those
people Some Wapto roots, two mats and a Small pouch of Tobacco of their
own manufactory--for which I gave large fish hooks, which they were
verry fond, those Indians are much more reserved and better behaved to
day than yesterday--the Sight of our Sentinal who walks on his post,
has made this reform in those people who but yesterday was verry
impertenant and disagreeable to all--This evening they all Cleared out
before the time to Shut the gates, without being derected to doe So--I
derected Sinks to be dug and a Sentinal Box which was accomplished one
of those Indeans brought a Musquet to be repared, which only wanted a
Screw flattened, for which he gave me a Peck of Wapto roots, I gave him
a flint and a pice of Sheep Skin of which he was pleased




[Clark, December 31, 1805]
Tuesday 31st December 1805
last night was Cloudy and Some rain, this day prove Cloudy and Showerry
all day, all the Indians Continue at their Camp near us, two other
Canoes arrived, one from the War ci a cum Village with 3 indians and
the other of 3 men & a Squar from higher up the river and are of the
Skil-lute nation, those people brought with them Some Wappato roots,
mats made of flags and rushes dried fish, and a fiew Shaw-na tah-que
and Dressed Elk Skins, all of which they asked enormous prices for,
perticularly the dressed Elk Skins, I purchased of those people Some
Wap pa to two mats and about 3 pipes of their tobacco in a neet little
bag made of rushes--This tobacco was much like what we had Seen before
with the So So ne or Snake indians, for those articles I gave a large
fishing hook and Several other Small articles, the fishinghooks they
were verry fond of. Those Skit lutes are much better behaved than the
War ci a cum indeed we found a great alteration in the Conduct of them
all this morning, the Sight of our Sentinal on his post at the gate,
together with our deturmined proseedure of putting all out at Sun Set
has made this reform in those War ci a corns who is foward impertinant
an thieveish.

The nativs all leave us the fort this evening before Sun Set without
being told or desired to do So--we had Sinks dug & a Sentinal box made-
a Skit lute brought a gun which he requested me to have repared, it
only wanted a Screw flattened So as to Catch, I put a flint into his
gun & he presented me in return a peck of Wappato for payment, I gave
him piece of a Sheap Skin and a Small piece of blue Cloth to Cover his
lock for which he was much pleased and gave me in return Some roots &c.

I Saw flies and different kinds of insects in motion to day--Snakes are
yet to be Seen and Snales without Covers is Common and verry large
water fowls of various kinds are in great numbers in the rivers and
Creeks and the sides of Meriwethers Bay near us but excessively wild-
the fore part of this night fair and Clear

With the party of Clat Sops who visited us last was a man of much
lighter Coloured than the nativs are generaly, he was freckled with
long duskey red hair, about 25 years of age, and must Certainly be half
white at least, this man appeared to understand more of the English
language than the others of his party, but did not Speak a word of
English, he possessed all the habits of the indians




[Lewis, January 1, 1806]
Fort Clatsop 1806.
January 1st Tuesday.
This morning I was awoke at an early hour by the discharge of a volley
of small arms, which were fired by our party in front of our quarters
to usher in the new year; this was the only mark of rispect which we
had it in our power to pay this celebrated day. our repast of this day
tho better than that of Christmass, consisted principally in the
anticipation of the 1st day of January 1807, when in the bosom of our
friends we hope to participate in the mirth and hilarity of the day,
and when with the zest given by the recollection of the present, we
shall completely, both mentally and corporally, enjoy the repast which
the hand of civilization has prepared for us. at present we were
content with eating our boiled Elk and wappetoe, and solacing our
thirst with our only beverage pure water. two of our hunters who set
out this morning reterned in the evening having killed two bucks elk;
they presented Capt. Clark and myself each a marrow-bone and tonge, on
which we suped. visited today by a few of the Clotsops who brought some
roots and burries for the purpose of trading with us. we were uneasy
with rispect to two of our men, Willard and Wiser, who were dispatched
on the 28th ulto. with the saltmakers, and were directed to return
immediately; their not having returned induces us to believe it
probable that they have missed their way.--our fourtification being now
completed we issued an order for the more exact and uniform dicipline
and government of the garrison. (see orderly book 1st January 1806).-




[Clark, January 1, 1806]
January 1st Wednesday 1806
This morning proved cloudy with moderate rain, after a pleasent worm
night during which there fell but little rain--This morning at Day we
wer Saluted from the party without, wishing us a "hapy new year" a
Shout and discharge of their arms--no Indians to be Seen this morning-
they left the place of their encampment dureing the last night The work
of our houses and fort being now Complete, we Ishued an order in which
we pointed out the rules & regulations for the government of the Party
in respect to the Indians as also for the Safty and protection of our
Selves &c.

two Clotsops Came with a mat and Some fiew roots of Cut wha mo, for
which they asked a file they did not trade but Continued all night

Sent out 2 hunters this morning who returned, haveing killed 2 Elk
about 3 miles distant, Some fiew Showers of rain in the Course of this
day. Cloudy all the day.




[Clark, January 1, 1806]
Fort Clatsop 1806
Wednesday the 1st of January
This morning I was awoke at an early hour by the discharge of a Volley
of Small arms, which were fired by our party in front of our quarters
to usher in the new year, this was the only mark of respect which we
had it in our power to pay this Selibrated day. our repast of this day
tho better than that of Christmas Consisted principally in the
anticipation of the 1st day of January 1807, when in the bosom of our
friends we hope to participate in the mirth and hilarity of the day,
and when with the relish given by the recollection of the present, we
Shall Completely, both mentally and Corparally, the repast which the
hand of Civilization has produced for us. at present we were Content
with eating our boiled Elk and Wappato, and Solacing our thirst with
our only beverage pure water. two of our hunters who Set out this
morning returned in the evening haveing killed two Buck Elks; they
presented Capt. Lewis and my Self each a marrow bone and tongue on
which we Suped--we are visited to day by a fiew of the Clatsops by
water they brought some roots and berries for the purpose of tradeing
with us. our fortification being now Complete we issue an order for the
more exact and uniform dicipline and government of the garrison. (See
orderly book Jany 2d 1806)




[Lewis, January 1, 1806]
Fort Clatsop, January 1st 1806
The fort being now completed, the Commanding officers think proper to
direct that the guard shall as usual consist of one Sergeant and three
privates, and that the same be regularly relieved each morning at sun
rise. The post of the new guard shall be in the room of the Sergeants
rispectivly commanding the same. the centinel shall be posted, both day
and night, on the parade in front of the commanding offercers quarters;
tho should he at any time think proper to remove himself to any other
part of the fort, in order the better to inform himself of the desighns
or approach of any party of savages, he is not only at liberty, but is
hereby required to do so. It shall be the duty of the centinel also to
announce the arrival of all parties of Indians to the Sergeant of the
Guard, who shall immediately report the same to the Commanding officers.

The Commanding Officers require and charge the Garrison to treat the
natives in a friendly manner; nor will they be permitted at any time,
to abuse, assault or strike them; unless such abuse assault or stroke
