and this impulse of rabblement was not restrained without a certain
clamour of voices, highly to be regretted in the case.

When some degree of order had been restored, Dick, with a few chosen men,
set forth in advance.  The darkness on shore, by contrast with the
flashing of the surf, appeared before him like a solid body; and the
howling and whistling of the gale drowned any lesser noise.

He had scarce reached the end of the pier, however, when there fell a
lull of the wind; and in this he seemed to hear on shore the hollow
footing of horses and the clash of arms.  Checking his immediate
followers, he passed forward a step or two alone, even setting foot upon
the down; and here he made sure he could detect the shape of men and
horses moving.  A strong discouragement assailed him.  If their enemies
were really on the watch, if they had beleaguered the shoreward end of
the pier, he and Lord Foxham were taken in a posture of very poor
defence, the sea behind, the men jostled in the dark upon a narrow
causeway.  He gave a cautious whistle, the signal previously agreed upon.

It proved to be a signal far more than he desired.  Instantly there fell,
through the black night, a shower of arrows sent at a venture; and so
close were the men huddled on the pier that more than one was hit, and
the arrows were answered with cries of both fear and pain.  In this first
discharge, Lord Foxham was struck down; Hawksley had him carried on board
again at once; and his men, during the brief remainder of the skirmish,
fought (when they fought at all) without guidance.  That was perhaps the
chief cause of the disaster which made haste to follow.

At the shore end of the pier, for perhaps a minute, Dick held his own
with a handful; one or two were wounded upon either side; steel crossed
steel; nor had there been the least signal of advantage, when in the
twinkling of an eye the tide turned against the party from the ship.
Someone cried out that all was lost; the men were in the very humour to
lend an ear to a discomfortable counsel; the cry was taken up.  "On
board, lads, for your lives!" cried another.  A third, with the true
instinct of the coward, raised that inevitable report on all retreats:
"We are betrayed!"  And in a moment the whole mass of men went surging
and jostling backward down the pier, turning their defenceless backs on
their pursuers and piercing the night with craven outcry.

One coward thrust off the ship's stern, while another still held her by
the bows.  The fugitives leaped, screaming, and were hauled on board, or
fell back and perished in the sea.  Some were cut down upon the pier by
the pursuers.  Many were injured on the ship's deck in the blind haste
and terror of the moment, one man leaping upon another, and a third on
both.  At last, and whether by design or accident, the bows of the Good
Hope were liberated; and the ever-ready Lawless, who had maintained his
place at the helm through all the hurly-burly by sheer strength of body
and a liberal use of the cold steel, instantly clapped her on the proper
tack.  The ship began to move once more forward on the stormy sea, its
scuppers running blood, its deck heaped with fallen men, sprawling and
struggling in the dark.

Thereupon, Lawless sheathed his dagger, and turning to his next
neighbour, "I have left my mark on them, gossip," said he, "the yelping,
coward hounds."

Now, while they were all leaping and struggling for their lives, the men
had not appeared to observe the rough shoves and cutting stabs with which
Lawless had held his post in the confusion.  But perhaps they had already
begun to understand somewhat more clearly, or perhaps another ear had
overheard, the helmsman's speech.

Panic-stricken troops recover slowly, and men who have just disgraced
themselves by cowardice, as if to wipe out the memory of their fault,
will sometimes run straight into the opposite extreme of insubordination.
So it was now; and the same men who had thrown away their weapons and
been hauled, feet foremost, into the Good Hope, began to cry out upon
their leaders, and demand that someone should be punished.

This growing ill-feeling turned upon Lawless.

In order to get a proper offing, the old outlaw had put the head of the
Good Hope to seaward.

"What!" bawled one of the grumblers, "he carrieth us to seaward!"

"'Tis sooth," cried another.  "Nay, we are betrayed for sure."

And they all began to cry out in chorus that they were betrayed, and in
shrill tones and with abominable oaths bade Lawless go about-ship and
bring them speedily ashore.  Lawless, grinding his teeth, continued in
silence to steer the true course, guiding the Good Hope among the
formidable billows.  To their empty terrors, as to their dishonourable
threats, between drink and dignity he scorned to make reply.  The
malcontents drew together a little abaft the mast, and it was plain they
were like barnyard cocks, "crowing for courage."  Presently they would be
fit for any extremity of injustice or ingratitude.  Dick began to mount
by the ladder, eager to interpose; but one of the outlaws, who was also
something of a seaman, got beforehand.

"Lads," he began, "y' are right wooden heads, I think.  For to get back,
by the mass, we must have an offing, must we not?  And this old
Lawless--"

Someone struck the speaker on the mouth, and the next moment, as a fire
springs among dry straw, he was felled upon the deck, trampled under the
feet, and despatched by the daggers of his cowardly companions.  At this
the wrath of Lawless rose and broke.

"Steer yourselves," he bellowed, with a curse; and, careless of the
result, he left the helm.

The Good Hope was, at that moment, trembling on the summit of a swell.
She subsided, with sickening velocity, upon the farther side.  A wave,
like a great black bulwark, hove immediately in front of her; and, with a
staggering blow, she plunged headforemost through that liquid hill.  The
green water passed right over her from stem to stern, as high as a man's
knees; the sprays ran higher than the mast; and she rose again upon the
other side, with an appalling, tremulous indecision, like a beast that
has been deadly wounded.

Six or seven of the malcontents had been carried bodily overboard; and as
for the remainder, when they found their tongues again, it was to bellow
to the saints and wail upon Lawless to come back and take the tiller.

Nor did Lawless wait to be twice bidden.  The terrible result of his
fling of just resentment sobered him completely.  He knew, better than
any one on board, how nearly the Good Hope had gone bodily down below
their feet; and he could tell, by the laziness with which she met the
sea, that the peril was by no means over.

Dick, who had been thrown down by the concussion and half drowned, rose
wading to his knees in the swamped well of the stern, and crept to the
old helmsman's side.

"Lawless," he said, "we do all depend on you; y' are a brave, steady man,
indeed, and crafty in the management of ships; I shall put three sure men
to watch upon your safety."

"Bootless, my master, bootless," said the steersman, peering forward
through the dark.  "We come every moment somewhat clearer of these
sandbanks; with every moment, then, the sea packeth upon us heavier, and
for all these whimperers, they will presently be on their backs.  For, my
master, 'tis a right mystery, but true, there never yet was a bad man
that was a good shipman.  None but the honest and the bold can endure me
this tossing of a ship."

"Nay, Lawless," said Dick, laughing, "that is a right shipman's byword,
and hath no more of sense than the whistle of the wind.  But, prithee,
how go we?  Do we lie well?  Are we in good case?"

"Master Shelton," replied Lawless, "I have been a Grey Friar--I praise
fortune--an archer, a thief, and a shipman.  Of all these coats, I had
the best fancy to die in the Grey Friar's, as ye may readily conceive,
and the least fancy to die in John Shipman's tarry jacket; and that for
two excellent good reasons: first, that the death might take a man
suddenly; and second, for the horror of that great, salt smother and
welter under my foot here"--and Lawless stamped with his foot.
"Howbeit," he went on, "an I die not a sailor's death, and that this
night, I shall owe a tall candle to our Lady."

"Is it so?" asked Dick.

"It is right so," replied the outlaw.  "Do ye not feel how heavy and dull
she moves upon the waves?  Do ye not hear the water washing in her hold?
She will scarce mind the rudder even now.  Bide till she has settled a
bit lower; and she will either go down below your boots like a stone
image, or drive ashore here, under our lee, and come all to pieces like a
twist of string."

"Ye speak with a good courage," returned Dick.  "Ye are not then
appalled?"

"Why, master," answered Lawless, "if ever a man had an ill crew to come
to port with, it is I--a renegade friar, a thief, and all the rest on't.
Well, ye may wonder, but I keep a good hope in my wallet; and if that I
be to drown, I will drown with a bright eye, Master Shelton, and a steady
hand."

Dick returned no answer; but he was surprised to find the old vagabond of
so resolute a temper, and fearing some fresh violence or treachery, set
forth upon his quest for three sure men.  The great bulk of the men had
now deserted the deck, which was continually wetted with the flying
sprays, and where they lay exposed to the shrewdness of the winter wind.
They had gathered, instead, into the hold of the merchandise, among the
butts of wine, and lighted by two swinging lanterns.

Here a few kept up the form of revelry, and toasted each other deep in
Arblaster's Gascony wine.  But as the Good Hope continued to tear through
the smoking waves, and toss her stem and stern alternately high in air
and deep into white foam, the number of these jolly companions diminished
with every moment and with every lurch.  Many sat apart, tending their
hurts, but the majority were already prostrated with sickness, and lay
moaning in the bilge.

Greensheve, Cuckow, and a young fellow of Lord Foxham's whom Dick had
already remarked for his intelligence and spirit, were still, however,
both fit to understand and willing to obey.  These Dick set, as a
body-guard, about the person of the steersman, and then, with a last look
at the black sky and sea, he turned and went below into the cabin,
whither Lord Foxham had been carried by his servants.



CHAPTER VI--THE GOOD HOPE (concluded)


The moans of the wounded baron blended with the wailing of the ship's
dog.  The poor animal, whether he was merely sick at heart to be
separated from his friends, or whether he indeed recognised some peril in
the labouring of the ship, raised his cries, like minute-guns, above the
roar of wave and weather; and the more superstitious of the men heard, in
these sounds, the knell of the Good Hope.

Lord Foxham had been laid in a berth upon a fur cloak.  A little lamp
burned dim before the Virgin in the bulkhead, and by its glimmer Dick
could see the pale countenance and hollow eyes of the hurt man.

"I am sore hurt," said he.  "Come near to my side, young Shelton; let
there be one by me who, at least, is gentle born; for after having lived
nobly and richly all the days of my life, this is a sad pass that I
should get my hurt in a little ferreting skirmish, and die here, in a
foul, cold ship upon the sea, among broken men and churls."

"Nay, my lord," said Dick, "I pray rather to the saints that ye will
recover you of your hurt, and come soon and sound ashore."

"How!" demanded his lordship.  "Come sound ashore?  There is, then, a
question of it?"

"The ship laboureth--the sea is grievous and contrary," replied the lad;
"and by what I can learn of my fellow that steereth us, we shall do well,
indeed, if we come dryshod to land."

"Ha!" said the baron, gloomily, "thus shall every terror attend upon the
passage of my soul! Sir, pray rather to live hard, that ye may die easy,
than to be fooled and fluted all through life, as to the pipe and tabor,
and, in the last hour, be plunged among misfortunes!  Howbeit, I have
that upon my mind that must not be delayed.  We have no priest aboard?"

"None," replied Dick.

"Here, then, to my secular interests," resumed Lord Foxham: "ye must be
as good a friend to me dead, as I found you a gallant enemy when I was
living.  I fall in an evil hour for me, for England, and for them that
trusted me.  My men are being brought by Hamley--he that was your rival;
they will rendezvous in the long holm at Holywood; this ring from off my
finger will accredit you to represent mine orders; and I shall write,
besides, two words upon this paper, bidding Hamley yield to you the
damsel.  Will he obey?  I know not."

"But, my lord, what orders?" inquired Dick.

"Ay," quoth the baron, "ay--the orders;" and he looked upon Dick with
hesitation.  "Are ye Lancaster or York?" he asked, at length.

"I shame to say it," answered Dick, "I can scarce clearly answer.  But so
much I think is certain: since I serve with Ellis Duckworth, I serve the
house of York.  Well, if that be so, I declare for York."

"It is well," returned the other; "it is exceeding well.  For, truly, had
ye said Lancaster, I wot not for the world what I had done.  But sith ye
are for York, follow me.  I came hither but to watch these lords at
Shoreby, while mine excellent young lord, Richard of Gloucester, {1}
prepareth a sufficient force to fall upon and scatter them.  I have made
me notes of their strength, what watch they keep, and how they lie; and
these I was to deliver to my young lord on Sunday, an hour before noon,
at St. Bride's Cross beside the forest.  This tryst I am not like to
keep, but I pray you, of courtesy, to keep it in my stead; and see that
not pleasure, nor pain, tempest, wound, nor pestilence withhold you from
the hour and place, for the welfare of England lieth upon this cast."

"I do soberly take this up on me," said Dick.  "In so far as in me lieth,
your purpose shall be done."

"It is good," said the wounded man. "My lord duke shall order you
farther, and if ye obey him with spirit and good will, then is your
fortune made.  Give me the lamp a little nearer to mine eyes, till that I
write these words for you."

He wrote a note "to his worshipful kinsman, Sir John Hamley;" and then a
second, which he-left without external superscripture.

"This is for the duke," he said.  "The word is 'England and Edward,' and
the counter, 'England and York.'"

"And Joanna, my lord?" asked Dick.

"Nay, ye must get Joanna how ye can," replied the baron.  "I have named
you for my choice in both these letters; but ye must get her for
yourself, boy.  I have tried, as ye see here before you, and have lost my
life.  More could no man do."

By this time the wounded man began to be very weary; and Dick, putting
the precious papers in his bosom, bade him be of good cheer, and left him
to repose.

The day was beginning to break, cold and blue, with flying squalls of
snow.  Close under the lee of the Good Hope, the coast lay in alternate
rocky headlands and sandy bays; and further inland the wooded hill-tops
of Tunstall showed along the sky.  Both the wind and the sea had gone
down; but the vessel wallowed deep, and scarce rose upon the waves.

Lawless was still fixed at the rudder; and by this time nearly all the
men had crawled on deck, and were now gazing, with blank faces, upon the
inhospitable coast.

"Are we going ashore?" asked Dick.

"Ay," said Lawless, "unless we get first to the bottom."

And just then the ship rose so languidly to meet a sea, and the water
weltered so loudly in her hold, that Dick involuntarily seized the
steersman by the arm.

"By the mass!" cried Dick, as the bows of the Good Hope reappeared above
the foam, "I thought we had foundered, indeed; my heart was at my
throat."

In the waist, Greensheve, Hawksley, and the better men of both companies
were busy breaking up the deck to build a raft; and to these Dick joined
himself, working the harder to drown the memory of his predicament.  But,
even as he worked, every sea that struck the poor ship, and every one of
her dull lurches, as she tumbled wallowing among the waves, recalled him
with a horrid pang to the immediate proximity of death.
