* * * * *. The work itself cannot fail of innumerable readers, and a
great influence, for it counts many of the most significant pulse-beats
of the tune. Apart from its range of character and fine descriptions,
it records some of the mystical apparitions, and attempts to solve some
of the problems of the time. How to combine the benefits of the
religious life with those of the artist-life in an existence more
simple, more full, more human in short, than either of the two
hitherto known by these names has been,--this problem is but poorly
solved in the "Countess of Rudolstadt," the sequel to Consuelo. It is
true, as the English reviewer says, that George Sand is a far better
poet than philosopher, and that the chief use she can be of in these
matters is, by her great range of observation and fine intuitions, to
help to develop the thoughts of the time a little way further. But the
sincerity, the reality of all he can obtain from this writer will be
highly valued by the earnest man.

In one respect the book is entirely successful--in showing how inward
purity and honor may preserve a woman from bewilderment and danger,
and secure her a genuine independence. Whoever aims at this is still
considered, by unthinking or prejudiced minds, as wishing to despoil
the female character of its natural and peculiar loveliness. It is
supposed that delicacy must imply weakness, and that only an Amazon
can stand upright, and have sufficient command of her faculties to
confront the shock of adversity, or resist the allurements of
tenderness. Miss Bremer, Dumas, and the northern novelist, Andersen,
make women who have a tendency to the intellectual life of an artist
fail, and suffer the penalties of arrogant presumption, in the very
first steps of a career to which an inward vocation called them in
preference to the usual home duties. Yet nothing is more obvious than
that the circumstances of the time do, more and more frequently, call
women to such lives, and that, if guardianship is absolutely necessary
to women, many must perish for want of it. There is, then, reason to
hope that God may be a sufficient guardian to those who dare rely on
him; and if the heroines of the novelists we have named ended as they
did, it was for the want of the purity of ambition and simplicity of
character which do not permit such as Consuelo to be either unseated
and depraved, or unresisting victims and breaking reeds, if left alone
in the storm and crowd of life. To many women this picture will prove
a true Consuelo (consolation), and we think even very prejudiced men
will not read it without being charmed with the expansion, sweetness
and genuine force, of a female character, such as they have not met,
but must, when painted, recognize as possible, and may be led to
review their opinions, and perhaps to elevate and enlarge their hopes,
as to "Woman's sphere" and "Woman's mission." If such insist on what
they have heard of the private life of this writer, and refuse to
believe that any good thing can come out of Nazareth, we reply that we
do not know the true facts as to the history of George Sand. There has
been no memoir or notice of her published on which any one can rely,
and we have seen too much of life to accept the monsters of gossip in
reference to any one. But we know, through her works, that, whatever
the stains on her life and reputation may have been, there is in her a
soul so capable of goodness and honor as to depict them most
successfully in her ideal forms. It is her works, and not her private
life, that we are considering. Of her works we have means of judging;
of herself, not. But among those who have passed unblamed through the
walks of life, we have not often found a nobleness of purpose and
feeling, a sincere religious hope, to be compared with the spirit that
breathes through the pages of Consuelo.

The experiences of the artist-life, the grand and penetrating remarks
upon music, make the book a precious acquisition to all whose hearts
are fashioned to understand such things.

We suppose that we receive here not only the mind of the writer, but
of Liszt, with whom she has publicly corresponded in the "_Lettres
d'un Voyageur_." None could more avail us, for "in him also is a
spark of the divine fire," as Beethoven said of Ichubert. We may thus
consider that we have in this book the benefit of the most electric
nature, the finest sensibility, and the boldest spirit of
investigation combined, expressing themselves in a little world of
beautiful or picturesque forms.

Although there are grave problems discussed, and sad and searching
experiences described in this work, yet its spirit is, in the main,
hopeful, serene, almost glad. It is the spirit inspired from a near
acquaintance with the higher life of art. Seeing there something
really achieved and completed, corresponding with the soul's desires,
faith is enlivened as to the eventual fulfilment of those desires, and
we feel a certainty that the existence which looks at present so
marred and fragmentary shall yet end in harmony. The shuttle is at
work, and the threads are gradually added that shall bring out the
pattern, and prove that what seems at present confusion is really the
way and means to order and beauty.




JENNY LIND,

THE "CONSUELO" OF GEORGE SAND.


Jenny Lind, the prima donna of Stockholm, is among the most
distinguished of those geniuses who have been invited to welcome the
queen to Germany. Her name has been unknown among us, as she is still
young, and has not wandered much from the scene of her first triumphs;
but many may have seen, last winter, in the foreign papers, an account
of her entrance into Stockholm after an absence of some length. The
people received her with loud cries of homage, took the horses from
her carriage and drew her home; a tribute of respect often paid to
conquerors and statesmen, but seldom, or, as far as we know, never to
the priesthood of the muses, who have conferred the higher benefit of
raising, refining and exhilarating, the popular mind.

An accomplished Swede, now in this country, communicated to a friend
particulars of Jenny Lind's career, which suggested the thought that
she might have given the hint for the principal figure in Sand's late
famous novel, "Consuelo."

This work is at present in process of translation in "The Harbinger,"
a periodical published at Brook Farm, Mass.; but, as this translation
has proceeded but a little way, and the book in its native tongue is
not generally, though it has been extensively, circulated here, we
will give a slight sketch of its plan.

It has been a work of deepest interest to those who have looked upon
Sand for some years back, as one of the best exponents of the
difficulties, the errors, the aspirations, the weaknesses, and the
regenerative powers of the present epoch. The struggle in her mind and
the experiments of her life have been laid bare to the eyes of her
fellow-creatures with fearless openness--fearless, not shameless. Let
no man confound the bold unreserve of Sand with that of those who have
lost the feeling of beauty and the love of good. With a bleeding heart
and bewildered feet she sought the truth, and if she lost the way,
returned as soon as convinced she had done so; but she would never
hide the fact that she had lost it. "What God knows, I dare avow to
man," seems to be her motto. It is impossible not to see in her, not
only the distress and doubts of the intellect, but the temptations of
a sensual nature; but we see too the courage of a hero and a deep
capacity for religion. This mixed nature, too, fits her peculiarly to
speak to men so diseased as men are at present. They feel she knows
their ailment, and if she find a cure, it will really be by a specific
remedy.

An upward tendency and growing light are observable in all her works
for several years past, till now, in the present, she has expressed
such conclusions as forty years of the most varied experience have
brought to one who had shrunk from no kind of discipline, yet still
cried to God amid it all; one who, whatever you may say against her,
you must feel has never accepted a word for a thing, or worn one
moment the veil of hypocrisy; and this person one of the most powerful
nature, both as to passion and action, and of an ardent, glowing
genius. These conclusions are sadly incomplete. There is an amazing
alloy in the last product of her crucible, but there is also so much
of pure gold that the book is truly a cordial, as its name of Consuelo
(consolation) promises.

The young Consuelo lives as a child the life of a beggar. Her youth is
passed in the lowest circumstances of the streets of Venice. She
brings the more pertinacious fire of Spanish blood to be fostered by
the cheerful airs of Italy. A vague sense of the benefits to be
derived, from such mingling of various influences, in the formation of
a character, is to be discerned in several works of art now, when men
are really wishing to become citizens of the world, though old habits
still interfere on every side with so noble a development.

Nothing can be more charming than the first volume, which describes
the young girl amid the common life of Venice. It is sunny, open, and
romantic as the place. The beauty of her voice, when a little
singing-girl in the streets, arrested the attention of a really great
and severe master, Porpora, who educated her to music. In this she
finds the vent and the echo for her higher self. Her affections are
fixed on a young companion, an unworthy object, but she does not know
him to be so. She judges from her own candid soul, that all must be
good, and derives from the tie, for a while, the fostering influences
which love alone has for genius. Clear perception follows quickly upon
her first triumphs in art. They have given her a rival, and a mean
rival, in her betrothed, whose talent, though great, is of an inferior
grade to hers; who is vain, every way impure. Her master, Porpora,
tries to avail himself of this disappointment to convince her that the
artist ought to devote himself to art alone; that private ties must
interfere with his perfection and his glory. But the nature of
Consuelo revolts against this doctrine, as it would against the
seclusion of a convent. She feels that genius requires manifold
experience for its development, and that the mind, concentrated on a
single object, is likely to pay by a loss of vital energy for the
economy of thoughts and time.

Driven by these circumstances into Germany, she is brought into
contact with the old noblesse, a very different, but far less
charming, atmosphere than that of the gondoliers of Venice. But here,
too, the strong, simple character of our Consuelo is unconstrained, if
not at home, and when her heart swells and needs expansion, she can
sing.

Here the Count de Rudolstadt, Albert, loves Consuelo, which seems, in
the conduct of the relation, a type of a religious democracy in love
with the spirit of art. We do not mean that any such cold abstraction
is consciously intended, but all that is said means this. It shadows
forth one of the greatest desires which convulse our age.

A most noble meaning is couched in the history of Albert, and though
the writer breaks down under such great attempts, and the religion and
philosophy of the book are clumsily embodied compared with its poesy
and rhetoric, yet great and still growing thoughts are expressed with
sufficient force to make the book a companion of rare value to one in
the same phase of mind.

Albert is the aristocratic democrat, such as Alfieri was; one who, in
his keen perception of beauty, shares the good of that culture which
ages have bestowed on the more fortunate classes, but in his large
heart loves and longs for the good of all men, as if he had himself
suffered in the lowest pits of human misery. He is all this and more
in his transmigration, real or fancied, of soul, through many forms of
heroic effort and bloody error; in his incompetency to act at the
present time, his need of long silences, of the company of the dead
and of fools, and eventually of a separation from all habitual ties,
is expressed a great idea, which is still only in the throes of birth,
yet the nature of whose life we begin to prognosticate with some
clearness.

Consuelo's escape from the castle, and even from Albert, her
admiration of him, and her incapacity to love him till her own
character be more advanced, are told with great naturalness. Her
travels with Joseph Haydn, are again as charmingly told as the
Venetian life. Here the author speaks from her habitual existence, and
far more masterly than of those deep places of thought where she is
less at home. She has lived much, discerned much, felt great need of
great thoughts, but not been able to think a great way for herself.
She fearlessly accompanies the spirit of the age, but she never
surpasses it; _that_ is the office of the great thinker.

At Vienna Consuelo is brought fully into connection with the great
world as an artist. She finds that its realities, so far from being
less, are even more harsh and sordid for the artist than for any
other; and that with avarice, envy and falsehood, she must prepare for
the fearful combat which awaits noble souls in any kind of arena, with
the pain of disgust when they cannot raise themselves to
patience--with the almost equal pain, when they can, of pity for those
who know not what they do.

Albert is on the verge of the grave; and Consuelo, who, not being able
to feel for him sufficient love to find in it compensation for the
loss of that artist-life to which she feels Nature has destined her,
had hitherto resisted the entreaties of his aged father, and the
pleadings of her own reverential and tender sympathy with the wants of
his soul, becomes his wife just before he dies.

The sequel, therefore, of this history is given under the title of
Countess of Rudolstadt. Consuelo is still on the stage; she is at the
Prussian court. The well-known features of this society, as given in
the memoirs of the time, are put together with much grace and wit. The
sketch of Frederic is excellent.

The rest of the book is devoted to expression of the author's ideas on
the subject of reform, and especially of association as a means
thereto. As her thoughts are yet in a very crude state, the execution
of this part is equally bungling and clumsy. Worse: she falsifies the
characters of both Consuelo and Albert,--who is revived again by
subterfuge of trance,--and stains her best arrangements by the mixture
of falsehood and intrigue.

Yet she proceeds towards, if she walks not by, the light of a great
idea; and sincere democracy, universal religion, scatter from afar
many seeds upon the page for a future time. The book should be, and
will be, universally read. Those especially who have witnessed all
Sand's doubts and sorrows on the subject of marriage, will rejoice in
the clearer, purer ray which dawns upon her now. The most natural and
deep part of the book, though not her main object, is what relates to
the struggle between the claims of art and life, as to whether it be
better for the world and one's self to develop to perfection a talent
which Heaven seemed to have assigned as a special gift and vocation,
or sacrifice it whenever the character seems to require this for its
general development. The character of Consuelo is, throughout the
first part, strong, delicate, simple, bold, and pure. The fair lines
of this picture are a good deal broken in the second part; but we must
remain true to the impression originally made upon us by this charming
and noble creation of the soul of Sand.

It is in reference to _our_ Consuelo that a correspondent
[Footnote: We do not know how accurate is this correspondent's
statement of facts. The narrative is certainly interesting.--_Ed_.]
writes, as to Jenny Lind; and we are rejoiced to find that so many
hints were, or might have been, furnished for the picture from real
life. If Jenny Lind did not suggest it, yet she must also be, in her
own sphere, a Consuelo.

"Jenny Lind must have been born about 1822 or 1828. When a young
child, she was observed, playing about and singing in the streets of
Stockholm, by Mr. Berg, master of singing for the royal opera. Pleased
and astonished at the purity and suavity of her voice, he inquired
instantly for her family, and found her father, a poor innkeeper,
willing and glad to give up his daughter to his care, on the promise
to protect her and give her an excellent musical education. He was
always very careful of her, never permitting her to sing except in his
presence, and never letting her appear on the stage, unless as a mute
figure in some ballet, such, for instance, as Cupid and the Graces,
till she was sixteen, when she at once executed her part in 'Der
Freyschutz,' to the full satisfaction and surprise of the public of
Stockholm. From that time she gradually became the favorite of every
one. Without beauty, she seems, from her innocent and gracious
manners, beautiful on the stage and charming in society. She is one of
the few actresses whom no evil tongue can ever injure, and is
respected and welcomed in any and all societies.

"The circumstances that reminded me of Consuelo were these: that she
was a poor child, taken up by this singing-master, and educated
thoroughly and severely by him; that she loved his son, who was a
good-for-nothing fellow, like Anzoleto, and at last discarded him;
that she refused the son of an English earl, and, when he fell sick,
his father condescended to entreat for him, just as the Count of
Rudolstadt did for his son; that, though plain and low in stature,
when singing her best parts she appears beautiful, and awakens
enthusiastic admiration; that she is rigidly correct in her demeanor
towards her numerous admirers, having even returned a present sent her
by the crown-prince, Oscar, in a manner that she deemed equivocal.
This last circumstance being noised abroad, the next time she appeared
on the stage she was greeted with more enthusiastic plaudits than
ever, and thicker showers of flowers fell upon her from the hands of
her true friends, the public. She was more fortunate than Consuelo in
not being compelled to sing to a public of Prussian corporals."

Indeed, the picture of Frederic's opera-audience, with the pit full of
his tall grenadiers with their wives on their shoulders, never daring
to applaud except when he gave the order, as if by tap of drum,
opposed to the tender and expansive nature of the artist, is one of
the best tragicomedies extant. In Russia, too, all is military; as
soon as a new musician arrives, he is invested with a rank in the
army. Even in the church Nicholas has lately done the same. It seems
as if he could not believe a man to be alive, except in the army;
could not believe the human heart could beat, except by beat of drum.
But we believe in Russia there is at least a mask of gayety thrown
over the chilling truth. The great Frederic wished no disguise;
everywhere he was chief corporal, and trampled with his everlasting
boots the fair flowers of poesy into the dust.

The North has been generous to us of late; she has sent us _Ole
Bull_. She is about to send _Frederika Bremer_. May she add
JENNY LIND!




CAROLINE.


The other evening I heard a gentle voice reading aloud the story of
Maurice, a boy who, deprived of the use of his limbs by paralysis, was
sustained in comfort, and almost in cheerfulness, by the exertions of
his twin sister. Left with him in orphanage, her affections were
centred upon him, and, amid the difficulties his misfortunes brought
upon them, grew to a fire intense and pure enough to animate her with
angelic impulses and powers. As he could not move about, she drew him
everywhere in a little cart; and when at last they heard that
sea-bathing might accomplish his cure, conveyed him, in this way,
hundreds of miles to the sea-shore. Her pious devotion and faith were
rewarded by his cure, and (a French story would be entirely incomplete
otherwise) with money, plaudits and garlands, from the by-standers.

Though the story ends in this vulgar manner, it is, in its conduct,
extremely sweet and touching, not only as to the beautiful qualities
developed by these trials in the brother and sister, but in the
purifying and softening influence exerted, by the sight of his
helplessness and her goodness, on all around them.

Those who are the victims of some natural blight often fulfil this
important office, and bless those within their sphere more, by
awakening feelings of holy tenderness and compassion, than a man
healthy and strong can do by the utmost exertion of his good-will and
energies. Thus, in the East, men hold sacred those in whom they find a
distortion or alienation of mind which makes them unable to provide
for themselves. The well and sane feel themselves the ministers of
Providence to carry out a mysterious purpose, while taking care of
those who are thus left incapable of taking care of themselves; and,
while fulfilling this ministry, find themselves refined and made
better.

The Swiss have similar feelings as to those of their families whom
cretinism has reduced to idiocy. They are attended to, fed, dressed
clean, and provided with a pleasant place for the day, before doing
anything else, even by very busy and poor people.

We have seen a similar instance, in this country, of voluntary care of
an idiot, and the mental benefits that ensued. This idiot, like most
that are called so, was not without a glimmer of mind.

His teacher was able to give him some notions, both of spiritual and
mental facts; at least she thought she had given him the idea of God,
and though it appeared by his gestures that to him the moon was the
representative of that idea, yet he certainly did conceive of
something above him, and which inspired him with reverence and
delight. He knew the names of two or three persons who had done him
kindness, and when they were mentioned, would point upward, as he did
to the moon, showing himself susceptible, in his degree, of Mr.
Carlyle's grand method of education, hero-worship. She had awakened in
him a love of music, so that he could be soothed in his most violent
moods by her gentle singing. It was a most touching sight to see him
sitting opposite to her at such tunes, his wondering and lack-lustre
eyes filled with childish pleasure, while in hers gleamed the same
pure joy that we may suppose to animate the looks of an angel
appointed by Heaven to restore a ruined world.

We know another instance, in which a young girl became to her village
a far more valuable influence than any patron saint who looks down
from his stone niche, while his votaries recall the legend of his
goodness in days long past.

Caroline lived in a little, quiet country village--quiet as no village
can now remain, since the railroad strikes its spear through the peace
of country life. She lived alone with a widowed mother, for whom, as
well as for herself, her needle won bread, while the mother's
strength, and skill sufficed to the simple duties of their household.
They lived content and hopeful, till, whether from sitting still too
much, or some other cause, Caroline became ill, and soon the physician
pronounced her spine to be affected, and to such a degree that she was
incurable.

This news was a thunder-bolt to the poor little cottage. The mother,
who had lost her elasticity of mind, wept in despair; but the young
girl, who found so early all the hopes and joys of life taken from
her, and that she was seemingly left without any shelter from the
storm, had even at first the faith and strength to bow her head in
gentleness, and say, "God will provide." She sustained and cheered her
mother.

