Many accounts of gay ordination parties have been preserved in diaries for
us. Reverend Mr. Smith, who was settled in Portland in the early part of
the eighteenth century, wrote thus in his journal of an ordination which
he attended: "Mr. Foxcroft ordained at New Gloucester. We had a pleasant
journey home. Mr. L. was alert and kept us all merry. A _jolly ordination_.
We lost all sight of decorum." The Mr. L. referred to was Mr. Stephen
Longfellow, greatgrandfather of the poet.

Bills for ordination-expenses abound in items of barrels of rum and cider
and metheglin, of bowls of flip and punch and toddy, of boxes of lemons and
loaves of sugar, in punches, and sometimes broken punchbowls, and in one
case a large amount of Malaga and Canary wine, spices and "ross water,"
from which was brewed doubtless an appetizing ordination-cup which may have
rivalled Josselyn's New England nectar of "cyder, Maligo raisins, spices,
and sirup of clove-gillyflowers."

In Massachusetts, in January, 1759, the subject of the frequent disorders
and irregularities in connection with ordination-services, especially in
country towns, came before the council of the province, who referred
its consideration to a convention of ministers. The ministers at that
convention were recommended to each give instruction, exhortation, and
advice against excesses to the members of his congregation whenever an
ordination was about to take place in the vicinity of his church. In this
way it was hoped that the reformation would be aided, and temperance,
order, and decorum established. The newspapers were free in their
condemnation of the feasting and roistering at ordination-services. When
Dr. Cummings was ordained over the Old South Church of Boston in February,
1761, a feast took place at the Rev. Dr. Sewall's house which occasioned
much comment. A four-column letter of criticism appeared in the Boston
Gazette of March 9, 1761, over the signature of "Countryman," which
provoked several answers and much newspaper controversy. As Dr. Sewall had
been moderator of the meeting of ministers held only two years previously
with the hope, and for the purpose of abolishing ordination revelries, it
is not strange that the circumstance of the feast being given in his house
should cause public comment and criticism.

"Countryman" complained that "the price of provisions was raised a quarter
cart in Boston for several days before the instalment by reason of the
great preparations therefor, and the readiness of the ecclesiastical
caterers to give almost any price that was demanded. Many Boston people
complained the town had, by this means, in a few days lost a large sum of
money; which was, as it were, levied on and extorted from them. If the
poor were the _better for what remained of so plentiful and splendid a
feast_ I am very glad but yet think it is a pity the charity were not
better timed." He reprovingly enumerates, "There were six tables that held
one with another eighteen persons each, upon each table a good rich plumb
pudding, a dish of boil'd pork and fowls, and a corn'd leg of pork with
sauce proper for it, a leg of bacon, a piece of alamode beef, a leg of
mutton with caper sauce, a roast line of veal, a roast turkey, a venison
pastee, besides chess cakes and tarts, cheese and butter. Half a dozen
cooks were employed upon this occasion, upwards of twenty tenders to wait
upon the tables; they had the best of old cyder, one barrel of Lisbon wine,
punch in plenty before and after dinner, made of old Barbados spirit. The
cost of this moderate dinner was upwards of fifty pounds lawful money."
This special ordination-feast, even as detailed by the complaining
"Countryman," does not seem to me very reprehensible. The standing of the
church, the wealth of the congregation, the character of the guests (among
whom were the Governor and the judges of the Superior Court) all make
this repast appear neither ostentatious nor extravagant. Fifty pounds was
certainly not an enormous sum to spend for a dinner with wine for over one
hundred persons, and such a good dinner too. Nor is it probable that a city
as large as was Boston at that date could through that dinner have been
swept of provisions to such an extent that prices would be raised a quarter
part. I suspect some personal malice caused "Countryman's" attacks, for he
certainly could have found in other towns more flagrant cases to complain
of and condemn.

Though no record exists to prove that "the poor were the better for
what remained" after this Boston feast, in other towns letters
and church-entries show that any fragments remaining after the
ordination-dinner were well disposed of. Sometimes they furnished forth the
new minister's table. In one case they were given to "a widowed family"
("widowed" here being used in the old tender sense of bereaved). In
Killingly "the overplush of provisions" was sold to help pay the arrearages
of the salary of the outgoing minister, thus showing a laudable desire to
"settle up and start square."

If the church were dedicated at the time of the ordination, that would
naturally be cause for additional gayety. A very interesting and graphic
account of the feast at the dedication of the Old Tunnel Meeting-House of
Lynn in the year 1682 has been preserved. It thus describes the scene:--

"Ye Deddication Dinner was had in ye greate barne of Mr. Hoode which by
reason of its goodly size was deemed ye most fit place. It was neatly
adorned with green bows and other hangings and made very faire to look
upon, ye wreaths being mostly wrought by ye young folk, they meeting
together, both maides and young men, and having a merry time in doing ye
work. Ye rough stalls and unbowed posts being gaily begirt and all ye
corners and cubbies being clean swept and well aired, it truly did appear
a meet banquetting hall. Ye scaffolds too from which ye provinder had been
removed were swept cleane as broome could make them. Some seats were put up
on ye scaffoldes whereon might sitt such of ye antient women as would see &
ye maides and children. Ye greate floor was all held for ye company which
was to partake of ye feast of fat things, none others being admitted there
save them that were to wait upon ye same. Ye kine that were wont to be
there were forced to keep holiday in the field."

Then follows a minute account of how the fowls persisted in flying in
and roosting over the table, scattering feathers and hay on the parsons
beneath.

"Mr. Shepard's face did turn very red and he catched up an apple and hurled
it at ye birds. But he thereby made a bad matter worse for ye fruit being
well aimed it hit ye legs of a fowl and brought him floundering and
flopping down on ye table, scattering gravy, sauce and divers things upon
our garments and in our faces. But this did not well please some, yet with
most it was a happening that made great merryment. Dainty meats were on ye
table in great plenty, bear-stake, deer-meat, rabbit, and fowle, both wild
and from ye barnyard. Luscious puddings we likewise had in abundance,
mostly apple and berry, but some of corn meal with small bits of sewet
baked therein; also pyes and tarts. We had some pleasant fruits, as apples,
nuts and wild grapes, and to crown all, we had plenty of good cider and ye
inspiring Barbadoes drink. Mr. Shepard and most of ye ministers were
grave and prudent at table, discoursing much upon ye great points of ye
deddication sermon and in silence laboring upon ye food before them. But I
will not risque to say on which they dwelt with most relish, ye discourse
or ye dinner. Most of ye young members of ye Council would fain make a
jolly time of it. Mr. Gerrish, ye Wenham minister, tho prudent in his
meat and drinks, was yet in right merry mood. And he did once grievously
scandalize Mr. Shepard, who on suddenly looking up from his dish did spy
him, as he thot, winking in an unbecoming way to one of ye pretty damsels
on ye scaffold. And thereupon bidding ye godly Mr. Rogers to labor with him
aside for his misbehavior, it turned out that ye winking was occasioned by
some of ye hay seeds that were blowing about, lodging in his eye; whereat
Mr. Shepard felt greatly releaved.

"Ye new Meeting house was much discoursed upon at ye table. And most thot
it as comely a house of worship as can be found in the whole Collony save
only three or four. Mr. Gerrish was in such merry mood that he kept ye end
of ye table whereby he sat in right jovial humour. Some did loudly laugh
and clap their hands. But in ye middest of ye merryment a strange disaster
did happen unto him. Not having his thots about him he endeavored ye
dangerous performance of gaping and laughing at the same time which he must
now feel is not so easy or safe a thing. In doing this he set his jaws open
in such wise that it was beyond all his power to bring them together again.
His agonie was very great, and his joyful laugh soon turned to grievous
gioaning. Ye women in ye scaffolds became much distressed for him. We did
our utmost to stay ye anguish of Mr. Gerrish, but could make out little
till Mr. Rogers who knoweth somewhat of anatomy did bid ye sufferer to sit
down on ye floor, which being done Mr. Rogers took ye head atween his legs,
turning ye face as much upward as possible and then gave a powerful blow
and then sudden press which brot ye jaws into working order. But Mr.
Geirish did not gape or laugh much more on that occasion, neither did he
talk much for that matter.

"No other weighty mishap occurred save that one of ye Salem delegates, in
boastfully essaying to crack a walnut atween his teeth did crack, instead
of ye nut, a most usefull double tooth and was thereby forced to appear at
ye evening with a bandaged face."

This ended this most amusing chapter of disasters to the ministers, though
the banquet was diversified by interrupting crows from invading roosters,
fierce and undignified counter-attacks with nuts and apples by the
clergymen, a few mortifyingly "mawdlin songs and much roistering laughter,"
and the account ends, "so noble and savoury a banquet was never before
spread in this noble town, God be praised." What a picture of the good old
times! Different times make different manners; the early Puritan ministers
did not, as a rule, drink to excess, any more than do our modern clergymen;
but it is not strange that though they were of Puritan blood and belief,
they should have fallen into the universal custom of the day, and should
have "gone to their graves full of years, honor, simplicity, and rum." The
only wonder is, when the ministers had the best places at every table, at
every feast, at every merry-making in New England, that stories of their
roistering excesses should not have come down to us as there have of the
intemperate clergy of Virginia.

The ordination services within the meeting-houses were not always decorous
and quiet scenes. In spite of the reverence which our forefathers had for
their church and their ministers, it did not prevent them from bitterly
opposing the settlement of an unwished-for clergyman over them, and many
towns were racked and divided, then as now, over the important question.
As years passed on the church members grew bold enough to dare to offer
personal and bodily opposition. At the ordination of the Rev. Peter
Thatcher in the New North Church in Boston, in 1720, there were two
parties. The members who did not wish him to be settled over the church
went into the meeting-house and made a great disorder and clamor. They
forbade the proceedings, and went into the gallery, and threw from thence
water and missiles on the friends of the clergymen who were gathered around
him at the altar. Perhaps they obtained courage for these sacrilegious acts
from the barrels of rum and the bowls of strong punch. And this was in
Puritanical Boston, in the year of the hundredth anniversary of the landing
of the Mayflower. Thus had one century changed the absolute reverence and
affectionate regard of the Pilgrims for their church, their ministers,
and their meeting-houses, to irreverent and obstinate desire for personal
satisfaction. No wonder that the ministers at that date preached and
believed that Satan was making fresh and increasing efforts to destroy the
Puritan church. The hour was ready for Whitefield, for Edwards, for any
new awakening; and was above all fast approaching for the sadly needed
temperance reform.

In the seventeenth century a minister was ordained and re-ordained at
each church over which he had charge; but after some years the name of
installation was given to each appointment after the first ordination, and
the ceremony was correspondingly changed.




XX.

The Ministers.



The picture which Colonel Higginson has drawn of the Puritan minister is so
well known and so graphic that any attempt to add to it would be futile.
All the succeeding New England parsons, as years rolled by, were not,
however, like the black-gowned, black-gloved, stately, and solemn man whom
he has so clearly shown us. Men of rigid decorum, and grave ceremony there
were, such as Dr. Emmons and Jonathan Edwards; but there were parsons also
of another type,--eccentric, unconventional, and undignified in demeanor
and dress. Parson Robinson, of Duxbury, persisted in wearing in the pulpit,
as part of his clerical attire, a round jacket instead of the suitable
gown or Geneva cloak, and he was known thereby as "Master Jack." With
astonishing inconsistency this Master Jack objected to the village
blacksmith's wearing his leathern apron into the church, and he assailed
the offender again and again with words and hints from his pulpit. He was
at last worsted by the grimaces of the victorious smith (where was the
Duxbury tithingman?), and indignantly left the pulpit, ejaculating, "I'll
not preach while that man sits before me." A remonstrating parishioner
said afterward to Master Jack, "I'd not have left if the Devil sat there."
"Neither would I", was the quick answer.

Another singular article of attire was worn in the pulpit by Father Mills,
of Torrington, though neither in irreverence nor indifference. When his
dearly loved wife died he pondered how he, who always wore black, could
express to the world that he was wearing mourning; and his simple heart hit
upon this grotesque device: he left off his full-flowing wig, and tied
up his head in a black silk handkerchief, which he wore thereafter as a
trapping of woe.

Parson Judson, of Taunton, was so lazy that he used to preach while sitting
down in the pulpit; and was so contemptibly fond of comfort that he would
on summer Sundays give out to the sweltering members of his congregation
the longest psalm in the psalm-book, and then desert them--piously
perspiring and fuguing--and lie under a tree enjoying the cool outdoor
breezes until the long psalm was ended, escaping thus not only the heat but
the singing; and when we consider the quantity and quality of both, and
that he condemned his good people to an extra amount of each, it seems
a piece of clerical inhumanity that would be hard to equal. Surely this
selfish Taunton sybarite was the prosaic ideal of Hamlet's words:--

  "Some ungracious pastors do
  Show me the steep and thorny way to Heaven,
  Whilst like a puff'd and reckless libertine
  Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,
  And recks not his own rede."

But lazy and slothful ministers were fortunately rare in New England. No
primrose path of dalliance was theirs; industrious and hard-working were
nearly all the early parsons, preaching and praying twice on the Sabbath,
and preaching again on Lecture days; visiting the sick and often giving
medical and "chyrurgycal" advice; called upon for legal counsel and
adjudication; occupied in spare moments in teaching and preparing young
men for college; working on their farms; hearing the children say their
catechism; fasting and praying long, weary hours in their own study,--truly
they were "pious and painful preachers," as Colonel Higginson saw recorded
on a gravestone in Watertown. Though I suspect "painful" in the Puritan
vocabulary meant "painstaking," did it not? Cotton Mather called John
Fiske, of Chelmsford, a "plaine but able painful and useful preacher,"
while President Dunster, of Harvard College, was described by a
contemporary divine as "pious painful and fit to teach." Other curious
epithets and descriptions were applied to the parsons; they were called
"holy-heavenly," "sweet-affecting," "soul-ravishing," "heaven-piercing,"
"angel-rivalling," "subtil," "irrefragable," "angelical," "septemfluous,"
"holy-savoured," "princely," "soul-appetizing," "full of antic tastes"
(meaning having the tastes of an antiquary), "God-bearing." Of two of the
New England saints it was written:--

  "Thier Temper far from Injucundity,
  Thier tongues and pens from Infecundity."

Many other fulsome, turgid, and even whimsical expressious of praise might
be named, for the Puritans were rich in classic sesquipedalian adjectives,
and their active linguistic consciences made them equally fertile in
producing new ones.

Ready and unexpected were the solemn Puritans in repartee. A party of gay
young sparks, meeting austere old John Cotton, determined to guy him. One
of the young reprobates sent up to him and whispered in his ear, "Cotton,
thou art an old fool." "I am, I am," was the unexpected answer; "the Lord
make both thee and me wiser than we are." Two young men of like intent met
Mr. Haynes, of Vermont, and said with mock sad faces, "Have you heard the
news? the Devil is dead." Quick came the answer, "Oh, poor, fatherless
children! what will become of you?"

Gloomy and depressed of spirits they were often. The good Warham, who could
take faithful and brave charge of his flock in the uncivilized wilds
of Connecticut among ferocious savages, was tortured by doubts and
"blasphemous suggestions," and overwhelmed by unbelief, enduring specially
agonizing scruples about administering and partaking of the Lord's Supper,
and was thus perplexed and buffeted until the hour of his sad death. The
ministers went through various stages of uncertainty and gloom, from the
physical terror of Dr. Cogswell in a thunderstorm, through vacillating and
harassing convictions about the Half Way Covenant, through doubt of God,
of salvation, of heaven, of eternite, particularly distressing suspicions
about the reality of hell and the personality of the Devil, to the stage
of deep melancholy which was shown in its highest type in "Handkerchief
Moody," who preached and prayed and always appeared in public with a
handkerchief over his face, and gave to Hawthorne the inspiration for his
story of "The Black Veil." Rev. Mr. Bradstreet, of the First Church of
Charlestown, was so hypochondriacal that he was afraid to preach in the
pulpit, feeling sure that he would die if he entered therein; so he always
delivered his sermons to his patient congregation from the deacons' pew.
Mr. Bradstreet was unconventional in many other respects, and was far from
being a typical Puritan minister. He seldom wore a coat, but generally
appeared in a plaid gown, and was always seen with a pipe in his mouth,--a
most disreputable addition to the clerical toilet at that date, or, in
truth, at any date. He was a learned and pious man, however, and was thus
introduced to a fellow clergyman, "Here is a man who can whistle Greek."

Scarcely one of the early Puritan ministers was free from the sad shadow of
doubt and fear. No "rose-pink or dirty-drab views of humanity" were theirs;
all was inky-black. And it is impossible to express the gloom and the
depression of spirit which fall on one now, after these centuries of
prosperous and cheerful years, when one considers thoughtfully the deep and
despairing agony of mind endured by these good, brave, steadfast, godly
Puritan ministers. Read, for instance, the sentences from the diary of the
Rev. John Baily, or of Nathaniel Mather, as given by Cotton Mather in his
"Magnalia." Mather says that poor, sad, heart-sick Baily was filled with
"desponding jealousies," "disconsolate uneasinesses," gloomy fears, and
thinks the words from his diary "may be profitable to some discouraged
minds." Profitable! Ah, no; far from it! The overwhelming blackness
of despair, the woful doubts and fears about destruction and utter
annihilation which he felt so deeply and so continually, fall in a heavy,
impenetrable cloud upon us as we read, until we feel that we too are in the
"Suburbs of hell" and are "eternally damned."

But in succeeding years they were not always gloomy and not always staid,
as we know from the stories of the cheerful parties at ordination-times;
and I doubt not the reverend Assembly of Elders at Cambridge enjoyed to the
full degree the twelve gallons of sack and six gallons of white wine sent
to them by the Court as a testimony of deep respect. And the group of
clergymen who were painted over the mantelpiece of Parson Lowell, of
Newbury, must have been far from gloom, as the punch-bowl and drinking-cups
and tobacco and pipes would testify, and their cheerful motto likewise: "In
essentials unity, in non-essentials liberty, in all things charity." And
the Rev. Mr. ---- no, I will not tell his name--kept an account with
one Jerome Ripley, a storekeeper, and on one page of this account-book,
containing thirty-nine entries, twenty-one were for New England rum.
It somewhat lessens in our notions the personal responsibility, or the
personal potatory capability of the parson, to discover that there was
an ordination in town during that rum-paged week, and that the visiting
ministers probably drank the greater portion of Jerome Ripley's liquor.
But I wish the store-keeper had--to save this parson's reputation among
succeeding generations--called and entered the rum as hay, or tea, or
nails, or anything innocent and virtuous and clerical. When we read of all
these doings and drinkings of the old New England ministers,--"if ancient
tales say true, nor wrong these ancient men"--we feel that we cannot so
fiercely resent nor wonder at the degrading coupling in Byron's sneering
lines:--

  "There's naught, no doubt, so much the spirit calms,
  As rum and true religion."

All the cider made by the New England elders did not tend to gloom,
and they were celebrated for their fine cider. The best cider in
Massachusetts--that which brought the highest price--was known as the
Arminian cider, because the minister who furnished it to the market was
suspected of having Arminian tendencies. A very telling compliment to the
cider of one of the first New England ministers is thus recorded: "Mr.
Whiting had a score of appill-trees from which he made delicious cyder.
And it hath been said yt an Indyan once coming to hys house and Mistress
Whiting giving him a drink of ye cyder, he did sett down ye pot and smaking
his lips say yt Adam and Eve were rightlie damned for eating ye appills in
ye garden of Eden, they should have made them into cyder." This perverse
application of good John Eliot's teaching would have vexed the apostle
sorely. Of so much account were the barrels of cider, and so highly were
they prized by the ministers, that one honest soul did not hesitate to
thank the Lord in the pulpit for the "many barrels of cider vouchsafed to
us this year."

Stronger liquors than cider were also manufactured by the ministers,--and
by God-fearing, pious ministers also. They did not hesitate to own and
operate distilleries. Rev. Nathan Strong, pastor of the First Church of
Hartford and author of the hymn "Swell the anthem, raise the song," was
engaged in the distilling business and did not make a success of it either.
Having become bankrupt, he did not dare show his head anywhere in public
for some time, except on Sunday, for fear of arrest. This disreputable and
most unclerical affair did not operate against him in the minds of the
contemporaneous public, for ten years later he received the degree of
Doctor of Divinity from Princeton College; and he did not hesitate to joke
about his liquor manufacturing, saying to two of his brother-clergymen,
"Oh, we are all three in the same boat together,--Brother Prime raises the
grain, I distil it, and Brother Flint drinks it."

Impostors there were--false parsons--in the early struggling days of New
England (since "the devil was never weary and never ceasing in disturbing
the peace of the new English church"), and they plagued the colonists
sorely. The very first shepherd of the wandering flock--Mr. Lyford, who
preached to the planters in 1624--was, as Bradford says, "most unsavory
salt," a most agonizing and unbearable thorn in the flesh and spirit of the
poor homesick Pilgrims; and he was finally banished to Virginia, where it
was supposed that he would find congenial and un-Puritanlike companions.
Another bold-faced cheat preached to the colonists a most impressive sermon
on the text, "Let him that stole steal no more," while his own pockets were
stuffed out with stolen money. "Out of the fulness of the heart the mouth
speaketh."

Dicky Swayn, "after a thousand rogueries," set up as a parson in Boston.
But, unfortunately for him, he prayed too loud and too long on one
occasion, and his prayer attracted the attention of a woman whose servant
he had formerly been. She promptly exposed his false pretensions and past
villanies, and he left Boston and an army of cheated creditors. In 1699
two other attractive and plausible scamps--Kingsbury and May--garbed and
curried themselves as ministers, and went through a course of unchecked
villany, building only on their agreeable presence. Cotton Mather wrote
pertinently of one of these charmers, "Fascination is a thing whereof
mankind has more Experience than Comprehension;" and he also wrote very
despitefully of the adventurer's scholarly attainments saying there were
