sworn that here he yet remained."

"Hist! speak lower; for we know not what ears are open, and the Mingoes
are a quick-witted breed. As for Uncas, he is out on the plain, and the
Maquas, if any such are about us, will find their equal."

"You think that Montcalm has not called off all his Indians? Let us give
the alarm to our companions, that we may stand to our arms. Here are
five of us, who are not unused to meet an enemy."

"Not a word to either, as you value your life. Look at the Sagamore, how
like a grand Indian chief he sits by the fire. If there are any skulkers
out in the darkness, they will never discover, by his countenance, that
we suspect danger at hand."

"But they may discover him, and it will prove his death. His person can
be too plainly seen by the light of that fire, and he will become the
first and most certain victim."

"It is undeniable that now you speak the truth," returned the scout,
betraying more anxiety than was usual; "yet what can be done? A single
suspicious look might bring on an attack before we are ready to receive
it. He knows, by the call I gave to Uncas, that we have struck a scent;
I will tell him that we are on the trail of the Mingoes; his Indian
nature will teach him how to act."

The scout applied his fingers to his mouth, and raised a low hissing
sound, that caused Duncan at first to start aside, believing that he
heard a serpent. The head of Chingachgook was resting on a hand, as he
sat musing by himself but the moment he had heard the warning of the
animal whose name he bore, he arose to an upright position, and his dark
eyes glanced swiftly and keenly on every side of him. With his sudden
and, perhaps, involuntary movement, every appearance of surprise or
alarm ended. His rifle lay untouched, and apparently unnoticed, within
reach of his hand. The tomahawk that he had loosened in his belt for the
sake of ease, was even suffered to fall from its usual situation to the
ground, and his form seemed to sink, like that of a man whose nerves
and sinews were suffered to relax for the purpose of rest. Cunningly
resuming his former position, though with a change of hands, as if the
movement had been made merely to relieve the limb, the native awaited
the result with a calmness and fortitude that none but an Indian warrior
would have known how to exercise.

But Heyward saw that while to a less instructed eye the Mohican chief
appeared to slumber, his nostrils were expanded, his head was turned a
little to one side, as if to assist the organs of hearing, and that his
quick and rapid glances ran incessantly over every object within the
power of his vision.

"See the noble fellow!" whispered Hawkeye, pressing the arm of Heyward;
"he knows that a look or a motion might disconsart our schemes, and put
us at the mercy of them imps--"

He was interrupted by the flash and report of a rifle. The air was
filled with sparks of fire, around that spot where the eyes of Heyward
were still fastened, with admiration and wonder. A second look told him
that Chingachgook had disappeared in the confusion. In the meantime, the
scout had thrown forward his rifle, like one prepared for service, and
awaited impatiently the moment when an enemy might rise to view.
But with the solitary and fruitless attempt made on the life of
Chingachgook, the attack appeared to have terminated. Once or twice the
listeners thought they could distinguish the distant rustling of bushes,
as bodies of some unknown description rushed through them; nor was it
long before Hawkeye pointed out the "scampering of the wolves," as they
fled precipitately before the passage of some intruder on their proper
domains. After an impatient and breathless pause, a plunge was heard
in the water, and it was immediately followed by the report of another
rifle.

"There goes Uncas!" said the scout; "the boy bears a smart piece! I know
its crack, as well as a father knows the language of his child, for I
carried the gun myself until a better offered."

"What can this mean?" demanded Duncan, "we are watched, and, as it would
seem, marked for destruction."

"Yonder scattered brand can witness that no good was intended, and this
Indian will testify that no harm has been done," returned the scout,
dropping his rifle across his arm again, and following Chingachgook, who
just then reappeared within the circle of light, into the bosom of the
work. "How is it, Sagamore? Are the Mingoes upon us in earnest, or is it
only one of those reptiles who hang upon the skirts of a war-party,
to scalp the dead, go in, and make their boast among the squaws of the
valiant deeds done on the pale faces?"

Chingachgook very quietly resumed his seat; nor did he make any reply,
until after he had examined the firebrand which had been struck by
the bullet that had nearly proved fatal to himself. After which he was
content to reply, holding a single finger up to view, with the English
monosyllable:

"One."

"I thought as much," returned Hawkeye, seating himself; "and as he had
got the cover of the lake afore Uncas pulled upon him, it is more than
probable the knave will sing his lies about some great ambushment,
in which he was outlying on the trail of two Mohicans and a white
hunter--for the officers can be considered as little better than idlers
in such a scrimmage. Well, let him--let him. There are always some
honest men in every nation, though heaven knows, too, that they are
scarce among the Maquas, to look down an upstart when he brags ag'in the
face of reason. The varlet sent his lead within whistle of your ears,
Sagamore."

Chingachgook turned a calm and incurious eye toward the place where the
ball had struck, and then resumed his former attitude, with a composure
that could not be disturbed by so trifling an incident. Just then Uncas
glided into the circle, and seated himself at the fire, with the same
appearance of indifference as was maintained by his father.

Of these several moments Heyward was a deeply interested and wondering
observer. It appeared to him as though the foresters had some secret
means of intelligence, which had escaped the vigilance of his own
faculties. In place of that eager and garrulous narration with which
a white youth would have endeavored to communicate, and perhaps
exaggerate, that which had passed out in the darkness of the plain,
the young warrior was seemingly content to let his deeds speak for
themselves. It was, in fact, neither the moment nor the occasion for an
Indian to boast of his exploits; and it is probably that, had Heyward
neglected to inquire, not another syllable would, just then, have been
uttered on the subject.

"What has become of our enemy, Uncas?" demanded Duncan; "we heard your
rifle, and hoped you had not fired in vain."

The young chief removed a fold of his hunting skirt, and quietly
exposed the fatal tuft of hair, which he bore as the symbol of victory.
Chingachgook laid his hand on the scalp, and considered it for a moment
with deep attention. Then dropping it, with disgust depicted in his
strong features, he ejaculated:

"Oneida!"

"Oneida!" repeated the scout, who was fast losing his interest in the
scene, in an apathy nearly assimilated to that of his red associates,
but who now advanced in uncommon earnestness to regard the bloody badge.
"By the Lord, if the Oneidas are outlying upon the trail, we shall by
flanked by devils on every side of us! Now, to white eyes there is no
difference between this bit of skin and that of any other Indian, and
yet the Sagamore declares it came from the poll of a Mingo; nay, he even
names the tribe of the poor devil, with as much ease as if the scalp was
the leaf of a book, and each hair a letter. What right have Christian
whites to boast of their learning, when a savage can read a language
that would prove too much for the wisest of them all! What say you, lad,
of what people was the knave?"

Uncas raised his eyes to the face of the scout, and answered, in his
soft voice:

"Oneida."

"Oneida, again! when one Indian makes a declaration it is commonly true;
but when he is supported by his people, set it down as gospel!"

"The poor fellow has mistaken us for French," said Heyward; "or he would
not have attempted the life of a friend."

"He mistake a Mohican in his paint for a Huron! You would be as likely
to mistake the white-coated grenadiers of Montcalm for the scarlet
jackets of the Royal Americans," returned the scout. "No, no, the
sarpent knew his errand; nor was there any great mistake in the matter,
for there is but little love atween a Delaware and a Mingo, let their
tribes go out to fight for whom they may, in a white quarrel. For
that matter, though the Oneidas do serve his sacred majesty, who is
my sovereign lord and master, I should not have deliberated long about
letting off 'killdeer' at the imp myself, had luck thrown him in my
way."

"That would have been an abuse of our treaties, and unworthy of your
character."

"When a man consort much with a people," continued Hawkeye, "if they
were honest and he no knave, love will grow up atwixt them. It is true
that white cunning has managed to throw the tribes into great confusion,
as respects friends and enemies; so that the Hurons and the Oneidas, who
speak the same tongue, or what may be called the same, take each other's
scalps, and the Delawares are divided among themselves; a few hanging
about their great council-fire on their own river, and fighting on the
same side with the Mingoes while the greater part are in the Canadas,
out of natural enmity to the Maquas--thus throwing everything into
disorder, and destroying all the harmony of warfare. Yet a red natur' is
not likely to alter with every shift of policy; so that the love atwixt
a Mohican and a Mingo is much like the regard between a white man and a
sarpent."

"I regret to hear it; for I had believed those natives who dwelt within
our boundaries had found us too just and liberal, not to identify
themselves fully with our quarrels."

"Why, I believe it is natur' to give a preference to one's own quarrels
before those of strangers. Now, for myself, I do love justice; and,
therefore, I will not say I hate a Mingo, for that may be unsuitable to
my color and my religion, though I will just repeat, it may have been
owing to the night that 'killdeer' had no hand in the death of this
skulking Oneida."

Then, as if satisfied with the force of his own reasons, whatever might
be their effect on the opinions of the other disputant, the honest but
implacable woodsman turned from the fire, content to let the controversy
slumber. Heyward withdrew to the rampart, too uneasy and too little
accustomed to the warfare of the woods to remain at ease under the
possibility of such insidious attacks. Not so, however, with the scout
and the Mohicans. Those acute and long-practised senses, whose powers so
often exceed the limits of all ordinary credulity, after having detected
the danger, had enabled them to ascertain its magnitude and duration.
Not one of the three appeared in the least to doubt their perfect
security, as was indicated by the preparations that were soon made to
sit in council over their future proceedings.

The confusion of nations, and even of tribes, to which Hawkeye alluded,
existed at that period in the fullest force. The great tie of language,
and, of course, of a common origin, was severed in many places; and it
was one of its consequences, that the Delaware and the Mingo (as the
people of the Six Nations were called) were found fighting in the same
ranks, while the latter sought the scalp of the Huron, though believed
to be the root of his own stock. The Delawares were even divided among
themselves. Though love for the soil which had belonged to his ancestors
kept the Sagamore of the Mohicans with a small band of followers who
were serving at Edward, under the banners of the English king, by far
the largest portion of his nation were known to be in the field as
allies of Montcalm. The reader probably knows, if enough has not already
been gleaned form this narrative, that the Delaware, or Lenape, claimed
to be the progenitors of that numerous people, who once were masters
of most of the eastern and northern states of America, of whom the
community of the Mohicans was an ancient and highly honored member.

It was, of course, with a perfect understanding of the minute and
intricate interests which had armed friend against friend, and brought
natural enemies to combat by each other's side, that the scout and his
companions now disposed themselves to deliberate on the measures that
were to govern their future movements, amid so many jarring and savage
races of men. Duncan knew enough of Indian customs to understand
the reason that the fire was replenished, and why the warriors, not
excepting Hawkeye, took their seats within the curl of its smoke with
so much gravity and decorum. Placing himself at an angle of the works,
where he might be a spectator of the scene without, he awaited the
result with as much patience as he could summon.

After a short and impressive pause, Chingachgook lighted a pipe whose
bowl was curiously carved in one of the soft stones of the country,
and whose stem was a tube of wood, and commenced smoking. When he had
inhaled enough of the fragrance of the soothing weed, he passed the
instrument into the hands of the scout. In this manner the pipe had made
its rounds three several times, amid the most profound silence, before
either of the party opened his lips. Then the Sagamore, as the oldest
and highest in rank, in a few calm and dignified words, proposed the
subject for deliberation. He was answered by the scout; and Chingachgook
rejoined, when the other objected to his opinions. But the youthful
Uncas continued a silent and respectful listener, until Hawkeye, in
complaisance, demanded his opinion. Heyward gathered from the manners of
the different speakers, that the father and son espoused one side of a
disputed question, while the white man maintained the other. The contest
gradually grew warmer, until it was quite evident the feelings of the
speakers began to be somewhat enlisted in the debate.

Notwithstanding the increasing warmth of the amicable contest, the
most decorous Christian assembly, not even excepting those in which its
reverend ministers are collected, might have learned a wholesome lesson
of moderation from the forbearance and courtesy of the disputants. The
words of Uncas were received with the same deep attention as those which
fell from the maturer wisdom of his father; and so far from manifesting
any impatience, neither spoke in reply, until a few moments of silent
meditation were, seemingly, bestowed in deliberating on what had already
been said.

The language of the Mohicans was accompanied by gestures so direct and
natural that Heyward had but little difficulty in following the thread
of their argument. On the other hand, the scout was obscure; because
from the lingering pride of color, he rather affected the cold and
artificial manner which characterizes all classes of Anglo-Americans
when unexcited. By the frequency with which the Indians described the
marks of a forest trial, it was evident they urged a pursuit by land,
while the repeated sweep of Hawkeye's arm toward the Horican denoted
that he was for a passage across its waters.

The latter was to every appearance fast losing ground, and the point was
about to be decided against him, when he arose to his feet, and shaking
off his apathy, he suddenly assumed the manner of an Indian, and adopted
all the arts of native eloquence. Elevating an arm, he pointed out the
track of the sun, repeating the gesture for every day that was necessary
to accomplish their objects. Then he delineated a long and painful path,
amid rocks and water-courses. The age and weakness of the slumbering and
unconscious Munro were indicated by signs too palpable to be mistaken.
Duncan perceived that even his own powers were spoken lightly of, as
the scout extended his palm, and mentioned him by the appellation of
the "Open Hand"--a name his liberality had purchased of all the friendly
tribes. Then came a representation of the light and graceful movements
of a canoe, set in forcible contrast to the tottering steps of one
enfeebled and tired. He concluded by pointing to the scalp of the
Oneida, and apparently urging the necessity of their departing speedily,
and in a manner that should leave no trail.

The Mohicans listened gravely, and with countenances that reflected the
sentiments of the speaker. Conviction gradually wrought its influence,
and toward the close of Hawkeye's speech, his sentences were accompanied
by the customary exclamation of commendation. In short, Uncas and his
father became converts to his way of thinking, abandoning their own
previously expressed opinions with a liberality and candor that, had
they been the representatives of some great and civilized people, would
have infallibly worked their political ruin, by destroying forever their
reputation for consistency.

The instant the matter in discussion was decided, the debate, and
everything connected with it, except the result appeared to be
forgotten. Hawkeye, without looking round to read his triumph in
applauding eyes, very composedly stretched his tall frame before the
dying embers, and closed his own organs in sleep.

Left now in a measure to themselves, the Mohicans, whose time had been
so much devoted to the interests of others, seized the moment to devote
some attention to themselves. Casting off at once the grave and austere
demeanor of an Indian chief, Chingachgook commenced speaking to his
son in the soft and playful tones of affection. Uncas gladly met the
familiar air of his father; and before the hard breathing of the scout
announced that he slept, a complete change was effected in the manner of
his two associates.

It is impossible to describe the music of their language, while thus
engaged in laughter and endearments, in such a way as to render it
intelligible to those whose ears have never listened to its melody.
The compass of their voices, particularly that of the youth, was
wonderful--extending from the deepest bass to tones that were even
feminine in softness. The eyes of the father followed the plastic and
ingenious movements of the son with open delight, and he never failed to
smile in reply to the other's contagious but low laughter. While under
the influence of these gentle and natural feelings, no trace of ferocity
was to be seen in the softened features of the Sagamore. His figured
panoply of death looked more like a disguise assumed in mockery than a
fierce annunciation of a desire to carry destruction in his footsteps.

After an hour had passed in the indulgence of their better feelings,
Chingachgook abruptly announced his desire to sleep, by wrapping his
head in his blanket and stretching his form on the naked earth. The
merriment of Uncas instantly ceased; and carefully raking the coals in
such a manner that they should impart their warmth to his father's feet,
the youth sought his own pillow among the ruins of the place.

Imbibing renewed confidence from the security of these experienced
foresters, Heyward soon imitated their example; and long before the
night had turned, they who lay in the bosom of the ruined work, seemed
to slumber as heavily as the unconscious multitude whose bones were
already beginning to bleach on the surrounding plain.




CHAPTER 20

     "Land of Albania! let me bend mine eyes
     On thee; thou rugged nurse of savage men!"
     --Childe Harold

The heavens were still studded with stars, when Hawkeye came to arouse
the sleepers. Casting aside their cloaks Munro and Heyward were on their
feet while the woodsman was still making his low calls, at the entrance
of the rude shelter where they had passed the night. When they issued
from beneath its concealment, they found the scout awaiting their
appearance nigh by, and the only salutation between them was the
significant gesture for silence, made by their sagacious leader.

"Think over your prayers," he whispered, as they approached him; "for He
to whom you make them, knows all tongues; that of the heart, as well
as those of the mouth. But speak not a syllable; it is rare for a white
voice to pitch itself properly in the woods, as we have seen by the
example of that miserable devil, the singer. Come," he continued,
turning toward a curtain of the works; "let us get into the ditch on
this side, and be regardful to step on the stones and fragments of wood
as you go."

His companions complied, though to two of them the reasons of this
extraordinary precaution were yet a mystery. When they were in the low
cavity that surrounded the earthen fort on three sides, they found that
passage nearly choked by the ruins. With care and patience, however,
they succeeded in clambering after the scout, until they reached the
sandy shore of the Horican.

"That's a trail that nothing but a nose can follow," said the satisfied
scout, looking back along their difficult way; "grass is a treacherous
carpet for a flying party to tread on, but wood and stone take no print
from a moccasin. Had you worn your armed boots, there might, indeed,
have been something to fear; but with the deer-skin suitably prepared,
a man may trust himself, generally, on rocks with safety. Shove in the
canoe nigher to the land, Uncas; this sand will take a stamp as easily
as the butter of the Jarmans on the Mohawk. Softly, lad, softly; it must
not touch the beach, or the knaves will know by what road we have left
the place."

The young man observed the precaution; and the scout, laying a board
from the ruins to the canoe, made a sign for the two officers to enter.
When this was done, everything was studiously restored to its former
disorder; and then Hawkeye succeeded in reaching his little birchen
vessel, without leaving behind him any of those marks which he appeared
so much to dread. Heyward was silent until the Indians had cautiously
paddled the canoe some distance from the fort, and within the broad and
dark shadows that fell from the eastern mountain on the glassy surface
of the lake; then he demanded:

"What need have we for this stolen and hurried departure?"

"If the blood of an Oneida could stain such a sheet of pure water as
this we float on," returned the scout, "your two eyes would answer your
own question. Have you forgotten the skulking reptile Uncas slew?"

"By no means. But he was said to be alone, and dead men give no cause
for fear."

"Ay, he was alone in his deviltry! but an Indian whose tribe counts so
many warriors, need seldom fear his blood will run without the death
shriek coming speedily from some of his enemies."

"But our presence--the authority of Colonel Munro--would prove
sufficient protection against the anger of our allies, especially in a
case where the wretch so well merited his fate. I trust in Heaven you
have not deviated a single foot from the direct line of our course with
so slight a reason!"

"Do you think the bullet of that varlet's rifle would have turned aside,
though his sacred majesty the king had stood in its path?" returned
the stubborn scout. "Why did not the grand Frencher, he who is
captain-general of the Canadas, bury the tomahawks of the Hurons, if a
word from a white can work so strongly on the natur' of an Indian?"

The reply of Heyward was interrupted by a groan from Munro; but after
he had paused a moment, in deference to the sorrow of his aged friend he
resumed the subject.

"The marquis of Montcalm can only settle that error with his God," said
the young man solemnly.

"Ay, ay, now there is reason in your words, for they are bottomed on
religion and honesty. There is a vast difference between throwing a
regiment of white coats atwixt the tribes and the prisoners, and coaxing
an angry savage to forget he carries a knife and rifle, with words that
must begin with calling him your son. No, no," continued the scout,
looking back at the dim shore of William Henry, which was now fast
receding, and laughing in his own silent but heartfelt manner; "I have
put a trail of water atween us; and unless the imps can make friends
with the fishes, and hear who has paddled across their basin this fine
morning, we shall throw the length of the Horican behind us before they
have made up their minds which path to take."

"With foes in front, and foes in our rear, our journey is like to be one
of danger."

"Danger!" repeated Hawkeye, calmly; "no, not absolutely of danger; for,
with vigilant ears and quick eyes, we can manage to keep a few hours
ahead of the knaves; or, if we must try the rifle, there are three of us
who understand its gifts as well as any you can name on the borders. No,
not of danger; but that we shall have what you may call a brisk push of
it, is probable; and it may happen, a brush, a scrimmage, or some such
divarsion, but always where covers are good, and ammunition abundant."

It is possible that Heyward's estimate of danger differed in some degree
from that of the scout, for, instead of replying, he now sat in silence,
while the canoe glided over several miles of water. Just as the day
dawned, they entered the narrows of the lake*, and stole swiftly and
cautiously among their numberless little islands. It was by this road
that Montcalm had retired with his army, and the adventurers knew not
but he had left some of his Indians in ambush, to protect the rear of
his forces, and collect the stragglers. They, therefore, approached the
passage with the customary silence of their guarded habits.

     * The beauties of Lake George are well known to every
     American tourist. In the height of the mountains which
     surround it, and in artificial accessories, it is inferior
     to the finest of the Swiss and Italian lakes, while in
     outline and purity of water it is fully their equal; and in
     the number and disposition of its isles and islets much
     superior to them all together. There are said to be some
     hundreds of islands in a sheet of water less than thirty
     miles long. The narrows, which connect what may be called,
     in truth, two lakes, are crowded with islands to such a
     degree as to leave passages between them frequently of only
     a few feet in width. The lake itself varies in breadth from
     one to three miles.

Chingachgook laid aside his paddle; while Uncas and the scout urged the
light vessel through crooked and intricate channels, where every foot
that they advanced exposed them to the danger of some sudden rising
on their progress. The eyes of the Sagamore moved warily from islet to
islet, and copse to copse, as the canoe proceeded; and, when a clearer
sheet of water permitted, his keen vision was bent along the bald rocks
and impending forests that frowned upon the narrow strait.

Heyward, who was a doubly interested spectator, as well from the
beauties of the place as from the apprehension natural to his situation,
was just believing that he had permitted the latter to be excited
without sufficient reason, when the paddle ceased moving, in obedience
to a signal from Chingachgook.

"Hugh!" exclaimed Uncas, nearly at the moment that the light tap his
father had made on the side of the canoe notified them of the vicinity
of danger.

"What now?" asked the scout; "the lake is as smooth as if the winds had
never blown, and I can see along its sheet for miles; there is not so
much as the black head of a loon dotting the water."

The Indian gravely raised his paddle, and pointed in the direction
in which his own steady look was riveted. Duncan's eyes followed the
motion. A few rods in their front lay another of the wooded islets,
but it appeared as calm and peaceful as if its solitude had never been
disturbed by the foot of man.

"I see nothing," he said, "but land and water; and a lovely scene it
is."

"Hist!" interrupted the scout. "Ay, Sagamore, there is always a reason
for what you do. 'Tis but a shade, and yet it is not natural. You see
the mist, major, that is rising above the island; you can't call it a
fog, for it is more like a streak of thin cloud--"

"It is vapor from the water."

"That a child could tell. But what is the edging of blacker smoke
that hangs along its lower side, and which you may trace down into the
thicket of hazel? 'Tis from a fire; but one that, in my judgment, has
been suffered to burn low."

"Let us, then, push for the place, and relieve our doubts," said the
impatient Duncan; "the party must be small that can lie on such a bit of
land."

"If you judge of Indian cunning by the rules you find in books, or
by white sagacity, they will lead you astray, if not to your death,"
returned Hawkeye, examining the signs of the place with that acuteness
