charge you to thank King Ethelred for his generosity. It so happens
that this part of the country is already becoming somewhat bare of food
and we are wearying for new scenes. I think, therefore, that before the
winter days are far advanced we shall weigh anchor and set sail. But
our going shall not be one day earlier on account of Ethelred's desire
to be rid of us."

The messengers wanted a more definite promise from Olaf that he would
not only sail away at this present time but also that he would not
again invade the English coasts. But to this Olaf would not agree.
Either the king must be satisfied that the vikings intended to quit the
shores of East Anglia in a few weeks' time, or he might take back his
gold and suffer his kingdom to be invaded and ravaged at whatever point
the Norsemen chose to make a landing.

It seemed for a long time that they could come to no agreement; but
finally the matter was so arranged that the gold was delivered into
Olaf's hands and the messengers departed, with a mere half promise of
peace and the assurance that Olaf would remove his ships within twenty
days. Olaf did not hold himself bound to keep these conditions;
nevertheless he resolved to abide by them. He had already discovered
that his forces were too small to attempt, with any certainty of
success, a deliberate conquest of England; and, indeed, even before the
arrival of Ethelred's messengers, he had determined to presently
withdraw his fleet until such times as he had gathered about him a host
large enough and strong enough to lay siege to London. His departure
from Maldon was therefore of his own choosing and not the result of any
threats upon the part of the English king.

Meanwhile Olaf did not lose sight of the fact that the foolish policy
of King Ethelred, instead of having the effect of securing the kingdom
against invasion, only set forth a very strong encouragement to the
vikings to repeat their incursions as often as they were in want of
money. Ethelred and his advisers seem never to have learned this
lesson, and for many years after the battle of Maldon the sea rovers,
both Danish and Norwegian, continued to harry the English coasts, with
the invariable result that, so soon as they had plundered a few
monasteries and reduced a few villages to ashes, they were sure to
receive the offer of a very handsome bribe as an inducement to put to
sea again.



CHAPTER XIII: THE HERMIT OF THE SCILLYS.


On a certain day in the late winter of the next year Olaf Triggvison
led his fleet across the turbulent waters of the Pentland Firth, and
steered his course for the islands of Orkney. On his way northward
along the coasts of England he had many times made a landing to plunder
some seaside village and to replenish his stores of food and water. He
had harried wide on both shores of the Humber and in Northumberland,
had stormed King Ida's fortress of Bamborough, and made a raid upon
Berwick. In Scotland, also, he had ravaged and plundered. But of these
adventures there remains no record. Before the time of his crossing to
the Orkneys he had lost five of his ships and a large number of his
men, and from this it may be judged that he had either encountered very
stormy weather or suffered some reverse at the hands of his enemies.

The snow still lay deep upon the islands when he entered the wide
channel named Scapa Flow, and anchored his fleet under shelter of the
high island of Hoy. Many of his vessels were by this time in need of
repair, so he crossed the sound and beached them near to where the port
of Stromness now lies, and at this place he took up his quarters until
the coming of the summer.

The Orkney Islands were then, and for many generations afterwards,
peopled by Scandinavian vikings and their families, who paid tax and
tribute to Norway. Olaf therefore found himself among men who spoke his
own tongue, and who were glad enough to make friends with a chief, of
whom it could be said that he had done great and valiant deeds in
battle. One thing which more than all else won these people to him was
their knowledge that he was the same Ole the Esthonian who, with Vagn
Akison, had stood out to the end in the great sea fight against Hakon
of Lade. Earl Hakon was now the ruler over the Orkney islanders, but he
was beginning to be so bitterly hated by them that they looked upon all
his enemies as their own particular friends. For a little time they had
centred their hopes in Earl Sigvaldi of Jomsburg, who had lately taken
refuge in the Orkneys. But Sigvaldi had now gone back to his stronghold
on the Baltic, in the hope of restoring his scattered company of
vikings. The coming of Olaf was therefore regarded with great favour by
the Orcadian vikings, who thought it possible that he would join them
in an attempt to drive Earl Hakon from the Norwegian throne.

In order to delay Olaf's departure from the islands the people got him
to help them in building a great temple on the shores of one of their
lakes, and, when the temple was finished and duly dedicated to Odin,
they proposed to Olaf that he should lead an expedition across to
Norway. Olaf replied that he did not consider the time ripe for such an
attempt, and that for the present he had other plans in hand; but he
bade them, in the meantime, busy themselves with the building of ships.

Now while Olaf was still in Orkney there came one day into Scapa Flow
one of the ships of King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark. Olaf learned from
her captain that the Dane folk had rebelled against Sweyn, for the
reason that, having accepted Christianity and compelled his people to
follow his example, he had now thrown off the true belief and turned
back to the worship of the heathen gods, demanding that his subjects
should again acknowledge Odin and Thor to be greater than the God of
the Christians. Rather than do this, the Danes had resolved to drive
their unbelieving king into exile; and Sweyn Forkbeard, having lost his
throne, had taken to vikingry.

On hearing this, Olaf Triggvison gave the ship captain a message to
take back to his master, bidding Sweyn remember the vow he had sworn at
his inheritance feast, and saying that if he had a mind to fulfil that
vow he might now make the attempt, for that he--Ole the Esthonian--was
now preparing his forces for a great invasion of England, and would be
well pleased if Sweyn would join him in the expedition. The place of
the gathering of the forces was to be Ipswich, in East Anglia, and the
time of meeting was to be the middle of the harvest month in the next
summer.

Olaf did not wait in the Orkneys for an answer to this message. His
vikings were already growing weary of idleness and eager to be again
upon the sea. So the ships were put in readiness, and when a fair wind
offered, the anchors were weighed and the sails set, and the fleet sped
westward through Roy Sound towards Cape Wrath. Thence they sailed down
among the Hebrides--or the Southern Isles, as the Norsemen always
called them. Here Olaf had many battles and won many ships from the
descendants of Harald Fairhair's rebel subjects, who had made
settlements in the Isles. Here, too, he gained some hundreds of men to
his following. He harried also in the north parts of Ireland, and had
certain battles in the Island of Man. By this time the summer was far
spent, so he sailed east away to Cumberland and there rested throughout
the winter.

His men thought that this part of England, with its mountains and
lakes, was so much like their own birthland in distant Norway, that
they showed great unwillingness to leave it. Many did, indeed, remain,
and the settlements they made in the lake country have left traces
which even to the present day may be recognized, not only in the
remains of heathen temples and tombs, but also in the names of places
and in certain Norse words that occur in the common speech of the
Cumbrian folk.

From Cumberland Olaf sailed south to Wales. There again he harried wide
about, and also in Cornwall, and at length he came to the Scilly Isles.
King Athelstane had conquered these islands half a century before, and
had established a monastery there, the ruins of which may still be seen.

Now when Olaf Triggvison lay at Scilly, sheltering from a storm that
had driven him out of his intended course, he heard that in the isle of
Tresco there was a certain soothsayer who was said to be well skilled
in the foretelling of things which had not yet come to pass. Olaf fell
a-longing to test the spaeing of this man.

"I will try him by means of a trick," Olaf said one day to Kolbiorn;
"and in this wise: You shall go to him instead of me, and say that you
are King Ole the Esthonion; and if he believes you, then is he no
soothsayer."

Now Olaf was already famed in all lands for being fairer and nobler
than all other men, and he chose Kolbiorn as his messenger because he
was the fairest and biggest of his men and most resembled himself, and
he sent him ashore, arrayed in the most beautiful clothing.

Kolbiorn searched long among the trees and rocks before he found the
little cave in which the lonely hermit dwelt; and when he entered he
saw a gray bearded old man, deep in meditation before a crucifix, and
wearing the habit of a Christian priest.

The hermit looked up at the tall figure of his visitor, and waited for
him to speak. Kolbiorn answered as Olaf had bidden him, saying that his
name was King Ole. But the hermit shook his head.

"King thou art not," said he gravely; "but my counsel to thee is, that
thou be true to thy King."

No other word did he speak, and Kolbiorn turned away and fared back to
Olaf, who, on hearing of the answer that had been given, longed all the
more to meet this hermit, whom he now believed to be verily a
soothsayer.

So on the next day, while the wind was high and the waves broke with a
heavy roar upon the rocks, Olaf dressed himself very simply, without
any body armour, and went ashore, attended by two shieldmen. When he
entered the hermit's cell he found the old man sitting at an oaken
table with a roll of parchment before him, upon which he was inscribing
some holy legend. He greeted Olaf most kindly, and when they had spoken
together for a while, Olaf asked him what he could say as to how he
should speed coming by his rightful inheritance or any other good
fortune.

Then the hermit answered:

"In the time that is to come, thou shalt be a very glorious king and do
glorious deeds. Many men shalt thou bring to the right troth and to
christening, helping thereby both thyself and thy fellow men."

"As to the first part of your prophecy--that I shall become a great
king, that I can well believe," returned Olaf; "but that I shall ever
help men to christening, I cannot believe, for I am now, and always
shall be, a faithful worshipper of the gods of Asgard and an enemy to
all believers in Christ."

"Nevertheless," answered the hermit, "the second part of what I have
said is even more certain to come true than the first; and, to the end
that my words may be trusted, take this as a token: Hard by thy ship
thou shall presently fall into a snare of a host of men, and battle
will spring thence, and thou wilt be sorely hurt, and of this wound
thou shalt look to die and be borne to ship on shield; yet thou shalt
be whole of thy hurt within seven nights and be speedily christened
thereafter."

Olaf laughed at the good man, and presently went his way. But as he
passed downward towards the boat that awaited him among the rocks, he
was met by a party of unpeaceful men who fell suddenly upon him with
their swords. Olaf called upon his two guards, who had lagged behind,
but ere they came to his help he, being without any arms, received a
great sword thrust in his chest. His assailants fled when they saw the
two guards approaching from among the trees, and Olaf was left bleeding
where he fell. His two men lifted him upon one of their shields, and
carried him down to the boat and bore him wounded upon his ship. For
six days he lay unconscious, and, as all thought, upon the point of
death. But on the seventh night the danger was passed, and thereafter
he speedily grew well.

Then Olaf deemed that in having foretold this matter so exactly the old
hermit had proved himself to be indeed a very wise soothsayer. So he
went ashore a second time, and the two talked much and long together.

It seemed that Cerdic was the hermit's name. He had once been a
bondslave among Norsemen, and had known Olaf's father, King Triggvi,
whom Olaf personally resembled. He could speak very well in the Norse
tongue, and his soft and gentle voice was very soothing to all who
heard it. At first he spoke of the ways of heathen men, of their
revengeful spirit and their cruelty in warfare, and he condemned their
offering of blood sacrifices and their worship of graven images. Such
gods as Odin and Thor, Njord and Frey, were, he said, but the creations
of men's poetic fancy, and had no real existence. Odin was at one time
but an earthly man, with all man's faults and sins. The earthquake and
the thunder had nothing to do with the rolling of Thor's chariot or the
throwing of Thor's hammer. The waves of the ocean would rise in anger
or fall into calm peace though the name of Njord had never been spoken;
and the seasons would change in their order, fields and pastures would
grow, without the favour of Frey.

So spoke the hermit, and then he told the story of the Creation and of
Adam's Fall, and showed how Christ had come to preach peace on earth
and to save the world. It was a principle of the Christian faith; said
Cerdic, that men should remember the Sabbath day and keep it holy, that
they should not bow down to graven images, that they should not steal,
nor be covetous, nor do murder, nor bear false witness; that they
should love their enemies and bless those who cursed them.

Olaf listened in patience to all these things, asking many questions
concerning them. At last Cerdic appealed to him and besought him most
earnestly to come to repentance and to make himself a faithful follower
of Christ, so that he might at the close of his earthly life be worthy
to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Now Olaf Triggvison had until this time lived always in the firm hope
that when he died he would be admitted into the shining hall of
Valhalla, where he might expect to meet all the great heroes of past
times. He believed that Odin would receive him there, and reward him
well for all the glorious deeds that he had done. So he was not at all
willing to abandon this Norseman's faith in a future life which, as men
promised, should be full of warfare by day and of merry carousing by
night.

Yet it was evident that Cerdic had not spoken without good effect; for
Olaf agreed--as many of the Scandinavians did in these times--that he
would at once be christened, on the one condition that, while calling
himself a follower of Christ, he should not be expected to abandon
either his belief in Odin or his hopes of Valhalla. The holy man of
Scilly well knew that this divided faith would not last long, but he
was also assured that in the contest the victory would certainly rest
with Christ.

Accordingly Olaf was christened, with all his warriors and shipmen. He
lay among the Scilly Isles for many days thereafter, and learned the
true faith so well that it remained his guiding light throughout the
rest of his life, and made him, as shall presently be seen, one of the
most zealous Christians of his time.

Now, as the summer days passed by and it drew near to the harvest time,
Olaf bethought him of his tryst with King Sweyn Forkbeard, so he raised
his anchors and sped out into the open main and round by the forelands,
and so north to Ipswich. It was three years since he had first besieged
the East Anglian town, and in the interval the folk had returned to
their devastated dwellings and built them anew. Olaf now took forcible
possession of the town for a second time. He was not yet so entirely a
Christian that he had any scruples in attacking Christian folk and
turning them out of their homes.

He lay with his ships in the Orwell for three weeks, and at the end of
that time King Sweyn and his fleet arrived from the Baltic. Olaf had
already gathered about him some fifty-five vessels of war, fully manned
and equipped; and with those which Sweyn added to the number, he had
now a force of ninety-four ships of all sizes, from small skiffs of ten
banks of oars and a crew of a hundred men, up to great dragonships with
thirty pairs of oars, two towering masts, and a complete company of
about four hundred seamen and warriors. The whole force of ninety-four
ships carried with them some thirty thousand men.

This was not to be one of the old plundering raids of a body of
adventurers seeking merely to better their fortunes by winning
themselves new homes at the point of the sword. It was an expedition
greater than any that Brihtnoth had ever met with steel or Ethelred
with gold, and its purpose was one of deliberately planned invasion and
conquest.

At first when Olaf and Sweyn met and joined their fleets and armies
there was a disagreement between them as to which chief was to assume
the higher command. Sweyn declared that the leading position was his by
the right that he was a king, and should be accorded the more power in
