my attackers, nor form any guess as to who they might be, or how they
had hurled me from my saddle. The champing and stamping of a horse hard
by showed me that Covenant was a prisoner as well as his master.

'Dutch Pete's got as much as he can carry,' said a rough, harsh voice.
'He lies on the track as limp as a conger.'

'Ah, poor Pete!' muttered another. 'He'll never deal a card or drain a
glass of the right Cognac again.'

'There you lie, mine goot vriend,' said the injured man, in weak,
quavering tones. 'And I will prove that you lie if you have a flaschen
in your pocket.'

'If Pete were dead and buried,' the first speaker said, 'a word about
strong waters would bring him to. Give him a sup from your bottle,
Dicon.'

There was a great gurgling and sucking in the darkness, followed by a
gasp from the drinker. 'Gott sei gelobt,' he exclaimed in a stronger
voice, 'I have seen more stars than ever were made. Had my kopf not
been well hooped he would have knocked it in like an ill-staved cask. He
shlags like the kick of a horse.'

As he spoke the edge of the moon peeped over a cliff and threw a flood
of cold clear light upon the scene. Looking up I saw that a strong rope
had been tied across the road from one tree trunk to another about eight
feet above the ground. This could not be seen by me, even had I been
fully awake, in the dusk; but catching me across the breast as Covenant
trotted under it, it had swept me off and dashed me with great force to
the ground. Either the fall or the blows which I had received had cut me
badly, for I could feel the blood trickling in a warm stream past my
ear and down my neck. I made no attempt to move, however, but waited in
silence to find out who these men were into whose hands I had fallen.
My one fear was lest my letters should be taken away from me, and my
mission rendered of no avail. That in this, my first trust, I should be
disarmed without a blow and lose the papers which had been confided to
me, was a chance which made me flush and tingle with shame at the very
thought.

The gang who had seized me were rough-bearded fellows in fur caps and
fustian jackets, with buff belts round their waists, from which hung
short straight whinyards. Their dark sun-dried faces and their great
boots marked them as fishermen or seamen, as might be guessed from their
rude sailor speech. A pair knelt on either side with their hands upon
my arms, a third stood behind with a cocked pistol pointed at my head,
while the others, seven or eight in number, were helping to his feet the
man whom I had struck, who was bleeding freely from a cut over the eye.

'Take the horse up to Daddy Mycroft's,' said a stout, black-bearded man,
who seemed to be their leader. 'It is no mere dragooner hack,(Note
I. Appendix) but a comely, full-blooded brute, which will fetch sixty
pieces at the least. Your share of that, Peter, will buy salve and
plaster for your cut.'

'Ha, houndsfoot!' cried the Dutchman, shaking his fist at me. 'You
would strike Peter, would you? You would draw Peter's blood, would you?
Tausend Teufel, man! if you and I were together upon the hillside we
should see vich vas the petter man.'

'Slack your jaw tackle, Pete,' growled one of his comrades. 'This fellow
is a limb of Satan for sure, and doth follow a calling that none but a
mean, snivelling, baseborn son of a gun would take to. Yet I warrant,
from the look of him, that he could truss you like a woodcock if he had
his great hands upon you. And you would howl for help as you did last
Martinmas, when you did mistake Cooper Dick's wife for a gauger.'

'Truss me, would he? Todt und Holle!' cried the other, whom the blow
and the brandy had driven to madness. 'We shall see. Take that, thou
deyvil's spawn, take that!' He ran at me, and kicked me as hard as he
could with his heavy sea-boots.

Some of the gang laughed, but the man who had spoken before gave
the Dutchman a shove that sent him whirling. 'None of that,' he said
sternly. 'We'll have British fair-play on British soil, and none of your
cursed longshore tricks. I won't stand by and see an Englishman
kicked, d'ye see, by a tub-bellied, round-starned, schnapps-swilling,
chicken-hearted son of an Amsterdam lust-vrouw. Hang him, if the skipper
likes. That's all above board, but by thunder, if it's a fight that you
will have, touch that man again.'

'All right, Dicon,' said their leader soothingly. 'We all know that
Pete's not a fighting man, but he's the best cooper on the coast, eh,
Pete? There is not his equal at staving, hooping, and bumping. He'll
take a plank of wood and turn it into a keg while another man would be
thinking of it.'

'Oh, you remember that, Captain Murgatroyd,' said the Dutchman sulkily.
'But you see me knocked about and shlagged, and bullied, and called
names, and what help have I? So help me, when the _Maria_ is in the
Texel next, I'll take to my old trade, I will, and never set foot on her
again.'

'No fear,' the Captain answered, laughing. 'While the _Maria_ brings in
five thousand good pieces a year, and can show her heels to any cutter
on the coast, there is no fear of greedy Pete losing his share of her.
Why, man, at this rate you may have a lust-haus of your own in a year or
two, with a trimmed lawn, and the trees all clipped like peacocks, and
the flowers in pattern, and a canal by the door, and a great bouncing
house-wife just like any Burgomeister. There's many such a fortune been
made out of Mechlin and Cognac.'

'Aye, and there's many a broken kopf got over Mechlin and Cognac,'
grumbled my enemy. 'Donner! There are other things beside lust-houses
and flower-beds. There are lee-shores and nor'-westers, beaks and
preventives.'

'And there's where the smart seaman has the pull over the herring buss,
or the skulking coaster that works from Christmas to Christmas with all
the danger and none of the little pickings. But enough said! Up with the
prisoner, and let us get him safely into the bilboes.'

I was raised to my feet and half carried, half dragged along in the
midst of the gang. My horse had already been led away in the opposite
direction. Our course lay off the road, down a very rocky and rugged
ravine which sloped away towards the sea. There seemed to be no trace of
a path, and I could only stumble along over rocks and bushes as best I
might in my fettered and crippled state. The blood, however, had
dried over my wounds, and the cool sea breeze playing upon my forehead
refreshed me, and helped me to take a clearer view of my position.

It was plain from their talk that these men were smugglers. As such,
they were not likely to have any great love for the Government, or
desire to uphold King James in any way. On the contrary, their goodwill
would probably be with Monmouth, for had I not seen the day before a
whole regiment of foot in his army, raised from among the coaster folk?
On the other hand, their greed might be stronger than their loyalty, and
might lead them to hand me over to justice in the hope of reward. On the
whole it would be best, I thought, to say nothing of my mission, and to
keep my papers secret as long as possible.

But I could not but wonder, as I was dragged along, what had led these
men to lie in wait for me as they had done. The road along which I had
travelled was a lonely one, and yet a fair number of travellers bound
from the West through Weston to Bristol must use it. The gang could
not lie in perpetual guard over it. Why had they set a trap on this
particular night, then? The smugglers were a lawless and desperate body,
but they did not, as a rule, descend to foot-paddery or robbery. As long
as no one interfered with them they were seldom the first to break the
peace. Then, why had they lain in wait for me, who had never injured
them? Could it possibly be that I had been betrayed? I was still turning
over these questions in my mind when we all came to a halt, and the
Captain blew a shrill note on a whistle which hung round his neck.

The place where we found ourselves was the darkest and most rugged spot
in the whole wild gorge. On either side great cliffs shot up, which
arched over our heads, with a fringe of ferns and bracken on either lip,
so that the dark sky and the few twinkling stars were well-nigh hid.
Great black rocks loomed vaguely out in the shadowy light, while in
front a high tangle of what seemed to be brushwood barred our road. At a
second whistle, however, a glint of light was seen through the branches,
and the whole mass was swung to one side as though it moved upon a
hinge. Beyond it a dark winding passage opened into the side of the
hill, down which we went with our backs bowed, for the rock ceiling was
of no great height. On every side of us sounded the throbbing of the
sea.

Passing through the entrance, which must have been dug with great labour
through the solid rock, we came out into a lofty and roomy cave, lit
up by a fire at one end, and by several torches. By their smoky yellow
glare I could see that the roof was, at least, fifty feet above us, and
was hung by long lime-crystals, which sparkled and gleamed with great
brightness. The floor of the cave was formed of fine sand, as soft and
velvety as a Wilton carpet, sloping down in a way which showed that the
cave must at its mouth open upon the sea, which was confirmed by the
booming and splashing of the waves, and by the fresh salt air which
filled the whole cavern. No water could be seen, however, as a sharp
turn cut off our view of the outlet.

In this rock-girt space, which may have been sixty paces long and
thirty across, there were gathered great piles of casks, kegs and cases;
muskets, cutlasses, staves, cudgels, and straw were littered about upon
the floor. At one end a high wood fire blazed merrily, casting strange
shadows along the walls, and sparkling like a thousand diamonds among
the crystals on the roof. The smoke was carried away through a great
cleft in the rocks. Seated on boxes, or stretched on the sand round the
fire, there were seven or eight more of the band, who sprang to their
feet and ran eagerly towards us as we entered.

Have ye got him?' they cried. 'Did he indeed come? Had he attendants?'

'He is here, and he is alone,' the Captain answered. 'Our hawser fetched
him off his horse as neatly as ever a gull was netted by a cragsman.
What have ye done in our absence, Silas!'

'We have the packs ready for carriage,' said the man addressed, a
sturdy, weather-beaten seaman of middle age. 'The silk and lace are done
in these squares covered over with sacking. The one I have marked "yarn"
and the other "jute"--a thousand of Mechlin to a hundred of the shiny.
They will sling over a mule's back. Brandy, schnapps, Schiedam, and
Hamburg Goldwasser are all set out in due order. The 'baccy is in the
flat cases over by the Black Drop there. A plaguey job we had carrying
it all out, but here it is ship-shape at last, and the lugger floats
like a skimming dish, with scarce ballast enough to stand up to a
five-knot breeze.'

'Any signs of the _Fairy Queen_?' asked the smuggler.

'None. Long John is down at the water's edge looking out for her
flash-light. This wind should bring her up if she has rounded
Combe-Martin Point. There was a sail about ten miles to the
east-nor'-east at sundown. She might have been a Bristol schooner, or
she might have been a King's fly-boat.'

'A King's crawl-boat,' said Captain Murgatroyd, with a sneer. 'We cannot
hang the gauger until Venables brings up the _Fairy Queen_, for after
all it was one of his hands that was snackled. Let him do his own dirty
work.'

'Tausend Blitzen!' cried the ruffian Dutchman, 'would it not be a kindly
grass to Captain Venables to chuck the gauger down the Black Drop ere he
come? He may have such another job to do for us some day.'

'Zounds, man, are you in command or am I?' said the leader angrily.
'Bring the prisoner forward to the fire! Now, hark ye, dog of a
land-shark; you are as surely a dead man as though you were laid out
with the tapers burning. See here'--he lifted a torch, and showed by
its red light a great crack in the floor across the far end of the
cave--'you can judge of the Black Drop's depth!' he said, raising an
empty keg and tossing it over into the yawning gulf. For ten seconds
we stood silent before a dull distant clatter told that it had at last
reached the bottom.

'It will carry him half-way to hell before the breath leaves him,' said
one.

'It's an easier death than the Devizes gallows!' cried a second.

'Nay, he shall have the gallows first!' a third shouted. 'It is but his
burial that we are arranging.'

'He hath not opened his mouth since we took him,' said the man who was
called Dicon. 'Is he a mute, then? Find your tongue, my fine fellow, and
let us hear what your name is. It would have been well for you if you
had been born dumb, so that you could not have sworn our comrade's life
away.'

'I have been waiting for a civil question after all this brawling and
brabbling,' said I. 'My name is Micah Clarke. Now, pray inform me who ye
may be, and by what warrant ye stop peaceful travellers upon the public
highway?'

'This is our warrant,' Murgatroyd answered, touching the hilt of his
cutlass. 'As to who we are, ye know that well enough. Your name is
not Clarke, but Westhouse, or Waterhouse, and you are the same cursed
exciseman who snackled our poor comrade, Cooper Dick, and swore away his
life at Ilchester.'

'I swear that you are mistaken,' I replied. 'I have never in my life
been in these parts before.'

'Fine words! Fine words!' cried another smuggler. 'Gauger or no, you
must jump for it, since you know the secret of our cave.'

'Your secret is safe with me,' I answered. 'But if ye wish to murder me,
I shall meet my fate as a soldier should. I should have chosen to die on
the field of battle, rather than to lie at the mercy of such a pack of
water-rats in their burrow.'

'My faith!' said Murgatroyd. 'This is too tall talk for a gauger. He
bears himself like a soldier, too. It is possible that in snaring the
owl we have caught the falcon. Yet we had certain token that he would
come this way, and on such another horse.'

'Call up Long John,' suggested the Dutchman. 'I vould not give a plug of
Trinidado for the Schelm's word. Long John was with Cooper Dick when he
was taken.'

'Aye,' growled the mate Silas. 'He got a wipe over the arm from the
gauger's whinyard. He'll know his face, if any will.'

'Call him, then,' said Murgatroyd, and presently a long, loose-limbed
seaman came up from the mouth of the cave, where he had been on watch.
He wore a red kerchief round his forehead, and a blue jerkin, the sleeve
of which he slowly rolled up as he came nigh.

'Where is Gauger Westhouse?' he cried; 'he has left his mark on my arm.
Rat me, if the scar is healed yet. The sun is on our side of the wall
now, gauger. But hullo, mates! Who be this that ye have clapped into
irons? This is not our man!'

'Not our man!' they cried, with a volley of curses.

'Why, this fellow would make two of the gauger, and leave enough over
to fashion a magistrate's clerk. Ye may hang him to make sure, but still
he's not the man.'

'Yes, hang him!' said Dutch Pete. 'Sapperment! is our cave to be the
talk of all the country? Vere is the pretty _Maria_ to go then, vid her
silks and her satins, her kegs and her cases'? Are we to risk our
cave for the sake of this fellow? Besides, has he not schlagged my
kopf--schlagged your cooper's kopf--as if he had hit me mit mine own
mallet? Is that not vorth a hemp cravat?'

'Worth a jorum of rumbo,' cried Dicon. 'By your leave, Captain, I would
say that we are not a gang of padders and michers, but a crew of honest
seamen, who harm none but those who harm us. Exciseman Westhouse hath
slain Cooper Dick, and it is just that he should die for it; but as to
taking this young soldier's life, I'd as soon think of scuttling the
saucy _Maria_, or of mounting the Jolly Roger at her peak.'

What answer would have been given to this speech I cannot tell, for
at that moment a shrill whistle resounded outside the cave, and two
smugglers appeared bearing between them the body of a man. It hung so
limp that I thought at first that he might be dead, but when they threw
him on the sand he moved, and at last sat up like one who is but half
awoken from a swoon. He was a square dogged-faced fellow, with a long
white scar down his cheek, and a close-fitting blue coat with brass
buttons.

'It's Gauger Westhouse!' cried a chorus of voices. 'Yes, it is Gauger
Westhouse,' said the man calmly, giving his neck a wriggle as though he
were in pain. 'I represent the King's law, and in its name I arrest ye
all, and declare all the contraband goods which I see around me to be
confiscate and forfeited, according to the second section of the first
clause of the statute upon illegal dealing. If there are any honest men
in this company, they will assist me in the execution of my duty.' He
staggered to his feet as he spoke, but his spirit was greater than his
strength, and he sank back upon the sand amid a roar of laughter from
the rough seamen.

'We found him lying on the road when we came from Daddy Mycroft's,' said
one of the new-comers, who were the same men who had led away my horse.
'He must have passed just after you left, and the rope caught him under
the chin and threw him a dozen paces. We saw the revenue button on his
coat, so we brought him down. Body o' me, but he kicked and plunged for
all that he was three-quarters stunned.'

'Have ye slacked the hawser?' the Captain asked.

'We cast one end loose and let it hang.'

''Tis well. We must keep him for Captain Venables. But now, as to our
other prisoner: we must overhaul him and examine his papers, for so many
craft are sailing under false colours that we must needs be careful.
Hark ye, Mister Soldier! What brings you to these parts, and what king
do you serve? for I hear there's a mutiny broke out, and two skippers
claim equal rating in the old British ship.'

'I am serving under King Monmouth,' I answered, seeing that the proposed
search must end in the finding of my papers.

'Under King Monmouth!' cried the smuggler. 'Nay, friend, that rings
somewhat false. The good King hath, I hear, too much need of his friends
in the south to let an able soldier go wandering along the sea coast
like a Cornish wrecker in a sou'-wester.'

'I bear despatches,' said I, 'from the King's own hand to Henry Duke
of Beaufort, at his castle at Badminton. Ye can find them in my inner
pocket, but I pray ye not to break the seal, lest it bring discredit
upon my mission.'

'Sir,' cried the gauger, raising himself upon his elbow, 'I do hereby
arrest you on the charge of being a traitor, a promoter of treason, a
vagrant, and a masterless man within the meaning of the fourth statute
of the Act. As an officer of the law I call upon you to submit to my
warrant.'

'Brace up his jaw with your scarf, Jim,' said Murgatroyd. 'When Venables
comes he will soon find a way to check his gab. Yes,' he continued,
looking at the back of my papers, 'it is marked, as you say, "From James
the Second of England, known lately as the Duke of Monmouth, to Henry
Duke of Beaufort, President of Wales, by the hand of Captain Micah
Clarke, of Saxon's regiment of Wiltshire foot." Cast off the lashings,
Dicon. So, Captain, you are a free man once more, and I grieve that we
should have unwittingly harmed you. We are good Lutherans to a man, and
would rather speed you than hinder you on this mission.'

'Could we not indeed help him on his way!' said the mate Silas. 'For
myself, I don't fear a wet jacket or a tarry hand for the cause, and
I doubt not ye are all of my way of thinking. Now with this breeze we
could run up to Bristol and drop the Captain by morning, which would
save him from being snapped up by any land-sharks on the road.'

'Aye, aye,' cried Long John. 'The King's horse are out beyond Weston,
but he could give them the slip if he had the _Maria_ under him.'

'Well,' said Murgatroyd, 'we could get back by three long tacks.
Venables will need a day or so to get his goods ashore. If we are to
sail back in company we shall have time on our hands. How would the plan
suit you, Captain?'

'My horse!' I objected.

'It need not stop us. I can rig up a handy horse-stall with my spare
spars and the grating. The wind has died down. The lugger could be
brought to Dead Man's Edge, and the horse led down to it. Run up to
Daddy's, Jim; and you, Silas, see to the boat. Here is some cold junk
and biscuit--seaman's fare, Captain--and a glass o' the real Jamaica to
wash it down an' thy stomach be not too dainty for rough living.'

I seated myself on a barrel by the fire, and stretched my limbs, which
were cramped and stiffened by their confinement, while one of the seamen
bathed the cut on my head with a wet kerchief, and another laid out some
food on a case in front of me. The rest of the gang had trooped away to
the mouth of the cave to prepare the lugger, save only two or three who
stood on guard round the ill-fated gauger. He lay with his back resting
against the wall of the cave, and his arms crossed over his breast,
glancing round from time to time at the smugglers with menacing eyes, as
a staunch old hound might gaze at a pack of wolves who had overmatched
him. I was turning it over in my own mind whether aught could be done to
help him, when Murgatroyd came over, and dipping a tin pannikin into the
open rum tub, drained it to the success of my mission.

'I shall send Silas Bolitho with you,' said he, 'while I bide here to
meet Venables, who commands my consort. If there is aught that I can do
to repay you for your ill usage--'

'There is but one thing, Captain,' I broke in eagerly. 'It is as much,
or more, for your own sake than mine that I ask it. Do not allow this
unhappy man to be murdered.'

Murgatroyd's face flushed with anger. 'You are a plain speaker, Captain
Clarke,' said he. 'This is no murder. It is justice. What harm do we
here? There is not an old housewife over the whole countryside who does
not bless us. Where is she to buy her souchong, or her strong waters,
except from us! We charge little, and force our goods on no one. We are
peaceful traders. Yet this man and his fellows are ever yelping at our
heels, like so many dogfish on a cod bank. We have been harried, and
chivied, and shot at until we are driven into such dens as this. A month
ago, four of our men were bearing a keg up the hillside to Farmer Black,
who hath dealt with us these five years back. Of a sudden, down came
half a score of horse, led by this gauger, hacked and slashed with their
broad-swords, cut Long John's arm open, and took Cooper Dick prisoner.
Dick was haled to Ilchester Gaol, and hung up after the assizes like
a stoat on a gamekeeper's door. This night we had news that this very
gauger was coming this way, little knowing that we should be on the
look-out for him. Is it a wonder that we should lay a trap for him, and
that, having caught him, we should give him the same justice as he gave
our comrades?'

'He is but a servant, I argued. 'He hath not made the law. It is his
duty to enforce it. It is with the law itself that your quarrel is.'

'You are right,' said the smuggler gloomily. 'It is with Judge Moorcroft
that we have our chief account to square. He may pass this road upon his
circuit. Heaven send he does! But we shall hang the gauger too. He knows
our cave now, and it would be madness to let him go.'

I saw that it was useless to argue longer, so I contented myself with
dropping my pocket-knife on the sand within reach of the prisoner, in
the hope that it might prove to be of some service to him. His guards
were laughing and joking together, and giving little heed to their
charge, but the gauger was keen enough, for I saw his hand close over
it.

I had walked and smoked for an hour or more, when Silas the mate
appeared, and said that the lugger was ready and the horse aboard.
Bidding Murgatroyd farewell, I ventured a few more words in favour of
the gauger, which were received with a frown and an angry shake of the
head. A boat was drawn up on the sand, inside the cave, at the water's
edge. Into this I stepped, as directed, with my sword and pistols, which
had been given back to me, while the crew pushed her off and sprang in
as she glided into deep water.

I could see by the dim light of the single torch which Murgatroyd held
upon the margin, that the roof of the cave sloped sheer down upon us as
we sculled slowly out towards the entrance. So low did it come at last
that there was only a space of a few feet between it and the water, and
we had to bend our heads to avoid the rocks above us. The boatmen gave
two strong strokes, and we shot out from under the overhanging ledge,
and found ourselves in the open with the stars shining murkily above
us, and the moon showing herself dimly and cloudily through a gathering
haze. Right in front of us was a dark blur, which, as we pulled towards
it, took the outline of a large lugger rising and falling with the pulse
of the sea. Her tall thin spars and delicate network of cordage towered
above us as we glided under the counter, while the creaking of blocks
and rattle of ropes showed that she was all ready to glide off upon her
journey. Lightly and daintily she rode upon the waters, like some giant
seafowl, spreading one white pinion after another in preparation for
her flight. The boatmen ran us alongside and steadied the dinghy while I
climbed over the bulwarks on to the deck.

She was a roomy vessel, very broad in the beam, with a graceful curve in
her bows, and masts which were taller than any that I had seen on such
a boat on the Solent. She was decked over in front, but very deep in the
after part, with ropes fixed all round the sides to secure kegs when the
hold should be full. In the midst of this after-deck the mariners had
built a strong stall, in which my good steed was standing, with a bucket
full of oats in front of him. My old friend shoved his nose against my
face as I came aboard, and neighed his pleasure at finding his master
once more. We were still exchanging caresses when the grizzled head of
Silas Bolitho the mate popped out of the cabin hatchway.

'We are fairly on our way now, Captain Clarke,' said he. 'The breeze
has fallen away to nothing, as you can see, and we may be some time in
running down to our port. Are you not aweary?'

'I am a little tired,' I confessed. 'My head is throbbing from the crack
I got when that hawser of yours dashed me from my saddle.'

'An hour or two of sleep will make you as fresh as a Mother Carey's
chicken,' said the smuggler. 'Your horse is well cared for, and you can
leave him without fear. I will set a man to tend him, though, truth to
say, the rogues know more about studding-sails and halliards than they
do of steeds and their requirements. Yet no harm can come to him, so you
had best come down and turn in.'

I descended the steep stairs which led down into the low-roofed cabin of
the lugger. On either side a recess in the wall had been fitted up as a
couch.

'This is your bed,' said he, pointing to one of them. 'We shall call
you if there be aught to report.' I needed no second invitation, but
flinging myself down without undressing, I sank in a few minutes into
a dreamless sleep, which neither the gentle motion of the boat nor the
clank of feet above my head could break off.



Chapter XXIV. Of the Welcome that met me at Badminton

When I opened my eyes I had some ado to recall where I was, but on
sitting up it was brought home to me by my head striking the low ceiling
with a sharp rap. On the other side of the cabin Silas Bolitho was
stretched at full length with a red woollen nightcap upon his head, fast
asleep and snoring. In the centre of the cabin hung a swing-table,
much worn, and stained all over with the marks of countless glasses
and pannikins. A wooden bench, screwed to the floor, completed the
furniture, with the exception of a stand of muskets along one side.
Above and below the berths in which we lay were rows of lockers, in
which, doubtless, some of the more choice laces and silks were stowed.
The vessel was rising and falling with a gentle motion, but from the
flapping of canvas I judged that there was little wind. Slipping quietly
from my couch, so as not to wake the mate, I stole upon deck.

We were, I found, not only becalmed, but hemmed in by a dense fog-bank
which rolled in thick, choking wreaths all round us, and hid the very
water beneath us. We might have been a ship of the air riding upon
a white cloud-bank. Now and anon a little puff of breeze caught the
foresail and bellied it out for a moment, only to let it flap back
against the mast, limp and slack, once more. A sunbeam would at times
break through the dense cloud, and would spangle the dead grey wall with
a streak of rainbow colour, but the haze would gather in again and shut
off the bright invader. Covenant was staring right and left with great
questioning eyes. The crew were gathered along the bulwarks and smoking
their pipes while they peered out into the dense fog.

'God den, Captain,' said Dicon, touching his fur cap. 'We have had a
rare run while the breeze lasted, and the mate reckoned before he turned
in that we were not many miles from Bristol town.'

'In that case, my good fellow,' I answered, 'ye can set me ashore, for I
have not far to go.'

'We must e'en wait till the fog lifts,' said Long John. 'There's only
one place along here, d'ye see, where we can land cargoes unquestioned.
When it clears we shall turn her head for it, but until we can take our
bearings it is anxious work wi' the sands under our lee.'

'Keep a look-out there, Tom Baldock!' cried Dicon to a man in the bows.
'We are in the track of every Bristol ship, and though there's so little
wind, a high-sparred craft might catch a breeze which we miss.'

'Sh!' said Long John suddenly, holding up his hand in warning. 'Sh!'

We listened with all our ears, but there was no sound, save the gentle
wash of the unseen waves against our sides.

'Call the mate!' whispered the seaman. 'There's a craft close by us. I
heard the rattle of a rope upon her deck.'

Silas Bolitho was up in an instant, and we all stood straining our ears,
and peering through the dense fog-bank. We had well-nigh made up our
minds that it was a false alarm, and the mate was turning back in no
very good humour, when a clear loud bell sounded seven times quite
close to us, followed by a shrill whistle and a confused shouting and
stamping.

'It's a King's ship,' growled the mate. 'That's seven bells, and the
bo'sun is turning out the watch below.'

'It was on our quarter,' whispered one.

'Nay, I think it was on our larboard bow,' said another.

The mate held up his hand, and we all listened for some fresh sign
of the whereabouts of our scurvy neighbour. The wind had freshened a
little, and we were slipping through the water at four or five knots
an hour. Of a sudden a hoarse voice was heard roaring at our very side.
''Bout ship!' it shouted. 'Bear a hand on the lee-braces, there! Stand
by the halliards! Bear a hand, ye lazy rogues, or I'll be among ye with
my cane, with a wannion to ye!'

'It is a King's ship, sure enough, and she lies just there,' said Long
John, pointing out over the quarter. 'Merchant adventurers have
civil tongues. It's your blue-coated, gold-braided, swivel-eyed,
quarter-deckers that talk of canes. Ha! did I not tell ye!'

As he spoke, the white screen of vapour rolled up like the curtain in
a playhouse, and uncovered a stately war-ship, lying so close that we
could have thrown a biscuit aboard. Her long, lean, black hull rose
and fell with a slow, graceful rhythm, while her beautiful spars and
snow-white sails shot aloft until they were lost in the wreaths of fog
which still hung around her. Nine bright brass cannons peeped out at us
from her portholes. Above the line of hammocks, which hung like carded
