Baerle amused himself with this bulb. Well, I think it very cruel to
take from him the only thing that he could have amused himself with.'

"'But, first of all,' said my father, 'we ought to know how he has
contrived to procure this bulb.'

"I turned my eyes away to avoid my father's look; but I met those of
Jacob.

"It was as if he had tried to read my thoughts at the bottom of my
heart.

"Some little show of anger sometimes saves an answer. I shrugged my
shoulders, turned my back, and advanced towards the door.

"But I was kept by something which I heard, although it was uttered in a
very low voice only.

"Jacob said to my father,--

"'It would not be so difficult to ascertain that.'

"'How so?'

"'You need only search his person: and if he has the other bulbs, we
shall find them, as there usually are three suckers!'"

"Three suckers!" cried Cornelius. "Did you say that I have three?"

"The word certainly struck me just as much as it does you. I turned
round. They were both of them so deeply engaged in their conversation
that they did not observe my movement.

"'But,' said my father, 'perhaps he has not got his bulbs about him?'

"'Then take him down, under some pretext or other and I will search his
cell in the meanwhile.'"

"Halloa, halloa!" said Cornelius. "But this Mr. Jacob of yours is a
villain, it seems."

"I am afraid he is."

"Tell me, Rosa," continued Cornelius, with a pensive air.

"What?"

"Did you not tell me that on the day when you prepared your borders this
man followed you?"

"So he did."

"That he glided like a shadow behind the elder trees?"

"Certainly."

"That not one of your movements escaped him?"

"Not one, indeed."

"Rosa," said Cornelius, growing quite pale.

"Well?"

"It was not you he was after."

"Who else, then?"

"It is not you that he was in love with!"

"But with whom else?"

"He was after my bulb, and is in love with my tulip!"

"You don't say so! And yet it is very possible," said Rosa.

"Will you make sure of it?"

"In what manner?"

"Oh, it would be very easy!"

"Tell me."

"Go to-morrow into the garden; manage matters so that Jacob may know, as
he did the first time, that you are going there, and that he may follow
you. Feign to put the bulb into the ground; leave the garden, but look
through the keyhole of the door and watch him."

"Well, and what then?"

"What then? We shall do as he does."

"Oh!" said Rosa, with a sigh, "you are very fond of your bulbs."

"To tell the truth," said the prisoner, sighing likewise, "since your
father crushed that unfortunate bulb, I feel as if part of my own self
had been paralyzed."

"Now just hear me," said Rosa; "will you try something else?"

"What?"

"Will you accept the proposition of my father?"

"Which proposition?"

"Did not he offer to you tulip bulbs by hundreds?"

"Indeed he did."

"Accept two or three, and, along with them, you may grow the third
sucker."

"Yes, that would do very well," said Cornelius, knitting his brow; "if
your father were alone, but there is that Master Jacob, who watches all
our ways."

"Well, that is true; but only think! you are depriving yourself, as I
can easily see, of a very great pleasure."

She pronounced these words with a smile, which was not altogether
without a tinge of irony.

Cornelius reflected for a moment; he evidently was struggling against
some vehement desire.

"No!" he cried at last, with the stoicism of a Roman of old, "it would
be a weakness, it would be a folly, it would be a meanness! If I thus
give up the only and last resource which we possess to the uncertain
chances of the bad passions of anger and envy, I should never deserve to
be forgiven. No, Rosa, no; to-morrow we shall come to a conclusion as to
the spot to be chosen for your tulip; you will plant it according to my
instructions; and as to the third sucker,"--Cornelius here heaved a deep
sigh,--"watch over it as a miser over his first or last piece of gold;
as the mother over her child; as the wounded over the last drop of blood
in his veins; watch over it, Rosa! Some voice within me tells me that it
will be our saving, that it will be a source of good to us."

"Be easy, Mynheer Cornelius," said Rosa, with a sweet mixture of
melancholy and gravity, "be easy; your wishes are commands to me."

"And even," continued Van Baerle, warming more and more with his
subject, "if you should perceive that your steps are watched, and
that your speech has excited the suspicion of your father and of that
detestable Master Jacob,--well, Rosa, don't hesitate for one moment to
sacrifice me, who am only still living through you,--me, who have no one
in the world but you; sacrifice me,--don't come to see me any more."

Rosa felt her heart sink within her, and her eyes were filling with
tears.

"Alas!" she said.

"What is it?" asked Cornelius.

"I see one thing."

"What do you see?"

"I see," said she, bursting out in sobs, "I see that you love your
tulips with such love as to have no more room in your heart left for
other affections."

Saying this, she fled.

Cornelius, after this, passed one of the worst nights he ever had in his
life.

Rosa was vexed with him, and with good reason. Perhaps she would never
return to see the prisoner, and then he would have no more news, either
of Rosa or of his tulips.

We have to confess, to the disgrace of our hero and of floriculture,
that of his two affections he felt most strongly inclined to regret the
loss of Rosa; and when, at about three in the morning, he fell asleep
overcome with fatigue, and harassed with remorse, the grand black tulip
yielded precedence in his dreams to the sweet blue eyes of the fair maid
of Friesland.




Chapter 19. The Maid and the Flower


But poor Rosa, in her secluded chamber, could not have known of whom or
of what Cornelius was dreaming.

From what he had said she was more ready to believe that he dreamed of
the black tulip than of her; and yet Rosa was mistaken.

But as there was no one to tell her so, and as the words of Cornelius's
thoughtless speech had fallen upon her heart like drops of poison, she
did not dream, but she wept.

The fact was, that, as Rosa was a high-spirited creature, of no mean
perception and a noble heart, she took a very clear and judicious view
of her own social position, if not of her moral and physical qualities.

Cornelius was a scholar, and was wealthy,--at least he had been
before the confiscation of his property; Cornelius belonged to the
merchant-bourgeoisie, who were prouder of their richly emblazoned
shop signs than the hereditary nobility of their heraldic bearings.
Therefore, although he might find Rosa a pleasant companion for the
dreary hours of his captivity, when it came to a question of bestowing
his heart it was almost certain that he would bestow it upon a
tulip,--that is to say, upon the proudest and noblest of flowers, rather
than upon poor Rosa, the jailer's lowly child.

Thus Rosa understood Cornelius's preference of the tulip to herself, but
was only so much the more unhappy therefor.

During the whole of this terrible night the poor girl did not close an
eye, and before she rose in the morning she had come to the resolution
of making her appearance at the grated window no more.

But as she knew with what ardent desire Cornelius looked forward to the
news about his tulip; and as, notwithstanding her determination not to
see any more a man her pity for whose fate was fast growing into love,
she did not, on the other hand, wish to drive him to despair, she
resolved to continue by herself the reading and writing lessons; and,
fortunately, she had made sufficient progress to dispense with the help
of a master when the master was not to be Cornelius.

Rosa therefore applied herself most diligently to reading poor Cornelius
de Witt's Bible, on the second fly leaf of which the last will of
Cornelius van Baerle was written.

"Alas!" she muttered, when perusing again this document, which she never
finished without a tear, the pearl of love, rolling from her limpid
eyes on her pale cheeks--"alas! at that time I thought for one moment he
loved me."

Poor Rosa! she was mistaken. Never had the love of the prisoner been
more sincere than at the time at which we are now arrived, when in the
contest between the black tulip and Rosa the tulip had had to yield to
her the first and foremost place in Cornelius's heart.

But Rosa was not aware of it.

Having finished reading, she took her pen, and began with as laudable
diligence the by far more difficult task of writing.

As, however, Rosa was already able to write a legible hand when
Cornelius so uncautiously opened his heart, she did not despair of
progressing quickly enough to write, after eight days at the latest, to
the prisoner an account of his tulip.

She had not forgotten one word of the directions given to her by
Cornelius, whose speeches she treasured in her heart, even when they did
not take the shape of directions.

He, on his part, awoke deeper in love than ever. The tulip, indeed,
was still a luminous and prominent object in his mind; but he no longer
looked upon it as a treasure to which he ought to sacrifice everything,
and even Rosa, but as a marvellous combination of nature and art with
which he would have been happy to adorn the bosom of his beloved one.

Yet during the whole of that day he was haunted with a vague uneasiness,
at the bottom of which was the fear lest Rosa should not come in the
evening to pay him her usual visit. This thought took more and more hold
of him, until at the approach of evening his whole mind was absorbed in
it.

How his heart beat when darkness closed in! The words which he had said
to Rosa on the evening before and which had so deeply afflicted her, now
came back to his mind more vividly than ever, and he asked himself
how he could have told his gentle comforter to sacrifice him to his
tulip,--that is to say, to give up seeing him, if need be,--whereas to
him the sight of Rosa had become a condition of life.

In Cornelius's cell one heard the chimes of the clock of the fortress.
It struck seven, it struck eight, it struck nine. Never did the metal
voice vibrate more forcibly through the heart of any man than did the
last stroke, marking the ninth hour, through the heart of Cornelius.

All was then silent again. Cornelius put his hand on his heart, to
repress as it were its violent palpitation, and listened.

The noise of her footstep, the rustling of her gown on the staircase,
were so familiar to his ear, that she had no sooner mounted one step
than he used to say to himself,--

"Here comes Rosa."

This evening none of those little noises broke the silence of the lobby,
the clock struck nine, and a quarter; the half-hour, then a quarter to
ten, and at last its deep tone announced, not only to the inmates of
the fortress, but also to all the inhabitants of Loewestein, that it was
ten.

This was the hour at which Rosa generally used to leave Cornelius. The
hour had struck, but Rosa had not come.

Thus then his foreboding had not deceived him; Rosa, being vexed, shut
herself up in her room and left him to himself.

"Alas!" he thought, "I have deserved all this. She will come no more,
and she is right in staying away; in her place I should do just the
same."

Yet notwithstanding all this, Cornelius listened, waited, and hoped
until midnight, then he threw himself upon the bed, with his clothes on.

It was a long and sad night for him, and the day brought no hope to the
prisoner.

At eight in the morning, the door of his cell opened; but Cornelius did
not even turn his head; he had heard the heavy step of Gryphus in the
lobby, but this step had perfectly satisfied the prisoner that his
jailer was coming alone.

Thus Cornelius did not even look at Gryphus.

And yet he would have been so glad to draw him out, and to inquire about
Rosa. He even very nearly made this inquiry, strange as it would needs
have appeared to her father. To tell the truth, there was in all this
some selfish hope to hear from Gryphus that his daughter was ill.

Except on extraordinary occasions, Rosa never came during the day.
Cornelius therefore did not really expect her as long as the day lasted.
Yet his sudden starts, his listening at the door, his rapid glances at
every little noise towards the grated window, showed clearly that the
prisoner entertained some latent hope that Rosa would, somehow or other,
break her rule.

At the second visit of Gryphus, Cornelius, contrary to all his former
habits, asked the old jailer, with the most winning voice, about
her health; but Gryphus contented himself with giving the laconical
answer,--

"All's well."

At the third visit of the day, Cornelius changed his former inquiry:--

"I hope nobody is ill at Loewestein?"

"Nobody," replied, even more laconically, the jailer, shutting the door
before the nose of the prisoner.

Gryphus, being little used to this sort of civility on the part of
Cornelius, began to suspect that his prisoner was about to try and bribe
him.

Cornelius was now alone once more; it was seven o'clock in the evening,
and the anxiety of yesterday returned with increased intensity.

But another time the hours passed away without bringing the sweet vision
