from another drapery, opposite the royal couch, gleamed the burnished
mail of the knights of Spain. Foremost of these haughty visitors, whose
iron heels clanked loudly on the tesselated floor, came a noble and
stately form, in full armour, save the helmet, and with a mantle of
azure velvet, wrought with the silver cross that made the badge of the
Christian war. Upon his manly countenance was visible no sign of undue
arrogance or exultation; but something of that generous pity which brave
men feel for conquered foes dimmed the lustre of his commanding eye, and
softened the wonted sternness of his martial bearing. He and his train
approached the king with a profound salutation of respect; and falling
back, motioned to the herald that accompanied him, and whose garb,
breast and back, was wrought with the arms of Spain, to deliver himself
of his mission.

"To Boabdil!" said the herald, with a loud voice, that filled the whole
expanse, and thrilled with various emotions the dumb assembly. "To
Boabdil el Chico, King of Granada, Ferdinand of Arragon and Isabel of
Castile send royal greeting. They command me to express their hope that
the war is at length concluded; and they offer to the King of Granada
such terms of capitulation as a king, without dishonour, may receive.
In the stead of this city, which their Most Christian Majesties will
restore to their own dominion, as is just, they offer, O king, princely
territories in the Alpuxarras mountains to your sway, holding them by
oath of fealty to the Spanish crown. To the people of Granada, their
Most Christian Majesties promise full protection of property, life,
and faith under a government by their own magistrates, and according
to their own laws; exemption from tribute for three years; and taxes
thereafter, regulated by the custom and ratio of their present imposts.
To such Moors as, discontented with these provisions, would abandon
Granada, are promised free passage for themselves and their wealth.
In return for these marks of their royal bounty, their Most Christian
Majesties summon Granada to surrender (if no succour meanwhile arrive)
within seventy days. And these offers are now solemnly recorded in the
presence, and through the mission, of the noble and renowned knight,
Gonzalvo of Cordova, deputed by their Most Christian Majesties from
their new city of Santa Fe."

When the herald had concluded, Boabdil cast his eye over his thronged
and splendid court. No glance of fire met his own; amidst the silent
crowd, a resigned content was alone to be perceived: the proposals
exceeded the hope of the besieged.

"And," asked Boabdil, with a deep-drawn sigh, "if we reject these
offers?"

"Noble prince," said Gonzalvo, earnestly, "ask us not to wound thine
ears with the alternative. Pause, and consider of our offers; and, if
thou doubtest, O brave king! mount the towers of thine Alhambra, survey
our legions marshalled beneath thy walls, and turn thine eyes upon a
brave people, defeated, not by human valour, but by famine, and the
inscrutable will of God."

"Your monarchs shall have our answer, gentle Christian, perchance ere
nightfall. And you, Sir Knight, who hast delivered a message bitter for
kings to bear, receive, at least, our thanks for such bearing as might
best mitigate the import. Our vizier will bear to your apartment those
tokens of remembrance that are yet left to the monarch of Granada to
bestow."

"Muza," resumed the king, as the Spaniards left the presence--"thou hast
heard all. What is the last counsel thou canst give thy sovereign?"

The fierce Moor had with difficulty waited this licence to utter such
sentiments as death only could banish from that unconquerable heart. He
rose, descended from the couch, and, standing a little below the
king, and facing the motley throng of all of wise or brave yet left to
Granada, thus spoke:--

"Why should we surrender? two hundred thousand inhabitants are yet
within our walls; of these, twenty thousand, at least, are Moors, who
have hands and swords. Why should we surrender? Famine presses us, it is
true; but hunger, that makes the lion more terrible, shall it make the
man more base? Do ye despair? so be it! despair in the valiant ought
to have an irresistible force. Despair has made cowards brave: shall it
sink the brave to cowards? Let us arouse the people; hitherto we have
depended too much upon the nobles. Let us collect our whole force, and
march upon this new city, while the soldiers of Spain are employed in
their new profession of architects and builders. Hear me, O God and
prophet of the Moslem! hear one who never was forsworn! If, Moors of
Granada, ye adopt my counsel, I cannot promise ye victory, but I
promise ye never to live without it: I promise ye, at least, your
independence--for the dead know no chains! If we cannot live, let us
so die that we may leave to remotest ages a glory that shall be more
durable than kingdoms. King of Granada! this is the counsel of Muza Ben
Abil Gazan."

The prince ceased. But he, whose faintest word had once breathed fire
into the dullest, had now poured out his spirit upon frigid and lifeless
matter. No man answered--no man moved.

Boabdil alone, clinging to the shadow of hope, turned at last towards
the audience.

"Warriors and sages!" he said, "as Muza's counsel is your king's desire,
say but the word, and, ere the hour-glass shed its last sand, the blast
of our trumpet shall be ringing through the Vivarrambla."

"O king! fight not against the will of fate--God is great!" replied the
chief of the alfaquis.

"Alas!" said Abdelmelic, "if the voice of Muza and your own falls thus
coldly upon us, how can ye stir the breadless and heartless multitude?"

"Is such your general thought and your general will?" said Boabdil.

An universal murmur answered, "Yes!"

"Go then, Abdelmelic;" resumed the ill-starred king; "go with yon
Spaniards to the Christian camp, and bring us back the best terms you
can obtain. The crown has passed from the head of El Zogoybi; Fate
sets her seal upon my brow. Unfortunate was the commencement of my
reign--unfortunate its end. Break up the divan."

The words of Boabdil moved and penetrated an audience, never till then
so alive to his gentle qualities, his learned wisdom, and his natural
valour. Many flung themselves at his feet, with tears and sighs; and the
crowd gathered round to touch the hem of his robe.

Muza gazed at them in deep disdain, with folded arms and heaving breast.

"Women, not men!" he exclaimed, "ye weep, as if ye had not blood still
left to shed! Ye are reconciled to the loss of liberty, because ye are
told ye shall lose nothing else. Fools and dupes! I see, from the spot
where my spirit stands above ye, the dark and dismal future to which ye
are crawling on your knees: bondage and rapine--the violence of lawless
lust--the persecution of hostile faith--your gold wrung from ye by
torture--your national name rooted from the soil. Bear this, and
remember me! Farewell, Boabdil! you I pity not; for your gardens have
yet a poison, and your armories a sword. Farewell, nobles and santons of
Granada! I quit my country while it is yet free."

Scarcely had he ceased, ere he had disappeared from the hall. It was as
the parting genius of Granada!




CHAPTER IV. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SOLITARY HORSEMAN.

It was a burning and sultry noon, when, through a small valley, skirted
by rugged and precipitous hills, at the distance of several leagues from
Granada, a horseman, in complete armour, wound his solitary way; His
mail was black and unadorned; on his vizor waved no plume. But there
was something in his carriage and mien, and the singular beauty of his
coal-black steed, which appeared to indicate a higher rank than the
absence of page and squire, and the plainness of his accoutrements,
would have denoted to a careless eye. He rode very slowly; and his
steed, with the licence of a spoiled favourite, often halted lazily in
his sultry path, as a tuft of herbage, or the bough of some overhanging
tree, offered its temptation. At length, as he thus paused, a noise was
heard in a copse that clothed the descent of a steep mountain; and the
horse started suddenly back, forcing the traveller from his reverie.
He looked mechanically upward, and beheld the figure of a man bounding
through the trees, with rapid and irregular steps. It was a form that
suited well the silence and solitude of the spot; and might have passed
for one of those stern recluses--half hermit, half soldier--who, in the
earlier crusades, fixed their wild homes amidst the sands and caves of
Palestine. The stranger supported his steps by a long staff. His hair
and beard hung long and matted over his broad shoulders. A rusted mail,
once splendid with arabesque enrichments, protected his breast; but the
loose gown--a sort of tartan, which descended below the cuirass--was
rent and tattered, and his feet bare; in his girdle was a short curved
cimiter, a knife or dagger, and a parchment roll, clasped and bound with
iron.

As the horseman gazed at this abrupt intruder on the solitude, his
frame quivered with emotion; and, raising himself to his full height, he
called aloud, "Fiend or santon--whatsoever thou art--what seekest thou
in these lonely places, far from the king thy counsels deluded, and the
city betrayed by thy false prophecies and unhallowed charms?"

"Ha!" cried Almamen, for it was indeed the Israelite; "by thy black
charger, and the tone of thy haughty voice, I know the hero of Granada.
Rather, Muza Ben Abil Gazan, why art thou absent from the last hold of
the Moorish empire?"

"Dost thou pretend to read the future, and art thou blind to the
present? Granada has capitulated to the Spaniard. Alone I have left a
land of slaves, and shall seek, in our ancestral Africa, some spot where
the footstep of the misbeliever hath not trodden."

"The fate of one bigotry is, then, sealed," said Almamen, gloomily; "but
that which succeeds it is yet more dark."

"Dog!" cried Muza, couching his lance, "what art thou that thus
blasphemest?"

"A Jew!" replied Almamen, in a voice of thunder, and drawing his
cimiter: "a despised and despising Jew! Ask you more? I am the son of
a race of kings. I was the worst enemy of the Moors till I found the
Nazarene more hateful than the Moslem; and then even Muza himself was
not their more renowned champion. Come on, if thou wilt--man to man: I
defy thee"

"No, no," muttered Muza, sinking his lance; "thy mail is rusted with
the blood of the Spaniard, and this arm cannot smite the slayer of the
Christian. Part we in peace."

"Hold, prince!" said Almamen, in an altered voice: "is thy country the
sole thing dear to thee? Has the smile of woman never stolen beneath
thine armour? Has thy heart never beat for softer meetings than the
encounter of a foe?"

"Am I human, and a Moor?" returned Muza. "For once you divine aright;
and, could thy spells bestow on these eyes but one more sight of the
last treasure left to me on earth, I should be as credulous of thy
sorcery as Boabdil."

"Thou lovest her still, then--this Leila?"

"Dark necromancer, hast thou read my secret? and knowest thou the name
of my beloved one? Ah! let me believe thee indeed wise, and reveal to
me the spot of earth which holds the delight of my soul! Yes," continued
the Moor, with increased emotion, and throwing up his vizor, as if for
air--"yes; Allah forgive me! but, when all was lost at Granada, I had
still one consolation in leaving my fated birthplace: I had licence to
search for Leila; I had the hope to secure to my wanderings in distant
lands one to whose glance the eyes of the houris would be dim. But I
waste words. Tell me where is Leila, and conduct me to her feet!"

"Moslem, I will lead thee to her," answered Almamen, gazing on the
prince with an expression of strange and fearful exultation in his dark
eyes: "I will lead thee to her-follow me. It is only yesternight that I
learned the walls that confined her; and from that hour to this have I
journeyed over mountain and desert, without rest or food."

"Yet what is she to thee?" asked Muza, suspiciously.

"Thou shalt learn full soon. Let us on."

So saying, Almamen sprang forward with a vigour which the excitement of
his mind supplied to the exhaustion of his body. Muza wonderingly
pushed on his charger, and endeavoured to draw his mysterious guide into
conversation: but Almamen scarcely heeded him. And when he broke from
his gloomy silence, it was but in incoherent and brief exclamations,
often in a tongue foreign to the ear of his companion. The hardy Moor,
though steeled against the superstitions of his race, less by the
philosophy of the learned than the contempt of the brave, felt an awe
gather over him as he glanced, from the giant rocks and lonely valleys,
to the unearthly aspect and glittering eyes of the reputed sorcerer; and
more than once he muttered such verses of the Koran as were esteemed by
his countrymen the counterspell to the machinations of the evil genii.

It might be an hour that they had thus journeyed together, when Almamen
paused abruptly. "I am wearied," said he, faintly; "and, though time
presses, I fear that my strength will fail me."

"Mount, then, behind me," returned the Moor, after some natural
hesitation: "Jew though thou art, I will brave the contamination for the
sake of Leila."

"Moor!" cried the Hebrew, fiercely, "the contamination would be mine.
Things of yesterday, as thy Prophet and thy creed are, thou canst not
sound the unfathomable loathing which each heart faithful to the Ancient
of Days feels for such as thou and thine."

"Now, by the Kaaba!" said Muza, and his brow became dark, "another such
word and the hoofs of my steed shall trample the breath of blasphemy
from thy body."

"I would defy thee to the death," answered Almamen, disdainfully; "but
I reserve the bravest of the Moors to witness a deed worthy of the
descendant of Jephtha. But hist! I hear hoofs."

Muza listened; and his sharp ear caught a distinct ring upon the hard
and rocky soil. He turned round and saw Almamen gliding away through
the thick underwood, until the branches concealed his form. Presently,
a curve in the path brought in view a Spanish cavalier, mounted on an
Andalusian jennet: the horseman was gaily singing one of the popular
ballads of the time; and, as it related to the feats of the Spaniards
against the Moors, Muza's haughty blood was already stirred, and his
moustache quivered on his lip. "I will change the air," muttered the
Moslem, grasping his lance, when, as the thought crossed him, he beheld
the Spaniard suddenly reel in his saddle and lay prostrate on the
ground. In the same instant Almamen had darted from his hiding-place,
seized the steed of the cavalier, mounted, and, ere Muza recovered from
his surprise, was by the side of the Moor.

"By what harm," said Muza, curbing his barb, "didst thou fell the
Spaniard--seemingly without a blow?"

"As David felled Goliath--by the pebble and the sling," answered
Almamen, carelessly. "Now, then, spur forward, if thou art eager to see
thy Leila."

The horsemen dashed over the body of the stunned and insensible
Spaniard. Tree and mountain glided by; gradually the valley vanished,
and a thick forest loomed upon their path. Still they made on, though
the interlaced boughs and the ruggedness of the footing somewhat
obstructed their way; until, as the sun began slowly to decline, they
entered a broad and circular space, round which trees of the eldest
growth spread their motionless and shadowy boughs. In the midmost sward
was a rude and antique stone, resembling the altar of some barbarous and
departed creed. Here Almamen abruptly halted, and muttered inaudibly to
himself.

"What moves thee, dark stranger?" said the Moor; "and why dost thou
mutter and gaze on space?"

Almamen answered not, but dismounted, hung his bridle to a branch of a
scathed and riven elm, and advanced alone into the middle of the
space. "Dread and prophetic power that art within me!" said the Hebrew,
aloud,--"this, then, is the spot that, by dream and vision, thou hast
foretold me wherein to consummate and record the vow that shall sever
from the spirit the last weakness of the flesh. Night after night hast
thou brought before mine eyes, in darkness and in slumber, the solemn
solitude that I now survey. Be it so! I am prepared!"

Thus speaking, he retired for a few moments into the wood: collected
in his arms the dry leaves and withered branches which cumbered the
desolate clay, and placed the fuel upon the altar. Then, turning to the
East, and raising his hands he exclaimed, "Lo! upon this altar, once
worshipped, perchance, by the heathen savage, the last bold spirit of
thy fallen and scattered race dedicates, O Ineffable One! that precious
offering Thou didst demand from a sire of old. Accept the sacrifice!"

As the Hebrew ended his adjuration he drew a phial from his bosom, and
sprinkled a few drops upon the arid fuel. A pale blue flame suddenly
leaped up; and, as it lighted the haggard but earnest countenance of
the Israelite, Muza felt his Moorish blood congeal in his veins, and
shuddered, though he scarce knew why. Almamen, with his dagger, severed
from his head one of his long locks, and cast it upon the flame. He
watched it until it was consumed; and then, with a stifled cry, fell
upon the earth in a dead swoon. The Moor hastened to raise him; he
chafed his hands and temples; he unbuckled the vest upon his bosom; he
forgot that his comrade was a sorcerer and a Jew, so much had the agony
of that excitement moved his sympathy.

It was not till several minutes had elapsed that Almamen, with a
deep-drawn sigh, recovered from his swoon. "Ah, beloved one! bride of my
heart!" he murmured, "was it for this that thou didst commend to me
the only pledge of our youthful love? Forgive me! I restore her to the
earth, untainted by the Gentile." He closed his eyes again, and a strong
convulsion shook his frame. It passed; and he rose as a man from a
fearful dream, composed, and almost as it were refreshed, by the terrors
he had undergone. The last glimmer of the ghastly light was dying away
upon that ancient altar, and a low wind crept sighing through the trees.

"Mount, prince," said Almamen, calmly, but averting his eyes from the
altar; "we shall have no more delays."

"Wilt thou not explain thy incantation?" asked Muza; "or is it, as my
