
"Of the forest."

"Are there any ruins in the forest?"

"The Chartreuse, which is not in the forest, but merely some hundred
feet from it."

"And in the forest?"

"There is a sort of hermitage which is called La Correrie, belonging to
the Chartreuse, with which it communicates by a subterranean passage."

"Good! Now, if you can provide me with a grotto you will overwhelm me."

"We have the grotto of Ceyzeriat, but that is on the other side of the
Reissouse."

"I don't mind. If the grotto won't come to me, I will do like Mahomet--I
will go to the grotto. In the meantime let us go to M. Leduc."

Five minutes later we reached M. Leduc's house. He, on learning what we
wanted, placed himself, his horse, and his carriage at my disposal. I
accepted all. There are some men who offer their services in such a way
that they place you at once at your ease.

We first visited the Chartreuse. Had I built it myself it could not have
suited me better. A deserted cloister, devastated garden, inhabitants
almost savages. Chance, I thank thee!

From there we went to the Correrie; it was the supplement of the
Chartreuse. I did not yet know what I could do with it; but evidently it
might be useful to me.

"Now, sir," I said to my obliging guide, "I need a pretty site, rather
gloomy, surrounded by tall trees, beside a river. Have you anything like
that in the neighborhood?"

"What do you want to do with it?"

"To build a chateau there."

"What kind of a chateau?"

"Zounds! of cards! I have a family to house, a model mother, a
melancholy young girl, a mischievous brother, and a poaching gardener."

"There is a place called Noires-Fontaines."

"In the first place the name is charming."

"But there is no chateau there."

"So much the better, for I should have been obliged to demolish it."

"Let us go to Noires-Fontaines."

We started; a quarter of an hour later we descended at the ranger's
lodge.

"Shall we take this little path?" said M. Leduc; "it will take us where
you want to go."

It led us, in fact, to a spot planted with tall trees which overshadowed
three or four rivulets.

"We call this place Noires-Fontaines," M. Leduc explained.

"And here Madame de Montrevel, Amelie and little Edouard will dwell. Now
what are those villages which I see in front of me?"

"Here, close at hand, is Montagnac; yonder, on the mountain side,
Ceyzeriat."

"Is that where the grotto is?"

"Yes. But how did you know there was a grotto at Ceyzeriat?"

"Never mind, go on. The name of those other villages, if you please."

"Saint-Just, Treconnas, Ramasse, Villereversure."

"That will do."

"Have you enough?"

"Yes."

I drew out my note-book, sketched a plan of the locality and wrote about
in their relative positions the names of the villages which M. Leduc had
just pointed out to me.

"That's done!" said I.

"Where shall we go now?"

"Isn't the church of Brou near this road?"

"Yes."

"Then let us go to the church of Brou."

"Do you need that in your novel?"

"Yes, indeed; you don't imagine I am going to lay my scene in a country
which contains the architectural masterpiece of the sixteenth century
without utilizing that masterpiece, do you?"

"Let us go to the church of Brou."

A quarter of an hour later the sacristan showed us into this granite
jewel-case which contains the three marble gems called the tombs of
Marguerite of Austria, Marguerite or Bourbon, and of Philibert le Beau.

"How is it," I asked the sacristan, "that all these masterpieces were
not reduced to powder during the Revolution?"

"Ah! sir, the municipality had an idea."

"What was it?"

"That of turning the church into a storage house for fodder."

"Yes, and the hay saved the marble; you are right, my friend, that _was_
an idea."

"Does this idea of the municipality afford you another?" asked M. Leduc.

"Faith, yes, and I shall have poor luck if I don't make something out of
it."

I looked at my watch. "Three o'clock! Now for the prison. I have an
appointment with M. Milliet at four on the Place du Bastion."

"Wait; there is one thing more."

"What is that?"

"Have you noticed Marguerite of Austria's motto?"

"No; where is it?"

"Oh, all over. In the first place, look above her tomb."

"'Fortune, infortune, fort'une.'"

"Exactly."

"Well, what does this play of words mean?"

"Learned men translate it thus: 'Fate persecutes a woman much.'"

"Explain that a little."

"You must, in the first place, assume that it is derived from the
Latin."

"True, that is probable."

"Well, then: 'Fortuna infortunat--'"

"Oh! Oh! 'Infortunat.'"

"Bless me!"

"That strongly resembles a solecism!"

"What do you want?"

"An explanation."

"Explain it yourself."

"Well; 'Fortuna, infortuna, forti una.' 'Fortune and misfortune are
alike to the strong.'"

"Do you know, that may possibly be the correct translation?"

"Zounds! See what it is not to be learned, my dear sir; we are endowed
with common-sense, and that sees clearer than science. Have you anything
else to tell me?"

"No."

"Then let us go to the prison."

We got into the carriage and returned to the city, stopping only at the
gate of the prison. I glanced out of the window.

"Oh!" I exclaimed, "they have spoiled it for me."

"What! They've spoiled it for you?"

"Certainly, it was not like this in my prisoners' time. Can I speak to
the jailer?"

"Certainly."

"Then let us consult him."

We knocked at the door. A man about forty opened it. He recognized M.
Leduc.

"My dear fellow," M. Leduc said to him, "this is one of my learned
friends--"

"Come, come," I exclaimed, interrupting him, "no nonsense."

"Who contends," continued M. Leduc, "that the prison is no longer the
same as it was in the last century?"

"That is true, M. Leduc, it was torn down and rebuilt in 1816."

"Then the interior arrangements are no longer the same?"

"Oh! no, sir, everything was changed."

"Could I see the old plan?"

"M. Martin, the architect, might perhaps be able to find one for you."

"Is he any relation to M. Martin, the lawyer?"

"His brother."

"Very well, my friend, then I can get my plan."

"Then we have nothing more to do here?" inquired M. Leduc.

"Nothing."

"Then I am free to go home?"

"I shall be sorry to leave you, that is all."

"Can you find your way to the Bastion without me?"

"It is close by."

"What are you going to do this evening?"

"I will spend it with you, if you wish."

"Very good! You will find a cup of tea waiting for you at nine."

"I shall be on hand for it."

I thanked M. Leduc. We shook hands and parted.

I went down the Rue des Lisses (meaning Lists, from a combat which
took place in the square to which it leads), and skirting the Montburon
Garden, I reached the Place du Bastion. This is a semicircle now used as
the town marketplace. In the midst stands the statue of Bichat by
David d'Angers. Bichat, in a frockcoat--why that exaggeration of
realism?--stands with his hand upon the heart of a child about nine or
ten years old, perfectly nude--why that excess of ideality? Extended
at Bichat's feet lies a dead body. It is Bichat's book "Of Life and
of Death" translated into bronze. I was studying this statue, which
epitomizes the defects and merits of David d'Angers, when I felt some
one touch my shoulder. I turned around; it was M. Milliet. He held a
paper in his hand.

"Well?" I asked.

"Well, victory!"

"What is that you have there?"

"The minutes of the trial and execution."

"Of whom?"

"Of your men."

"Of Guyon, Lepretre, Amiet--!"

"And Hyvert."

"Give it to me."

"Here it is."

I took it and read:

  REPORT OF THE DEATH AND EXECUTION OF LAURENT GUYON, ETIENNE
  HYVERT, FRANCOIS AMIET, ANTOINE LEPRETRE. Condemned the twentieth
  Thermidor of the year VIII., and executed the twenty-third
  Vendemiaire of the year IX.

  To-day, the twenty-third Vendemiaire of the year IX., the
  government commissioner of the tribunal, who received at eleven
  of the evening the budget of the Minister of Justice, containing
  the minutes of the trial and the judgment which condemns to
  death Laurent Guyon, Etienne Hyvert, Francois Amiet and Antoine
  Lepretre;--the decision of the Court of Appeals of the sixth
  inst., rejecting the appeal against the sentence of the
  twenty-first Thermidor of the year VIII., I did notify by letter,
  between seven and eight of the morning, the four accused that
  their sentence of death would take effect to-day at eleven o'clock.
  In the interval which elapsed before eleven o'clock, the four
  accused shot themselves with pistols and stabbed themselves with
  blows from a poinard in prison. Lepretre and Guyon, according
  to public rumor, were dead; Hyvert fatally wounded and dying;
  Amiet fatally wounded, but still conscious. All four, in this
  state, were conveyed to the scaffold, and, living or dead, were
  guillotined. At half after eleven, the sheriff, Colin, handed in
  the report of their execution to the Municipality for registration
  upon the death roll:

  The captain of gendarmerie remitted to the Justice of the Peace
  a report of what had occurred in the prison, of which he was a
  witness. I, who was not present, do certify to what I have learned
  by hearsay only.

    (Signed) DUBOST, _Clerk_.

  Bourg, 23d Vendemiaire of the year IX.

Ah! so it was the poet who was right and not the historian! The captain
of gendarmerie, who remitted the report of the proceedings in the prison
to the Justice of the Peace, at which he was present, was Nodier's
uncle. This report handed to the Justice of the Peace was the story
which, graven upon the young man's mind, saw the light some forty
years later unaltered, in that masterpiece entitled "Souvenirs de la
Revolution." The entire series of papers was in the record office. M.
Martin offered to have them copied for me; inquiry, trial and judgment.

I had a copy of Nodier's "Souvenirs of the Revolution" in my pocket.
In my hand I held the report of the execution which confirmed the facts
therein stated.

"Now let us go to our magistrate," I said to M. Milliet.

"Let us go to our magistrate," he repeated.

The magistrate was confounded, and I left him convinced that poets know
history as well as historians--if not better.

ALEX. DUMAS.




PROLOGUE. THE CITY OF AVIGNON

We do not know if the prologue we are going to present to our readers'
eyes be very useful, nevertheless we cannot resist the desire to make of
it, not the first chapter, but the preface of this book.

The more we advance in life, the more we advance in art, the more
convinced we become that nothing is abrupt and isolated; that nature
and society progress by evolution and not by chance, and that the event,
flower joyous or sad, perfumed or fetid, beneficent or fatal, which
unfolds itself to-day before our eyes, was sown in the past, and had
its roots sometimes in days anterior to ours, even as it will bear its
fruits in the future.

Young, man accepts life as it comes, enamored of yestereen, careless
of the day, heeding little the morrow. Youth is the springtide with its
dewy dawns and its beautiful nights; if sometimes a storm clouds the
sky, it gathers, mutters and disperses, leaving the sky bluer, the
atmosphere purer, and Nature more smiling than before. What use is there
in reflecting on this storm that passes swift as a caprice, ephemeral
as a fancy? Before we have discovered the secret of the meteorological
enigma, the storm will have disappeared.

But it is not thus with the terrible phenomena, which at the close of
summer, threaten our harvests; or in the midst of autumn, assail our
vintages; we ask whither they go, we query whence they come, we seek a
means to prevent them.

To the thinker, the historian, the poet, there is a far deeper subject
for reflection in revolutions, these tempests of the social atmosphere
which drench the earth with blood, and crush an entire generation of
men, than in those upheavals of nature which deluge a harvest, or flay
the vineyards with hail--that is to say, the fruits of a single harvest,
wreaking an injury, which can at the worst be repaired the ensuing year;
unless the Lord be in His days of wrath.

Thus, in other days, be it forgetfulness, heedlessness or ignorance
perhaps--(blessed he who is ignorant! a fool he who is wise!)--in other
days in relating the story which I am going to tell you to-day I would,
without pausing at the place where the first scene of this book occurs,
have accorded it but a superficial mention, and traversing the Midi like
any other province, have named Avignon like any other city.

But to-day it is no longer the same; I am no longer tossed by the
flurries of spring, but by the storms of summer, the tempests of
autumn. To-day when I name Avignon, I evoke a spectre; and, like Antony
displaying Caesar's toga, say:

  "Look! in this place ran Cassius' dagger through;
  See what a rent the envious Casca made;
  Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabbed--"

So, seeing the bloody shroud of the papal city, I say: "Behold the blood
of the Albigenses, and here the blood of the Cevennais; behold the blood
of the Republicans, and here the blood of the Royalists; behold the
blood of Lescuyer; behold the blood of Marechal Brune."

And I feel myself seized with a profound sadness, and I begin to write,
but at the first lines I perceive that, without suspecting it, the
historian's chisel has superseded the novelist's pen in my hand.

Well, let us be both. Reader, grant me these ten, fifteen, twenty pages
to the historian; the novelist shall have the rest.

Let us say, therefore, a few words about Avignon, the place where the
first scene of the new book which we are offering to the public, opens.
Perhaps, before reading what we have to say, it would be well to cast a
glance at what its native historian, Francois Nouguier, says of it.

"Avignon," he writes, "a town noble for its antiquity, pleasing in
its site, superb for its walls, smiling for the fertility of its soil,
charming for the gentleness of its inhabitants, magnificent for its
palace, beautiful in its broad streets, marvellous in the construction
of its bridge, rich because of its commerce, and known to all the
world."

May the shade of Francois Nouguier pardon us if we do not at first see
his city with the same eyes as he does. To those who know Avignon be it
to say who has best described it, the historian or the novelist.

It is but just to assert in the first place that Avignon is a town
by itself, that is to say, a town of extreme passions. The period of
religious dissensions, which culminated for her in political hatreds,
dates from the twelfth century. After his flight from Lyons, the valleys
of Mont Ventoux sheltered Pierre de Valdo and his Vaudois, the ancestors
of those Protestants who, under the name of the Albigenses, cost the
Counts of Toulouse, and transferred to the papacy, the seven chateaux
which Raymond VI. possessed in Languedoc.

Avignon, a powerful republic governed by podestats, refused to submit
to the King of France. One morning Louis VIII., who thought it easier
to make a crusade against Avignon like Simon de Montfort, than against
Jerusalem like Philippe Auguste; one morning, we say, Louis VIII.
appeared before the gates of Avignon, demanding admission with lances at
rest, visor down, banners unfurled and trumpets of war sounding.

The bourgeois refused. They offered the King of France, as a last
concession, a peaceful entrance, lances erect, and the royal banner
alone unfurled. The King laid siege to the town, a siege which lasted
three months, during which, says the chronicler, the bourgeois of
Avignon returned the French soldiers arrow for arrow, wound for wound,
death for death.

The city capitulated at length. Louis VIII. brought the Roman
Cardinal-Legate, Saint-Angelo, in his train. It was he who dictated the
terms, veritable priestly terms, hard and unconditional. The Avignonese
were commanded to demolish their ramparts, to fill their moats, to raze
three hundred towers, to sell their vessels, and to burn their engines
and machines of war. They had moreover to pay an enormous impost, to
abjure the Vaudois heresy, and maintain thirty men fully armed and
equipped, in Palestine, to aid in delivering the tomb of Christ. And
finally, to watch over the fulfillment of these terms, of which the bull
is still extant in the city archives, a brotherhood of penitents was
founded which, reaching down through six centuries, still exists in our
days.

In opposition to these penitents, known as the "White Penitents," the
order of the "Black Penitents" was founded, imbued with the spirit of
opposition of Raymond of Toulouse.

From that day forth the religious hatreds developed into political
hatreds. It was not sufficient that Avignon should be the land of
heresy. She was destined to become the theatre of schisms.

Permit us, in connection with this French Rome, a short historical
digression. Strictly speaking, it is not essential to the subject
of which we treat, and we were perhaps wiser to launch ourselves
immediately into the heart of the drama; but we trust that we will be
forgiven. We write more particularly for those who, in a novel, like
occasionally to meet with something more than fiction.

In 1285 Philippe le Bel ascended the throne.

It is a great historical date, this date of 1285. The papacy which, in
the person of Gregory VII., successfully opposed the Emperor of Germany;
the papacy which, vanquished in matters temporal by Henry IV., yet
vanquished him morally. This papacy was slapped by a simple Sabine
gentleman, and the steel gauntlet of Colonna reddened the cheek of
Boniface VIII. But the King of France, whose hand had really dealt this
blow, what happened to him under the successor of Boniface VIII.?

This successor was Benedict XI., a man of low origin, but who might
perhaps have developed into a man of genius, had they allowed him the
time. Too weak for an open struggle with Philippe le Bel, he found a
means which would have been the envy of the founder of a celebrated
order two hundred years later. He pardoned Colonna openly.

To pardon Colonna was to declare Colonna culpable, since culprits alone
have need of pardon. If Colonna were guilty, the King of France was at
least his accomplice.

There was some danger in supporting such an argument; also Benedict
XI. was pope but eight months. One day a veiled woman, a pretended
lay-sister of Sainte-Petronille at Perugia, came to him while he was
at table, offering him a basket of figs. Did it conceal an asp like
Cleopatra's? The fact is that on the morrow the Holy See was vacant.

Then Philippe le Bel had a strange idea; so strange that it must, at
first, have seemed an hallucination.

It was to withdraw the papacy from Rome, to install it in France, to put
it in jail, and force it to coin money for his profit.

The reign of Philippe le Bel was the advent of gold. Gold! that was the
sole and unique god of this king who had slapped a pope. Saint Louis had
a priest, the worthy Abbe Suger, for minister; Philippe le Bel had two
bankers, two Florentines, Biscio and Musiato.

Do you expect, dear reader, that we are about to fall into the
philosophical commonplace of anathematizing gold? You are mistaken.

In the thirteenth century gold meant progress. Until then nothing was
known but the soil. Gold was the soil converted into money, the
soil mobilized, exchangeable, transportable, divisible, subtilized,
spiritualized, as it were.

So long as the soil was not represented by gold, man, like the god
Thermes, that landmark of the fields, had his feet imprisoned by the
earth. Formerly the earth bore man, to-day man bears the earth.

But this gold had to be abstracted from its hiding-place, and it was
hidden far otherwise than in the mines of Chile or Mexico. All the gold
was in the possession of the churches and the Jews. To extract it from
this double mine it needed more than a king; it required a pope.

And that is why Philippe le Bel, that great exploiter of gold, resolved
to have a pope of his own. Benedict XI. dead, a conclave was held at
Perugia; at this conclave the French cardinals were in the majority.
Philippe le Bel cast his eyes upon the Archbishop of Bordeaux, Bertrand
de Got, and to him he gave rendezvous in a forest near Saint-Jean
d'Angely.

Bertrand de Got took heed not to miss that appointment.

The King and the Archbishop heard mass there, and at the moment when the
Host was elevated, they bound themselves by this God they glorified to
absolute secrecy. Bertrand de Got was still ignorant of the matter in
question. Mass over, Philippe le Bel said:

"Archbishop, I have it in my power to make thee pope."

Bertrand de Got listened no longer, but cast himself at the King's feet,
saying:

"What must I do to obtain this?"

"Accord me the six favors which I shall ask of thee," replied Philippe
le Bel.

"It's for thee to command and for me to obey," said the future Pope.

The vow of servitude was taken.

The King raised Bertrand de Got, and, kissing him on the mouth, said:

"The six favors which I demand of thee are these: First, thou shalt
reconcile me completely with the Church, and grant me pardon for the
misdeed that I committed toward Boniface VIII. Second, thou shalt
restore to me and mine the right of communion of which the Court of Rome
deprived me. Third, thou shalt grant me the clergy's tithe in my kingdom
for the next five years, to help defray the expenses of the war in
Flanders. Fourth, thou shalt destroy and annul the memory of Pope
Boniface VIII. Fifth, thou shalt bestow the dignity of cardinal upon
Messires Jacopo and Pietro de Colonna. As to the sixth favor and
promise, that I shall reserve to speak to thee thereof in its time and
place."

Bertrand de Got swore to the promises and favors known, and to the
promise and favor unknown. This last, which the King had not dared to
mention in connection with the others, was the abolition of the Knights
Templar. Besides the promises made on the Corpus Domini, Bertrand de Got
gave as hostages his brother and two of his nephews. The King swore on
his side that he should be elected pope.

This scene, set in the deep shadows of a crossroad in the forest,
resembled rather an evocation between magician and demon than an
agreement entered upon between king and pope.

Also the coronation of the King, which took place shortly afterward
at Lyons, and which began the Church's captivity, seemed but little
agreeable to God. Just as the royal procession was passing, a wall
crowded with spectators fell, wounding the King and killing the Duc de
Bretagne. The Pope was thrown to the ground, and his tiara rolled in the
mud.

Bertrand de Got was elected pope under the name of Clement V.

Clement V. paid all that Bertrand de Got had promised. Philippe was
absolved, Holy Communion restored to him and his, the purple again
descended upon the shoulders of the Colonna, the Church was obliged
to defray the expenses of the war in Flanders and Philippe de Valois's
crusade against the Greek Empire. The memory of Pope Boniface VIII. was,
if not destroyed and annulled, at least besmirched; the walls of the
Temple were razed, and the Templars burned on the open space of the Pont
Neuf.

All these edicts--they were no longer called bulls from the moment the
temporal power dictated them--all these edicts were dated at Avignon.

Philippe le Bel was the richest of all the kings of the French monarchy;
he possessed an inexhaustible treasury, that is to say, his pope. He had
purchased him, he used him, he put him to the press, and as cider flows
from apples, so did this crushed pope bleed gold. The pontificate,
struck by the Colonna in the person of Boniface VIII., abdicated the
empire of the world in the person of Clement V.

We have related the advent of the king of blood and the pope of gold.
We know how they ended. Jacques de Molay, from his funeral pyre, adjured
them both to appear before God within the year. _Ae to geron sithullia_,
says Aristophanes. "Dying hoary heads possess the souls of sibyls."

Clement V. departed first. In a vision he saw his palace in flames.
"From that moment," says Baluze, "he became sad and lasted but a short
time."

Seven months later it was Philippe's turn. Some say that he was killed
while hunting, overthrown by a wild boar. Dante is among their number.
"He," said he, "who was seen near the Seine falsifying the coin of the
realm shall die by the tusk of a boar." But Guillaume de Nangis makes
the royal counterfeiter die of a death quite otherwise providential.

"Undermined by a malady unknown to the physicians, Philippe expired,"
said he, "to the great astonishment of everybody, without either his
pulse or his urine revealing the cause of his malady or the imminence of
the danger."

The King of Debauchery, the King of Uproar, Louis X., called the Hutin,
succeeded his father, Philippe le Bel; John XXII. to Clement V.

Avignon then became in truth a second Rome. John XXII. and Clement VI.
anointed her queen of luxury. The manners and customs of the times made
her queen of debauchery and indulgence. In place of her towers, razed by
Romain de Saint-Angelo, Hernandez de Heredi, grand master of Saint-Jean
of Jerusalem, girdled her with a belt of walls. She possessed dissolute
monks, who transformed the blessed precincts of her convents into places
of debauchery and licentiousness; her beautiful courtesans tore the
diamonds from the tiara to make of them bracelets and necklaces; and
finally she possessed the echoes of Vaucluse, which wafted the melodious
strains of Petrarch's songs to her.

This lasted until King Charles V., who was a virtuous and pious prince,
having resolved to put an end to the scandal, sent the Marechal de
Boucicaut to drive out the anti-pope, Benedict XIII., from Avignon. But
at sight of the soldiers of the King of France the latter remembered
that before being pope under the name of Benedict XIII. he had been
captain under the name of Pierre de Luna. For five months he defended
himself, pointing his engines of war with his own hands from the heights
of the chateau walls, engines otherwise far more murderous than his
pontifical bolts. At last forced to flee, he left the city by a
postern, after having ruined a hundred houses and killed four thousand
Avignonese, and fled to Spain, where the King of Aragon offered him
sanctuary.

There each morning, from the summit of a tower, assisted by the two
priests who constituted his sacred college, he blessed the whole world,
which was none the better for it, and excommunicated his enemies, who
were none the worse for it. At last, feeling himself nigh to death,
and fearing lest the schism die with him, he elected his two vicars
cardinals on the condition that after his death one of the two would
elect the other pope. The election was made. The new pope, supported by
the cardinal who made him, continued the schism for awhile. Finally both
entered into negotiations with Rome, made honorable amends, and returned
to the fold of Holy Church, one with the title of Arch bishop of
Seville, the other as Archbishop of Toledo.

From this time until 1790 Avignon, widowed of her popes, was governed
by legates and vice-legates. Seven sovereign pontiffs had resided
within her walls some seven decades; she had seven hospitals, seven
fraternities of penitents, seven monasteries, seven convents, seven
parishes, and seven cemeteries.

To those who know Avignon there was at that epoch--there is yet--two
cities within a city: the city of the priests, that is to say, the Roman
city, and the city of the merchants, that is to say, the French city.
The city of the priests, with its papal palace, its hundred churches,
its innumerable bell-towers, ever ready to sound the tocsin of
conflagration, the knell of slaughter. The town of the merchants, with
its Rhone, its silk-workers, its crossroads, extending north, east,
south and west, from Lyons to Marseilles, from Nimes to Turin. The
French city, the accursed city, longing for a king, jealous of its
liberties, shuddering beneath its yoke of vassalage, a vassalage of the
priests with the clergy for its lord.

The clergy--not the pious clergy, tolerantly austere in the practice
of its duty and charity, living in the world to console and edify
it, without mingling in its joys and passions--but a clergy such as
intrigue, cupidity, and ambition had made it; that is to say, the
court abbes, rivalling the Roman priests, indolent, libertine, elegant,
impudent, kings of fashion, autocrats of the salon, kissing the hands of
those ladies of whom they boasted themselves the paramours, giving their
hands to kiss to the women of the people whom they honored by making
their mistresses.

Do you want a type of those abbes? Take the Abbe Maury. Proud as a duke,
insolent as a lackey, the son of a shoemaker, more aristocratic than the
son of a great lord.

One understands that these two categories of inhabitants, representing
the one heresy, the other orthodoxy; the one the French party, the other
the Roman party; the one the party of absolute monarchy, the other that
of progressive constitutionalism, were not elements conducive to the
peace and security of this ancient pontifical city. One understands,
we say, that at the moment when the revolution broke out in Paris, and
manifested itself by the taking of the Bastille, that the two parties,
hot from the religious wars of Louis XIV., could not remain inert in the
presence of each other.

We have said, Avignon, city of priests; let us add, city of hatreds.
Nowhere better than in convent towns does one learn to hate. The heart
of the child, everywhere else free from wicked passions, was born there
full of paternal hatreds, inherited from father to son for the last
eight hundred years, and after a life of hate, bequeathed in its turn, a
diabolical heritage, to his children.

Therefore, at the first cry of liberty which rang through France the
French town rose full of joy and hope. The moment had come at last for
her to contest aloud that concession made by a young queen, a minor,
in expiation of her sins, of a city and a province, and with it half a
million souls. By what right had she sold these souls in aeternum to the
hardest and most exacting of all masters, the Roman Pontiff?

All France was hastening to assemble in the fraternal embrace of the
Federation at the Champ de Mars. Was she not France? Her sons ejected
delegates to wait upon the legate and request him respectfully to leave
the city, giving him twenty-four hours in which to do so.

During the night the papists amused themselves by hanging from a gibbet
an effigy of straw wearing the tri-color cockade.

The course of the Rhone has been controlled, the Durance canalled, dikes
have been built to restrain the fierce torrents, which, at the melting
of the snows, pour in liquid avalanches from the summits of Mt. Ventoux.
But this terrible flood, this living flood, this human torrent that
rushed leaping through the rapid inclines of the streets of Avignon,
once released, once flooding, not even God Himself has yet sought to
stay it.

At sight of this manikin with the national colors, dancing at the end
of a cord, the French city rose upon its very foundations with terrible
cries of rage. Four papist, suspected of this sacrilege, two marquises,
one burgher, and a workman, were torn from their homes and hung in the
manikin's stead. This occurred the eleventh of June, 1790.

The whole French town wrote to the National Assembly that she gave
herself to France, and with her the Rhone, her commerce, the Midi, and
the half of Provence.

The National Assembly was in one of its reactionary moods. It did not
wish to quarrel with the Pope; it dallied with the King, and the matter
was adjourned. From that moment the rising became a revolt, and the Pope
was free to do with Avignon what the court might have done with Paris,
if the Assembly had delayed its proclamation of the Rights of Man.
The Pope ordered the annulment of all that had occurred at the Comtat
Venaissin, the re-establishment of the privileges of the nobles and
clergy, and the reinstallation of the Inquisition in all its rigor. The
pontifical decrees were affixed to the walls.

One man, one only, in broad daylight dared to go straight to the walls,
in face of all, and tear down the decree. His name was Lescuyer. He
was not a young man; and therefore it was not the fire of youth that
impelled him. No, he was almost an old man who did not even belong to
the province. He was a Frenchman from Picardy, ardent yet reflective, a
former notary long since established at Avignon.

It was a crime that Roman Avignon remembered; a crime so great that the
Virgin wept!

You see Avignon is another Italy. She must have her miracles, and if
God will not perform them, so surely will some one be at hand to invent
them. Still further, the miracle must be a miracle pertaining to the
Virgin. La Madonna! the mind, the heart, the tongue of the Italians are
full of these two words.

It was in the Church of the Cordeliers that this miracle occurred. The
crowd rushed there. It was much that the Virgin should weep; but a rumor
spread at the same time that brought the excitement to a climax. A large
coffer, tightly sealed, had been carried through the city; this chest
had excited the curiosity of all Avignon. What did it contain? Two hours
later it was no longer a coffer; but eighteen trunks had been seen going
toward the Rhone. As for their contents, a porter had revealed that;
they contained articles from the Mont-de-Piete that the French party
were taking with them into exile. Articles from the Mont-de-Piete, that
is to say, the spoils of the poor! The poorer the city the richer its
pawn-shops. Few could boast such wealth as those of Avignon. It was no
longer a factional affair, it was a theft, an infamous theft. Whites
and Reds rushed to the Church of the Cordeliers, shouting that the
municipality must render them an accounting.

Lescuyer was the secretary of the municipality. His name was thrown to
the crowd, not for having torn down the pontifical decrees--from that
moment he would have had defenders--but for having signed the order to
the keeper of the Mont-de-Piete permitting the removal of the articles
in pawn.

Four men were sent to seize Lescuyer and bring him to the church. They
found him in the street on his way to the municipality. The four men
fell upon him and dragged him to the church with the most ferocious
cries. Once there, Lescuyer understood from the flaming eyes that met
his, from the clinched fists threatening him, the shrieks demanding his
death; Lescuyer understood that instead of being in the house of the
Lord he was in one of those circles of hell forgotten by Dante.

The only idea that occurred to him as to this hatred against him was
that he had caused it by tearing down the pontifical decrees. He climbed
into the pulpit, expecting to convert it into a seat of justice, and in
the voice of a man who not only does not blame himself, but who is even
ready to repeat his action, he said:

"Brothers, I consider the revolution necessary; consequently I have done
all in my power--"

The fanatics understood that if Lescuyer explained, Lescuyer was saved.
That was not what they wanted. They flung themselves upon him, tore him
from the pulpit, and thrust him into the midst of this howling mob, who
dragged him to the altar with that sort of terrible cry which combines
the hiss of the serpent and the roar of the tiger, the murderous zou!
zou! peculiar to the people of Avignon.

Lescuyer recognized that fatal cry; he endeavored to gain refuge at the
foot of the altar. He found none; he fell there.

A laborer, armed with a stick, dealt him such a blow on the head that
the stick broke in two pieces. Then the people hurled themselves upon
the poor body, and, with that mixture of gayety and ferocity peculiar to
Southern people, the men began to dance on his stomach, singing, while
the women, that he might better expiate his blasphemies against the
Pope, cut or rather scalloped his lips with their scissors.

And out of the midst of this frightful group came a cry, or rather a
groan; this death groan said: "In the name of Heaven! in the name of the
Virgin! in the name of humanity! kill me at once."

This cry was heard, and by common consent the assassins stood aside.
They left the unfortunate man bleeding, disfigured, mangled, to taste of
his death agony.

This lasted five hours, during which, amid shouts of laughter, insults,
and jeers from the crowd, this poor body lay palpitating upon the steps
of the altar. That is how they kill at Avignon.

Stay! there is yet another way. A man of the French party conceived the
idea of going to the Mont-de-Piete for information. Everything was in
order there, not a fork or a spoon had been removed. It was therefore
not as an accomplice of theft that Lescuyer had just been so cruelly
murdered, it was for being a patriot.

