though it cost him an effort, he held back. As the Conde de Gondomar
appeared, Sir Thomas Lake arose, and made him a profound salutation,
which was returned with equal ceremony by the Spanish Ambassador. The
latter, however, did not take a seat, but remained standing with Lord
Roos, whose presence was acknowledged by a cold and distant bow from his
father-in-law. The young nobleman did not appear in the slightest degree
disconcerted by the reception he met with, or apprehensive of the result
of the investigation. He jested apart with De Gondomar; and both he and
the Spanish Ambassador appeared greatly amused by Gillian's
embarrassment. Behind him stood his servant Diego.

"You are handmaiden to the Countess of Exeter, I presume?" demanded Lady
Lake of the damsel.

"I am, my lady," she answered.

"The girl does not look as if the imputations cast upon her character
can be true," observed Sir Thomas Lake.

As this was said, poor Gillian became suffused with blushes, and hung
her head.

"Before I put any further questions to her," remarked Lady Lake, "I
will ask Lord Roos if he still persists in affirming that it was this
damsel who visited him last night?"

Dick Taverner looked as if his fate depended upon the response the young
nobleman might make to the inquiry.

"I must decline to answer your ladyship's question," returned Lord Roos.

"Why cannot he speak out?" muttered Dick. "This uncertainty is worse
than anything."

"What says the damsel herself," observed Sir Thomas Lake. "Does she
admit the charge?"

"You cannot expect her to do that, Sir Thomas," interposed Lord Roos.

"I expect her to answer my question," rejoined the Secretary of State,
sharply. "Were you in Lord Roos's room last night?" he added, to
Gillian.

"Oh, dear! I am ready to faint," she exclaimed. "Catch me, Dick--catch
me!"

"Answer 'yes' or 'no,' or I won't," he rejoined.

"Well, then, 'yes!' if I must say something," she replied.

Poor Dick fell back, as if struck by a shot.

"I don't believe it," cried Sir Thomas.

"Nor I either," said Dick, recovering himself. "I don't believe she
could do such a wicked thing. Besides, it was the foreign ambassador,
there," he added, pointing to De Gondomar, "who seemed most enamoured
of her yesterday; and I shouldn't have been so much surprised if she had
gone to see him. Perhaps she did," he continued, addressing the poor
damsel, who again hung her head.

"I can take upon me to affirm that such was not the case," observed De
Gondomar.

"Have you the lock of hair with you?" whispered Sir Thomas to his lady.

"I have," she replied, taking a small packet from her bosom.

The movement did not pass unnoticed by Lord Roos and the Spanish
Ambassador, between whom an almost imperceptible smile passed.

"If you have put all the interrogations you desire to make to Gillian,
Madam," said Lord Roos to his mother-in-law, "perhaps she may be
permitted to depart? The situation cannot be agreeable to her."

"A moment more, my lord," cried Lady Lake. "If I detain her it is to
clear her character. I know her to be perfectly innocent."

At this announcement, Dick Taverner's countenance brightened, and he
extended his arms towards Gillian, who gladly availed herself of his
support.

"I am quite sure she was not the person I surprised in your chamber last
night," continued Lady Lake.

"Indeed, Madam! How do you arrive at that conviction?"

"Because that person's hair was jet black, whereas Gillian's, as we
see, is of the exactly opposite colour."

Dick Taverner could not help pressing his lips against the back of the
pretty damsel's neck as this was uttered.

"Your proof of this, Madam?" demanded Lord Roos.

"Behold it!" she cried. "This look of hair was cut off before your
visitant escaped, and has remained in my possession ever since. Ha! how
is this?" she exclaimed, as she unfolded the packet, and disclosed a
tress of fair hair, evidently matching Gillian's lint-white locks. "What
transformation has taken place! Witchcraft has been practised. This is
the Countess's work."

"The minion must have been there, after all," cried Dick Taverner,
thrusting Gillian from him.

"The charge of witchcraft will not serve your turn, Madam," said Lord
Roos derisively. "The explanation is simple. Your eyes have deceived
you."

"Most palpably," cried the Conde de Gondomar, who had caught Gillian in
his arms, as the jealous apprentice cast her from him. "I am afraid her
ladyship cannot see very clearly."

"I see clearly enough that a trick has been practised upon me," Lady
Lake rejoined sharply. "But let Lord Roos look to himself. I will have
my revenge, and a terrible one it shall be."

"Do not commit yourself," said Sir Thomas in a low tone.

"Your business here is at an end, fair maiden," said the Conde de
Gondomar to Gillian; "and as your lover abandons you, I am ready to take
charge of you."

So saying he led her forth, followed by Lord Roos, whose smile of
triumph exasperated his mother-in-law almost beyond endurance.

For a moment Dick Tayerner remained irresolute; but his mistress had no
sooner disappeared, than he rushed after her, vowing he would have her
back if it cost him his life.




CHAPTER XXVII.

The Puritan's Prison.


Hugh Calveley, it has already been intimated, was lodged in a vault
beneath the gateway. The place was commonly used as a sort of black-hole
for the imprisonment of any refractory member of the royal household, or
soldier on guard guilty of neglect of duty. Circular in shape, it
contained a large pillar, to which iron rings and chains were attached.
The walls were of stone, the roof arched with ribs springing from the
pillar that supported it, and the floor was paved. Window there was
none; but air was admitted through a small grated aperture in the roof;
and thus imperfectly ventilated, it will not be wondered at that the
vault should be damp. Moisture constantly trickled down the walls, and
collected in pools on the broken pavement; but unwholesome as it was,
and altogether unfit for occupation, it was deemed good enough for those
generally thrust into it, and far too good for its present tenant.

As the prisoner exhibited no violence, the thongs with which his hands
were bound were removed on his entrance to the vault, and he was allowed
the free use of his limbs. The breast-plate in which he was clad was
taken from him, and his vesture was again closely searched, but no
further discovery was made either of concealed weapon, or of any paper
or letter tending to show that he had accomplices in his dread design.
The only thing found upon him, indeed, was a small Bible, and this,
after it had been examined, he was permitted to retain. To the
interrogatories put to him by Master Dendy, the serjeant-at-arms, he
returned the briefest answers; and when he had said as much as he
thought fit, he obstinately refused to make further reply.

Incensed at his perversity, and determined to extort a full confession,
in order that it might be laid before the King, the serjeant-at-arms
ordered the manacles to be applied. But though the torture was
exquisite, he bore it with firmness, and without uttering a groan;
maintaining the same determined silence as before. Had he dared, Master
Dendy would have had recourse to severer measures; but having no warrant
for any such proceeding, he was obliged to content himself with threats.
To these Hugh Calveley replied by a grim smile of contempt; but as the
serjeant-at-arms was departing to make his report to Sir Thomas Lake, he
said, "I have something to disclose; but it is for the King's ear
alone."

"Better reveal it to me," rejoined Dendy, halting. "I have it in my
power to render your situation far more tolerable, or to inflict
greater torment upon you. Make your choice."

"Deal with me as you please," returned Hugh Calveley sternly. "What I
have to say is to the King, and to the King only; and though you break
every bone in my body with your engines, and tear off my flesh with
red-hot pincers, you shall not force the secret from me."

Master Dendy looked at him, and felt disposed to place him in the
dreadful instrument of torture called Skeffington's irons, which was
hanging against the wall; but the consideration that had hitherto
restrained him--namely, that he was without authority for the step, and
might be called to account for it--weighed with him still; wherefore he
contented himself with ordering the prisoner to be chained to the
pillar; and having seen the injunction obeyed, he left him.

In this miserable plight Hugh Calveley remained for some hours, without
light and without food. How the time was passed none knew; but the two
yeomen of the guard who entered the vault found him on his knees
absorbed in prayer. They brought a lamp with them, and refreshments of a
better kind than those usually afforded to a prisoner, and set them
before him. But he refused to partake of them. The only favour he
besought was permission to read his Bible; and the lamp placed within
reach, he was soon deeply engrossed in the perusal of those pages from
which, when earnestly sought, consolation has ever been derived under
the most trying circumstances.

Sir Jocelyn had forborne to visit the prisoner from a fear that his
presence might be painful; but the office imposed upon him by the King
left him no alternative; and about midnight he descended to the vault,
to ascertain from personal inspection that Hugh Calveley was in safe
custody. The door was unlocked by the halberdier stationed at it, and
the young man found himself alone with the prisoner. He was
inexpressibly shocked by the spectacle he beheld, as he had no idea how
severely the unfortunate Puritan had been treated, nor of the sort of
prison in which he was confined.

Hugh Calveley, who was still intently reading the Bible, which he had
placed upon his knee while he held the lamp near it, to throw the light
upon its leaves, did not appear to be disturbed by the opening of the
door, nor did he raise his eyes. But, at last, a deep groan issuing from
the breast of the young man aroused him, and he held up the lamp to
ascertain who was near. On discovering that it was Sir Jocelyn, he
knitted his brow, and, after sternly regarding him for a moment,
returned to his Bible, without uttering a word; but finding the other
maintained his post, he demanded, almost fiercely, why he was disturbed?

"Can I do aught for your relief?" rejoined the young man. "At least, I
can have those chains taken off."

"Thou speakest as one in authority," cried Hugh Calveley, regarding
him, fixedly. "Art thou appointed to be my jailer?"

Sir Jocelyn made no answer, but averted his head.

"This only was wanting to fill up the measure of my scorn for thee,"
pursued the Puritan. "Thou art worthy of thine office. But show me no
favour, for I will receive none at thy hands. I would rather wear these
fetters to my death, however much they may gall my limbs, than have them
struck off by thee. I would rather rot in this dungeon--ay, though it
were worse than it is--than owe my liberation to thee. The sole favour
thou canst show me is to rid me of thy presence, which is hateful to me,
and chases holy thoughts from my breast, putting evil in their place."

"Why should this be so, O friend of my father?" exclaimed Sir Jocelyn.
"And why should my presence be hateful to you? There is no man living
whom I would less willingly offend than yourself; and in all I have
done, where you have been concerned, I have had no free agency. Judge me
not then too harshly. I commiserate your situation from the depths of my
heart, and would relieve it were it possible."

"Then wherefore persist in troubling me?" rejoined Hugh Calveley. "Have
I not good cause for my dislike of you? You have disappointed the
expectations I had formed of you. You failed me when I put your
professions to the test. You thwarted my design at the moment when its
success was certain, and when the tyrant was completely in my power. But
for you I should not be here, loaded with these fetters; or if I were, I
should be consoled by the thought that I had liberated my country from
oppression, instead of being crushed by the sense of failure. What seek
you from me, miserable time-server? Have you not had your reward for the
service you have rendered the King? Is he not grateful enough? I have
served as your stepping-stone to promotion. What more can I do?"

"You can cease to do me injustice," returned Sir Jocelyn. "Honours,
procured as mine have been, are valueless, and I would rather be without
them. I sought them not. They have been forced upon me. Look at the
matter fairly, and you will see that all these consequences, whether for
good or ill, have sprung from your own desperate act."

"It may be so," rejoined the Puritan. "I will not dispute it. But though
ill has accrued to me, and good to you, I would not change positions
with you. You will wear the tyrant's fetters for ever. I shall soon be
free from mine."

"Have you nothing to say concerning your daughter?" demanded the young
man.

"Nothing," replied the Puritan, with an expression of deep pain, which,
however, he checked by a mighty effort. "I have done with the world, and
desire not to be brought back to it."

"And you refuse to be freed from your chains?"

"My sole desire, as I have said, is to be freed from you."

"That wish, at least, shall be granted," replied Sir Jocelyn, as, with a
sad heart, he departed.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

The Secret.


Thrice was the guard relieved during that long night, and as often was
the prisoner visited. On the first occasion, he was found to be still
engaged with his Bible, and he so continued during the whole time the
man remained in the vault.

The next who came discovered him on his knees, praying loudly and
fervently, and, unwilling to disturb him, left him at his devotions.

But the third who entered was struck with terror at the prisoner's
appearance. He had risen from the ground, and was standing as erect as
the fetters would permit, with his hands outstretched, and his eyes
fixed on vacancy. He was muttering something, but his words were
unintelligible. He looked like one who beheld a vision; and this
impression was produced upon the man, who half expected some awful shape
to reveal itself to him. But whatever it might be, spirit of good or
ill, it was visible to the Puritan alone.

After gazing at him for some minutes, in mixed wonderment and fright,
the halberdier ventured to draw near him. As he touched him, the Puritan
uttered a fearful cry, and attempted to spring forward, as if to grasp
some vanishing object, but being checked in the effort by the chain, he
fell heavily to the ground, and seemed to sustain severe injury; for
when the man raised him, and set him against the pillar, though he made
no complaint, it was evident he suffered excruciating pain. The
halberdier poured out a cup of wine, and offered it to him; but, though
well-nigh fainting, he peremptorily refused it.

From this moment a marked change was perceptible in his looks. The hue
of his skin became cadaverous; his eyes grew dim and glassy; and his
respiration was difficult. Everything betokened that his sufferings
would be speedily over, and that, however he might deserve it, Hugh
Calveley would be spared the disgrace of death by the hands of the
executioner. The halberdier was not unaware of his condition, and his
first impulse was to summon assistance; but he was deterred from doing
so by the earnest entreaty of the Puritan to be left alone; and thinking
this the most merciful course he could pursue under the circumstances,
he yielded to the request, scarcely expecting to behold him alive again.

It was by this same man that the door of the vault was opened to Sir
Jocelyn and Aveline.

The shock experienced by the maiden at the sight of her father had
well-nigh overcome her. She thought him dead, and such was Sir Jocelyn's
first impression. The unfortunate Puritan was still propped against the
pillar, as the halberdier had left him, but his head had fallen to one
side, and his arms hung listlessly down. With a piercing shriek his
daughter flew towards him, and kneeling beside him, raised his head
gently, and gazing eagerly into his face, perceived that he still lived,
though the spirit seemed ready to wing its flight from its fleshly
tabernacle.

The situation was one to call forth every latent energy in Aveline's
character. Controlling her emotion, she uttered no further cry, but set
herself, with calmness, to apply such restoratives as were at hand to
her father. After bathing his temples and chafing his hands, she had the
satisfaction, ere long, of seeing him open his eyes. At first, he seemed
to have a difficulty in fixing his gaze upon her, but her voice reached
his ears, and the feeble pressure of his hand told that he knew her.

The power of speech returned to him at length, and he faintly murmured,
"My child, I am glad to see you once more. I thought all was over; but
it has pleased Heaven to spare me for a few moments to give you my
blessing. Bow down your head, O my daughter, and take it; and though
given by a sinner like myself, it shall profit you! May the merciful
God, who pardoneth all that repent, even at the last hour, and watcheth
over the orphan, bless you, and protect you!"

"Amen!" exclaimed Jocelyn, fervently.

"Who was it spoke?" demanded the Puritan. And as no answer was returned,
he repeated the inquiry.

"It was I--Jocelyn Mounchensey, the son of your old friend," replied the
young man.

"Come nigh to me, Jocelyn," said the dying man. "I have done you wrong,
and entreat your pardon."

"O, talk not thus!" cried Jocelyn, springing towards him. "I have
nothing to forgive, but much to be forgiven."

"You have a noble heart, Jocelyn," rejoined Hugh Calveley; "and in that
respect resemble your father. In his name, I conjure you to listen to
me. You will not refuse my dying request. I have a sacred trust to
commit to you."

"Name it!" cried the young man; "and rest assured it shall be
fulfilled."

"Give me some wine," gasped the Puritan, faintly. "My strength is
failing fast, and it may revive me."

And with, great effort he swallowed a few drops from the cup filled for
him by Jocelyn. Still, his appearance was so alarming, that the young
man could not help urging him not to delay.

"I understand," replied Hugh Calveley, slightly pressing his hand. "You
think I have no time to lose; and you are right. My child, then, is the
trust I would confide to you. Son, behold thy sister! Daughter, behold
thy brother!"

"I will be more than a brother to her," cried Sir Jocelyn, earnestly.

"More thou canst not be," rejoined Hugh Calveley; "unless--"

"Unless what?" demanded Sir Jocelyn.

"I cannot explain," cried the Puritan, with an expression of agony;
"there is not time. Suffice it, she is already promised in marriage."

"Father!" exclaimed Aveline, in surprise, and with something of
reproach. "I never heard of such an engagement before. It has been made
without my consent."

"I charge you to fulfil it, nevertheless, my child, if it be required,"
