
Seeing which I begged them all to go away and not scare the holy women,
who were used to quiet in the place. And then I remembered the honour
the honest warriors had meant this for, and thanked them, bidding them
make allowances for my being put out at first.

Then took they off their helms and shouted thrice; and then fled
rapidly, for the gates opened behind me, and there was the abbess
herself, with her cheeks red, and her eyes burning bright in anger, as I
thought, while behind her peeped all her nuns at the crowded street, and
at myself standing shamefaced on the steps, doffing my helm as I saw her.

But instead of being angry, she held out both her hands, and spoke
kindly, saying; "Never has our quiet place heard such clamour before;
but we women will not be behind the men in welcoming Heregar;" and so
she bade the nuns come forward, laying her hands on my shoulder, and
adding; "See, daughters, this is he who dared to warn the land of its
danger, saving the lives of our sisters of Bridgwater, and many others,
and who has even now led the host and conquered, giving us safety and
peaceful rest again."

But I knelt and kissed her hand, while there went a little murmur among
the nuns.

Then the lady abbess touched gently my bound shoulder, and said that the
hurt was but rudely tended and that she must bind it afresh; so should
she show her gratitude to one who had bled for the land. And they led me
into the courtyard; and thence to the guest chamber, and there waited
Alswythe.

Now when I looked to see her greet me formally, as in the presence of
the abbess, she ran into my arms, and I found that we were alone.

Then must she hear and I tell all that had happened to me since we
parted; but that was too long for the telling then, for very soon the
abbess came with clatter of vessels along the passage, bringing warm
water and salves to bind my small wound afresh.

And in that Alswythe helped her, with many pitying words and soft
touches, so that I thought it good to be hurt if such tendance might
ever be had. And many things they asked, as of Wulfhere's safety, and
the collier's, and of how I got that wound, and the like. And that last
I could not tell them, marvelling myself when it came, and more that it
was the only one; but I know I smote flatwise once or twice myself in
the heat of fight, so doubtless it was so with others, else would
Aldhelm have been in halves or thereabouts.

Then I told them of my message to the king, and at that Alswythe
rejoiced. And the abbess said that doubtless the king would reward the
messenger, and what reward would I ask an he did so?

Now there was only one reward to me in all the world, and for answer I
took Alswythe's hand, all wet with the water she bathed my hurt with,
and kissed it. On which the maiden blushed, and looked down, but the
abbess laughed softly, saying, "Verily, I thought so," and then seemed
to choke a little, turning away from us. And Alswythe did not draw away
her hand from mine, but let her cheek rest for a moment against my head,
and so there was a little silence.

Then the abbess turned round again, and her eyes were bright, but the
shine was of tears in them, and she spoke briskly.

"Now must you get hence, Heregar, my son, and go your way to the king
with all haste, so shall you be back the sooner. Give him a scarf to
bind that wound, Alswythe; so shall it seem an honour and not a scar."

So there was a little leave taking, but not much, though enough, and I
went from the nunnery with Alswythe's white and red and gold scarf over
my shoulder; gay enough to look at, but no gayer than the heart beneath it.

And there, waiting for me in the street, was my tail, armed and drawn up
in line of fours to see me back to the abbey. So I went there at the
head of them, with more shouting of people.

There was Wulfhere sitting on the doorsteps of the great door, having a
bag in his hand, and when I got up to him, he thrust it out to me,
saying "largess", and that I was glad enough to understand.

So I put my hand into the bag, and crying, "Here is withal to drink to
Somerset and Dorset shoulder to shoulder," scattered the silver pennies
among them, and so left them without any order among them at all, though
shoulder to shoulder certainly.

"Ho, master!" said Wulfhere, "you looked mighty angry when you were
carried aloft an hour ago."

"Aye," said I, "'tis pity a thane cannot walk abroad quietly on his own
business."

"Well, well, they thought that you were their business, doubtless."

"Whence came all those pennies?" I asked, for we had no store at all to
cast away.

"From Eanulf and Ealhstan," said Wulfhere, laughing. "They came to me,
and saying that they were sore jealous, and minded to have good cause
therefor, gave me this that you might carry off all well to the end."

And that was good of them, for else I know not how I should have left
the men without more speech making.

Just then came the ealdorman into the hall where we were, and laughing,
asked me if I meant to take all that following to Salisbury. But I only
wanted the standard guards who were left, and Aldhelm, as one who had
fought as such. This I had told Wulfhere before, so that I was not
surprised when I heard that all were ready, and but waiting for me to
set off.

Then Eanulf and Osric took me to the bishop, and there gave me writings
to deliver to the king, and also bade me tell all that he asked, in my
own way.

And those three saw us set forth, all well mounted, and a goodly company
to look at, the bishop blessing us before we went, and the people and
warriors following and cheering us on our way through the town, and even
some way beyond the walls.



CHAPTER XVII. ALFRED THE ATHELING.


Of our long ride to the king's place there is little to tell. Only that
everywhere the news seemed to have flown before us, and men knew who we
were and what our errand, crowding round us to hear all about the
fighting, and to be assured that the Danes had truly gone. And great
cheer made they for us everywhere, so that we were treated as princes
almost.

Therefore, that was a merry ride and a pleasant in the early June
weather, and we were ever cheerful, for it so happened, as may have been
already seen, that no one of us had lost close friend or kin in the
battles, but had the rather gained much. Yet maybe we were the only ones
of whom that might be said; for mixed with the joy was mourning over all
the land. And of all my company, I had the most cause to be
lighthearted; so that for all I had gained I thought the hard things I
had gone through were well worth the bearing. Ever, therefore, have I
judged him the happiest who out of hardship gains rest; for he best
knows its worth.

So at last we came to Salisbury town, and that was full of a brilliant
company: the courtiers of the king, and their following again. Yet, for
all their magnificence, thanks to our good bishop's gifts, we showed
well as we rode into the streets, and I think were envied by many
because the marks of honourable war were yet on us; so that the men
spoke of Aldhelm's crushed headpiece, or Wulfhere's gashed shield that
bore the mark of the axe that he stopped from me, or my riven mail that
Alswythe's scarf would scarcely hide, and Wislac's broken crest.

And if they looked from us to our men, there was yet more of the like to
speak about; for not one of the standard guard had been scatheless from
heavy weapon play.

Being thus marked we were easy to be known, and hardly had we drawn rein
at the great hostelry where we should wait till the king summoned us,
when a thane came to me, asking if we were from bishop or ealdorman. And
when I said we were so, bearing letters from them, he bade us to the
king's presence at once, tarrying for nothing, as we were waited for.

Fain would we have washed away the stains of travel; but he was urgent,
saying that the king's word brooked no delay. Therefore, leaving our
horses with the people of the inn, we followed him, marching in order,
to the great house where Ethelwulf was.

Here were guards and many thanes, and I must show the tokens given me,
before we might enter, while our thane stood by, impatient at the
formalities.

Those over, we came to a greet hall high-ceiled with oak, and carved
everywhere, and strewn with sweet sedges, and on the high place sat the
king and queen and one of the athelings.

Now I had never seen the king before, but I thought him like all that I
had heard of in stories. For he sat in his purple robes, ermine-trimmed,
having on a little gold crown over his long, curling hair, and his
gloves and shoes were of cloth of gold, curiously wrought with pearls,
while at his feet sat a page, holding a cushion whereon lay sceptre and
orb.

But I looked to see the face of a warrior under the gold circle of the
king, and therein was disappointed; for his face was kind and gentle, as
many a good warrior's has been in time of peace, but lacked those lines
which a man might know would harden into grimness and strength in time
of need. And I thought that Ealhstan was like a king, and Ethelwulf like
a bishop rather.

Yet by the king's side, leaning on his chair, was one whom I then noted
not, having eyes only for his father--Alfred the Atheling, who, to my
mind, is both warrior and saint, as though Ethelwulf, his father, and
Ealhstan, his teacher, had each taught him the properties of the other,
making a perfect king.

Now, while I looked, our guide went and made obeisance before the king,
telling him of our coming, and at that the face of Ethelwulf lighted up,
and he called to us to come near and give our message. And I saw the
queen clasp her hands, as preparing to hear things all too heavy for a
lady's ear, while the atheling stood up and gazed eagerly at us. Then,
too, over all the court was deep silence, as they made a lane through
which we must pass to reach the throne, and our feet seemed to make all
the sound there was.

So we tramped up, and bowed low before the king, who ran his eyes over
us, though not as a captain: but as one who knows men of all sorts well,
and is accustomed to judge their faces.

Then he said to me; "You are Heregar, the bishop's standard bearer. We
have heard of you as such, and welcome you, knowing you must bring good
news, as your face tells me."

"I am Heregar, Lord King," I answered, "and I bring good news--written
in these which I am to give into your own hand."

Then the king smiled a little, and signed the atheling to take the
letters, and give them him.

But I, not knowing court ways, must needs think this beside my duty, and
said quickly, not knowing to whom I spoke; "Pardon me, Thane, I am to
give these into the king's own hand," and so stepped past him, holding
out the letters to Ethelwulf.

And at that the atheling laughed outright, which was strange to me in
the king's presence, saying, "Not so far wrong, standard bearer, if not
very polite;" and so stepped back to his place, still laughing.

But Ethelwulf did not notice this, having taken the letters eagerly from
me, and broken open the first that came.

Now when he had read the first few lines, he looked up, and reading from
the letter, which doubtless told him the names of the bearers--
"Heregar I know," he said; "which is Wulfhere?"

Then Wulfhere bowed, and the king asked for Wislac and Aldhelm, and then
for each of the men in turn. And when each had answered, he looked hard
at us, still holding the letter open, but saying nothing, and then fell
to reading again. So we must stand still till all those letters were read.

Presently he took one, and reading the outside, gave it to the atheling,
saying it was to him, and went on reading. That the atheling took, and
as he read, looked at us, and it seemed particularly at me, though I
thought nothing of that.

At last the king finished, and turned to a tall, noble-looking warrior
who stood very near the dais, bidding him treat us with all honour, and
see to our lodging near him while we were at court. Shortly, he said, he
would speak to us of all we could tell him.

Then he held out his ungloved hand to us, which the atheling made a
smiling sign for me to kiss, and that we all did, and then he looked
pleasantly at us, and went his way from the hall, followed by his close
attendants, with the queen and the atheling.

So soon as the king was gone, the talk began all over the hall, and most
of all they crowded round us to learn what we could tell them; but that
tall thane, whose name was Ceorle, came and took us away, telling the
rest jestingly that they should have the second telling of the news, but
that the king must have the first. And so he took us to guest chambers
in his own house, and there left us in charge of his steward, treating
us four thanes with all honour, and our men, as became their standing,
among his own best men.

At least, this last was but for a short time, for the lay brethren came
to me, looking oddly at me, and saying that they were in a strait; for,
being lay brethren first, and warriors after, they knew not how to join
in the talk and idle jests of the servants and housecarles. Moreover,
they said that their vows obliged them to certain duties of prayer. And
this I thought was honest of them, for many a lay brother would, when he
found that I noted not their state, have broken out of bounds gladly,
for the time.

So I sent for the steward, and asked him where they might be bestowed,
and after a little thought, he said that the abbot, who had a following
of honest housecarles, would take them in; and that he managed for us,
and afterwards told me that Ealhstan's men had gained great praise, both
for themselves and the bishop, by their ways in the abbey.

This is a little thing: but I tell it because it shows what sort of man
Bishop Ealhstan was. For even over these rough warriors he had gained
such a power for good that he had made of them all he wished--sturdy
champions of the faith, both bodily and spiritually.

So when those three were gone elsewhere our only serving man was my
collier, and well was he treated in Ceorle's house.

We bided quietly there all the rest of that day and that night, and then
in the morning were bidden to speak with the king, Ceorle taking us four
himself and sending one to find the lay brethren and Dudda.

The king sat with Alfred the Atheling in a private chamber, no other but
Ceorle being beside him while we were there. And I was a little
frightened about my putting aside the young prince now, for I knew who
he was from Ceorle. But he had a pleasant look and greeting for us as we
came in. So also had Ethelwulf himself, who seemed less stately than
yesterday when he sat in his royal attire in full court.

Richly dressed he was now, with a gold circlet on his head and great
gold bracelets on his arms; but he was in no high place, only sitting
easily in a carved and cushioned chair, while the atheling sat on a
settle by the window.

The letters I had brought lay open on the table at the king's elbow, and
his hand was on them, and there were other writings scattered about;
great ones with red seals hanging thereto--made no doubt by the gold
signet which stood close by in its open casket.

"Come near, Thanes," the king said in his deep, quiet voice. "Let us
talk together of this matter as friends, for a useless king were I but
for such as you who keep my throne from the blows of enemies."

"Stay, Father," said Alfred the Atheling, starting up. "Let me write
while the thanes speak," and he gathered up pens and such, and a roll of
parchment, sitting down at the table and then holding pen ready, and
looking at us.

The king smiled at him and his haste, and said, "Verily, Thanes, you
must mind your words if Alfred writes them down, for he will ever keep
records of tales such as yours, saying that they are for men to read
hereafter."

But that had no terrors for us, seeing that we had a plain tale to tell,
truth and nothing more. So, as Ceorle bid us, we four sat down by the
window, and the king asked me to tell my story from the first.

So I began by saying that I had seen the landing of the Danes at Stert,
and warned the watchmen of the levy.

There Alfred stopped me, holding up his pen suddenly.

"Tell us, Thane, of the Watchet landing," he said.

And when I began to tell of that he looked up again, with his eyes
dancing, and asked me how I came on Quantock hill.

Thereat the king laughed a little, saying that Alfred should have been a
lawman, and the atheling said that, with his father's help, he meant to
be such, and a good one.

And that he has become, for the laws he has given us will last, as it
seems to me, till the name of Saxon has departed.

Then I was a little in doubt what to say, and the king saw this. So he
told me kindly that he had had very full accounts written by the bishop
and ealdormen; but now both he and the atheling would fain hear about
myself; that is, if my friends already knew all, and if I would not heed
Ceorle.

Now I saw that I must speak more of myself than I wished, and would fain
have been excused, saying something of that sort. But the atheling asked
me to think of them as friends who would feel for me, saying, too, that
of my own history he would not write, and so kindly did he urge me,
drawing me on, that at last I had told him all from the beginning of my
troubles, even to the time when I rode with Alswythe into Glastonbury
and sought the bishop.

"That is well told," said Alfred, when I had finished so far, and the
king sighed a little, but left all the speaking to his son.

"Now, Wulfhere," he went on, "it is your turn," and so made the old
warrior take up the tale; but he bade him begin at the first fight.

However, Wulfhere must needs go back to the war arrow business, and then
to the staying of the flight at Cannington, and in this Alfred did not
stop him, though I thought it more than needed.

So he told all his tale, even to the slaying of the berserk, and things
like that. And as he told of the breaking of the ring, and our stand
inside of it, Alfred the Atheling wrote fast, and presently he bade
Wulfhere cease, and going to a corner took down a harp, while his father
smiled on him, and tuning it, broke out into a wondrous war song that
made our hearts beat fast, for we seemed to feel that it was full of the
very shout and ring of battle inside our circle of foes, and we were as
men who looked on and saw our own deeds over again, only made more
glorious by the hand of the poet and the voice of the singer.

So that when he ended the king's eyes flashed, and Ceorle's face was red
and good to look at with a war light on it, and Wislac shouted, as I had
nearly done.

But at that sound, strange in the king's presence, we all started, and
