I trow they mean not such dreadful wishes: custom belike. Moderate in
drinking, and mix water with their wine, and sing and dance over their
cups, and are then enchanting company. They are curious not to drink
in another man's cup. In war the English gain the better of them in the
field; but the French are their masters in attack and defence of cities;
witness Orleans, where they besieged their besiegers and hashed them
sore with their double and treble culverines; and many other sieges in
this our century. More than all nations they flatter their women, and
despise them. No. She may be their sovereign ruler. Also they often hang
their female malefactors, instead of drowning them decently, as other
nations use. The furniture in their inns is walnut, in Germany only
deal. French windows are ill. The lower half is of wood, and opens; the
upper half is of glass, but fixed; so that the servant cannot come at
it to clean it. The German windows are all glass, and movable, and shine
far and near like diamonds. In France many mean houses are not glazed
at all. Once I saw a Frenchman pass a church without unbonneting. This
I ne'er witnessed in Holland, Germany, or Italy. At many inns they show
the traveller his sheets, to give him assurance they are clean, and warm
them at the fire before him; a laudable custom. They receive him kindly
and like a guest; they mostly cheat him, and whiles cut his throat.
They plead in excuse hard and tyrannous laws. And true it is their law
thrusteth its nose into every platter, and its finger into every pie.
In France worshipful men wear their hats and their furs indoors, and
go abroad lighter clad. In Germany they don hat and furred cloak to go
abroad; but sit bareheaded and light clad round the stove.

"The French intermix not the men and women folk in assemblies, as we
Hollanders use. Round their preachers the women sit on their heels in
rows, and the men stand behind them. Their harvests are rye, and flax,
and wine. Three mules shall you see to one horse, and whole flocks of
sheep as black as coal.

"In Germany the snails be red. I lie not. The French buy minstrelsy,
but breed jests, and make their own mirth. The Germans foster their set
fools, with ear-caps, which move them to laughter by simulating madness;
a calamity that asks pity, not laughter. In this particular I deem that
lighter nation wiser than the graver German. What sayest thou? Alas!
canst not answer me now.

"In Germany the petty laws are wondrous wise and just. Those against
criminals, bloody. In France bloodier still; and executed a trifle more
cruelly there. Here the wheel is common, and the fiery stake; and under
this king they drown men by the score in Paris river, Seine yclept. But
the English are as peremptory in hanging and drowning for a light fault;
so travellers report. Finally, a true-hearted Frenchman, when ye chance
on one, is a man as near perfect as earth affords; and such a man is my
Denys, spite of his foul mouth."

Denys. "My foul mouth! Is that so writ, Master Richart?"

Richart. "Ay, in sooth; see else."

Denys (inspecting the letter gravely). "I read not the letter so."

Richart. "How then?"

Denys. "Humph! ahem why just the contrary." He added: "'Tis kittle work
perusing of these black scratches men are agreed to take for words. And
I trow 'tis still by guess you clerks do go, worthy sir. My foul mouth!
This is the first time e'er I heard on't. Eh, mesdames?"

But the females did not seize the opportunity he gave them, and burst
into a loud and general disclaimer. Margaret blushed and said nothing;
the other two bent silently over their work with something very like a
sly smile. Denys inspected their countenances long and carefully. And
the perusal was so satisfactory, that he turned with a tone of injured,
but patient innocence, and bade Richart read on.

"The Italians are a polished and subtle people. They judge a man, not by
his habits, but his speech and gesture. Here Sir Chough may by no
means pass for falcon gentle, as did I in Germany, pranked in my noble
servant's feathers. Wisest of all nations in their singular temperance
of food and drink. Most foolish of all to search strangers coming into
their borders, and stay them from bringing much money in. They should
rather invite it, and like other nations, let the traveller from taking
of it out. Also here in Venice the dames turn their black hair yellow by
the sun and art, to be wiser than Him who made them. Ye enter no Italian
town without a bill of health, though now is no plague in Europe. This
peevishness is for extortion's sake. The innkeepers cringe and fawn, and
cheat, and in country places murder you. Yet will they give you clean
sheets by paying therefor. Delicate in eating, and abhor from putting
their hand in the plate; sooner they will apply a crust or what not.
They do even tell of a cardinal at Rome, which armeth his guest's left
hand with a little bifurcal dagger to hold the meat, while his knife
cutteth it. But methinks this, too, is to be wiser than Him, who made
the hand so supple and prehensile."

Eli. "I am of your mind, my lad."

"They are sore troubled with the itch. And ointment for it, unguento per
la rogna, is cried at every corner of Venice. From this my window I saw
an urchin sell it to three several dames in silken trains, and to two
velvet knights."

Catherine. "Italy, my lass, I rede ye wash your body i' the tub
o' Sundays; and then ye can put your hand i' the plate o' Thursday
withouten offence."

"Their bread is lovely white. Their meats they spoil with sprinkling
cheese over them; O, perversity! Their salt is black; without a lie. In
commerce these Venetians are masters of the earth and sea; and govern
their territories wisely. Only one flaw I find; the same I once heard
a learned friar cast up against Plato his republic: to wit, that here
women are encouraged to venal frailty, and do pay a tax to the State,
which, not content with silk and spice, and other rich and honest
freights, good store, must trade in sin. Twenty thousand of these
Jezebels there be in Venice and Candia, and about, pampered and honoured
for bringing strangers to the city, and many live in princely palaces of
their own. But herein methinks the politic signors of Venice forget what
King David saith, 'Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh
but in vain.' Also, in religion, they hang their cloth according to the
wind, siding now with the Pope, now with the Turk; but aye with the god
of traders, mammon hight. Shall flower so cankered bloom to the world's
end? But since I speak of flowers, this none may deny them, that they
are most cunning in making roses and gilliflowers to blow unseasonably.
In summer they nip certain of the budding roses and water them not. Then
in winter they dig round these discouraged plants, and put in cloves;
and so with great art rear sweet-scented roses, and bring them to market
in January. And did first learn this art of a cow. Buds she grazed in
summer, and they sprouted at yule. Women have sat in the doctors' chairs
at their colleges. But she that sat in St. Peter's was a German. Italy
too, for artful fountains and figures that move by water and enact life.
And next for fountains is Augsburg, where they harness the foul knave
Smoke to good Sir Spit, and he turneth stout Master Roast. But lest any
one place should vaunt, two towns there be in Europe, which, scorning
giddy fountains, bring water tame in pipes to every burgher's door, and
he filleth his vessels with but turning of a cock. One is London,
so watered this many a year by pipes of a league from Paddington, a
neighbouring city; and the other is the fair town of Lubeck. Also the
fierce English are reported to me wise in that they will not share their
land and flocks with wolves; but have fairly driven those marauders into
their mountains. But neither in France, nor Germany, nor Italy, is a
wayfarer's life safe from the vagabones after sundown. I can hear of no
glazed house in all Venice; but only oiled linen and paper; and behind
these barbarian eyelets, a wooden jalosy. Their name for a cowardly
assassin is 'a brave man,' and for an harlot, 'a courteous person,'
which is as much as to say that a woman's worst vice, and a man's worst
vice, are virtues. But I pray God for little Holland that there an
assassin may be yclept an assassin, and an harlot an harlot, till
domesday; and then gloze foul faults with silken names who can!"

Eli (with a sigh). "He should have been a priest, saving your presence,
my poor lass."

"January 26.--Sweetheart, I must be brief, and tell thee but a part of
that I have seen, for this day my journal ends. To-night it sails for
thee, and I, unhappy, not with it, but to-morrow, in another ship, to
Rome.

"Dear Margaret, I took a hand litter, and was carried to St. Mark his
church. Outside it, towards the market-place, is a noble gallery, and
above it four famous horses, cut in brass by the ancient Romans, and
seem all moving, and at the very next step must needs leap down on the
beholder. About the church are six hundred pillars of marble, porphyry,
and ophites. Inside is a treasure greater than either, at St. Denys,
or Loretto, or Toledo. Here a jewelled pitcher given the seigniory by a
Persian king, also the ducal cap blazing with jewels, and on its crown
a diamond and a chrysolite, each as big as an almond; two golden crowns
and twelve golden stomachers studded with jewels, from Constantinople;
item, a monstrous sapphire; item, a great diamond given by a French
king; item, a prodigious carbuncle; item, three unicorns' horns. But
what are these compared with the sacred relics?

"Dear Margaret, I stood and saw the brazen chest that holds the body of
St. Mark the Evangelist. I saw with these eyes and handled his ring, and
his gospel written with his own hand, and all my travels seemed light;
for who am I that I should see such things? Dear Margaret, his sacred
body was first brought from Alexandria, by merchants in 810, and then
not prized as now; for between 829, when this church was builded, and
1094, the very place where it lay was forgotten. Then holy priests
fasted and prayed many days seeking for light, and lo! the Evangelist's
body brake at midnight through the marble and stood before them. They
fell to the earth; but in the morning found the crevice the sacred body
had burst through, and peering through it saw him lie. Then they took
and laid him in his chest beneath the altar, and carefully put back the
stone with its miraculous crevice, which crevice I saw, and shall gape
for a monument while the world lasts. After that they showed me the
Virgin's chair, it is of stone; also her picture, painted by St. Luke,
very dark, and the features now scarce visible. This picture, in time of
drought, they carry in procession, and brings the rain. I wish I had
not seen it. Item, two pieces of marble spotted with John the Baptist's
blood; item, a piece of the true cross, and of the pillar to which
Christ was tied; item, the rock struck by Moses, and wet to this hour;
also a stone Christ sat on, preaching at Tyre; but some say it is the
one the patriarch Jacob laid his head on, and I hold with them, by
reason our Lord never preached at Tyre. Going hence, they showed me
the state nursery for the children of those aphrodisian dames, their
favourites. Here in the outer wall was a broad niche, and if they bring
them so little as they can squeeze them through it alive, the bairn
falls into a net inside, and the state takes charge of it, but if too
big, their mothers must even take them home again, with whom abiding
'tis like to be mali corvi mali ovum. Coming out of the church we met
them carrying in a corpse, with the feet and face bare. This I then
first learned is Venetian custom, and sure no other town will ever rob
them of it, nor of this that follows. On a great porphyry slab in the
piazza were three ghastly heads rotting and tainting the air, and in
their hot summers like to take vengeance with breeding of a plague.
These were traitors to the state, and a heavy price--two thousand
ducats--being put on each head, their friends had slain them and brought
all three to the slab, and so sold blood of others and their own faith.
No state buys heads so many, nor pays half so high a price for that
sorry merchandise. But what I most admired was to see over against the
Duke's palace a fair gallows in alabaster, reared express to bring him,
and no other, for the least treason to the state; and there it stands in
his eye whispering him memento mori. I pondered, and owned these signors
my masters, who will let no man, not even their sovereign, be above the
common weal. Hard by, on a wall, the workmen were just finishing, by
order of the seigniory, the stone effigy of a tragical and enormous act
enacted last year, yet on the wall looks innocent. Here two gentle folks
whisper together, and there other twain, their swords by their side.
Four brethren were they, which did on either side conspire to poison the
other two, and so halve their land in lieu of quartering it; and at a
mutual banquet these twain drugged the wine, and those twain envenomed a
marchpane, to such good purpose that the same afternoon lay four 'brave
men' around one table grovelling in mortal agony, and cursing of one
another and themselves, and so concluded miserably, and the land, for
which they had lost their immortal souls, went into another family. And
why not? it could not go into a worse.

"But O, sovereign wisdom of bywords! how true they put the finger on
each nation's, or particular's, fault.

     "Quand Italie sera sans poison
     Et France sans trahison
     Et l'Angleterre sans guerre,
     Lors sera le monde sans terre."

Richart explained this to Catherine, then proceeded: "And after this
they took me to the quay, and presently I espied among the masts one
garlanded with amaranth flowers. 'Take me thither,' said I, and I let
my guide know the custom of our Dutch skippers to hoist flowers to
the masthead when they are courting a maid. Oft had I scoffed at this
saying, 'So then his wooing is the earth's concern. But now, so far from
the Rotter, that bunch at a masthead made my heart leap with assurance
of a countryman. They carried me, and oh, Margaret! on the stern of that
Dutch boy, was written in muckle letters,

RICHART ELIASSOEN, AMSTERDAM.

'Put me down,' I said; 'for our Lady's sake put me down.' I sat on the
bank and looked, scarce believing my eyes, and looked, and presently
fell to crying, till I could see the words no more. Ah me, how they went
to my heart, those bare letters in a foreign land. Dear Richart! good,
kind brother Richart! often I have sat on his knee and rid on his back.
Kisses many he has given me, unkind word from him had I never. And there
was his name on his own ship, and his face and all his grave, but good
and gentle ways, came back to me, and I sobbed vehemently, and cried
aloud, 'Why, why is not brother Richart here, and not his name only?' I
spake in Dutch, for my heart was too full to hold their foreign tongues,
and

Eli. "Well, Richart, go on, lad, prithee go on. Is this a place to halt
at?"

Richart. "Father, with my duty to you, it is easy to say go on, but
think ye I am not flesh and blood? The poor boy's--simple grief and
brotherly love coming--so sudden-on me, they go through my heart and--I
cannot go on; sink me if I can even see the words, 'tis writ so fine."

Denys. "Courage, good Master Richart! Take your time. Here are more eyne
wet than yours. Ah, little comrade! would God thou wert here, and I at
Venice for thee."

Richart. "Poor little curly-headed lad, what had he done that we have
driven him so far?"

"That is what I would fain know," said Catherine drily, then fell to
weeping and rocking herself, with her apron over her head.

"Kind dame, good friends," said Margaret trembling, "let me tell you
how the letter ends. The skipper hearing our Gerard speak his grief in
Dutch, accosted him, and spake comfortably to him; and after a while
our Gerard found breath to say he was worthy Master Richart's brother.
Thereat was the good skipper all agog to serve him."

Richart. "So! so! skipper! Master Richart aforesaid will be at thy
wedding and bring's purse to boot."

Margaret. "Sir, he told Gerard of his consort that was to sail that
very night for Rotterdam; and dear Gerard had to go home and finish his
letter and bring it to the ship. And the rest, it is but his poor dear
words of love to me, the which, an't please you, I think shame to hear
them read aloud, and ends with the lines I sent to Mistress Kate, and
they would sound so harsh now and ungrateful."

The pleading tone, as much as the words, prevailed, and Richart said he
would read no more aloud, but run his eye over it for his own brotherly
satisfaction. She blushed and looked uneasy, but made no reply.

"Eli," said Catherine, still sobbing a little, "tell me, for our Lady's
sake, how our poor boy is to live at that nasty Rome. He is gone there
to write, but here he his own words to prove writing avails nought: a
had died o' hunger by the way but for paint-brush and psaltery. Well
a-day!"

"Well," said Eli, "he has got brush and music still. Besides, so many
men so many minds. Writing, though it had no sale in other parts, may be
merchandise at Rome."

"Father," said little Kate, "have I your good leave to put in my word
'twixt mother and you?"

"And welcome, little heart."

"Then, seems to me, painting and music, close at hand, be stronger than
writing, but being distant, nought to compare; for see what glamour
written paper hath done here but now. Our Gerard, writing at Venice,
hath verily put his hand into this room at Rotterdam, and turned all
our hearts. Ay, dear dear Gerard, methinks thy spirit hath rid hither on
these thy paper wings; and oh! dear father, why not do as we should do
were he here in the body?"

"Kate," said Eli, "fear not; Richart and I will give him glamour for
glamour. We will write him a letter, and send it to Rome by a sure hand
with money, and bid him home on the instant."

Cornelis and Sybrandt exchanged a gloomy look.

"Ah, good father! And meantime?"

"Well, meantime?"

"Dear father, dear mother, what can we do to pleasure the absent, but be
kind to his poor lass; and her own trouble afore her?"

"'Tis well!" said Eli; "but I am older than thou." Then he turned
gravely to Margaret: "Wilt answer me a question, my pretty mistress?"

"If I may, sir," faltered Margaret.

"What are these marriage lines Gerard speaks of in the letter?"

"Our marriage lines, sir. His and mine. Know you not that we are
betrothed?"

"Before witnesses?"

"Ay, sure. My poor father and Martin Wittenhaagen."

"This is the first I ever heard of it. How came they in his hands? They
should be in yours."

"Alas, sir, the more is my grief; but I ne'er doubted him; and he said
it was a comfort to him to have them in his bosom."

"Y'are a very foolish lass."

"Indeed I was, sir. But trouble teaches the simple."

"'Tis a good answer. Well, foolish or no, y'are honest. I had shown ye
more respect at first, but I thought y'had been his leman, and that is
the truth."

"God forbid, sir! Denys, methinks 'tis time for us to go. Give me my
letter, sir!"

"Bide ye! bide ye! be not so hot for a word! Natheless, wife, methinks
her red cheek becomes her."

"Better than it did you to give it her, my man."

"Softly, wife, softly. I am not counted an unjust man though I be
somewhat slow."

Here Richart broke in. "Why, mistress, did ye shed your blood for our
Gerard?"

"Not I, sir. But maybe I would."

"Nay, nay. But he says you did. Speak sooth now!"

"Alas! I know not what ye mean. I rede ye believe not all that my poor
lad says of me. Love makes him blind."

"Traitress!" cried Denys. "Let not her throw dust in thine eyes,
Master Richart. Old Martin tells me ye need not make signals to me,
she-comrade; I am as blind as love--Martin tells me she cut her arm, and
let her blood flow, and smeared her heels when Gerard was hunted by the
bloodhounds, to turn the scent from her lad."

"Well, and if I did, 'twas my own, and spilled for the good of my own,"
said Margaret defiantly. But Catherine suddenly clasping her, she began
to cry at having found a bosom to cry on, of one who would have also
shed her blood for Gerard in danger.

Eli rose from his chair. "Wife," said he solemnly, "you will set another
chair at our table for every meal: also another plate and knife. They
will be for Margaret and Peter. She will come when she likes, and stay
away when she pleases. None may take her place at my left hand. Such as
can welcome her are welcome to me. Such as cannot, I force them not to
abide with me. The world is wide and free. Within my walls I am master,
and my son's betrothed is welcome."

Catherine bustled out to prepare supper. Eli and Richart sat down and
concocted a letter to bring Gerard home. Richart promised it should go
by sea to Rome that very week. Sybrandt and Cornelis exchanged a gloomy
wink, and stole out. Margaret, seeing Giles deep in meditation, for the
dwarf's intelligence had taken giant strides, asked him to bring her the
letter. "You have heard but half, good master Giles," said she. "Shall I
read you the rest?"

"I shall be much beholden to you," shouted the sonorous atom.

She gave him her stool: curiosity bowed his pride to sit on it; and
Margaret murmured the first part of the letter into his ear very low,
not to disturb Eli and Richart. And to do this, she leaned forward and
put her lovely face cheek by jowl with Giles's hideous one: a strange
contrast, and worth a painter's while to try and represent. And in this
attitude Catherine found her, and all the mother warmed towards her, and
she exchanged an eloquent glance with little Kate.

The latter smiled, and sewed, with drooping lashes.

"Get him home on the instant," roared Giles. "I'll make a man of him."

"Hear the boy!" said Catherine, half comically, half proudly.

"We hear him," said Richart; "a mostly makes himself heard when a do
speak."

Sybrandt. "Which will get to him first?"

Cornelis (gloomily). "Who can tell?"



CHAPTER LV

About two months before this scene in Eli's home, the natives of a
little' maritime place between Naples and Rome might be seen flocking to
the sea beach, with eyes cast seaward at a ship, that laboured against a
stiff gale blowing dead on the shore.

At times she seemed likely to weather the danger, and then the
spectators congratulated her aloud: at others the wind and sea drove
her visibly nearer, and the lookers-on were not without a secret
satisfaction they would not have owned even to themselves.

     Non quia vexari quemquam est jucunda voluptas
     Sed quibus ipse malis careas quia cernere suave est.

And the poor ship, though not scientifically built for sailing, was
admirably constructed for going ashore, with her extravagant poop that
caught the wind, and her lines like a cocked hat reversed. To those
on the beach that battered labouring frame of wood seemed alive, and
struggling against death with a panting heart. But could they have been
transferred to her deck they would have seen she had not one beating
heart but many, and not one nature but a score were coming out clear in
that fearful hour.

The mariners stumbled wildly about the deck, handling the ropes as each
thought fit, and cursing and praying alternately.

The passengers were huddled together round the mast, some sitting, some
kneeling, some lying prostrate, and grasping the bulwarks as the vessel
rolled and pitched in the mighty waves. One comely young man, whose ashy
cheek, but compressed lips, showed how hard terror was battling in him
with self-respect, stood a little apart, holding tight by a shroud, and
wincing at each sea. It was the ill-fated Gerard. Meantime prayers and
vows rose from the trembling throng amid-ships, and to hear them,
it seemed there were almost as many gods about as men and women. The
sailors, indeed, relied on a single goddess. They varied her titles
only, calling on her as "Queen of Heaven," "Star of the Sea," "Mistress
of the World," "Haven of Safety." But among the landsmen Polytheism
raged. Even those who by some strange chance hit on the same divinity
did not hit on the same edition of that divinity. An English merchant
vowed a heap of gold to our lady of Walsingham. But a Genoese merchant
vowed a silver collar of four pounds to our lady of Loretto; and a
Tuscan noble promised ten pounds of wax lights to our lady of Ravenna;
and with a similar rage for diversity they pledged themselves, not on
the true Cross, but on the true Cross in this, that, or the other modern
city.

Suddenly a more powerful gust than usual catching the sail at a
disadvantage, the rotten shrouds gave way, and the sail was torn out
with a loud crack, and went down the wind smaller and smaller, blacker
and blacker, and fluttered into the sea, half a mile off, like a sheet
of paper, and ere the helmsman could put the ship's head before the
wind, a wave caught her on the quarter and drenched the poor wretches to
the bone, and gave them a foretaste of chill death. Then one vowed aloud
to turn Carthusian monk, if St. Thomas would save him. Another would
go a pilgrim to Compostella, bareheaded, barefooted, with nothing but
a coat of mail on his naked skin, if St. James would save him. Others
invoked Thomas, Dominic, Denys, and above all, Catherine of Sienna.

Two petty Neapolitan traders stood shivering.

One shouted at the top of his voice, "I vow to St. Christopher at Paris
a waxen image of his own weight, if I win safe to land."

On this the other nudged him, and said, "Brother, brother, take heed
what you vow. Why, if you sell all you have in the world by public
auction, 'twill not buy his weight in wax."

"Hold your tongue, you fool," said the vociferator. Then in a whisper:

"Think ye I am in earnest? Let me but win safe to land, I'll not give
him a rush dip."

Others lay flat and prayed to the sea.

"Oh, most merciful sea! oh, sea most generous! oh! bountiful sea! oh,
beautiful sea! be gentle, be kind, preserve us in this hour of peril."

And others wailed and moaned in mere animal terror each time the
ill-fated ship rolled or pitched more terribly than usual; and she was
now a mere plaything in the arms of the tremendous waves.

A Roman woman of the humbler class sat with her child at her half-bared
breast, silent amid that wailing throng: her cheek ashy pale; her eye
calm; and her lips moved at times in silent prayer, but she neither
wept, nor lamented, nor bargained with the gods. Whenever the ship
seemed really gone under their feet, and bearded men squeaked, she
kissed her child; but that was all. And so she sat patient, and suckled
him in death's jaws; for why should he lose any joy she could give him;
moribundo? Ay, there I do believe, sat Antiquity among those mediaevals.
Sixteen hundred years had not tainted the old Roman blood in her veins;
and the instinct of a race she had perhaps scarce heard of taught her to
die with decent dignity.

A gigantic friar stood on the poop with feet apart, like the Colossus of
Rhodes, not so much defying, as ignoring, the peril that surrounded him.
He recited verses from the Canticles with a loud unwavering voice; and
invited the passengers to confess to him. Some did so on their knees,
and he heard them and laid his hands on them, and absolved them as if
he had been in a snug sacristy, instead of a perishing ship. Gerard got
nearer and nearer to him, by the instinct that takes the wavering to
the side of the impregnable. And in truth, the courage of heroes facing
fleshly odds might have paled by the side of that gigantic friar, and
his still more gigantic composure. Thus, even here, two were found who
maintained the dignity of our race: a woman, tender, yet heroic, and a
monk steeled by religion against mortal fears.

And now, the sail being gone, the sailors cut down the useless mast a
foot above the board, and it fell with its remaining hamper over the
ship's side. This seemed to relieve her a little.

But now the hull, no longer impelled by canvas, could not keep ahead of
the sea. It struck her again and again on the poop, and the tremendous
blows seemed given by a rocky mountain, not by a liquid.

The captain left the helm and came amidships pale as death. "Lighten
her," he cried. "Fling all overboard, or we shall founder ere we strike,
and lose the one little chance we have of life." While the sailors were
executing this order, the captain, pale himself, and surrounded by pale
faces that demanded to know their fate, was talking as unlike an English
skipper in like peril as can well be imagined. "Friends," said he, "last
night when all was fair, too fair, alas! there came a globe of fire
close to the ship. When a pair of them come it is good luck, and nought
can drown her that voyage. We mariners call these fiery globes Castor
and Pollux. But if Castor come without Pollux, or Pollux without Castor,
she is doomed. Therefore, like good Christians, prepare to die."

These words were received with a loud wail.

To a trembling inquiry how long they had to prepare, the captain
replied, "She may, or may not, last half an hour; over that, impossible;
she leaks like a sieve; bustle, men, lighten her."

The poor passengers seized on everything that was on deck and flung
it overboard. Presently they laid hold of a heavy sack; an old man was
lying on it, sea sick. They lugged it from under him. It rattled. Two
of them drew it to the side; up started the owner, and with an unearthly
shriek, pounced on it. "Holy Moses! what would you do? 'Tis my all;
'tis the whole fruits of my journey; silver candlesticks, silver plates,
brooches, hanaps--"

"Let go, thou hoary villain," cried the others; "shall all our lives be
lost for thy ill-gotten gear?" "Fling him in with it," cried one; "'tis
this Ebrew we Christian men are drowned for." Numbers soon wrenched it
from him, and heaved it over the side. It splashed into the waves. Then
its owner uttered one cry of anguish, and stood glaring, his white hair
streaming in the wind, and was going to leap after it, and would, had
it floated. But it sank, and was gone for ever; and he staggered to and
fro, tearing his hair, and cursed them and the ship, and the sea, and
all the powers of heaven and hell alike.

And now the captain cried out: "See, there is a church in sight. Steer
for that church, mate, and you, friends, pray to the saint, whoe'er he
be."

So they steered for the church and prayed to the unknown god it was
named after. A tremendous sea pooped them, broke the rudder, and jammed
it immovable, and flooded the deck.

Then wild with superstitious terror some of them came round Gerard.
"Here is the cause of all," they cried. "He has never invoked a single
saint. He is a heathen; here is a pagan aboard."

"Alas, good friends, say not so," said Gerard, his teeth chattering with
cold and fear. "Rather call these heathens, that lie a praying to
the sea. Friends, I do honour the saints--but I dare not pray to them
now--there is no time--(oh!) what avail me Dominic, and Thomas, and
Catherine? Nearer God's throne than these St. Peter sitteth; and if I
pray to him, it's odd, but I shall be drowned ere he has time to plead
my cause with God. Oh! oh! oh! I must need go straight to Him that made
the sea, and the saints, and me. Our Father which art in heaven, save
these poor souls and me that cry for the bare life! Oh, sweet Jesus,
pitiful Jesus, that didst walk Genezaret when Peter sank, and wept for
Lazarus dead when the apostles' eyes were dry, oh, save poor Gerard--for
dear Margaret's sake!"

At this moment the sailors were seen preparing to desert the sinking
ship in the little boat, which even at that epoch every ship carried;
then there was a rush of egotists; and thirty souls crowded into it.
Remained behind three who were bewildered, and two who were paralyzed,
with terror. The paralyzed sat like heaps of wet rags, the bewildered
ones ran to and fro, and saw the thirty egotists put off, but made no
attempt to join them: only kept running to and fro, and wringing their
hands. Besides these there was one on his knees, praying over the wooden
statue of the Virgin Mary, as large as life, which the sailors had
reverently detached from the mast. It washed about the deck, as the
water came slushing in from the sea, and pouring out at the scuppers;
and this poor soul kept following it on his knees, with his hands
clasped at it, and the water playing with it. And there was the Jew
palsied, but not by fear. He was no longer capable of so petty a
passion. He sat cross-legged, bemoaning his bag, and whenever the
spray lashed him, shook his fist at where it came from, and cursed the
Nazarenes, and their gods, and their devils, and their ships, and their
waters, to all eternity.

And the gigantic Dominican, having shriven the whole ship, stood calmly
communing with his own spirit. And the Roman woman sat pale and patient,
only drawing her child closer to her bosom as death came nearer.

Gerard saw this, and it awakened his manhood.

"See! see!" he said, "they have ta'en the boat and left the poor woman
and her child to perish."

His heart soon set his wit working.

"Wife, I'll save thee yet, please God." And he ran to find a cask or a
plank to float her. There was none.

Then his eye fell on the wooden image of the Virgin. He caught it up in
his arms, and heedless of a wail that issued from its worshipper like a
child robbed of its toy, ran aft with it. "Come, wife," he cried.
"I'll lash thee and the child to this. 'Tis sore worm eaten, but 'twill
serve."

She turned her great dark eye on him and said a single word:

"Thyself?!"

But with wonderful magnanimity and tenderness.

"I am a man, and have no child to take care of."

"Ah!" said she, and his words seemed to animate her face with a desire
to live. He lashed the image to her side. Then with the hope of life she
lost something of her heroic calm; not much: her body trembled a little,
but not her eye.

The ship was now so low in the water that by using an oar as a lever he
could slide her into the waves.

"Come," said he, "while yet there is time."

She turned her great Roman eyes, wet now, upon him. "Poor youth!--God
forgive me!--My child!" And he launched her on the surge, and with his
oar kept her from being battered against the ship.

A heavy hand fell on him; a deep sonorous voice sounded in his ear:
"'Tis well. Now come with me."

It was the gigantic friar.

Gerard turned, and the friar took two strides, and laid hold of the
broken mast. Gerard did the same, obeying him instinctively. Between
them, after a prodigious effort, they hoisted up the remainder of the
mast, and carried it off. "Fling it in," said the friar, "and follow
it." They flung it in; but one of the bewildered passengers had run
after them, and jumped first and got on one end. Gerard seized the
other, the friar the middle.

It was a terrible situation. The mast rose and plunged with each wave
like a kicking horse, and the spray flogged their faces mercilessly, and
blinded them: to help knock them off.

Presently was heard a long grating noise ahead. The ship had struck, and
soon after, she being stationary now, they were hurled against her with
tremendous force. Their companion's head struck against the upper part
of the broken rudder with a horrible crack, and was smashed like a
cocoa-nut by a sledge-hammer. He sunk directly, leaving no trace but
a red stain on the water, and a white clot on the jagged rudder, and a
death cry ringing in their ears, as they drifted clear under the lee of
the black hull. The friar uttered a short Latin prayer for the safety of
his soul, and took his place composedly. They rolled along; one moment
they saw nothing, and seemed down in a mere basin of watery hills: the
next they caught glimpses of the shore speckled bright with people,
who kept throwing up their arms with wild Italian gestures to encourage
them, and the black boat driving bottom upwards, and between it and
them the woman rising and falling like themselves. She had come across a
paddle, and was holding her child tight with her left arm, and paddling
gallantly with her right.

When they had tumbled along thus a long time, suddenly the friar said
quietly--

"I touched the ground."

"Impossible, father," said Gerard; "we are more than a hundred yards
from shore. Prithee, prithee, leave not our faithful mast."

"My son," said the friar, "you speak prudently. But know that I have
business of Holy Church on hand, and may not waste time floating when
I can walk, in her service. There I felt it with my toes again; see the
benefit of wearing sandals, and not shoon. Again; and sandy. Thy
stature is less than mine: keep to the mast! I walk." He left the mast
accordingly and extending his powerful arms, rushed through the water.
Gerard soon followed him. At each overpowering wave the monk stood like
a tower, and closing his mouth, threw his head back to encounter it, and
was entirely lost under it awhile: then emerged and ploughed lustily on.
At last they came close to the shore; but the suction outward baffled
all their attempts to land. Then the natives sent stout fishermen into
the sea, holding by long spears in a triple chain; and so dragged them
ashore.

The friar shook himself, bestowed a short paternal benediction on the
natives, and went on to Rome, with eyes bent on earth according to his
rule, and without pausing. He did not even cast a glance back upon that
sea, which had so nearly engulfed him, but had no power to harm him,
without his Master's leave.

While he stalks on alone to Rome without looking back, I who am not in
the service of Holy Church, stop a moment to say that the reader and
I were within six inches of this giant once before; but we escaped him
that time. Now I fear we are in for him. Gerard grasped every hand upon
the beach. They brought him to an enormous fire, and with a delicacy
he would hardly have encountered in the north, left him to dry himself
alone: on this he took out of his bosom a parchment, and a paper, and
dried them carefully. When this was done to his mind, and not till then,
he consented to put on a fisherman's dress and leave his own by the
fire, and went down to the beach. What he saw may be briefly related.

The captain stuck by the ship, not so much from gallantry, as from a
conviction that it was idle to resist Castor or Pollux, whichever it was
that had come for him in a ball of fire.

Nevertheless the sea broke up the ship and swept the poop, captain and
all, clear of the rest, and took him safe ashore. Gerard had a principal
hand in pulling him out of the water. The disconsolate Hebrew landed on
another fragment, and on touching earth, offered a reward for his bag,
which excited little sympathy, but some amusement. Two more were saved
on pieces of the wreck. The thirty egotists came ashore, but one at
a time, and dead; one breathed still. Him the natives, with excellent
intentions, took to a hot fire. So then he too retired from this
shifting scene.

As Gerard stood by the sea, watching, with horror and curiosity mixed,
his late companions washed ashore, a hand was laid lightly on his
shoulder. He turned. It was the Roman matron, burning with womanly
gratitude. She took his hand gently, and raising it slowly to her lips,
kissed it; but so nobly, she seemed to be conferring an honour on one
deserving hand. Then with face all beaming and moist eyes, she held her
child up and made him kiss his preserver.

Gerard kissed the child more than once. He was fond of children. But he
said nothing. He was much moved; for she did not speak at all, except
with her eyes, and glowing cheeks, and noble antique gesture, so large
and stately. Perhaps she was right. Gratitude is not a thing of words.
It was an ancient Roman matron thanking a modern from her heart of
hearts.

Next day towards afternoon, Gerard--twice as old as last year, thrice
as learned in human ways, a boy no more, but a man who had shed blood in
self-defence, and grazed the grave by land and sea--reached the Eternal
City; post tot naufragia tutus.



CHAPTER LVI

Gerard took a modest lodging on the west bank of the Tiber, and every
day went forth in search of work, taking a specimen round to every shop
he could hear of that executed such commissions.

They received him coldly. "We make our letter somewhat thinner than
this," said one. "How dark your ink is," said another. But the main cry
was, "What avails this? Scant is the Latin writ here now. Can ye not
write Greek?"

"Ay, but not nigh so well as Latin."

"Then you shall never make your bread at Rome."

Gerard borrowed a beautiful Greek manuscript at a high price, and went
home with a sad hole in his purse, but none in his courage.

In a fortnight he had made vast progress with the Greek character;
so then, to lose no time, he used to work at it till noon, and hunt
customers the rest of the day.

When he carried round a better Greek specimen than any they possessed,
the traders informed him that Greek and Latin were alike unsaleable; the
city was thronged with works from all Europe. He should have come last
year.

Gerard bought a psaltery. His landlady, pleased with his looks and
manners, used often to speak a kind word in passing. One day she made
him dine with her, and somewhat to his surprise asked him what had
dashed his spirits. He told her. She gave him her reading of the matter.
"Those sly traders," she would be bound, "had writers in their pay,
for whose work they received a noble price, and paid a sorry one. So no
wonder they blow cold on you. Methinks you write too well. How know I
that? say you. Marry--marry, because you lock not your door, like the
churl Pietro, and women will be curious. Ay, ay, you write too well for
them."

Gerard asked an explanation.

"Why," said she, "your good work might put out the eyes of that they are
selling."

Gerard sighed. "Alas! dame, you read folk on the ill side, and you so
kind and frank yourself."

"My dear little heart, these Romans are a subtle race. Me? I am a
Siennese, thanks to the Virgin."

"My mistake was leaving Augsburg," said Gerard.

"Augsburg?" said she haughtily: "is that a place to even to Rome? I
never heard of it, for my part."

She then assured him that he should make his fortune in spite of the
booksellers. "Seeing thee a stranger, they lie to thee without sense or
discretion. Why, all the world knows that our great folk are bitten with
the writing spider this many years, and pour out their money like water,
and turn good land and houses into writ sheepskins, to keep in a chest
or a cupboard. God help them, and send them safe through this fury, as
He hath through a heap of others; and in sooth hath been somewhat less
cutting and stabbing among rival factions, and vindictive eating of
their opposites' livers, minced and fried, since Scribbling came in.
Why, I can tell you two. There is his eminence Cardinal Bassarion, and
his holiness the Pope himself. There be a pair could keep a score such
as thee a writing night and day. But I'll speak to Teresa; she hears the
gossip of the court."

The next day she told him she had seen Teresa, and had heard of five
more signors who were bitten with the writing spider. Gerard took down
their names, and bought parchment, and busied himself for some days in
preparing specimens. He left one, with his name and address, at each of
these signors' doors, and hopefully awaited the result.

There was none.

Day after day passed and left him heartsick.

And strange to say this was just the time when Margaret was fighting so
hard against odds to feed her male dependents at Rotterdam, and arrested
for curing without a licence instead of killing with one.

Gerard saw ruin staring him in the face.

He spent the afternoons picking up canzonets and mastering them. He laid
in playing cards to colour, and struck off a meal per day.

This last stroke of genius got him into fresh trouble.

In these "camere locande" the landlady dressed all the meals, though
the lodgers bought the provisions. So Gerard's hostess speedily detected
him, and asked him if he was not ashamed himself: by which brusque
opening, having made him blush and look scared, she pacified herself
all in a moment, and appealed to his good sense whether Adversity was a
thing to be overcome on an empty stomach.

"Patienza, my lad! times will mend; meantime I will feed you for the
love of heaven." (Italian for "gratis.")

"Nay, hostess," said Gerard, "my purse is not yet quite void, and it
would add to my trouble an if true folk should lose their due by me."

"Why, you are as mad as your neighbour Pietro, with his one bad
picture."

"Why, how know you 'tis a bad picture?"

"Because nobody will buy it. There is one that hath no gift. He will
have to don casque and glaive, and carry his panel for a shield."

Gerard pricked up his ears at this: so she told him more. Pietro had
come from Florence with money in his purse, and an unfinished picture;
had taken her one unfurnished room, opposite Gerard's, and furnished
it neatly. When his picture was finished, he received visitors and had
offers for it: though in her opinion liberal ones, he had refused so
disdainfully as to make enemies of his customers. Since then he had
often taken it out with him to try and sell, but had always brought it
back; and the last month, she had seen one movable after another go out
of his room, and now he wore but one suit, and lay at night on a great
chest. She had found this out only by peeping through the keyhole, for
he locked the door most vigilantly whenever he went out. "Is he afraid
we shall steal his chest, or his picture, that no soul in all Rome is
weak enough to buy?"

"Nay, sweet hostess; see you not 'tis his poverty he would screen from
view?"

"And the more fool he! Are all our hearts as ill as his? A might give us
a trial first, anyway."

"How you speak of him. Why, his case is mine; and your countryman to
boot."

"Oh, we Siennese love strangers. His case yours? Nay, 'tis just the
contrary. You are the comeliest youth ever lodged in this house; hair
like gold: he is a dark, sour-visaged loon. Besides, you know how to
take a woman on her better side; but not he. Natheless, I wish he would
not starve to death in my house, to get me a bad name. Anyway, one
starveling is enough in any house. You are far from home, and it is for
me, which am the mistress here, to number your meals--for me and the
Dutch wife, your mother, that is far away: we two women shall settle
that matter. Mind thou thine own business, being a man, and leave
cooking and the like to us, that are in the world for little else that
I see but to roast fowls, and suckle men at starting, and sweep their
grownup cobwebs."

"Dear kind dame, in sooth you do often put me in mind of my mother that
is far away."

"All the better; I'll put you more in mind of her before I have done
with you." And the honest soul beamed with pleasure.

Gerard not being an egotist, nor blinded by female partialities, saw his
own grief in poor proud Pietro; and the more he thought of it the more
he resolved to share his humble means with that unlucky artist; Pietro's
sympathy would repay him. He tried to waylay him; but without success.

One day he heard a groaning in the room. He knocked at the door, but
received no answer. He knocked again. A surly voice bade him enter.

He obeyed somewhat timidly, and entered a garret furnished with a chair,
a picture, face to wall, an iron basin, an easel, and a long chest,
on which was coiled a haggard young man with a wonderfully bright eye.
Anything more like a coiled cobra ripe for striking the first comer was
never seen.

"Good Signor Pietro," said Gerard, "forgive me that, weary of my own
solitude, I intrude on yours; but I am your nighest neighbour in this
house, and methinks your brother in fortune. I am an artist too."

"You are a painter? Welcome, signer. Sit down on my bed."

And Pietro jumped off and waved him into the vacant throne with a
magnificent demonstration of courtesy.

Gerard bowed, and smiled; but hesitated a little. "I may not call
myself a painter. I am a writer, a caligraph. I copy Greek and Latin
manuscripts, when I can get them to copy."

"And you call that an artist?"

"Without offence to your superior merit, Signor Pietro."

"No offence, stranger, none. Only, meseemeth an artist is one who
thinks, and paints his thought. Now a caligraph but draws in black and
white the thoughts of another."

"'Tis well distinguished, signor. But then, a writer can write the
thoughts of the great ancients, and matters of pure reason, such as
no man may paint: ay, and the thoughts of God, which angels could not
paint. But let that pass. I am a painter as well; but a sorry one."

"The better thy luck. 'They will buy thy work in Rome."

"But seeking to commend myself to one of thy eminence, I thought it well
rather to call myself a capable writer, than a scurvy painter."

At this moment a step was heard on the stair. "Ah! 'tis the good dame,"
cried Gerard. "What oh! hostess, I am here in conversation with Signor
Pietro. I dare say he will let me have my humble dinner here."

The Italian bowed gravely.

The landlady brought in Gerard's dinner smoking and savoury. She put the
dish down on the bed with a face divested of all expression, and went.

Gerard fell to. But ere he had eaten many mouthfuls, he stopped, and
said: "I am an ill-mannered churl, Signor Pietro. I ne'er eat to my mind
when I eat alone. For our Lady's sake put a spoon into this ragout with
me; 'tis not unsavoury, I promise you."

Pietro fixed his glittering eye on him.

"What, good youth, thou a stranger, and offerest me thy dinner?"

"Why, see, there is more than one can eat."

"Well, I accept," said Pietro; and took the dish with some appearance of
calmness, and flung the contents out of window.

Then he turned, trembling with mortification and ire, and said: "Let
that teach thee to offer alms to an artist thou knowest not, master
writer."

Gerard's face flushed with anger, and it cost him a bitter struggle not
to box this high-souled creature's ears. And then to go and destroy
good food! His mother's milk curdled in his veins with horror at such
impiety. Finally, pity at Pietro's petulance and egotism, and a touch of
respect for poverty-struck pride, prevailed.

However, he said coldly, "Likely what thou hast done might pass in a
novel of thy countryman, Signor Boccaccio; but 'twas not honest."

"Make that good!" said the painter sullenly.

"I offered thee half my dinner; no more. But thou hast ta'en it all.
Hadst a right to throw away thy share, but not mine. Pride is well, but
justice is better."

Pietro stared, then reflected.

"'Tis well. I took thee for a fool, so transparent was thine artifice.
Forgive me! And prithee leave me! Thou seest how 'tis with me. The world
hath soured me. I hate mankind. I was not always so. Once more excuse
that my discourtesy, and fare thee well."

Gerard sighed, and made for the door.

But suddenly a thought struck him. "Signor Pietro," said he, "we
Dutchmen are hard bargainers. We are the lads 'een eij scheeren,' that
is, 'to shave an egg.' Therefore, I, for my lost dinner, do claim to
feast mine eyes on your picture, whose face is toward the wall."

"Nay, nay," said the painter hastily, "ask me not that; I have already
misconducted myself enough towards thee. I would not shed thy blood."

"Saints forbid! My blood?"

"Stranger," said Pietro sullenly, "irritated by repeated insults to my
picture, which is my child, my heart, I did in a moment of rage make a
solemn vow to drive my dagger into the next one that should flout it,
and the labour and love that I have given to it."

"What, are all to be slain that will not praise this picture?" and he
looked at its back with curiosity.

"Nay, nay; if you would but look at it, and hold your parrot tongues.
But you will be talking. So I have turned it to the wall for ever. Would
I were dead, and buried in it for my coffin!"

Gerard reflected.

"I accept the condition. Show me the picture! I can but hold my peace."

Pietro went and turned its face, and put it in the best light the room
afforded, and coiled himself again on his chest, with his eye, and
stiletto, glittering.

The picture represented the Virgin and Christ, flying through the air in
a sort of cloud of shadowy cherubic faces; underneath was a landscape,
forty or fifty miles in extent, and a purple sky above.

Gerard stood and looked at it in silence. Then he stepped close, and
looked. Then he retired as far off as he could, and looked; but said not
a word.

When he had been at this game half an hour, Pietro cried out querulously
and somewhat inconsistently: "well, have you not a word to say about
it?"

Gerard started. "I cry your mercy; I forgot there were three of us here.
Ay, I have much to say." And he drew his sword.

"Alas! alas!" cried Pietro, jumping in terror from his lair. "What
wouldst thou?"

"Marry, defend myself against thy bodkin, signor; and at due odds,
being, as aforesaid, a Dutchman. Therefore, hold aloof, while I deliver
judgment, or I will pin thee to the wall like a cockchafer."

"Oh! is that all?" said Pietro, greatly relieved. "I feared you were
going to stab my poor picture with your sword, stabbed already by so
many foul tongues."

Gerard "pursued criticism under difficulties." Put himself in a position
of defence, with his sword's point covering Pietro, and one eye glancing
aside at the picture. "First, signor, I would have you know that, in
the mixing of certain colours, and in the preparation of your oil, you
Italians are far behind us Flemings. But let that flea stick. For as
small as I am, I can show you certain secrets of the Van Eycks, that you
will put to marvellous profit in your next picture. Meantime I see in
this one the great qualities of your nation. Verily, ye are solis filii.
If we have colour, you have imagination. Mother of Heaven! an he hath
not flung his immortal soul upon the panel. One thing I go by is this;
it makes other pictures I once admired seem drossy, earth-born things.
The drapery here is somewhat short and stiff, why not let it float
freely, the figures being in air and motion?

"I will! I will!" cried Pietro eagerly. "I will do anything for those
who will but see what I have done."

"Humph! This landscape it enlightens me. Henceforth I scorn those little
huddled landscapes that did erst content me. Here is nature's very face:
a spacious plain, each distance marked, and every tree, house, figure,
field, and river smaller and less plain, by exquisite gradation, till
vision itself melts into distance. O, beautiful! And the cunning rogue
hath hung his celestial figure in air out of the way of his little world
below. Here, floating saints beneath heaven's purple canopy. There,
far down, earth and her busy hives. And they let you take this painted
poetry, this blooming hymn, through the streets of Rome and bring it
