when she did remember, the events of that night seemed to stand out
in fearful colours.

Yet there was one thought of comfort: Cuthbert was not far away.
Since her father had openly accused her of vileness, deceit, and
treachery; since he had struck her down so cruelly, and had not
even come to see her in her helplessness and weakness, must not
Cuthbert's surmise be the true one--must he not surely be mad? She
could see by the old woman's cowering looks if the door moved on
its hinges, how much she feared the terrible master; and when
Petronella was sufficiently recovered to be able to enter into the
kind of conversation by means of signals which in some sort
resembled the finger talking of more modern times, she learned that
indeed her father was in a more black and terrible mood than ever
before, and that old Martha herself went in fear of her life.

Bit by bit the old woman made the girl understand what had
happened. Shortly after the day upon which she had found her young
mistress lying cold and insensible on the stone floor of the hall,
Philip Trevlyn had come to the Gate House, and had demanded an
interview with the owner. Right well did both the women know the
nature of that errand, though none had been present but the young
lover and the enraged father. There could be no manner of doubt but
that, incited to it by Cuthbert's tale, he had come to make a
definite offer of marriage, and doubtless had tried to bribe the
avaricious old man by some tempting offer of gold or land. But
whatever had been the terms in which the proposal was couched,
anger had proved a stronger passion with Nicholas than greed.
Philip had been driven from the house with a fury that threatened
actual violence, and for hours afterwards Nicholas had raged up and
down the house like a wild beast in a cage. He had once gone up to
his daughter's room with a face so full of fury that the old woman
had feared he meant to fall upon her then and there; but even he
had been calmed by a glance at the still, unconscious face upon the
pillow, so white and bloodless and death-like; and the man had gone
down with a quieter footfall than he had mounted, but had been
brooding in sullen fury ever since, so that the old servant had
feared to approach him even to bring him his needful food. She had
spent almost all her time up with her young mistress, afraid to
leave her by night or day lest some mischance should befall her.

All this the girl gradually understood as she became strong enough
to take in the silent talk of the old woman. She knew that she must
have lain some days in this state of unconsciousness, for the trees
were greener than they had been when she had seen them last, and
the sunlight was fast gaining its golden summer-like glow. There
was something exhilarating in the beauty and richness of reviving
nature, and even Petronella's wan cheek kindled into a flush of
pleasure as she looked forth once again upon the fair world around
her dismal home.

Home? no, that was no longer the word for it. Slowly but surely the
knowledge had come to her that Cuthbert had been right, and that
this house could no longer be a home to her. Right well did she
credit now, what had never entered her mind before, that her father
had brooded and brooded until his very mind had become unhinged. He
was not master of his words when he spoke to her as he had done
upon that terrible night; he was not master of his actions when he
had flung her away and left her lying unconscious on the stone
floor. There was even some slight comfort in this thought, though
it settled for ever the doubt in her mind. She must leave the Gate
House so soon as she was strong enough to walk, and she must find
her brother in the forest, and place herself beneath his care.

The old servant approved the plan. She herself could find a refuge
at Trevlyn Chase; but that house would be no shelter for her young
mistress. Her father's authority would be enough to carry her back
into captivity; and what her fate would be, were she to have
escaped him once and be again brought back, was a thought to
shudder at.

"I must go back to Cuthbert," she said to herself, as she looked
over the fair landscape, and thought longingly of the cool, dim
woods, and the free life of the forest. Her own home was nothing
now but a prison house. She knew that if she presented herself
before her father sound and whole, she would at once be placed
under some close restraint that would effectually hinder her from
carrying out her plan. He would sooner kill her, as she verily
believed, than permit her such liberty as might enable her to meet
by accident or design any member of the household from the Chase.
If she were to succeed in her escape, the attempt must be made
whilst her father still believed her too feeble to stir from her
bed; after that she would be too closely watched for it to be
possible.

The old woman entered into this scheme with alacrity and zeal.
Petronella kept to her bed; and when Nicholas Trevlyn demanded by
signs how it fared with his daughter, he was answered by solemn
shakings of the head. If he mounted the stairs to see with his own
eyes how she was, he saw her lying upon the bed with closed eyes
and wan face, and would smile with an evil smile and mutter that
she was safe enough now--safe enough now.

Yet each day hope and the good food the shrewd old woman contrived
to provide for her did its work upon Petronella's frail body, and
she grew better every hour. Indeed, after some while she felt
stronger than she had done for many weeks before her illness; and
in due time even the fond old woman began to see that there was no
need to postpone longer the scheme of escape.

It was a simple little scheme, yet one which promised success if
carefully carried out. Nicholas Trevlyn was accustomed to take
night by night a posset of mead, brewed in some particular way by
Martha. She was, upon the night planned as the one for the escape
of Petronella, to add to this posset some drops of a concoction
prepared by herself from herbs, which would infallibly produce
sound and deep sleep within two hours. The master of the house
asleep, all would be simple. The two women would sally forth by the
postern door, and make for the forest. With the first light of the
dawn, Martha would seek the shelter of Trevlyn Chase, whilst
Petronella sought her brother in the pixies' dell. Nicholas Trevlyn
would awake the next morning to find himself alone in the old Gate
House that he had made intolerable for any other inmate.



Chapter 16: The Pixies' Dell.


After leaving Petronella close to her home, and watching the slight
figure vanish within the postern door, Cuthbert turned his own
steps towards the Chase, resolved to see Philip and tell him what
had passed between him and his sister before returning to the
forest dell where he had resolved to keep his watch.

He would not make any disturbance at the house at this dead hour of
the night; but as he was familiar with the place, he quickly found
his way to a small pavilion in the garden, the door of which was
not locked at night, and stretching himself upon a wooden settle
which stood there, he quickly fell asleep, and slept soundly and
well until awakened by the sound of a startled exclamation.

Springing to his feet, bewildered for a moment, and unable to
remember where he was, he found himself confronted by the eager,
startled face and big lustrous eyes of his cousin Kate.

"Cuthbert! thou here!" she exclaimed in amaze. "Thou surely hast
not brought me ill news of my--of Culverhouse!" and a deep flush
overspread her face as she spoke.

Cuthbert hastened to reassure her. He explained that he had not
seen Culverhouse since they parted in the forest, and that his own
errand was of a private nature, and concerned himself and his
sister.

"Ah, poor Petronella! methinks a hard lot is hers, Cuthbert. My
brother does what he may; yet that is but little, and of late he
has not been able so much as to get sight of her. Yet I see not
what thou canst do for her. Thy father is even more incensed
against thee than against us!"

"I came but to see with mine own eyes how she fared, and to breathe
a word of hope in her ear. Kate, sweet coz, let me breathe that
same word in thine; for thou wast the one to give me hope and
confidence when all besides looked on me as a wild dreamer.
Methinks I am on the track of the lost treasure. Methinks with
patience and care I shall find it yet."

Kate's eyes kindled and glowed.

"Nay, now, that is good hearing! Said I not ever that the old saws
spake sooth? And is not the luck to return to the house of Wyvern
through its daughters' sons? Cuthbert, tell me more--tell me all!
how is it thou hast succeeded where all besides have failed?"

"I cannot lay claim to success as yet," answered Cuthbert, smiling.
"I have not said the treasure is mine, only that I trow I know
where soon I may lay hands upon it. Sweet Kate, when all that gold
is brought back to the halls of Trevlyn Chase whence it was taken,
sure thy dowry will be fair enough to win Lord Andover's smiles.
Sure thou wilt not then be afraid to own--"

But Kate laid her soft hand upon his lips and glanced round with
startled eyes. Courageous as she was to carry out a bold
resolution, she was not free from nervous timidity, too.

"Speak not the words, good Cuthbert, neither here nor yet within
the walls of the Chase. I have not dared to breathe to them at home
the thing I have done. Heaven pardon me if it were a sin; but I may
not wish it undone. It is so sweet to feel myself his; and if it be
as thou sayest, we may not have long to wait ere he may claim me
before the world. But if thou findest the treasure thyself, will it
not be all thine?"

"I trow not, and I trust thou hast no such evil thoughts of me,
fair cousin, as to think that I would keep all, when but a portion
was my father's share, and that will scarce be mine whilst he
lives. I do but hope to restore it to those to whom it rightfully
belongs. I trow there will be enough to make all glad and happy,
and I doubt not that something of good hap may come to me thereby.
But to lay claim to all--why, that would be a scurvy thought,
unworthy a man of honour."

Kate's bright face was full of eager sympathy and approval.

"I like thee, Cuthbert," she cried; "I like thy honest thoughts and
words. Thou art in sooth a very proper youth. Thou art worthy of
thy Wyvern blood, which I hold to be purer than that of Trevlyn,
which has times and again been stained by acts of malice, greed,
and violence. But see, the sun is rising in the sky! We must back
to the house for the morning meal. And, Cuthbert, good Cuthbert,
thou wilt keep my secret? Thou wilt not tell of our meeting on May
Day in the forest?"

"Never a word an thou biddest me not," answered Cuthbert, with a
smile. "So that is to be a secret, Lady Culverhouse?"

She recoiled with a little start, her eyes dancing, her cheeks
aglow.

"O Cuthbert, I had not thought that my name was changed. Lady
Culverhouse! What a pleasant sound it has! But oh, not a word at
home! I dare not tell them aught till Culverhouse be by my side. I
misdoubt me that I did right to let him persuade me thus; and yet I
could not say him nay, and I longed to hear the words spoken that
should bind us to each other. But I dare not tell my father! I trow
both he and my mother would chide full sternly. In truth, I fear me
it were scarce a maidenly act. But, O Cuthbert, love is so
strong--so hard a task master. Where he drives, it seems that one
needs must go;" and she looked up at him with such arch appeal that
he felt those glances would go far to soften the sternest parental
heart.

"In truth, I believe thee, fair coz, and I will keep thy secret
faithfully. It is safe with me; and I trust that all will end
happily when the lost treasure shall return to the house of
Trevlyn."

And talking eagerly upon this theme, which was also to be kept
secret from all the world besides, the cousins walked towards the
house. Cuthbert received a warm and hearty greeting from all his
kinsfolks there, who were pleased that he should have kept his
promise and have come to see them with the long days of early
summer.

Sir Richard and his wife were both pleased with the fashion in
which the youth had developed; his intelligence and information
were now plainly apparent, and had taken a fresh impetus from the
new surroundings in which he had found himself. He could talk with
discrimination and insight on all the leading topics of the day,
had plainly lost much of his old rusticity of thought and speech,
and had become an interesting and self-possessed youth.

But his errand was really to Philip, and to him he spoke in private
of his sister's story, and how she had promised to obey her father
and to see him no more. Cuthbert could assure the disappointed
lover that this was no indication of coldness on Petronella's part,
but that it was done from a sense of filial duty, combined with a
fear of some violence on her father's part towards her lover should
he be provoked too far. Cuthbert was as certain as Philip could
wish that Petronella's heart was entirely his. He had read the
girl's secret in the tones of her voice and in the shy glances of
her soft eyes. He told Philip, too, of the gold that was awaiting
the girl in her uncle's keeping, and added that he was certain sure
that Martin Holt would be glad enough to give it over to his niece
if she had a sturdy husband of the Reformed faith to take care of
her and it. His only fear was of its falling into the hands of the
Papists, which thing would have been abhorrent to the grand sire
whose legacy the money was. That fear laid to rest, he would be
glad to be rid of the charge, and to give over the gold to its
rightful owner.

Philip's heart was with Petronella, and he had not concerned
himself as yet with any thoughts as to her poverty and his own
somewhat impecunious position as his father's heir, but with three
sisters to be provided for out of the revenues of the impoverished
estate. He was man of the world enough to know that this dowry
would do much to smooth his path when the time should come for
making known his case to his parents, but for the moment his
thoughts were all with the lonely girl shut up so relentlessly by
her father.

"I will see Nicholas Trevlyn," he said, with stern decision.
"Things have gone too far not to go further. I will see him, and
make formal application for his daughter's hand. He can but refuse
me, and I shall tell him plainly that I decline to give her up at
any word of his. I can wait with patience till she is of age to
judge for herself; but she is the woman of my choice, and her alone
will I wed if she will have me."

Cuthbert's face was grave and troubled.

"And waiting for that, she may well be done to death within those
walls, as I should have been had I not fled. I am in trouble of
heart anent my sister. I pray she may find her way to me yet in the
free forest!"

Philip started and looked surprised.

"Is there likelihood of that?"

"I know not. I bid her come if our father should grow more harsh,
and told her where I likeliest might be found. I purpose to dwell
for a while myself in the forest, albeit thou wouldst mock me if
thou knewest the wherefore."

"To search for the lost treasure, I doubt not," said Philip with a
smile, remembering the talk of the autumn previous. "Marry thou
hast my best wishes for a happy quest. But what couldst thou do
with a tender maid out in the woods with thee?"

"I scarce know that myself; but anything would be better than life
with a madman--as I trow our father is like to become an he change
not his habit of life. Belike I would take her to mine uncle on the
bridge; yet perchance he would not thank me for adding to his
charges.

"If we had other relatives--"

"Why, and so ye have, even as we have. Hast never heard of my Lady
Humbert and Mistress Dowsabel Wyvern? They must be kinsfolk of
thine as well as of ours, and they dwell not very far distant from
here, albeit I myself have never visited them."

Cuthbert raised his head and looked eagerly at Philip.

"I would know more of that," he said.

"It is not much I can tell thee. This Lady Humbert is a widow, and
is sister to that Gertrude Wyvern who was my grandam and thy aunt.
Mistress Dowsabel is her younger sister; and albeit they are both
now of a good old age, they dwell together, with only servants for
company, in a house thou wouldst have passed on the road to London
hadst thou not taken the lonelier way across the heath. My father
and mother go each year to see after their welfare, and a letter
comes now and again from them with greetings or questions. We of
the younger generation have never been to visit them, since they
are too old to wish for the presence of the young, and love not to
see the changeless current of their lives interrupted. I remember
that of old, when we were in disgrace for some prank, our grandam
would shake her head at us and vow we should be sent to her sister
Dowsabel for chastisement, and stay with her till we learned better
manners. So we have grown up in the fancy that these kinswomen be
something stern and redoubtable ladies. Nevertheless, if thou wast
to put thy sister beneath their care, I trow they would receive her
with kindness and treat her well, and she would scarce regret the
Gate House were the captivity never so hard. Nor would Nicholas
Trevlyn be like to seek her there, though at the Chase he would
find her at once, were we to strive to aid her flight as we aided
thine."

Cuthbert saw this plainly, and asked a few more eager questions
about these ladies and where they might be found. He hardly knew
whether or not he expected Petronella to flee away to him, but at
least it would do no harm to be prepared in case she did so.

Philip told him all he knew, which was not much. The house would be
easily found, as it stood upon the highroad just a mile from a
large village, its gates opening straight upon the road, although
at the back were gardens and pleasaunces and a clear trout stream.
It seemed to Cuthbert as he listened that such a place as this
might prove a safe haven of refuge for his sister should one be
needed, and he resolved that if she once came to him he would
persuade her to place herself beneath the protection of these
ladies.

He would well have liked to see her again, to have whispered
something of this new plan into her ears. But though he lingered
much about the house during the two short weeks he spent at the
Chase, he saw no glimpse of his sister, and he did not dare to
summon her out to meet him at night, lest haply the suspicions of
the grim old tyrant should be aroused.

Leaving Philip fully determined to see Nicholas Trevlyn ere long,
to lay before him his formal proposal for Petronella's hand, and
confident that all at the Chase would befriend her as far as it was
possible; Cuthbert, afraid to linger longer in the immediate
vicinity of the Gate House, took his departure for the forest,
resolved to give himself over heart and soul to the search after
the missing treasure, and not to give it up until every nook and
corner of the pixies' dell had been subjected to the closest
scrutiny.

It was easy to obtain from Philip all such tools as would be
needful for the task of excavation. Although the young man himself
had small hopes of Cuthbert's success, he was interested in spite
of himself in the proposed plan, and would have been more so had he
known how much had been already discovered. But Cuthbert kept much
of that to himself, not willing that tattling tongues should spread
the rumour. Only to real believers in the hidden treasure did he
care to speak of the gipsy's strange words and the visit to the
wise woman of Budge Row. Philip, he thought, would smile, and
perhaps he would speak of the matter to his father, who in turn
might name it to some one else, and so it might come round, through
the gipsy spies and watchers, to the ears of Long Robin himself.
That, as Cuthbert well knew, would be well-nigh destruction to all
his cherished hopes; yet one who believed not would smile at his
fears, and could scarce be expected to observe the needful caution.

As Cuthbert started for his nine miles' tramp in the cool of the
evening, with his tools slung across his shoulders, he was glad to
think that he had resisted the temptation to speak openly of this
matter to any but Petronella and Kate. With them he well knew the
secret was safe, for they entertained for Long Robin just the same
suspicious fear as he did himself, and their lips were sealed even
as his own.

The walk was nothing for his strong young limbs; but as he
approached the lonely dell, he instinctively slackened his speed,
and proceeded with greater caution. The thick growth of the trees
made the place dark in spite of the moon, which hung low in the sky
and shone between the trees in long silvery beams; and the tangled
path which once had led to the forest well had been long overgrown
with a mass of bramble and underwood, through which it was hard to
force a way.

But Cuthbert cautiously proceeded, listening intently for any
sounds of life to indicate the presence of Long Robin, the only
being likely to be near at such an hour; but all appeared to be
intensely still, and presently he commenced his cautious descent
into the dell itself, and at last stood beside the old stone wall
that guarded the mouth of the well.

Cuthbert had heard something of that well since he had been at his
uncle's house. Some of the old servants at the Chase knew the
forest well, and he had been told the story of the pixies' dell:
how it had once been a noted spot in the forest, and how travellers
turned aside to drink the waters, which were not only fresh and
clear and cold, even on the most sultry summer's day, but were
reported to possess healing properties, especially if taken at
certain hours of the night and in certain phases of the moon. Long
ago there had been a monastery near the well, and the monks had
dispensed the waters to the applicants who came. But the monastery
had fallen into ruins and had disappeared, and after that the
pixies were given the credit of the healing waters. People came to
drink them, though less frequently than before; and as the place
grew more lonely and deserted, rumours began to float about that
the pixies were inimical to man, and that the waters no longer
possessed their old power. Later on still, a more terrible thing
was discovered: it was said that it was death to approach that dell
and drink the waters. Men's bones had been found in great numbers
close about that spot, and it was plain that they must belong to
the unhappy wights who, disregarding cautions, had ventured to the
place, and had died before they could get away from thence.

After that, as may well be guessed, no sick folks had cared to
trouble the dell again. Travellers made a wide circuit to avoid it,
and it was held to be the place of most evil repute in the forest.

All this story was well understood by Cuthbert, who felt no fear of
the spot, only a little natural awe as he recollected the deed that
had once been done there. The moon was going down as he looked
about him; the dark hour before morning was about to fall upon the
world. He looked about for a resting place in which to conceal
himself till he could commence his search, and found the place he
desired in a hollow tree, just beyond the circle of smooth sward
that surrounded the well itself.

Plainly this tree had been used before for a like purpose. The
leaves had been carefully raked together within, and were covered
by a warm rug, in which Cuthbert was not sorry to wrap himself, for
the night air was sharp and chilly though the days were hot.

"Long Robin's rug, or I greatly mistake me," he said with a smile.
"I trow he would be sore amazed were he to come and find me here.
Howbeit he would but take me for a passing wayfarer, since he knows
not my face, and I misdoubt me if he come tonight. He fears too
much Joanna's watchful eyes and Miriam's jealous ones. I will sleep
in peace till daylight dawns, and then I will begin my search."

Sleep came quickly to the lad's eyes, but it was only light, for
with the first blush of dawn he awoke and prepared to commence his
work.

His tools he had hidden away beneath the heap of leaves which had
formed his bed, and he did not disturb them for the time being, but
walked forth and examined the dell for himself before making any
excavation.

First his attention was given to the patch of greensward around the
well; but this was so smooth and even that it seemed as if it had
not been disturbed for ages. Such soft emerald turf, as Cuthbert
well knew, was the growth of centuries, and there was no sort of
trace or seam to indicate the handiwork of man.

Round and round the open space he paced, his eyes fixed upon the
ground beneath his feet, his quick glance shifting from spot to
spot, as he strove for some indication, however faint, of the
existence of some hidden hoard.

"Yet it is certain to be well hid. It were strange if I did light
upon it in the first hour," he said to himself at length, covering
his disappointment with a smile. "I will break my fast with the
good fare given me by my fair cousin Kate, and will taste the
waters of the magic well. I trow I shall take no harm from them.
Long Robin will scarce have poisoned the spring from which he
himself must ofttimes drink."

Whilst he partook of his simple meal, he looked about him with keen
and eager glances, wondering where he should next search, and
striving to see traces of footsteps in the sandy sides of the dell,
or breaks in the tangled growth of underwood that would indicate
some track used by Robin. Cuthbert shrewdly suspected that he would
not be able to resist the temptation of going frequently to the
spot where the buried treasure lay, to see if the ground remained
undisturbed, and he thought that the surest way of discovering this
spot was to seek for traces likely to be left by him; or, failing
these, to watch patiently from some obscure spot till the gipsy
came again to the dell, when it was probable he might betray the
secret by his own movements.

"If I dig and delve before the clue is mine, I may chance to put
him on his guard, and find nothing. No; I will be patient--I will
be very cautious. Success comes to him that can wait. Long Robin is
a foe not to be despised or trifled with; I can tell that from his
own words and Joanna's. He would take a hundred lives to save his
golden secret. He is cautious and cunning and wary. I must try to
be the same."

All that long summer's day Cuthbert prowled up and down the dell,
searching for some trace, however slight, which should give him the
clue, and searching in vain. The only path where the undergrowth
was in any way trodden was the one by which he and Robin alike
approached the well, the old, half-obliterated track that once had
been so freely used. All around the sides of the dell, fern and
bramble, hazel and undergrowth of all kinds, grew in wild
confusion. Search as he would, Cuthbert could find nothing like a
path of any kind. Did Robin indeed trust to that tangled
undergrowth to keep his secret hid? And if so, what chance was
there of its being found unless the whole dell was dug up?

A short while back it seemed so much to have found out this dell.
When he had been resolved to search the whole forest through, no
wonder the task had been practically impossible; but when he had
had indications of a confined locality, he had looked upon his work
as well-nigh accomplished, and had come here with a heart full of
high hopes. And now he was confronted by difficulties that appeared
almost as insurmountable as before; for he plainly saw the
hopelessness of attempting single-handed to delve the whole dell
over. Robin would return before the task was more than begun. He
would guess the import, would set a close watch, and would slay the
bold invader of his haunted dell without pity or remorse. Whilst
the only other plan, that of bringing a gang of men to work strong
enough to be a guard to themselves, was simply out of the question
for Cuthbert. He had no money himself. His uncle Martin would
certainly not give him the gold in the box for any such
