had drawn Brother Thomas from the water; but thereof I said no word, for
indeed my dreams were haunted by his hooded face, like that of the snake
which, as travellers tell, wears a hood in Prester John's country, and is
the most venomous of beasts serpentine.  So concerning Brother Thomas I
held my peace, and the barque, swinging round a corner of the bank, soon
brought us into a country with no sign of war on it, and here the poplar-
trees had not been felled for planks to make bulwarks, but whispered by
the riverside.

The wide stream carried many a boat, and shone with sails, white, and
crimson, and brown; the boat-men sang, or hailed each other from afar.
There was much traffic, stores being carried from Blois to the army.  Some
mile or twain above Beaugency we were forced to land, and, I being borne
in a litter, we took a cross-path away from the stream, joining it again
two miles below Beaugency, because the English held that town, though not
for long.  The sun had set, yet left all his gold shining on the water
when we entered Blois, and there rested at a hostel for the night.  Next
day--one of the goodliest of my life, so soft and clear and warm it was,
yet with a cool wind on the water--we voyaged to Tours; and now Elliot
was glad enough, making all manner of mirth.

Her desire, she said, was to meet a friend that she had left at their
house in Tours, one that she had known as long as she knew me, my friend
he was too, yet I had never spoken of him, or asked how he did.  Now I,
being wrapped up wholly in her, and in my joy to see her kind again, and
so beautiful, had no memory of any such friend, wherefore she mocked me,
and rebuked me for a hard heart and ungrateful.  "This friend of mine,"
she said, "was the first that made us known each to other.  Yea, but for
him, the birds might have pecked out your eyne, and the ants eaten your
bones bare, yet"--with a sudden anger, and tears in her eyes at the words
she spoke--"you have clean forgotten him!"

"Ah, you mean the jackanapes.  And how is the little champion?"

"Like the lads of Wamfray, aye for ill, and never for good," said my
master; but she frowned on him, and said--

"Now you ask, because I forced you on it; but, sir, I take it very ill
that you have so short a memory for a friend.  Now, tell me, in all the
time since you left us at Chinon, how often have you thought of him?"

"Nigh as often as I thought of you," I answered.  "For when you came into
my mind (and that was every minute), as in a picture, thither too came
your playfellow, climbing and chattering, and holding out his little bowl
for a comfit."

"Nay, then you thought of me seldom, or you would have asked how he
does."

Here she turned her face from me, half in mock anger.  But, just as it is
with children, so it was with Elliot, for indeed my dear was ever much of
a child, wherefore her memory is now to me so tender.  And as children
make pretence to be in this humour or that for sport, and will affect to
be frighted till they really fear and weep, so Elliot scarce knew how
deep her own humour went, and whether she was acting like a player in a
Mystery, or was in good earnest.  And if she knew not rightly what her
humour was, far less could I know, so that she was ever a puzzle to me,
and kept me in a hundred pretty doubts and dreads every day.  Alas! how
sorely, through all these years, have I longed to hear her rebuke me in
mirth, and put me adread, and laugh at me again I for she was, as it
were, wife and child to me, at once, and I a child with her, and as happy
as a child.

Thus, nothing would now jump with her humour but to be speaking of her
jackanapes, and how he would come louting and leaping to welcome her, and
forsake her old kinswoman, who had followed with them to Tours.  And she
had much to report concerning his new tricks: how he would leap over a
rod for the Dauphin or the Maid, but not if adjured in the name of the
English King, or the Duke of Burgundy.  Also, if you held him, he would
make pretence to bite any that you called Englishman or false Frenchman.
Moreover, he had now been taught to fetch and carry, and would climb into
Elliot's window, from the garden, and bring her little basket of silks,
or whatsoever she desired, or carry it thither, as he was commanded.

"And he wrung the cat's neck," quoth my master; but Elliot bade him hold
his peace.

In such sport the hours passed, till we were safely come to Tours, and so
to their house in a street running off the great place, where the
cathedral stands.  It was a goodly dwelling, with fair carved-work on the
beams, and in the doorway stood the old Scots kinswoman, smiling wide and
toothless, to welcome us.  Elliot kissed her quickly, and she fondled
Elliot, and held a hand out over her shoulder to greet me.

"But where is my jackanapes, that should have been here to salute his
mistress?" Elliot cried.

"Out and alas!" said the old wife in our country tongue--"out and alas!
for I have ill news.  The poor beast is missing these three days past,
and we fear he is stolen away by some gangrel bodies, for the town is
full of them.  There came two to our door, three days agone, and one was
a blind man, and the other a one-armed soldier, maimed in the wars, and I
gave them bite and sup, as a Christian should do.  Now, they had not been
gone but a few minutes, and I was in the spence, putting away the dishes,
when I heard a whistle in the street, and anon another.  I thought little
of it, and so was about my business for an hour, when I missed the
jackanapes.  And then there was a hue and cry, and all the house was
searched, and the neighbours were called on, but since that day there has
been no word of the jackanapes.  But, for the blind man and the armless
soldier, the town guard saw them leaving by the North Gate, with a violer
woman and her husband, an ill-looking loon, in their company."  Elliot
sat her down and wept sore.  "They have stolen my little friend," she
cried, "and now he that was so fat I called him Tremouille will go hungry
and lean, and be whipped to make him do his tricks, and I shall never see
him more."

Then she ran out of the chamber, to weep alone, as I guessed, for she was
pitiful and of very tender affection, and dumb things came near about her
heart, as is the manner of many women.

But I made no doubt in my mind that the husband of the ape's old mistress
had stolen him, and I, too, sorrowed for the poor beast that my mistress
loved, and that, in very deed, had been the saving of my own life.  Then
I spoke to my master, and said that we must strive to buy her a new ape,
or a little messan dog, to be her playfellow.

But he shook his head.  "Say nothing more of the beast," he muttered,
"unless she speaks of him first, and that, methinks, will be never.  For
it is not her wont to speak of what lies very deep in her heart, and if
you talk of the beast it will please her little."

And, indeed, I heard no word more of the jackanapes from Elliot, save
that, coming back from the minster next day, she whispered, "I have
prayed for him," and so fled to her own chamber.

As then I deemed it a strange thing, and scarcely to be approved by Holy
Church, that my lady should pray for a dumb beast who had no soul to be
saved.  But a faithful, loving prayer is not unavailing or unheard of Him
who made the beasts, as well as He made us; for whose sin, or the sin of
our father Adam, they now suffer, silently.  And the answer to this
prayer was to be known in the end.

As the week went on, tidings came that made Elliot glad again, if before
she had been sad enough.  For this was that great week of wonders which
shall never be forgotten while France is France, and the lilies bloom.

On June the thirteenth the Maid took Jargeau, whence the famed Bastard of
Orleans had been driven some weeks agone; and the Earl of Suffolk yielded
him her prisoner, saying that she was "the most valiant woman in the
world."  Scarce had tidings of this great victory come, when messengers
followed, declaring that the Maid had seized the Bridge of Meun and
driven the English into the Castle.

Next she marched against Beaugency, and, at midnight of June the
seventeenth, the English made terms, that they might go forth with their
lives, but without baggage or arms, and with but one mark of silver
apiece.  Next morning came Talbot, the best knight then on ground, and
Fastolf, the wariest of captains, with a great army of English.  First
they made for Jargeau, but they came too late, and then they rode to
Meun, and would have assailed the French in the bridge-fort, but, even
then, they heard how Beaugency had yielded to La Pucelle, and how the
garrison was departed into Normandy, like pilgrims, without swords, and
staff in hand.  Thus all the Loire and the water-way was in the power of
France, wherefore the English marched off through the country called La
Beauce, which then lay desert and overgrown with wild wood, by reason of
the war.  And there, in a place named Coynce, near Patay, the Maid
overtook the English, having with her La Hire and Xaintrailles, and she
charged them so rudely, that ere the English could array them in order of
battle, they were already flying for their lives.  There were Talbot and
Warwick taken and held to ransom, but Fastolf fled as fast as his horse
could carry him.

Thus in one week, between June the eleventh and June the eighteenth, the
Maid had delivered three strong towns from the English, and had utterly
routed them in fair field.  Then, at Orleans, on June the nineteenth, the
army went to the churches, thanking God, and the Blessed Virgin, and all
the saints, for such great signs and marvels wrought through the Maid
only.

Sorrow it is to me to write of such things by report, and not to have
seen them done.  But, as Talbot said to the Duc d'Alencon, when they took
him at Patay, "it is fortune of war."

But, as day by day messengers came, their horses red with spurring, to
the cross in the market-place of Tours, and as we that gathered round
heard of some fresh victory, you may consider whether we rejoiced,
feasted, filled the churches with our thanksgivings, and deemed that, in
a few weeks, there would be no living Englishman on French soil.  And of
all that were glad my lady was the happiest, for she had believed in the
Maid from the very beginning, when her father mocked.  And a hard life
she now led him with her sallies, day by day, as more and ever more glad
tidings were brought, and we could hear Elliot singing through the house.

Yea, I found her once dancing in the garden all alone, a beautiful sight
to look upon, as the sun fell on her and the shadow, she footing it as if
to music, but the music was made by her own heart.  Leaning against an
apple-tree, I watched her, who waved her hand to me, and still danced on;
this was after we had heard the news of Beaugency.  As she so swayed and
moved, dancing daintily, came a blast of a trumpet and a gay peal from
the minster bells.  Then forth rushed Elliot, and through the house, and
down the street into the market-place, nor did I know where I was, till I
found myself beside her, and heard the Maire read a letter to all the
folk, telling how the English were routed at Pathay in open field.
Thereon the whole multitude fell a-dancing, and I, for all my malady, was
fain to dance with them; but Elliot led me home, her head high, and blue
rays darting from her eyes.  From that day my life seemed to come back to
me, and I was no longer the sick man.  So the weeks went by, in all
delight, my master working hard, and I helping him in my degree, for new
banners would be wanted when the Dauphin went for his sacring to his good
town of Reims.  As we all deemed, this could no longer be delayed; and
thereafter our armies would fall on Paris, and so strong grew I, that I
was in hopes to be with them, where, at last, fortune was to be won.  But
of this my hope I said little to Elliot, waiting till I could wear
armour, and exercising myself thereat privately in the garden, before
folk had risen in the mornings.




CHAPTER XVIII--HOW ELLIOT'S JACKANAPES WAS SEEN AT THE KING'S CROWNING


"The hearts of kings are in His hand," says Holy Scripture, and it is of
necessity to be believed that the hearts of kings, in an especial sense,
are wisely governed.  Yet, the blindness of our sinful souls, we often
may not see, nor by deep consideration find out, the causes wherefore
kings often act otherwise, and, as we might deem, less worthily than
common men.  For it is a truth and must be told, that neither before he
was anointed with the blessed oil from the holy vessel, or ampulla, which
the angel brought to St. Remigius, nor even after that anointing (which
is more strange), did Charles VII., King of France, bear him kingly as
regards the Maiden.  Nay, I have many a time thought with sorrow that if
Xaintrailles, or La Hire, ay, or any the meanest esquire in all our army,
had been born Dauphin, in three months after the Maid's victories in June
Paris would have been ours, and not an Englishman left to breathe the air
of France.  For it needed but that the King should obey the Maid, ride
straight to Reims, and thence on Paris town, and every city would have
opened its gates to him, as the walls of Jericho fell at the mere sound
of the trumpets of Israel.

This is no foolish fancy of an old man dreaming in a cloister about what
might have been.  For the Regent of the English, brother of their King
Harry the Fifth, and himself a wise man, and brave, if cruel, was of this
same mind.  First, he left Paris and shut himself up in the strong castle
of Vincennes, dreading an uproar among the people; and next, he wholly
withdrew himself to Rouen, for he had now no force of men to guard the
walls of Paris.  Our Dauphin had but to mount and ride, and all would
have been his at one blow, ay, or without a blow.  The Maid, as we daily
heard, kept praying him, even with tears, to do no more than this; and
from every side came in men free and noble, ready to serve at their own
charges.  The poorest gentlemen who had lost all in the troubles, and
might not even keep a horse to ride, were of goodwill to march as common
foot-soldiers.

But, while all France called on her King, he was dwelling at Sully, in
the castle of La Tremouille, a man who had a foot in either camp, so that
neither English nor Burgundians had ever raided on his rich lands, when
these lay in their power.  So, what with the self-seeking, and sloth, and
jealousy of La Tremouille; what with the worldly policy of the Archbishop
of Reims, crying Peace, where there was no peace, the Maid and the
captains were not listened to, or, if they were heard, their plans were
wrought out with a faint heart, so that, at last, if it is lawful to say
so, the will of men prevailed over the will of Heaven.

Never, I pray, may any prince of my own country be so bestead, and so ill-
served, that, when he has won battles and gained cities two or three, and
needs but to ride forward and win all his kingdom, he shall be turned
back by the little faith of his counsellors!  Never may such a thing
befall a prince of Scotland!  Concerning these matters of State, as may
be believed, we devised much at Tours, while messengers were coming and
going, and long, weary councils were being held at Sully and at Gien.
D'Alencon, we got news, was all for striking a blow yet more bold than
the march to Reims, and would have attacked the English where they were
strongest, and nearest their own shores, namely, at Rouen.  The
counsellors of the peaceful sort were inclined to waste time in besieging
La Charite, and other little towns on Loire-side.  But her Voices had
bidden the Maid, from the first, to carry the Dauphin to Reims, that
there he might be anointed, and known to France for the very King.  So at
last, finding that time was sorely wasted, whereas all hope lay in a
swift stroke, ere the English could muster men, and bring over the army
lately raised by the Cardinal of Winchester to go crusading against the
miscreants of Bohemia--the Maid rode out of Gien, with her own company,
on June the twenty-seventh, and lodged in the fields, some four leagues
away, on the road to Auxerre.  And next day the King and the Court
followed her perforce, with a great army of twelve thousand men.
Thenceforth there came news to us every day in Tours, and all the news
was good.  Town after town opened its gates at the summons of the Maid,
and notably Troyes and Chalons, in despite of the English garrisons.

We were all right glad, and could scarce sleep for joy, above all when a
messenger rode in, one Thomas Scott, whom I had encountered before, as I
have written, bidding my master come straightway to Reims, to join the
King, and exercise his craft in designing a great picture of the
coronation.  So with much ado he bestowed his canvases, brushes, paints,
and all other gear of his trade in wallets, and, commending his daughter
to his old kinswoman, to obey her in all things, he set off on horseback
with Thomas Scott.  But for myself, I was to lodge, while he was at
Reims, with a worthy woman of Tours, for the avoiding of evil tongues,
and very tardily the time passed with me, for that I might not be, as
before, always in the company of Elliot.

As for my lady, she was, during most of these days, on her knees at the
altar in the great minster, praying to the saints for the Dauphin, and
the Maid, and for her father, that he might come and go safely on his
journey.  Nor did she pray in vain, for, no more than two days after the
first tidings had arrived that the sacring was done, and that all had
gone well, my master rode to his own door, weary, but glad at heart, and
hobbled into his house.  One was sent running to bring me this good news,
and I myself ran, for now I was able, and found him seated at his meat,
as well as he could eat it for Elliot, that often stopped his mouth with
kisses.

He held forth his hand to me, saying, "All is as well as heart could
desire, and the Maid bids you follow her, if you may, to the taking of
Paris, for there she says will be your one chance to win your spurs.  And
now let me eat and drink, for the heat is great, the ways dusty, and I
half famished.  Thereafter ask me what you will, and you, Elliot, come
not between a hungry man and his meat."

So he spoke, sitting at his table with his tankard in his hand, and his
wallets lying about him on the floor.  Elliot was therefore fain not to
be embracing him, but rather to carve for him, and serve in the best
manner, that he might sup the quicker and tell us all his tale.  This he
did at last, Elliot sitting on his knee, with her arm about his neck.
But, as touches the sacring, how it was done, though many of the peers of
France were not there to see, and how noble were the manners of the King
and the Maid, who stood there with her banner, and of the only reward
which she would take, namely, that her townsfolk should live free of tax
and corvee, all this is known and written of in Chronicles.  Nor did I
see it myself, so I pass by.  But, next to actual beholding of that
glorious rite, the best thing was to hear my master tell of it, taking
out his books, wherein he had drawn the King, and the Maid in her
harness, and many of the great lords.  From these pictures a tapestry was
afterwards wrought, and hung in Reims Cathedral, where it is to this day:
the Maid on horseback beckoning the King onward, the Scots archers beside
him in the most honourable place, as was their lawful due, and, behind
all, the father of the Maid entering Reims by another road.  By great
good fortune, and by virtue of being a fellow-traveller with Thomas
Scott, the rider of the King's stable, my master found lodgings easily
enough.  So crowded was the town that, the weather being warm, in mid
July, many lay in tabernacles of boughs, in the great place of Reims, and
there was more singing that night than sleeping.  But my master had lain
at the hostelry called L'Asne Roye, in the parvise, opposite to the
cathedral, where also lay Jean d'Arc, the father of the Maid.  Thither
she herself came to visit him, and she gave gifts to such of the people
of her own countryside as were gathered at Reims.

"And, Jeannot, do you fear nothing?" one of them asked her, who had known
her from a child.

"I fear nothing but treason," my master heard her reply, a word that we
had afterwards too good cause to remember.

"And is she proud now that she is so great?" asked Elliot.

"She proud!  No pride has she, but sat at meat, and spoke friendly with
all these manants, and it was 'tu' and 'toy,' and 'How is this one? and
that one?' till verily, I think, she had asked for every man, woman,
child, and dog in Domremy.  And that puts me in mind--"

"In mind of what?"

"Of nought.  Faith, I remember not what I was going to say, for I am well
