of wilderness and mountain fastness lay between him and his quest,
young De la Verendrye wanted to cross the Great Divide.  Destiny
decreed otherwise.  The raid of the Bows against the Snakes ended in a
fiasco.  No Snakes were to be found at their usual winter hunt.  Had
they decamped to massacre the Bow women and children left in the valley
to the rear?  The Bows fled back to their wives in a panic; so De la
Verendrye could not climb the mountains that barred the way to the sea.
The retreat was made in the teeth of a howling mountain blizzard, and
the warriors reached the rendezvous more dead than alive.  No Snake
Indians were seen at all.  The Bows marched homeward along the valley
of the Upper Missouri through the country of the Sioux, with whom they
were allied.  On the banks of the river the brothers buried a leaden
plate with the royal arms of France imprinted.  At the end of July,
1743, they were once more back on the Assiniboine River.  For thirteen
years they had followed a hopeless quest.  Instead of a Western Sea,
they had found a sea of prairie, a sea of mountains, and two great
rivers, the Saskatchewan and the Missouri.


VI

1743-1750

But the explorer, who had done so much to extend French domain in the
West, was a ruined man.  To the accusations of his creditors were added
the jealous calumnies of fur traders eager to exploit the new country.
The eldest son, with tireless energy, had gone up the Saskatchewan to
Fort Poskoyac when he was recalled to take a position in the army at
Montreal.  In 1746 De la Verendrye himself was summoned to Quebec and
his command given to M. de Noyelles.  The game being played by jealous
rivals was plain.  De la Verendrye was to be kept out of the West while
tools of the Quebec traders spied out the fur trade of the Assiniboine
and the Missouri.  Immediately on receiving freedom from military duty,
young Chevalier de la Verendrye set out for Manitoba.  On the way he
met his father's successor, M. de Noyelles, coming home crestfallen.
The supplanter had failed to control the Indians.  In one year half the
forts of the chain leading to the Western Sea had been destroyed.
These Chevalier de la Verendrye restored as he passed westward.

Governor Beauharnois had always refused to believe the charges of
private peculation against M. de la Verendrye.  Governor de la
Galissonniere was equally favorable to the explorer; and De la
Verendrye was decorated with the Order of the Cross of St. Louis, and
given permission to continue his explorations.  The winter of 1749 was
passed preparing supplies for the posts of the West; but a life of
hardship and disappointment had undermined the constitution of the
dauntless pathfinder.  On the 6th of December, while busy with plans
for his hazardous and thankless quest, he died suddenly at Montreal.

Rival fur traders scrambled for the spoils of the Manitoba and Missouri
territory like dogs for a bone.  De la Jonquiere had become governor.
Allied with him was the infamous Bigot, the intendant, and those two
saw in the Western fur trade an opportunity to enrich themselves.  The
rights of De la Verendrye's sons to succeed their father were entirely
disregarded.  Legardeur de Saint-Pierre was appointed commander of the
Western Sea.  The very goods forwarded by De la Verendrye were
confiscated.

[Illustration: "Tepees dotted the valley."]

But Saint-Pierre had enough trouble from his appointment.  His
lieutenant, M. de Niverville, almost lost his life among hostiles on
the way down the Saskatchewan after building Fort Lajonquiere at the
foothills of the Rockies, where Calgary now stands.  Saint-Pierre had
headquarters in Manitoba on the Assiniboine, and one afternoon in
midwinter, when his men were out hunting, he saw his fort suddenly fill
with armed Assiniboines bent on massacre.  They jostled him aside,
broke into the armory, and helped themselves to weapons.  Saint-Pierre
had only one recourse.  Seizing a firebrand, he tore the cover off a
keg of powder and threatened to blow the Indians to perdition.  The
marauders dashed from the fort, and Saint-Pierre shot the bolts of gate
and sally-port.  When the white hunters returned, they quickly gathered
their possessions together and abandoned Fort de la Reine.  Four days
later the fort lay in ashes.  So ended the dream of enthusiasts to find
a way overland to the Western Sea.


[1] The authorities for La Verendrye's life are, of course, his own
reports as found in the State Papers of the Canadian Archives, Pierre
Margry's compilation of these reports, and the Rev. Father Jones'
collection of the _Aulneau Letters_.

[2] The _Pays d'en Haut_ or "Up-Country" was the vague name given by
the fur traders to the region between the Missouri and the North Pole.

[3] Throughout this volume the word "Sioux" is used as applying to the
entire confederacy, and not to the Minnesota Sioux only.




PART III

1769-1782

SEARCH FOR THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE LEADS
  SAMUEL HEARNE TO THE ARCTIC CIRCLE AND
  ATHABASCA REGION




CHAPTER IX

1769-1782

SAMUEL HEARNE

The Adventures of Hearne in his Search for the Coppermine River and the
Northwest Passage--Hilarious Life of Wassail led by Governor
Norton--The Massacre of the Eskimo by Hearne's Indians North of the
Arctic Circle--Discovery of the Athabasca Country--Hearne becomes
Resident Governor of the Hudson's Bay Company, but is captured by the
French--Frightful Death of Norton and Suicide of Matonabbee


For a hundred years after receiving its charter to exploit the furs of
the North, the Hudson's Bay Company slumbered on the edge of a frozen
sea.

Its fur posts were scattered round the desolate shores of the Northern
bay like beads on a string; but the languid Company never attempted to
penetrate the unknown lands beyond the coast.  It was unnecessary.  The
Indians came to the Company.  The company did not need to go to the
Indians.  Just as surely as spring cleared the rivers of ice and set
the unlocked torrents rushing to the sea, there floated down-stream
Indian dugout and birch canoe, loaded with wealth of peltries for the
fur posts of the English Company.  So the English sat snugly secure
inside their stockades, lords of the wilderness, and drove a thriving
trade with folded hands.  For a penny knife, they bought a beaver skin;
and the skin sold in Europe for two or three shillings.  The trade of
the old Company was not brisk; but it paid.

[Illustration: An Eskimo Belle.  Note the apron of ermine and sable].

It was the prod of keen French traders that stirred the slumbering
giant.  In his search for the Western Sea, De la Verendrye had pushed
west by way of the Great Lakes to the Missouri and the Rocky Mountains
and the Saskatchewan.  Henceforth, not so many furs came down-stream to
the English Company on the bay.  De la Verendrye had been followed by
hosts of free-lances--_coureurs_ and _voyageurs_--who spread through
the wilderness from the Missouri to the Athabasca, intercepting the
fleets of furs that formerly went to Hudson Bay.  The English Company
rubbed its eyes; and rivals at home began to ask what had been done in
return for the charter.  France had never ceased seeking the mythical
Western Sea that was supposed to lie just beyond the Mississippi; and
when French buccaneers destroyed the English Company's forts on the
bay, the English ambassador at Paris exacted such an enormous bill of
damages that the Hudson Bay traders were enabled to build a stronger
fortress up at Prince of Wales on the mouth of Churchill River than the
French themselves possessed at Quebec on the St. Lawrence.  What--asked
the rivals of the Company in London--had been done in return for such
national protection?  France had discovered and explored a whole new
world north of the Missouri.  What had the English done?  Where did the
Western Sea of which Spain had possession in the South lie towards the
North?  What lay between the Hudson Bay and that Western Sea?  Was
there a Northwest passage by water through this region to Asia?  If
not, was there an undiscovered world in the North, like Louisiana in
the South?  There was talk of revoking the charter.  Then the Company
awakened from its long sleep with a mighty stir.

The annual boats that came out to Hudson Bay in the summer of 1769
anchored on the offing, six miles from the gray walls of Fort Prince of
Wales, and roared out a salute of cannon becoming the importance of
ships that bore almost revolutionary commissions.  The fort cannon on
the walls of Churchill River thundered their answer.  A pinnace came
scudding over the waves from the ships.  A gig boat launched out from
the fort to welcome the messengers.  Where the two met halfway, packets
of letters were handed to Moses Norton, governor at Fort Prince of
Wales, commanding him to despatch his most intrepid explorers for the
discovery of unknown rivers, strange lands, rumored copper mines, and
the mythical Northwest Passage that was supposed to lead directly to
China.

The fort lay on a spit of sand running out into the bay at the mouth of
Churchill River.  It was three hundred yards long by three hundred
yards wide, with four bastions, in three of which were stores and wells
of water.  The fourth bastion contained the powder-magazine.  The walls
were thirty feet wide at the bottom and twenty feet wide at the top, of
hammer-dressed stone, mounted with forty great cannon.  A commodious
stone house, furnished with all the luxuries of the chase, stood in the
centre of the courtyard.  This was the residence of the governor.
Offices, warehouses, barracks, and hunters' lodges were banked round
the inner walls of the fort.  The garrison consisted of thirty-nine
common soldiers and a few officers.  In addition, there hung about the
fort the usual habitues of a Northern fur post,--young clerks from
England, who had come out for a year's experience in the wilds;
underpaid artisans, striving to mend their fortunes by illicit trade;
hunters and _coureurs_ and _voyageurs_, living like Indians but with a
strain of white blood that forever distinguished them from their
comrades; stately Indian sachems, stalking about the fort with whiffs
of contempt from their long calumets for all this white-man luxury; and
a ragamuffin brigade,--squaws, youngsters, and beggars,--who subsisted
by picking up food from the waste heap of the fort.

The commission to despatch explorers to the inland country proved the
sensation of a century at the fort.  Round the long mess-room table
gathered officers and traders, intent on the birch-bark maps drawn by
old Indian chiefs of an unknown interior, where a "Far-Off-Metal River"
flowed down to the Northwest Passage.  Huge log fires blazed on the
stone hearths at each end of the mess room.  Smoky lanterns and pine
fagots, dipped in tallow and stuck in iron clamps, shed a fitful light
from rafters that girded ceiling and walls.  On the floor of flagstones
lay enormous skins of the chase--polar bear, Arctic wolf, and grizzly.
Heads of musk-ox, caribou, and deer decorated the great timber girders.
Draped across the walls were Company flags--an English ensign with the
letters "H. B. C." painted in white on a red background, or in red on a
white background.

At the head of the table sat one of the most remarkable scoundrels
known in the annals of the Company, Moses Norton, governor of Fort
Prince of Wales, a full-blooded Indian, who had been sent to England
for nine years to be educated and had returned to the fort to resume
all the vices and none of the virtues of white man and red.
Clean-skinned, copper-colored, lithe and wiry as a tiger cat, with the
long, lank, oily black hair of his race, Norton bore himself with all
the airs of a European princelet and dressed himself in the beaded
buckskins of a savage.  Before him the Indians cringed as before one of
their demon gods, and on the same principle.  Bad gods could do the
Indians harm.  Good gods wouldn't.  Therefore, the Indians propitiated
the bad gods; and of all Indian demons Norton was the worst.  The black
arts of mediaeval poisoning were known to him, and he never scrupled to
use them against an enemy.  The Indians thought him possessed of the
power of the evil eye; but his power was that of arsenic or laudanum
dropped in the food of an unsuspecting enemy.  Two of his wives, with
all of whom he was inordinately jealous, had died of poison.  Against
white men who might offend him he used more open means,--the triangle,
the whipping post, the branding iron.  Needless to say that a man who
wielded such power swelled the Company's profits and stood high in
favor with the directors.  At his right hand lay an enormous bunch of
keys.  These he carried with him by day and kept under his pillow by
night.  They were the keys to the apartments of his many wives, for
like all Indians Norton believed in a plurality of wives, and the life
of no Indian was safe who refused to contribute a daughter to the
harem.  The two master passions of the governor were jealousy and
tyranny; and while he lived like a Turkish despot himself, he ruled his
fort with a rod of iron and left the brand of his wrath on the person
of soldier or officer who offered indignity to the Indian race.  It was
a common thing for Norton to poison an Indian who refused to permit a
daughter to join the collection of wives; then to flog the back off a
soldier who casually spoke to one of the wives in the courtyard; and in
the evening spend the entire supper hour preaching sermons on virtue to
his men.  By a curious freak, Marie, his daughter, now a child of nine,
inherited from her father the gentle qualities of the English life in
which he had passed his youth.  She shunned the native women and was
often to be seen hanging on her father's arm, as officers and governor
smoked their pipes over the mess-room table.

Near Norton sat another famous Indian, Matonabbee, the son of a slave
woman at the fort, who had grown up to become a great ambassador to the
native tribes for the English traders.  Measuring more than six feet,
straight as a lance, supple as a wrestler, thin, wiry, alert, restless
with the instinct of the wild creatures, Matonabbee was now in the
prime of his manhood, chief of the Chipewyans at the fort, and master
of life and death to all in his tribe.  It was Matonabbee whom the
English traders sent up the Saskatchewan to invite the tribes of the
Athabasca down to the bay.  The Athabascans listened to the message of
peace with a treacherous smile.  At midnight assassins stole to his
tent, overpowered his slave, and dragged the captive out.  Leaping to
his feet, Matonabbee shouted defiance, hurled his assailants aside like
so many straws, pursued the raiders to their tents, single-handed
released his slave, and marched out unscathed.  That was the way
Matonabbee had won the Athabascans for the Hudson's Bay Company.

Officers of the garrison, bluff sea-captains, spinning yarns of iceberg
and floe, soldiers and traders, made up the rest of the company.  Among
the white men was one eager face,--that of Samuel Hearne, who was to
explore the interior and now scanned the birch-bark drawings to learn
the way to the "Far-off-Metal River."

[Illustration: Samuel Hearne.]

By November 6 all was in readiness for the departure of the explorer.
Two Indian guides, who knew the way to the North, were assigned to
Hearne; two European servants went with him to look after the
provisions; and two Indian hunters joined the company.  In the gray
mist of Northern dawn, with the stars still pricking through the frosty
air, seven salutes of cannon awakened the echoes of the frozen sea.
The gates of the fort flung open, creaking with the frost rust, and
Hearne came out, followed by his little company, the dog bells of the
long toboggan sleighs setting up a merry jingling as the huskies broke
from a trot to a gallop over the snow-fields for the North.  Heading
west-northwest, the band travelled swiftly with all the enthusiasm of
untested courage.  North winds cut their faces like whip-lashes.  The
first night out there was not enough snow to make a wind-break of the
drifts; so the sleighs were piled on edge to windward, dogs and men
lying heterogeneously in their shelter.  When morning came, one of the
Indian guides had deserted.  The way became barer.  Frozen swamps
across which the storm wind swept with hurricane force were succeeded
by high, rocky barrens devoid of game, unsheltered, with barely enough
stunted shrubbery for the whittling of chips that cooked the morning
and night meals.  In a month the travellers had not accomplished ten
miles a day.  Where deer were found the Indians halted to gorge
themselves with feasts.  Where game was scarce they lay in camp,
depending on the white hunters.  Within three weeks rations had
dwindled to one partridge a day for the entire company.  The Indians
seemed to think that Hearne's white servants had secret store of food
on the sleighs.  The savages refused to hunt.  Then Hearne suspected
some ulterior design.  It was to drive him back to the fort by famine.
Henceforth, he noticed on the march that the Indians always preceded
the whites and secured any game before his men could fire a shot.  One
night toward the end of November the savages plundered the sleighs.
Hearne awakened in amazement to see the company marching off, laden
with guns, ammunition, and hatchets.  He called.  Their answer was
laughter that set the woods ringing.  Hearne was now two hundred miles
from the fort, without either ammunition or food.  There was nothing to
do but turn back.  The weather was fair.  By snaring partridges, the
white men obtained enough game to sustain them till they reached the
fort on the 11th of December.

[Illustration: Eskimo using Double-bladed Paddle.]

The question now was whether to wait till spring or set out in the
teeth of midwinter.  If Hearne left the fort in spring, he could not
possibly reach the Arctic Circle till the following winter; and with
the North buried under drifts of snow, he could not learn where lay the
Northwest Passage.  If he left the fort in winter in order to reach the
Arctic in summer, he must expose his guides to the risks of cold and
starvation.  The Indians told of high, rocky barrens, across which no
canoes could be carried.  They advised snow-shoe travel.  Obtaining
three Chipewyans and two Crees as guides, and taking no white servants,
Hearne once more set out, on February 23, 1770, for the "Far-Away-Metal
River."  This time there was no cannonading.  The guns were buried
under snow-drifts twenty feet deep, and the snow-shoes of the
travellers glided over the fort walls to the echoing cheers of soldiers
and governor standing on the ramparts.  The company travelled light,
depending on chance game for food.  All wood that could be used for
fire lay hidden deep under snow.  At wide intervals over the white
wastes mushroom cones of snow told where a stunted tree projected the
antlered branches of topmost bough through the depths of drift; but for
the most part camp was made by digging through the shallowest snow with
snow-shoes to the bottom of moss, which served the double purpose of
fuel for the night kettle and bed for travellers.  In the hollow a
wigwam was erected, with the door to the south, away from the north
wind.  Snared rabbits and partridges supplied the food.  The way lay as
before--west-northwest--along a chain of frozen lakes and rivers
connecting Hudson Bay with the Arctic Ocean.  By April the marchers
were on the margin of a desolate wilderness--the Indian region of
"Little Sticks,"--known to white men as the Barren Lands, where dwarf
trees project above the billowing wastes of snow like dismantled masts
on the far offing of a lonely sea.  Game became scarcer.  Neither the
round footprint of the hare nor the frost tracery of the northern
grouse marked the snowy reaches of unbroken white.  Caribou had
retreated to the sheltered woods of the interior; and a cleverer hunter
than man had scoured the wide wastes of game.  Only the wolf pack
roamed the Barren Lands.  It was unsafe to go on without food.  Hearne
kept in camp till the coming of the goose month--April--when birds of
