fear, or some chivalrous feeling having its origin in that moment when
I had fancied myself her knight?  I am not sure, for I had not made up
my mind even now whether I ought to pity or detest her; whether she had
made a tool of me, or I had been false to her.

"She came up to the bed, you remember, Anne?"  Croisette went on. "You
were next to her.  She saw you indistinctly, and took you for her
sister.  And then I sprang from the bed."

"I know you did!"  I exclaimed sharply.  All this time I had forgotten
that grievance.  "You nearly frightened her out of her wits, St. Croix.
I cannot think what possessed you--why you did it?"

"To save your life, Anne," he answered solemnly, "and her from a crime!
an unutterable, an unnatural crime.  She had come back to I can hardly
tell it you--to murder her sister.  You start.  You do not believe me.
It sounds too horrible.  But I could see better than you could.  She
was exactly between you and the light.  I saw the knife raised.  I saw
her wicked face!  If I had not startled her as I did, she would have
stabbed you.  She dropped the knife on the floor, and I picked it up
and have it. See!"

I looked furtively, and turned away again, shivering.  "Why," I
muttered, "why did she do it?"

"She had failed you know to get her sister back to Pavannes' house,
where she would have fallen an easy victim.  Bezers, who knew Madame
d'O, prevented that.  Then that fiend slipped back with her knife;
thinking that in the common butchery the crime would be overlooked, and
never investigated, and that Mirepoix would be silent!"

I said nothing.  I was stunned.  Yet I believed the story.  When I went
over the facts in my mind I found that a dozen things, overlooked at
the time and almost forgotten in the hurry of events, sprang up to
confirm it.  M. de Pavannes'--the other M. de Pavannes'--suspicions had
been well founded.  Worse than Bezers was she?  Ay!  worse a hundred
times.  As much worse as treachery ever is than violence; as the
pitiless fraud of the serpent is baser than the rage of the wolf.

"I thought," Croisette added softly, not looking at me, "when I
discovered that you had gone off with her, that I should never see you
again, Anne.  I gave you up for lost.  The happiest moment of my life I
think was when I saw you come back."

"Croisette," I whispered piteously, my cheeks burning, "let us never
speak of her again."

And we never did--for years.  But how strange is life.  She and the
wicked man with whom her fate seemed bound up had just crossed our
lives when their own were at the darkest.  They clashed with us, and,
strangers and boys as we were, we ruined them.  I have often asked
myself what would have happened to me had I met her at some earlier and
less stormy period--in the brilliance of her beauty.  And I find but
one answer.  I should bitterly have rued the day.  Providence was good
to me.  Such men and such women, we may believe have ceased to exist
now.  They flourished in those miserable days of war and divisions, and
passed away with them like the foul night-birds of the battle-field.

To return to our journey.  In the morning sunshine one could not but be
cheerful, and think good things possible.  The worst trial I had came
with each sunset.  For then--we generally rode late into the
evening--Louis sought my side to talk to me of his sweetheart.  And how
he would talk of her!  How many thousand messages he gave me for her!
How often he recalled old days among the hills, with each laugh and
jest and incident, when we five had been as children!  Until I would
wonder passionately, the tears running down my face in the darkness,
how he could--how he could talk of her in that quiet voice which
betrayed no rebellion against fate, no cursing of Providence!  How he
could plan for her and think of her when she should be alone!

Now I understand it.  He was still labouring under the shock of his
friends' murder.  He was still partially stunned.  Death seemed natural
and familiar to him, as to one who had seen his allies and companions
perish without warning or preparation. Death had come to be normal to
him, life the exception; as I have known it seem to a child brought
face to face with a corpse for the first time.

One afternoon a strange thing happened.  We could see the Auvergne
hills at no great distance on our left--the Puy de Dome above them--and
we four were riding together.  We had fallen--an unusual thing--to the
rear of the party.  Our road at the moment was a mere track running
across moorland, sprinkled here and there with gorse and brushwood.
The main company had straggled on out of sight.  There were but half a
dozen riders to be seen an eighth of a league before us, a couple
almost as far behind. I looked every way with a sudden surging of the
heart.  For the first time the possibility of flight occurred to me.
The rough Auvergne hills were within reach.  Supposing we could get a
lead of a quarter of a league, we could hardly be caught before
darkness came and covered us.  Why should we not put spurs to our
horses and ride off?

"Impossible!"  said Pavannes quietly, when I spoke.

"Why?"  I asked with warmth.

"Firstly," he replied, "because I have given my word to go with the
Vidame to Cahors."

My face flushed hotly.  But I cried, "What of that?  You were taken by
treachery!  Your safe conduct was disregarded.  Why should you be
scrupulous?  Your enemies are not.  This is folly?"

"I think not.  Nay," Louis answered, shaking his head, "you would not
do it yourself in my place."

"I think I should," I stammered awkwardly.

"No, you would not, lad," he said smiling.  "I know you too well. But
if I would do it, it is impossible."  He turned in the saddle and,
shading his eyes with his hand from the level rays of the sun, looked
back intently.  "It is as I thought," he continued. "One of those men
is riding grey Margot, which Bure said yesterday was the fastest mare
in the troop.  And the man on her is a light weight.  The other fellow
has that Norman bay horse we were looking at this morning.  It is a
trap laid by Bezers, Anne. If we turned aside a dozen yards, those two
would be after us like the wind."

"Do you mean," I cried, "that Bezers has drawn his men forward on
purpose?"

"Precisely;" was Louis's answer.  "That is the fact.  Nothing would
please him better than to take my honour first, and my life afterwards.
But, thank God, only the one is in his power."

And when I came to look at the horsemen, immediately before us, they
confirmed Louis's view.  They were the best mounted of the party:  all
men of light weight too.  One or other of them was constantly looking
back.  As night fell they closed in upon us with their usual care.
When Bure joined us there was a gleam of intelligence in his bold eyes,
a flash of conscious trickery.  He knew that we had found him out, and
cared nothing for it.

And the others cared nothing.  But the thought that if left to myself I
should have fallen into the Vidame's cunning trap filled me with new
hatred towards him; such hatred and such fear--for there was
humiliation mingled with them--as I had scarcely felt before.  I
brooded over this, barely noticing what passed in our company for
hours--nay, not until the next day when, towards evening, the cry arose
round me that we were within sight of Cahors.  Yes, there it lay below
us, in its shallow basin, surrounded by gentle hills.  The domes of the
cathedral, the towers of the Vallandre Bridge, the bend of the Lot,
where its stream embraces the town--I knew them all.  Our long journey
was over.

And I had but one idea.  I had some time before communicated to
Croisette the desperate design I had formed--to fall upon Bezers and
kill him in the midst of his men in the last resort.  Now the time had
come if the thing was ever to be done:  if we had not left it too long
already.  And I looked about me.  There was some confusion and jostling
as we halted on the brow of the hill, while two men were despatched
ahead to announce the governor's arrival, and Bure, with half a dozen
spears, rode out as an advanced guard.

The road where we stood was narrow, a shallow cutting winding down the
declivity of the hills.  The horses were tired, It was a bad time and
place for my design, and only the coming night was in my favour.  But I
was desperate.

Yet before I moved or gave a signal which nothing could recall, I
scanned the landscape eagerly, scrutinizing in turn the small, rich
plain below us, warmed by the last rays of the sun, the bare hills here
glowing, there dark, the scattered wood-clumps and spinneys that filled
the angles of the river, even the dusky line of helm-oaks that crowned
the ridge beyond--Caylus way.  So near our own country there might be
help!  If the messenger whom we had despatched to the Vicomte before
leaving home had reached him, our uncle might have returned, and even
be in Cahors to meet us.

But no party appeared in sight:  and I saw no place where an ambush
could be lying.  I remembered that no tidings of our present plight or
of what had happened could have reached the Vicomte.  The hope faded
out of life as soon as despair had given it birth.  We must fend for
ourselves and for Kit.

That was my justification.  I leaned from my saddle towards
Croisette--I was riding by his side--and muttered, as I felt my horse's
head and settled myself firmly in the stirrups, "You remember what I
said?  Are you ready?"

He looked at me in a startled way, with a face showing white in the
shadow:  and from me to the one solitary figure seated like a pillar a
score of paces in front with no one between us and it. "There need be
but two of us," I muttered, loosening my sword. "Shall it be you or
Marie?  The others must leap their horses out of the road in the
confusion, cross the river at the Arembal Ford if they are not
overtaken, and make for Caylus."

He hesitated.  I do not know whether it had anything to do with his
hesitation that at that moment the cathedral bell in the town below us
began to ring slowly for Vespers.  Yes, he hesitated. He--a Caylus.
Turning to him again, I repeated my question impatiently.  "Which shall
it be?  A moment, and we shall be moving on, and it will be too late."

He laid his hand hurriedly on my bridle, and began a rambling answer.
Rambling as it was I gathered his meaning.  It was enough for me!  I
cut him short with one word of fiery indignation, and turned to Marie
and spoke quickly.  "Will you, then?"  I said.

But Marie shook his head in perplexity, and answering little, said the
same.  So it happened a second time.

Strange!  Yet strange as it seemed, I was not greatly surprised. Under
other circumstances I should have been beside myself with anger at the
defection.  Now I felt as if I had half expected it, and without
further words of reproach I dropped my head and gave it up.  I passed
again into the stupor of endurance.  The Vidame was too strong for me.
It was useless to fight against him.  We were under the spell.  When
the troop moved forward, I went with them, silent and apathetic.

We passed through the gate of Cahors, and no doubt the scene was worthy
of note; but I had only a listless eye for it--much such an eye as a
man about to be broken on the wheel must have for that curious
instrument, supposing him never to have seen it before.  The whole
population had come out to line the streets through which we rode, and
stood gazing, with scarcely veiled looks of apprehension, at the
procession of troopers and the stern face of the new governor.

We dismounted passively in the courtyard of the castle, and were for
going in together, when Bure intervened.  "M. de Pavannes," he said,
pushing rather rudely between us, "will sup alone to-night.  For you,
gentlemen, this way, if you please."

I went without remonstrance.  What was the use?  I was conscious that
the Vidame from the top of the stairs leading to the grand entrance was
watching us with a wolfish glare in his eyes.  I went quietly.  But I
heard Croisette urging something with passionate energy.

We were led through a low doorway to a room on the ground floor; a
place very like a cell.  Were we took our meal in silence. When it was
over I flung myself on one of the beds prepared for us, shrinking from
my companions rather in misery than in resentment.

No explanation had passed between us.  Still I knew that the other two
from time to time eyed me doubtfully.  I feigned therefore to be
asleep, but I heard Bure enter to bid us good-night--and see that we
had not escaped.  And I was conscious too of the question Croisette put
to him, "Does M. de Pavannes lie alone to-night, Bure?"

"Not entirely," the captain answered with gloomy meaning.  Indeed he
seemed in bad spirits himself, or tired.  "The Vidame is anxious for
his soul's welfare, and sends a priest to him."

They sprang to their feet at that.  But the light and its bearer, who
so far recovered himself as to chuckle at his master's pious thought,
had disappeared.  They were left to pace the room, and reproach
themselves and curse the Vidame in an agony of late repentance.  Not
even Marie could find a loop-hole of escape from here.  The door was
double-locked; the windows so barred that a cat could scarcely pass
through them; the walls were of solid masonry.

Meanwhile I lay and feigned to sleep, and lay feigning through long,
long hours; though my heart like theirs throbbed in response to the
dull hammering that presently began without, and not far from us, and
lasted until daybreak.  From our windows, set low and facing a wall, we
could see nothing.  But we could guess what the noise meant, the dull,
earthy thuds when posts were set in the ground, the brisk, wooden
clattering when one plank was laid to another.  We could not see the
progress of the work, or hear the voices of the workmen, or catch the
glare of their lights.  But we knew what they were doing.  They were
raising the scaffold.



CHAPTER XII.

JOY IN THE MORNING.

I was too weary with riding to go entirely without sleep.  And moreover
it is anxiety and the tremor of excitement which make the pillow
sleepless, not, heaven be thanked, sorrow.  God made man to lie awake
and hope:  but never to lie awake and grieve. An hour or two before
daybreak I fell asleep, utterly worn out. When I awoke, the sun was
high, and shining slantwise on our window.  The room was gay with the
morning rays, and soft with the morning freshness, and I lay a while,
my cheek on my hand, drinking in the cheerful influence as I had done
many and many a day in our room at Caylus.  It was the touch of Marie's
hand, laid timidly on my arm, which roused me with a shock to
consciousness.  The truth broke upon me.  I remembered where we were,
and what was before us.  "Will you get up, Anne?" Croisette said.  "The
Vidame has sent for us."

I got to my feet, and buckled on my sword.  Croisette was leaning
against the wall, pale and downcast.  Bure filled the open doorway, his
feathered cap in his hand, a queer smile on his face.  "You are a good
sleeper, young gentleman," he said.  "You should have a good
conscience."

"Better than yours, no doubt!"  I retorted, "or your master's."

He shrugged his shoulders, and, bidding us by a sign to follow him, led
the way through several gloomy passages.  At the end of these, a flight
of stone steps leading upwards seemed to promise something better; and
true enough, the door at the top being opened, the murmur of a crowd
reached our ears, with a burst of sunlight and warmth.  We were in a
lofty room, with walls in some places painted, and elsewhere hung with
tapestry; well lighted by three old pointed windows reaching to the
rush-covered floor. The room was large, set here and there with stands
of arms, and had a dais with a raised carved chair at one end.  The
ceiling was of blue, with gold stars set about it.  Seeing this, I
remembered the place.  I had been in it once, years ago, when I had
attended the Vicomte on a state visit to the governor.  Ah! that the
Vicomte were here now!

I advanced to the middle window, which was open.  Then I started back,
for outside was the scaffold built level with the floor, and
rush-covered like it!  Two or three people were lounging on it.  My
eyes sought Louis among the group, but in vain.  He was not there:  and
while I looked for him, I heard a noise behind me, and he came in,
guarded by four soldiers with pikes.

His face was pale and grave, but perfectly composed.  There was a
