
"Well, it's hot enough now," cried Mark eagerly.  "What do you say to
to-morrow night."

"Why not to-night?" said Ralph.  "I'm willing.  Then we'll go to-night.
What time?"

"It ought to be after our people are gone to bed.  We should have to
come out unknown."

"Yes, I forgot that.  Then it would have to be ten o'clock first, and it
would take us quite an hour to get quietly up to the mouth of the cave."

"Yes, with a lantern under a cloak, and every man a torch," said Ralph.

"Oh, I say, you are good at this sort of thing," cried Mark eagerly.  "I
shouldn't have thought of that."

"We couldn't fight in the dark; we shouldn't know friends from foes."

"We should know our own men, and of course your men would be enemies to
my men; but, of course, we shouldn't want to fight, but to know Purlrose
and his men.  Yes, we must have pitch torches.  I can bring any number
of them, for we use them sometimes in the big parts of the mine, where
the smoke doesn't matter.  Well, it all seems easy enough.  I don't
believe there'll be a door to batter down, only a curtain across to keep
the wind out, and it's a very narrow place, I remember.  I went just
inside once."

"I went in fifty yards or more, with Nick Garth," said Ralph, "and we
had candles.  We were looking for lead, but it was all stone shells."

"Oh, there's no lead there," said Mark confidently.  "We've got all the
lead worth working at the Black Tor."

"Yes, I'm afraid so; but there's a warm spring of water in there, and
from where we stopped, you could hear water running and falling, ever so
far-off."

"But what was it like, as far as you went in?"

"Just as if the mountain had been cracked, and both sides of the crack
matched, only sometimes they were two feet apart, and sometimes twenty
or more, making big chambers."

"Yes; some of our mine's like that," said Mark thoughtfully.  "I say,
enemy: think they set any sentries?"

"No, I don't believe they would."

"Then we'll rout them out; and if we can't do that, we'll drive them
farther in, and pile up big stones at the entrance, and starve them till
they surrender."

"Yes," cried Ralph eagerly, as he looked at his companion with the same
admiration Mark had displayed when he had proposed taking the torches.
"Capital: for the place is so big, that I don't believe we could find
them all.  Yours will be the way."

"Well, I think it is right," said Mark suddenly; "but we must catch old
Purlrose to-night."

"We will if we can," said Ralph.

"Well then, that's all.  It's as easy as easy.  All we've got to do is
to get our best men together, and meet--Ah! where shall we meet?"

"At Steeple Stone, half-way there.  That will be about the same distance
for you to come as for us."

"That's good," cried Mark gleefully.  "But we must have a word to know
each other by.  What do you say to `foes?'"

"Oh, that won't do," said Ralph.  "`Friends?'"

"But we're not friends; we're--we're--what are we."

"Allies," said Ralph quietly.

"Why not that, then?  Yes, of course.  `Allies.'  Can't be better."

"`Allies,' then," said Ralph.

"Well, what next?"

"To get the stuff together to fight with," replied Ralph.

"What, the men?  Yes, of course.  Then we'd better see to it at once."

"Yes, in a very quiet way, so that no one knows," said Ralph.

"And meet at the Steeple Stone about half-an-hour after our people are
gone to bed."

"And the first who are there to wait for the others."

"Oh, of course," cried Mark.  "Fair play; no going first, and doing the
work.  That would mean a fresh quarrel."

"When I fight, I fight fair," said Ralph proudly.

"I didn't mean to doubt it," said Mark apologetically.  "I say: this is
more sensible than for us two to fight now."

"Think so?"

"Yes: oh yes; only, of course, our fight has to come.  Yes, when these
people are cleared off."

"We can't have three sets of enemies," said Ralph gravely; "and I can't
help thinking that if we do not act, they will get more and more daring,
and drive us out."

"Pooh!" said Mark defiantly.

"Ah, I laughed at the idea at first; but they might take Cliff Castle or
Black Tor by surprise some night."

"Well, they might take Cliff Castle," said Mark, in rather a
contemptuous tone, "but not the Black Tor.  And they shan't even try to
take either," he added quickly, as if repenting his words.  "We'll
surprise them, and to-night."

"One moment," said Ralph.  "We must be careful, for it's quite possible
that some of the ruffians may be out on an expedition, and if we met
them in the dark, it might cause a serious mistake."

"We'll settle all that when we meet," said Mark.  "`Allies,' then--
to-night."

"`Allies'--to-night," said Ralph; and after stiffly saluting, in the
style taught by their fencing masters, the two lads separated, each
making for his own home.

Mark's task proved easy.  He went straight to the mine, descended, and
found Dummy.

"Coming to go right through the cave beyond the big waterfall, Master
Mark?" cried the lad eagerly.

"No," replied Mark shortly.  "Where's your father?"

"Right away down the mine, in the new lead, Master Mark," said the lad
in a disappointed tone.  "Aren't you never coming to have a hunt?"

"Oh yes, some day."

"That's what you always say.  There's lots to see and find out.  You
know where that water is."

"Yes: but never mind now."

"But, Master Mark, I'm sure that it comes from the river, where there's
that sink-hole in the narrow, where you see the water turn round and
round."

"Very likely; but here, I must see your father.  Take a light, and go
before me.  Here, Dummy, are there plenty of torches?"

"Yes, Master Mark; but what do you want with torches?"

"Don't ask questions, sirrah."

"Very well, Master Mark," said the boy, so meekly that his young master
was touched, and said gently:

"Look here, Dummy, can I trust you?"

"I dunno, Master Mark.  I'll do what you tell me."

"That's right.  Will you fight?"

The boy's eyes flashed in the candle-light, down in the grim chamber
were they stood.

"Torches--fight," he whispered.  "Are you going to tackle the Darleys?"

"No; the robbers."

"T'other's best; and they're robbers too.  But them'll do.  Want me to
come and help fight them?"

"Yes; will you?"

"Will I?" said the boy, showing his teeth.  "I'll follow you anywhere,
Master Mark."

"Well, I want to follow you now.  Take me to your father, and--not a
word to a soul."

Dummy slapped his mouth, and shut it close; then going to a niche in the
rock, he pointed to a box of candles, and a much bigger one, which he
opened and showed to be quite full of long sticks of hempen tow soaked
in pitch, one of which he took out, and gave to Mark, and took one
himself, lit it, and then led the way down, and in and out among the
darkest recesses of the mine.

"Smoky," said Dummy, giving his torch a wave, and sending the black
curls of fume eddying upward, to hang along the stone ceiling.  Then he
uttered an angry cry.

"What's the matter?"

"Hot pitch, Master Mark.  Big drop splathered on to my hand."

In due time the place where Dan Rugg was working and directing the men,
chipping out the rich lead ore, was reached, and he came out of the
murky place.

"Ah, Master Mark," he said.  "You, Dummy, put your foot on that smoky
link.  Want to smother us?"

"My fault, Dan," cried Mark.  "Come here."

He communicated a part of the plan, and the miner's stern face began to
relax more and more, till he showed his yellow teeth in a pleasant grin,
and put his sharp pick under his arm, so as to indulge in a good rub of
his hands.

"The varmin!" he said.  "The varmin!  Time it were done, Master Mark.
Oh yes, I'll pick out some lads who owe 'em a grudge, same as I do.  You
want eight of us?  Me and seven more?"

"You and Dummy, and six more."

"Dummy!  Tchah!  He's no good."

Dummy silently dug his elbow into his master's ribs, but it was
unnecessary.

"I want you and Dummy, and six men," said Mark decisively.

"Oh, very well, sir; you're young master; but what you can see in that
boy I don't know.  Nine on us," he continued thoughtfully.  "Twelve o'
them.  'Taren't enough, master."

Mark hesitated.  He had not meant to speak of his allies, for fear of
opposition, but concluded now that it would be better, and explained
everything.

"No, Master Mark; won't do, sir," said Dan, shaking his head ominously.
"No good can't come o' that.  They'll be running away, and leaving us in
the lurch."

"Nonsense.  Eight men will be picked who, as you say, owe the ruffians a
grudge, and they'll fight well."

"But they'd rather fight us, master, same as us would rather fight
them."

"Not this time, Dan.  We must join hands with them, and beat the
robbers.  Another time we may fight them."

There was a low savage snarl.

"What do you mean by that, Dummy?" cried Mark.

"You didn't tell me that Darley's boy was coming to fight alongside o'
you, Master Mark."

"Then I tell you now, Dummy," said Mark haughtily.  "We've joined
together to crush the robbers; so hold your tongue."

"Ay, he'd better," growled Dan.  "Well, Master Mark, I don't quite like
it; but if you say it's to be done, why, done it shall be."

"And you'll make the men you choose be secret?"

"Why, master?  Of course Sir Edward knows?"

"Not a word; and he is not to know till we bring in the prisoners."

"Whee-ew!" whistled the old miner; and then he chuckled.  "Well," he
said, "you have growed up a young game-cock!  All right, Master Mark.
We'll come; only you must bear all the blame if the master don't like
it.  You order me to do this?"

"Yes, I order you," said Mark firmly.  "It is time it was done."

"That's so, Master Mark, and that's enough.  I begin to feel as if I
should like a fight."

"And you shall have it.  I'll be outside, by the horse-stone, with eight
swords, eight pikes, and eight belts."

"That's good, master; but we must bring our picks as well.  We can
handle them better than other tools."

"Very well.  You leave your lads down at the bottom, and come up with
Dummy to fetch the arms; and mind this: I want to show up well before
the Darleys.  You'll pick fine trusty lads who can fight?"

"You leave that to me, Master Mark," said the old miner.  "I'm proud of
our family as you are.  They shan't have eight fellows as can equal us,
'cepting me and that stoopid boy."

"Don't you mind what he says, Dummy," cried Mark laughingly; "he doesn't
mean it.  There, come along.  I want you to help me pick out some good
sharp swords and pikes.  Mind, Dan, I shall be waiting for you as soon
as the last light's out."

"I shall be there, Master Mark," replied the old miner; and the two lads
returned to daylight, along the passages sparkling with crystals and
bits of ore.

Meanwhile, Ralph was as busy arranging with the retainers at Cliff
Castle, and as soon as he had taken Nick Garth into his confidence, that
gentleman lay down on the ground, and hid his face.

"Why, what does that mean?" cried the lad.

"Couldn't help it, sir.  'Bliged to, or I should have shouted for joy.
Get seven more?  Have a dozen, sir, or twenty.  Every man-jack'll want
to go."

"No: seven," said Ralph firmly.  "There'll be nine from the Black Tor,
so we shall be eighteen."

"What! nine o' them coming to help, Master Ralph!" cried Nick, whose jaw
dropped in his astonishment.

"Yes: they are as much at enmity with the rascals as we are."

"But, Master Ralph--"

"Now, no arguing, Nick; do as I tell you.  Get Ram Jennings, and six men
who have been injured by the gang, and I'll have swords and pikes ready
at ten.  Not a word to a soul."

"Isn't the chief coming?"

"No: I am the chief to-night, and my father will not know."

"But what'll he say to me?"

"Nothing.  I take all the blame."

"But he'll be mad about our going with a lot o' Black Torers."

"I tell you I am answerable for everything."

"Yes, but--"

"Look here, Nick: do you want to rout out Captain Purlrose and his
gang?"

"Do I want to, Master Ralph?  Do I want to get his head under a stone,
and sarve it like I would a nut?  Yes, I doos."

"Then pick the men.  Bind them to be silent, and meet me as soon as the
lights are all out.  Will you do this?"

"Won't I?" said the man exultantly; "and won't we?--Master Ralph, sir, I
am proud on you.--Well, this is going to be a treat!  But, say, Master
Ralph, will them Edens fight 'longside of us without being nasty?"

"Yes, because it's against a common enemy," said the lad.

"Common?  They just are, sir.  Commonest muck o' men.  Fit for nothing
but putting under ground.  Why, how I should like to take my old mother
with us, and let her loose at that there captain.  I wouldn't give much
for his chance.  Shall I tell her?"

"No!" cried Ralph.  "Not a soul.  Everything must be done in secret, and
the rascals up at Ergles taken by surprise."

"You trust me, Master Ralph," said the man; "and when Master Captain
Purlrose finds who's come, he will be surprised.  We'll hang him for a
scarecrow at once, of course?"

"No: bring him here a prisoner, and my father will settle that."

"Very well, sir.  We'll take him, dead or alive oh; but if I had my way,
I'd like to turn him over to my mother and all the women him and his
have robbed.  Why, do you know, sir, night afore last the beggars
carried off a pickle-tub and two feather beds.  And they call themselves
men."

Nick Garth spat on the ground in his disgust, closed one eye as he
looked at his young master, gave his mouth a sounding slap, and went
round at once to garden, stable, and barns, to quietly enlist the little
force, making each man swear secrecy, so that at nightfall not another
soul save the initiated had the slightest inkling of what was going on,
either at Cliff Castle or the Black Tor.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

ALLIED FORCES.

The crescent moon sank like a thin curve of light in the western sky
soon after nine o'clock that night.  At ten the last light disappeared
at both places connected with the adventure, when Mark Eden lowered
