action now ensued, and continued on both sides for an hour and twenty
minutes, when the enemy's fire began to slacken, and she attempted to
make off; but the superior skill of Captain Bowen frustrated the
attempt, and in less than twenty minutes compelled her to surrender.
When taken possession of she proved to be the _Mahonesa_, a Spanish
frigate of 36 guns, besides cohorns and snivels, manned with a crew of
275 men.  She was completely disabled, her main-deck guns were rendered
entirely useless, the booms having fallen down upon them, while her
standing and running rigging was cut to pieces, she having also lost
thirty men killed and as many more wounded.  The _Terpsichore_ had only
the boatswain and three seamen wounded.  Captain Bowen spoke of the
gallant way in which the Spanish captain, Don Thomas Ayaldi, had fought
his ship, having held out as long as he had the slightest prospect of
victory.  Notwithstanding her crippled condition, Captain Bowen
succeeded in carrying his prize to Lisbon, but she was considered too
much battered to be worth the cost of a thorough repair.

Soon afterwards, Captain Bowen captured a French 36-gun frigate, _La
Vestale_, all her masts and her bowsprit being knocked away, and a large
proportion of her crew killed and wounded.  Being close to the shoals
that lie between Cape Trafalgar and Cadiz, the prize, with the
_Terpsichore's_ master, one midshipman, and seven seamen, it having been
impossible to remove the French crew, drifted towards the shore, where
the master at length brought her up, and during the darkness the
_Terpsichore_ lost sight of her prize.  While attempting to tow her off
the next day, the towrope got foul of a rock and was cut.  Soon after
this the Frenchmen rose on the prize-crew and again anchored close
inshore.  The next morning, when Captain Bowen stood in to look for her,
he had the mortification to see her standing in to Cadiz, some Spanish
boats having come off and taken possession of her.  _La Vestale_ was,
however, captured in the year 1799 by the gallant Captain Cunningham, of
the _Clyde_.

Passing over many interesting events, we come to one which cannot be
omitted in the history of the British Navy.  English seamen had long
undoubtedly been subjected to much ill-treatment.  A large proportion of
a ship's company consisted of pressed men, compelled to serve against
their will.  They were often harshly treated by their officers; they
were badly fed, and but poorly paid, and often punished; while their
necessaries were embezzled, and they were cheated in a variety of ways.
Towards the end of February, 1797, while Lord Howe was on shore, several
petitions were sent up from the seamen at Portsmouth, asking for an
advance of wages.  They were forwarded to Earl Spencer, First Lord of
the Admiralty, but as they were looked upon as forgeries, no notice was
taken of them.  Lord Howe being unable from sickness to go afloat, Lord
Bridport took command of the fleet, when the seamen, supposing their
complaints to be disregarded, refused to put to sea.  On the 17th of
March, every man in the fleet having sworn to support the cause, the
mutiny broke out.  Ropes were reeved at the foreyard-arms of the _Queen
Charlotte_, and the mutineers were about to hang the first lieutenant of
the ship, when Lord Bridport saved him.  They, however, turned all the
officers out of the fleet who had behaved in any way to offend them.
Two delegates were appointed from each ship to represent the whole
fleet, and the admiral's cabin in the _Queen Charlotte_ was fixed upon
as the place for their deliberations.  On the 21st Admirals Gardner,
Colpoys, and Pole went on board the _Queen Charlotte_ in order to confer
with the delegates.  These men assured the admirals that no arrangement
would be considered as satisfactory till it should be sanctioned by the
king and parliament, and guaranteed by a proclamation for a general
pardon.  So irritated did Admiral Gardner become on hearing this, that
he seized one of the delegates and swore that he would have them all
hanged with every fifth man throughout the fleet.  This so exasperated
the crew that it was with difficulty Admiral Gardner escaped with his
life from the ship.  The red or bloody flag was now seen flying from the
_Royal George_, and that of Lord Bridport was struck.  The mutineers
also loaded all the guns, keeping a watch the same as at sea; every
officer being detained on board his respective ship.  In a few days,
however, the seamen, hearing that their petitions were likely to be
attended to, returned to their duty.  Admiral Bridport rehoisted his
flag on board the _Royal George_, and informed the seamen that he had
brought with him the redress of their grievances and his majesty's
pardon for the offenders.  It was now hoped that all matters in dispute
were settled; but the seamen, fancying that notwithstanding the
admiral's assurances, they were to be neglected, again refused when
ordered to weigh anchor.  Admiral Golpoys, on this, ordered the marines
to prevent the delegates from coming on board.  The latter attempted to
force their way, when the marines fired, and five seamen were killed and
one of their officers wounded.  On this the crew of the _London_ turned
the guns in the fore-part of the ship aft, and threatened to blow the
officers, and all who stood by them, into the water.  Seeing that
resistance was hopeless, the officers surrendered, and the admiral and
captain were confined in their cabins.  Happily, on the 8th of May, a
resolution of the House of Commons was passed, and the king's free
pardon being communicated to the seamen, they became satisfied, the red
flag was struck, the officers were reinstated in their commands, and the
whole fleet put to sea the next day to look out for the enemy.  Lord
Bridport had been ordered to keep at sea as much as possible, and only
to return when necessary to refit or revictual.  This plan succeeded,
and the seamen generally obeyed their officers and conducted themselves
properly.

At Plymouth the ships' companies exhibited a mutinous disposition, but,
after a time, they accepted the terms offered to the seamen at
Portsmouth, and tranquillity was restored.

While these things were occurring at home, Sir John Jervis, with about
15 sail of the line, 4 frigates, 2 sloops of war, and a cutter, after
putting into the Tagus, was cruising off Cape Saint Vincent.  While
there, a Spanish fleet of 25 sail of the line, 11 frigates, and a brig,
came through the Straits of Gibraltar, bound for Cadiz.  On the 14th of
February, before dawn, a Portuguese frigate brought intelligence to the
admiral that a Spanish fleet was about five leagues to windward.  The
English fleet was formed in two compact divisions; in one of them was
the _Captain_, with the broad pendant of Horatio Nelson.  It appeared
that the Spaniards had at first supposed that the fleet in sight was
part of a convoy.  Some days before an American, which had passed
through the British fleet before Admiral Sir Hyde Parker had joined with
five ships of the line, while another, the _Culloden_, was absent in
chase, had given the information that the English admiral had only nine
sail of the line.  The morning broke dark and hazy, and the Spaniards
obtaining but a partial view of the British fleet, were fully confirmed
in their mistake, and believed that they should surround the whole
British squadron and carry them in triumph into Cadiz.  Notwithstanding
the more just estimate that Sir John Jervis had of his opponents, he
lost no time in endeavouring to bring them to action.  The main body of
the Spanish fleet came down under all sail, with the wind on the
starboard-quarter, while the ships to leeward, close-hauled on the same
tack, were endeavouring to join them there.  Admiral Jervis formed his
line close-hauled on the starboard tack, steering straight for the
opening between the two divisions of the Spanish fleet.  The _Culloden_,
the leading ship, commanded by Captain Troubridge, had the honour of
commencing the battle about half-past eleven; the other British ships
following, effectually cut off a part of the Spanish fleet from the main
body, and compelled them to form on the larboard tack, with the
intention of passing through or to leeward of the British line; but they
were met with so warm a reception from the centre of the British that
they were obliged to tack, and were unable again to get into action till
towards the close of the day.  Admiral Jervis now devoted all his
attention to the main body of the enemy's fleet to windward, which was
reduced at this time, by the separation of the ships to leeward, to
eighteen sail of the line.  A little after twelve o'clock the signal was
made for the British fleet to tack in succession, and soon after the
signal for again passing the enemy's line; while the Spanish admiral's
design appeared to be to join the ships to leeward by wearing round to
the rear of the British line.  The intention of the enemy was, however,
soon perceived by Commodore Nelson, who, being in the rear, had an
opportunity of observing this manoeuvre.  In order to frustrate the
design, he had no sooner passed the Spanish rear than he wore and stood
on the other tack towards the enemy.  In executing this bold and
decisive manoeuvre, the commodore found himself alongside of the Spanish
admiral in the _Santissima Trinidad_, of 136 guns.  Notwithstanding this
immense disparity, Nelson was not the man to shrink from the contest,
though the Spaniard was ably supported by her two seconds ahead and
astern, each of which was a three-decker.  While Nelson sustained this
unequal conflict, Troubridge in the _Culloden_, and Captain Frederick in
the _Blenheim_, were coming to his assistance.  Sir John Jervis had
ordered Captain Collingwood in the _Excellent_ to bear up, while he
passed to leeward of the rearmost ships of the enemy.  As he did so, he
gave the _San Ysidro_ so effectual a broadside that she was compelled to
submit.  Captain Collingwood then passed on to the relief of Nelson, but
before he arrived, the Spaniard's mizen-mast fell overboard and she got
entangled with her second, the _San Nicolas_, a ship of guns.  On this,
Nelson determined to board the _San Nicolas_, and the _Captain_ was so
judiciously placed by Captain Miller, her commander, that he laid her
aboard on the starboard-quarter of the Spanish 84, her spritsail-yard
passing over the enemy's poop, and hooking in her mizen-shrouds.
Nothing can surpass Nelson's own description of what now took place.
Calling for the boarders, he ordered them on board:--"The soldiers of
the 69th regiment, with an alacrity which will ever do them credit, and
Lieutenant Pearson of the same regiment, were almost the foremost on
this service.  The first man who jumped into the enemy's mizen-chains
was Captain Berry, late my first lieutenant (Captain Miller was in the
very act of going also, but I directed him to remain).  A soldier of the
69th regiment having broken the upper-quarter-gallery window, jumped in,
followed by myself and others as fast as possible.  I found the cabin
doors fastened, and some Spanish officers fired their pistols at us
through the windows; but having burst open the doors, the soldiers
fired, and the Spanish brigadier (or commodore) fell as he was
retreating to the quarter-deck.  I found Captain Berry in possession of
the poop, and the Spanish ensign hauling down.  I passed with my people
and Lieutenant Pearson along the larboard gangway to the forecastle,
where I met several Spanish officers prisoners to my seamen, and they
delivered me their swords.  At this moment, a fire of pistols or muskets
opening from the admiral's stern-gallery in the _San Josef_, I directed
the soldiers to fire into her stern.  Our seamen by this time were in
full possession of every part of the ship.  About seven of my men were
killed, and some few wounded, and about twenty Spaniards.  Having placed
sentinels at the different ladders, and calling to Captain Miller,
ordering him to send more men into the _San Nicolas_, I directed my
brave fellows to board the first-rate, the _San Josef_, which was done
in an instant, Captain Berry assisting me into the main-chains.

"At this moment a Spanish officer looked over the quarter-deck rail, and
said they surrendered.  From this most welcome intelligence, it was not
long before I was on the quarter-deck, when the Spanish captain, with
bended knee, presented me his sword, and told me the admiral was dying
of his wounds below.  I asked him on his honour if the ship had
surrendered.  He declared she had; on which I gave him my hand, and
desired him to call his officers and ship's company and tell them of it,
which he did; and on the quarter-deck of a Spanish first-rate,
extravagant as the story may seem, did I receive the swords of
vanquished Spaniards, which, as I received, I gave to William Fearney,
one of my barge-men, who tucked them, with the greatest _sang-froid_,
under his arm."

Immediately on Nelson's return on board the _Captain_, he made the
signal for boats to assist in disengaging her from the prizes, and as
she was rendered incapable of further service until refitted, he hoisted
his pennant for the moment on board the _Minerve_ frigate.  In the
meantime Admiral Jervis ordered the _Victory_ to be placed on the
lee-quarter of the rearmost ship of the enemy, the _Salvador del Mundo_,
and threw in so effectual a broadside that the Spanish commander, seeing
the _Barfleur_ bear down to second the _Victory_, struck his flag.  He
was very nearly capturing the _Santissana Trinidad_, but the rest of the
Spanish fleet, hitherto uninjured, coming down, he found it necessary to
secure his prizes and bring to.  All these ships did was to open an
ineffectual fire, and then to sail away, leaving the British to carry
off their prizes in triumph.  The English ships lost in killed and
wounded only 300 men, while on board the ships captured the Spanish
killed and wounded amounted to 697.  Just honours were showered on the
victorious admirals and captains; Sir John Jervis was created a peer of
Great Britain, under the titles of Baron Jervis of Meaford and Earl
Saint Vincent; and among others, Commodore Nelson, who had just before
been made a vice-admiral, received the insignia of the Bath.

It had been believed that the mutinous spirit of the seamen had been
quelled by the concessions made to them, but such, it was soon found,
was not the case.  On the 20th of May most of the ships lying at the
Nore, and nearly all of those belonging to the North Sea Fleet, hoisted
the red flag.  The mutineers at Sheerness, like those at Spithead, had
chosen two delegates from every ship, and had appointed as a president
over them a man of the name of Richard Parker; while on board each ship
was a committee of twelve men, who decided on all the affairs relative
to its internal management.  They declared themselves dissatisfied with
the terms accepted by the seamen of Portsmouth, and demanded a more just
division of prize-money, more regular and frequent payment of wages, and
also permission to go on shore when in port, with several other
conditions.  This statement they required Vice-Admiral Buckner, whose
flag was flying on board the _Sandwich_, of 90 guns, to transmit without
delay to the Admiralty, and they declared that only when its conditions
were complied with would they return to their duty.  So bold did they
become that they went on shore without interruption, parading Sheerness
with music and flags, inviting the crews of other ships to join them;
while they had their headquarters in a public-house, above which a red
flag was hoisted.  To put a stop to this, some regiments were sent for,
when they thought it prudent to keep to their ships.  All communication
with the shore being stopped, the mutineers supplied themselves with
water and provisions from the merchant-vessels which they brought to,
while they allowed none to proceed up to London, completely blockading
the port.  Throughout the whole of the mutiny the seamen behaved
respectfully to their superior officers, while the strictest discipline
was kept up on board all the ships.  On the king's birthday the seamen
even exhibited their loyalty by firing a grand salute from all the
ships, which were decorated in the manner usual on festive occasions.

Conciliatory measures for inducing the seamen to return to their duty
were tried in vain.  The Government, however, would not yield to any of
their demands, and the seamen on board most of the ships at length
finding their cause hopeless, hauled down the red flag.  Some had
previously made their escape from their midst.  Ultimately, the crew of
the _Sandwich_ carried their ship under the guns of Sheerness, when a
guard of soldiers coming on board, Parker, their ringleader, was
delivered up.  He, with the chief culprits, was tried, convicted, and
executed; others were flogged through the fleet, and many were
imprisoned for certain periods, a general pardon being granted to the
seamen who had been misled by them.

Wide as was the spread of the mutiny, whole ships' companies remained
true to their colours.  Among these crews who remained loyal, that of
the _Saint Fiorenzo_ deserves especially to be mentioned, and an account
written by the late Admiral Mitford, who was then a midshipman on board
her, cannot fail to prove interesting.  "She was," says Admiral Mitford,
"the favourite frigate of his majesty George the Third, who, from his
courtesy and kind manner towards the ship's company, had endeared
himself to them.  This may in some degree account for the loyalty of the
men, strengthened by their unbounded attachment to one of the most
humane, brave, and zealous commanders that ever walked a deck--one to
whom every man looked up as a father, the late Admiral Sir Harry Burrard
Neale.  A better lesson cannot be given to a young officer to show that
by kindness and firmness that desirable object may be attained which was
so eminently proved during one of the most eventful periods of this
country.  The _Saint Fiorenzo_ was at Spithead when the first mutiny
broke out, and the red flag was hoisted on board the _Queen Charlotte_.
The day before that event the men came and informed Sir Harry of what
was to take place, but that he might rely on their loyalty, and as far
as was consistent with prudence, that they would obey every order from
the officers, to which resolution they most scrupulously adhered.  While
such was the state of affairs, the _Saint Fiorenzo_ having received
orders to proceed to Sheerness for the purpose of fitting out to carry
over the Princess Royal, then Duchess of Hesse-Homburg, to Cuxhaven,
after her marriage, the mutineers allowed her to sail without attempting
to stop her.  Their demands having been acceded to by the Government,
the men, just as we were sailing, returned to their duty.
Notwithstanding the loyalty of our crew, two of the delegates,
thoroughly trustworthy men, had been chosen, with Sir Harry's
permission, who regularly brought him all the information they could
obtain.  On our arrival at Sheerness, we found the red flag still flying
on board the _Sandwich_ guard-ship, and supposing that her crew had not
been informed of what had taken place at Spithead, our delegates went on
board to explain, and were surprised and disgusted to find that fresh
demands had been made by the North Sea Fleet, and of so frivolous a
nature, that from some remarks made by our men, perhaps not very
courteous, their zeal in the cause was suspected, and consequently the
mutineers were very jealous of our crew.  On returning on board, our
delegates immediately communicated with the _Clyde_, an old
fellow-cruiser, commanded by Captain Cunningham, who also enjoying the
confidence of his ship's company, an agreement took place between the
respective captains and their crews, that should the disaffection of the
mutineers continue, they would leave them and run under cover of the
forts at Sheerness.  I should say that I believe a very small proportion
of the men were disaffected, and, as on most public outbreaks, the
majority were dictated to by a few desperate and disappointed men.
Parker had been shipmate with a considerable number of the _Saint
Fiorenzo's_ crew, and they had a great contempt for him.  He had been
acting-lieutenant in some ship with them, and was dismissed for
drunkenness.  If a little energy had been used on some of the
opportunities that offered, the whole affair might have been quashed.

"Having got leave to go on shore from the delegates of our ship, I
landed and passed through the dockyard, followed by the whole of the
delegates of the fleet, Parker and Davis walking together in procession.
When outside the gates, they saw the Lancashire fencibles coming to
strengthen the garrison, to whom they offered every insult they could
devise.  On this the officer in command halted his men, and coming up to
the admiral and commissioner, who were standing opposite the gates,
asked, so I understood him, whether he might be permitted to surround
the delegates, complaining of the insults offered to himself and his
men.  On this I involuntarily exclaimed, `Now's the time;' when the
admiral asked me what I meant, and how I dared to speak?  I said, `These
are all the delegates,' pointing out to them Parker and Davis and
others.  The fellows overheard me, and I have no doubt I became a marked
man.  I may congratulate myself on the event which carried us away from
the fleet, otherwise I might have suffered what others did, and been
yard-armed, tarred, and feathered; but I feel justified in saying that,
had my suggestion been acted upon, there would have been an end of the
mutiny at the Nore.  Returning on board I found that every arrangement
had been made, and the _Clyde_ being the inshore ship, was to move
first, which she did, and ran under the batteries; when, either from
incompetency or fear, our pilot refused to take charge of the ship, and
the tide being on the turn to ebb, Sir Harry Neale thought it advisable
to wait for a more favourable opportunity.  In the meantime we were
visited by the delegates of some of the leading ships, who abused our
crew for permitting the _Clyde_ to escape without our firing upon her.
So incensed did the men become at this, that one of the quartermasters,
John Ainslie, came aft, and asked the first lieutenant whether they
might not throw the blackguards overboard, which, I doubt not, a nod of
assent would have effected.

"The mutineers now gave orders to our crew to place the frigate between
the _Inflexible_ and _Director_, to send our gunpowder on board the
_Sandwich_, Admiral Parker as he was called, and to unbend our sails,
with which orders our people agreed to comply.  Sir Harry was
immediately acquainted with the circumstances, and he at once arranged
that the ship, instead of doing so, should run into Sheerness.  When all
was prepared, with springs to our cables to cast inshore, and we were
ready to cut, in heaving the spring broke, and we cast outward.  Sir
Harry, whose presence of mind never forsook him, on this directed the
quartermaster to take the command and he would dictate to him.  All was
sheeted home in a moment, and we stood in between the two line-of-battle
ships, which had their guns double-shotted, their crews being all ready
with lanyards in hand to fire upon us.  The ship by that time had got
good way, when Sir Harry gave the order to let fly all the sheets, which
took the mutineers by surprise, and supposing that the ship was coming
to an anchor, they did not fire.  Sir Harry then ordered the helm to be
put hard a-port, which caused the ship to shoot ahead of the
_Inflexible_.  He now came on deck and took the command, crying out to
the ship's company, `Well done, my lads!' when a loud murmur of applause
was heard fore and aft; but we had no time to cheer.  `Now, clear away
the bulkheads, and mount the guns,' he cried.  By this time the whole
fleet of 82 sail had opened their fire upon us.  The shot fell like
hail, but, whether intentionally or not, few struck our hull.  It was
reported that the _Director_ fired blank cartridges or she might have
done us more injury; but I believe that her crew, struck with awe at the
idea of firing on their countrymen, and also with admiration of their
bravery, fired wide.  In little more than two hours the bulkheads were
cleared away from the cabin door to the break of the quarter-deck, the
whole space having been fitted up with cabins for the suite of her royal
highness, the guns on both sides being also down in the hold.  The guns
were mounted and we were ready for action.  The men now came aft and
begged that, should the mutineers come after them, they might go down
with the ship rather than return to the fleet at the Nore.  Our master,
although a good pilot, did not feel himself justified in taking charge
of the ship within the boundaries of a branch pilot.  We were therefore
on the look-out for a pilot-vessel, when a lugger was discovered on the
lee bow, and we were on the point of bearing down on her, when we saw
the North Sea Fleet coming with the red flag flying, having left their
station in a state of mutiny, the admiral and all the officers being
under arrest.  A frigate bore down to us, when Sir Harry gave the
speaking-trumpet to the quartermaster Stanley, and when she hailed as to
what we were doing there, he replied that we were looking out to stop
the ships with provisions for the fleet.  She then proceeded, and joined
the fleet again, and we made sail after the lugger.  The necessary
signals were made, but not being answered, we gave chase, and, after a
run of four hours, captured the _Castor and Pollux_, a French vessel of
16 guns.  We were proceeding to Portsmouth with our prize, when she,
being to windward, spoke a brig, who informed us that the mutiny had
again broken out at Spithead.  Sir Harry on this thought it prudent to
anchor under Dungeness until he could communicate with the Admiralty.
During the night, as we lay there, a ship was seen bearing down towards
us, which, however, answered the private signals; but that could not be
depended upon, as it was probable that the mutineers would have
possessed themselves of them.  We accordingly beat to quarters.  The men
again repeated their request to sink rather than surrender to the
mutineers.  The stranger appeared high out of the water, and we could
not be certain whether she might not be a line-of-battle ship.  The wind
being very light, she closed slowly.  The suspense was awful.  The
springs were hove on to keep our broadside to bear.  Sir Harry hailed,
and her answer was, `The _Hussar_ frigate, Lord Garlies, from the West
Indies.'  Having come from a long voyage, her appearance was accounted
for.  Seeing the lights at all our port-holes, those on board the
frigate could not understand the necessity of such extreme precautions,
being, of course, ignorant of the mutiny.  When her men wore acquainted
with our situation, they were so struck with the bravery and
determination of the _Saint Fiorenzo's_ ship's company that they
immediately said, should any ship be sent to bring us back, they would
share our fate.  None, however, came, and in a few days we heard that
the mutiny was at an end, and we sailed, I think, for Plymouth, and
another ship was ordered to take over the Princess of Hesse-Homburg."

By the daring and determination of another captain, Sir Henry Trollope,
he prevented his ship's company from joining the mutineers.  He had been
removed from the _Glutton_ to the _Russell_, 74, one of the North Sea
Fleet, which lay in Yarmouth Roads.  On hearing that his crew were about
to join the mutineers, he came to the resolution of compelling them, by
a proceeding of the most desperate character, to obey his orders.
Providing himself with provisions and water, a compass and a chart, and
a brace of pistols, he secretly entered the powder-magazine.  Besides
the door at the entrance, there was a grate, through which he could look
into the outer apartment.  Seating himself with his pistols in his hand,
he sent for the delegates, and ordered them at once to get the ship
under way, to carry her out to sea.  "You know me, my lads," he said,
calmly; "we have been ordered to proceed to the Texel, and these orders
must be obeyed.  Sooner than have her name disgraced, I will blow her
and all on board up into the air.  Return on deck and attend to your
duty."

The mutineers looked aghast, but they knew their captain, and of what he
was capable, too well to disobey him.  They could not have molested him,
even had they dared.  The crew, obeying their officers, while the
captain sat far below in the magazine, their guiding spirit, got the
ship under way, and stood out to sea--the rest of the ships, either not
aware of what she was about, or not venturing to interfere with her.  In
a short time she joined Admiral Duncan, who, with his flag flying on
board the _Venerable_, was blockading the Texel.  He had been left with
only his own ship and the _Adamant_, keeping in check a Dutch fleet of
15 sail of the line, under Admiral de Winter.  In order to prevent the
Dutch from coming out, Admiral Duncan made use of a ruse, frequently
repeating signals, as if communicating with the main body of his fleet
in the offing.  At length he was joined by other line-of-battle ships,
but his fleet, severely battered by bad weather, and being short of
provisions, had to put back into Yarmouth Roads, while Captain Trollope
remained with a small squadron to watch the enemy.  He continued there
till the 9th of October, when information was brought that the Dutch
fleet was at sea.  He immediately sailed, and having looked into the
Texel, on the 11th the _Russell_ and other ships were seen with the
signal flying at their mast-heads that the enemy was in sight to
leeward.  The Dutch fleet stood away, however, towards the coast of
Suffolk, when, finding that the English admiral was within seven leagues
of him, he sailed back towards Camperdown, followed by the English
look-out frigates.  De Winter now formed a close line of battle, and
resolutely awaited Admiral Duncan.  The British fleet on this bore down
on the enemy, with the signal flying for close action.  The _Monarch_,
leading the larboard division of the British fleet, first cut the Dutch
line, pouring in well-directed broadsides on the ships on either side of
her.  The action soon became general; one after the other the Dutch
ships were compelled to strike.  One of them, the _Hercules_, catching
fire, the crew threw overboard their powder, and were therefore obliged
to surrender their ship.  The Dutch admiral's ship, the _Vryheid_, held
out gallantly to the last, but was at length compelled to yield, when
the rest of the ships which had not yet struck their colours, did their
best to make off.  By this time the English were in possession of two
seventy-fours, five sixty-fours, two fifties, and two frigates.  The
escaping enemy could not be pursued, for the land was close aboard, and
the fleet in nine fathoms water.  All the victors could do, therefore,
was to secure their prizes, and to endeavour to get clear of the shore
before nightfall.  The Dutchmen had fought gallantly, aiming at the
hulls of the British ships, which were fearfully shattered, and in all
of them numerous shots were found sticking; though the masts and rigging
were but comparatively little injured.  The English lost 228 killed and
812 wounded, including many officers, and the Dutch 540 killed and 620
wounded.  Of the whole Dutch fleet seven only escaped, and five of these
were afterwards captured.  With regard to the number of their guns, the
two fleets were almost equal--the English ships carrying altogether 1150
guns, and the Dutch 1034; besides which, the latter had some corvettes
and brigs which took part in the action, and greatly annoyed their
opponents, though their guns were not counted.  The victory of
Camperdown was gained by the very men who had taken part in the mutiny.
On the news reaching England, all those still under sentence were
pardoned.

During this year occurred the unfortunate attack on Santa Cruz, in the
island of Teneriffe, when, in attempting to land on the mole, Nelson
lost an arm, and the gallant Captain Bowen, with several lieutenants,
was killed, many of the boats being sunk and their crews perishing.

In the year 1798 the French made three attempts to land armies in
Ireland, but on each occasion their fleets were driven back, and many of
their ships were captured.  A previous attempt had been made in 1796,
when they were scattered and discomfited by the weather.  The second
succeeded in landing a body of troops; the greater number were killed,
and the survivors were made prisoners.  In the third, the _Hoche_, under
the command of Commodore Bompart, was captured, as were several frigates
of his squadron; while the fourth, finding the warm reception the troops
would meet with should they attempt to land, put back into port.

At this time there were no less than 30,000 French prisoners in England,
and by an agreement with their own government, which was to support
them, it was arranged they should reside at Portsmouth, Plymouth, Norman
Cross, Liverpool, Edinburgh, Chatham, and Stapleton.  Arrangements were
made towards the end of the war for the exchange of prisoners, but it
was found that there were only 2800 English in France.  The French
Directory now issued a decree declaring that all persons natives of, or
originally belonging to, neutral countries, or countries in alliance
with France, serving on board any English ship, should be tried as
pirates.  The English Government, in retaliation, threatened to treat
all subjects of the French Republic in the same manner, should the
savage order be carried out.  This threat had the desired effect.

Bonaparte had been for some time planning a campaign in Egypt.  Sailing
with a large fleet from Toulon, he first captured Malta, and then
proceeded to Alexandria, wonderfully escaping Earl Saint Vincent and
Vice-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson.  Napoleon having landed, his fleet,
under Admiral Brueys, brought up in Aboukir Bay.  Here Nelson found the
French on the 8th of August, drawn up at anchor in order of battle, and
at 3 p.m. he threw out the signal to prepare for the fight, followed an
hour afterwards with orders to anchor by the stern with springs to their
cables.  Another signal was shortly afterwards made to signify that the
admiral meant to attack the enemy's van and centre.  At 6 p.m. Nelson
signalised to the fleet to fill and stand on, which they did in
admirable order, the _Goliath_ leading; when, soon afterwards hoisting
their colours, with the Union Jack in several parts of the rigging, the
British ships took up the stations allotted to them.  At 6:20 p.m. the
_Conquirant_, followed by the _Guerrier_, opened her fire upon the
_Goliath_ and _Zealous_, which was quickly answered by those ships; but
the sun had already sunk into the ocean before any other British ship
had fired a shot.  Loud cheers now burst from every ship of the English
fleet, when the men, flying to their guns, opened their broadsides with
