that the King of England was being treacherously used, and that Joan
of Arc was going to be allowed to cheat the stake. But they whispered
comfort into his ear:

"Give yourself no uneasiness, my lord; we shall soon have her again."

Perhaps the like tidings found their way all around, for good news
travels fast as well as bad. At any rate, the ragings presently quieted
down, and the huge concourse crumbled apart and disappeared. And thus we
reached the noon of that fearful Thursday.

We two youths were happy; happier than any words can tell--for we were
not in the secret any more than the rest. Joan's life was saved. We
knew that, and that was enough. France would hear of this day's infamous
work--and then! Why, then her gallant sons would flock to her standard
by thousands and thousands, multitudes upon multitudes, and their wrath
would be like the wrath of the ocean when the storm-winds sweep it; and
they would hurl themselves against this doomed city and overwhelm it
like the resistless tides of that ocean, and Joan of Arc would march
again!

In six days--seven days--one short week--noble France, grateful France,
indignant France, would be thundering at these gates--let us count the
hours, let us count the minutes, let us count the seconds! O happy day,
O day of ecstasy, how our hearts sang in our bosoms!

For we were young then, yes, we were very young.

Do you think the exhausted prisoner was allowed to rest and sleep after
she had spent the small remnant of her strength in dragging her tired
body back to the dungeon?

No, there was no rest for her, with those sleuth-hounds on her track.
Cauchon and some of his people followed her to her lair straightway;
they found her dazed and dull, her mental and physical forces in a state
of prostration. They told her she had abjured; that she had made certain
promises--among them, to resume the apparel of her sex; and that if she
relapsed, the Church would cast her out for good and all. She heard the
words, but they had no meaning to her. She was like a person who has
taken a narcotic and is dying for sleep, dying for rest from nagging,
dying to be let alone, and who mechanically does everything the
persecutor asks, taking but dull note of the things done, and but dully
recording them in the memory. And so Joan put on the gown which Cauchon
and his people had brought; and would come to herself by and by, and
have at first but a dim idea as to when and how the change had come
about.

Cauchon went away happy and content. Joan had resumed woman's dress
without protest; also she had been formally warned against relapsing. He
had witnesses to these facts. How could matters be better?

But suppose she should not relapse?

Why, then she must be forced to do it.

Did Cauchon hint to the English guards that thenceforth if they chose
to make their prisoner's captivity crueler and bitterer than ever, no
official notice would be taken of it? Perhaps so; since the guards did
begin that policy at once, and no official notice was taken of it.
Yes, from that moment Joan's life in that dungeon was made almost
unendurable. Do not ask me to enlarge upon it. I will not do it.




22 Joan Gives the Fatal Answer

FRIDAY and Saturday were happy days for Noel and me. Our minds were full
of our splendid dream of France aroused--France shaking her mane--France
on the march--France at the gates--Rouen in ashes, and Joan free! Our
imagination was on fire; we were delirious with pride and joy. For we
were very young, as I have said.

We knew nothing about what had been happening in the dungeon in the
yester-afternoon. We supposed that as Joan had abjured and been taken
back into the forgiving bosom of the Church, she was being gently used
now, and her captivity made as pleasant and comfortable for her as the
circumstances would allow. So, in high contentment, we planned out our
share in the great rescue, and fought our part of the fight over and
over again during those two happy days--as happy days as ever I have
known.

Sunday morning came. I was awake, enjoying the balmy, lazy weather, and
thinking. Thinking of the rescue--what else? I had no other thought now.
I was absorbed in that, drunk with the happiness of it.

I heard a voice shouting far down the street, and soon it came nearer,
and I caught the words:

"Joan of Arc has relapsed! The witch's time has come!"

It stopped my heart, it turned my blood to ice. That was more than sixty
years ago, but that triumphant note rings as clear in my memory to-day
as it rang in my ear that long-vanished summer morning. We are so
strangely made; the memories that could make us happy pass away; it is
the memories that break our hearts that abide.

Soon other voices took up that cry--tens, scores, hundreds of voices;
all the world seemed filled with the brutal joy of it. And there were
other clamors--the clatter of rushing feet, merry congratulations,
bursts of coarse laughter, the rolling of drums, the boom and crash of
distant bands profaning the sacred day with the music of victory and
thanksgiving.

About the middle of the afternoon came a summons for Manchon and me to
go to Joan's dungeon--a summons from Cauchon. But by that time distrust
had already taken possession of the English and their soldiery again,
and all Rouen was in an angry and threatening mood. We could see plenty
of evidences of this from our own windows--fist-shaking, black looks,
tumultuous tides of furious men billowing by along the street.

And we learned that up at the castle things were going very badly,
indeed; that there was a great mob gathered there who considered the
relapse a lie and a priestly trick, and among them many half-drunk
English soldiers. Moreover, these people had gone beyond words. They
had laid hands upon a number of churchmen who were trying to enter the
castle, and it had been difficult work to rescue them and save their
lives.

And so Manchon refused to go. He said he would not go a step without
a safeguard from Warwick. So next morning Warwick sent an escort of
soldiers, and then we went. Matters had not grown peacefuler meantime,
but worse. The soldiers protected us from bodily damage, but as we
passed through the great mob at the castle we were assailed with insults
and shameful epithets. I bore it well enough, though, and said to
myself, with secret satisfaction, "In three or four short days, my lads,
you will be employing your tongues in a different sort from this--and I
shall be there to hear."

To my mind these were as good as dead men. How many of them would still
be alive after the rescue that was coming? Not more than enough to amuse
the executioner a short half-hour, certainly.

It turned out that the report was true. Joan had relapsed. She was
sitting there in her chains, clothed again in her male attire.

She accused nobody. That was her way. It was not in her character to
hold a servant to account for what his master had made him do, and her
mind had cleared now, and she knew that the advantage which had been
taken of her the previous morning had its origin, not in the subordinate
but in the master--Cauchon.

Here is what had happened. While Joan slept, in the early morning of
Sunday, one of the guards stole her female apparel and put her male
attire in its place. When she woke she asked for the other dress, but
the guards refused to give it back. She protested, and said she was
forbidden to wear the male dress. But they continued to refuse. She had
to have clothing, for modesty's sake; moreover, she saw that she could
not save her life if she must fight for it against treacheries like
this; so she put on the forbidden garments, knowing what the end would
be. She was weary of the struggle, poor thing.

We had followed in the wake of Cauchon, the Vice-Inquisitor, and the
others--six or eight--and when I saw Joan sitting there, despondent,
forlorn, and still in chains, when I was expecting to find her situation
so different, I did not know what to make of it. The shock was very
great. I had doubted the relapse perhaps; possibly I had believed in it,
but had not realized it.

Cauchon's victory was complete. He had had a harassed and irritated
and disgusted look for a long time, but that was all gone now, and
contentment and serenity had taken its place. His purple face was full
of tranquil and malicious happiness. He went trailing his robes and
stood grandly in front of Joan, with his legs apart, and remained so
more than a minute, gloating over her and enjoying the sight of this
poor ruined creature, who had won so lofty a place for him in the
service of the meek and merciful Jesus, Saviour of the World, Lord
of the Universe--in case England kept her promise to him, who kept no
promises himself.

Presently the judges began to question Joan. One of them, named
Marguerie, who was a man with more insight than prudence, remarked upon
Joan's change of clothing, and said:

"There is something suspicious about this. How could it have come about
without connivance on the part of others? Perhaps even something worse?"

"Thousand devils!" screamed Cauchon, in a fury. "Will you shut your
mouth?"

"Armagnac! Traitor!" shouted the soldiers on guard, and made a rush for
Marguerie with their lances leveled. It was with the greatest difficulty
that he was saved from being run through the body. He made no more
attempts to help the inquiry, poor man. The other judges proceeded with
the questionings.

"Why have you resumed this male habit?"

I did not quite catch her answer, for just then a soldier's halberd
slipped from his fingers and fell on the stone floor with a crash; but
I thought I understood Joan to say that she had resumed it of her own
motion.

"But you have promised and sworn that you would not go back to it."

I was full of anxiety to hear her answer to that question; and when it
came it was just what I was expecting. She said--quiet quietly:

"I have never intended and never understood myself to swear I would not
resume it."

There--I had been sure, all along, that she did not know what she was
doing and saying on the platform Thursday, and this answer of hers was
proof that I had not been mistaken. Then she went on to add this:

"But I had a right to resume it, because the promises made to me have
not been kept--promises that I should be allowed to go to mass and
receive the communion, and that I should be freed from the bondage of
these chains--but they are still upon me, as you see."

"Nevertheless, you have abjured, and have especially promised to return
no more to the dress of a man."

Then Joan held out her fettered hands sorrowfully toward these unfeeling
men and said:

"I would rather die than continue so. But if they may be taken off, and
if I may hear mass, and be removed to a penitential prison, and have a
woman about me, I will be good, and will do what shall seem good to you
that I do."

Cauchon sniffed scoffingly at that. Honor the compact which he and his
had made with her?

Fulfil its conditions? What need of that? Conditions had been a good
thing to concede, temporarily, and for advantage; but they have served
their turn--let something of a fresher sort and of more consequence
be considered. The resumption of the male dress was sufficient for all
practical purposes, but perhaps Joan could be led to add something to
that fatal crime. So Cauchon asked her if her Voices had spoken to her
since Thursday--and he reminded her of her abjuration.

"Yes," she answered; and then it came out that the Voices had talked
with her about the abjuration--told her about it, I suppose. She
guilelessly reasserted the heavenly origin of her mission, and did it
with the untroubled mien of one who was not conscious that she had ever
knowingly repudiated it. So I was convinced once more that she had had
no notion of what she was doing that Thursday morning on the platform.
Finally she said, "My Voices told me I did very wrong to confess
that what I had done was not well." Then she sighed, and said with
simplicity, "But it was the fear of the fire that made me do so."

That is, fear of the fire had made her sign a paper whose contents she
had not understood then, but understood now by revelation of her Voices
and by testimony of her persecutors.

She was sane now and not exhausted; her courage had come back, and
with it her inborn loyalty to the truth. She was bravely and serenely
speaking it again, knowing that it would deliver her body up to that
very fire which had such terrors for her.

That answer of hers was quite long, quite frank, wholly free from
concealments or palliations. It made me shudder; I knew she was
pronouncing sentence of death upon herself. So did poor Manchon. And he
wrote in the margin abreast of it:

"RESPONSIO MORTIFERA."

Fatal answer. Yes, all present knew that it was, indeed, a fatal answer.
Then there fell a silence such as falls in a sick-room when the watchers
of the dying draw a deep breath and say softly one to another, "All is
over."

Here, likewise, all was over; but after some moments Cauchon, wishing to
clinch this matter and make it final, put this question:

"Do you still believe that your Voices are St. Marguerite and St.
Catherine?"

"Yes--and that they come from God."

"Yet you denied them on the scaffold?"

Then she made direct and clear affirmation that she had never had any
intention to deny them; and that if--I noted the if--"if she had made
some retractions and revocations on the scaffold it was from fear of the
fire, and it was a violation of the truth."

There it is again, you see. She certainly never knew what it was she had
done on the scaffold until she was told of it afterward by these people
and by her Voices.

And now she closed this most painful scene with these words; and there
was a weary note in them that was pathetic:

"I would rather do my penance all at once; let me die. I cannot endure
captivity any longer."

The spirit born for sunshine and liberty so longed for release that it
would take it in any form, even that.

Several among the company of judges went from the place troubled and
sorrowful, the others in another mood. In the court of the castle we
found the Earl of Warwick and fifty English waiting, impatient for
news. As soon as Cauchon saw them he shouted--laughing--think of a man
destroying a friendless poor girl and then having the heart to laugh at
it:

"Make yourselves comfortable--it's all over with her!"




23 The Time Is at Hand

THE YOUNG can sink into abysses of despondency, and it was so with Noel
and me now; but the hopes of the young are quick to rise again, and it
was so with ours. We called back that vague promise of the Voices, and
said the one to the other that the glorious release was to happen at
"the last moment"--"that other time was not the last moment, but this
is; it will happen now; the King will come, La Hire will come, and with
them our veterans, and behind them all France!" And so we were full of
heart again, and could already hear, in fancy, that stirring music the
clash of steel and the war-cries and the uproar of the onset, and in
fancy see our prisoner free, her chains gone, her sword in her hand.

But this dream was to pass also, and come to nothing. Late at night,
when Manchon came in, he said:

"I am come from the dungeon, and I have a message for you from that poor
child."

A message to me! If he had been noticing I think he would have
discovered me--discovered that my indifference concerning the prisoner
was a pretense; for I was caught off my guard, and was so moved and so
exalted to be so honored by her that I must have shown my feeling in my
face and manner.

"A message for me, your reverence?"

"Yes. It is something she wishes done. She said she had noticed the
young man who helps me, and that he had a good face; and did I think he
would do a kindness for her? I said I knew you would, and asked her what
it was, and she said a letter--would you write a letter to her mother?

"And I said you would. But I said I would do it myself, and gladly; but
she said no, that my labors were heavy, and she thought the young man
would not mind the doing of this service for one not able to do it for
herself, she not knowing how to write. Then I would have sent for you,
and at that the sadness vanished out of her face. Why, it was as if
she was going to see a friend, poor friendless thing. But I was not
permitted. I did my best, but the orders remain as strict as ever,
the doors are closed against all but officials; as before, none but
officials may speak to her. So I went back and told her, and she sighed,
and was sad again. Now this is what she begs you to write to her mother.
It is partly a strange message, and to me means nothing, but she said
her mother would understand. You will 'convey her adoring love to her
family and her village friends, and say there will be no rescue, for
that this night--and it is the third time in the twelvemonth, and is
final--she has seen the Vision of the Tree.'"

"How strange!"

"Yes, it is strange, but that is what she said; and said her parents
would understand. And for a little time she was lost in dreams and
thinkings, and her lips moved, and I caught in her muttering these
lines, which she said over two or three times, and they seemed to bring
peace and contentment to her. I set them down, thinking they might have
some connection with her letter and be useful; but it was not so; they
were a mere memory, floating idly in a tired mind, and they have no
meaning, at least no relevancy."

I took the piece of paper, and found what I knew I should find:

And when in exile wand'ring, we Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of
thee, Oh, rise upon our sight!

There was no hope any more. I knew it now. I knew that Joan's letter was
a message to Noel and me, as well as to her family, and that its object
was to banish vain hopes from our minds and tell us from her own mouth
of the blow that was going to fall upon us, so that we, being her
soldiers, would know it for a command to bear it as became us and her,
and so submit to the will of God; and in thus obeying, find assuagement
of our grief. It was like her, for she was always thinking of others,
not of herself. Yes, her heart was sore for us; she could find time to
think of us, the humblest of her servants, and try to soften our pain,
lighten the burden of our troubles--she that was drinking of the bitter
waters; she that was walking in the Valley of the Shadow of Death.

I wrote the letter. You will know what it cost me, without my telling
you. I wrote it with the same wooden stylus which had put upon parchment
the first words ever dictated by Joan of Arc--that high summons to
the English to vacate France, two years past, when she was a lass of
seventeen; it had now set down the last ones which she was ever to
dictate. Then I broke it. For the pen that had served Joan of Arc could
not serve any that would come after her in this earth without abasement.

The next day, May 29th, Cauchon summoned his serfs, and forty-two
responded. It is charitable to believe that the other twenty were
ashamed to come. The forty-two pronounced her a relapsed heretic, and
condemned her to be delivered over to the secular arm. Cauchon thanked
them.

Then he sent orders that Joan of Arc be conveyed the next morning to
the place known as the Old Market; and that she be then delivered to the
civil judge, and by the civil judge to the executioner. That meant she
would be burnt.

All the afternoon and evening of Tuesday, the 29th, the news was
flying, and the people of the country-side flocking to Rouen to see the
tragedy--all, at least, who could prove their English sympathies and
count upon admission. The press grew thicker and thicker in the streets,
the excitement grew higher and higher. And now a thing was noticeable
again which had been noticeable more than once before--that there was
pity for Joan in the hearts of many of these people. Whenever she had
been in great danger it had manifested itself, and now it was apparent
again--manifest in a pathetic dumb sorrow which was visible in many
faces.

Early the next morning, Wednesday, Martin Ladvenu and another friar
were sent to Joan to prepare her for death; and Manchon and I went
with them--a hard service for me. We tramped through the dim corridors,
winding this way and that, and piercing ever deeper and deeper into that
vast heart of stone, and at last we stood before Joan. But she did not
