more becomingly mine.  And, by the way, I must not fail to offer you my
little compliment.  It is a gratifying surprise to meet you in the dress
of a gentleman, and to see'--with a circular look upon the scattered
bills--'that your necessities have already been so liberally relieved.'

I bowed with a smile that was perhaps no less hateful than his own.

'There are so many necessities in this world,' said I.  'Charity has to
choose.  One gets relieved, and some other, no less indigent, perhaps
indebted, must go wanting.'

'Malice is an engaging trait,' said he.

'And envy, I think?' was my reply.

He must have felt that he was not getting wholly the better of this
passage at arms; perhaps even feared that he should lose command of his
temper, which he reined in throughout the interview as with a red-hot
curb, for he flung away from me at the word, and addressed the lawyer
with insulting arrogance.

'Mr. Romaine,' he said, 'since when have you presumed to give orders in
this house?'

'I am not prepared to admit that I have given any,' replied Romaine;
'certainly none that did not fall in the sphere of my responsibilities.'

'By whose orders, then, am I denied entrance to my uncle's room?' said my
cousin.

'By the doctor's, sir,' replied Romaine; 'and I think even you will admit
his faculty to give them.'

'Have a care, sir,' cried Alain.  'Do not be puffed up with your
position.  It is none so secure, Master Attorney.  I should not wonder in
the least if you were struck off the rolls for this night's work, and the
next I should see of you were when I flung you alms at a pothouse door to
mend your ragged elbows.  The doctor's orders?  But I believe I am not
mistaken!  You have to-night transacted business with the Count; and this
needy young gentleman has enjoyed the privilege of still another
interview, in which (as I am pleased to see) his dignity has not
prevented his doing very well for himself.  I wonder that you should care
to prevaricate with me so idly.'

'I will confess so much,' said Mr. Romaine, 'if you call it
prevarication.  The order in question emanated from the Count himself.
He does not wish to see you.'

'For which I must take the word of Mr. Daniel Romaine?' asked Alain.

'In default of any better,' said Romaine.

There was an instantaneous convulsion in my cousin's face, and I
distinctly heard him gnash his teeth at this reply; but, to my surprise,
he resumed in tones of almost good humour:

'Come, Mr. Romaine, do not let us be petty!'  He drew in a chair and sat
down.  'Understand you have stolen a march upon me.  You have introduced
your soldier of Napoleon, and (how, I cannot conceive) he has been
apparently accepted with favour.  I ask no better proof than the funds
with which I find him literally surrounded--I presume in consequence of
some extravagance of joy at the first sight of so much money.  The odds
are so far in your favour, but the match is not yet won.  Questions will
arise of undue influence, of sequestration, and the like: I have my
witnesses ready.  I tell it you cynically, for you cannot profit by the
knowledge; and, if the worst come to the worst, I have good hopes of
recovering my own and of ruining you.'

'You do what you please,' answered Romaine; 'but I give it you for a
piece of good advice, you had best do nothing in the matter.  You will
only make yourself ridiculous; you will only squander money, of which you
have none too much, and reap public mortification.'

'Ah, but there you make the common mistake, Mr. Romaine!' returned Alain.
'You despise your adversary.  Consider, if you please, how very
disagreeable I could make myself, if I chose.  Consider the position of
your _protege_--an escaped prisoner!  But I play a great game.  I condemn
such petty opportunities.'

At this Romaine and I exchanged a glance of triumph.  It seemed manifest
that Alain had as yet received no word of Clausel's recapture and
denunciation.  At the same moment the lawyer, thus relieved of the
instancy of his fear, changed his tactics.  With a great air of
unconcern, he secured the newspaper, which still lay open before him on
the table.

'I think, Monsieur Alain, that you labour under some illusion,' said he.
'Believe me, this is all beside the mark.  You seem to be pointing to
some compromise.  Nothing is further from my views.  You suspect me of an
inclination to trifle with you, to conceal how things are going.  I
cannot, on the other hand, be too early or too explicit in giving you
information which concerns you (I must say) capitally.  Your great-uncle
has to-night cancelled his will, and made a new one in favour of your
cousin Anne.  Nay, and you shall hear it from his own lips, if you
choose!  I will take so much upon me,' said the lawyer, rising.  'Follow
me, if you please, gentlemen.'

Mr. Romaine led the way out of the room so briskly, and was so briskly
followed by Alain, that I had hard ado to get the remainder of the money
replaced and the despatch-box locked, and to overtake them, even by
running ere they should be lost in that maze of corridors, my uncle's
house.  As it was, I went with a heart divided; and the thought of my
treasure thus left unprotected, save by a paltry lid and lock that any
one might break or pick open, put me in a perspiration whenever I had the
time to remember it.  The lawyer brought us to a room, begged us to be
seated while he should hold a consultation with the doctor, and, slipping
out of another door, left Alain and myself closeted together.

Truly he had done nothing to ingratiate himself; his every word had been
steeped in unfriendliness, envy, and that contempt which (as it is born
of anger) it is possible to support without humiliation.  On my part, I
had been little more conciliating; and yet I began to be sorry for this
man, hired spy as I knew him to be.  It seemed to me less than decent
that he should have been brought up in the expectation of this great
inheritance, and now, at the eleventh hour, be tumbled forth out of the
house door and left to himself, his poverty and his debts--those debts of
which I had so ungallantly reminded him so short a time before.  And we
were scarce left alone ere I made haste to hang out a flag of truce.

'My cousin,' said I, 'trust me, you will not find me inclined to be your
enemy.'

He paused in front of me--for he had not accepted the lawyer's invitation
to be seated, but walked to and fro in the apartment--took a pinch of
snuff, and looked at me while he was taking it with an air of much
curiosity.

'Is it even so?' said he.  'Am I so far favoured by fortune as to have
your pity?  Infinitely obliged, my cousin Anne!  But these sentiments are
not always reciprocal, and I warn you that the day when I set my foot on
your neck, the spine shall break.  Are you acquainted with the properties
of the spine?' he asked with an insolence beyond qualification.

It was too much.  'I am acquainted also with the properties of a pair of
pistols,' said I, toising him.

'No, no, no!' says he, holding up his finger.  'I will take my revenge
how and when I please.  We are enough of the same family to understand
each other, perhaps; and the reason why I have not had you arrested on
your arrival, why I had not a picket of soldiers in the first clump of
evergreens, to await and prevent your coming--I, who knew all, before
whom that pettifogger, Romaine, has been conspiring in broad daylight to
supplant me--is simply this: that I had not made up my mind how I was to
take my revenge.'

At that moment he was interrupted by the tolling of a bell.  As we stood
surprised and listening, it was succeeded by the sound of many feet
trooping up the stairs and shuffling by the door of our room.  Both, I
believe, had a great curiosity to set it open, which each, owing to the
presence of the other, resisted; and we waited instead in silence, and
without moving, until Romaine returned and bade us to my uncle's
presence.

He led the way by a little crooked passage, which brought us out in the
sick-room, and behind the bed.  I believe I have forgotten to remark that
the Count's chamber was of considerable dimensions.  We beheld it now
crowded with the servants and dependants of the house, from the doctor
and the priest to Mr. Dawson and the housekeeper, from Dawson down to
Rowley and the last footman in white calves, the last plump chambermaid
in her clean gown and cap, and the last ostler in a stable waiscoat.
This large congregation of persons (and I was surprised to see how large
it was) had the appearance, for the most part, of being ill at ease and
heartily bewildered, standing on one foot, gaping like zanies, and those
who were in the corners nudging each other and grinning aside.  My uncle,
on the other hand, who was raised higher than I had yet seen him on his
pillows, wore an air of really imposing gravity.  No sooner had we
appeared behind him, than he lifted his voice to a good loudness, and
addressed the assemblage.

'I take you all to witness--can you hear me?--I take you all to witness
that I recognise as my heir and representative this gentleman, whom most
of you see for the first time, the Viscount Anne de St.-Yves, my nephew
of the younger line.  And I take you to witness at the same time that,
for very good reasons known to myself, I have discarded and disinherited
this other gentleman whom you all know, the Viscount de St.-Yves.  I have
also to explain the unusual trouble to which I have put you all--and,
since your supper was not over, I fear I may even say annoyance.  It has
pleased M. Alain to make some threats of disputing my will, and to
pretend that there are among your number certain estimable persons who
may be trusted to swear as he shall direct them.  It pleases me thus to
put it out of his power and to stop the mouths of his false witnesses.  I
am infinitely obliged by your politeness, and I have the honour to wish
you all a very good evening.'

As the servants, still greatly mystified, crowded out of the sickroom
door, curtseying, pulling the forelock, scraping with the foot, and so
on, according to their degree, I turned and stole a look at my cousin.
He had borne this crushing public rebuke without change of countenance.
He stood, now, very upright, with folded arms, and looking inscrutably at
the roof of the apartment.  I could not refuse him at that moment the
tribute of my admiration.  Still more so when, the last of the domestics
having filed through the doorway and left us alone with my great-uncle
and the lawyer, he took one step forward towards the bed, made a
dignified reverence, and addressed the man who had just condemned him to
ruin.

'My lord,' said he, 'you are pleased to treat me in a manner which my
gratitude, and your state, equally forbid me to call in question.  It
will be only necessary for me to call your attention to the length of
time in which I have been taught to regard myself as your heir.  In that
position, I judged it only loyal to permit myself a certain scale of
expenditure.  If I am now to be cut off with a shilling as the reward of
twenty years of service, I shall be left not only a beggar, but a
bankrupt.'

Whether from the fatigue of his recent exertion, or by a well-inspired
ingenuity of hate, my uncle had once more closed his eyes; nor did he
open them now.  'Not with a shilling,' he contented himself with
replying; and there stole, as he said it, a sort of smile over his face,
that flickered there conspicuously for the least moment of time, and then
faded and left behind the old impenetrable mask of years, cunning, and
fatigue.  There could be no mistake: my uncle enjoyed the situation as he
had enjoyed few things in the last quarter of a century.  The fires of
life scarce survived in that frail body; but hatred, like some immortal
quality, was still erect and unabated.

Nevertheless my cousin persevered.

'I speak at a disadvantage,' he resumed.  'My supplanter, with perhaps
more wisdom than delicacy, remains in the room,' and he cast a glance at
me that might have withered an oak tree.

I was only too willing to withdraw, and Romaine showed as much alacrity
to make way for my departure.  But my uncle was not to be moved.  In the
same breath of a voice, and still without opening his eyes, he bade me
remain.

'It is well,' said Alain.  'I cannot then go on to remind you of the
twenty years that have passed over our heads in England, and the services
I may have rendered you in that time.  It would be a position too odious.
Your lordship knows me too well to suppose I could stoop to such
ignominy.  I must leave out all my defence--your lordship wills it so!  I
do not know what are my faults; I know only my punishment, and it is
greater than I have the courage to face.  My uncle, I implore your pity:
pardon me so far; do not send me for life into a debtors' jail--a pauper
debtor.'

'_Chat et vieux_, _pardonnez_?' said my uncle, quoting from La Fontaine;
and then, opening a pale-blue eye full on Alain, he delivered with some
emphasis:

    'La jeunesse se flatte et croit tout obtenir;
    La vieillesse est impitoyable.'

The blood leaped darkly into Alain's face.  He turned to Romaine and me,
and his eyes flashed.

'It is your turn now,' he said.  'At least it shall be prison for prison
with the two viscounts.'

'Not so, Mr. Alain, by your leave,' said Romaine.  'There are a few
formalities to be considered first.'

But Alain was already striding towards the door.

'Stop a moment, stop a moment!' cried Romaine.  'Remember your own
counsel not to despise an adversary.'

Alain turned.

'If I do not despise I hate you!' he cried, giving a loose to his
passion.  'Be warned of that, both of you.'

'I understand you to threaten Monsieur le Vicomte Anne,' said the lawyer.
'Do you know, I would not do that.  I am afraid, I am very much afraid,
if you were to do as you propose, you might drive me into extremes.'

'You have made me a beggar and a bankrupt,' said Alain.  What extreme is
left?'

'I scarce like to put a name upon it in this company,' replied Romaine.
'But there are worse things than even bankruptcy, and worse places than a
debtors' jail.'

The words were so significantly said that there went a visible thrill
through Alain; sudden as a sword-stroke, he fell pale again.

'I do not understand you,' said he.

'O yes, you do,' returned Romaine.  'I believe you understand me very
well.  You must not suppose that all this time, while you were so very
busy, others were entirely idle.  You must not fancy, because I am an
Englishman, that I have not the intelligence to pursue an inquiry.  Great
as is my regard for the honour of your house, M. Alain de St.-Yves, if I
hear of you moving directly or indirectly in this matter, I shall do my
duty, let it cost what it will: that is, I shall communicate the real
name of the Buonapartist spy who signs his letters _Rue Gregoire de
Tours_.'

I confess my heart was already almost altogether on the side of my
insulted and unhappy cousin; and if it had not been before, it must have
been so now, so horrid was the shock with which he heard his infamy
exposed.  Speech was denied him; he carried his hand to his neckcloth; he
staggered; I thought he must have fallen.  I ran to help him, and at that
he revived, recoiled before me, and stood there with arms stretched forth
as if to preserve himself from the outrage of my touch.

'Hands off!' he somehow managed to articulate.

'You will now, I hope,' pursued the lawyer, without any change of voice,
'understand the position in which you are placed, and how delicately it
behoves you to conduct yourself.  Your arrest hangs, if I may so express
myself, by a hair; and as you will be under the perpetual vigilance of
myself and my agents, you must look to it narrowly that you walk
straight.  Upon the least dubiety, I will take action.'  He snuffed,
looking critically at the tortured man.  'And now let me remind you that
your chaise is at the door.  This interview is agitating to his
lordship--it cannot be agreeable for you--and I suggest that it need not
be further drawn out.  It does not enter into the views of your uncle,
the Count, that you should again sleep under this roof.'

As Alain turned and passed without a word or a sign from the apartment, I
instantly followed.  I suppose I must be at bottom possessed of some
humanity; at least, this accumulated torture, this slow butchery of a man
as by quarters of rock, had wholly changed my sympathies.  At that moment
I loathed both my uncle and the lawyer for their coldblooded cruelty.

Leaning over the banisters, I was but in time to hear his hasty footsteps
in that hall that had been crowded with servants to honour his coming,
and was now left empty against his friendless departure.  A moment later,
and the echoes rang, and the air whistled in my ears, as he slammed the
door on his departing footsteps.  The fury of the concussion gave me (had
one been still wanted) a measure of the turmoil of his passions.  In a
sense, I felt with him; I felt how he would have gloried to slam that
door on my uncle, the lawyer, myself, and the whole crowd of those who
had been witnesses to his humiliation.




CHAPTER XX--AFTER THE STORM


No sooner was the house clear of my cousin than I began to reckon up,
ruefully enough, the probable results of what had passed.  Here were a
number of pots broken, and it looked to me as if I should have to pay for
all!  Here had been this proud, mad beast goaded and baited both publicly
and privately, till he could neither hear nor see nor reason; whereupon
the gate had been set open, and he had been left free to go and contrive
whatever vengeance he might find possible.  I could not help thinking it
was a pity that, whenever I myself was inclined to be upon my good
behaviour, some friends of mine should always determine to play a piece
of heroics and cast me for the hero--or the victim--which is very much
the same.  The first duty of heroics is to be of your own choosing.  When
they are not that, they are nothing.  And I assure you, as I walked back
to my own room, I was in no very complaisant humour: thought my uncle and
Mr. Romaine to have played knuckle-bones with my life and prospects;
cursed them for it roundly; had no wish more urgent than to avoid the
pair of them; and was quite knocked out of time, as they say in the ring,
to find myself confronted with the lawyer.

He stood on my hearthrug, leaning on the chimney-piece, with a gloomy,
thoughtful brow, as I was pleased to see, and not in the least as though
he were vain of the late proceedings.

'Well?' said I.  'You have done it now!'

'Is he gone?' he asked.

'He is gone,' said I.  'We shall have the devil to pay with him when he
comes back.'

'You are right,' said the lawyer, 'and very little to pay him with but
flams and fabrications, like to-night's.'
