offerings, large-eyed queenly Hera. But when the months and days were
fulfilled and the seasons duly came on as the earth moved round, she
bare one neither like the gods nor mortal men, fell, cruel Typhaon, to
be a plague to men. Straightway large-eyed queenly Hera took him and
bringing one evil thing to another such, gave him to the dragoness; and
she received him. And this Typhaon used to work great mischief among the
famous tribes of men. Whosoever met the dragoness, the day of doom would
sweep him away, until the lord Apollo, who deals death from afar, shot a
strong arrow at her. Then she, rent with bitter pangs, lay drawing great
gasps for breath and rolling about that place. An awful noise swelled up
unspeakable as she writhed continually this way and that amid the wood:
and so she left her life, breathing it forth in blood. Then Phoebus
Apollo boasted over her:

(ll. 363-369) 'Now rot here upon the soil that feeds man! You at least
shall live no more to be a fell bane to men who eat the fruit of the
all-nourishing earth, and who will bring hither perfect hecatombs.
Against cruel death neither Typhoeus shall avail you nor ill-famed
Chimera, but here shall the Earth and shining Hyperion make you rot.'

(ll. 370-374) Thus said Phoebus, exulting over her: and darkness covered
her eyes. And the holy strength of Helios made her rot away there;
wherefore the place is now called Pytho, and men call the lord Apollo by
another name, Pythian; because on that spot the power of piercing Helios
made the monster rot away.

(ll. 375-378) Then Phoebus Apollo saw that the sweet-flowing spring had
beguiled him, and he started out in anger against Telphusa; and soon
coming to her, he stood close by and spoke to her:

(ll. 379-381) 'Telphusa, you were not, after all, to keep to yourself
this lovely place by deceiving my mind, and pour forth your clear
flowing water: here my renown shall also be and not yours alone?'

(ll. 382-387) Thus spoke the lord, far-working Apollo, and pushed over
upon her a crag with a shower of rocks, hiding her streams: and he made
himself an altar in a wooded grove very near the clear-flowing stream.
In that place all men pray to the great one by the name Telphusian,
because he humbled the stream of holy Telphusa.

(ll. 388-439) Then Phoebus Apollo pondered in his heart what men he
should bring in to be his ministers in sacrifice and to serve him in
rocky Pytho. And while he considered this, he became aware of a swift
ship upon the wine-like sea in which were many men and goodly, Cretans
from Cnossos [2510], the city of Minos, they who do sacrifice to the
prince and announce his decrees, whatsoever Phoebus Apollo, bearer of
the golden blade, speaks in answer from his laurel tree below the dells
of Parnassus. These men were sailing in their black ship for traffic and
for profit to sandy Pylos and to the men of Pylos. But Phoebus Apollo
met them: in the open sea he sprang upon their swift ship, like a
dolphin in shape, and lay there, a great and awesome monster, and none
of them gave heed so as to understand [2511]; but they sought to cast
the dolphin overboard. But he kept shaking the black ship every way and
make the timbers quiver. So they sat silent in their craft for fear, and
did not loose the sheets throughout the black, hollow ship, nor lowered
the sail of their dark-prowed vessel, but as they had set it first of
all with oxhide ropes, so they kept sailing on; for a rushing south wind
hurried on the swift ship from behind. First they passed by Malea, and
then along the Laconian coast they came to Taenarum, sea-garlanded town
and country of Helios who gladdens men, where the thick-fleeced sheep of
the lord Helios feed continually and occupy a glad-some country. There
they wished to put their ship to shore, and land and comprehend the
great marvel and see with their eyes whether the monster would remain
upon the deck of the hollow ship, or spring back into the briny deep
where fishes shoal. But the well-built ship would not obey the helm,
but went on its way all along Peloponnesus: and the lord, far-working
Apollo, guided it easily with the breath of the breeze. So the ship ran
on its course and came to Arena and lovely Argyphea and Thryon, the ford
of Alpheus, and well-placed Aepy and sandy Pylos and the men of Pylos;
past Cruni it went and Chalcis and past Dyme and fair Elis, where the
Epei rule. And at the time when she was making for Pherae, exulting in
the breeze from Zeus, there appeared to them below the clouds the steep
mountain of Ithaca, and Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus. But
when they were passed by all the coast of Peloponnesus, then, towards
Crisa, that vast gulf began to heave in sight which through all its
length cuts off the rich isle of Pelops. There came on them a strong,
clear west-wind by ordinance of Zeus and blew from heaven vehemently,
that with all speed the ship might finish coursing over the briny water
of the sea. So they began again to voyage back towards the dawn and the
sun: and the lord Apollo, son of Zeus, led them on until they reached
far-seen Crisa, land of vines, and into haven: there the sea-coursing
ship grounded on the sands.

(ll. 440-451) Then, like a star at noonday, the lord, far-working
Apollo, leaped from the ship: flashes of fire flew from him thick and
their brightness reached to heaven. He entered into his shrine between
priceless tripods, and there made a flame to flare up bright, showing
forth the splendour of his shafts, so that their radiance filled all
Crisa, and the wives and well-girded daughters of the Crisaeans raised
a cry at that outburst of Phoebus; for he cast great fear upon them
all. From his shrine he sprang forth again, swift as a thought, to speed
again to the ship, bearing the form of a man, brisk and sturdy, in the
prime of his youth, while his broad shoulders were covered with his
hair: and he spoke to the Cretans, uttering winged words:

(ll. 452-461) 'Strangers, who are you? Whence come you sailing along the
paths of the sea? Are you for traffic, or do you wander at random
over the sea as pirates do who put their own lives to hazard and bring
mischief to men of foreign parts as they roam? Why rest you so and are
afraid, and do not go ashore nor stow the gear of your black ship? For
that is the custom of men who live by bread, whenever they come to land
in their dark ships from the main, spent with toil; at once desire for
sweet food catches them about the heart.'

(ll. 462-473) So speaking, he put courage in their hearts, and the
master of the Cretans answered him and said: 'Stranger--though you are
nothing like mortal men in shape or stature, but are as the deathless
gods--hail and all happiness to you, and may the gods give you good. Now
tell me truly that I may surely know it: what country is this, and what
land, and what men live herein? As for us, with thoughts set otherwards,
we were sailing over the great sea to Pylos from Crete (for from there
we declare that we are sprung), but now are come on shipboard to this
place by no means willingly--another way and other paths--and gladly
would we return. But one of the deathless gods brought us here against
our will.'

(ll. 474-501) Then far-working Apollo answered then and said: 'Strangers
who once dwelt about wooded Cnossos but now shall return no more each to
his loved city and fair house and dear wife; here shall you keep my rich
temple that is honoured by many men. I am the son of Zeus; Apollo is my
name: but you I brought here over the wide gulf of the sea, meaning
you no hurt; nay, here you shall keep my rich temple that is greatly
honoured among men, and you shall know the plans of the deathless gods,
and by their will you shall be honoured continually for all time. And
now come, make haste and do as I say. First loose the sheets and lower
the sail, and then draw the swift ship up upon the land. Take out your
goods and the gear of the straight ship, and make an altar upon the
beach of the sea: light fire upon it and make an offering of white meal.
Next, stand side by side around the altar and pray: and in as much as at
the first on the hazy sea I sprang upon the swift ship in the form of a
dolphin, pray to me as Apollo Delphinius; also the altar itself shall
be called Delphinius and overlooking [2512] for ever. Afterwards, sup
beside your dark ship and pour an offering to the blessed gods who dwell
on Olympus. But when you have put away craving for sweet food, come
with me singing the hymn Ie Paean (Hail, Healer!), until you come to the
place where you shall keep my rich temple.'

(ll. 502-523) So said Apollo. And they readily harkened to him and
obeyed him. First they unfastened the sheets and let down the sail and
lowered the mast by the forestays upon the mast-rest. Then, landing upon
the beach of the sea, they hauled up the ship from the water to dry land
and fixed long stays under it. Also they made an altar upon the beach of
the sea, and when they had lit a fire, made an offering of white meal,
and prayed standing around the altar as Apollo had bidden them. Then
they took their meal by the swift, black ship, and poured an offering
to the blessed gods who dwell on Olympus. And when they had put away
craving for drink and food, they started out with the lord Apollo, the
son of Zeus, to lead them, holding a lyre in his hands, and playing
sweetly as he stepped high and featly. So the Cretans followed him to
Pytho, marching in time as they chanted the Ie Paean after the manner of
the Cretan paean-singers and of those in whose hearts the heavenly Muse
has put sweet-voiced song. With tireless feet they approached the ridge
and straightway came to Parnassus and the lovely place where they were
to dwell honoured by many men. There Apollo brought them and showed them
his most holy sanctuary and rich temple.

(ll. 524-525) But their spirit was stirred in their dear breasts, and
the master of the Cretans asked him, saying:

(ll. 526-530) 'Lord, since you have brought us here far from our dear
ones and our fatherland,--for so it seemed good to your heart,--tell us
now how we shall live. That we would know of you. This land is not to
be desired either for vineyards or for pastures so that we can live well
thereon and also minister to men.'

(ll. 531-544) Then Apollo, the son of Zeus, smiled upon them and said:
'Foolish mortals and poor drudges are you, that you seek cares and hard
toils and straits! Easily will I tell you a word and set it in your
hearts. Though each one of you with knife in hand should slaughter sheep
continually, yet would you always have abundant store, even all that the
glorious tribes of men bring here for me. But guard you my temple and
receive the tribes of men that gather to this place, and especially show
mortal men my will, and do you keep righteousness in your heart. But
if any shall be disobedient and pay no heed to my warning, or if there
shall be any idle word or deed and outrage as is common among mortal
men, then other men shall be your masters and with a strong hand shall
make you subject for ever. All has been told you: do you keep it in your
heart.'

(ll. 545-546) And so, farewell, son of Zeus and Leto; but I will
remember you and another hymn also.




IV. TO HERMES (582 lines)

(ll. 1-29) Muse, sing of Hermes, the son of Zeus and Maia, lord of
Cyllene and Arcadia rich in flocks, the luck-bringing messenger of the
immortals whom Maia bare, the rich-tressed nymph, when she was joined
in love with Zeus,--a shy goddess, for she avoided the company of the
blessed gods, and lived within a deep, shady cave. There the son of
Cronos used to lie with the rich-tressed nymph, unseen by deathless
gods and mortal men, at dead of night while sweet sleep should hold
white-armed Hera fast. And when the purpose of great Zeus was fixed in
heaven, she was delivered and a notable thing was come to pass. For
then she bare a son, of many shifts, blandly cunning, a robber, a cattle
driver, a bringer of dreams, a watcher by night, a thief at the gates,
one who was soon to show forth wonderful deeds among the deathless gods.
Born with the dawning, at mid-day he played on the lyre, and in the
evening he stole the cattle of far-shooting Apollo on the fourth day
of the month; for on that day queenly Maia bare him. So soon as he had
leaped from his mother's heavenly womb, he lay not long waiting in his
holy cradle, but he sprang up and sought the oxen of Apollo. But as he
stepped over the threshold of the high-roofed cave, he found a tortoise
there and gained endless delight. For it was Hermes who first made the
tortoise a singer. The creature fell in his way at the courtyard gate,
where it was feeding on the rich grass before the dwelling, waddling
along. When he saw it, the luck-bringing son of Zeus laughed and said:

(ll. 30-38) 'An omen of great luck for me so soon! I do not slight it.
Hail, comrade of the feast, lovely in shape, sounding at the dance! With
joy I meet you! Where got you that rich gaud for covering, that spangled
shell--a tortoise living in the mountains? But I will take and carry you
within: you shall help me and I will do you no disgrace, though first of
all you must profit me. It is better to be at home: harm may come out
of doors. Living, you shall be a spell against mischievous witchcraft
[2513]; but if you die, then you shall make sweetest song.

(ll. 39-61) Thus speaking, he took up the tortoise in both hands and
went back into the house carrying his charming toy. Then he cut off its
limbs and scooped out the marrow of the mountain-tortoise with a scoop
of grey iron. As a swift thought darts through the heart of a man when
thronging cares haunt him, or as bright glances flash from the eye, so
glorious Hermes planned both thought and deed at once. He cut stalks of
reed to measure and fixed them, fastening their ends across the back and
through the shell of the tortoise, and then stretched ox hide all over
it by his skill. Also he put in the horns and fitted a cross-piece upon
the two of them, and stretched seven strings of sheep-gut. But when he
had made it he proved each string in turn with the key, as he held the
lovely thing. At the touch of his hand it sounded marvellously; and, as
he tried it, the god sang sweet random snatches, even as youths bandy
taunts at festivals. He sang of Zeus the son of Cronos and neat-shod
Maia, the converse which they had before in the comradeship of love,
telling all the glorious tale of his own begetting. He celebrated, too,
the handmaids of the nymph, and her bright home, and the tripods all
about the house, and the abundant cauldrons.

(ll. 62-67) But while he was singing of all these, his heart was bent
on other matters. And he took the hollow lyre and laid it in his sacred
cradle, and sprang from the sweet-smelling hall to a watch-place,
pondering sheer trickery in his heart--deeds such as knavish folk pursue
in the dark night-time; for he longed to taste flesh.

(ll. 68-86) The Sun was going down beneath the earth towards Ocean
with his horses and chariot when Hermes came hurrying to the shadowy
mountains of Pieria, where the divine cattle of the blessed gods had
their steads and grazed the pleasant, unmown meadows. Of these the Son
of Maia, the sharp-eyed slayer of Argus then cut off from the herd fifty
loud-lowing kine, and drove them straggling-wise across a sandy place,
turning their hoof-prints aside. Also, he bethought him of a crafty ruse
and reversed the marks of their hoofs, making the front behind and the
hind before, while he himself walked the other way [2514]. Then he
wove sandals with wicker-work by the sand of the sea, wonderful
things, unthought of, unimagined; for he mixed together tamarisk and
myrtle-twigs, fastening together an armful of their fresh, young wood,
and tied them, leaves and all securely under his feet as light sandals.
The brushwood the glorious Slayer of Argus plucked in Pieria as he was
preparing for his journey, making shift [2515] as one making haste for a
long journey.

(ll. 87-89) But an old man tilling his flowering vineyard saw him as he
was hurrying down the plain through grassy Onchestus. So the Son of Maia
began and said to him:

(ll. 90-93) 'Old man, digging about your vines with bowed shoulders,
surely you shall have much wine when all these bear fruit, if you obey
me and strictly remember not to have seen what you have seen, and not to
have heard what you have heard, and to keep silent when nothing of your
own is harmed.'

(ll. 94-114) When he had said this much, he hurried the strong cattle on
together: through many shadowy mountains and echoing gorges and flowery
plains glorious Hermes drove them. And now the divine night, his dark
ally, was mostly passed, and dawn that sets folk to work was quickly
coming on, while bright Selene, daughter of the lord Pallas, Megamedes'
son, had just climbed her watch-post, when the strong Son of Zeus drove
the wide-browed cattle of Phoebus Apollo to the river Alpheus. And they
came unwearied to the high-roofed byres and the drinking-troughs
that were before the noble meadow. Then, after he had well-fed the
loud-bellowing cattle with fodder and driven them into the byre,
close-packed and chewing lotus and began to seek the art of fire.

He chose a stout laurel branch and trimmed it with the knife....
((LACUNA)) [2516] ....held firmly in his hand: and the hot smoke rose
up. For it was Hermes who first invented fire-sticks and fire. Next
he took many dried sticks and piled them thick and plenty in a
sunken trench: and flame began to glow, spreading afar the blast of
fierce-burning fire.

(ll. 115-137) And while the strength of glorious Hephaestus was
beginning to kindle the fire, he dragged out two lowing, horned cows
close to the fire; for great strength was with him. He threw them both
panting upon their backs on the ground, and rolled them on their sides,
bending their necks over [2517], and pierced their vital chord. Then he
went on from task to task: first he cut up the rich, fatted meat, and
pierced it with wooden spits, and roasted flesh and the honourable chine
and the paunch full of dark blood all together. He laid them there upon
the ground, and spread out the hides on a rugged rock: and so they are
still there many ages afterwards, a long, long time after all this, and
are continually [2518]. Next glad-hearted Hermes dragged the rich meats
he had prepared and put them on a smooth, flat stone, and divided them
into twelve portions distributed by lot, making each portion wholly
honourable. Then glorious Hermes longed for the sacrificial meat, for
the sweet savour wearied him, god though he was; nevertheless his proud
heart was not prevailed upon to devour the flesh, although he greatly
desired [2519]. But he put away the fat and all the flesh in the
high-roofed byre, placing them high up to be a token of his youthful
theft. And after that he gathered dry sticks and utterly destroyed with
fire all the hoofs and all the heads.

(ll. 138-154) And when the god had duly finished all, he threw his
sandals into deep-eddying Alpheus, and quenched the embers, covering the
black ashes with sand, and so spent the night while Selene's soft light
shone down. Then the god went straight back again at dawn to the bright
crests of Cyllene, and no one met him on the long journey either of
the blessed gods or mortal men, nor did any dog bark. And luck-bringing
Hermes, the son of Zeus, passed edgeways through the key-hole of the
hall like the autumn breeze, even as mist: straight through the cave he
went and came to the rich inner chamber, walking softly, and making no
noise as one might upon the floor. Then glorious Hermes went hurriedly
to his cradle, wrapping his swaddling clothes about his shoulders as
though he were a feeble babe, and lay playing with the covering about
his knees; but at his left hand he kept close his sweet lyre.

(ll. 155-161) But the god did not pass unseen by the goddess his mother;
but she said to him: 'How now, you rogue! Whence come you back so at
night-time, you that wear shamelessness as a garment? And now I surely
believe the son of Leto will soon have you forth out of doors with
unbreakable cords about your ribs, or you will live a rogue's life in
the glens robbing by whiles. Go to, then; your father got you to be a
great worry to mortal men and deathless gods.'

(ll. 162-181) Then Hermes answered her with crafty words: 'Mother, why
do you seek to frighten me like a feeble child whose heart knows few
words of blame, a fearful babe that fears its mother's scolding?
Nay, but I will try whatever plan is best, and so feed myself and you
continually. We will not be content to remain here, as you bid, alone
of all the gods unfee'd with offerings and prayers. Better to live
in fellowship with the deathless gods continually, rich, wealthy, and
enjoying stories of grain, than to sit always in a gloomy cave: and, as
regards honour, I too will enter upon the rite that Apollo has. If
my father will not give it to me, I will seek--and I am able--to be a
prince of robbers. And if Leto's most glorious son shall seek me out, I
think another and a greater loss will befall him. For I will go to
Pytho to break into his great house, and will plunder therefrom splendid
tripods, and cauldrons, and gold, and plenty of bright iron, and much
apparel; and you shall see it if you will.'
