"Content you, Humfrey!  You'll hear enough of it anon.  A most foul,
bloody, and horrible plot, quite enough to hang every soul that has
meddled in it, and yet safe to do no harm--like poor Hal's blunderbuss,
which would never go off, except when it burst, and blew him to pieces."

Will felt that he had said quite enough to impress Humfrey with a sense
of his statecraft and importance, and was not sorry for an interruption
before he should have said anything dangerous.  It was from Frank
Pierrepoint, who had been Diccon's schoolmate, and was enchanted to see
him.  Humfrey was to stay one day longer in town in case Walsingham
should wish to see him, and to show Diccon something of London, which
they had missed on their way to Plymouth.

St. Paul's Cathedral was even then the sight that all Englishmen were
expected to have seen, and the brothers took their way thither,
accompanied by Frank Pierrepoint, who took their guidance on his hands.
Had the lads seen the place at the opening of the century they would
have thought it a piteous spectacle, for desecration and sacrilege had
rioted there unchecked, the magnificent peal of bells had been gambled
away at a single throw of the dice, the library had been utterly
destroyed, the magnificent plate melted up, and what covetous
fanaticism had spared had been further ravaged by a terrible fire.  At
this time Bishop Bancroft had done his utmost towards reparation, and
the old spire had been replaced by a wooden one; but there was much of
ruin and decay visible all around, where stood the famous octagon
building called Paul's Cross, where outdoor sermons were preached to
listeners of all ranks.  This was of wood, and was kept in moderately
good repair.  Beyond, the nave of the Cathedral stretched its length,
the greatest in England.  Two sets of doors immediately opposite to one
another on the north and south sides had rendered it a thoroughfare in
very early times, in spite of the endeavours of the clergy; and at this
time "Duke Humfrey's Walk," from the tomb of Duke Humfrey Stafford, as
the twelve grand Norman bays of this unrivalled nave were called, was
the prime place for the humours of London; and it may be feared that
this, rather than the architecture, was the chief idea in the minds of
the youths, as a babel of strange sounds fell on their ears, "a still
roar like a humming of bees," as it was described by a contemporary,
or, as Humfrey said, like the sea in a great hollow cave.  A cluster of
choir-boys were watching at the door to fall on any one entering with
spurs on, to levy their spur money, and one gentleman, whom they had
thus attacked, was endeavouring to save his purse by calling on the
youngest boy to sing his gamut.

Near at hand was a pillar, round which stood a set of men, some rough,
some knavish-looking, with the blue coats, badges, short swords, and
bucklers carried by serving-men.  They were waiting to be hired, as if
in a statute fair, and two or three loud-voiced bargains were going on.
In the middle aisle, gentlemen in all the glory of plumed hats,
jewelled ears, ruffed necks, Spanish cloaks, silken jerkins, velvet
hose, and be-rosed shoes, were marching up and down, some
attitudinising to show their graces, some discussing the news of the
day, for "Paul's Walk" was the Bond Street, the Row, the Tattersall's,
the Club of London.  Twelve scriveners had their tables to act as
letter-writers, and sometimes as legal advisers, and great amusement
might be had by those who chose to stand listening to the blundering
directions of their clients.  In the side aisles, horse-dealing,
merchants' exchanges, everything imaginable in the way of traffic was
going on.  Disreputable-looking men, who there were in sanctuary from
their creditors, there lurked around Humfrey Stafford's tomb; and young
Pierrepoint's warning to guard their purses was evidently not wasted,
for a country fellow, who had just lost his, was loudly demanding
justice, and getting jeered at for his simplicity in expecting to
recover it.

"Seest thou this?" said a voice close to Humfrey, and he found a hand
on his arm, and Babington, in the handsome equipment of one of the
loungers, close to him.

"A sorry sight, that would grieve my good mother," returned Humfrey.

"My Mother, the Church, is grieved," responded Antony.  "This is what
you have brought us to, for your so-called religion," he added,
ignorant or oblivious that these desecrations had been quite as
shocking before the Reformation.  "All will soon be changed, however,"
he added.

"Sir Thomas Gresham's New Exchange has cleared off some of the traffic,
they say," returned Humfrey.

"Pshaw!" said Antony; "I meant no such folly.  That were cleansing one
stone while the whole house is foul with shame.  No.  There shall be a
swift vengeance on these desecrators.  The purifier shall come again,
and the glory and the beauty of the true Faith shall be here as of old,
when our fathers bowed before the Holy Rood, instead of tearing it
down."  His eye glanced with an enthusiasm which Humfrey thought
somewhat wild, and he said, "Whist! these are not things to be thus
spoken of."

"All is safe," said Babington, drawing him within shelter of the
chantry of Sir John Beauchamp's tomb.  "Never heed Diccon--Pierrepoint
can guide him," and Humfrey saw their figures, apparently absorbed in
listening to the bidding for a horse.  "I have things of moment to say
to thee, Humfrey Talbot.  We have been old comrades, and had that
childish emulation which turns to love in manhood in the face of
perils."

Humfrey, recollecting how they had parted, held out his hand in
recognition of the friendliness.

"I would fain save thee," said Babington.  "Heretic and rival as thou
art, I cannot but love thee, and I would have thee die, if die thou
must, in honourable fight by sea or land, rather than be overtaken by
the doom that will fall on all who are persecuting our true and lawful
confessor and sovereign."

"Gramercy for thy good will, Tony," said Humfrey, looking anxiously to
see whether his old companion was in his right mind, yet remembering
what had been said of plots.

"Thou deem'st me raving," said Antony, smiling at the perplexed
countenance before him, "but thou wilt see too late that I speak sooth,
when the armies of the Church avenge the Name that has been profaned
among you!"

"The Spaniards, I suppose you mean," said Humfrey coolly.  "You must be
far gone indeed to hope to see those fiends turned loose on this
peaceful land, but by God's blessing we have kept them aloof before, I
trust we may again."

"You talk of God's blessing.  Look at His House," said Babington.

"He is more like to bless honest men who fight for their Queen, their
homes and hearths, than traitors who would bring in slaughterers and
butchers to work their will!"

"His glory is worked through judgment, and thus must it begin!"
returned the young man.  "But I would save thee, Humfrey," he added.
"Go thou back to Plymouth, and be warned to hold aloof from that prison
where the keepers will meet their fit doom! and the captive will be set
free.  Thou dost not believe," he added.  "See here," and drawing into
the most sheltered part of the chantry, he produced from his bosom a
picture in the miniature style of the period, containing six heads,
among which his own was plainly to be recognised, and likewise a face
which Humfrey felt as if he should never forget, that which he had seen
in Richmond Park, quailing beneath the Queen's eye. Round the picture
was the motto--

          "Hi mihi sunt comites quos ipsa pericula jungunt."


"I tell thee, Humfrey, thou wilt hear--if thou dost live to hear--of
these six as having wrought the greatest deed of our times!"

"May it only be a deed an honest man need not be ashamed of," said
Humfrey, not at all convinced of his friend's sanity.

"Ashamed of!" exclaimed Babington.  "It is blest, I tell thee, blest by
holy men, blest by the noble and suffering woman who will thus be
delivered from her martyrdom."

"Babington, if thou talkest thus, it will be my duty to have thee put
in ward," said Humfrey.

Antony laughed, and there was a triumphant ring very like insanity in
his laughter.  Humfrey, with a moment's idea that to hint that the
conspiracy was known would blast it at once, if it were real, said, "I
see not Cuthbert Langston among your six.  Know you, I saw him only
yestereven going into Secretary Walsingham's privy chamber."

"Was he so?" answered Babington.  "Ha! ha! he holds them all in play
till the great stroke be struck!  Why! am not I myself in Walsingham's
confidence?  He thinketh that he is about to send me to France to watch
the League.  Ha! ha!"

Here Humfrey's other companions turned back in search of him; Babington
vanished in the crowd, he hardly knew how, and he was left in
perplexity and extreme difficulty as to what was his duty as friend or
as subject.  If Babington were sane, there must be a conspiracy for
killing the Queen, bringing in the Spaniards and liberating Mary, and
he had expressly spoken of having had the latter lady's sanction, while
the sight of the fellow in Richmond Park gave a colour of probability
to the guess.  Yet the imprudence and absurdity of having portraits
taken of six assassins before the blow was struck seemed to contradict
all the rest.  On the other hand, Cavendish had spoken of having all
the meshes of the web in the hands of the Council; and Langston or
Maude seemed to be trusted by both parties.

Humfrey decided to feel his way with Will Cavendish, and that evening
spoke of having met Babington and having serious doubts whether he were
in his right mind.  Cavendish laughed, "Poor wretch!  I could pity
him," he said, "though his plans be wicked enough to merit no
compassion.  Nay, never fear, Humfrey.  All were overthrown, did I
speak openly.  Nay, to utter one word would ruin me for ever.  'Tis
quite sufficient to say that he and his fellows are only at large till
Mr. Secretary sees fit, that so his grip may be the more sure."

Humfrey saw he was to be treated with no confidence, and this made him
the more free to act.  There were many recusant gentlemen in the
neighbourhood of Chartley, and an assault and fight there were not
improbable, if, as Cavendish hinted, there was a purpose of letting the
traitors implicate themselves in the largest numbers and as fatally as
possible.  On the other hand, Babington's hot head might only fancy he
had authority from the Queen for his projects.  If, through Cicely, he
could convey the information to Mary, it might save her from even
appearing to be cognisant of these wild schemes, whatever they might
be, and to hint that they were known was the surest way to prevent
their taking effect.  Any way, Humfrey's heart was at Chartley, and
every warning he had received made him doubly anxious to be there in
person, to be Cicely's guardian in case of whatever danger might
threaten her.  He blessed the fiction which still represented him as
her brother, and which must open a way for him to see her, but he
resolved not to take Diccon thither, and parted with him when the roads
diverged towards Lichfield, sending to his father a letter which Diccon
was to deliver only into his own hand, with full details of all he had
seen and heard, and his motives for repairing to Chartley.

"Shall I see my little Cis?" thought he.  "And even if she play the
princess to me, how will she meet me?  She scorned me even when she was
at home.  How will it be now when she has been for well-nigh a year in
this Queen's training?  Ah! she will be taught to despise me! Heigh ho!
At least she may be in need of a true heart and strong arm to guard
her, and they shall not fail her."

Will Cavendish, in the plenitude of the official importance with which
he liked to dazzle his old playfellow, had offered him a pass to
facilitate his entrance, and he found reason to be glad that he had
accepted it, for there was a guard at the gate of Chartley Park, and he
was detained there while his letter was sent up for inspection to Sir
Amias Paulett, who had for the last few months acted as warder to the
Queen.

However, a friendly message came back, inviting him to ride up.  The
house--though called a castle--had been rebuilt in hospitable domestic
style, and looked much less like a prison than Sheffield Lodge, but at
every enclosure stood yeomen who challenged the passers-by, as though
this were a time of alarm.  However, at the hall-door itself stood Sir
Amias Paulett, a thin, narrow-browed, anxious-looking man, with the
stiffest of ruffs, over which hung a scanty yellow beard.

"Welcome, sir," he said, with a nervous anxious distressed manner.
"Welcome, most welcome.  You will pardon any discourtesy, sir, but
these are evil times.  The son, I think, of good Master Richard Talbot
of Bridgefield?  Ay, I would not for worlds have shown any lack of
hospitality to one of his family.  It is no want of respect, sir.  No;
nor of my Lord's house; but these are ill days, and with my charge,
sir--if Heaven itself keep not the house--who knows what may chance or
what may be laid on me?"

"I understand," said Humfrey, smiling.  "I was bred close to Sheffield,
and hardly knew what 'twas to live beyond watch and ward."

"Yea!" said Paulett, shaking his head.  "You come of a loyal house,
sir; but even the good Earl was less exercised than I am in the charge
of this same lady.  But I am glad, glad to see you, sir.  And you would
see your sister, sir?  A modest young lady, and not indevout, though I
have sometimes seen her sleep at sermon.  It is well that the poor
maiden should see some one well affected, for she sitteth in the very
gate of Babylon; and with respect, sir, I marvel that a woman, so godly
as Mistress Talbot of Bridgefield is reported to be, should suffer it.
However, I do my poor best, under Heaven, to hinder the faithful of the
household from being tainted.  I have removed Preaux, who is well known
to be a Popish priest in disguise, and thus he can spread no more of
his errors.  Moreover, my chaplain, Master Blunden, with other godly
men, preaches three times a week against Romish errors, and all are
enforced to attend.  May their ears be opened to the truth!  I am about
to attend this lady on a ride in the Park, sir.  It might--if she be
willing--be arranged that your sister, Mistress Talbot, should spend
the time in your company, and methinks the lady will thereto agree, for
she is ever ready to show a certain carnal and worldly complaisance to
the wishes of her attendants, and I have observed that she greatly
affects the damsel, more, I fear, than may be for the eternal welfare
of the maiden's soul."




CHAPTER XXVI.

IN THE WEB.


It was a beautiful bright summer day, and Queen Mary and some of her
train were preparing for their ride.  The Queen was in high spirits,
and that wonderful and changeful countenance of hers was beaming with
anticipation and hope, while her demeanour was altogether delightful to
every one who approached her.  She was adding some last instructions to
Nau, who was writing a letter for her to the French ambassador, and
Cicely stood by her, holding her little dog in a leash, and looking
somewhat anxious and wistful.  There was more going on round the girl
than she was allowed to understand, and it made her anxious and uneasy.
She knew that the correspondence through the brewer was actively
carried on, but she was not informed of what passed.  Only she was
aware that some crisis must be expected, for her mother was ceaselessly
restless and full of expectation.  She had put all her jewels and
valuables into as small a compass as possible, and talked more than
ever of her plans for giving her daughter either to the Archduke
Matthias, or to some great noble, as if the English crown were already
within her grasp. Anxious, curious, and feeling injured by the want of
confidence, yet not daring to complain, Cicely felt almost fretful at
her mother's buoyancy, but she had been taught a good many lessons in
the past year, and one of them was that she might indeed be caressed,
but that she must show neither humour nor will of her own, and the
least presumption in inquiry or criticism was promptly quashed.

There was a knock at the door, and the usher announced that Sir Amias
Paulett prayed to speak with her Grace.  Her eye glanced round with the
rapid emotion of one doubtful whether it were for weal or woe, yet with
undaunted spirit to meet either, and as she granted her permission, Cis
heard her whisper to Nau, "A rider came up even now! 'Tis the tidings!
Are the Catholics of Derby in the saddle?  Are the ships on the coast?"

In came the tall old man with a stiff reverence: "Madam, your Grace's
horses attend you, and I have tidings"--(Mary started
forward)--"tidings for this young lady, Mistress Cicely Talbot.  Her
brother is arrived from the Spanish Main, and requests permission to
see and speak with her."

Radiance flashed out on Cicely's countenance as excitement faded on
that of her mother: "Humfrey!  O madam! let me go to him!" she
entreated, with a spring of joy and clasped hands.

Mary was far too kind-hearted to refuse, besides to have done so would
have excited suspicion at a perilous moment, and the arrangement Sir
Amias proposed was quickly made.  Mary Seaton was to attend the Queen
in Cicely's stead, and she was allowed to hurry downstairs, and only
one warning was possible:

"Go then, poor child, take thine holiday, only bear in mind what and
who thou art."

Yet the words had scarce died on her ears before she was oblivious of
all save that it was a familial home figure who stood at the bottom of
the stairs, one of the faces she trusted most in all the world which
beamed out upon her, the hands which she knew would guard her through
everything were stretched out to her, the lips with veritable love in
them kissed the cheeks she did not withhold.  Sir Amias stood by and
gave the kindest smile she had seen from him, quite changing his
pinched features, and he proposed to the two young people to go and
walk in the garden together, letting them out into the square walled
garden, very formal, but very bright and gay, and with a pleached alley
to shelter them from the sun.

"Good old gentleman!" exclaimed Humfrey, holding the maiden's hand in
his.  "It is a shame to win such pleasure by feigning."

"As for that," sighed Cis, "I never know what is sooth here, and what
am I save a living lie myself?  O Humfrey! I am so weary of it all."

"Ah I would that I could bear thee home with me," he said, little
prepared for this reception.

"Would that thou couldst!  O that I were indeed thy sister, or that the
writing in my swaddling bands had been washed out!--Nay," catching back
her words, "I meant not that!  I would not but belong to the dear Lady
here.  She says I comfort her more than any of them, and oh! she
is--she is, there is no telling how sweet and how noble. It was only
that the sight of thee awoke the yearning to be at home with mother and
with father.  Forget my folly, Humfrey."

"I cannot soon forget that Bridgefield seems to thee thy true home," he
said, putting strong restraint on himself to say and do no more, while
his heart throbbed with a violence unawakened by storm or Spaniard.

"Tell me of them all," she said.  "I have heard naught of them since we
left Tutbury, where at least we were in my Lord's house, and the dear
old silver dog was on every sleeve.  Ah! there he is, the trusty rogue."

And snatching up Humfrey's hat, which was fastened with a brooch of his
crest in the fashion of the day, she kissed the familiar token. Then,
however, she blushed and drew herself up, remembering the caution not
to forget who she was, and with an assumption of more formal dignity,
she said, "And how fares it with the good Mrs. Talbot?"

"Well, when I last heard," said Humfrey, "but I have not been at home.
I only know what Will Cavendish and my Lord Talbot told me.  I sent
Diccon on to Bridgefield, and came out of the way to see you, lady," he
concluded, with the same regard to actual circumstances that she had
shown.

"Oh, that was good!" she whispered, and they both seemed to feel a
certain safety in avoiding personal subjects.  Humfrey had the history
of his voyage to narrate--to tell of little Diccon's gallant doings,
and to exalt Sir Francis Drake's skill and bravery, and at last to let
it ooze out, under Cis's eager questioning, that when his captain had
died of fever on the Hispaniola coast, and they had been overtaken by a
tornado, Sir Francis had declared that it was Humfrey's skill and
steadfastness which had saved the ship and crew.

"And it was that tornado," he said, "which stemmed the fever, and saved
little Diccon's life.  Oh! when he lay moaning below, then was the time
to long for my mother."

Time sped on till the great hall clock made Cicely look up and say she
feared that the riders would soon return, and then Humfrey knew that he
must make sure to speak the words of warning he came to utter.  He
told, in haste, of his message to Queen Elizabeth, and of his being
sent on to Secretary Walsingham, adding, "But I saw not the great man,
for he was closeted--with whom think you?   No other than Cuthbert
Langston, whom Cavendish called by another name.  It amazed me the
more, because I had two days before met him in Westminster with Antony
Babington, who presented him to me by his own name."

"Saw you Antony Babington?" asked Cis, raising her eyes to his face,
but looking uneasy.

"Twice, at Westminster, and again in Paul's Walk.  Had you seen him
since you have been here?"

"Not here, but at Tutbury.  He came once, and I was invited to dine in
the hall, because he brought recommendations from the Countess." There
was a pause, and then, as if she had begun to take in the import of
Humfrey's words, she added, "What said you?  That Mr. Langston was
going between him and Mr. Secretary?"

"Not exactly that," and Humfrey repeated with more detail what he had
seen of Langston, forbearing to ask any questions which Cicely might
not be able to answer with honour; but they had been too much together
in childhood not to catch one another's meaning with half a hint, and
she said, "I see why you came here, Humfrey.  It was good and true and
kind, befitting you.  I will tell the Queen.  If Langston be in it,
there is sure to be treachery.  But, indeed, I know nothing or
well-nigh nothing."

"I am glad of it," fervently exclaimed Humfrey.

"No; I only know that she has high hopes, and thinks that the term of
her captivity is well-nigh over.  But it is Madame de Courcelles whom
she trusts, not me," said Cicely, a little hurt.

"So is it much better for thee to know as little as possible," said
Humfrey, growing intimate in tone again in spite of himself.  "She hath
not changed thee much, Cis, only thou art more grave and womanly, ay,
and thou art taller, yea, and thinner, and paler, as I fear me thou
mayest well be."

"Ah, Humfrey, 'tis a poor joy to be a princess in prison!  And yet I
shame me that I long to be away.  Oh no, I would not.  Mistress Seaton
and Mrs. Curll and the rest might be free, yet they have borne this
durance patiently all these years--and I think--I think she loves me a
little, and oh! she is hardly used.  Humfrey, what think'st thou that
Mr. Langston meant?  I wot now for certain that it was he who twice
came to beset us, as Tibbott the huckster, and with the beads and
bracelets!  They all deem him a true friend to my Queen."

"So doth Babington," said Humfrey, curtly.

"Ah!" she said, with a little terrified sound of conviction, then
added, "What thought you of Master Babington?"

"That he is half-crazed," said Humfrey.

"We may say no more," said Cis, seeing a servant advancing from the
house to tell her that the riders were returning.  "Shall I see you
again, Humfrey?"

"If Sir Amias should invite me to lie here to-night, and remain
to-morrow, since it will be Sunday."

"At least I shall see you in the morning, ere you depart," she said, as
with unwilling yet prompt steps she returned to the house, Humfrey
feeling that she was indeed his little Cis, yet that some change had
come over her, not so much altering her, as developing the capabilities
he had always seen.

For herself, poor child, her feelings were in a strange turmoil, more
than usually conscious of that dual existence which had tormented her
ever since she had been made aware of her true birth.  Moreover, she
had a sense of impending danger and evil, and, by force of contrast,
the frank, open-hearted manner of Humfrey made her the more sensible of
being kept in the dark as to serious matters, while outwardly made a
pet and plaything by her mother, "just like Bijou," as she said to
herself.

"So, little one," said Queen Mary, as she returned, "thou hast been
revelling once more in tidings of Sheffield!  How long will it take me
to polish away the dulness of thy clownish contact?"

"Humphrey does not come from home, madam, but from London.  Madam, let
me tell you in your ear--"

Mary's eye instantly took the terrified alert expression which had come
from many a shock and alarm.  "What is it, child?" she asked, however,
in a voice of affected merriment.  "I wager it is that he has found his
true Cis.  Nay, whisper it to me, if it touch thy silly little heart so
deeply."

Cicely knelt down, the Queen bending over her, while she murmured in
her ear, "He saw Cuthbert Langston, by a feigned name, admitted to Mr.
Secretary Walsingham's privy chamber."

She felt the violent start this information caused, but the command of
voice and countenance was perfect.

"What of that, mignonne?" she said.  "What knoweth he of this Langston,
as thou callest him?"

"He is my--no--his father's kinsman, madam, and is known to be but a
plotter.  Oh, surely, he is not in your secrets, madam, my mother,
after that day at Tutbury?"

"Alack, my lassie, Gifford or Babington answered for him," said the
Queen, "and he kens more than I could desire.  But this Humfrey of
thine!  How came he to blunder out such tidings to thee?"

"It was no blunder, madam.  He came here of purpose."

"Sure," exclaimed Mary, "it were too good to hope that he hath become
well affected.  He--a sailor of Drake's, a son of Master Richard! Hath
Babington won him over; or is it for thy sake, child?  For I bestowed
no pains to cast smiles to him at Sheffield, even had he come in my
way."

"I think, madam," said Cicely, "that he is too loyal-hearted to bear
the sight of treachery without a word of warning."

"Is he so?  Then he is the first of his nation who hath been of such a
mind!  Nay, mignonne, deny not thy conquest.  This is thy work."

"I deny not that--that I am beloved by Humfrey," said Cicely, "for I
have known it all my life; but that goes for naught in what he deems it
right to do."

"There spoke so truly Mistress Susan's scholar that thou makest me
laugh in spite of myself and all the rest.  Hold him fast, my maiden;
think what thou wilt of his service, and leave me now, and send
Melville and Curll to me."

Cicely went away full of that undefined discomfort experienced by
generous young spirits when their elders, more worldly-wise (or
foolish), fail even to comprehend the purity or loftiness of motive
which they themselves thoroughly believe.  Yet, though she had
infinitely more faith in Humfrey's affection than she had in that of
Babington, she had not by any means the same dread of being used to
bait the hook for him, partly because she knew his integrity too well
to expect to shake it, and partly because he was perfectly aware of her
real birth, and could not be gulled with such delusive hopes as poor
Antony might once have been.

Humfrey meantime was made very welcome by Sir Amias Paulett, who
insisted on his spending the next day, Sunday, at Chartley, and made
him understand that he was absolutely welcome, as having a strong arm,
stout heart, and clear brain used to command.  "Trusty aid do I need,"
said poor Sir Amias, "if ever man lacked an arm of flesh.  The Council
is putting more on me than ever man had to bear, in an open place like
this, hard to be defended, and they will not increase the guard lest
they should give the alarm, forsooth!"

"What is it that you apprehend?" inquired Humfrey.

"There's enough to apprehend when all the hot-headed Papists of
Stafford and Derbyshire are waiting the signal to fire the outhouses
and carry off this lady under cover of the confusion.  Mr. Secretary
swears they will not stir till the signal be given, and that it never
will; but such sort of fellows are like enough to mistake the sign, and
the stress may come through their dillydallying to make all sure as
they say, and then, if there be any mischance, I shall be the one to
bear the blame.  Ay, if it be their own work!" he added, speaking to
himself, "Murder under trust!  That would serve as an answer to foreign
princes, and my head would have to pay for it, however welcome it might
be!  So, good Mr. Talbot, supposing any alarm should arise, keep you
close to the person of this lady, for there be those who would make the
fray a colour for taking her life, under pretext of hindering her from
being carried off."

It was no wonder that a warder in such circumstances looked harassed
and perplexed, and showed himself glad of being joined by any ally whom
he could trust.  In truth, harsh and narrow as he was, Paulett was too
good and religious a man for the task that had been thrust on him,
where loyal obedience, sense of expediency, and even religious
fanaticism, were all in opposition to the primary principles of truth,
mercy, and honour.  He was, besides, in constant anxiety, living as he
did between plot and counterplot, and with the certainty that
emissaries of the Council surrounded him who would have no scruple in
taking Mary's life, and leaving him to bear the blame, when Elizabeth
would have to explain the deed to the other sovereigns of Europe.  He
disclosed almost all this to Humfrey, whose frank, trustworthy
expression seemed to move him to unusual confidence.

At supper-time another person appeared, whom Humfrey thought he had
once seen at Sheffield--a thin, yellow-haired and bearded man, much
marked with smallpox, in the black dress of a lawyer, who sat above the
household servants, though below the salt.  Paulett once drank to him
with a certain air of patronage, calling him Master Phillipps, a name
that came as a revelation to Humfrey.  Phillipps was the decipherer who
had, he knew, been employed to interpret Queen Mary's letters after the
Norfolk plot.  Were there, then, fresh letters of that unfortunate lady
in his hands, or were any to be searched for and captured?




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE CASTLE WELL.


  "What vantage or what thing
  Gett'st thou thus for to sting,
    Thou false and flatt'ring liar?
  Thy tongue doth hurt, it's seen
  No less than arrows keen
    Or hot consuming fire."


So sang the congregation in the chapel at Chartley, in the strains of
Sternhold and Hopkins, while Humfrey Talbot could not forbear from a
misgiving whether these falsehoods were entirely on the side to which
they were thus liberally attributed.  Opposite to him stood Cicely, in
her dainty Sunday farthingale of white, embroidered with violet buds,
and a green and violet boddice to match, holding herself with that
unconscious royal bearing which had always distinguished her, but with
an expression of care and anxiety drawing her dark brows nearer
together as she bent over her book.

She knew that her mother had left her bed with the earliest peep of
summer dawn, and had met the two secretaries in her cabinet.  There
they were busy for hours, and she had only returned to her bed just as
the household began to bestir itself.

"My child," she said to Cicely, "I am about to put my life into thy
keeping and that of this Talbot lad.  If what he saith of this Langston
be sooth, I am again betrayed, fool that I was to expect aught else.
My life is spent in being betrayed.  The fellow hath been a go-between
in all that hath passed between Babington and me. If he hath uttered it
to Walsingham, all is over with our hopes, and the window in whose
sunlight I have been basking is closed for ever! But something may yet
be saved.  Something?  What do I say?--The letters I hold here would
