This, "if" filled her with a feverish restlessness. The doctrine that
the well-being of the soul depended on the preservation of the earthly
part of every human being left behind at death, had been impressed on
her from childhood. She believed in this error, which had built pyramids
and excavated rocks, and trembled at the thought that, according to the
Persian custom, her body would be thrown to the dogs and birds of prey,
and so given up to the powers of destruction, that her soul must be
deprived of every hope of eternal life. Then the thought came to her,
should she prove unfaithful to the gods of her fathers again, and once
more fall down before these new spirits of light, who gave the dead body
over to the elements and only judged the soul? And so she raised her
hands to the great and glorious sun, who with his golden sword-like rays
was just dispersing the mists that hung over the Euphrates, and opened
her lips to sing her newly-learnt hymns in praise of Mithras; but her
voice failed her, instead of Mithras she could only see her own great
Ra, the god she had so often worshipped in Egypt, and instead of a
Magian hymn could only sing the one with which the Egyptian priests are
accustomed to greet the rising sun.

This hymn brought comfort with it, and as she gazed on the young light,
the rays of which were not yet strong enough to dazzle her, she thought
of her childhood, and the tears gathered in her eyes. Then she looked
down over the broad plain. There was the Euphrates with his yellow waves
looking so like the Nile; the many villages, just as in her own
home, peeping out from among luxuriant cornfields and plantations of
fig-trees. To the west lay the royal hunting-park; she could see its
tall cypresses and nut-trees miles away in the distance. The dew was
glistening on every little leaf and blade of grass, and the birds sang
deliciously in the shrubberies round her dwelling. Now and then a gentle
breath of wind arose, carrying the sweet scent of the roses across to
her, and playing in the tops of the slender, graceful palms which grew
in numbers on the banks of the river and in the fields around.

She had so often admired these beautiful trees, and compared them to
dancing-girls, as she watched the wind seizing their heavy tops and
swaying the slender stems backwards and forwards. And she had often said
to herself that here must be the home of the Phoenix, that wonderful
bird from the land of palms, who, the priests said, came once in every
five hundred years to the temple of Ra in Heliopolis and burnt himself
in the sacred incense-flames, only to rise again from his own ashes more
beautiful than before, and, after three days, to fly back again to his
home in the East. While she was thinking of this bird, and wishing that
she too might rise again from the ashes of her unhappiness to a new and
still more glorious joy, a large bird with brilliant plumage rose out of
the dark cypresses, which concealed the palace of the man she loved and
who had made her so miserable, and flew towards her. It rose higher and
higher, and at last settled on a palmtree close to her window. She had
never seen such a bird before, and thought it could not possibly be a
usual one, for a little gold chain was fastened to its foot, and its
tail seemed made of sunbeams instead of feathers. It must be Benno, the
bird of Ra! She fell on her knees again and sang with deep reverence
the ancient hymn to the Phoenix, never once turning her eyes from the
brilliant bird.

The bird listened to her singing, bending his little head with its
waving plumes, wisely and inquisitively from side to side, and flew
away directly she ceased. Nitetis looked after him with a smile. It was
really only a bird of paradise that had broken the chain by which he had
been fastened to a tree in the park, but to her he was the Phoenix. A
strange certainty of deliverance filled her heart; she thought the god
Ra had sent the bird to her, and that as a happy spirit she should take
that form. So long as we are able to hope and wish, we can bear a great
deal of sorrow; if the wished-for happiness does not come, anticipation
is at least prolonged and has its own peculiar sweetness. This feeling
is of itself enough, and contains a kind of enjoyment which can take the
place of reality. Though she was so weary, yet she lay down on her couch
with fresh hopes, and fell into a dreamless sleep almost against her
will, without having touched the poison.

The rising sun generally gives comfort to sad hearts who have passed the
night in weeping, but to a guilty conscience, which longs for darkness,
his pure light is an unwelcome guest. While Nitetis slept, Mandane lay
awake, tormented by fearful remorse. How gladly she would have held
back the sun which was bringing on the day of death to this kindest of
mistresses, and have spent the rest of her own life in perpetual night,
if only her yesterday's deed could but have been undone!

The good-natured, thoughtless girl called herself a wretched murderess
unceasingly, resolved again and again to confess the whole truth and so
to save Nitetis; but love of life and fear of death gained the victory
over her weak heart every time. To confess was certain death, and she
felt as if she had been made for life; she had so many hopes for the
future, and the grave seemed so dreadful. She thought she could perhaps
have confessed the whole truth, if perpetual imprisonment had been
all she had to fear; but death! no, she could not resolve on that. And
besides, would her confession really save the already condemned Nitetis?

Had she not sent a message to Bartja herself by that unfortunate
gardener's boy? This secret correspondence had been discovered, and that
was enough of itself to ruin Nitetis, even if she, Mandane, had done
nothing in the matter. We are never so clever as when we have to find
excuses for our own sins.

At sunrise, Mandane was kneeling by her mistress's couch, weeping
bitterly and wondering that Nitetis could sleep so calmly.

Boges, the eunuch, had passed a sleepless night too, but a very happy
one. His hated colleague, Kandaules, whom he had used as a substitute
for himself, had been already executed, by the king's command, for
negligence, and on the supposition that he had accepted a bribe; Nitetis
was not only ruined, but certain to die a shameful death. The influence
of the king's mother had suffered a severe shock; and lastly, he had
the pleasure of knowing, not only that he had outwitted every one and
succeeded in all his plans, but that through his favorite Phaedime he
might hope once more to become the all-powerful favorite of former days.
That sentence of death had been pronounced on Croesus and the young
heroes, was by no means an unwelcome thought either, as they might have
been instrumental in bringing his intrigues to light.

In the grey of the morning he left the king's apartment and went to
Phaedime. The proud Persian had taken no rest. She was waiting for him
with feverish anxiety, as a rumor of all that had happened had already
reached the harem and penetrated to her apartments. She was lying on
a purple couch in her dressing-room; a thin silken chemise and yellow
slippers thickly sown with turquoises and pearls composed her entire
dress. Twenty attendants were standing round her, but the moment
she heard Boges she sent her slaves away, sprang up to meet him, and
overwhelmed him with a stream of incoherent questions, all referring to
her enemy Nitetis.

"Gently, gently, my little bird," said Boges, laying his hand on her
shoulder. "If you can't make up your mind to be as quiet as a little
mouse while I tell my story, and not to ask one question, you won't hear
a syllable of it to-day. Yes, indeed, my golden queen, I've so much
to tell that I shall not have finished till to-morrow, if you are to
interrupt me as often as you like. Ah, my little lamb, and I've still so
much to do to-day. First I must be present at an Egyptian donkey-ride;
secondly, I must witness an Egyptian execution... but I see I am
anticipating my story; I must begin at the beginning. I'll allow you to
cry, laugh and scream for joy as much as you will, but you're forbidden
to ask a single question until I have finished. I think really I have
deserved these caresses. There, now I am quite at my ease, and can
begin. Once upon a time there was a great king in Persia, who had many
wives, but he loved Phaedime better than the rest, and set her above
all the others. One day the thought struck him that he would ask for the
hand of the King of Egypt's daughter in marriage, and he sent a great
embassy to Sais, with his own brother to do the wooing for him--"

"What nonsense!" cried Phaedime impatiently; "I want to know what has
happened now."

"Patience, patience, my impetuous March wind. If you interrupt me again,
I shall go away and tell my story to the trees. You really need not
grudge me the pleasure of living my successes over again. While I tell
this story, I feel as happy as a sculptor when he puts down his hammer
and gazes at his finished work."

"No, no!" said Phaedime, interrupting him again. "I cannot listen now
to what I know quite well already. I am dying of impatience, and every
fresh report that the eunuchs and slave-girls bring makes it worse. I
am in a perfect fever--I cannot wait. Ask whatever else you like, only
deliver me from this awful suspense. Afterwards I will listen to you for
days, if you wish."

Boges' smile at these words was one of great satisfaction; he rubbed his
hands and answered: "When I was a child I had no greater pleasure than
to watch a fish writhing on the hook; now I have got you, my splendid
golden carp, at the end of my line, and I can't let you go until I have
sated myself on your impatience."

Phaedime sprang up from the couch which she had shared with Boges,
stamping her foot and behaving like a naughty child. This seemed to
amuse the eunuch immensely; he rubbed his hands again and again, laughed
till the tears ran down over his fat cheeks, emptied many a goblet of
wine to the health of the tortured beauty, and then went on with his
tale: "It had not escaped me that Cambyses sent his brother (who had
brought Nitetis from Egypt), out to the war with the Tapuri purely from
jealousy. That proud woman, who was to take no orders from me, seemed to
care as little for the handsome, fair-haired boy as a Jew for pork, or
an Egyptian for white beans. But still I resolved to nourish the king's
jealousy, and use it as a means of rendering this impudent creature
harmless, as she seemed likely to succeed in supplanting us both in his
favor. It was long, however, before I could hit on a feasible plan.

"At last the new-year's festival arrived and all the priests in the
kingdom assembled at Babylon. For eight days the city was full of
rejoicing, feasting and merry-making. At court it was just the same, and
so I had very little time to think of my plans. But just then, when I
had hardly any hope of succeeding, the gracious Amescha cpenta sent a
youth across my path, who seemed created by Angramainjus himself to
suit my plan. Gaumata, the brother of Oropastes, came to Babylon to
be present at the great new-year's sacrifice. I saw him first in his
brother's house, whither I had been sent on a message from the king,
and his likeness to Bartja was so wonderful, that I almost fancied I was
looking at an apparition. When I had finished my business with
Oropastes the youth accompanied me to my carriage. I showed no signs
of astonishment at this remarkable likeness, treated him however, with
immense civility, and begged him to pay me a visit. He came the very
same evening. I sent for my best wine, pressed him to drink, and
experienced, not for the first time, that the juice of the vine has one
quality which outweighs all the rest: it can turn even a silent man into
a chatter-box. The youth confessed that the great attraction which had
brought him to Babylon was, not the sacrifice, but a girl who held the
office of upper attendant to the Egyptian Princess. He said he had loved
her since he was a child; but his ambitious brother had higher views for
him, and in order to get the lovely Mandane out of his way, had procured
her this situation. At last he begged me to arrange an interview with
her. I listened good-naturedly, made a few difficulties, and at last
asked him to come the next day and see how matters were going on. He
came, and I told him that it might be possible to manage it, but only if
he would promise to do what I told him without a question. He agreed to
everything, returned to Rhagae at my wish, and did not come to Babylon
again until yesterday, when he arrived secretly at my house, where I
concealed him. Meanwhile Bartja had returned from the war. The great
point now was to excite the king's jealousy again, and ruin the Egyptian
at one blow. I roused the indignation of your relations through your
public humiliation, and so prepared the way for my plan. Events were
wonderfully in my favor. You know how Nitetis behaved at the birthday
banquet, but you do not know that that very evening she sent a
gardener's boy to the palace with a note for Bartja. The silly fellow
managed to get caught and was executed that very night, by command of
the king, who was almost mad with rage; and I took care that Nitetis
should be as entirely cut off from all communication with her friends,
as if she lived in the nest of the Simurg. You know the rest."

"But how did Gaumata escape?"

"Through a trap-door, of which nobody knows but myself, and which stood
wide open waiting for him. Everything turned out marvellously; I even
succeeded in getting hold of a dagger which Bartja had lost while
hunting, and in laying it under Nitetis' window. In order to get rid of
the prince during these occurrences, and prevent him from meeting the
king or any one else who might be important as a witness, I asked the
Greek merchant Kolxus, who was then at Babylon with a cargo of Milesian
cloth, and who is always willing to do me a favor, because I buy all the
woollen stuffs required for the harem of him, to write a Greek letter,
begging Bartja, in the name of her he loved best, to come alone to
the first station outside the Euphrates gate at the rising of the
Tistar-star. But I had a misfortune with this letter, for the messenger
managed the matter clumsily. He declares that he delivered the letter
to Bartja; but there can be no doubt that he gave it to some one else,
probably to Gaumata, and I was not a little dismayed to hear that Bartja
was sitting over the wine with his friends on that very evening. Still
what had been done could not be undone, and I knew that the witness of
men like your father, Hystaslies, Croesus and Intaphernes, would far
outweigh anything that Darius, Gyges and Araspes could say. The former
would testify against their friend, the latter for him. And so at
last everything went as I would have had it. The young gentlemen
are sentenced to death and Croesus, who as usual, presumed to speak
impertinently to the king, will have lived his last hour by this time.
As to the Egyptian Princess, the secretary in chief has just been
commanded to draw up the following order. Now listen and rejoice, my
little dove! "'Nitetis, the adulterous daughter of the King of Egypt,
shall be punished for her hideous crimes according to the extreme rigor
of the law, thus: She shall be set astride upon an ass and led through
the streets of Babylon; and all men shall see that Cambyses knows how
to punish a king's daughter, as severely as his magistrates would punish
the meanest beggar. --To Boges, chief of the eunuchs, is entrusted the
execution of this order.

By command of King Cambyses. Ariabignes, chief of the Secretaries'

"I had scarcely placed these lines in the sleeve of my robe, when
the king's mother, with her garments rent, and led by Atossa, pressed
hastily into the hall. Weeping and lamentation followed; cries,
reproaches, curses, entreaties and prayers; but the king remained firm,
and I verily believe Kassandane and Atossa would have been sent after
Croesus and Bartja into the other world, if fear of Cyrus's spirit had
not prevented the son, even in this furious rage, from laying hands
on his father's widow. Kassandane, however, did not say one word for
Nitetis. She seems as fully convinced of her guilt as you and I can be.
Neither have we anything to fear from the enamored Gaumata. I have hired
three men to give him a cool bath in the Euphrates, before he gets back
to Rhagae. Ah, ha! the fishes and worms will have a jolly time!"

Phaedime joined in Boges' laughter, bestowed on him all the flattering
names which she had caught from his own smooth tongue, and in token of
her gratitude, hung a heavy chain studded with jewels round his neck
with her own beautiful arms.




CHAPTER V.

Before the sun had reached his mid-day height, the news of what had
happened and of what was still to happen had filled all Babylon. The
streets swarmed with people, waiting impatiently to see the strange
spectacle which the punishment of one of the king's wives, who had
proved false and faithless, promised to afford. The whip-bearers were
forced to use all their authority to keep this gaping crowd in order.
Later on in the day the news that Bartja and his friends were soon to be
executed arrived among the crowd; they were under the influence of the
palm-wine, which was liberally distributed on the king's birthday and
the following days, and could not control their excited feelings; but
these now took quite another form.

Bands of drunken men paraded the streets, crying: "Bartja, the good son
of Cyrus, is to be executed!" The women heard these words in their quiet
apartments, eluded their keepers, forgot their veils, and rushing forth
into the streets, followed the excited and indignant men with cries and
yells. Their pleasure in the thought of seeing a more fortunate sister
humbled, vanished at the painful news that their beloved prince was
condemned to death. Men, women and children raged, stormed and cursed,
exciting one another to louder and louder bursts of indignation. The
workshops were emptied, the merchants closed their warehouses, and the
school-boys and servants, who had a week's holiday on occasion of the
king's birthday, used their freedom to scream louder than any one else,
and often to groan and yell without in the least knowing why.

At last the tumult was so great that the whip-bearers were insufficient
to cope with it, and a detachment of the body-guard was sent to patrol
the streets. At the sight of their shining armor and long lances, the
crowd retired into the side streets, only, however, to reassemble in
fresh numbers when the troops were out of sight.

At the gate, called the Bel gate, which led to the great western
high-road, the throng was thicker than at any other point, for it was
said that through this gate, the one by which she had entered Babylon,
the Egyptian Princess was to be led out of the city in shame and
disgrace. For this reason a larger number of whipbearers were stationed
here, in order to make way for travellers entering the city. Very
few people indeed left the city at all on this day, for curiosity was
stronger than either business or pleasure; those, on the other hand,
who arrived from the country, took up their stations near the gate on
hearing what had drawn the crowd thither.

It was nearly mid-day, and only wanted a few hours to the time fixed for
Nitetis' disgrace, when a caravan approached the gate with great speed.
The first carriage was a so-called harmamaxa, drawn by four horses
decked out with bells and tassels; a two-wheeled cart followed, and last
in the train was a baggage-wagon drawn by mules. A fine, handsome man of
about fifty, dressed as a Persian courtier, and another, much older, in
long white robes, occupied the first carriage. The cart was filled by a
number of slaves in simple blouses, and broad-brimmed felt hats,
wearing the hair cut close to the head. An old man, dressed as a Persian
servant, rode by the side of the cart. The driver of the first carriage
had great difficulty in making way for his gaily-ornamented horses
through the crowd; he was obliged to come to a halt before the gate and
call some whip-bearers to his assistance. "Make way for us!" he cried to
the captain of the police who came up with some of his men; "the royal
post has no time to lose, and I am driving some one, who will make you
repent every minute's delay."

"Softly, my son," answered the official. "Don't you see that it's easier
to-day to get out of Babylon, than to come in? Whom are you driving?"

"A nobleman, with a passport from the king. Come, be quick and make way
for us."

"I don't know about that; your caravan does not look much like royalty."

"What have you to do with that? The pass.... "

"I must see it, before I let you into the city." These words were half
meant for the traveller, whom he was scrutinizing very suspiciously.

While the man in the Persian dress was feeling in his sleeve for the
passport, the whip-bearer turned to some comrades who had just come up,
and pointed out the scanty retinue of the travellers, saying: "Did
you ever see such a queer cavalcade? There's something odd about these
strangers, as sure as my name's Giv. Why, the lowest of the king's
carpet-bearers travels with four times as many people, and yet this man
has a royal pass and is dressed like one of those who sit at the royal
table."

At this moment the suspected traveller handed him a little silken roll
scented with musk, sealed with the royal seal, and containing the king's
own handwriting.

The whip-bearer took it and examined the seal. "It is all in order," he
murmured, and then began to study the characters. But no sooner had
he deciphered the first letters than he looked even more sharply than
before at the traveller, and seized the horses' bridles, crying out:
"Here, men, form a guard round the carriage! this is an impostor."

When he had convinced himself that escape was impossible, he went up to
the stranger again and said: "You are using a pass which does not belong
to you. Gyges, the son of Croesus, the man you give yourself out for,
is in prison and is to be executed to-day. You are not in the least like
him, and you will have reason to repent leaving tried to pass for him.
Get out of your carriage and follow me."

The traveller, however, instead of obeying, began to speak in broken
Persian, and begged the officer rather to take a seat by him in the
carriage, for that he had very important news to communicate. The man
hesitated a moment; but on seeing a fresh band of whip-bearers come up,
he nodded to them to stand before the impatient, chafing horses, and got
into the carriage.

The stranger looked at him with a smile and said: "Now, do I look like
an impostor?"

"No; your language proves that you are not a Persian, but yet you look
like a nobleman."

"I am a Greek, and have come hither to render Cambyses an important
service. Gyges is my friend, and lent me his passport when he was in
Egypt, in case I should ever come to Persia. I am prepared to vindicate
my conduct before the king, and have no reason for fear. On the
contrary, the news I bring gives me reason to expect much from his
favor. Let me be taken to Croesus, if this is your duty; he will be
surety for me, and will send back your men, of whom you seem to stand in
great need to-day. Distribute these gold pieces among them, and tell
me without further delay what my poor friend Gyges has done to deserve
death, and what is the reason of all this crowd and confusion."

The stranger said this in bad Persian, but there lay so much dignity and
confidence in his tone, and his gifts were on such a large scale, that
the cringing and creeping servant of despotism felt sure he must be
sitting opposite to a prince, crossed his arms reverentially, and,
excusing himself from his many pressing affairs, began to relate
rapidly. He had been on duty in the great hall during the examination
of the prisoners the night before, and could therefore tell all that had
happened with tolerable accuracy. The Greek followed his tale eagerly,
with many an incredulous shake of his handsome head, however, when the
daughter of Amasis and the son of Cyrus were spoken of as having
been disloyal and false, that sentence of death had been pronounced,
especially on Croesus, distressed him visibly, but the sadness soon
vanished from his quickly-changing features, and gave place to thought;
this in its turn was quickly followed by a joyful look, which could
only betoken that the thinker had arrived at a satisfactory result. His
dignified gravity vanished in a moment; he laughed aloud, struck his
forehead merrily, seized the hand of the astonished captain, and said:

"Should you be glad, if Bartja could be saved?"

"More than I can say."

"Very well, then I will vouch for it, that you shall receive at least
two talents, if you can procure me an interview with the king before the
first execution has taken place."

"How can you ask such a thing of me, a poor captain?..."

"Yes, you must, you must!"

"I cannot."

"I know well that it is very difficult, almost impossible, for a
stranger to obtain an audience of your king; but my errand brooks no
delay, for I can prove that Bartja and his friends are not guilty.
Do you hear? I can prove it. Do you think now, you can procure me
admittance?"

"How is it possible?"

"Don't ask, but act. Didn't you say Darius was one of the condemned?"

"Yes."

"I have heard, that his father is a man of very high rank."

"He is the first in the kingdom, after the sons of Cyrus."

"Then take me to him at once. He will welcome me when he hears I am able
to save his son."

"Stranger, you are a wonderful being. You speak with so much confidence
that..."

"That you feel you may believe me. Make haste then, and call some of
your men to make way for us, and escort us to the palace."

There is nothing, except a doubt, which runs more quickly from mind to
mind, than a hope that some cherished wish may be fulfilled, especially
when this hope has been suggested to us by some one we can trust.

The officer believed this strange traveller, jumped out of the carriage,
flourishing his scourge and calling to his men: "This nobleman has come
on purpose to prove Bartja's innocence, and must be taken to the king at
once. Follow me, my friends, and make way for him!"

Just at that moment a troop of the guards appeared in sight. The captain
of the whip-bearers went up to their commander, and, seconded by the
shouts of the crowd, begged him to escort the stranger to the palace.

During this colloquy the traveller had mounted his servant's horse, and
now followed in the wake of the Persians.

The good news flew like wind through the huge city. As the riders
proceeded, the crowd fell back more willingly, and loader and fuller
grew the shouts of joy until at last their march was like a triumphal
procession.

In a few minutes they drew up before the palace; but before the brazen
gates had opened to admit them, another train came slowly into sight. At
the head rode a grey-headed old man; his robes were brown, and rent, in
token of mourning, the mane and tail of his horse had been shorn off and
the creature colored blue.--It was Hystaspes, coming to entreat mercy
for his son.

The whip-bearer, delighted at this sight, threw himself down before
the old man with a cry of joy, and with crossed arms told him what
confidence the traveller had inspired him with.

Hystaspes beckoned to the stranger; he rode up, bowed gracefully and
courteously to the old man, without dismounting, and confirmed the words
of the whip bearer. Hystaspes seemed to feel fresh confidence too after
hearing the stranger, for he begged him to follow him into the palace
and to wait outside the door of the royal apartment, while he himself,
conducted by the head chamberlain, went in to the king.

When his old kinsman entered, Cambyses was lying on his purple couch,
pale as death. A cup-bearer was kneeling on the ground at his feet,
trying to collect the broken fragments of a costly Egyptian drinking-cup
which the king had thrown down impatiently because its contents had not
pleased his taste. At some distance stood a circle of court-officials,
in whose faces it was easy to read that they were afraid of their
ruler's wrath, and preferred keeping as far from him as possible. The
dazzling light and oppressive heat of a Babylonian May day came in
through the open windows, and not a sound was to be heard in the great
room, except the whining of a large dog of the Epirote breed, which had
just received a tremendous kick from Cambyses for venturing to fawn on
his master, and was the only being that ventured to disturb the solemn
stillness. Just before Hystaspes was led in by the chamberlain, Cambyses
had sprung up from his couch. This idle repose had become unendurable,
he felt suffocated with pain and anger. The dog's howl suggested a new
idea to his poor tortured brain, thirsting for forgetfulness.

"We will go out hunting!" he shouted to the poor startled courtiers. The
master of the hounds, the equerries, and huntsmen hastened to obey his
orders. He called after them, "I shall ride the unbroken horse Reksch;
get the falcons ready, let all the dogs out and order every one to come,
who can throw a spear. We'll clear the preserves!"

He then threw himself down on his divan again, as if these words had
quite exhausted his powerful frame, and did not see that Hystaspes
had entered, for his sullen gaze was fixed on the motes playing in the
sunbeams that glanced through the window.

Hystaspes did not dare to address him; but he stationed himself in the
window so as to break the stream of motes and thus draw attention to
himself.

At first Cambyses looked angrily at him and his rent garments, and then
asked with a bitter smile; "What do you want?"

"Victory to the king! Your poor servant and uncle has come to entreat
his ruler's mercy."

"Then rise and go! You know that I have no mercy for perjurers and false
swearers. 'Tis better to have a dead son than a dishonorable one."

"But if Bartja should not be guilty, and Darius..."

"You dare to question the justice of my sentence?"

"That be far from me. Whatever the king does is good, and cannot be
gainsaid; but still..."

"Be silent! I will not hear the subject mentioned again. You are to be
pitied as a father; but have these last few hours brought me any joy?
Old man, I grieve for you, but I have as little power to rescind his
punishment as you to recall his crime."

"But if Bartja really should not be guilty--if the gods..."

"Do you think the gods will come to the help of perjurers and
deceivers?"

"No, my King; but a fresh witness has appeared."

"A fresh witness? Verily, I would gladly give half my kingdom, to be
convinced of the innocence of men so nearly related to me."

"Victory to my lord, the eye of the realm! A Greek is waiting outside,
who seems, to judge by his figure and bearing, one of the noblest of his
race."

The king laughed bitterly: "A Greek! Ah, ha! perhaps some relation to
Bartja's faithful fair one! What can this stranger know of my family
affairs? I know these beggarly Ionians well. They are impudent enough to
meddle in everything, and think they can cheat us with their sly tricks.
How much have you had to pay for this new witness, uncle? A Greek is
as ready with a lie as a Magian with his spells, and I know they'll do
anything for gold. I'm really curious to see your witness. Call him in.
But if he wants to deceive me, he had better remember that where the
head of a son of Cyrus is about to fall, a Greek head has but very
little chance." And the king's eyes flashed with anger as he said these
words. Hystaspes, however, sent for the Greek.

Before he entered, the chamberlains fastened the usual cloth before his
mouth, and commanded him to cast himself on the ground before the king.
The Greek's bearing, as he approached, under the king's penetrating
glance, was calm and noble; he fell on his face, and, according to the
Persian custom, kissed the ground.

His agreeable and handsome appearance, and the calm and modest manner in
which he bore the king's gaze, seemed to make a favorable impression on
the latter; he did not allow him to remain long on the earth, and asked
him in a by no means unfriendly tone: "Who are you?"

"I am a Greek nobleman. My name is Phanes, and Athens is my home. I have
served ten years as commander of the Greek mercenaries in Egypt, and not
ingloriously."

"Are you the man, to whose clever generalship the Egyptians were
indebted for their victories in Cyprus?"

"I am."

"What has brought you to Persia?"

"The glory of your name, Cambyses, and the wish to devote my arms and
experience to your service."

"Nothing else? Be sincere, and remember that one single lie may cost
your life. We Persians have different ideas of truth from the Greeks."

"Lying is hateful to me too, if only, because, as a distortion and
corruption of what is noblest, it seems unsightly in my eyes."

"Then speak."

"There was certainly a third reason for my coming hither, which I should
like to tell you later. It has reference to matters of the greatest
importance, which it will require a longer time to discuss; but
to-day--"

"Just to-day I should like to hear something new. Accompany me to the
chase. You come exactly at the right time, for I never had more need of
diversion than now."

"I will accompany you with pleasure, if..."

"No conditions to the king! Have you had much practice in hunting?"

"In the Libyan desert I have killed many a lion."

"Then come, follow me."

In the thought of the chase the king seemed to have thrown off all his
weakness and roused himself to action; he was just leaving the hall,
when Hystaspes once more threw himself at his feet, crying with
up-raised hands: "Is my son--is your brother, to die innocent? By the
soul of your father, who used to call me his truest friend, I conjure
you to listen to this noble stranger."

Cambyses stood still. The frown gathered on his brow again, his voice
sounded like a menace and his eyes flashed as he raised his hand and
said to the Greek: "Tell me what you know; but remember that in every
untrue word, you utter your own sentence of death."

Phanes heard this threat with the greatest calmness, and answered,
bowing gracefully as he spoke: "From the sun and from my lord the king,
nothing can be hid. What power has a poor mortal to conceal the truth
from one so mighty? The noble Hystaspes has said, that I am able to
prove your brother innocent. I will only say, that I wish and hope I may
succeed in accomplishing anything so great and beautiful. The gods have
at least allowed me to discover a trace which seems calculated to throw
light on the events of yesterday; but you yourself must decide whether
my hopes have been presumptuous and my suspicions too easily aroused.
Remember, however, that throughout, my wish to serve you has been
sincere, and that if I have been deceived, my error is pardonable; that
nothing is perfectly certain in this world, and every man believes that
to be infallible which seems to him the most probable."

"You speak well, and remind me of... curse her! there, speak and have
done with it! I hear the dogs already in the court."

"I was still in Egypt when your embassy came to fetch Nitetis. At the
house of Rhodopis, my delightful, clever and celebrated countrywoman,
I made the acquaintance of Croesus and his son; I only saw your brother
and his friends once or twice, casually; still I remembered the young
prince's handsome face so well, that some time later, when I was in
the workshop of the great sculptor Theodorus at Samos, I recognized his
features at once."

"Did you meet him at Samos?"

"No, but his features had made such a deep and faithful impression on
Theodorus' memory, that he used them to beautify the head of an Apollo,
which the Achaemenidae had ordered for the new temple of Delphi."

"Your tale begins, at least, incredibly enough. How is it possible to
copy features so exactly, when you have not got them before you?"

"I can only answer that Theodorus has really completed this
master-piece, and if you wish for a proof of his skill would gladly send
you a second likeness of..."

"I have no desire for it. Go on with your story."

"On my journey hither, which, thanks to your father's excellent
arrangements, I performed in an incredibly short time, changing horses
every sixteen or seventeen miles..."

