our father Abbot; and one morning, after roaming in the neighbourhood to
look at the old stones and ruins, which is the custom of travellers, he
returned, put into our box some alms, and two days afterwards he
appeared in the place he now inhabits and in the dress he assumes."

"And of what nature, my Father, is the place, and of what fashion the
dress?"

"Holy Saint Francis!" exclaimed the Father, with a surprise so great
that I thought at first it related to the wine, "Holy Saint Francis!
have you not seen the well yet?"

"No, Father, unless you speak of the fountain about a mile and a quarter
distant."

"Tusk--tusk!" said the good man, "what ignoramuses you travellers are!
You affect to know what kind of slippers Prester John wears and to have
been admitted to the bed-chamber of /the Pagoda of China/; and yet, when
one comes to sound you, you are as ignorant of everything a man of real
learning knows as an Englishman is of his missal.  Why, I thought that
every fool in every country had heard of the Holy Well of St. Francis,
situated exactly two miles from our famous convent, and that every fool
in the neighbourhood had seen it."

"What the fools, my Father, whether in this neighbourhood or any other,
may have heard or seen, I, who profess not ostensibly to belong to so
goodly an order, cannot pretend to know; but be assured that the Holy
Well of St. Francis is as unfamiliar to me as the Pagoda of
China--Heaven bless /him/--is to you."

Upon this the learned monk, after expressing due astonishment, offered
to show it to me; and as I thought I might by acquiescence get rid of
him the sooner, and as, moreover, I wished to see the Abbot, to whom
some books for me had been lately sent, I agreed to the offer.

The well, said the monk, lay not above a mile out of the customary way
to the monastery; and after /we/ had finished the flask of wine, we
sallied out on our excursion,--the monk upon a stately and strong ass,
myself on foot.

The Abbot, on granting me his friendship and protection, had observed
that I was not the only stranger and recluse on whom his favour was
bestowed.  He had then mentioned the Hermit of the Well, as an eccentric
and strange being, who lived an existence of rigid penance, harmless to
others, painful only to himself.  This story had been confirmed in the
few conversations I had ever interchanged with my host and hostess, who
seemed to take a peculiar pleasure in talking of the Solitary; and from
them I had heard also many anecdotes of his charity towards the poor and
his attention to the sick.  All these circumstances came into my mind as
the good monk indulged his loquacity upon the subject, and my curiosity
became at last somewhat excited respecting my fellow recluse.

I now learned from the monk that the post of Hermit of the Well was an
office of which the present anchorite was by no means the first tenant.
The well was one of those springs, frequent in Catholic countries, to
which a legend and a sanctity are attached; and twice a year--once in
the spring, once in the autumn--the neighbouring peasants flocked
together, on a stated day, to drink, and lose their diseases.  As the
spring most probably did possess some medicinal qualities, a few
extraordinary cures had occurred, especially among those pious persons
who took not biennial, but constant draughts; and to doubt its holiness
was downright heresy.

Now, hard by this well was a cavern, which, whether first formed by
nature or art, was now, upon the whole, constructed into a very
commodious abode; and here, for years beyond the memory of man, some
solitary person had fixed his abode to dispense and to bless the water,
to be exceedingly well fed by the surrounding peasants, to wear a long
gown of serge or sackcloth, and to be called the Hermit of the Well.  So
fast as each succeeding anchorite died there were enough candidates
eager to supply his place; for it was no bad /metier/ to some penniless
imposter to become the quack and patentee of a holy specific.  The
choice of these candidates always rested with the superior of the
neighbouring monastery; and it is not impossible that he made an
indifferently good percentage upon the annual advantages of his
protection and choice.

At the time the traveller appeared, the former hermit had just departed
this life, and it was, therefore, to the vacancy thus occasioned that he
had procured himself to be elected.  The incumbent appeared quite of a
different mould from the former occupants of the hermitage.  He
accepted, it is true, the gifts laid at regular periods upon a huge
stone between the hermitage and the well, but he distributed among the
donors alms far more profitable than their gifts.  He entered no
village, borne upon an ass laden with twin sacks, for the purpose of
sanctimoniously robbing the inhabitants; no profane songs were ever
heard resounding from his dwelling by the peasant incautiously lingering
at a late hour too near its vicinity; my guide, the monk, complained
bitterly of his unsociability, and no scandalous legend of nymph-like
comforters and damsel visitants haunting the sacred dwelling escaped
from the garrulous friar's well-loaded budget.

"Does he study much?" said I, with the interest of a student.

"I fear me not," quoth the monk.  "I have had occasion often to enter
his abode, and I have examined all things with a close eye,--for,
praised be the Lord, I have faculties more than ordinarily clear and
observant,--but I have seen no books therein, excepting a missal, and a
Latin or Greek Testament, I know not well which; nay, so incurious or
unlearned is the holy man that he rejected even a loan of the 'Life of
Saint Francis,' notwithstanding it has many and rare pictures, to say
nothing of its most interesting and amazing tales."

More might the monk have said, had we not now suddenly entered a thick
and sombre wood.  A path cut through it was narrow, and only capable of
admitting a traveller on foot or horseback; and the boughs overhead were
so darkly interlaced that the light scarcely, and only in broken and
erratic glimmerings, pierced the canopy.

"It is the wood," said the monk, crossing himself, "wherein the
wonderful adventure happened to Saint Francis, which I will one day
narrate at length to you."

"And we are near the well, I suppose?" said I.

"It is close at hand," answered the monk.

In effect we had not proceeded above fifty yards before the path brought
us into a circular space of green sod, in the midst of which was a small
square stone building, of plain but not inelegant shape, and evidently
of great antiquity.  At one side of this building was an iron handle,
for the purpose of raising water, that cast itself into a stone basin,
to which was affixed by a strong chain an iron cup.  An inscription in
monkish Latin was engraved over the basin, requesting the traveller to
pause and drink, and importing that what that water was to the body,
faith was to the soul; near the cistern was a rude seat, formed by the
trunk of a tree.  The door of the well-house was of iron, and secured by
a chain and lock; perhaps the pump was so contrived that only a certain
quantum of the sanctified beverage could be drawn up at a time, without
application to some mechanism within; and wayfarers were thereby
prevented from helping themselves /ad libitum/, and thus depriving the
anchorite of the profit and the necessity of his office.

It was certainly a strange, lonely, and wild place; and the green sward,
round as a fairy ring, in the midst of trees, which, black, close, and
huge, circled it like a wall; and the solitary gray building in the
centre, gaunt and cold, startled the eye with the abruptness of its
appearance, and the strong contrast made by its wan hues to the dark
verdure and forest gloom around it.

I took a draught of the water, which was very cold and tasteless, and
reminded the monk of his disorder in the reins, to which a similar
potation might possibly be efficacious.  To this suggestion the monk
answered that he would certainly try the water some other time; but that
at present the wine he had drunk might pollute its divine properties.
So saying, he turned off the conversation by inviting me to follow him
to the hermitage.

In our way thither he pointed out a large fragment of stone, and
observed that the water would do me evil instead of good if I forgot to
remunerate its guardian.  I took the hint, and laid a piece of silver on
the fragment.

A short journey through the wood brought us to the foot of a hill
covered with trees, and having at its base a strong stone door, the
entrance to the excavated home of the anchorite.  The monk gently tapped
thrice at this door, but no answer came.  "The holy man is from home,"
said he, "let us return."

We did so; and the monk, keeping behind me, managed, as he thought
unseen, to leave the stone as naked as we had found it!  We now struck
through another path in the wood, and were soon at the convent.  I did
not lose the opportunity to question the Abbot respecting his tenant: I
learned from him little more than the particulars I have already
narrated, save that in concluding his details, he said:--

"I can scarcely doubt but that the Hermit is, like yourself, a person of
rank; his bearing and his mien appear to denote it.  He has given, and
gives yearly, large sums to the uses of the convent: and, though he
takes the customary gifts of the pious villagers, it is only by my
advice and for the purpose of avoiding suspicion.  Should he be
considered rich, it might attract cupidity; and there are enough bold
hands and sharp knives in the country to place the wealthy and the
unguarded in some peril.  Whoever he may be--for he has not confided his
secret to me--I do not doubt but that he is doing penance for some great
crime; and, whatever be the crime, I suspect that its earthly punishment
is nearly over.  The Hermit is naturally of a delicate and weak frame,
and year after year I have marked him sensibly wearing away; so that
when I last saw him, three days since, I was shocked at the visible
ravages which disease or penance had engraven upon him.  If ever Death
wrote legibly, its characters are in that brow and cheek."

"Poor man! Know you not even whom to apprise of his decease when he is
no more?"

"I do not yet; but the last time I saw him he told me that he found
himself drawing near his end, and that he should not quit life without
troubling me with one request."

After this the Abbot spoke of other matters, and my visit expired.

Interested in the recluse more deeply than I acknowledged to myself, I
found my steps insensibly leading me homeward by the more circuitous
road which wound first by the holy well.  I did not resist the impulse,
but walked musingly onward by the waning twilight, for the day was now
over, until I came to the well.  As I emerged from the wood, I started
involuntarily and drew back.  A figure, robed from head to foot in a
long sable robe, sat upon the rude seat beside the well; sat so still,
so motionless, that coming upon it abruptly in that strange place, the
heart beat irregularly at an apparition so dark in hue and so death-like
in its repose.  The hat, large, broad, and overhanging, which suited the
costume, was lying on the ground; and the face, which inclined upward,
seemed to woo the gentle air of the quiet and soft skies.  I approached
a few steps, and saw the profile of the countenance more distinctly than
I had done before.  It was of a marble whiteness; the features, though
sharpened and attenuated by disease, were of surpassing beauty; the hair
was exceedingly, almost effeminately, long, and hung in waves of perfect
jet on either side; the mouth was closed firmly, and deep lines or
rather furrows were traced from its corners to either nostril.  The
stranger's beard, of a hue equally black as the hair, was dishevelled
and neglected, but not very long; and one hand, which lay on the sable
robe, was so thin and wan you might have deemed the very starlight could
have shone through it.  I did not doubt that it was the recluse whom I
saw; I drew near and accosted him.

"Your blessing, holy Father, and your permission to taste the healing of
your well."

Sudden as was my appearance, and abrupt my voice, the Hermit evinced by
no startled gesture a token of surprise.  He turned very slowly round,
cast upon me an indifferent glance, and said, in a sweet and very low
tone,--

"You have my blessing, Stranger: there is water in the cistern; drink,
and be healed."

I dipped the bowl in the basin, and took sparingly of the water.  In the
accent and tone of the stranger, my ear, accustomed to the dialects of
many nations, recognized something English; I resolved, therefore, to
address him in my native tongue, rather than the indifferent Italian in
which I had first accosted him.

"The water is fresh and cooling: would, holy Father, that it could
penetrate to a deeper malady than the ills of flesh; that it could
assuage the fever of the heart, or lave from the wearied mind the dust
which it gathers from the mire and travail of the world."

Now the Hermit testified surprise; but it was slight and momentary.  He
gazed upon me more attentively than he had done before, and said, after
a pause,--

"My countryman! and in this spot!  It is not often that the English
penetrate into places where no ostentatious celebrity dwells to sate
curiosity and flatter pride.  My countryman: it is well, and perhaps
fortunate.  Yes," he said, after a second pause, "yes; it were indeed a
boon, had the earth a fountain for the wounds which fester and the
disease which consumes the heart."

"The earth has oblivion, Father, if not a cure."

"It is false!" cried the Hermit, passionately, and starting wildly from
his seat; "the earth has /no/ oblivion.  The grave,--is /that/
forgetfulness?  No, no: /there is no grave for the soul/!  The deeds
pass; the flesh corrupts: but the memory passes not, and withers not.
From age to age, from world to world, through eternity, throughout
creation, it is perpetuated; and immortality,--a curse,--/a hell/!"

Surprised by the vehemence of the Hermit, I was still more startled by
the agonizing and ghastly expression of his face.

"My Father," said I, "pardon me if I have pressed upon a sore.  I also
have that within which, did a stranger touch it, would thrill my whole
frame with torture, and I would fain ask from your holy, soothing, and
pious comfort, something of alleviation or of fortitude."

The Hermit drew near to me; he laid his thin hand upon my arm, and
looked long and wistfully in my face.  It was then that a suspicion
crept through me which after observation proved to be true, that the
wanderings of those dark eyes and the meaning of that blanched brow were
tinctured with insanity.

"Brother and fellow man," said he, mournfully, "hast thou in truth
suffered? and dost thou still smart at the remembrance?  We are friends
then.  If thou hast suffered as much as I have, I will fall down and do
homage to thee as a superior; for pain has its ranks, and I think at
times that none ever climbed the height that I have done.  Yet you look
not like one who has had nights of delirium, and days in which the heart
lay in the breast, as a corpse endowed with consciousness might lie in
the grave, feeling the worm gnaw it, and the decay corrupt, and yet
incapable of resistance or of motion.  Your cheek is thin, but firm;
your eye is haughty and bright; you have the air of one who has lived
with men, and struggled and not been vanquished in the struggle.
Suffered!  No, man, no,--/you/ have not suffered!"

"My Father, it is not in the countenance that Fate graves her records.
I have, it is true, contended with my fellows; and if wealth and honour
be the premium, not in vain: but I have not contended against Sorrow
with a like success; and I stand before you, a being who, if passion be
a tormentor and the death of the loved a loss, has borne that which the
most wretched will not envy."

Again a fearful change came over the face of the recluse: he grasped my
arm more vehemently, "You speak my own sorrows; you utter my own curse;
I will see you again; you may do my last will better than yon monks.
Can I trust you?  If you have in truth known misfortune, I will! I will!
yea, even to the outpouring--merciful, merciful God, what would I
say,--what would I reveal!"

Suddenly changing his voice, he released me, and said, touching his
forehead with a meaning gesture and a quiet smile, "You say you are my
rival in pain.  Have you ever known the rage and despair of the heart
mount /here/?  It is a wonderful thing to be calm as I am now, when that
rising makes itself felt in fire and torture!"

"If there be aught, Father, which a man who cares not what country he
visit, or what deed--so it be not of guilt or shame--he commit, can do
towards the quiet of your soul, say it, and I will attempt your will."

"You are kind, my Son," said the Hermit, resuming his first melancholy
and dignified composure of mien and bearing; "and there is something in
your voice which seems to me like a tone that I have heard in youth.  Do
you live near at hand?"

"In the valley, about four miles hence; I am, like yourself, a fugitive
from the world."

"Come to me then to-morrow at eve; to-morrow!  No, that is a holy eve,
and I must keep it with scourge and prayer. The next at sunset.  I shall
be collected then, and I would fain know more of you than I do.  Bless
you, my Son; adieu."

"Yet stay, Father, may I not conduct you home?"

"No; my limbs are weak, but I trust they can carry me to that home, till
I be borne thence to my last.  Farewell! the night grows, and man fills
even these shades with peril.  The eve after next, at sunset, we meet
again."

So saying, the hermit waved his hand, and I stood apart, watching his
receding figure, until the trees cloaked the last glimpse from my view.
I then turned homeward, and reached my cottage in safety, despite of the
hermit's caution.  But I did not retire to rest: a powerful foreboding,
rather than suspicion, that, in the worn and wasted form which I had
beheld, there was identity with one whom I had not met for years, and
whom I had believed to be no more, thrillingly possessed me.

"Can--can it be?" thought I.  "Can grief have a desolation, or
remembrance an agony, sufficient to create so awful a change?  And of
all human beings, for that one to be singled out; that one in whom
passion and sin were, if they existed, nipped in their earliest germ,
and seemingly rendered barren of all fruit!  If too, almost against the
evidence of sight and sense, an innate feeling has marked in that most
altered form the traces of a dread recognition, would not his memory
have been yet more vigilant than mine?  Am I so changed that he should
have looked me in the face so wistfully, and found there naught save the
lineaments of a stranger?"  And, actuated by this thought, I placed the
light by the small mirror which graced my chamber.  I recalled, as I
gazed, my features as they had been in earliest youth.  "No," I said,
with a sigh, "there is nothing here that he should recognize."

And I said aright: my features, originally small and delicate, had grown
enlarged and prominent.  The long locks of my youth (for only upon state
occasions did my early vanity consent to the fashion of the day) were
succeeded by curls, short and crisped; the hues, alternately pale and
hectic, that the dreams of romance had once spread over my cheek, had
settled into the unchanging bronze of manhood; the smooth lip and
unshaven chin were clothed with a thick hair; the once unfurrowed brow
was habitually knit in thought; and the ardent, restless expression that
boyhood wore had yielded to the quiet unmoved countenance of one in whom
long custom has subdued all outward sign of emotion, and many and
various events left no prevalent token of the mind save that of an
habitual but latent resolution.  My frame, too, once scarcely less
slight than a woman's, was become knit and muscular; and nothing was
left by which, in the foreign air, the quiet brow, and the athletic
form, my very mother could have recognized the slender figure and
changeable face of the boy she had last beheld.  The very sarcasm of the
eye was gone; and I had learned the world's easy lesson,--the
dissimulation of composure.

I have noted one thing in others, and it was particularly noticeable in
me; namely, that few who mix very largely with men, and with the
courtier's or the citizen's design, ever retain the key and tone of
their original voice.  The voice of a young man is as yet modulated by
nature, and expresses the passion of the moment; that of the matured
pupil of art expresses rather the customary occupation of his life.
Whether he aims at persuading, convincing, or commanding others, his
voice irrevocably settles into the key he ordinarily employs; and, as
persuasion is the means men chiefly employ in their commerce with each
other, especially in the regions of a court, so a tone of artificial
blandness and subdued insinuation is chiefly that in which the accents
of worldly men are clothed; the artificial intonation, long continued,
grows into nature, and the very pith and basis of the original sound
fritter themselves away.  The change was great in me, for at that time
which I brought in comparison with the present my age was one in which
the voice is yet confused and undecided, struggling between the accents
of youth and boyhood; so that even this most powerful and unchanging of
all claims upon the memory was in a great measure absent in me; and
nothing but an occasional and rare tone could have produced even that
faint and unconscious recognition which the Hermit had confessed.

I must be pardoned these egotisms, which the nature of my story renders
necessary.

With what eager impatience did I watch the hours to the appointed
interview with the Hermit languish themselves away!  However, before
that time arrived and towards the evening of the next day, I was
surprised by the rare honour of a visit from Anselmo himself.  He came
attended by two of the mendicant friars of his order, and they carried
between them a basket of tolerable size, which, as mine hostess
afterwards informed me, with many a tear, went back somewhat heavier
than it came, from the load of certain /receptacula/ of that rarer wine
which she had had the evening before the indiscreet hospitality to
produce.

The Abbot came to inform me that the Hermit had been with him that
morning, making many inquiries respecting me.  "I told him," said he,
"that I was acquainted with your name and birth, but that I was under a
solemn promise not to reveal them, without your consent; and I am now
here, my Son, to learn from you whether that consent may be obtained?"

"Assuredly not, holy Father!" said I, hastily; nor was I contented until
I had obtained a renewal of his promise to that effect.  This seemed to
give the Abbot some little chagrin: perhaps the Hermit had offered a
reward for my discovery.  However, I knew that Anselmo, though a griping
was a trustworthy man, and I felt safe in his renewed promise.  I saw
him depart with great satisfaction, and gave myself once more to
conjectures respecting the strange recluse.

As the next evening I prepared to depart towards the hermitage, I took
peculiar pains to give my person a foreign and disguised appearance.  A
loose dress, of rude and simple material, and a high cap of fur, were
pretty successful in accomplishing this purpose.  And, as I gave the
last look at the glass before I left the house, I said inly, "If there
