CHAPTER XV.
The Mother and Son.--Virtue should be the Sovereign of the Feelings,
  not their Destroyer



Book II.


CHAPTER I.
The Hero in London.--Pleasure is often the shortest, as it is the
  earliest road to Wisdom, and we may say of the World what Zeal-of-
  the-Land-Busy says of the Pig-Booth, "We escape so much of the
  other Vanities by our early Entering"

CHAPTER II.
Gay Scenes and Conversations.--The New Exchange and the Puppet-
  Show.--The Actor, the Sexton, and the Beauty

CHAPTER III.
More Lions

CHAPTER IV.
An intellectual Adventure

CHAPTER V.
The Beau in his Den, and a Philosopher discovered

CHAPTER VI.
A universal Genius.--Pericles turned Barber.--Names of Beauties in
  171-.--The Toasts of the Kit-Cat Club

CHAPTER VII.
A Dialogue of Sentiment succeeded by the Sketch of a Character, in
  whose Eyes Sentiment was to Wise Men what Religion is to Fools;
  namely, a Subject of Ridicule

CHAPTER VIII.
Lightly won, lightly lost.--A Dialogue of equal Instruction and
  Amusement.--A Visit to Sir Godfrey Kneller

CHAPTER IX.
A Development of Character, and a long Letter; a Chapter, on the
  whole, more important than it seems

CHAPTER X.
Being a short Chapter, containing a most important Event

CHAPTER XI.
Containing more than any other Chapter in the Second Book of this
History



Book III.


CHAPTER I.
Wherein the History makes great Progress and is marked by one
  important Event in Human Life

CHAPTER II.
Love; Parting; a Death-Bed.--After all human Nature is a beautiful
  Fabric; and even its Imperfections are not odious to him who has
  studied the Science of its Architecture, and formed a reverent
  Estimate of its Creator

CHAPTER III.
A great Change of Prospects

CHAPTER IV.
An Episode.--The Son of the Greatest Man who (one only excepted)
  /ever rose to a Throne/, but by no means of the Greatest Man (save
  one) /who ever existed/

CHAPTER V.
In which the Hero shows Decision on more Points than one.--More of
  Isora's Character is developed

CHAPTER VI.
An Unexpected Meeting.--Conjecture and Anticipation

CHAPTER VII.
The Events of a Single Night.--Moments make the Hues in which
  Years are coloured



Book IV.


CHAPTER I.
A Re-entrance into Life through the Ebon Gate, Affliction

CHAPTER II.
Ambitious Projects

CHAPTER III.

The real Actors Spectators to the false ones

CHAPTER IV.
Paris.--A Female Politician, and an Ecclesiastical One.--Sundry other
  Matters

CHAPTER V.
A Meeting of Wits.--Conversation gone out to Supper in her Dress of
  Velvet and Jewels

CHAPTER VI.
A Court, Courtiers, and a King

CHAPTER VII.
Reflections.--A Soiree.--The Appearance of one important in the
  History.--A Conversation with Madame de Balzac highly satisfactory
  and cheering.--A Rencontre with a curious old Soldier.--
  The Extinction of a once great Luminary

CHAPTER VIII.
In which there is Reason to fear that Princes are not invariably free
  from Human Peccadilloes

CHAPTER IX.
A Prince, an Audience, and a Secret Embassy

CHAPTER X.
Royal Exertions for the Good of the People

CHAPTER XI.
An Interview



Book V.


CHAPTER I.
A Portrait

CHAPTER II.
The Entrance into Petersburg.--A Rencontre with an inquisitive and
  mysterious Stranger.--Nothing like Travel

CHAPTER III.
The Czar.--The Czarina.--A Feast at a Russian Nobleman's

CHAPTER IV.
Conversations with the Czar.--If Cromwell was the greatest Man
  (Caesar excepted) who ever /rose/ to the Supreme Power, Peter was
  the greatest Man ever /born/ to it

CHAPTER V.
Return to Paris.--Interview with Bolingbroke.--A gallant Adventure.
  --Affair with Dubois.--Public Life is a Drama, in which private
  Vices generally play the Part of the Scene-shifters

CHAPTER VI.
A long Interval of Years.--A Change of Mind and its Causes



Book VI.


CHAPTER I.
The Retreat

CHAPTER II.
The Victory

CHAPTER III.
The Hermit of the Well

CHAPTER IV.
The Solution of many Mysteries.--A dark View of the Life and Nature
  of Man

CHAPTER V.
In which the History makes a great Stride towards the final Catastrophe.
  --The Return to England, and the Visit to a Devotee

CHAPTER VI.
The Retreat of a celebrated Man, and a Visit to a great Poet

CHAPTER VII.
The Plot approaches its /Denouement/

CHAPTER VIII.
The Catastrophe



CONCLUSION



DEVEREUX.



BOOK I.



CHAPTER I.

OF THE HERO'S BIRTH AND PARENTAGE.--NOTHING CAN DIFFER MORE FROM THE END
OF THINGS THAN THEIR BEGINNING.

MY grandfather, Sir Arthur Devereux (peace be with his ashes!) was a
noble old knight and cavalier, possessed of a property sufficiently
large to have maintained in full dignity half a dozen peers,--such as
peers have been since the days of the first James.  Nevertheless, my
grandfather loved the equestrian order better than the patrician,
rejected all offers of advancement, and left his posterity no titles but
those to his estate.

Sir Arthur had two children by wedlock,--both sons; at his death, my
father, the younger, bade adieu to the old hall and his only brother,
prayed to the grim portraits of his ancestors to inspire him, and set
out--to join as a volunteer the armies of that Louis, afterwards
surnamed /le grand/.  Of him I shall say but little; the life of a
soldier has only two events worth recording,--his first campaign and his
last.  My uncle did as his ancestors had done before him, and, cheap as
the dignity had grown, went up to court to be knighted by Charles II.
He was so delighted with what he saw of the metropolis that he forswore
all intention of leaving it, took to Sedley and champagne, flirted with
Nell Gwynne, lost double the value of his brother's portion at one
sitting to the chivalrous Grammont, wrote a comedy corrected by
Etherege, and took a wife recommended by Rochester.  The wife brought
him a child six months after marriage, and the infant was born on the
same day the comedy was acted.  Luckily for the honour of the house, my
uncle shared the fate of Plemneus, king of Sicyon, and all the offspring
he ever had (that is to say, the child and the play) "died as soon as
they were born."  My uncle was now only at a loss what to do with his
wife,--that remaining treasure, whose readiness to oblige him had been
so miraculously evinced.  She saved him the trouble of long cogitation,
an exercise of intellect to which he was never too ardently inclined.
There was a gentleman of the court, celebrated for his sedateness and
solemnity; my aunt was piqued into emulating Orpheus, and, six weeks
after her confinement, she put this rock into motion,--they eloped.
Poor gentleman! it must have been a severe trial of patience to a man
never known before to transgress the very slowest of all possible walks,
to have had two events of the most rapid nature happen to him in the
same week: scarcely had he recovered the shock of being run away with by
my aunt, before, terminating forever his vagrancies, he was run through
by my uncle.  The wits made an epigram upon the event, and my uncle, who
was as bold as a lion at the point of a sword, was, to speak frankly,
terribly disconcerted by the point of a jest.  He retired to the country
in a fit of disgust and gout.  Here his natural goodness soon recovered
the effects of the artificial atmosphere to which it had been exposed,
and he solaced himself by righteously governing domains worthy of a
prince, for the mortifications he had experienced in the dishonourable
career of a courtier.

Hitherto I have spoken somewhat slightingly of my uncle, and in his
dissipation he deserved it, for he was both too honest and too simple to
shine in that galaxy of prostituted genius of which Charles II. was the
centre.  But in retirement he was no longer the same person; and I do
not think that the elements of human nature could have furnished forth a
more amiable character than Sir William Devereux presiding at Christmas
over the merriment of his great hall.

Good old man! his very defects were what we loved best in him: vanity
was so mingled with good-nature, that it became graceful, and we
reverenced one the most, while we most smiled at the other.

One peculiarity had he which the age he had lived in and his domestic
history rendered natural enough; namely, an exceeding distaste to the
matrimonial state: early marriages were misery, imprudent marriages
idiotism, and marriage, at the best, he was wont to say, with a kindling
eye and a heightened colour, marriage at the best was the devil!  Yet it
must not be supposed that Sir William Devereux was an ungallant man.  On
the contrary, never did the /beau sexe/ have a humbler or more devoted
servant.  As nothing in his estimation was less becoming to a wise man
than matrimony, so nothing was more ornamental than flirtation.

He had the old man's weakness, garrulity; and he told the wittiest
stories in the world, without omitting anything in them but the point.
This omission did not arise from the want either of memory or of humour;
but solely from a deficiency in the malice natural to all jesters.  He
could not persuade his lips to repeat a sarcasm hurting even the dead or
the ungrateful; and when he came to the drop of gall which should have
given zest to the story, the milk of human kindness broke its barrier,
despite of himself,--and washed it away.  He was a fine wreck, a little
prematurely broken by dissipation, but not perhaps the less interesting
on that account; tall, and somewhat of the jovial old English girth,
with a face where good-nature and good living mingled their smiles and
glow.  He wore the garb of twenty years back, and was curiously
particular in the choice of his silk stockings.  Between you and me, he
was not a little vain of his leg, and a compliment on that score was
always sure of a gracious reception.

The solitude of my uncle's household was broken by an invasion of three
boys,--none of the quietest,--and their mother, who, the gentlest and
saddest of womankind, seemed to follow them, the emblem of that primeval
silence from which all noise was born.  These three boys were my two
brothers and myself.  My father, who had conceived a strong personal
attachment for Louis XIV., never quitted his service, and the great King
repaid him by orders and favours without number; he died of wounds
received in battle,--a Count and a Marshal, full of renown and destitute
of money.  He had married twice: his first wife, who died without issue,
was a daughter of the noble house of La Tremouille; his second, our
mother, was of a younger branch of the English race of Howard.  Brought
up in her native country, and influenced by a primitive and retired
education, she never loved that gay land which her husband had adopted
as his own.  Upon his death she hastened her return to England, and
refusing, with somewhat of honourable pride, the magnificent pension
which Louis wished to settle upon the widow of his favourite, came to
throw herself and her children upon those affections which she knew they
were entitled to claim.

My uncle was unaffectedly rejoiced to receive us; to say nothing of his
love for my father, and his pride at the honours the latter had won to
their ancient house, the good gentleman was very well pleased with the
idea of obtaining four new listeners, out of whom he might select an
heir, and he soon grew as fond of us as we were of him.  At the time of
our new settlement, I had attained the age of twelve; my second brother
(we were twins) was born an hour after me; my third was about fifteen
months younger.  I had never been the favourite of the three.  In the
first place, my brothers (my youngest especially) were uncommonly
handsome, and, at most, I was but tolerably good-looking: in the second
place, my mind was considered as much inferior to theirs as my body; I
was idle and dull, sullen and haughty,--the only wit I ever displayed
was in sneering at my friends, and the only spirit, in quarrelling with
my twin brother; so said or so thought all who saw us in our childhood;
and it follows, therefore, that I was either very unamiable or very much
misunderstood.

But, to the astonishment of myself and my relations, my fate was now to
be reversed; and I was no sooner settled at Devereux Court than I became
evidently the object of Sir William's pre-eminent attachment.  The fact
was, that I really liked both the knight and his stories better than my
brothers did; and the very first time I had seen my uncle, I had
commented on the beauty of his stocking, and envied the constitution of
his leg; from such trifles spring affection!  In truth, our attachment
to each other so increased that we grew to be constantly together; and
while my childish anticipations of the world made me love to listen to
stories of courts and courtiers, my uncle returned the compliment by
declaring of my wit, as the angler declared of the River Lea, that one
would find enough in it, if one would but angle sufficiently long.

Nor was this all; my uncle and myself were exceedingly like the waters
of Alpheus and Arethusa,--nothing was thrown into the one without being
seen very shortly afterwards floating upon the other.  Every witticism
or legend Sir William imparted to me (and some, to say truth, were a
little tinged with the licentiousness of the times he had lived in), I
took the first opportunity of retailing, whatever might be the audience;
and few boys, at the age of thirteen, can boast of having so often as
myself excited the laughter of the men and the blushes of the women.
This circumstance, while it aggravated my own vanity, delighted my
uncle's; and as I was always getting into scrapes on his account, so he
was perpetually bound, by duty, to defend me from the charges of which
he was the cause.  No man defends another long without loving him the
better for it; and perhaps Sir William Devereux and his eldest nephew
were the only allies in the world who had no jealousy of each other.



CHAPTER II.

A FAMILY CONSULTATION.--A PRIEST, AND AN ERA IN LIFE.

"YOU are ruining the children, my dear Sir William," said my gentle
mother, one day when I had been particularly witty; "and the Abbe
Montreuil declares it absolutely necessary that they should go to
school."

"To school!" said my uncle, who was caressing his right leg, as it lay
over his left knee,--"to school, Madam! you are joking.  What for,
pray?"

"Instruction, my dear Sir William," replied my mother.

"Ah, ah; I forgot that; true, true!" said my uncle, despondingly, and
there was a pause.  My mother counted her rosary; my uncle sank into a
revery; my twin brother pinched my leg under the table, to which I
replied by a silent kick; and my youngest fixed his large, dark,
speaking eyes upon a picture of the Holy Family, which hung opposite to
him.

My uncle broke the silence; he did it with a start.

"Od's fish, Madam,"--(my uncle dressed his oaths, like himself, a little
after the example of Charles II.)--"od's fish, Madam, I have thought of
a better plan than that; they shall have instruction without going to
school for it."

"And how, Sir William?"

"I will instruct them myself, Madam," and William slapped the calf of
the leg he was caressing.

My mother smiled.

"Ay, Madam, you may smile; but I and my Lord Dorset were the best
scholars of the age; you shall read my play."

"Do, Mother," said I, "read the play.  Shall I tell her some of the
jests in it, Uncle?"

My mother shook her head in anticipative horror, and raised her finger
reprovingly.  My uncle said nothing, but winked at me; I understood the
signal, and was about to begin, when the door opened, and the Abbe
Montreuil entered.  My uncle released his right leg, and my jest was cut
off.  Nobody ever inspired a more dim, religious awe than the Abbe
Montreuil.  The priest entered with a smile.  My mother hailed the
entrance of an ally.

"Father," said she, rising, "I have just represented to my good brother
the necessity of sending my sons to school; he has proposed an
alternative which I will leave you to discuss with him."

"And what is it?" said Montreuil, sliding into a chair, and patting
Gerald's head with a benignant air.

"To educate them himself," answered my mother, with a sort of satirical
gravity.  My uncle moved uneasily in his seat, as if, for the first
time, he saw something ridiculous in the proposal.

The smile, immediately fading from the thin lips of the priest, gave way
