Warbeck's story in the dark, when he might, one would imagine, have
rendered the matter clear to all England.  But, for all this bribing of
the Scotch lords at the Scotch King's Court, he could not procure the
Pretender to be delivered up to him.  James, though not very particular
in many respects, would not betray him; and the ever-busy Duchess of
Burgundy so provided him with arms, and good soldiers, and with money
besides, that he had soon a little army of fifteen hundred men of various
nations.  With these, and aided by the Scottish King in person, he
crossed the border into England, and made a proclamation to the people,
in which he called the King 'Henry Tudor;' offered large rewards to any
who should take or distress him; and announced himself as King Richard
the Fourth come to receive the homage of his faithful subjects.  His
faithful subjects, however, cared nothing for him, and hated his faithful
troops: who, being of different nations, quarrelled also among
themselves.  Worse than this, if worse were possible, they began to
plunder the country; upon which the White Rose said, that he would rather
lose his rights, than gain them through the miseries of the English
people.  The Scottish King made a jest of his scruples; but they and
their whole force went back again without fighting a battle.

The worst consequence of this attempt was, that a rising took place among
the people of Cornwall, who considered themselves too heavily taxed to
meet the charges of the expected war.  Stimulated by Flammock, a lawyer,
and Joseph, a blacksmith, and joined by Lord Audley and some other
country gentlemen, they marched on all the way to Deptford Bridge, where
they fought a battle with the King's army.  They were defeated--though
the Cornish men fought with great bravery--and the lord was beheaded, and
the lawyer and the blacksmith were hanged, drawn, and quartered.  The
rest were pardoned.  The King, who believed every man to be as avaricious
as himself, and thought that money could settle anything, allowed them to
make bargains for their liberty with the soldiers who had taken them.

Perkin Warbeck, doomed to wander up and down, and never to find rest
anywhere--a sad fate: almost a sufficient punishment for an imposture,
which he seems in time to have half believed himself--lost his Scottish
refuge through a truce being made between the two Kings; and found
himself, once more, without a country before him in which he could lay
his head.  But James (always honourable and true to him, alike when he
melted down his plate, and even the great gold chain he had been used to
wear, to pay soldiers in his cause; and now, when that cause was lost and
hopeless) did not conclude the treaty, until he had safely departed out
of the Scottish dominions.  He, and his beautiful wife, who was faithful
to him under all reverses, and left her state and home to follow his poor
fortunes, were put aboard ship with everything necessary for their
comfort and protection, and sailed for Ireland.

But, the Irish people had had enough of counterfeit Earls of Warwick and
Dukes of York, for one while; and would give the White Rose no aid.  So,
the White Rose--encircled by thorns indeed--resolved to go with his
beautiful wife to Cornwall as a forlorn resource, and see what might be
made of the Cornish men, who had risen so valiantly a little while
before, and who had fought so bravely at Deptford Bridge.

To Whitsand Bay, in Cornwall, accordingly, came Perkin Warbeck and his
wife; and the lovely lady he shut up for safety in the Castle of St.
Michael's Mount, and then marched into Devonshire at the head of three
thousand Cornishmen.  These were increased to six thousand by the time of
his arrival in Exeter; but, there the people made a stout resistance, and
he went on to Taunton, where he came in sight of the King's army.  The
stout Cornish men, although they were few in number, and badly armed,
were so bold, that they never thought of retreating; but bravely looked
forward to a battle on the morrow.  Unhappily for them, the man who was
possessed of so many engaging qualities, and who attracted so many people
to his side when he had nothing else with which to tempt them, was not as
brave as they.  In the night, when the two armies lay opposite to each
other, he mounted a swift horse and fled.  When morning dawned, the poor
confiding Cornish men, discovering that they had no leader, surrendered
to the King's power.  Some of them were hanged, and the rest were
pardoned and went miserably home.

Before the King pursued Perkin Warbeck to the sanctuary of Beaulieu in
the New Forest, where it was soon known that he had taken refuge, he sent
a body of horsemen to St. Michael's Mount, to seize his wife.  She was
soon taken and brought as a captive before the King.  But she was so
beautiful, and so good, and so devoted to the man in whom she believed,
that the King regarded her with compassion, treated her with great
respect, and placed her at Court, near the Queen's person.  And many
years after Perkin Warbeck was no more, and when his strange story had
become like a nursery tale, _she_ was called the White Rose, by the
people, in remembrance of her beauty.

The sanctuary at Beaulieu was soon surrounded by the King's men; and the
King, pursuing his usual dark, artful ways, sent pretended friends to
Perkin Warbeck to persuade him to come out and surrender himself.  This
he soon did; the King having taken a good look at the man of whom he had
heard so much--from behind a screen--directed him to be well mounted, and
to ride behind him at a little distance, guarded, but not bound in any
way.  So they entered London with the King's favourite show--a
procession; and some of the people hooted as the Pretender rode slowly
through the streets to the Tower; but the greater part were quiet, and
very curious to see him.  From the Tower, he was taken to the Palace at
Westminster, and there lodged like a gentleman, though closely watched.
He was examined every now and then as to his imposture; but the King was
so secret in all he did, that even then he gave it a consequence, which
it cannot be supposed to have in itself deserved.

At last Perkin Warbeck ran away, and took refuge in another sanctuary
near Richmond in Surrey.  From this he was again persuaded to deliver
himself up; and, being conveyed to London, he stood in the stocks for a
whole day, outside Westminster Hall, and there read a paper purporting to
be his full confession, and relating his history as the King's agents had
originally described it.  He was then shut up in the Tower again, in the
company of the Earl of Warwick, who had now been there for fourteen
years: ever since his removal out of Yorkshire, except when the King had
had him at Court, and had shown him to the people, to prove the imposture
of the Baker's boy.  It is but too probable, when we consider the crafty
character of Henry the Seventh, that these two were brought together for
a cruel purpose.  A plot was soon discovered between them and the
keepers, to murder the Governor, get possession of the keys, and proclaim
Perkin Warbeck as King Richard the Fourth.  That there was some such
plot, is likely; that they were tempted into it, is at least as likely;
that the unfortunate Earl of Warwick--last male of the Plantagenet
line--was too unused to the world, and too ignorant and simple to know
much about it, whatever it was, is perfectly certain; and that it was the
King's interest to get rid of him, is no less so.  He was beheaded on
Tower Hill, and Perkin Warbeck was hanged at Tyburn.

Such was the end of the pretended Duke of York, whose shadowy history was
made more shadowy--and ever will be--by the mystery and craft of the
King.  If he had turned his great natural advantages to a more honest
account, he might have lived a happy and respected life, even in those
days.  But he died upon a gallows at Tyburn, leaving the Scottish lady,
who had loved him so well, kindly protected at the Queen's Court.  After
some time she forgot her old loves and troubles, as many people do with
Time's merciful assistance, and married a Welsh gentleman.  Her second
husband, SIR MATTHEW CRADOC, more honest and more happy than her first,
lies beside her in a tomb in the old church of Swansea.

The ill-blood between France and England in this reign, arose out of the
continued plotting of the Duchess of Burgundy, and disputes respecting
the affairs of Brittany.  The King feigned to be very patriotic,
indignant, and warlike; but he always contrived so as never to make war
in reality, and always to make money.  His taxation of the people, on
pretence of war with France, involved, at one time, a very dangerous
insurrection, headed by Sir John Egremont, and a common man called John a
Chambre.  But it was subdued by the royal forces, under the command of
the Earl of Surrey.  The knighted John escaped to the Duchess of
Burgundy, who was ever ready to receive any one who gave the King
trouble; and the plain John was hanged at York, in the midst of a number
of his men, but on a much higher gibbet, as being a greater traitor.  Hung
high or hung low, however, hanging is much the same to the person hung.

Within a year after her marriage, the Queen had given birth to a son, who
was called Prince Arthur, in remembrance of the old British prince of
romance and story; and who, when all these events had happened, being
then in his fifteenth year, was married to CATHERINE, the daughter of the
Spanish monarch, with great rejoicings and bright prospects; but in a
very few months he sickened and died.  As soon as the King had recovered
from his grief, he thought it a pity that the fortune of the Spanish
Princess, amounting to two hundred thousand crowns, should go out of the
family; and therefore arranged that the young widow should marry his
second son HENRY, then twelve years of age, when he too should be
fifteen.  There were objections to this marriage on the part of the
clergy; but, as the infallible Pope was gained over, and, as he _must_ be
right, that settled the business for the time.  The King's eldest
daughter was provided for, and a long course of disturbance was
considered to be set at rest, by her being married to the Scottish King.

And now the Queen died.  When the King had got over that grief too, his
mind once more reverted to his darling money for consolation, and he
thought of marrying the Dowager Queen of Naples, who was immensely rich:
but, as it turned out not to be practicable to gain the money however
practicable it might have been to gain the lady, he gave up the idea.  He
was not so fond of her but that he soon proposed to marry the Dowager
Duchess of Savoy; and, soon afterwards, the widow of the King of Castile,
who was raving mad.  But he made a money-bargain instead, and married
neither.

The Duchess of Burgundy, among the other discontented people to whom she
had given refuge, had sheltered EDMUND DE LA POLE (younger brother of
that Earl of Lincoln who was killed at Stoke), now Earl of Suffolk.  The
King had prevailed upon him to return to the marriage of Prince Arthur;
but, he soon afterwards went away again; and then the King, suspecting a
conspiracy, resorted to his favourite plan of sending him some
treacherous friends, and buying of those scoundrels the secrets they
disclosed or invented.  Some arrests and executions took place in
consequence.  In the end, the King, on a promise of not taking his life,
obtained possession of the person of Edmund de la Pole, and shut him up
in the Tower.

This was his last enemy.  If he had lived much longer he would have made
many more among the people, by the grinding exaction to which he
constantly exposed them, and by the tyrannical acts of his two prime
favourites in all money-raising matters, EDMUND DUDLEY and RICHARD
EMPSON.  But Death--the enemy who is not to be bought off or deceived,
and on whom no money, and no treachery has any effect--presented himself
at this juncture, and ended the King's reign.  He died of the gout, on
the twenty-second of April, one thousand five hundred and nine, and in
the fifty-third year of his age, after reigning twenty-four years; he was
buried in the beautiful Chapel of Westminster Abbey, which he had himself
founded, and which still bears his name.

It was in this reign that the great CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, on behalf of
Spain, discovered what was then called The New World.  Great wonder,
interest, and hope of wealth being awakened in England thereby, the King
and the merchants of London and Bristol fitted out an English expedition
for further discoveries in the New World, and entrusted it to SEBASTIAN
CABOT, of Bristol, the son of a Venetian pilot there.  He was very
successful in his voyage, and gained high reputation, both for himself
and England.




CHAPTER XXVII--ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE EIGHTH, CALLED BLUFF KING HAL AND
BURLY KING HARRY


PART THE FIRST


We now come to King Henry the Eighth, whom it has been too much the
fashion to call 'Bluff King Hal,' and 'Burly King Harry,' and other fine
names; but whom I shall take the liberty to call, plainly, one of the
most detestable villains that ever drew breath.  You will be able to
judge, long before we come to the end of his life, whether he deserves
the character.

He was just eighteen years of age when he came to the throne.  People
said he was handsome then; but I don't believe it.  He was a big, burly,
noisy, small-eyed, large-faced, double-chinned, swinish-looking fellow in
later life (as we know from the likenesses of him, painted by the famous
HANS HOLBEIN), and it is not easy to believe that so bad a character can
ever have been veiled under a prepossessing appearance.

He was anxious to make himself popular; and the people, who had long
disliked the late King, were very willing to believe that he deserved to
be so.  He was extremely fond of show and display, and so were they.
Therefore there was great rejoicing when he married the Princess
Catherine, and when they were both crowned.  And the King fought at
tournaments and always came off victorious--for the courtiers took care
of that--and there was a general outcry that he was a wonderful man.
Empson, Dudley, and their supporters were accused of a variety of crimes
they had never committed, instead of the offences of which they really
had been guilty; and they were pilloried, and set upon horses with their
faces to the tails, and knocked about and beheaded, to the satisfaction
of the people, and the enrichment of the King.

The Pope, so indefatigable in getting the world into trouble, had mixed
himself up in a war on the continent of Europe, occasioned by the
reigning Princes of little quarrelling states in Italy having at various
times married into other Royal families, and so led to _their_ claiming a
share in those petty Governments.  The King, who discovered that he was
very fond of the Pope, sent a herald to the King of France, to say that
he must not make war upon that holy personage, because he was the father
of all Christians.  As the French King did not mind this relationship in
the least, and also refused to admit a claim King Henry made to certain
lands in France, war was declared between the two countries.  Not to
perplex this story with an account of the tricks and designs of all the
sovereigns who were engaged in it, it is enough to say that England made
a blundering alliance with Spain, and got stupidly taken in by that
country; which made its own terms with France when it could and left
England in the lurch.  SIR EDWARD HOWARD, a bold admiral, son of the Earl
of Surrey, distinguished himself by his bravery against the French in
this business; but, unfortunately, he was more brave than wise, for,
skimming into the French harbour of Brest with only a few row-boats, he
attempted (in revenge for the defeat and death of SIR THOMAS KNYVETT,
another bold English admiral) to take some strong French ships, well
defended with batteries of cannon.  The upshot was, that he was left on
board of one of them (in consequence of its shooting away from his own
boat), with not more than about a dozen men, and was thrown into the sea
and drowned: though not until he had taken from his breast his gold chain
and gold whistle, which were the signs of his office, and had cast them
into the sea to prevent their being made a boast of by the enemy.  After
this defeat--which was a great one, for Sir Edward Howard was a man of
valour and fame--the King took it into his head to invade France in
person; first executing that dangerous Earl of Suffolk whom his father
had left in the Tower, and appointing Queen Catherine to the charge of
his kingdom in his absence.  He sailed to Calais, where he was joined by
MAXIMILIAN, Emperor of Germany, who pretended to be his soldier, and who
took pay in his service: with a good deal of nonsense of that sort,
flattering enough to the vanity of a vain blusterer.  The King might be
successful enough in sham fights; but his idea of real battles chiefly
consisted in pitching silken tents of bright colours that were
ignominiously blown down by the wind, and in making a vast display of
gaudy flags and golden curtains.  Fortune, however, favoured him better
than he deserved; for, after much waste of time in tent pitching, flag
flying, gold curtaining, and other such masquerading, he gave the French
battle at a place called Guinegate: where they took such an unaccountable
panic, and fled with such swiftness, that it was ever afterwards called
by the English the Battle of Spurs.  Instead of following up his
advantage, the King, finding that he had had enough of real fighting,
came home again.

The Scottish King, though nearly related to Henry by marriage, had taken
part against him in this war.  The Earl of Surrey, as the English
general, advanced to meet him when he came out of his own dominions and
crossed the river Tweed.  The two armies came up with one another when
the Scottish King had also crossed the river Till, and was encamped upon
the last of the Cheviot Hills, called the Hill of Flodden.  Along the
plain below it, the English, when the hour of battle came, advanced.  The
Scottish army, which had been drawn up in five great bodies, then came
steadily down in perfect silence.  So they, in their turn, advanced to
meet the English army, which came on in one long line; and they attacked
it with a body of spearmen, under LORD HOME.  At first they had the best
of it; but the English recovered themselves so bravely, and fought with
such valour, that, when the Scottish King had almost made his way up to
the Royal Standard, he was slain, and the whole Scottish power routed.
Ten thousand Scottish men lay dead that day on Flodden Field; and among
them, numbers of the nobility and gentry.  For a long time afterwards,
the Scottish peasantry used to believe that their King had not been
really killed in this battle, because no Englishman had found an iron
belt he wore about his body as a penance for having been an unnatural and
undutiful son.  But, whatever became of his belt, the English had his
sword and dagger, and the ring from his finger, and his body too, covered
with wounds.  There is no doubt of it; for it was seen and recognised by
English gentlemen who had known the Scottish King well.

When King Henry was making ready to renew the war in France, the French
King was contemplating peace.  His queen, dying at this time, he
proposed, though he was upwards of fifty years old, to marry King Henry's
sister, the Princess Mary, who, besides being only sixteen, was betrothed
to the Duke of Suffolk.  As the inclinations of young Princesses were not
much considered in such matters, the marriage was concluded, and the poor
girl was escorted to France, where she was immediately left as the French
King's bride, with only one of all her English attendants.  That one was
a pretty young girl named ANNE BOLEYN, niece of the Earl of Surrey, who
had been made Duke of Norfolk, after the victory of Flodden Field.  Anne
Boleyn's is a name to be remembered, as you will presently find.

And now the French King, who was very proud of his young wife, was
preparing for many years of happiness, and she was looking forward, I
dare say, to many years of misery, when he died within three months, and
left her a young widow.  The new French monarch, FRANCIS THE FIRST,
seeing how important it was to his interests that she should take for her
second husband no one but an Englishman, advised her first lover, the
Duke of Suffolk, when King Henry sent him over to France to fetch her
home, to marry her.  The Princess being herself so fond of that Duke, as
to tell him that he must either do so then, or for ever lose her, they
were wedded; and Henry afterwards forgave them.  In making interest with
the King, the Duke of Suffolk had addressed his most powerful favourite
and adviser, THOMAS WOLSEY--a name very famous in history for its rise
and downfall.

Wolsey was the son of a respectable butcher at Ipswich, in Suffolk and
received so excellent an education that he became a tutor to the family
of the Marquis of Dorset, who afterwards got him appointed one of the
late King's chaplains.  On the accession of Henry the Eighth, he was
promoted and taken into great favour.  He was now Archbishop of York; the
Pope had made him a Cardinal besides; and whoever wanted influence in
England or favour with the King--whether he were a foreign monarch or an
English nobleman--was obliged to make a friend of the great Cardinal
Wolsey.

He was a gay man, who could dance and jest, and sing and drink; and those
were the roads to so much, or rather so little, of a heart as King Henry
had.  He was wonderfully fond of pomp and glitter, and so was the King.
He knew a good deal of the Church learning of that time; much of which
consisted in finding artful excuses and pretences for almost any wrong
thing, and in arguing that black was white, or any other colour.  This
kind of learning pleased the King too.  For many such reasons, the
Cardinal was high in estimation with the King; and, being a man of far
greater ability, knew as well how to manage him, as a clever keeper may
know how to manage a wolf or a tiger, or any other cruel and uncertain
beast, that may turn upon him and tear him any day.  Never had there been
seen in England such state as my Lord Cardinal kept.  His wealth was
enormous; equal, it was reckoned, to the riches of the Crown.  His
palaces were as splendid as the King's, and his retinue was eight hundred
strong.  He held his Court, dressed out from top to toe in flaming
scarlet; and his very shoes were golden, set with precious stones.  His
followers rode on blood horses; while he, with a wonderful affectation of
humility in the midst of his great splendour, ambled on a mule with a red
velvet saddle and bridle and golden stirrups.

Through the influence of this stately priest, a grand meeting was
arranged to take place between the French and English Kings in France;
but on ground belonging to England.  A prodigious show of friendship and
rejoicing was to be made on the occasion; and heralds were sent to
proclaim with brazen trumpets through all the principal cities of Europe,
that, on a certain day, the Kings of France and England, as companions
and brothers in arms, each attended by eighteen followers, would hold a
tournament against all knights who might choose to come.

CHARLES, the new Emperor of Germany (the old one being dead), wanted to
prevent too cordial an alliance between these sovereigns, and came over
to England before the King could repair to the place of meeting; and,
besides making an agreeable impression upon him, secured Wolsey's
interest by promising that his influence should make him Pope when the
next vacancy occurred.  On the day when the Emperor left England, the
King and all the Court went over to Calais, and thence to the place of
meeting, between Ardres and Guisnes, commonly called the Field of the
Cloth of Gold.  Here, all manner of expense and prodigality was lavished
on the decorations of the show; many of the knights and gentlemen being
so superbly dressed that it was said they carried their whole estates
upon their shoulders.

There were sham castles, temporary chapels, fountains running wine, great
cellars full of wine free as water to all comers, silk tents, gold lace
and foil, gilt lions, and such things without end; and, in the midst of
all, the rich Cardinal out-shone and out-glittered all the noblemen and
gentlemen assembled.  After a treaty made between the two Kings with as
much solemnity as if they had intended to keep it, the lists--nine
hundred feet long, and three hundred and twenty broad--were opened for
the tournament; the Queens of France and England looking on with great
array of lords and ladies.  Then, for ten days, the two sovereigns fought
five combats every day, and always beat their polite adversaries; though
they _do_ write that the King of England, being thrown in a wrestle one
day by the King of France, lost his kingly temper with his brother-in-
arms, and wanted to make a quarrel of it.  Then, there is a great story
belonging to this Field of the Cloth of Gold, showing how the English
were distrustful of the French, and the French of the English, until
Francis rode alone one morning to Henry's tent; and, going in before he
was out of bed, told him in joke that he was his prisoner; and how Henry
jumped out of bed and embraced Francis; and how Francis helped Henry to
dress, and warmed his linen for him; and how Henry gave Francis a
splendid jewelled collar, and how Francis gave Henry, in return, a costly
bracelet.  All this and a great deal more was so written about, and sung
about, and talked about at that time (and, indeed, since that time too),
that the world has had good cause to be sick of it, for ever.

Of course, nothing came of all these fine doings but a speedy renewal of
the war between England and France, in which the two Royal companions and
brothers in arms longed very earnestly to damage one another.  But,
before it broke out again, the Duke of Buckingham was shamefully executed
on Tower Hill, on the evidence of a discharged servant--really for
nothing, except the folly of having believed in a friar of the name of
HOPKINS, who had pretended to be a prophet, and who had mumbled and
jumbled out some nonsense about the Duke's son being destined to be very
great in the land.  It was believed that the unfortunate Duke had given
offence to the great Cardinal by expressing his mind freely about the
expense and absurdity of the whole business of the Field of the Cloth of
Gold.  At any rate, he was beheaded, as I have said, for nothing.  And
the people who saw it done were very angry, and cried out that it was the
work of 'the butcher's son!'

The new war was a short one, though the Earl of Surrey invaded France
again, and did some injury to that country.  It ended in another treaty
of peace between the two kingdoms, and in the discovery that the Emperor
of Germany was not such a good friend to England in reality, as he
pretended to be.  Neither did he keep his promise to Wolsey to make him
Pope, though the King urged him.  Two Popes died in pretty quick
succession; but the foreign priests were too much for the Cardinal, and
kept him out of the post.  So the Cardinal and King together found out
that the Emperor of Germany was not a man to keep faith with; broke off a
projected marriage between the King's daughter MARY, Princess of Wales,
and that sovereign; and began to consider whether it might not be well to
marry the young lady, either to Francis himself, or to his eldest son.

There now arose at Wittemberg, in Germany, the great leader of the mighty
change in England which is called The Reformation, and which set the
people free from their slavery to the priests.  This was a learned
Doctor, named MARTIN LUTHER, who knew all about them, for he had been a
priest, and even a monk, himself.  The preaching and writing of Wickliffe
had set a number of men thinking on this subject; and Luther, finding one
day to his great surprise, that there really was a book called the New
Testament which the priests did not allow to be read, and which contained
truths that they suppressed, began to be very vigorous against the whole
body, from the Pope downward.  It happened, while he was yet only
beginning his vast work of awakening the nation, that an impudent fellow
named TETZEL, a friar of very bad character, came into his neighbourhood
selling what were called Indulgences, by wholesale, to raise money for
beautifying the great Cathedral of St. Peter's, at Rome.  Whoever bought
an Indulgence of the Pope was supposed to buy himself off from the
punishment of Heaven for his offences.  Luther told the people that these
Indulgences were worthless bits of paper, before God, and that Tetzel and
his masters were a crew of impostors in selling them.

The King and the Cardinal were mightily indignant at this presumption;
and the King (with the help of SIR THOMAS MORE, a wise man, whom he
afterwards repaid by striking off his head) even wrote a book about it,
with which the Pope was so well pleased that he gave the King the title
of Defender of the Faith.  The King and the Cardinal also issued flaming
warnings to the people not to read Luther's books, on pain of
excommunication.  But they did read them for all that; and the rumour of
what was in them spread far and wide.

When this great change was thus going on, the King began to show himself
in his truest and worst colours.  Anne Boleyn, the pretty little girl who
had gone abroad to France with his sister, was by this time grown up to
be very beautiful, and was one of the ladies in attendance on Queen
Catherine.  Now, Queen Catherine was no longer young or handsome, and it
is likely that she was not particularly good-tempered; having been always
rather melancholy, and having been made more so by the deaths of four of
her children when they were very young.  So, the King fell in love with
the fair Anne Boleyn, and said to himself, 'How can I be best rid of my
own troublesome wife whom I am tired of, and marry Anne?'

{Catherine was old, so he fell in love with Anne Boleyn: p0.jpg}

You recollect that Queen Catherine had been the wife of Henry's brother.
What does the King do, after thinking it over, but calls his favourite
priests about him, and says, O! his mind is in such a dreadful state, and
he is so frightfully uneasy, because he is afraid it was not lawful for
him to marry the Queen!  Not one of those priests had the courage to hint
that it was rather curious he had never thought of that before, and that
his mind seemed to have been in a tolerably jolly condition during a
great many years, in which he certainly had not fretted himself thin;
but, they all said, Ah! that was very true, and it was a serious
business; and perhaps the best way to make it right, would be for his
Majesty to be divorced!  The King replied, Yes, he thought that would be
the best way, certainly; so they all went to work.

If I were to relate to you the intrigues and plots that took place in the
endeavour to get this divorce, you would think the History of England the
most tiresome book in the world.  So I shall say no more, than that after
a vast deal of negotiation and evasion, the Pope issued a commission to
Cardinal Wolsey and CARDINAL CAMPEGGIO (whom he sent over from Italy for
