I said to God: 'O God! whose look is that lightning, whose voice is that
thunder, if this man ought to die, extinguish that lightning, still the
thunder for ten minutes. The silence of the skies, the darkness of the
heavens shall be thy answer!' Watch in hand, I counted eleven minutes
without a flash or a sound. I saw at the point of a promontory a boat,
tossed by a terrible tempest, a boat with but one man in it, in danger
every minute of sinking; a wave lifted it as the breath of an infant
lifts a plume, and cast it on the rocks. The boat flew to pieces; the
man clung to the rock, and all the people cried out: 'He is lost!' His
father was there, his two brothers were there, but none dared to succor
him. I raised my arms to the Lord and said: 'If Milliere is condemned by
Thee as by me, O God, let me save that man; with no help but thine let
me save him!' I stripped, I knotted a rope around my arm, and I swam to
the rock. The water seemed to subside before my breast. I reached the
man. His father and brothers held the rope. He gained the land. I could
have returned as he did, fastening the rope to the rocks. I flung it
away from me; I trusted to God and cast myself into the waves. They
floated me gently and surely to the shore, even as the waters of the
Nile bore Moses' basket to Pharaoh's daughter. The enemy's outposts were
stationed around the village of Saint-Nolf; I was hidden in the woods of
Grandchamp with fifty men. Recommending my soul to God, I left the woods
alone. 'Lord God,' I said, 'if it be Thy will that Milliere die, let
that sentry fire upon me and miss me; then I will return to my men and
leave that sentry unharmed, for Thou wilt have been with him for an
instant.' I walked to the Republican; at twenty paces he fired and
missed me. Here is the hole in my hat, an inch from my head; the hand
of God had aimed that weapon. That happened yesterday. I thought that
Milliere was at Nantes. To-night they came and told me that Milliere and
his guillotine were at La Roche-Bernard. Then I said: 'God has brought
him to me; he shall die.'"

Roland listened with a certain respect to the superstitious narrative
of the Breton leader. He was not surprised to find such beliefs and such
poetry in a man born in face of a savage sea, among the Druid monuments
of Karnac. He realized that Milliere was indeed condemned, and that God,
who had thrice seemed to approve his judgment, alone could save him. But
one last question occurred to him.

"How will you strike him?" he asked.

"Oh!" said Georges, "I do not trouble myself about that; he will be
executed."

One of the two men who had brought in the supper table now entered the
room.

"Brise-Bleu," said Cadoudal, "tell Coeur-de-Roi that I wish to speak to
him."

Two minutes later the Breton presented himself.

"Coeur-de-Roi," said Cadoudal, "did you not tell me that the murderer
Thomas Milliere was at Roche-Bernard?"

"I saw him enter the town side by side with the Republican colonel, who
did not seem particularly flattered by such companionship."

"Did you not add that he was followed by his guillotine?"

"I told you his guillotine followed between two cannon, and I believe if
the cannon could have got away the guillotine would have been left to go
its way alone."

"What precautions does Milliere take in the towns he visits?"

"He has a special guard about him, and the streets around his house are
barricaded. He carries pistols always at hand."

"In spite of that guard, in spite of that barricade and the pistols,
will you undertake to reach him?"

"I will, general."

"Because of his crimes, I have condemned that man; he must die."

"Ah!" exclaimed Coeur-de-Roi, "the day of justice has come at last!"

"Will you undertake to execute my sentence, Coeur-de-Roi?"

"I will, general."

"Go then, Coeur-de-Roi. Take the number of men you need; devise what
stratagem you please, but reach the man, and strike."

"If I die, general--"

"Fear not; the curate of Leguerno shall say enough masses in your
behalf to keep your poor soul out of purgatory. But you will not die,
Coeur-de-Roi."

"That's all right, general. Now that I am sure of the masses, I ask
nothing more. I have my plan."

"When will you start?"

"To-night."

"When will he die?"

"To-morrow."

"Go. See that three hundred men are ready to follow me in half an hour."

Coeur-de-Roi went out as simply as he had entered.

"You see," said Cadoudal, "the sort of men I command. Is your First
Consul as well served as I, Monsieur de Montrevel?"

"By some, yes."

"Well, with me it is not some, but all."

Benedicite entered and questioned Georges with a look.

"Yes," replied Georges, with voice and nod.

Benedicite went out.

"Did you see any one on your way here?" asked Cadoudal.

"Not one."

"I asked for three hundred men in half an hour, and they will be here
in that time. I might have asked for five hundred, a thousand, two
thousand, and they would have responded as promptly."

"But," said Roland, "you have, in number at least, a limit you cannot
exceed."

"Do you want to know my effective? It is easily told, I won't tell you
myself, for you wouldn't believe me. Wait. I will have some one tell
you."

He opened the door and called out: "Branche-d'Or!"

Two seconds later Branche-d'Or appeared.

"This is my major-general," said Cadoudal, laughing. "He fulfils the
same functions for me that General Berthier does for the First Consul.
Branche-d'Or--"

"General."

"How many men are stationed along the road from here to La
Roche-Bernard, which the gentleman followed in coming to see me?"

"Six hundred on the Arzal moor, six hundred among the Marzan gorse,
three hundred at Peaule, three hundred at Billiers."

"Total, eighteen hundred. How many between Noyal and Muzillac?"

"Four hundred."

"Two thousand two hundred. How many between here and Vannes?"

"Fifty at Theix, three hundred at the Trinite, six hundred between the
Trinite and Muzillac."

"Three thousand two hundred. And from Ambon to Leguerno?"

"Twelve hundred."

"Four thousand four hundred. And in the village around me, in the
houses, the gardens, the cellars?"

"Five to six hundred, general."

"Thank you, Benedicite."

He made a sign with his head and Benedicite went out.

"You see," said Cadoudal, simply, "about five thousand. Well, with those
five thousand men, all belonging to this country, who know every tree,
every stone, every bush, I can make war against the hundred thousand men
the First Consul threatens to send against me."

Roland smiled.

"You think that is saying too much, don't you?"

"I think you are boasting a little, general; boasting of your men,
rather."

"No; for my auxiliaries are the whole population. None of your generals
can make a move unknown to me; send a despatch without my intercepting
it; find a retreat where I shall not pursue him. The very soil is
royalist and Christian! In default of the inhabitants, it speaks and
tells me: 'The Blues passed here; the slaughterers are hidden there!'
For the rest, you can judge for yourself."

"How?"

"We are going on an expedition about twenty-four miles from here. What
time is it?"

Both young men looked at their watches.

"Quarter to twelve," they said together.

"Good!" said Georges, "our watches agree; that is a good sign. Perhaps
some day our hearts will do the same."

"You were saying, general?"

"I was saying that it was a quarter to twelve, colonel; and that at six
o'clock, before day, we must be twenty miles from here. Do you want to
rest?"

"I!"

"Yes; you can sleep an hour."

"Thanks; it's unnecessary."

"Then we will start whenever you are ready."

"But your men?"

"Oh! my men are ready."

"Where?"

"Everywhere."

"I should like to see them."

"You shall."

"When?"

"Whenever agreeable to you. My men are very discreet, and never show
themselves till I make the signal."

"So that whenever I want to see them--"

"You will tell me; I shall give the signal and they'll appear."

"Let us start, general."

"Yes, let us start."

The two young men wrapped themselves in their cloaks and went out. At
the door Roland collided against a small group of five men. These five
men wore Republican uniforms; one of them had sergeant stripes on his
sleeve.

"What is all this?" asked Roland.

"Nothing," replied Cadoudal, laughing.

"But who are these men?"

"Coeur-de-Roi and his party; they are starting on that expedition you
know of."

"Then they expect by means of this uniform--"

"Oh! you shall know all, colonel; I have no secrets from you." Then,
turning to the little group, Cadoudal called: "Coeur-de-Roi!"

The man with the stripes on his sleeves left the group, and came to
Cadoudal.

"Did you call me, general?" asked the pretended sergeant.

"Yes, I want to know your plan."

"Oh! general, it is very simple."

"Let me judge of that."

"I put this paper in the muzzle of my gun." Coeur-de-Roi showed a large
envelope with an official red seal, which had once, no doubt, contained
some Republican despatch intercepted by the Chouans. "I present myself
to the sentries, saying: 'Despatch from the general of division.'
I enter the first guardhouse and ask to be shown the house of the
citizen-commissioner; they show me, I thank them; always best to be
polite. I reach the house, meet a second sentry to whom I tell the same
tale as to the first; I go up or down to citizen Milliere accordingly
as he lives in the cellar or the garret. I enter without difficulty, you
understand--'Despatch from the general of division'. I find him in his
study or elsewhere, present my paper, and while he opens it, I kill him
with this dagger, here in my sleeve."

"Yes, but you and your men?"

"Ah, faith! In God's care; we are defending his cause, it is for him to
take care of us."

"Well, you see, colonel," said Cadoudal, "how easy it all is. Let us
mount, colonel! Good luck, Coeur-de-Roi!"

"Which of these two horses am I to take?" asked Roland.

"Either; one is as good as the other; each has an excellent pair of
English pistols in its holsters."

"Loaded?"

"And well-loaded, colonel; that's a job I never trust to any one."

"Then we'll mount."

The two young men were soon in their saddles, and on the road to Vannes;
Cadoudal guiding Roland, and Branche-d'Or, the major-general of the
army, as Georges called him, following about twenty paces in the rear.

When they reached the end of the village, Roland darted his eyes along
the road, which stretches in a straight line from Muzillac to the
Trinite. The road, fully exposed to view, seemed absolutely solitary.

They rode on for about a mile and a half, then Roland said: "But where
the devil are your men?"

"To right and left, before and behind us."

"Ha, what a joke!"

"It's not a joke, colonel; do you think I should be so rash as to risk
myself thus without scouts?"

"You told me, I think, that if I wished to see your men I had only to
say so."

"I did say so."

"Well, I wish to see them."

"Wholly, or in part?"

"How many did you say were with you?"

"Three hundred."

"Well, I want to see one hundred and fifty."

"Halt!" cried Cadoudal.

Putting his hands to his mouth he gave the hoot of the screech-owl,
followed by the cry of an owl; but he threw the hoot to the right and
the cry to the left.

Almost instantly, on both sides of the road, human forms could be seen
in motion, bounding over the ditch which separated the bushes from the
road, and then ranging themselves beside the horses.

"Who commands on the right?" asked Cadoudal.

"I, Moustache," replied a peasant, coming near.

"Who commands on the left?" repeated the general.

"I, Chante-en-hiver," replied another peasant, also approaching him.

"How many men are with you, Moustache?"

"One hundred."

"How many men are with you, Chante-en-hiver?"

"Fifty."

"One hundred and fifty in all, then?" asked Georges.

"Yes," replied the two Breton leaders.

"Is that your number, colonel?" asked Cadoudal laughing.

"You are a magician, general."

"No; I am a poor peasant like them; only I command a troop in which
each brain knows what it does, each heart beats singly for the two great
principles of this world, religion and monarchy." Then, turning to his
men, Cadoudal asked: "Who commands the advanced guard?"

"Fend-l'air," replied the two Chouans.

"And the rear-guard?"

"La Giberne."

The second reply was made with the same unanimity as the first.

"Then we can safely continue our way?"

"Yes, general; as if you were going to mass in your own village."

"Let us ride on then, colonel," said Cadoudal to Roland. Then turning to
his men he cried: "Be lively, my lads."

Instantly every man jumped the ditch and disappeared. For a few seconds
the crackling of twigs on the bushes, and the sound of steps among the
underbrush, was heard. Then all was silent.

"Well," asked Cadoudal, "do you think that with such men I have anything
to fear from the Blues, brave as they may be?"

Roland heaved a sigh; he was of Cadoudal's opinion.

They rode on. About three miles from Trinite they caught sight of a
black spot approaching along the road with great rapidity. As it became
more distinct this spot stopped suddenly.

"What is that?" asked Roland.

"As you see, a man," replied Cadoudal.

"Of course; but who is this man?"

"You might have guessed from the rapidity of his coming; he is a
messenger."

"Why does he stop?"

"Because he has seen us, and does not know whether to advance or
retreat."

"What will he do?"

"Wait before deciding."

"For what?"

"A signal."

"Will he answer the signal?"

"He will not only answer but obey it. Will you have him advance or
retreat; or will you have him step aside."

"I wish him to advance; by that means we shall know the news he brings."

Cadoudal gave the call of the cuckoo with such perfection that Roland
looked about him for the bird.

"It was I," said Cadoudal, "you need not look for it."

"Is the messenger going to come?"

"Not-going to, he is coming."

The messenger had already started, and was rapidly approaching; in a few
seconds he was beside his general.

"Ah!" said the latter, "is that you, Monte-a-l'assaut?"

The general stooped, and Monte-a-l'assaut said a few words in his ear.

"Benedicite has already warned me," said Georges. Then turning to
Roland, he said, "Something of importance is to happen in the village of
the Trinite in a quarter of an hour, which you ought to see. Come, hurry
up."

And, setting the example, he put his horse to a gallop. Roland did the
same.

When they reached the village they could see from a distance, by the
light of some pine torches, a tumultuous mob in the market square. The
cries and movements of this mob bespoke some grave occurrence.

"Fast, fast!" cried Cadoudal.

Roland asked no better; he dug his spurs in his horse's belly.

At the clatter of horses' hoofs the peasants scattered. There were five
or six hundred of them at least, all armed.

Cadoudal and Roland found themselves in a circle of light in the midst
of cries and agitation.

The crowd was pressing more particularly toward the opening of a street
which led to the village of Tridon. A diligence was coming down that
street escorted by a dozen Chouans; two on either side of the postilion,
ten others guarding the doors. The carriage stopped in the middle of the
market-square. All were so intent upon the diligence that they paid but
scant attention to Cadoudal.

"Hola," shouted Georges. "What is all this?"

At this well known voice, everyone turned round, and heads were
uncovered.

"The Big Round Head!" they murmured.

"Yes," said Cadoudal.

A man went up to Georges.

"Didn't Benedicite and Monte-a-l'assaut notify you?" he inquired.

"Yes. Is that the diligence from Ploermel to Vannes that you are
bringing back?"

"Yes, general. It was stopped between Trefleon and Saint-Nolf."

"Is he in it?"

"We think so."

"Act according to your consciences; if it is a crime toward God, take
it on yourselves; I take only the responsibility toward men. I will
be present at what takes place; but I will not share in it--either to
hinder or help."

"Well," demanded a hundred voices, "what does he say, Sabre-tout?"

"He says we must act according to our consciences, and that he washes
his hands of it."

"Long live the Big Round Head!" cried all the people, rushing toward the
diligence.

Cadoudal remained motionless in the midst of this crowd. Roland stood
near him, also motionless, but full of curiosity; for he was completely
ignorant of who, or what, was in question.

The man who had just spoken to Cadoudal, and whom his companions called
Sabre-tout, opened the door. The travellers were huddled together and
trembling in the darkness within.

"If you have nothing to reproach yourselves with against God or the
king," said Sabre-tout in a full sonorous voice, "descend without fear.
We are not brigands, we are Christians and royalists."

This declaration no doubt reassured the travellers, for a man got
out, then two women, then a mother pressing her child in her arms, and
finally another man. The Chouans examined them attentively as they came
down the carriage steps; not finding the man they wanted, they said to
each traveller, "Pass on."

One man alone remained in the coach. A Chouan thrust a torch in the
vehicle, and by its light they could see he was a priest.

"Minister of the Lord," said Sabre-tout, "why did you not descend with
the others? Did you not hear me say we were Christians and royalists?"

The priest did not move; but his teeth chattered.

"Why this terror?" continued Sabre-tout. "Does not your cloth plead for
you? The man who wears a cassock can have done nothing against royalty
or religion."

The priest crouched back, murmuring: "Mercy! mercy!"

"Why mercy?" demanded Sabre-tout, "do you feel that you are guilty,
wretch?"

"Oh! oh!" exclaimed Roland, "is that how you royalists and Christians
speak to a man of God!"

"That man," said Cadoudal, "is not a man of God, but a man of the
devil."

"Who is he, then?"

"Both an atheist and a regicide; he denied his God and voted for the
death of the king. That is the Conventional Audrein."

Roland shuddered. "What will they do?" he asked.

"He gave death, he will receive death," answered Cadoudal.

During this time the Chouans had pulled Audrein out of the diligence.

"Ha! is it you, bishop of Vannes?" cried Sabre-tout.

"Mercy!" begged the bishop.

"We were informed of your arrival, and were waiting for you."

"Mercy!" repeated the bishop for the third time.

"Have you your pontifical robes with you?"

"Yes, my friends, I have."

"Then dress yourself as a prelate; it is long since we have seen one."

A trunk marked with the prelate's name was taken from the diligence
and opened. They took the bishop's robes from it, and handed them to
Audrein, who put them on. Then, when every vestment was in its place,
the peasants ranged themselves in a circle, each with his musket in his
hand. The glare of the torches was reflected on the barrels, casting
evil gleams.

Two men took the priest and led him into the circle, supporting him
beneath his arms. He was pale as death. There was a moment of lugubrious
silence.

A voice broke it. It was that of Sabre-tout.

"We are about to judge you," said the Chouan. "Priest of God, you have
betrayed the Church; child of France, you have condemned your king to
death."

"Alas! alas!" stammered the priest.

"Is it true?"

"I do not deny it."

"Because it is impossible to deny. What have you to say in
justification?"

"Citizens--"

"We are not citizens," cried Sabre-tout, in a voice thunder, "we are
royalists."

"Gentlemen--"

"We are not gentlemen; we are Chouans."

"My friends--"

"We are not your friends; we are your judges. You judges are questioning
you; answer."

"I repent of what I did, and I ask pardon of God and men."

"Men cannot pardon you," replied the same implacable voice; "for,
pardoned to-day, you would sin to-morrow. You may change your skin, but
never your heart. You have nothing to expect from men but death; as for
God, implore his mercy."

The regicide bowed his head; the renegade bent his knee. But suddenly
drawing himself up, he cried: "I voted the king's death, it is true, but
with a reservation--"

"What reservation?"

"The time of the execution."

"Sooner or later, it was still the king's death which you voted, and the
king was innocent."

"True, true," said the priest, "but I was afraid."

"Then you are not only a regicide, and an apostate, but also a coward.
We are not priests, but we are more just than you. You voted the death
of the innocent; we vote the death of the guilty. You have ten minutes
in which to prepare to meet your God."

The bishop gave a cry of terror and fell upon both knees; the church
bells rang, as if of their own impulse, and two of the men present,
accustomed to the offices of the church, intoned the prayers for the
dying. It was some time before the bishop found words with which to
respond. He turned affrighted glances in supplication to his judges one
after the other, but, not one face met his with even the consolation
of mere pity. The torches, flickering in the wind, lent them, on the
contrary, a savage and terrible expression. Then at last he mingled his
voice with the voices that were praying for him.

The judges allowed him time to follow the funeral prayer to its close.
In the meantime others were preparing a pile of wood.

"Oh!" cried the priest, beholding these preparations with growing
terror; "would you have the cruelty to kill me thus?"

"No," replied his inflexible accuser, "flames are the death of martyrs;
you are not worthy of such a death. Apostate, the hour has come!"

"Oh, my God! my God!" cried the priest, raising his arms to heaven.

"Stand up!" said the Chouan.

The priest tried to obey, but his strength failed him, and he fell again
to his knees.

"Will you let that murder be done before your eyes?" Roland asked
Cadoudal.

"I said that I washed my hands of it," replied the latter.

"Pilate said that, and Pilate's hands are to this day red with the blood
of Jesus Christ."

"Because Jesus Christ was a righteous man; this man is a Barabbas."

"Kiss your cross! kiss your cross!" cried Sabre-tout.

The prelate looked at him with a terrified air, but without obeying. It
was evident that he no longer saw, no longer heard.

"Oh!" cried Roland, making an effort to dismount, "it shall never be
said that I let a man be murdered before me, and did not try to, save
him."

A threatening murmur rose around him; his words had been overheard. That
was all that was needed to excite the young man.

"Ah! is that the way of it?" he cried, carrying his hand to one of his
holsters.

But with a movement rapid as thought, Cadoudal seized his hand, and,
while Roland struggled vainly to free himself from this grip of iron, he
shouted: "Fire!"

Twenty shots resounded instantly, and the bishop fell, an inert mass.

"Ah!" cried Roland. "What have you done?"

"Forced you to keep your promise," replied Cadoudal; "you swore to see
all and hear all without offering any opposition."

"So perish all enemies of God and the king," said Sabre-tout, in a
solemn voice.

"Amen!" responded the spectators with one voice of sinister unanimity.

Then they stripped the body of its sacerdotal ornaments, which they
flung upon the pile of wood, invited the other travellers to take their
places in the diligence, replaced the postilion in his saddle, and,
opening their ranks to give passage to the coach, cried: "Go with God!"

The diligence rolled rapidly away.

"Come, let us go," cried Cadoudal, "we have still twelve miles to do,
and we have lost an hour here." Then, addressing the executioners, he
said: "That man was guilty; that man is punished. Human justice and
divine justice are satisfied. Let prayers for the dead be said over his
body, and give him Christian burial; do you hear?" And sure of being
obeyed, Cadoudal put his horse to a gallop.

Roland seemed to hesitate for a moment whether to follow him or not;
then, as if resolving to accomplish a duty, he said: "I will go to the
end."

Spurring his horse in the direction taken by Cadoudal he reached the
Chouan leader in a few strides. Both disappeared in the darkness, which
grew thicker and thicker as the men left the place where the torches
were illuminating the dead priest's face and the fire was consuming his
vestments.




CHAPTER XXXIV. THE DIPLOMACY OF GEORGES CADOUDAL

The feeling that Roland experienced as he followed Georges Cadoudal
resembled that of a man half-awakened, who is still under the influence
of a dream, and returns gradually from the confines which separate night
from day. He strives to discover whether the ground he walks on is that
of fiction or reality, and the more he burrows in the dimness of his
brain the further he buries himself in doubt.

A man existed for whom Roland felt a worship almost divine. Accustomed
to live in the atmosphere of glory which surrounded that man, to see
others obey his orders, and to obey them himself with a promptness
and abnegation that were almost Oriental, it seemed amazing to him to
encounter, at the opposite ends of France, two organized powers, enemies
of the power of that man, and prepared to struggle against it. Suppose
a Jew of Judas Maccabeus, a worshipper of Jehovah, having, from his
infancy, heard him called the King of kings, the God of strength, of
vengeance, of armies, the Eternal, coming suddenly face to face with
the mysterious Osiris of the Egyptians, or the thundering Jupiter of the
Greeks.

His adventures at Avignon and Bourg with Morgan and the Company of Jehu,
his adventures in the villages of Muzillac and the Trinite with Cadoudal
and his Chouans, seemed to him some strange initiation in an unknown
religion; but like those courageous neophytes who risk death to learn
the secrets of initiation, he resolved to follow to the end.

Besides he was not without a certain admiration for these exceptional
characters; nor did he measure without a certain amazement these
revolted Titans, challenging his god; he felt they were in no sense
common men--neither those who had stabbed Sir John in the Chartreuse of
Seillon, nor those who had shot the bishop of Vannes at the village of
the Trinite.

And now, what was he to see? He was soon to know, for they had ridden
five hours and a half and the day was breaking.

Beyond the village of Tridon they turned across country; leaving
Vannes to the left, they reached Trefleon. At Trefleon, Cadoudal, still
followed by his major-general, Branche-d'Or, had found Monte-a-l'assaut
and Chante-en-hiver. He gave them further orders, and continued on his
way, bearing to the left and skirting the edges of a little wood which
lies between Grandchamp and Larre. There Cadoudal halted, imitated,
three separate times in succession, the cry of an owl, and was presently
surrounded by his three hundred men.

A grayish light was spreading through the sky beyond Trefleon and
Saint-Nolf; it was not the rising of the sun, but the first rays of
dawn. A heavy mist rose from the earth and prevented the eye from seeing
more than fifty feet beyond it.

Cadoudal seemed to be expecting news before risking himself further.

Suddenly, about five hundred paces distant, the crowing of a cock was
heard. Cadoudal pricked up his ears; his men looked at each other and
laughed.

The cock crowed again, but nearer.

"It is he," said Cadoudal; "answer him."

The howling of a dog came from within three feet of Roland, but so
perfectly imitated that the young man, although aware of what it was,
looked about him for the animal that was uttering such lugubrious
plaints. Almost at the same moment he saw a man coming rapidly through
the mist, his form growing more and more distinct as he approached. The
new-comer saw the two horsemen, and went toward them.

Cadoudal rode forward a few paces, putting his finger to his lips, as
if to request the man to speak low. The latter, therefore, did not pause
until he was close beside his general.

"Well, Fleur-d'epine," asked Georges, "have we got them?"

"Like a mouse in a trap; not one can re-enter Vannes, if you say the
word."

"I desire nothing better. How many are there?"

"One hundred men, commanded by the general himself."

"How many wagons?"

"Seventeen."

"When did they start?"

"They must be about a mile and three-quarters from here."

"What road have they taken?"

"Grandchamp to Vannes."

"So that, if I deploy from Meucon to Plescop--"

"You'll bar the way."

"That's all."

Cadoudal called his four lieutenants, Chante-en-hiver, Monte-a-l'assaut,
Fend-l'air, and La Giberne, to him, gave each of them fifty men, and
each with his men disappeared like shadows in the heavy mist, giving the
well-known hoot, as they vanished. Cadoudal was left with a hundred men,
Branche-d'Or and Fleur-d'epine. He returned to Roland.

"Well, general," said the latter, "is everything satisfactory?"

"Yes, colonel, fairly so," replied the Chouan; "but you can judge for
yourself in half an hour."

"It will be difficult to judge of anything in that mist."

