court, and I see that the spider will devour the wasp, unless the wasp
boldly break the web,--for woman-craft I call the spider, and soldier-
pride I style the wasp.  To speak plainly, these Woodvilles must be
bravely breasted and determinately abashed.  I do not mean that we can
deal with the king's wife and her family as with any other foes; but
we must convince them that they cannot cope with us, and that their
interests will best consist in acquiescing in that condition of things
which places the rule of England in the hands of the Neviles."

"My own thought, if I saw the way!"

"I see the way in this alliance; the Houses of York and Warwick must
become so indissolubly united, that an attempt to injure the one must
destroy both.  The queen and the Woodvilles plot against us; we must
raise in the king's family a counterpoise to their machinations.  It
brings no scandal on the queen to conspire against Warwick, but it
would ruin her in the eyes of England to conspire against the king's
brother; and Clarence and Warwick must be as one.  This is not all!
If our sole aid was in giddy George, we should but buttress our House
with a weathercock.  This connection is but as a part of the grand
scheme on which I have set my heart,--Clarence shall wed Isabel,
Gloucester wed Anne, and (let thy ambitious heart beat high, Montagu)
the king's eldest daughter shall wed thy son,--the male representative
of our triple honours.  Ah, thine eyes sparkle now!  Thus the whole
royalty of England shall centre in the Houses of Nevile and York; and
the Woodvilles will be caught and hampered in their own meshes, their
resentment impotent; for how can Elizabeth stir against us, if her
daughter be betrothed to the son of Montagu, the nephew of Warwick?
Clarence, beloved by the shallow commons; [Singular as it may seem to
those who know not that popularity is given to the vulgar qualities of
men, and that where a noble nature becomes popular (a rare
occurrence), it is despite the nobleness,--not because of it.
Clarence was a popular idol even to the time of his death.--Croyl.,
562.] Gloucester, adored both by the army and the Church; and Montagu
and Warwick, the two great captains of the age,--is not this a
combination of power that may defy Fate?"

"O George!" said Montagu, admiringly, "what pity that the Church
should spoil such a statesman!"

"Thou art profane, Montagu; the Church spoils no man,--the Church
leads and guides ye all; and, mark, I look farther still.  I would
have intimate league with France; I would strengthen ourselves with
Spain and the German Emperor; I would buy or seduce the votes of the
sacred college; I would have thy poor brother, whom thou so pitiest
because he has no son to marry a king's daughter, no daughter to wed
with a king's son--I would have thy unworthy brother, Montagu, the
father of the whole Christian world, and, from the chair of the
Vatican, watch over the weal of kingdoms.  And now, seest thou why
with to-morrow's sun I depart for Calais, and lend my voice in aid of
Clarence's for the first knot in this complicated bond?"

"But will Warwick consent while the king opposes?  Will his pride--"

"His pride serves us here; for so long as Clarence did not dare to
gainsay the king, Warwick in truth might well disdain to press his
daughter's hand upon living man.  The king opposes, but with what
right?  Warwick's pride will but lead him, if well addressed, to defy
affront and to resist dictation.  Besides, our brother has a woman's
heart for his children; and Isabel's face is pale, and that will plead
more than all my eloquence."

"But can the king forgive your intercession and Warwick's contumacy?"

"Forgive!--the marriage once over, what is left for him to do?  He is
then one with us, and when Gloucester returns all will be smooth
again,--smooth for the second and more important nuptials; and the
second shall preface the third; meanwhile, you return to the court.
To these ceremonials you need be no party: keep but thy handsome son
from breaking his neck in over-riding his hobby, and 'bide thy time!'"

Agreeably with the selfish but sagacious policy thus detailed, the
prelate departed the next day for Calais, where Clarence was already
urging his suit with the ardent impatience of amorous youth.  The
archbishop found, however, that Warwick was more reluctant than he had
anticipated, to suffer his daughter to enter any House without the
consent of its chief; nor would the earl, in all probability, have
acceded to the prayers of the princely suitor, had not Edward, enraged
at the flight of Clarence, and worked upon by the artful queen,
committed the imprudence of writing an intemperate and menacing letter
to the earl, which called up all the passions of the haughty Warwick.

"What!" he exclaimed, "thinks this ungrateful man not only to
dishonour me by his method of marrying his sisters, but will he also
play the tyrant with me in the disposal of mine own daughter!  He
threats! he!--enough.  It is due to me to show that there lives no man
whose threats I have not the heart to defy!"  And the prelate finding
him in this mood had no longer any difficulty in winning his consent.
This ill-omened marriage was, accordingly, celebrated with great and
regal pomp at Calais, and the first object of the archbishop was
attained.

While thus stood affairs between the two great factions of the state,
those discontents which Warwick's presence at court had a while laid
at rest again spread, broad and far, throughout the land.  The luxury
and indolence of Edward's disposition in ordinary times always
surrendered him to the guidance of others.  In the commencement of his
reign he was eminently popular, and his government, though stern,
suited to the times; for then the presiding influence was that of Lord
Warwick.  As the queen's counsels prevailed over the consummate
experience and masculine vigour of the earl, the king's government
lost both popularity and respect, except only in the metropolis; and
if, at the close of his reign, it regained all its earlier favour with
the people, it must be principally ascribed to the genius of Hastings,
then England's most powerful subject, and whose intellect calmly moved
all the springs of action.  But now everywhere the royal authority was
weakened; and while Edward was feasting at Shene and Warwick absent at
Calais, the provinces were exposed to all the abuses which most gall a
population.  The poor complained that undue exactions were made on
them by the hospitals, abbeys, and barons; the Church complained that
the queen's relations had seized and spent Church moneys; the men of
birth and merit complained of the advancement of new men who had done
no service: and all these several discontents fastened themselves upon
the odious Woodvilles, as the cause of all.  The second breach, now
notorious, between the king and the all-beloved Warwick, was a new
aggravation of the popular hatred to the queen's family, and seemed to
give occasion for the malcontents to appear with impunity, at least so
far as the earl was concerned: it was, then, at this critical time
that the circumstances we are about to relate occurred.




CHAPTER II.

THE WOULD-BE IMPROVERS OF JOVE'S FOOTBALL, EARTH.--THE SAD FATHER AND
THE SAD CHILD.--THE FAIR RIVALS.

Adam Warner was at work on his crucible when the servitor commissioned
to attend him opened the chamber door, and a man dressed in the black
gown of a student entered.

He approached the alchemist, and after surveying him for a moment in a
silence that seemed not without contempt, said, "What, Master Warner,
are you so wedded to your new studies that you have not a word to
bestow on an old friend?"

Adam turned, and after peevishly gazing at the intruder a few moments,
his face brightened up into recognition.

"En iterum!" he said.  "Again, bold Robin Hilyard, and in a scholar's
garb!  Ha!  doubtless thou hast learned ere this that peaceful studies
do best insure man's weal below, and art come to labour with me in the
high craft of mind-work!"

"Adam," quoth Hilyard, "ere I answer, tell me this: Thou with thy
science wouldst change the world: art thou a jot nearer to thy end?"

"Well-a-day," said poor Adam, "you know little what I have undergone.
For danger to myself by rack and gibbet I say nought.  Man's body is
fair prey to cruelty, and what a king spares to-day the worm shall
gnaw to-morrow.  But mine invention--my Eureka--look!" and stepping
aside, he lifted a cloth, and exhibited the mangled remains of the
unhappy model.

"I am forbid to restore it," continued Adam, dolefully.  "I must work
day and night to make gold, and the gold comes not; and my only change
of toil is when the queen bids me construct little puppet-boxes for
her children!  How, then, can I change the world?  And thou," he
added, doubtingly and eagerly--"thou, with thy plots and stratagem,
and active demagogy, thinkest thou that thou hast changed the world,
or extracted one drop of evil out of the mixture of gall and hyssop
which man is born to drink?"

Hilyard was silent, and the two world-betterers--the philosopher and
the demagogue--gazed on each other, half in sympathy, half in
contempt.  At last Robin said,--

"Mine old friend, hope sustains us both; and in the wilderness we yet
behold the Pisgah!  But to my business.  Doubtless thou art permitted
to visit Henry in his prison."

"Not so," replied Adam; "and for the rest, since I now eat King
Edward's bread, and enjoy what they call his protection, ill would it
beseem me to lend myself to plots against his throne."

"Ah, man, man, man," exclaimed Hilyard, bitterly, "thou art like all
the rest,--scholar or serf, the same slave; a king's smile bribes thee
from a people's service!"

Before Adam could reply, a panel in the wainscot slid back and the
bald head of a friar peered into the room.  "Son Adam," said the holy
man, "I crave your company an instant, oro vestrem aurem;" and with
this abominable piece of Latinity the friar vanished.

With a resigned and mournful shrug of the shoulders, Adam walked
across the room, when Hilyard, arresting his progress, said, crossing
himself, and in a subdued and fearful whisper, "Is not that Friar
Bungey, the notable magician?"

"Magician or not," answered Warner, with a lip of inexpressible
contempt and a heavy sigh, "God pardon his mother for giving birth to
such a numskull!" and with this pious and charitable ejaculation Adam
disappeared in the adjoining chamber, appropriated to the friar.

