months in an atmosphere of false rumours, for those I chiefly meet in
the circles of artists and men of letters, and the wits and flaneurs who
haunt such circles, are nearly all hostile to the Emperor. They agree,
at least, in asserting the decline of his popularity--the failure of his
intellectual powers; in predicting his downfall--deriding the notion
of a successor in his son. Well, I know not how to reconcile these
statements with the spectacle I have beheld to-day.

"In the chorus of acclamation amidst which the Emperor entered the hall,
it seemed as if one heard the voice of the France he had just appealed
to. If the Fates are really weaving woe and shame in his woof, it is in
hues which, to mortal eyes, seem brilliant with glory and joy.

"You will read the address of the President of the Corps Legislatif; I
wonder how it will strike you! I own fairly that me it wholly carried
away. At each sentiment I murmured to myself, 'Is not this true? and, if
true, are France and human nature ungrateful?'

"'It is now,' said the President, 'eighteen years since France, wearied
with confusion, and anxious for security, confiding in your genuis and
the Napoleonic dynasty, placed in your hands, together with the Imperial
Crown, the authority which the public necessity demanded.' Then the
address proceeded to enumerate the blessings that ensued--social
order speedily restored--the welfare of all classes of society
promoted--advances in commerce and manufactures to an extent hitherto
unknown. Is not this true? and, if so, are you, noble daughter of
France, ungrateful?

"Then came words which touched me deeply--me, who, knowing nothing of
politics, still feel the link that unites Art to Freedom: 'But from
the first your Majesty has looked forward to the time when this
concentration of power would no longer correspond to the aspirations of
a tranquil and reassured country, and, foreseeing the progress of
modern society, you proclaimed that 'Liberty must be the crowning of the
edifice.'' Passing then over the previous gradual advances in popular
government, the President came to the 'present self-abnegation,
unprecedented in history,' and to the vindication of that plebiscite
which I have heard so assailed--viz., Fidelity to the great principle
upon which the throne was founded, required that so important a
modification of a power bestowed by the people should not be made
without the participation of the people themselves. Then, enumerating
the millions who had welcomed the new form of government--the President
paused a second or two, as if with suppressed emotion--and every one
present held his breath, till, in a deeper voice, through which there
ran a quiver that thrilled through the hall, he concluded with--'France
is with you; France places the cause of liberty under the protection of
your dynasty and the great bodies of the State.' Is France with him? I
know not; but if the malcontents of France had been in the hall at
that moment, I believe they would have felt the power of that wonderful
sympathy which compels all the hearts in great audiences to beat in
accord, and would have answered, 'It is true.'

"All eyes now fixed on the Emperor, and I noticed few eyes which were
not moist with tears. You know that calm unrevealing face of his--a face
which sometimes disappoints expectation. But there is that in it which
I have seen in no other, but which I can imagine to have been common
to the Romans of old, the dignity that arises from self-control--an
expression which seems removed from the elation of joy, the depression
of sorrow--not unbecoming to one who has known great vicissitudes of
Fortune, and is prepared alike for her frowns or her smiles.

"I had looked at that face while M. Schneider was reading the
address--it moved not a muscle, it might have been a face of marble.
Even when at moments the words were drowned in applause and the Empress,
striving at equal composure, still allowed us to see a movement of
her eye lids, a tremble on her lips. The boy at his right, heir to his
dynasty, had his looks fixed on the President, as if eagerly swallowing
each word in the address, save once or twice, when he looked around the
hall curiously, and with a smile as a mere child might look. He struck
me as a mere child. Next to the Prince was one of those countenances
which once seen are never to be forgotten--the true Napoleonic type,
brooding, thoughtful, ominous, beautiful. But not with the serene energy
that characterises the head of the first Napoleon when Emperor, and
wholly without the restless eagerness for action which is stamped in the
lean outline of Napoleon when First Consul: no--in Prince Napoleon there
is a beauty to which, as woman, I could never give my heart--were I a
man, the intellect that would not command my trust. But, nevertheless,
in beauty, it is signal, and in that beauty the expression of intellect
is predominant.

"Oh, dear Eulalie, how I am digressing! The Emperor spoke--and believe
me, Eulalie, whatever the journals or your compatriots may insinuate,
there is in that man no sign of declining intellect or failing health. I
care not what may be his years, but that man is in mind and in health as
young as Caesar when he crossed the Rubicon.

"The old cling to the past--they do not go forward to the future. There
was no going back in that speech of the Emperor. There was something
grand and something young in the modesty with which he put aside all
references to that which his Empire had done in the past, and said with
a simple earnestness of manner which I cannot adequately describe--

"'We must more than ever look fearlessly forward to the future. Who
can be opposed to the progressive march of a regime founded by a great
people in the midst of political disturbance, and which now is fortified
by liberty?'

"As he closed, the walls of that vast hall seemed to rock with an
applause that must have been heard on the other side of the Seine.

"'Vive l'Empereur!'" "'Vive l'Imperatrice!'" "'Vive le Prince
Imperial!'"--and the last cry was yet more prolonged than the others, as
if to affirm the dynasty.

"Certainly I can imagine no Court in the old days of chivalry more
splendid than the audience in that grand hall of the Louvre. To the
right of the throne all the ambassadors of the civilised world in the
blaze of their rich costumes and manifold orders. In the gallery at the
left, yet more behind, the dresses and jewels of the dames d'honneur
and of the great officers of State. And when the Empress rose to depart,
certainly my fancy cannot picture a more queenlike image, or one that
seemed more in unison with the representation of royal pomp and power.
The very dress, of colour which would have been fatal to the beauty of
most women equally fair--a deep golden colour--(Valerie profanely called
it buff)--seemed so to suit the splendour of the ceremony and the day;
it seemed as if that stately form stood in the midst of a sunlight
reflected from itself. Day seemed darkened when that sunlight passed
away.

"I fear you will think I have suddenly grown servile to the gauds and
shows of mere royalty. I ask myself if that be so--I think not. Surely
it is a higher sense of greatness which has been impressed on me by the
pageant of to-day I feel as if there were brought vividly before me
the majesty of France, through the representation of the ruler she has
crowned.

"I feel also as if there, in that hall, I found a refuge from all the
warring contests in which no two seem to me in agreement as to the sort
of government to be established in place of the present. The 'Liberty'
clamoured for by one would cut the throat of the 'Liberty' worshipped by
another.

"I see a thousand phantom forms of LIBERTY--but only one living symbol
of ORDER--that which spoke from a throne to-day."

Isaura left her letter uncompleted. On the following Monday she was
present at a crowded soiree given by M. Louvier. Among the guests were
some of the most eminent leaders of the Opposition, including that
vivacious master of sharp sayings, M. P-------, whom Savarin entitled
"the French Sheridan;" if laws could be framed in epigrams he would be
also the French Solon.

There, too, was Victor de Mauleon, regarded by the Republican party with
equal admiration and distrust. For the distrust, he himself pleasantly
accounted in talk with Savarin.

"How can I expect to be trusted? I represent 'Common Sense;' every
Parisian likes Common Sense in print, and cries 'Je suis trahi' when
Common Sense is to be put into action."

A group of admiring listeners had collected round one (perhaps the most
brilliant) of those oratorical lawyers by whom, in France, the respect
for all laws has been so often talked away: he was speaking of the
Saturday's ceremonial with eloquent indignation. It was a mockery
to France to talk of her placing Liberty under the protection of the
Empire.

There was a flagrant token of the military force under which civil
freedom was held in the very dress of the Emperor and his insignificant
son: the first in the uniform of a General of Division; the second,
forsooth, in that of a sous-lieutenant. The other liberal chiefs chimed
in: "The army," said one, "was an absurd expense; it must be put down:"
"The world was grown too civilised for war," said another: "The Empress
was priest-ridden," said a third: "Churches might be tolerated; Voltaire
built a church, but a church simply to the God of Nature, not of
priestcraft,"--and so on.

Isaura, whom any sneer at religion pained and revolted, here turned
away from the orators to whom she had before been listening with earnest
attention, and her eyes fell on the countenance of De Mauleon, who was
seated opposite.

The countenance startled her, its expression was so angrily scornful;
that expression, however, vanished at once as De Mauleon's eyes met her
own, and drawing his chair near to her, he said, smiling: "Your look
tells me that I almost frightened you by the ill-bred frankness with
which my face must have betrayed my anger, at hearing such imbecile
twaddle from men who aspire to govern our turbulent France. You remember
that after Lisbon was destroyed by an earthquake a quack advertised
'pills against earthquakes.' These messieurs are not so cunning as the
quack; he did not name the ingredients of his pills."

"But, M. de Mauleon," said Isaura, "if you, being opposed to the Empire,
think so ill of the wisdom of those who would destroy it, are you
prepared with remedies for earthquakes more efficacious than their
pills?"

"I reply as a famous English statesman, when in opposition, replied to a
somewhat similar question,--'I don't prescribe till I'm called in.'"

"To judge by the seven millions and a half whose votes were announced
on Saturday, and by the enthusiasm with which the Emperor was greeted,
there is too little fear of an earthquake for a good trade of the
pills of these messieurs, or for fair play to the remedies you will not
disclose till called in."

"Ah, Mademoiselle! playful wit from lips not formed for politics makes
me forget all about emperors and earthquakes. Pardon that commonplace
compliment--remember I am a Frenchman, and cannot help being frivolous."

"You rebuke my presumption too gently. True, I ought not to intrude
political subjects on one like you--I understand so little about
them--but this is my excuse, I do so desire to know more."

M. de Mauleon paused, and looked at her earnestly with a kindly, half
compassionate look, wholly free from the impertinence of gallantry.
"Young poetess," he said, softly, "you care for politics. Happy, indeed,
is he--and whether he succeed or fail in his ambition abroad, proud
should he be of an ambition crowned at home--he who has made you desire
to know more of politics!"

The girl felt the blood surge to her temples. How could she have been so
self-confessed? She made no reply, nor did M. de Mauleon seem to expect
one; with that rare delicacy of high breeding which appears in France
to belong to a former generation, he changed his tone, and went on as if
there had been no interruption to the question her words implied.

"You think the Empire secure--that it is menaced by on earthquake? You
deceive yourself. The Emperor began with a fatal mistake, but a mistake
it needs many years to discover. He disdained the slow natural process
of adjustment between demand and supply--employer and workmen. He
desired--no ignoble ambition--to make Paris the wonder of the world,
the eternal monument of his reign. In so doing, he sought to create
artificial modes of content for revolutionary workmen. Never has any
ruler had such tender heed of manual labour to the disparagement of
intellectual culture. Paris is embellished; Paris is the wonder of the
world; other great towns have followed its example; they, too, have
their rows of palaces and temples. Well, the time comes when the
magician can no longer give work to the spirits he raises; then they
must fall on him and rend: out of the very houses he built for the
better habitation of workmen will flock the malcontents who cry, 'Down
with the Empire!' On the 21st of May you witnessed the pompous ceremony
which announces to the Empire a vast majority of votes, that will be
utterly useless to it except as food for gunpowder in the times that are
at hand. Seven days before, on the 14th of May, there was a riot in the
Faubourg d'Temple--easily put down--you scarcely hear of it. That riot
was not the less necessary to those who would warn the Empire that it is
mortal. True, the riot disperses--but it is unpunished; riot unpunished
is a revolution begun. The earthquake is nearer than you think; and for
that earthquake what are the pills you quacks advertise? They prate
of an age too enlightened for war; they would mutilate the army--nay,
disband it if they could--with Prussia next door to France. Prussia,
desiring, not unreasonably, to take that place in the world which France
now holds, will never challenge France; if she did, she would be too
much in the wrong to find a second: Prussia knowing that she has to do
with the vainest, the most conceited, the rashest antagonist that ever
flourished a rapier in the face of a spadassin--Prussia will make France
challenge her.

"And how do ces messieurs deal with the French army? Do they dare to say
to the ministers, 'Reform it'? Do they dare say, 'Prefer for men
whose first duty it is to obey, discipline to equality--insist on the
distinction between the officer and the private, and never confound it;
Prussian officers are well-educated gentlemen, see that yours are'? Oh
no; they are democrats too stanch not to fraternise with an armed mob;
they content themselves with grudging an extra sou to the Commissariat,
and winking at the millions fraudulently pocketed by some 'Liberal
contractor.' Dieu des dieux! France to be beaten, not as at Waterloo
by hosts combined, but in fair duel by a single foe! Oh, the shame! the
shame! But as the French army is now organised, beaten she must be, if
she meets the march of the German."

"You appal me with your sinister predictions," said Isaura; "but,
happily, there is no sign of war. M. Duplessis, who is in the confidence
of the Emperor, told us only the other day that Napoleon, on learning
the result of the plebiscite, said: 'The foreign journalists who have
been insisting that the Empire cannot coexist with free institutions,
will no longer hint that it can be safely assailed from without.' And
more than ever I may say L'Empire c'est la paix!"

Monsieur de Mauleon shrugged his shoulders. "The old story--Troy and the
wooden horse."

"Tell me, M. de Mauleon, why do you, who so despise the Opposition, join
with it in opposing the Empire?"

"Mademoiselle, the Empire opposes me; while it lasts I cannot be even a
Depute; when it is gone, Heaven knows that I may be, perhaps Dictator;
one thing, you may rely upon, that I would, if not Dictator myself,
support any man who was better fitted for that task."

"Better fitted to destroy the liberty which he pretended to fight for."

"Not exactly so," replied M. de Mauleon, imperturbably--"better fitted
to establish a good government in lieu of the bad one he had fought
against, and the much worse governments that would seek to turn France
into a madhouse, and make the maddest of the inmates the mad doctor!" He
turned away, and here their conversation ended.

But it so impressed Isaura, that the same night she concluded her letter
to Madame de Grantmesnil, by giving a sketch of its substance, prefaced
by an ingenuous confession that she felt less sanguine confidence in
the importance of the applauses which had greeted the Emperor at the
Saturday's ceremonial, and ending thus: "I can but confusedly transcribe
the words of this singular man, and can give you no notion of the manner
and the voice which made them eloquent. Tell me, can there be any truth
in his gloomy predictions? I try not to think so, but they seem to rest
over that brilliant hall of the Louvre like an ominous thunder-cloud."




CHAPTER II.

The Marquis de Rochebriant was seated in his pleasant apartment,
glancing carelessly at the envelopes of many notes and letters lying yet
unopened on his breakfast-table. He had risen late at noon, for he had
not gone to bed till dawn. The night had been spent at his club--over
the card-table--by no means to the pecuniary advantage of the Marquis.
The reader will have learned, through the conversation recorded in a
former chapter between De Mauleon and Enguerrand de Vandemar, that the
austere Seigneur Breton had become a fast viveur of Paris. He had long
since spent the remnant of Louvier's premium of L10,000., and he owed
a year's interest. For this last there was an excuse. M. Collot, the
contractor to whom he had been advised to sell the yearly fall of his
forest-trees, had removed the trees, but had never paid a sou beyond
the preliminary deposit; so that the revenue, out of which the mortgagee
should be paid his interest, was not forthcoming. Alain had instructed
M. Hebert to press the contractor; the contractor had replied, that if
not pressed he could soon settle all claims--if pressed, he must declare
himself bankrupt. The Chevalier de Finisterre had laughed at the alarm
which Alain conceived when he first found himself in the condition
of debtor for a sum he could not pay--creditor for a sum he could not
recover.

"Bagatelle!" said the Chevalier. "Tschu! Collot, if you give him time,
is as safe as the Bank of France, and Louvier knows it. Louvier will not
trouble you--Louvier, the best fellow in the world! I'll call on him and
explain matters."

It is to be presumed that the Chevalier did so explain; for though both
at the first, and quite recently at the second default of payment, Alain
received letters from M. Louvier's professional agent, as reminders of
interest due, and as requests for its payment, the Chevalier assured him
that these applications were formalities of convention--that Louvier, in
fact, knew nothing about them; and when dining with the great financier
himself, and cordially welcomed and called "Mon cher," Alain had taken
him aside and commenced explanation and excuse, Louvier had cut him
short. "Peste! don't mention such trifles. There is such a thing as
business--that concerns my agent; such a thing as friendship--that
concerns me. Allez!"

Thus M. de Rochebriant, confiding in debtor and in creditor, had
suffered twelve months to glide by without much heed of either, and more
than live up to an income amply sufficient indeed for the wants of an
ordinary bachelor, but needing more careful thrift than could well be
expected from the head of one of the most illustrious houses in France,
cast so young into the vortex of the most expensive capital in the
world.

The poor Marquis glided into the grooves that slant downward, much as
the French Marquis of tradition was wont to glide; not that he appeared
to live extravagantly, but he needed all he had for his pocket-money,
and had lost that dread of being in debt which he had brought up from
the purer atmosphere of Bretagne.

But there were some debts which; of course, a Rochebriant must
pay--debts of honour--and Alain had, on the previous night, incurred
such a debt and must pay it that day. He had been strongly tempted, when
the debt rose to the figure it had attained, to risk a change of luck;
but whatever his imprudence, he was incapable of dishonesty. If the luck
did not change, and he lost more, he would be without means to meet his
obligations. As the debt now stood, he calculated that he could just
discharge it by the sale of his coupe and horses. It is no wonder he
left his letters unopened, however charming they might be; he was quite
sure they would contain no cheque which would enable him to pay his debt
and retain his equipage.

The door opened, and the valet announced M. le Chevalier de
Finisterre--a man with smooth countenance and air distinque, a pleasant
voice and perpetual smile.

"Well, mon cher," cried the Chevalier, "I hope that you recovered the
favour of Fortune before you quitted her green table last night. When I
left she seemed very cross with you."

"And so continued to the end," answered Alain, with well-simulated
gaiety--much too bon gentilhomme to betray rage or anguish for pecuniary
loss.

"After all," said de Finisterre, lighting his cigarette, "the uncertain
goddess could not do you much harm; the stakes were small, and your
adversary, the Prince, never goes double or quits."

"Nor I either. 'Small,' however, is a word of relative import; the
stakes might be small to you, to me large. Entre nous, cher ami, I am
at the end of my purse, and I have only this consolation-I am cured of
play: not that I leave the complaint, the complaint leaves me; it can no
more feed on me than a fever can feed on a skeleton."

"Are you serious?"

"As serious as a mourner who has just buried his all."

"His all? Tut, with such an estate as Rochebriant!"

For the first time in that talk Alain's countenance became overcast.

"And how long will Rochebriant be mine? You know that I hold it at the
mercy of the mortgagee, whose interest has not been paid, and who could
if, he so pleased, issue notice, take proceedings--that--"

"Peste!" interrupted de Finisterre; "Louvier take proceedings! Louvier,
the best fellow in the world! But don't I see his handwriting on that
envelope? No doubt an invitation to dinner."

Alain took up the letter thus singled forth from a miscellany of
epistles, some in female handwritings, unsealed but ingeniously
twisted into Gordian knots--some also in female handwritings, carefully
sealed--others in ill-looking envelopes, addressed in bold, legible,
clerk-like caligraphy. Taken altogether, these epistles had a character
in common; they betokened the correspondence of a viveur, regarded from
the female side as young, handsome, well-born--on the male side, as a
viveur who had forgotten to pay his hosier and tailor.

Louvier wrote a small, not very intelligible, but very masculine hand,
as most men who think cautiously and act promptly do write. The letter
ran thus:

"Cher petit Marquis" (at that commencement Alain haughtily raised his
head and bit his lips).

   "CHER PETIT MARQUIS,--It is an age since I have seen you. No
   doubt my humble soirees are too dull for a beau seigueur so
   courted. I forgive you. Would I were a beau seigneur at your age!
   Alas! I am only a commonplace man of business, growing old, too.
   Aloft from the world in which I dwell, you can scarcely be aware
   that I have embarked a great part of my capital in building
   speculations. There is a Rue de Louvier that runs its drains right
   through my purse. I am obliged to call in the moneys due to me. My
   agent informs me that I am just 7000 louis short of the total I
   need--all other debts being paid in--and that there is a trifle more
   than 7000 louis owned to me as interest on my hypotheque on
   Rochebriant: kindly pay into his hands before the end of this week
   that sum. You have been too lenient to Collot, who must owe you
   more than that. Send agent to him. Desole to trouble you, and am
   au desespoir to think that my own pressing necessities compel me
   to urge you to take so much trouble. Mais que faire? The Rue de
   Louvier stops the way, and I must leave it to my agent to clear it.

   "Accept all my excuses, with the assurance of my sentiments the most
   cordial. PAUL LOUVIER."

Alain tossed the letter to De Finisterre. "Read that from the best
fellow in the world."

The Chevalier laid down his cigarette and read. "Diable!" he said, when
he returned the letter and resumed the cigarette--"Diable! Louvier must
be much pressed for money, or he would not have written in this strain.
What does it matter? Collot owes you more than 7000 louis. Let your
lawyer get them, and go to sleep with both ears on your pillow."

"Ah! you think Collot can pay if he will?"

"Ah! foi! did not M. Gandrin tell you that M. Collot was safe to buy
your wood at more money than any one else would give?"

"Certainly," said Alain, comforted. "Gandrin left that impression on my
mind. I will set him on the man. All will come right, I dare say; but if
it does not come right, what would Louvier do?"

"Louvier do!" answered Finisterre, reflectively. "Well do you ask my
opinion and advice?"

"Earnestly, I ask."

"Honestly, then, I answer. I am a little on the Bourse myself--most
Parisians are. Louvier has made a gigantic speculation in this new
street, and with so many other irons in the fire he must want all the
money he can get at. I dare say that if you do not pay him what you owe,
he must leave it to his agent to take steps for announcing the sale
of Rochebriant. But he detests scandal; he hates the notion of being
severe; rather than that, in spite of his difficulties, he will buy
Rochebriant of you at a better price than it can command at public sale.
Sell it to him. Appeal to him to act generously, and you will flatter
him. You will get more than the old place is worth. Invest the
surplus--live as you have done, or better--and marry an heiress.
Morbleu! a Marquis de Rochebriant, if he were sixty years old, would
rank high in the matrimonial market. The more the democrats have sought
to impoverish titles and laugh down historical names, the more do rich
democrat fathers-in-law seek to decorate their daughters with titles
and give their grandchildren the heritage of historical names. You look
shocked, pauvre anti. Let us hope, then, that Collot will pay. Set your
dog--I mean your lawyer--at him; seize him by the throat!"

Before Alain had recovered from the stately silence with which he had
heard this very practical counsel, the valet again appeared, and ushered
in M. Frederic Lemercier.

There was no cordial acquaintance between the visitors. Lemercier was
chafed at finding himself supplanted in Alain's intimate companionship
by so new a friend, and De Finisterre affected to regard Lemercier as a
would-be exquisite of low birth and bad taste.

Alain, too, was a little discomposed at the sight of Lemercier,
remembering the wise cautious which that old college friend had wasted
on him at the commencement of his Parisian career, and smitten with vain
remorse that the cautions had been so arrogantly slighted.

It was with some timidity that he extended his hand to Frederic, and he
was surprised as well as moved by the more than usual warmth with which
it was grasped by the friend he had long neglected. Such affectionate
greeting was scarcely in keeping with the pride which characterised
Frederic Lemercier.

"Ma foi!" said the Chevalier, glancing towards the clock, "how time
flies! I had no idea it was so late. I must leave you now, my dear
Rochebriant. Perhaps we shall meet at the club later--I dine there
to-day. Au plaisir, M. Lemercier."




CHAPTER III.

When the door had closed on the Chevalier, Frederic's countenance became
very grave. Drawing his chair near to Alain, he said: "We have not seen
much of each other lately,--nay, no excuses; I am well aware that it
could scarcely be otherwise. Paris has grown so large and so subdivided
into sets, that the best friends belonging to different sets become
as divided as if the Atlantic flowed between them. I come to-day in
consequence of something I have just heard from Duplessis. Tell me, have
you got the money for the wood you sold to M. Collot a year ago?"

"No," said Alain, falteringly.

"Good heavens! none of it?"

"Only the deposit of ten per cent., which of course I spent, for it
formed the greater part of my income. What of Collot? Is he really
unsafe?"

"He is ruined, and has fled the country. His flight was the talk of the
Bourse this morning. Duplessis told me of it."

Alain's face paled. "How is Louvier to be paid? Read that letter!"

Lemercier rapidly scanned his eye over the contents of Louvier's letter.

"It is true, then, that you owe this man a year's interest--more than
7,000 louis?"

"Somewhat more--yes. But that is not the first care that troubles
me--Rochebriant may be lost, but with it not my honour. I owe the
Russian Prince 300 louis, lost to him last night at ecarte. I must
find a purchaser for my coupe and horses; they cost me 600 louis last
year,--do you know any one who will give me three?"

"Pooh! I will give you six; your alezan alone is worth half the money!"

"My dear Frederic, I will not sell them to you on any account. But you
have so many friends--"

"Who would give their soul to say, 'I bought these horses of
Rochebriant.' Of course I do. Ha! young Rameau, you are acquainted with
him?"

"Rameau! I never heard of him!"

"Vanity of vanities, then what is fame? Rameau is the editor of Le Sens
Commun. You read that journal?"

"Yes, it has clever articles, and I remember how I was absorbed in the
eloquent romance which appeared in it."

"Ah! by the Signora Cicogna, with whom I think you were somewhat smitten
last year."

"Last year--was I? How a year can alter a man! But my debt to the
Prince. What has Le Sens Commun to do with my horses?"

"I met Rameau at Savarin's the other evening. He was making himself out
a hero and a martyr! his coupe had been taken from him to assist in a
barricade in that senseless emeute ten days ago; the coupe got smashed,
the horses disappeared. He will buy one of your horses and coupe.

"Leave it to me! I know where to dispose of the other two horses. At
what hour do you want the money?"

"Before I go to dinner at the club."

"You shall have it within two hours; but you must not dine at the club
to-day. I have a note from Duplessis to invite you to dine with him
to-day!"

"Duplessis! I know so little of him!"

"You should know him better. He is the only man who can give you sound
advice as to this difficulty with Louvier; and he will give it the more
carefully and zealously because he has that enmity to Louvier which one
rival financier has to another. I dine with him too. We shall find an
occasion to consult him quietly; he speaks of you most kindly. What a
lovely girl his daughter is!"

"I dare say. Ah! I wish I had been less absurdly fastidious. I wish I
had entered the army as a private soldier six months ago; I should have
been a corporal by this time! Still it is not too late. When Rochebriant
is gone, I can yet say with the Mouszquetaire in the melodrame: 'I am
rich--I have my honour and my sword!'"

"Nonsense! Rochebriant shall be saved; meanwhile I hasten to Rameau. Au
revoir, at the Hotel Duplessis--seven o'clock."

Lemercier went, and in less than two hours sent the Marquis bank-notes
for 600 louis, requesting an order for the delivery of the horses and
carriage.

That order written and signed, Alain hastened to acquit himself of his
debt of honour, and contemplating his probable ruin with a lighter heart
presented himself at the Hotel Duplessis.

Duplessis made no pretensions to vie with the magnificent existence of
Louvier. His house, though agreeably situated and flatteringly styled
the Hotel Duplessis, was of moderate size, very unostentatiously
furnished; nor was it accustomed to receive the brilliant motley crowds
which assembled in the salons of the elder financier.

Before that year, indeed, Duplessis had confined such entertainments as
he gave to quiet men of business, or a few of the more devoted and loyal
partisans of the Imperial dynasty; but since Valerie came to live with
him he had extended his hospitalities to wider and livelier circles,
including some celebrities in the world of art and letters as well as of
fashion. Of the party assembled that evening at dinner were Isaura, with
the Signora Venosta, one of the Imperial Ministers, the Colonel
whom Alain had already met at Lemercier's supper, Deputes (ardent
Imperialists), and the Duchesse de Tarascon; these, with Alain and
Frederic, made up the party. The conversation was not particularly gay.
Duplessis himself, though an exceedingly well-read and able man, had not
the genial accomplishments of a brilliant host. Constitutionally grave
and habitually taciturn--though there were moments in which he was
roused out of his wonted self into eloquence or wit--he seemed to-day
absorbed in some engrossing train of thought. The Minister, the Deputes
and the Duchesse de Tarascon talked politics, and ridiculed the trumpery
emeute of the 14th; exulted in the success of the plebiscite; and
admitting, with indignation, the growing strength of Prussia, and--with
scarcely less indignation, but more contempt, censuring the selfish
egotism of England in disregarding the due equilibrium of the European
balance of power,--hinted at the necessity of annexing Belgium as a
set-off against the results of Sadowa.

Alain found himself seated next to Isaura--to the woman who had so
captivated his eye and fancy on his first arrival in Paris.

Remembering his last conversation with Graham nearly a year ago, he felt
some curiosity to ascertain whether the rich Englishman had proposed to
her, and if so, been refused or accepted.

The first words that passed between them were trite enough, but after a
little pause in the talk, Alain said:

"I think Mademoiselle and myself have an acquaintance in common-Monsieur
Vane, a distinguished Englishman. Do you know if he be in Paris at
present? I have not seen him for many months."

"I believe he is in London; at least, Colonel Morley met the other day a
friend of his who said so."

Though Isaura strove to speak in a tone of indifference, Alain's ear
detected a ring of pain in her voice; and watching her countenance, he
was impressed with a saddened change in its expression. He was touched,
and his curiosity was mingled with a gentler interest as he said "When I
last saw M. Vane I should have judged him to be too much under the spell
of an enchantress to remain long without the pale of the circle she
draws around her."

Isaura turned her face quickly towards the speaker, and her lips moved,
but she said nothing audibly.

"Can there have been quarrel or misunderstanding?" thought Alain; and
after that question his heart asked itself, "Supposing Isaura were free,
her affections disengaged, could he wish to woo and to win her?" and his
heart answered--"Eighteen months ago thou wert nearer to her than now.
Thou wert removed from her for ever when thou didst accept the world
as a barrier between you; then, poor as thou wert, thou wouldst have
preferred her to riches. Thou went then sensible only of the ingenuous
impulses of youth, but the moment thou saidst, 'I am Rochebriant, and
having once owned the claims of birth and station, I cannot renounce
them for love, Isaura became but a dream. Now that ruin stares thee in
the face--now that thou must grapple with the sternest difficulties of
adverse fate--thou hast lost the poetry of sentiment which could alone
give to that dream the colours and the form of human life." He could not
again think of that fair creature as a prize that he might even dare to
covet. And as he met her inquiring eyes, and saw her quivering lip,
he felt instinctively that Graham was dear to her, and that the tender
interest with which she inspired himself was untroubled by one pang of
jealousy. He resumed:

"Yes, the last time I saw the Englishman he spoke with such respectful
homage of one lady, whose hand he would deem it the highest reward of
ambition to secure, that I cannot but feel deep compassion for him
if that ambition has been foiled; and thus only do I account for his
absence from Paris."

"You are an intimate friend of Mr. Vane's?"

"No, indeed, I have not that honour; our acquaintance is but slight,
but it impressed me with the idea of a man of vigorous intellect, frank
temper, and perfect honour."

Isaura's face brightened with the joy we feel when we hear the praise of
those we love.

At this moment, Duplessis, who had been observing the Italian and the
young Marquis, for the first time during dinner, broke silence.

"Mademoiselle," he said, addressing Isaura across the table, "I hope I
have not been correctly informed that your literary triumph has induced
you to forego the career in which all the best judges concur that your
successes would be not less brilliant; surely one art does not exclude
another."

Elated by Alain's report of Graham's words, by the conviction that these
words applied to herself, and by the thought that her renunciation of
the stage removed a barrier between them, Isaura answered, with a sort
of enthusiasm:

"I know not, M. Duplessis, if one art excludes another; if there be
desire to excel in each. But I have long lost all desire to excel in
the art you refer to, and resigned all idea of the career in which it
opens."

"So M. Vane told me," said Alain, in a whisper.

"When?"

"Last year--on the day that he spoke in terms of admiration so merited
of the lady whom M. Duplessis has just had the honour to address."

All this while, Valerie, who was seated at the further end of the table
beside the Minister, who had taken her in to dinner, had been watching,
with eyes, the anxious tearful sorrow of which none but her father had
noticed, the low-voiced confidence between Alain and the friend, whom
till that day she had so enthusiastically loved. Hitherto she had been
answering in monosyllables all attempts of the great man to draw her
into conversation; but now, observing how Isaura blushed and looked
down, that strange faculty in women, which we men call dissimulation,
and which in them is truthfulness to their own nature, enabled her to
carry off the sharpest anguish she had ever experienced, by a sudden
burst of levity of spirit. She caught up some commonplace the Minister
had adapted to what he considered the poverty of her understanding, with
a quickness of satire which startled that grave man, and he gazed at her
astonished. Up to that moment he had secretly admired her as a girl well
brought up--as girls fresh from a French convent are supposed to be;
now, hearing her brilliant rejoinder to his stupid observation, he said
inly: "Dame! the low birth of a financier's daughter shows itself."

But, being a clever man himself, her retort put him on his mettle, and
he became, to his own amazement, brilliant himself. With that matchless
quickness which belongs to Parisians, the guests around him seized the
new esprit de conversation which had been evoked between the statesman
and the childlike girl beside him; and as they caught up the ball,
lightly flung among them, they thought within themselves how much
more sparkling the financier's pretty, lively daughter was than that
dark-eyed young muse, of whom all the journalists of Paris were writing
in a chorus of welcome and applause, and who seemed not to have a word
to say worth listening to, except to the handsome young Marquis, whom,
no doubt, she wished to fascinate.

Valerie fairly outshone Isaura in intellect and in wit; and neither
Valerie nor Isaura cared, to the value of a bean-straw, about that
distinction. Each was thinking only of the prize which the humblest
peasant women have in common with the most brilliantly accomplished of
their sex--the heart of a man beloved.




CHAPTER IV.

On the Continent generally, as we all know, men do not sit drinking wine
together after the ladies retire. So when the signal was given all the
guests adjourned to the salon; and Alain quitted Isaura to gain the ear
of the Duchesse de Tarascon.

"It is long--at, least long for Paris life," said the Marquis--"since
my first visit to you, in company with Enguerrand de Vandemar. Much that
you then said rested on my mind, disturbing the prejudices I took from
Bretagne."

"I am proud to hear it, my kinsman."

"You know that I would have taken military service under the Emperor,
but for the regulation which would have compelled me to enter the ranks
as a private soldier."

"I sympathise with that scruple; but you are aware that the Emperor
himself could not have ventured to make any exception even in your
favour."

"Certainly not. I repent me of my pride; perhaps I may enlist still in
some regiment sent to Algiers."

"No; there are other ways in which a Rochebriant can serve a throne.
There will be an office at Court vacant soon, which would not misbecome
your birth."

"Pardon me; a soldier serves his country--a courtier owns a master; and
I cannot take the livery of the Emperor, though I could wear the uniform
of France."

"Your distinction is childish, my kinsman," said the Duchesse,
impetuously. "You talk as if the Emperor had an interest apart from the
nation. I tell you that he has not a corner of his heart--not even one
reserved for his son and his dynasty--in which the thought of France
does not predominate."

"I do not presume, Madame la Duchesse, to question the truth of what
you say; but I have no reason to suppose that the same thought does not
predominate in the heart of the Bourbon. The Bourbon would be the first
to say to me: 'If France needs your sword against her foes, let it
not rest in the scabbard.' But would the Bourbon say, 'The place of a
Rochebriant is among the valetaille of the Corsican's successor'?"

"Alas for poor France!" said the Duchesse; "and alas for men like you,
my proud cousin, if the Corsican's successors or successor be--"

"Henry V." interrupted Alain, with a brightening eye. "Dreamer! No;
some descendant of the mob-kings who gave Bourbons and nobles to the
guillotine."

While the Duchesse and Alain were thus conversing, Isaura had seated
herself by Valerie, and, unconscious of the offence she had given,
addressed her in those pretty caressing terms with which young-lady
friends are wont to compliment each other; but Valerie answered curtly
or sarcastically, and turned aside to converse with the Minister. A
few minutes more, and the party began to break up. Lemercier, however,
detained Alain, whispering, "Duplessis will see us on your business so
soon as the other guests have gone."




CHAPTER V.

"Monsieur le Marquis," said Duplessis, when the salon was cleared of all
but himself and the two friends, "Lemercier has confided to me the
state of your affairs in connection with M. Louvier, and flatters me by
thinking my advice may be of some service; if so, command me."

"I shall most gratefully accept your advice," answered Alain, "but I
fear my condition defies even your ability and skill."

"Permit me to hope not, and to ask a few necessary questions. M. Louvier
has constituted himself your sole mortgagee; to what amount, at what
interest, and from what annual proceeds is the interest paid?"

Herewith Alain gave details already furnished to the reader. Duplessis
listened, and noted down the replies.

"I see it all," he said, when Alain had finished. "M. Louvier had
predetermined to possess himself of your estate: he makes himself
mortgagee at a rate of interest so low, that I tell you fairly, at the
present value of money, I doubt if you could find any capitalist who
would accept the transfer of the mortgage at the same rate. This is not
like Louvier, unless he had an object to gain, and that object is your
land. The revenue from your estate is derived chiefly from wood, out
of which the interest due to Louvier is to be paid. M. Gandrin, in a
skilfully-guarded letter, encourages you to sell the wood from your
forests to a man who offers you several thousand francs more than it
could command from customary buyers. I say nothing against M. Gandrin,
but every man who knows Paris as I do, knows that M. Louvier can
put, and has put, a great deal of money into M. Gandrin's pocket. The
purchaser of your wood does not pay more than his deposit, and has
just left the country insolvent. Your purchaser, M. Collot, was an
adventurous speculator; he would have bought anything at any price,
provided he had time to pay; if his speculations had been lucky he would
have paid. M. Louvier knew, as I knew, that M. Collot was a gambler,
and the chances were that he would not pay. M. Louvier allows a year's
interest on his hypotheque to become due-notice thereof duly given
to you by his agent--now you come under the operation of the law. Of
course, you know what the law is?"

"Not exactly," answered Alain, feeling frostbitten by the congealing
words of his counsellor; "but I take it for granted that if I cannot pay
the interest of a sum borrowed on my property, that property itself is
forfeited."

"No, not quite that--the law is mild. If the interest which should be
paid half-yearly remains unpaid at the end of a year, the mortgagee has
a right to be impatient, has he not?"

"Certainly he has."

"Well, then, on fait un commandement tendant de saisie immobiliere, viz:
The mortgagee gives a notice that the property shall be put up for sale.
Then it is put up for sale, and in most cases the mortgagee buys it in.
Here, certainly, no competitors in the mere business way would vie with
Louvier; the mortgage at three and a half per cent. covers more than the
estate is apparently worth. Ah! but stop, M. le Marquis; the notice is
not yet served: the whole process would take six months from the day it
is served to the taking possession after the sale; in the meanwhile, if
you pay the interest due, the action drops. Courage, M. le Marquis! Hope
yet, if you condescend to call me friend."

"And me," cried Lemercier; "I will sell out of my railway shares
to-morrow-see to it, Duplessis--enough to pay off the damnable interest.
See to it, mon ami."

"Agree to that, M. le Marquis, and you are safe for another year," said
Duplessis, folding up the paper on which he had made his notes, but
