of their own rocks, but fast friends by blood of Algitha, once their
queen on Penmaenmawr. [Footnote: See the admirable description of the
tragedy of Penmaenmawr, in Bulwer's 'Harold.'] Edwin, the young Earl,
Algitha's brother, Hereward's nephew,--he must be with them too, if he
were a man.

Eastward, round Stafford, and the centre of Mercia, another blaze of
furious English valor. Morcar, Edwin's brother, must be there, as their
Earl, if he too was a man.

Then in the fens and Kesteven. What meant this news, that Hereward of
St. Omer was come again, and an army with him? That he was levying war
on all Frenchmen, in the name of Sweyn, King of Denmark and of England?
He is an outlaw, a desperado, a boastful swash-buckler, thought William,
it may be, to himself. He found out, in after years, that he had
mistaken his man.

And north, at York, in the rear of those three insurrections lay
Gospatrick, Waltheof, and Marlesweyn, with the Northumbrian host. Durham
was lost, and Comyn burnt therein. But York, so boasted William Malet,
could hold out for a year. He should not need to hold out for so long.

And last, and worst of all, hung on the eastern coast the mighty fleet
of Sweyn, who claimed England as his of right. The foe whom he had part
feared ever since he set foot on English soil, a collision with whom had
been inevitable all along, was come at last; but where would he strike
his blow?

William knew, it may be, that the Danes had been defeated at Norwich;
he knew, doubt it not (for his spies told him everything), that they
had purposed entering the Wash. To prevent a junction between them and
Hereward was impossible. He must prevent a junction between them and
Edwin and Morcar's men.

He determined, it seems--for he did it--to cut the English line in two,
and marched upon Stafford as its centre.

So it seems; for all records of these campaigns are fragmentary,
confused, contradictory. The Normans fought, and had no time to write
history. The English, beaten and crushed, died and left no sign. The
only chroniclers of the time are monks. And little could Ordericus
Vitalis, or Florence of Worcester, or he of Peterborough, faithful as he
was, who filled up the sad pages of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,--little
could they see or understand of the masterly strategy which was
conquering all England for Norman monks, in order that they, following
the army like black ravens, might feast themselves upon the prey which
others won for them. To them, the death of an abbot, the squabbles of a
monastery, the journey of a prelate to Rome, are more important than the
manoeuvres which decided the life and freedom of tens of thousands.

So all we know is, that William fell upon Morcar's men at Stafford,
and smote them with a great destruction; rolling the fugitives west and
east, toward Edwin, perhaps, at Chester, certainly toward Hereward in
the fens.

At Stafford met him the fugitives from York, Malet, his wife, and
children, with the dreadful news that the Danes had joined Gospatrick,
and that York was lost.

William burst into fiendish fury. He accused the wretched men of
treason. He cut off their hands, thrust out their eyes, threw Malet into
prison, and stormed on north.

He lay at Pontefract for three weeks. The bridges over the Aire were
broken down. But at last he crossed and marched on York.

No man opposed him. The Danes were gone down to the Humber. Gospatrick
and Waltheof's hearts had failed them, and they had retired before the
great captain.

Florence, of Worcester, says that William bought Earl Osbiorn off,
giving him much money, and leave to forage for his fleet along the
coast, and that Osbiorn was outlawed on his return to Denmark.

Doubtless William would have so done if he could. Doubtless the angry
and disappointed English raised such accusations against the earl,
believing them to be true. But is not the simpler cause of Osbiorn's
conduct to be found in this plain fact? He had sailed from Denmark to
put Sweyn, his brother, on the throne. He found, on his arrival, that
Gospatrick and Waltheof had seized it in the name of Edgar Atheling.
What had he to do more in England, save what he did?--go out into the
Humber, and winter safely there, waiting till Sweyn should come with
reinforcements in the spring?

Then William had his revenge. He destroyed, in the language of
Scripture, "the life of the land." Far and wide the farms were burnt
over their owners' heads, the growing crops upon the ground; the horses
were houghed, the cattle driven off; while of human death and misery
there was no end. Yorkshire, and much of the neighboring counties, lay
waste, for the next nine years. It did not recover itself fully till
several generations after.

The Danes had boasted that they would keep their Yule at York. William
kept his Yule there instead. He sent to Winchester for the regalia
of the Confessor; and in the midst of the blackened ruins, while the
English, for miles around, wandered starving in the snows, feeding on
carrion, on rats and mice, and, at last, upon each other's corpses, he
sat in his royal robes, and gave away the lands of Edwin and Morcar to
his liegemen. And thus, like the Romans, from whom he derived both his
strategy and his civilization, he "made a solitude and called it peace."

He did not give away Waltheof's lands; and only part of Gospatrick's. He
wanted Gospatrick; he loved Waltheof, and wanted him likewise.

Therefore, through the desert which he himself had made, he forced his
way up to the Tees a second time, over snow-covered moors; and this
time St. Cuthbert had sent no fog, being satisfied, presumably, with
William's orthodox attachment to St. Peter and Rome; so the Conqueror
treated quietly with Waltheof and Gospatrick, who lay at Durham.

Gospatrick got back his ancestral earldom from Tees to Tyne; and paid
down for it much hard money and treasure; bought it, in fact, he said.

Waltheof got back his earldom, and much of Morcar's. From the fens to
the Tees was to be his province. And then, to the astonishment alike of
Normans and English, and it may be, of himself, he married Judith, the
Conqueror's niece; and became, once more, William's loved and trusted
friend--or slave.

It seems inexplicable at first sight. Inexplicable, save as an instance
of that fascination which the strong sometimes exercise over the weak.

Then William turned southwest. Edwin, wild Edric, the dispossessed Thane
of Shropshire, and the wilder Blethwallon and his Welshmen, were still
harrying and slaying. They had just attacked Shrewsbury. William would
come upon them by a way they thought not of.

So over the backbone of England, by way, probably, of Halifax, or
Huddersfield, through pathless moors and bogs, down towards the plains
of Lancashire and Cheshire, he pushed over and on. His soldiers from the
plains of sunny France could not face the cold, the rain, the bogs, the
hideous gorges, the valiant peasants,--still the finest and shrewdest
race of men in all England,--who set upon them in wooded glens, or
rolled stones on them from the limestone crags. They prayed to be
dismissed, to go home.

"Cowards might go back," said William; "he should go on. If he could not
ride, he would walk. Whoever lagged, he would be foremost." And, cheered
by his example, the army at last debouched upon the Cheshire flats.

Then he fell upon Edwin, as he had fallen upon Morcar. He drove the wild
Welsh through the pass of Mold, and up into their native hills. He
laid all waste with fire and sword for many a mile, as Domesday-book
testifies to this day. He strengthened the walls of Chester, and
trampled out the last embers of rebellion; he went down south to
Salisbury, King of England once again.

Why did he not push on at once against the one rebellion left
alight,--that of Hereward and his fenmen?

It may be that he understood him and them. It may be that he meant to
treat with Sweyn, as he had done, if the story be true, with Osbiorn. It
is more likely that he could do no more; that his army, after so swift
and long a campaign, required rest. It may be that the time of service
of many of his mercenaries was expired. Be that as it may, he mustered
them at Old Sarum,--the Roman British burgh which still stands on the
down side, and rewarded them, according to their deserts, from the lands
of the conquered English.

How soon Hereward knew all this, or how he passed the winter of
1070-71, we cannot tell. But to him it must have been a winter of bitter
perplexity.

It was impossible to get information from Edwin; and news from York was
almost as impossible to get, for Gilbert of Ghent stood between him and
it.

He felt himself now pent in, all but trapped. Since he had set foot
last in England ugly things had risen up, on which he had calculated
too little,--namely, Norman castles. A whole ring of them in Norfolk
and Suffolk cut him off from the south. A castle at Cambridge closed
the south end of the fens; another at Bedford, the western end; while
Lincoln Castle to the north, cut him off from York.

His men did not see the difficulty; and wanted him to march towards
York, and clear all Lindsay and right up to the Humber.

Gladly would he have done so, when he heard that the Danes were
wintering in the Humber.

"But how can we take Lincoln Castle without artillery, or even a
battering-ram?"

"Let us march past, it then, and leave it behind."

"Ah, my sons," said Hereward, laughing sadly, "do you suppose that the
Mamzer spends his time--and Englishmen's life and labor--in heaping up
those great stone mountains, that you and I may walk past them? They are
put there just to prevent our walking past, unless we choose to have the
garrison sallying out to attack our rear, and cut us off from home, and
carry off our women into the bargain, when our backs are turned."

The English swore, and declared that they had never thought of that.

"No. We drink too much ale this side of the Channel, to think of
that,--or of anything beside."

"But," said Leofwin Prat, "if we have no artillery, we can make some."

"Spoken like yourself, good comrade. If we only knew how."

"I know," said Torfrida. "I have read of such things in books of the
ancients, and I have watched them making continually,--I little knew
why, or that I should ever turn engineer."

"What is there that you do not know?" cried they all at once. And
Torfrida actually showed herself a fair practical engineer.

But where was iron to come from? Iron for catapult springs, iron for ram
heads, iron for bolts and bars?

"Torfrida," said Hereward, "you are wise. Can you use the divining-rod?

"Why, my knight?"

"Because there might be iron ore in the wolds; and if you could find it
by the rod, we might get it up and smelt it."

Torfrida said humbly that she would try; and walked with the
divining-rod between her pretty fingers for many a mile in wood and
wold, wherever the ground looked red and rusty. But she never found any
iron.

"We must take the tires off the cart-wheels," said Leofwin Prat.

"But how will the carts do without? For we shall want them if we march."

"In Provence, where I was born, the wheels of the carts are made out of
one round piece of wood. Could we not cut out wheels like them?" asked
Torfrida.

"You are the wise woman, as usual," said Hereward.

Torfrida burst into a violent flood of tears, no one knew why.

There came over her a vision of the creaking carts, and the little sleek
oxen, dove-colored and dove-eyed, with their canvas mantles tied neatly
on to keep off heat and flies, lounging on with their light load of vine
and olive twigs beneath the blazing southern sun. When should she see
the sun once more? She looked up at the brown branches overhead, howling
in the December gale, and down at the brown fen below, dying into mist
and darkness as the low December sun died down; and it seemed as if her
life was dying down with it. There would be no more sun, and no more
summers, for her upon this earth.

None certainly for her poor old mother. Her southern blood was chilling
more and more beneath the bitter sky of Kesteven. The fall of the leaf
had brought with it rheumatism, ague, an many miseries. Cunning old
leech-wives treated the French lady with tonics, mugwort, and bogbean,
and good wine enow, But, like David of old, she got no heat; and before
Yule-tide came, she had prayed herself safely out of this world, and
into the world to come. And Torfrida's heart was the more light when she
saw her go.

She was absorbed utterly in Hereward and his plots. She lived for
nothing else; and clung to them all the more fiercely, the more
desperate they seemed.

So that small band of gallant men labored on, waiting for the Danes, and
trying to make artillery and take Lincoln Keep. And all the while--so
unequal is fortune when God so wills--throughout the Southern Weald,
from Hastings to Hind-head, every copse glared with charcoal-heaps,
every glen was burrowed with iron diggings, every hammer-pond stamped
and gurgled night and day, smelting and forging English iron, wherewith
the Frenchmen might slay Englishmen.

William--though perhaps he knew it not himself--had, in securing
Sussex and Surrey, secured the then great iron-field of England, and
an unlimited supply of weapons; and to that circumstance, it may be, as
much as to any other, the success of his campaigns may be due.

It must have been in one of these December days that a handful of
knights came through the Bruneswold, mud and blood bespattered, urging
on tired horses, as men desperate and foredone. And the foremost of them
all, when he saw Hereward at the gate of Bourne, leaped down, and threw
his arms round his neck and burst into bitter weeping.

"Hereward, I know you, though you know me not. I am your nephew, Morcar
Algarsson; and all is lost."

As the winter ran on, other fugitives came in, mostly of rank and
family. At last Edwin himself came, young and fair, like Morcar; he
who should have been the Conqueror's son-in-law; for whom his true-love
pined, as he pined, in vain. Where were Sweyn and his Danes? Whither
should they go till he came?

"To Ely," answered Hereward.

Whether or not it was his wit which first seized on the military
capabilities of Ely is not told. Leofric the deacon, who is likely to
know best, says that there were men there already holding theirs out
against William, and that they sent for Hereward. But it is not clear
from his words whether they were fugitives, or merely bold Abbot
Thurstan and his monks.

It is but probable, nevertheless, that Hereward, as the only man among
the fugitives who ever showed any ability whatsoever, and who was, also,
the only leader (save Morcar) connected with the fen, conceived the
famous "Camp of Refuge," and made it a formidable fact. Be that as it
may, Edwin and Morcar went to Ely; and there joined them a Count Tosti
(according to Leofric), unknown to history; a Siward Barn, or "the boy,"
who had been dispossessed of lands in Lincolnshire; and other valiant
and noble gentlemen,--the last wrecks of the English aristocracy. And
there they sat in Abbot Thurstan's hall, and waited for Sweyn and the
Danes.

But the worst Job's messenger who, during that evil winter and spring,
came into the fen, was Bishop Egelwin of Durham. He it was, most
probably, who brought the news of Yorkshire laid waste with fire and
sword. He it was, most certainly, who brought the worse news still, that
Gospatrick and Waltheof were gone over to the king. He was at Durham,
seemingly, when he saw that; and fled for his life ere evil overtook
him: for to yield to William that brave bishop had no mind.

But when Hereward heard that Waltheof was married to the Conqueror's
niece, he smote his hands together, and cursed him, and the mother who
bore him to Siward the Stout.

"Could thy father rise from his grave, he would split thy craven head in
the very lap of the Frenchwoman."

"A hard lap will he find it, Hereward," said Torfrida. "I know
her,--wanton, false, and vain. Heaven grant he do not rue the day he
ever saw her!"

"Heaven grant he may rue it! Would that her bosom were knives and
fish-hooks, like that of the statue in the fairy-tale. See what he has
done for us! He is Earl not only of his own lands, but he has taken
poor Morcar's too, and half his earldom. He is Earl of Huntingdon, of
Cambridge, they say,--of this ground on which we stand. What right
have I here now? How can I call on a single man to arm, as I could in
Morcar's name? I am an outlaw here and a robber; and so is every man
with me. And do you think that William did not know that? He saw well
enough what he was doing when he set up that great brainless idol as
Earl again. He wanted to split up the Danish folk, and he has done it.
The Northumbrians will stick to Waltheof. They think him a mighty
hero, because he held York-gate alone with his own axe against all the
French."

"Well, that was a gallant deed."

"Pish! we are all gallant men, we English. It is not courage that we
want, it is brains. So the Yorkshire and Lindsay men, and the Nottingham
men too, will go with Waltheof. And round here, and all through the
fens, every coward, every prudent man even,--every man who likes to be
within the law, and feel his head safe on his shoulders,--no blame to
him--will draw each from me for fear of this new Earl, and leave us to
end as a handful of outlaws. I see it all. As William sees it all. He is
wise enough, the Mamzer, and so is his father Belial, to whom he will
go home some day. Yes, Torfrida," he went on after a pause, more gently,
but in a tone of exquisite sadness, "you were right, as you always are.
I am no match for that man. I see it now."

"I never said that. Only--"

"Only you told me again and again that he was the wisest man on earth."

"And yet, for that very reason, I bade you win glory without end, by
defying the wisest man on earth."

"And do you bid me do it still?"

"God knows what I bid," said Torfrida, bursting into tears. "Let me go
pray, for I never needed it more."

Hereward watched her kneeling, as he sat moody, all but desperate. Then
he glided to her side, and said gently,--

"Teach me how to pray, Torfrida. I can say a Pater or an Ave. But that
does not comfort a man's heart, as far as I could ever find. Teach me to
pray, as you and my mother do."

And she put her arms round the wild man's neck, and tried to teach him,
like a little child.




CHAPTER XXVI.

HOW HEREWARD FULFILLED HIS WORDS TO THE PRIOR OF THE GOLDEN BOROUGH.


In the course of that winter died good Abbot Brand. Hereward went over
to see him, and found him mumbling to himself texts of Isaiah, and
confessing the sins of his people.

"'Woe to the vineyard that bringeth forth wild grapes. Woe to those that
join house to house, and field to field,'--like us, and the Godwinssons,
and every man that could, till we 'stood alone in the land.' 'Many
houses, great and fair, shall be without inhabitants.' It is all
foretold in Holy Writ, Hereward, my son. 'Woe to those who rise early to
fill themselves with strong drink, and the tabret and harp are in their
feasts; but they regard not the works of the Lord.' 'Therefore my people
are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge.' Ah, those
Frenchmen have knowledge, and too much of it; while we have brains
filled with ale instead of justice. 'Therefore hell hath enlarged
herself, and opened her mouth without measure'; and all go down into
it, one by one. And dost thou think thou shalt escape, Hereward, thou
stout-hearted?"

"I neither know nor care; but this I know, that whithersoever I go, I
shall go sword in hand."

"'They that take the sword shall perish by the sword,'" said Brand, and
blessed Hereward, and died.

A week after came news that Thorold of Malmesbury was coming to take
the Abbey of Peterborough, and had got as far as Stamford, with a right
royal train.

Then Hereward sent Abbot Thorold word, that if he or his Frenchmen put
foot into Peterborough, he, Hereward, would burn it over their heads.
And that if he rode a mile beyond Stamford town, he should walk back
into it barefoot in his shirt.

Whereon Thorold abode at Stamford, and kept up his spirits by singing
the songs of Roland,--which some say he himself composed.

A week after that, and the Danes were come.

A mighty fleet, with Sweyn Ulfsson at their head, went up the Ouse
toward Ely. Another, with Osbiorn at their head, having joined them off
the mouth of the Humber, sailed (it seems) up the Nene. All the chivalry
of Denmark and Ireland was come. And with it, all the chivalry and
the unchivalry of the Baltic shores. Vikings from Jomsburg and Arkona,
Gottlanders from Wisby; and with them savages from Esthonia, Finns from
Aeland, Letts who still offered in the forests of Rugen, human victims
to the four-headed Swantowit; foul hordes in sheep-skins and primeval
filth, who might have been scented from Hunstanton Cliff ever since
their ships had rounded the Skaw.

Hereward hurried to them with all his men. He was anxious, of course,
to prevent their plundering the landsfolk as they went,--and that the
savages from the Baltic shore would certainly do, if they could, however
reasonable the Danes, Orkneymen, and Irish Ostmen might be.

Food, of course, they must take where they could find it; but outrages
were not a necessary, though a too common, adjunct to the process of
emptying a farmer's granaries.

He found the Danes in a dangerous mood, sulky, and disgusted, as they
had good right to be. They had gone to the Humber, and found nothing but
ruin; the land waste; the French holding both the shores of the Humber;
and Osbiorn cowering in Humber-mouth, hardly able to feed his men. They
had come to conquer England, and nothing was left for them to conquer,
but a few peat-bogs. Then they would have what there was in them. Every
one knew that gold grew up in England out of the ground, wherever a monk
put his foot. And they would plunder Crowland. Their forefathers had
done it, and had fared none the worse. English gold they would have, if
they could not get fat English manors.

"No! not Crowland!" said Hereward; "any place but Crowland, endowed
and honored by Canute the Great,--Crowland, whose abbot was a Danish
nobleman, whose monks were Danes to a man, of their own flesh and blood.
Canute's soul would rise up in Valhalla and curse them, if they took the
value of a penny from St. Guthlac. St. Guthlac was their good friend.
He would send them bread, meat, ale, all they needed. But woe to the man
who set foot upon his ground."

Hereward sent off messengers to Crowland, warning all to be ready to
escape into the fens; and entreating Ulfketyl to empty his storehouses
into his barges, and send food to the Danes, ere a day was past. And
Ulfketyl worked hard and well, till a string of barges wound its way
through the fens, laden with beeves and bread, and ale-barrels in
plenty, and with monks too, who welcomed the Danes as their brethren,
talked to them in their own tongue, blessed them in St. Guthlac's name
as the saviors of England, and went home again, chanting so sweetly
their thanks to Heaven for their safety, that the wild Vikings were
awed, and agreed that St. Guthlac's men were wise folk and open-hearted,
and that it was a shame to do them harm.

But plunder they must have.

"And plunder you shall have!" said Hereward, as a sudden thought struck
him. "I will show you the way to the Golden Borough,--the richest
minster in England; and all the treasures of the Golden Borough shall be
yours, if you will treat Englishmen as friends, and spare the people of
the fens."

It was a great crime in the eyes of men of that time. A great crime,
taken simply, in Hereward's own eyes. But necessity knows no law.
Something the Danes must have, and ought to have; and St. Peter's gold
was better in their purses than in that of Thorold and his French monks.

So he led them across the fens and side rivers, till they came into the
old Nene, which men call Catwater and Muscal now.

As he passed Nomanslandhirne, and the mouth of the Crowland river, he
trembled, and trusted that the Danes did not know that they were within
three miles of St. Guthlac's sanctuary. But they went on ignorant, and
up the Muscal till they saw St. Peter's towers on the wooded rise, and
behind them the great forest which now is Milton Park.

There were two parties in Peterborough minster: a smaller faction of
stout-hearted English, a larger one who favored William and the French
customs, with Prior Herluin at their head. Herluin wanted not for
foresight, and he knew that evil was coming on him. He knew that the
Danes were in the fen. He knew that Hereward was with them. He knew that
they had come to Crowland. Hereward could never mean to let them sack
it. Peterborough must be their point. And Herluin set his teeth, like a
bold man determined to abide the worst, and barred and barricaded every
gate and door.

That night a hapless churchwarden, Ywar was his name, might have been
seen galloping through Milton and Castor Hanglands, and on by Barnack
quarries over Southorpe heath, with saddlebags of huge size stuffed with
"gospels, mass-robes, cassocks, and other garments, and such other small
things as he could carry away." And he came before day to Stamford,
where Abbot Thorold lay at his ease in his inn with his _hommes d'armes_
asleep in the hall.

And the churchwarden knocked them up, and drew Abbot Thorold's curtains
with a face such as his who

     "drew Priam's curtains in the dead of night,
   And would have told him, half his Troy was burned";

and told Abbot Thorold that the monks of Peterborough had sent him; and
that unless he saddled and rode his best that night, with his meinie of
men-at-arms, his Golden Borough would be even as Troy town by morning
light.

"A moi, hommes d'armes!" shouted Thorold, as he used to shout whenever
he wanted to scourge his wretched English monks at Malmesbury into some
French fashion.

The men leaped up, and poured in, growling.

"Take me this monk, and kick him into the street for waking me with such
news."

"But, gracious lord, the outlaws will surely burn Peterborough; and
folks said that you were a mighty man of war."

"So I am; but if I were Roland, Oliver, and Turpin rolled into one, how
am I to fight Hereward and the Danes with forty men-at-arms? Answer me
that, thou dunder-headed English porker. Kick him out."

And Ywar was kicked into the cold, while Thorold raged up and down his
chamber in mantle and slippers, wringing his hands over the treasure
of the Golden Borough, snatched from his fingers just as he was closing
them upon it.

That night the monks of Peterborough prayed in the minster till the long
hours passed into the short. The poor corrodiers, and other servants
of the monastery, fled from the town outside into the Milton woods. The
monks prayed on inside till an hour after matin. When the first flush
of the summer's dawn began to show in the northeastern sky, they heard
mingling with their own chant another chant, which Peterborough had not
heard since it was Medehampstead, three hundred years ago,--the terrible
Yuch-hey-saa-saa-saa,--the war-song of the Vikings of the north.

Their chant stopped of itself. With blanched faces and trembling knees
they fled, regardless of all discipline, up into the minster tower, and
from the leads looked out northeastward on the fen.

The first rays of the summer sun were just streaming over the vast sheet
of emerald, and glittering upon the winding river; and on a winding
line, too, seemingly endless, of scarlet coats and shields, black
hulls, gilded poops and vanes and beak-heads, and the flash and foam of
innumerable oars.

And nearer and louder came the oar-roll, like thunder working up from
the northeast; and mingled with it that grim yet laughing Heysaa, which
bespoke in its very note the revelry of slaughter.

The ships had all their sails on deck. But as they came nearer, the
monks could see the banners of the two foremost vessels.

The one was the red and white of the terrible Dannebrog. The other, the
scarcely less terrible white bear of Hereward.

"He will burn the minster! He has vowed to do it. As a child he vowed,
and he must do it. In this very minster the fiend entered into him and
possessed him; and to this minster has the fiend brought him back to do
his will. Satan, my brethren, having a special spite (as must needs be)
against St. Peter, rock and pillar of the Holy Church, chose out and
inspired this man, even from his mother's womb, that he might be the
foe and robber of St. Peter, and the hater of all who, like my humility,
honor him, and strive to bring this English land into due obedience to
that blessed apostle. Bring forth the relics, my brethren. Bring forth,
above all things, those filings of St. Peter's own chains,--the special
glory of our monastery, and perhaps its safeguard this day."

Some such bombast would any monk of those days have talked in like case.
And yet, so strange a thing is man, he might have been withal, like
Herluin, a shrewd and valiant man.

They brought out all the relics. They brought out the filings
themselves, in a box of gold. They held them out over the walls at the
ships, and called on all the saints to whom they belonged. But they
stopped that line of scarlet, black, and gold as much as their spiritual
descendants stop the lava-stream of Vesuvius, when they hold out similar
matters at them, with a hope unchanged by the experience of eight
hundred years. The Heysaa rose louder and nearer. The Danes were coming.
And they came.

And all the while a thousand skylarks rose from off the fen, and chanted
their own chant aloft, as if appealing to Heaven against that which
man's greed and man's rage and man's superstition had made of this fair
earth of God.

The relics had been brought out. But, as they would not work, the only
thing to be done was to put them back again and hide them safe, lest
they should bow down like Bel and stoop like Nebo, and be carried, like
them, into captivity themselves, being worth a very large sum of money
in the eyes of the more Christian part of the Danish host.

Then to hide the treasures as well as they could; which (says the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle) they hid somewhere in the steeple.

The Danes were landing now. The shout which they gave, as they leaped
on shore, made the hearts of the poor monks sink low. Would they be
murdered, as well as robbed? Perhaps not,--probably not. Hereward would
see to that. And some wanted to capitulate.

Herluin would not hear of it. They were safe enough. St. Peter's relic
might not have worked a miracle on the spot; but it must have done
something. St. Peter had been appealed to on his honor, and on his honor
he must surely take the matter up. At all events, the walls and gates
were strong, and the Danes had no artillery. Let them howl and rage
round the holy place, till Abbot Thorold and the Frenchmen of the
country rose and drove them to their ships.

In that last thought the cunning Norman was not so far wrong. The
Danes pushed up through the little town, and to the minster gates: but
entrance was impossible; and they prowled round and round like raging
wolves about a winter steading; but found no crack of entry.

Prior Herluin grew bold; and coming to the leads of the gateway
tower, looked over cautiously, and holding up a certain most sacred
emblem,--not to be profaned in these pages,--cursed them in the name of
his whole Pantheon.

"Aha, Herluin! Are you there?" asked a short, square man in gay armor.
"Have you forgotten the peat-stack outside Bolldyke Gate, and how you
bade light it under me thirty years since?"

"Thou art Winter?" and the Prior uttered what would be considered, from
any but a churchman's lips, a blasphemous and bloodthirsty curse; but
which was, as their writings sufficiently testify, merely one of the
lawful weapons or "arts" of those Christians who were "forbidden to
fight,"--the other weapon or art being that of lying.

"Aha! That goes like rain off a duck's back to one who has been a
minster scholar in his time. You! Danes! Ostmen! down! If you shoot at
that man I'll cut your heads off. He is the oldest foe I have in the
world, and the only one who ever hit me without my hitting him again;
and nobody shall touch him but me. So down bows, I say."

The Danes--humorous all of them--saw that there was a jest toward, and
perhaps some earnest too, and joined in jeering the Prior.

Herluin had ducked his head behind the parapet; not from cowardice, but
simply because he had on no mail, and might be shot any moment. But when
he heard Winter forbid them to touch him, he lifted up his head, and
gave his old pupil as good as he brought.

With his sharp, swift Norman priest's tongue he sneered, he jeered, he
scolded, he argued; and then threatened, suddenly changing his tone,
in words of real eloquence. He appealed to the superstitions of his
hearers. He threatened them with supernatural vengeance.
