and his elder brother, must needs have his following from the time he
was but fifteen years old. All the unruly youths of the neighborhood,
sons of free "holders," who owed some sort of military service to Earl
Leofric; Geri, his cousin; Winter, whom he called his brother-in-arms;
the Wulfrics, the Wulfards, the Azers, and many another wild blade, had
banded themselves round a young nobleman more unruly than themselves.
Their names were already a terror to all decent folk, at wakes and
fairs, alehouses and village sports. They atoned, be it remembered, for
their early sins by making those names in after years a terror to the
invaders of their native land: but as yet their prowess was limited to
drunken brawls and faction-fights; to upsetting old women at their work,
levying blackmail from quiet chapmen on the high road, or bringing back
in triumph, sword in hand and club on shoulder, their leader Hereward
from some duel which his insolence had provoked.

But this time, if the story of the sub-prior was to be believed,
Hereward and his housecarles had taken an ugly stride forward toward the
pit. They had met him riding along, intent upon his psalter, in a lonely
path of the Bruneswald,--"Whereon your son, most gracious lady, bade me
stand, saying that his men were thirsty and he had no money to buy ale
withal, and none so likely to help him thereto as a fat priest,--for so
he scandalously termed me, who, as your ladyship knows, am leaner than
the minster bell-ropes, with fasting Wednesdays and Fridays throughout
the year, beside the vigils of the saints, and the former and latter
Lents.

"But when he saw who I was, as if inspired by a malignant spirit, he
shouted out my name, and bade his companions throw me to the ground."

"Throw you to the ground?" shuddered the Lady Godiva.

"In much mire, madam. After which he took my palfrey, saying that
heaven's gate was too lowly for men on horseback to get in thereat; and
then my marten's fur gloves and cape which your gracious self bestowed
on me, alleging that the rules of my order allowed only one garment,
and no furs save catskins and such like. And lastly--I tremble while I
relate, thinking not of the loss of my poor money, but the loss of an
immortal soul--took from me a purse with sixteen silver pennies, which
I had collected from our tenants for the use of the monastery, and said,
blasphemously, that I and mine had swindled your ladyship, and therefore
him, your son, out of many a fair manor ere now; and it was but fair
that he should tithe the rents thereof, as he should never get the
lands out of our claws again; with more of the like, which I blush to
repeat,--and so left me to trudge hither in the mire."

"Wretched boy!" said the Lady Godiva, and hid her face in her hands;
"and more wretched I, to have brought such a son into the world!"

The monk had hardly finished his doleful story, when there was a
pattering of heavy feet, a noise of men shouting and laughing outside,
and a voice, above all, calling for the monk by name, which made that
good man crouch behind the curtain of Lady Godiva's bed. The next moment
the door of the bower was thrown violently open, and in walked,
or rather reeled, a noble lad eighteen years old. His face was of
extraordinary beauty, save that the lower jaw was too long and heavy,
and that his eyes wore a strange and almost sinister expression, from
the fact that the one of them was gray and the other blue. He was short,
but of immense breadth of chest and strength of limb; while his delicate
hands and feet and long locks of golden hair marked him of most noble,
and even, as he really was, of ancient royal race. He was dressed in a
gaudy costume, resembling on the whole that of a Highland chieftain. His
knees, wrists, and throat were tattoed in bright blue patterns; and he
carried sword and dagger, a gold ring round his neck, and gold rings on
his wrists. He was a lad to have gladdened the eyes of any mother: but
there was no gladness in the Lady Godiva's eyes as she received him; nor
had there been for many a year. She looked on him with sternness,--with
all but horror; and he, his face flushed with wine, which he had tossed
off as he passed through the hall to steady his nerves for the
coming storm, looked at her with smiling defiance, the result of long
estrangement between mother and son.

"Well, my lady," said he, ere she could speak, "I heard that this good
fellow was here, and came home as fast as I could, to see that he told
you as few lies as possible."

"He has told me," said she, "that you have robbed the Church of God."

"Robbed him, it may be, an old hoody crow, against whom I have a grudge
of ten years' standing."

"Wretched, wretched boy! What wickedness next? Know you not, that he who
robs the Church robs God himself?"

"And he who harms God's people," put in the monk from behind the chair,
"harms his Maker."

"His Maker?" said the lad, with concentrated bitterness. "It would be a
gay world, if the Maker thereof were in any way like unto you, who
call yourselves his people. Do you remember who told them to set the
peat-stack on fire under me ten years ago? Ah, ha, Sir Monk, you forget
that I have been behind the screen,--that I have been a monk myself, or
should have been one, if my pious lady mother here had had her will
of me, as she may if she likes of that doll there at her knee. Do you
forget why I left Peterborough Abbey, when Winter and I turned all your
priest's books upside down in the choir, and they would have flogged
us,--me, the Earl's son,--me, the Viking's son,--me, the champion, as I
will be yet, and make all lands ring with the fame of my deeds, as they
rung with the fame of my forefathers, before they became the slaves of
monks; and how when Winter and I got hold of the kitchen spits, and up
to the top of the peat-stack, and held you all at bay there, a whole
abbeyful of cowards there, against two seven years' children? It was you
bade set the peat-stack alight under us, and so bring us down; and would
have done it, too, had it not been for my Uncle Brand, the only man that
I care for in this wide world. Do you think I have not owed you a grudge
ever since that day, monk? And do you think I will not pay it? Do you
think I would not have burned Peterborough minster over your head before
now, had it not been for Uncle Brand's sake? See that I do not do it
yet. See that when there is another Prior in Borough you do not find
Hereward the Berserker smoking you out some dark night, as he would
smoke a wasps' nest. And I will, by--"

"Hereward, Hereward!" cried his mother, "godless, god-forgotten boy,
what words are these? Silence, before you burden your soul with an oath
which the devils in hell will accept, and force you to keep!" and she
sprung up, and, seizing his arm, laid her hand upon his mouth.

Hereward looked at her majestic face, once lovely, now careworn, and
trembled for a moment. Had there been any tenderness in it, his history
might have been a very different one; but alas! there was none. Not
that she was in herself untender; but that her great piety (call it not
superstition, for it was then the only form known or possible to pure
and devout souls) was so outraged by this, or even by the slightest
insult to that clergy whose willing slave she had become, that the only
method of reclaiming the sinner had been long forgotten, in genuine
horror at his sin. "Is it not enough," she went on, sternly, "that you
should have become the bully and the ruffian of all the fens?--that
Hereward the leaper, Hereward the wrestler, Hereward the thrower of the
hammer--sports, after all, only fit for the sons of slaves--should be
also Hereward the drunkard, Hereward the common fighter, Hereward the
breaker of houses, Hereward the leader of mobs of boon companions
which bring back to us, in shame and sorrow, the days when our heathen
forefathers ravaged this land with fire and sword? Is it not enough for
me that my son should be a common stabber--?"

"Whoever called me stabber to you, lies. If I have killed men, or had
them killed, I have done it in fair fight."

But she went on unheeding,--"Is it not enough, that, after having
squandered on your fellows all the money that you could wring from my
bounty, or win at your brutal sports, you should have robbed your own
father, collected his rents behind his back, taken money and goods from
his tenants by threats and blows; but that, after outraging them, you
must add to all this a worse sin likewise,--outraging God, and driving
me--me who have borne with you, me who have concealed all for your
sake--to tell your father that of which the very telling will turn my
hair to gray?"

"So you will tell my father?" said Hereward, coolly.

"And if I should not, this monk himself is bound to do so, or his
superior, your Uncle Brand."

"My Uncle Brand will not, and your monk dare not."

"Then I must. I have loved you long and well; but there is one thing
which I must love better than you: and that is, my conscience and my
Maker."

"Those are two things, my lady mother, and not one; so you had better
not confound them. As for the latter, do you not think that He who made
the world is well able to defend his own property,--if the lands and
houses and cattle and money which these men wheedle and threaten and
forge out of you and my father are really His property, and not merely
their plunder? As for your conscience, my lady mother, really you have
done so many good deeds in your life, that it might be beneficial to you
to do a bad one once in a way, so as to keep your soul in a wholesome
state of humility."

The monk groaned aloud. Lady Godiva groaned; but it was inwardly.
There was silence for a moment. Both were abashed by the lad's utter
shamelessness.

"And you will tell my father?" said he again. "He is at the old
miracle-worker's court at Westminster. He will tell the miracle-worker,
and I shall be outlawed."

"And if you be, wretched boy, whom have you to blame but yourself? Can
you expect that the king, sainted even as he is before his death, dare
pass over such an atrocity towards Holy Church?"

"Blame? I shall blame no one. Pass over? I hope he will not
pass over it, I only want an excuse like that for turning
kempery-man--knight-errant, as those Norman puppies call it,--like
Regnar Lodbrog, or Frithiof, or Harold Hardraade; and try what man
can do for himself in the world with nothing to help him in heaven and
earth, with neither saint nor angel, friend or counsellor, to see to
him, save his wits and his good sword. So send off the messenger, good
mother mine: and I will promise you I will not have him ham-strung on
the way, as some of my housecarles would do for me if I but held up my
hand; and let the miracle-monger fill up the measure of his folly, by
making an enemy of one more bold fellow in the world."

And he swaggered out of the room.

And when he was gone, the Lady Godiva bowed her head into her lap and
wept long and bitterly. Neither her maidens nor the priest dare speak
to her for nigh an hour; but at the end of that time she lifted up her
head, and settled her face again, till it was like that of a marble
saint over a minster door; and called for ink and paper, and wrote her
letter; and then asked for a trusty messenger who should carry it up to
Westminster.

"None so swift or sure," said the house steward, "as Martin Lightfoot."

Lady Godiva shook her head. "I mistrust that man," she said. "He is too
fond of my poor--of the Lord Hereward."

"He is a strange one, my lady, and no one knows whence he came, and,
I sometimes fancy, whither he may go either; but ever since my lord
threatened to hang him for talking with my young master, he has never
spoken to him, nor scarcely, indeed, to living soul. And one thing there
is makes him or any man sure, as long as he is well paid; and that is,
that he cares for nothing in heaven or earth save himself and what he
can get."

So Martin Lightfoot was sent for. He came in straight into the lady's
bedchamber, after the simple fashion of those days. He was a tall, lean,
bony man, as was to be expected from his nickname, with a long hooked
nose, a scanty brown beard, and a high conical head. His only garment
was a shabby gray woollen tunic, which served him both as coat and kilt,
and laced brogues of untanned hide. He might have been any age from
twenty to forty; but his face was disfigured with deep scars and long
exposure to the weather. He dropped on one knee, holding his greasy cap
in his hand, and looked, not at his lady's face, but at her feet, with a
stupid and frightened expression. She knew very little of him, save
that her husband had picked him up upon the road as a wanderer some five
years since; and that he had been employed as a doer of odd jobs and
runner of messages, and that he was supposed, from his taciturnity and
strangeness, to have something uncanny about him.

"Martin," said the lady, "they tell me that you are a silent and a
prudent man."

"That am I.             'Tongue speaketh bane,
   Though she herself hath nane.'"

"I shall try you: do you know your way to London?"

"Yes."

"To your lord's lodgings in Westminster?"

"Yes."

"How long shall you be going there with this letter?"

"A day and a half."

"When shall you be back hither?"

"On the fourth day."

"And you will go to my lord and deliver this letter safely?"

"Yes, your Majesty."

"Why do you call me Majesty? The King is Majesty."

"You are my Queen."

"What do you mean, man?"

"You can hang me."

"I hang thee, poor soul! Who did I ever hang, or hurt for a moment, if I
could help it?"

"But the Earl may."

"He will neither hang nor hurt thee if thou wilt take this letter
safely, and bring me back the answer safely."

"They will kill me."

"Who?"

"They," said Martin, pointing to the bower maidens,--young ladies of
good family who stood round, chosen for their good looks, after the
fashion of those times, to attend on great ladies. There was a cry of
angry and contemptuous denial, not unmixed with something like laughter,
which showed that Martin had but spoken the truth. Hereward, in spite of
all his sins, was the darling of his mother's bower; and there was not
one of the damsels but would have done anything short of murder to have
prevented Martin carrying the letter.

"Silence, man!" said Lady Godiva, so sternly that Martin saw that he had
gone too far. "How know'st such as thou what is in this letter?"

"Those others will know," said Martin, sullenly, without answering the
last question.

"Who?"

"His housecarles outside there."

"He has promised that they shall not touch thee. But how knowest thou
what is in this letter?"

"I will take it," said Martin: he held out his hand, took it and looked
at it, but upside down, and without any attempt to read it.

"His own mother," said he, after a while.

"What is that to thee?" said Lady Godiva, blushing and kindling.

"Nothing: I had no mother. But God has one!"

"What meanest thou, knave? Wilt thou take the letter or no?"

"I will take it." And he again looked at it without rising off his knee.
"His own father, too."

"What is that to thee, I say again?"

"Nothing: I have no father. But God's Son has one!"

"What wilt thou, thou strange man?" asked she, puzzled and
half-frightened; "and how camest thou to know what is in this letter?"

"Who does not know? A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. On the
fourth day from this I will be back."

And Martin rose, and putting the letter solemnly into the purse at his
girdle, shot out of the door with clenched teeth, as a man upon a fixed
purpose which it would lighten his heart to carry out. He ran rapidly
through the large outer hall, past the long oak table, at which Hereward
and his boon companions were drinking and roistering; and as he passed
the young lord he cast on him a look so full of meaning, that though
Hereward knew not what the meaning was, it startled him, and for a
moment softened him. Did this man who had sullenly avoided him for more
than two years, whom he had looked on as a clod or a post in the field
beneath his notice, since he could be of no use to him,--did this man
still care for him? Hereward had reason to know better than most that
there was something strange and uncanny about the man. Did he mean him
well? Or had he some grudge against him, which made him undertake this
journey willingly and out of spite?--possibly with the will to make bad
worse. For an instant Hereward's heart misgave him. He would stop the
letter at all risks. "Hold him!" he cried to his comrades.

But Martin turned to him, laid his finger on his lips, smiled kindly,
and saying "You promised!" caught up a loaf from the table, slipped
from among them like an eel, and darted out of the door, and out of
the close. They followed him to the great gate, and there stopped, some
cursing, some laughing. To give Martin Lightfoot a yard advantage was
never to come up with him again. Some called for bows to bring him
down with a parting shot. But Hereward forbade them; and stood leaning
against the gate-post, watching him trot on like a lean wolf over the
lawn, till he was lost in the great elm-woods which fringed the southern
fen.

"Now, lads," said Hereward, "home with you all, and make your peace with
your fathers. In this house you never drink ale again."

They looked at him, surprised.

"You are disbanded, my gallant army. As long as I could cut long thongs
out of other men's hides, I could feed you like earl's sons: but now I
must feed myself; and a dog over his bone wants no company. Outlawed I
shall be before the week is out; and unless you wish to be outlawed too,
you will obey orders, and home."

"We will follow you to the world's end," cried some.

"To the rope's end, lads: that is all you will get in my company. Go
home with you, and those who feel a calling, let them turn monks; and
those who have not, let them learn

     'For to plough and to sow,
       And to reap and to mow,
        And to be a farmer's boy.'

Good night."

And he went in, and shut the great gates after him, leaving them
astonished.

To take his advice, and go home, was the simplest thing to be done. A
few of them on their return were soundly thrashed, and deserved it;
a few were hidden by their mothers for a week, in hay-lofts and
hen-roosts, till their father's anger had passed away. But only one
turned monk or clerk, and that was Leofric the Unlucky, godson of the
great earl, and poet-in-ordinary to the band.

The next morning at dawn Hereward mounted his best horse, armed himself
from head to foot, and rode over to Peterborough.

When he came to the abbey-gate, he smote thereon with his lance-but,
till the porter's teeth rattled in his head for fear.

"Let me in!" he shouted. "I am Hereward Leofricsson. I must see my Uncle
Brand."

"O my most gracious lord!" cried the porter, thrusting his head out of
the wicket, "what is this that you have been doing to our Steward?"

"The tithe of what I will do, unless you open the gate!"

"O my lord!" said the porter, as he opened it, "if our Lady and St.
Peter would but have mercy on your fair face, and convert your soul to
the fear of God and man--"

"She would make me as good an old fool as you. Fetch my uncle, the
Prior."

The porter obeyed. The son of Earl Leofric was as a young lion among the
sheep in those parts; and few dare say him nay, certainly not the
monks of Peterborough; moreover, the good porter could not help being
strangely fond of Hereward--as was every one whom he did not insult,
rob, or kill.

Out came Brand, a noble elder: more fit, from his eye and gait, to be a
knight than a monk. He looked sadly at Hereward.

"'Dear is bought the honey that is licked off the thorn,' quoth
Hending," said he.

"Hending bought his wisdom by experience, I suppose," said Hereward,
"and so must I. So I am just starting out to see the world, uncle."

"Naughty, naughty boy! If we had thee safe here again for a week, we
would take this hot blood out of thee, and send thee home in thy right
mind."

"Bring a rod and whip me, then. Try, and you shall have your chance.
Every one else has had, and this is the end of their labors."

"By the chains of St. Peter," quoth the monk, "that is just what thou
needest. Hoist thee on such another fool's back, truss thee up, and lay
it on lustily, till thou art ashamed. To treat thee as a man is only to
make thee a more heady blown-up ass than thou art already."

"True, most wise uncle. And therefore my still wiser parents are going
to treat me like a man indeed, and send me out into the world to seek my
fortunes!"

"Eh?"

"They are going to prove how thoroughly they trust me to take care of
myself, by outlawing me. Eh? say I in return. Is not that an honor,
and a proof that I have not shown myself a fool, though I may have a
madman?"

"Outlaw you? O my boy, my darling, my pride! Get off your horse, and
don't sit there, hand on hip, like a turbaned Saracen, defying God and
man; but come down and talk reason to me, for the sake of St. Peter and
all saints."

Hereward threw himself off his horse, and threw his arms round his
uncle's neck.

"Pish! Now, uncle, don't cry, do what you will, lest I cry too. Help me
to be a man while I live, even if I go to the black place when I die."

"It shall not be!" .... and the monk swore by all the relics in
Peterborough minster.

"It must be. It shall be. I like to be outlawed. I want to be outlawed.
It makes one feel like a man. There is not an earl in England, save my
father, who has not been outlawed in his time. My brother Alfgar will be
outlawed before he dies, if he has the spirit of a man in him. It is the
fashion, my uncle, and I must follow it. So hey for the merry greenwood,
and the long ships, and the swan's bath, and all the rest of it. Uncle,
you will lend me fifty silver pennies?"

"I? I would not lend thee one, if I had it, which I have not. And yet,
old fool that I am, I believe I would."

"I would pay thee back honestly. I shall go down to Constantinople to
the Varangers, get my Polotaswarf [Footnote: See "The Heimskringla,"
Harold Hardraade's Saga, for the meaning of this word.] out of the
Kaiser's treasure, and pay thee back five to one."

"What does this son of Belial here?" asked an austere voice.

"Ah! Abbot Leofric, my very good lord. I have come to ask hospitality of
you for some three days. By that time I shall be a wolf's head, and out
of the law: and then, if you will give me ten minutes' start, you may
put your bloodhounds on my track, and see which runs fastest, they or
I. You are a gentleman, and a man of honor; so I trust to you to feed my
horse fairly the meanwhile, and not to let your monks poison me."

The Abbot's face relaxed. He tried to look as solemn as he could; but he
ended in bursting into a very great laughter, and swearing likewise.

"The insolence of this lad passes the miracles of all saints. He robs
St. Peter on the highway, breaks into his abbey, insults him to his
face, and then asks him for hospitality; and--"

"And gets it," quoth Hereward.

"What is to be done with him, Brand, my friend? If we turn him out--"

"Which we cannot do," said Brand, looking at the well-mailed and armed
lad, "without calling in half a dozen of our men-at-arms."

"In which case there would be blood shed, and scandal made in the holy
precincts."

"And nothing gained; for yield he would not till he was killed outright,
which God forbid!"

"Amen. And if he stay here, he may be persuaded to repentance."

"And restitution."

"As for that," quoth Hereward (who had remounted his horse from
prudential motives, and set him athwart the gateway, so that there was
no chance of the doors being slammed behind him), "if either of you will
lend me sixteen pence, I will pay it back to you and St. Peter before I
die, with interest enough to satisfy any Jew, on the word of a gentleman
and an earl's son."

The Abbot burst again into a great laughter. "Come in, thou graceless
renegade, and we will see to thee and thy horse; and I will pray to St.
Peter; and I doubt not he will have patience with thee, for he is very
merciful; and after all, thy parents have been exceeding good to us, and
the righteousness of the father, like his sins, is sometimes visited on
the children."

Now, why were the two ecclesiastics so uncanonically kind to this wicked
youth?

Perhaps because both the old bachelors were wishing from their hearts
that they had just such a son of their own. And beside, Earl Leofric
was a very great man indeed; and the wind might change; for it is an
unstable world.

"Only, mind, one thing," said the naughty boy, as he dismounted, and
halloed to a lay-brother to see to his horse,--"don't let me see the
face of that Herluin."

"And why? You have wronged him, and he will forgive you, doubtless, like
a good Christian as he is."

"That is his concern. But if I see him, I cut off his head. And, as
Uncle Brand knows, I always sleep with my sword under my pillow."

"O that such a mother should have borne such a son." groaned the Abbot,
as they went in.

On the fifth day came Martin Lightfoot, and found Hereward in Prior
Brand's private cell.

"Well?" asked Hereward coolly.

"Is he--? Is he--?" stammered Brand, and could not finish his sentence.

Martin nodded.

Hereward laughed,--a loud, swaggering, hysterical laugh.

"See what it is to be born of just and pious parents. Come, Master
Trot-alone, speak out and tell us all about it. Thy lean wolf's legs
have run to some purpose. Open thy lean wolf's mouth and speak for once,
lest I ease thy legs for the rest of thy life by a cut across the hams.
Find thy lost tongue, I say!"

"Walls have ears, as well as the wild-wood," said Martin.

"We are safe here," said the Prior; "so speak, and tell us the whole
truth."

"Well, when the Earl read the letter, he turned red, and pale again,
and then naught but, 'Men, follow me to the King at Westminster.' So
we went, all with our weapons, twenty or more, along the Strand, and up
into the King's new hall; and a grand hall it is, but not easy to get
into, for the crowd of monks and beggars on the stairs, hindering honest
folks' business. And there sat the King on a high settle, with his pink
face and white hair, looking as royal as a bell-wether new washed; and
on either side of him, on the same settle, sat the old fox and the young
wolf."

"Godwin and Harold? And where was the Queen?"

"Sitting on a stool at his feet, with her hands together as if she
were praying, and her eyes downcast, as demure as any cat. And so is
fulfilled the story, how the sheep-dog went out to get married, and left
the fox, the wolf, and the cat to guard the flock."

"If thou hast found thy tongue," said Brand, "thou art like enough to
lose it again by slice of knife, talking such ribaldry of dignities.
Dost not know"--and he sank his voice--"that Abbot Leofric is Earl
Harold's man, and that Harold himself made him abbot?"

"I said, walls have ears. It was you who told me that we were safe.
However, I will bridle the unruly one." And he went on. "And your father
walked up the hall, his left hand on his sword-hilt, looking an earl all
over, as he is."

"He is that," said Hereward, in a low voice.

"And he bowed; and the most magnificent, powerful, and virtuous Godwin
would have beckoned him up to sit on the high settle; but he looked
straight at the King, as if there were never a Godwin or a Godwinsson on
earth, and cried as he stood,--

"'Justice, my Lord the King!'

"And at that the King turned pale, and said, 'Who? What? O miserable
world! O last days drawing nearer and nearer! O earth, full of violence
and blood! Who has wronged thee now, most dear and noble Earl?'

"'Justice against my own son.'

"At that the fox looked at the wolf, and the wolf at the fox; and if
they did not smile it was not for want of will, I warrant. But your
father went on, and told all his story; and when he came to your
robbing master monk,--'O apostate!' cries the bell-wether, 'O spawn of
Beelzebub! excommunicate him, with bell, book, and candle. May he be
thrust down with Korah, Balaam, and Iscariot, to the most Stygian pot of
the sempiternal Tartarus.'

"And at that your father smiled. 'That is bishops' work,' says he; 'and
I want king's work from you, Lord King. Outlaw me this young rebel's
sinful body, as by law you can; and leave his sinful soul to the
priests,--or to God's mercy, which is like to be more than theirs.'

"Then the Queen looked up. 'Your own son, noble Earl? Think of what you
are doing, and one whom all say is so gallant and so fair. O persuade
him, father,--persuade him, Harold my brother,--or, if you cannot
persuade him, persuade the King at least, and save this poor youth from
exile.'"

"Puss Velvet-paw knew well enough," said Hereward, in a low voice, "that
the way to harden my father's heart was to set Godwin and Harold on
softening it. They ask my pardon from the King? I would not take it at
their asking, even if my father would."

"There spoke a true Leofricsson," said Brand, in spite of himself.

"'By the--'" (and Martin repeated a certain very solemn oath), "said
your father, 'justice I will have, my Lord King. Who talks to me of my
own son? You put me into my earldom to see justice done and law obeyed;
and how shall I make others keep within bound if I am not to keep in my
own flesh and blood? Here is this land running headlong to ruin, because
every nobleman--ay, every churl who owns a manor, if he dares--must
needs arm and saddle, and levy war on his own behalf, and harry and slay
the king's lieges, if he have not garlic to his roast goose every time
he chooses,'--and there your father did look at Godwin, once and for
all;--'and shall I let my son follow the fashion, and do his best to
leave the land open and weak for Norseman, or Dane, or Frenchman, or
whoever else hopes next to mount the throne of a king who is too holy to
leave an heir behind him?'"

"Ahoi! Martin the silent! Where learnt you so suddenly the trade of
preaching? I thought you kept your wind for your running this two years
past. You would make as good a talker among the Witan as Godwin himself.
You give it us all, word for word, and voice and gesture withal, as if
you were King Edward's French Chancellor."

Martin smiled. "I am like Falada the horse, my lords, who could only
speak to his own true princess. Why I held my tongue of late was
only lest they should cut my head off for talking, as they did poor
Falada's."

"Thou art a very crafty knave," said Brand, "and hast had clerk-learning
in thy time, I can see, and made bad use of it. I misdoubt very much
that thou art some runaway monk."

"That am I not, by St. Peter's chains!" said Martin, in an eager,
terrified voice. "Lord Hereward, I came hither as your father's
messenger and servant. You will see me safe out of this abbey, like an
honorable gentleman!"
