
Presently, looking up from his work, he saw that they were close in below
a promontory; a piece of ruinous cliff, against the base of which the sea
broke white and heavy, almost overplumbed the deck; and, above that,
again, a house appeared, crowning a down.

Inside the bay the seas ran gayly, raised the Good Hope upon their
foam-flecked shoulders, carried her beyond the control of the steersman,
and in a moment dropped her, with a great concussion, on the sand, and
began to break over her half-mast high, and roll her to and fro.  Another
great wave followed, raised her again, and carried her yet farther in;
and then a third succeeded, and left her far inshore of the more
dangerous breakers, wedged upon a bank.

"Now, boys," cried Lawless, "the saints have had a care of us, indeed.
The tide ebbs; let us but sit down and drink a cup of wine, and before
half an hour ye may all march me ashore as safe as on a bridge."

A barrel was broached, and, sitting in what shelter they could find from
the flying snow and spray, the shipwrecked company handed the cup around,
and sought to warm their bodies and restore their spirits.

Dick, meanwhile, returned to Lord Foxham, who lay in great perplexity and
fear, the floor of his cabin washing knee-deep in water, and the lamp,
which had been his only light, broken and extinguished by the violence of
the blow.

"My lord," said young Shelton, "fear not at all; the saints are plainly
for us; the seas have cast us high upon a shoal, and as soon as the tide
hath somewhat ebbed, we may walk ashore upon our feet."

It was nearly an hour before the vessel was sufficiently deserted by the
ebbing sea; and they could set forth for the land, which appeared dimly
before them through a veil of driving snow.

Upon a hillock on one side of their way a party of men lay huddled
together, suspiciously observing the movements of the new arrivals.

"They might draw near and offer us some comfort," Dick remarked.

"Well, an' they come not to us, let us even turn aside to them," said
Hawksley.  "The sooner we come to a good fire and a dry bed the better
for my poor lord."

But they had not moved far in the direction of the hillock, before the
men, with one consent, rose suddenly to their feet, and poured a flight
of well-directed arrows on the shipwrecked company.

"Back! back!" cried his lordship.  "Beware, in Heaven's name, that ye
reply not."

"Nay," cried Greensheve, pulling an arrow from his leather jack.  "We are
in no posture to fight, it is certain, being drenching wet, dog-weary,
and three-parts frozen; but, for the love of old England, what aileth
them to shoot thus cruelly on their poor country people in distress?"

"They take us to be French pirates," answered Lord Foxham.  "In these
most troublesome and degenerate days we cannot keep our own shores of
England; but our old enemies, whom we once chased on sea and land, do now
range at pleasure, robbing and slaughtering and burning.  It is the pity
and reproach of this poor land."

The men upon the hillock lay, closely observing them, while they trailed
upward from the beach and wound inland among desolate sand-hills; for a
mile or so they even hung upon the rear of the march, ready, at a sign,
to pour another volley on the weary and dispirited fugitives; and it was
only when, striking at length upon a firm high-road, Dick began to call
his men to some more martial order, that these jealous guardians of the
coast of England silently disappeared among the snow.  They had done what
they desired; they had protected their own homes and farms, their own
families and cattle; and their private interest being thus secured, it
mattered not the weight of a straw to any one of them, although the
Frenchmen should carry blood and fire to every other parish in the realm
of England.




BOOK IV--THE DISGUISE


CHAPTER I--THE DEN


The place where Dick had struck the line of a high-road was not far from
Holywood, and within nine or ten miles of Shoreby-on-the-Till; and here,
after making sure that they were pursued no longer, the two bodies
separated.  Lord Foxham's followers departed, carrying their wounded
master towards the comfort and security of the great abbey; and Dick, as
he saw them wind away and disappear in the thick curtain of the falling
snow, was left alone with near upon a dozen outlaws, the last remainder
of his troop of volunteers.

Some were wounded; one and all were furious at their ill-success and long
exposure; and though they were now too cold and hungry to do more, they
grumbled and cast sullen looks upon their leaders.  Dick emptied his
purse among them, leaving himself nothing; thanked them for the courage
they had displayed, though he could have found it more readily in his
heart to rate them for poltroonery; and having thus somewhat softened the
effect of his prolonged misfortune, despatched them to find their way,
either severally or in pairs, to Shoreby and the Goat and Bagpipes.

For his own part, influenced by what he had seen on board of the Good
Hope, he chose Lawless to be his companion on the walk.  The snow was
falling, without pause or variation, in one even, blinding cloud; the
wind had been strangled, and now blew no longer; and the whole world was
blotted out and sheeted down below that silent inundation.  There was
great danger of wandering by the way and perishing in drifts; and
Lawless, keeping half a step in front of his companion, and holding his
head forward like a hunting dog upon the scent, inquired his way of every
tree, and studied out their path as though he were conning a ship among
dangers.

About a mile into the forest they came to a place where several ways met,
under a grove of lofty and contorted oaks.  Even in the narrow horizon of
the falling snow, it was a spot that could not fail to be recognised; and
Lawless evidently recognised it with particular delight.

"Now, Master Richard," said he, "an y' are not too proud to be the guest
of a man who is neither a gentleman by birth nor so much as a good
Christian, I can offer you a cup of wine and a good fire to melt the
marrow in your frozen bones."

"Lead on, Will," answered Dick.  "A cup of wine and a good fire!  Nay, I
would go a far way round to see them."

Lawless turned aside under the bare branches of the grove, and, walking
resolutely forward for some time, came to a steepish hollow or den, that
had now drifted a quarter full of snow.  On the verge, a great beech-tree
hung, precariously rooted; and here the old outlaw, pulling aside some
bushy underwood, bodily disappeared into the earth.

The beech had, in some violent gale, been half-uprooted, and had torn up
a considerable stretch of turf and it was under this that old Lawless had
dug out his forest hiding-place.  The roots served him for rafters, the
turf was his thatch; for walls and floor he had his mother the earth.
Rude as it was, the hearth in one corner, blackened by fire, and the
presence in another of a large oaken chest well fortified with iron,
showed it at one glance to be the den of a man, and not the burrow of a
digging beast.

Though the snow had drifted at the mouth and sifted in upon the floor of
this earth cavern, yet was the air much warmer than without; and when
Lawless had struck a spark, and the dry furze bushes had begun to blaze
and crackle on the hearth, the place assumed, even to the eye, an air of
comfort and of home.

With a sigh of great contentment, Lawless spread his broad hands before
the fire, and seemed to breathe the smoke.

"Here, then," he said, "is this old Lawless's rabbit-hole; pray Heaven
there come no terrier!  Far I have rolled hither and thither, and here
and about, since that I was fourteen years of mine age and first ran away
from mine abbey, with the sacrist's gold chain and a mass-book that I
sold for four marks.  I have been in England and France and Burgundy, and
in Spain, too, on a pilgrimage for my poor soul; and upon the sea, which
is no man's country.  But here is my place, Master Shelton.  This is my
native land, this burrow in the earth!  Come rain or wind--and whether
it's April, and the birds all sing, and the blossoms fall about my
bed--or whether it's winter, and I sit alone with my good gossip the
fire, and robin red breast twitters in the woods--here, is my church and
market, and my wife and child.  It's here I come back to, and it's here,
so please the saints, that I would like to die."

"'Tis a warm corner, to be sure," replied Dick, "and a pleasant, and a
well hid."

"It had need to be," returned Lawless, "for an they found it, Master
Shelton, it would break my heart.  But here," he added, burrowing with
his stout fingers in the sandy floor, "here is my wine cellar; and ye
shall have a flask of excellent strong stingo."

Sure enough, after but a little digging, he produced a big leathern
bottle of about a gallon, nearly three-parts full of a very heady and
sweet wine; and when they had drunk to each other comradely, and the fire
had been replenished and blazed up again, the pair lay at full length,
thawing and steaming, and divinely warm.

"Master Shelton," observed the outlaw, "y' 'ave had two mischances this
last while, and y' are like to lose the maid--do I take it aright?"

"Aright!" returned Dick, nodding his head.

"Well, now," continued Lawless, "hear an old fool that hath been
nigh-hand everything, and seen nigh-hand all!  Ye go too much on other
people's errands, Master Dick.  Ye go on Ellis's; but he desireth rather
the death of Sir Daniel.  Ye go on Lord Foxham's; well--the saints
preserve him!--doubtless he meaneth well.  But go ye upon your own, good
Dick.  Come right to the maid's side.  Court her, lest that she forget
you.  Be ready; and when the chance shall come, off with her at the
saddle-bow."

"Ay, but, Lawless, beyond doubt she is now in Sir Daniel's own mansion."
answered Dick.

"Thither, then, go we," replied the outlaw.

Dick stared at him.

"Nay, I mean it," nodded Lawless.  "And if y' are of so little faith, and
stumble at a word, see here!"

And the outlaw, taking a key from about his neck, opened the oak chest,
and dipping and groping deep among its contents, produced first a friar's
robe, and next a girdle of rope; and then a huge rosary of wood, heavy
enough to be counted as a weapon.

"Here," he said, "is for you.  On with them!"

And then, when Dick had clothed himself in this clerical disguise,
Lawless produced some colours and a pencil, and proceeded, with the
greatest cunning, to disguise his face.  The eyebrows he thickened and
produced; to the moustache, which was yet hardly visible, he rendered a
like service; while, by a few lines around the eye, he changed the
expression and increased the apparent age of this young monk.

"Now," he resumed, "when I have done the like, we shall make as bonny a
pair of friars as the eye could wish.  Boldly to Sir Daniel's we shall
go, and there be hospitably welcome for the love of Mother Church."

"And how, dear Lawless," cried the lad, "shall I repay you?"

"Tut, brother," replied the outlaw, "I do naught but for my pleasure.
Mind not for me.  I am one, by the mass, that mindeth for himself.  When
that I lack, I have a long tongue and a voice like the monastery bell--I
do ask, my son; and where asking faileth, I do most usually take."

The old rogue made a humorous grimace; and although Dick was displeased
to lie under so great favours to so equivocal a personage, he was yet
unable to restrain his mirth.

With that, Lawless returned to the big chest, and was soon similarly
disguised; but, below his gown, Dick wondered to observe him conceal a
sheaf of black arrows.

"Wherefore do ye that?" asked the lad.  "Wherefore arrows, when ye take
no bow?"

"Nay," replied Lawless, lightly, "'tis like there will be heads
broke--not to say backs--ere you and I win sound from where we're going
to; and if any fall, I would our fellowship should come by the credit
on't.  A black arrow, Master Dick, is the seal of our abbey; it showeth
you who writ the bill."

"An ye prepare so carefully," said Dick, "I have here some papers that,
for mine own sake, and the interest of those that trusted me, were better
left behind than found upon my body.  Where shall I conceal them, Will?"

"Nay," replied Lawless, "I will go forth into the wood and whistle me
three verses of a song; meanwhile, do you bury them where ye please, and
smooth the sand upon the place."

"Never!" cried Richard.  "I trust you, man.  I were base indeed if I not
trusted you."

"Brother, y' are but a child," replied the old outlaw, pausing and
turning his face upon Dick from the threshold of the den.  "I am a kind
old Christian, and no traitor to men's blood, and no sparer of mine own
in a friend's jeopardy.  But, fool, child, I am a thief by trade and
birth and habit.  If my bottle were empty and my mouth dry, I would rob
you, dear child, as sure as I love, honour, and admire your parts and
person!  Can it be clearer spoken?  No."

And he stumped forth through the bushes with a snap of his big fingers.

Dick, thus left alone, after a wondering thought upon the inconsistencies
of his companion's character, hastily produced, reviewed, and buried his
papers.  One only he reserved to carry along with him, since it in nowise
compromised his friends, and yet might serve him, in a pinch, against Sir
Daniel.  That was the knight's own letter to Lord Wensleydale, sent by
Throgmorton, on the morrow of the defeat at Risingham, and found next day
by Dick upon the body of the messenger.

Then, treading down the embers of the fire, Dick left the den, and
rejoined the old outlaw, who stood awaiting him under the leafless oaks,
and was already beginning to be powdered by the falling snow.  Each
looked upon the other, and each laughed, so thorough and so droll was the
disguise.

"Yet I would it were but summer and a clear day," grumbled the outlaw,
"that I might see myself in the mirror of a pool.  There be many of Sir
Daniel's men that know me; and if we fell to be recognised, there might
be two words for you, brother, but as for me, in a paternoster while, I
should be kicking in a rope's-end."

Thus they set forth together along the road to Shoreby, which, in this
part of its course, kept near along the margin or the forest, coming
forth, from time to time, in the open country, and passing beside poor
folks' houses and small farms.

Presently at sight of one of these, Lawless pulled up.

"Brother Martin," he said, in a voice capitally disguised, and suited to
his monkish robe, "let us enter and seek alms from these poor sinners.
_Pax vobiscum_!  Ay," he added, in his own voice, "'tis as I feared; I
have somewhat lost the whine of it; and by your leave, good Master
Shelton, ye must suffer me to practise in these country places, before
that I risk my fat neck by entering Sir Daniel's.  But look ye a little,
what an excellent thing it is to be a Jack-of-all-trades!  An I had not
been a shipman, ye had infallibly gone down in the Good Hope; an I had
not been a thief, I could not have painted me your face; and but that I
had been a Grey Friar, and sung loud in the choir, and ate hearty at the
board, I could not have carried this disguise, but the very dogs would
have spied us out and barked at us for shams."

He was by this time close to the window of the farm, and he rose on his
tip-toes and peeped in.

"Nay," he cried, "better and better.  We shall here try our false faces
with a vengeance, and have a merry jest on Brother Capper to boot."

And so saying, he opened the door and led the way into the house.

Three of their own company sat at the table, greedily eating.  Their
daggers, stuck beside them in the board, and the black and menacing looks
which they continued to shower upon the people of the house, proved that
