carries himself best, and all the court is in a buzz over it."

"Why should the knights have all the sport?" growled Hordle John. "Could
they not set up five archers for the honor of Aquitaine and of Gascony?"

"Or five men-at-arms," said Black Simon.

"But who are the English knights?" asked Hawtayne.

"There are three hundred and forty-one in the town," said Aylward, "and
I hear that three hundred and forty cartels and defiances have already
been sent in, the only one missing being Sir John Ravensholme, who is in
his bed with the sweating sickness, and cannot set foot to ground."

"I have heard of it from one of the archers of the guard," cried a
bowman from among the straw; "I hear that the prince wished to break a
lance, but that Chandos would not hear of it, for the game is likely to
be a rough one."

"Then there is Chandos."

"Nay, the prince would not permit it. He is to be marshal of the lists,
with Sir William Felton and the Duc d'Armagnac. The English will be the
Lord Audley, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Thomas Wake, Sir William Beauchamp,
and our own very good lord and leader."

"Hurrah for him, and God be with him!" cried several. "It is honor to
draw string in his service."

"So you may well say," said Aylward. "By my ten finger-bones! if you
march behind the pennon of the five roses you are like to see all that a
good bowman would wish to see. Ha! yes, mes garcons, you laugh, but, by
my hilt! you may not laugh when you find yourselves where he will take
you, for you can never tell what strange vow he may not have sworn to. I
see that he has a patch over his eye, even as he had at Poictiers. There
will come bloodshed of that patch, or I am the more mistaken."

"How chanced it at Poictiers, good Master Aylward?" asked one of the
young archers, leaning upon his elbows, with his eyes fixed respectfully
upon the old bowman's rugged face.

"Aye, Aylward, tell us of it," cried Hordle John.

"Here is to old Samkin Aylward!" shouted several at the further end of
the room, waving their blackjacks in the air.

"Ask him!" said Aylward modestly, nodding towards Black Simon. "He saw
more than I did. And yet, by the holy nails! there was not very much
that I did not see either."

"Ah, yes," said Simon, shaking his head, "it was a great day. I never
hope to see such another. There were some fine archers who drew their
last shaft that day. We shall never see better men, Aylward."

"By my hilt! no. There was little Robby Withstaff, and Andrew
Salblaster, and Wat Alspaye, who broke the neck of the German. Mon Dieu!
what men they were! Take them how you would, at long butts or short,
hoyles, rounds, or rovers, better bowmen never twirled a shaft over
their thumb-nails."

"But the fight, Aylward, the fight!" cried several impatiently.

"Let me fill my jack first, boys, for it is a thirsty tale. It was at
the first fall of the leaf that the prince set forth, and he passed
through Auvergne, and Berry, and Anjou, and Touraine. In Auvergne the
maids are kind, but the wines are sour. In Berry it is the women that
are sour, but the wines are rich. Anjou, however, is a very good
land for bowmen, for wine and women are all that heart could wish. In
Touraine I got nothing save a broken pate, but at Vierzon I had a great
good fortune, for I had a golden pyx from the minster, for which I
afterwards got nine Genoan janes from the goldsmith in the Rue
Mont Olive. From thence we went to Bourges, where I had a tunic of
flame-colored silk and a very fine pair of shoes with tassels of silk
and drops of silver."

"From a stall, Aylward?" asked one of the young archers.

"Nay, from a man's feet, lad. I had reason to think that he might not
need them again, seeing that a thirty-inch shaft had feathered in his
back."

"And what then, Aylward?"

"On we went, coz, some six thousand of us, until we came to Issodun, and
there again a very great thing befell."

"A battle, Aylward?"

"Nay, nay; a greater thing than that. There is little to be gained out
of a battle, unless one have the fortune to win a ransom. At Issodun I
and three Welshmen came upon a house which all others had passed, and
we had the profit of it to ourselves. For myself, I had a fine
feather-bed--a thing which you will not see in a long day's journey in
England. You have seen it, Alleyne, and you, John. You will bear me out
that it is a noble bed. We put it on a sutler's mule, and bore it after
the army. It was on my mind that I would lay it by until I came to
start house of mine own, and I have it now in a very safe place near
Lyndhurst."

"And what then, master-bowman?" asked Hawtayne. "By St. Christopher! it
is indeed a fair and goodly life which you have chosen, for you gather
up the spoil as a Warsash man gathers lobsters, without grace or favor
from any man."

"You are right, master-shipman," said another of the older archers.
"It is an old bowyer's rede that the second feather of a fenny goose is
better than the pinion of a tame one. Draw on old lad, for I have come
between you and the clout."

"On we went then," said Aylward, after a long pull at his blackjack.
"There were some six thousand of us, with the prince and his knights,
and the feather-bed upon a sutler's mule in the centre. We made great
havoc in Touraine, until we came into Romorantin, where I chanced upon
a gold chain and two bracelets of jasper, which were stolen from me the
same day by a black-eyed wench from the Ardennes. Mon Dieu! there are
some folk who have no fear of Domesday in them, and no sign of grace in
their souls, for ever clutching and clawing at another man's chattels."

"But the battle, Aylward, the battle!" cried several, amid a burst of
laughter.

"I come to it, my young war-pups. Well, then, the King of France had
followed us with fifty thousand men, and he made great haste to catch
us, but when he had us he scarce knew what to do with us, for we were
so drawn up among hedges and vineyards that they could not come nigh us,
save by one lane. On both sides were archers, men-at-arms and knights
behind, and in the centre the baggage, with my feather-bed upon a
sutler's mule. Three hundred chosen knights came straight for it, and,
indeed, they were very brave men, but such a drift of arrows met them
that few came back. Then came the Germans, and they also fought very
bravely, so that one or two broke through the archers and came as far
as the feather-bed, but all to no purpose. Then out rides our own little
hothead with the patch over his eye, and my Lord Audley with his four
Cheshire squires, and a few others of like kidney, and after them went
the prince and Chandos, and then the whole throng of us, with axe and
sword, for we had shot away our arrows. Ma foi! it was a foolish thing,
for we came forth from the hedges, and there was naught to guard the
baggage had they ridden round behind us. But all went well with us, and
the king was taken, and little Robby Withstaff and I fell in with a wain
with twelve firkins of wine for the king's own table, and, by my hilt!
if you ask me what happened after that, I cannot answer you, nor can
little Robby Withstaff either."

"And next day?"

"By my faith! we did not tarry long, but we hied back to Bordeaux, where
we came in safety with the King of France and also the feather-bed. I
sold my spoil, mes garcons, for as many gold-pieces as I could hold in
my hufken, and for seven days I lit twelve wax candles upon the altar of
St. Andrew; for if you forget the blessed when things are well with you,
they are very likely to forget you when you have need of them. I have a
score of one hundred and nineteen pounds of wax against the holy Andrew,
and, as he was a very just man, I doubt not that I shall have full weigh
and measure when I have most need of it."

"Tell me, master Aylward," cried a young fresh-faced archer at the
further end of the room, "what was this great battle about?"

"Why, you jack-fool, what would it be about save who should wear the
crown of France?"

"I thought that mayhap it might be as to who should have this
feather-bed of thine."

"If I come down to you, Silas, I may lay my belt across your shoulders,"
Aylward answered, amid a general shout of laughter. "But it is time
young chickens went to roost when they dare cackle against their elders.
It is late, Simon."

"Nay, let us have another song."

"Here is Arnold of Sowley will troll as good a stave as any man in the
Company."

"Nay, we have one here who is second to none," said Hawtayne, laying his
hand upon big John's shoulder. "I have heard him on the cog with a voice
like the wave upon the shore. I pray you, friend, to give us 'The Bells
of Milton,' or, if you will, 'The Franklin's Maid.'"

Hordle John drew the back of his hand across his mouth, fixed his eyes
upon the corner of the ceiling, and bellowed forth, in a voice which
made the torches flicker, the southland ballad for which he had been
asked:--

        The franklin he hath gone to roam,
        The franklin's maid she bides at home,
        But she is cold and coy and staid,
        And who may win the franklin's maid?

        There came a knight of high renown
        In bassinet and ciclatoun;
        On bended knee full long he prayed,
        He might not win the franklin's maid.

        There came a squire so debonair
        His dress was rich, his words were fair,
        He sweetly sang, he deftly played:
        He could not win the franklin's maid.

        There came a mercer wonder-fine
        With velvet cap and gaberdine;
        For all his ships, for all his trade
        He could not buy the franklin's maid.

        There came an archer bold and true,
        With bracer guard and stave of yew;
        His purse was light, his jerkin frayed;
        Haro, alas! the franklin's maid!

        Oh, some have laughed and some have cried
        And some have scoured the country-side!
        But off they ride through wood and glade,
        The bowman and the franklin's maid.

A roar of delight from his audience, with stamping of feet and beating
of blackjacks against the ground, showed how thoroughly the song was
to their taste, while John modestly retired into a quart pot, which he
drained in four giant gulps. "I sang that ditty in Hordle ale-house ere
I ever thought to be an archer myself," quoth he.

"Fill up your stoups!" cried Black Simon, thrusting his own goblet into
the open hogshead in front of him. "Here is a last cup to the White
Company, and every brave boy who walks behind the roses of Loring!"

"To the wood, the flax, and the gander's wing!" said an old gray-headed
archer on the right.

"To a gentle loose, and the King of Spain for a mark at fourteen score!"
cried another.

"To a bloody war!" shouted a fourth. "Many to go and few to come!"

"With the most gold to the best steel!" added a fifth.

"And a last cup to the maids of our heart!" cried Aylward. "A steady
hand and a true eye, boys; so let two quarts be a bowman's portion."
With shout and jest and snatch of song they streamed from the room, and
all was peaceful once more in the "Rose de Guienne."



CHAPTER XXIII. HOW ENGLAND HELD THE LISTS AT BORDEAUX. So used were the
good burghers of Bordeaux to martial display and knightly sport, that an
ordinary joust or tournament was an everyday matter with them. The fame
and brilliancy of the prince's court had drawn the knights-errant and
pursuivants-of-arms from every part of Europe. In the long lists by the
Garonne on the landward side of the northern gate there had been many a
strange combat, when the Teutonic knight, fresh from the conquest of the
Prussian heathen, ran a course against the knight of Calatrava, hardened
by continual struggle against the Moors, or cavaliers from Portugal
broke a lance with Scandinavian warriors from the further shore of the
great Northern Ocean. Here fluttered many an outland pennon, bearing
symbol and blazonry from the banks of the Danube, the wilds of Lithuania
and the mountain strongholds of Hungary; for chivalry was of no clime
and of no race, nor was any land so wild that the fame and name of the
prince had not sounded through it from border to border.

Great, however, was the excitement through town and district when it
was learned that on the third Wednesday in Advent there would be held
a passage-at-arms in which five knights of England would hold the lists
against all comers. The great concourse of noblemen and famous soldiers,
the national character of the contest, and the fact that this was a last
trial of arms before what promised to be an arduous and bloody war,
all united to make the event one of the most notable and brilliant that
Bordeaux had ever seen. On the eve of the contest the peasants flocked
in from the whole district of the Medoc, and the fields beyond the walls
were whitened with the tents of those who could find no warmer lodging.
From the distant camp of Dax, too, and from Blaye, Bourge, Libourne, St.
Emilion, Castillon, St. Macaire, Cardillac, Ryons, and all the cluster
of flourishing towns which look upon Bordeaux as their mother, there
thronged an unceasing stream of horsemen and of footmen, all converging
upon the great city. By the morning of the day on which the courses were
to be run, not less than eighty people had assembled round the lists
and along the low grassy ridge which looks down upon the scene of the
encounter.

It was, as may well be imagined, no easy matter among so many noted
cavaliers to choose out five on either side who should have precedence
over their fellows. A score of secondary combats had nearly arisen from
the rivalries and bad blood created by the selection, and it was only
the influence of the prince and the efforts of the older barons which
kept the peace among so many eager and fiery soldiers. Not till the day
before the courses were the shields finally hung out for the inspection
of the ladies and the heralds, so that all men might know the names
of the champions and have the opportunity to prefer any charge against
them, should there be stain upon them which should disqualify them from
taking part in so noble and honorable a ceremony.

Sir Hugh Calverley and Sir Robert Knolles had not yet returned from
their raid into the marches of the Navarre, so that the English party
were deprived of two of their most famous lances. Yet there remained so
many good names that Chandos and Felton, to whom the selection had been
referred, had many an earnest consultation, in which every feat of
arms and failure or success of each candidate was weighed and balanced
against the rival claims of his companions. Lord Audley of Cheshire,
the hero of Poictiers, and Loring of Hampshire, who was held to be the
second lance in the army, were easily fixed upon. Then, of the younger
men, Sir Thomas Percy of Northumberland, Sir Thomas Wake of Yorkshire,
and Sir William Beauchamp of Gloucestershire, were finally selected to
uphold the honor of England. On the other side were the veteran Captal
de Buch and the brawny Olivier de Clisson, with the free companion
Sir Perducas d'Albret, the valiant Lord of Mucident, and Sigismond von
Altenstadt, of the Teutonic Order. The older soldiers among the English
shook their heads as they looked upon the escutcheons of these famous
warriors, for they were all men who had spent their lives upon the
saddle, and bravery and strength can avail little against experience and
wisdom of war.

"By my faith! Sir John," said the prince as he rode through the winding
streets on his way to the list, "I should have been glad to have
splintered a lance to-day. You have seen me hold a spear since I had
strength to lift one, and should know best whether I do not merit a
place among this honorable company."

"There is no better seat and no truer lance, sire," said Chandos; "but,
if I may say so without fear of offence, it were not fitting that you
should join in this debate."

"And why, Sir John?"

"Because, sire, it is not for you to take part with Gascons against
English, or with English against Gascons, seeing that you are lord of
both. We are not too well loved by the Gascons now, and it is but the
golden link of your princely coronet which holds us together. If that be
snapped I know not what would follow."

"Snapped, Sir John!" cried the prince, with an angry sparkle in his dark
eyes. "What manner of talk is this? You speak as though the allegiance
of our people were a thing which might be thrown off or on like a
falcon's jessel."

"With a sorry hack one uses whip and spur, sire," said Chandos; "but
with a horse of blood and spirit a good cavalier is gentle and soothing,
coaxing rather than forcing. These folk are strange people, and you must
hold their love, even as you have it now, for you will get from their
kindness what all the pennons in your army could not wring from them."

"You are over-grave to-day, John," the prince answered. "We may keep
such questions for our council-chamber. But how now, my brothers of
Spain, and of Majorca, what think you of this challenge?"

"I look to see some handsome joisting," said Don Pedro, who rode with
the King of Majorca upon the right of the prince, while Chandos was on
the left. "By St. James of Compostella! but these burghers would bear
some taxing. See to the broadcloth and velvet that the rogues bear upon
their backs! By my troth! if they were my subjects they would be glad
enough to wear falding and leather ere I had done with them. But mayhap
it is best to let the wool grow long ere you clip it."

"It is our pride," the prince answered coldly, "that we rule over
freemen and not slaves."

"Every man to his own humor," said Pedro carelessly. "Carajo! there is a
sweet face at yonder window! Don Fernando, I pray you to mark the house,
and to have the maid brought to us at the abbey."

"Nay, brother, nay!" cried the prince impatiently. "I have had occasion
to tell you more than once that things are not ordered in this way in
Aquitaine."

"A thousand pardons, dear friend," the Spaniard answered quickly, for a
flush of anger had sprung to the dark cheek of the English prince. "You
make my exile so like a home that I forget at times that I am not in
very truth back in Castile. Every land hath indeed its ways and manners;
but I promise you, Edward, that when you are my guest in Toledo or
Madrid you shall not yearn in vain for any commoner's daughter on whom
you may deign to cast your eye."

"Your talk, sire," said the prince still more coldly, "is not such as
I love to hear from your lips. I have no taste for such amours as you
speak of, and I have sworn that my name shall be coupled with that of no
woman save my ever dear wife."

"Ever the mirror of true chivalry!" exclaimed Pedro, while James of
Majorca, frightened at the stern countenance of their all-powerful
protector, plucked hard at the mantle of his brother exile.

"Have a care, cousin," he whispered; "for the sake of the Virgin have a
care, for you have angered him."

"Pshaw! fear not," the other answered in the same low tone. "If I miss
one stoop I will strike him on the next. Mark me else. Fair cousin," he
continued, turning to the prince, "these be rare men-at-arms and lusty
bowmen. It would be hard indeed to match them."

"They have journeyed far, sire, but they have never yet found their
match."

"Nor ever will, I doubt not. I feel myself to be back upon my throne
when I look at them. But tell me, dear coz, what shall we do next,
when we have driven this bastard Henry from the kingdom which he hath
filched?"

"We shall then compel the King of Aragon to place our good friend and
brother James of Majorca upon the throne."

"Noble and generous prince!" cried the little monarch.

"That done," said King Pedro, glancing out of the corners of his eyes
at the young conqueror, "we shall unite the forces of England, of
Aquitaine, of Spain and of Majorca. It would be shame to us if we did
not do some great deed with such forces ready to our hand."

"You say truly, brother," cried the prince, his eyes kindling at the
thought. "Methinks that we could not do anything more pleasing to Our
Lady than to drive the heathen Moors out of the country."

"I am with you, Edward, as true as hilt to blade. But, by St. James!
we shall not let these Moors make mock at us from over the sea. We must
take ship and thrust them from Africa."

"By heaven, yes!" cried the prince. "And it is the dream of my heart
that our English pennons shall wave upon the Mount of Olives, and the
lions and lilies float over the holy city."

"And why not, dear coz? Your bowmen have cleared a path to Paris, and
why not to Jerusalem? Once there, your arms might rest."

"Nay, there is more to be done," cried the prince, carried away by the
ambitious dream. "There is still the city of Constantine to be taken,
and war to be waged against the Soldan of Damascus. And beyond him again
there is tribute to be levied from the Cham of Tartary and from the
kingdom of Cathay. Ha! John, what say you? Can we not go as far eastward
as Richard of the Lion Heart?"

"Old John will bide at home, sire," said the rugged soldier. "By my
soul! as long as I am seneschal of Aquitaine I will find enough to do
in guarding the marches which you have entrusted to me. It would be
a blithe day for the King of France when he heard that the seas lay
between him and us."

"By my soul! John," said the prince, "I have never known you turn
laggard before."

"The babbling hound, sire, is not always the first at the mort," the old
knight answered.

"Nay, my true-heart! I have tried you too often not to know. But, by my
soul! I have not seen so dense a throng since the day that we brought
King John down Cheapside."

It was indeed an enormous crowd which covered the whole vast plain from
the line of vineyards to the river bank. From the northern gate the
prince and his companions looked down at a dark sea of heads, brightened
here and there by the colored hoods of the women, or by the sparkling
head-pieces of archers and men-at-arms. In the centre of this vast
assemblage the lists seemed but a narrow strip of green marked out with
banners and streamers, while a gleam of white with a flutter of pennons
at either end showed where the marquees were pitched which served as the
dressing-rooms of the combatants. A path had been staked off from the
city gate to the stands which had been erected for the court and the
nobility. Down this, amid the shouts of the enormous multitude, the
prince cantered with his two attendant kings, his high officers of
state, and his long train of lords and ladies, courtiers, counsellors,
and soldiers, with toss of plume and flash of jewel, sheen of silk and
glint of gold--as rich and gallant a show as heart could wish. The head
of the cavalcade had reached the lists ere the rear had come clear of
the city gate, for the fairest and the bravest had assembled from all
the broad lands which are watered by the Dordogne and the Garonne. Here
rode dark-browed cavaliers from the sunny south, fiery soldiers from
Gascony, graceful courtiers of Limousin or Saintonge, and gallant young
Englishmen from beyond the seas. Here too were the beautiful brunettes
of the Gironde, with eyes which out-flashed their jewels, while beside
them rode their blonde sisters of England, clear cut and aquiline,
swathed in swans'-down and in ermine, for the air was biting though
the sun was bright. Slowly the long and glittering train wound into the
lists, until every horse had been tethered by the varlets in waiting,
and every lord and lady seated in the long stands which stretched, rich
in tapestry and velvet and blazoned arms, on either side of the centre
of the arena.

The holders of the lists occupied the end which was nearest to the city
gate. There, in front of their respective pavilions, flew the martlets
of Audley, the roses of Loring, the scarlet bars of Wake, the lion of
the Percies and the silver wings of the Beauchamps, each supported by
a squire clad in hanging green stuff to represent so many Tritons, and
bearing a huge conch-shell in their left hands. Behind the tents the
great war-horses, armed at all points, champed and reared, while their
masters sat at the doors of their pavilions, with their helmets upon
their knees, chatting as to the order of the day's doings. The English
archers and men-at-arms had mustered at that end of the lists, but the
vast majority of the spectators were in favor of the attacking party,
for the English had declined in popularity ever since the bitter dispute
as to the disposal of the royal captive after the battle of Poictiers.
Hence the applause was by no means general when the herald-at-arms
proclaimed, after a flourish of trumpets, the names and styles of the
knights who were prepared, for the honor of their country and for the
love of their ladies, to hold the field against all who might do them
the favor to run a course with them. On the other hand, a deafening
burst of cheering greeted the rival herald, who, advancing from the
other end of the lists, rolled forth the well-known titles of the five
famous warriors who had accepted the defiance.

"Faith, John," said the prince, "it sounds as though you were right.
Ha! my grace D'Armagnac, it seems that our friends on this side will not
grieve if our English champions lose the day."

"It may be so, sire," the Gascon nobleman answered. "I have little doubt
that in Smithfield or at Windsor an English crowd would favor their own
countrymen."

"By my faith! that's easily seen," said the prince, laughing, "for a few
score English archers at yonder end are bellowing as though they would
out-shout the mighty multitude. I fear that they will have little to
shout over this tourney, for my gold vase has small prospect of crossing
the water. What are the conditions, John?"

"They are to tilt singly not less than three courses, sire, and the
victory to rest with that party which shall have won the greater number
of courses, each pair continuing till one or other have the vantage. He
who carries himself best of the victors hath the prize, and he who is
judged best of the other party hath a jewelled clasp. Shall I order that
the nakirs sound, sire?"

The prince nodded, and the trumpets rang out, while the champions rode
forth one after the other, each meeting his opponent in the centre of
the lists. Sir William Beauchamp went down before the practiced lance
of the Captal de Buch. Sir Thomas Percy won the vantage over the Lord
of Mucident, and the Lord Audley struck Sir Perducas d'Albret from
the saddle. The burly De Clisson, however, restored the hopes of the
attackers by beating to the ground Sir Thomas Wake of Yorkshire. So far,
there was little to choose betwixt challengers and challenged.

"By Saint James of Santiago!" cried Don Pedro, with a tinge of color
