


CHAPTER XXIV.


THE START OF THE "GOLDEN ROD."

Thanks to the early tidings which the guardsman had brought with him,
his little party was now ahead of the news.  As they passed through the
village of Louvier in the early morning they caught a glimpse of a naked
corpse upon a dunghill, and were told by a grinning watchman that it was
that of a Huguenot who had died impenitent, but that was a common enough
occurrence already, and did not mean that there had been any change in
the law.  At Rouen all was quiet, and Captain Ephraim Savage before
evening had brought both them and such property as they had saved aboard
of his brigantine, the Golden Rod.  It was but a little craft, some
seventy tons burden, but at a time when so many were putting out to sea
in open boats, preferring the wrath of Nature to that of the king, it
was a refuge indeed.  The same night the seaman drew up his anchor and
began to slowly make his way down the winding river.

And very slow work it was.  There was half a moon shining and a breeze
from the east, but the stream writhed and twisted and turned until
sometimes they seemed to be sailing up rather than down.  In the long
reaches they set the yard square and ran, but often they had to lower
their two boats and warp her painfully along, Tomlinson of Salem, the
mate, and six grave, tobacco-chewing, New England seamen with their
broad palmetto hats, tugging and straining at the oars.  Amos Green, De
Catinat, and even the old merchant had to take their spell ere morning,
when the sailors were needed aboard for the handling of the canvas.
At last, however, with the early dawn the river broadened out and each
bank trended away, leaving a long funnel-shaped estuary between.
Ephraim Savage snuffed the air and paced the deck briskly with a twinkle
in his keen gray eyes.  The wind had fallen away, but there was still
enough to drive them slowly upon their course.

"Where's the gal?" he asked.

"She is in my cabin," said Amos Green.  "I thought that maybe she could
manage there until we got across."

"Where will you sleep yourself, then?"

"Tut, a litter of spruce boughs and a sheet of birch bark over me have
been enough all these years.  What would I ask better than this deck of
soft white pine and my blanket?"

"Very good.  The old man and his nephew, him with the blue coat, can
have the two empty bunks.  But you must speak to that man, Amos.  I'll
have no philandering aboard my ship, lad--no whispering or cuddling or
any such foolishness.  Tell him that this ship is just a bit broke off
from Boston, and he'll have to put up with Boston ways until he gets off
her.  They've been good enough for better men than him.  You give me the
French for 'no philandering,' and I'll bring him up with a round turn
when he drifts."

"It's a pity we left so quick or they might have been married before we
started.  She's a good girl, Ephraim, and he is a fine man, for all that
their ways are not the same as ours.  They don't seem to take life so
hard as we, and maybe they get more pleasure out of it."

"I never heard tell that we were put here to get pleasure out of it,"
said the old Puritan, shaking his head.  "The valley of the shadow of
death don't seem to me to be the kind o' name one would give to a
play-ground.  It is a trial and a chastening, that's what it is, the
gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity.  We're bad from the
beginning, like a stream that runs from a tamarack swamp, and we've
enough to do to get ourselves to rights without any fool's talk about
pleasure."

"It seems to me to be all mixed up," said Amos.  "like the fat and the
lean in a bag of pemmican.  Look at that sun just pushing its edge over
the trees, and see the pink flush on the clouds and the river like a
rosy ribbon behind us.  It's mighty pretty to our eyes, and very
pleasing to us, and it wouldn't be so to my mind if the Creator hadn't
wanted it to be.  Many a time when I have lain in the woods in the fall
and smoked my pipe, and felt how good the tobacco was, and how bright
the yellow maples were, and the purple ash, and the red tupelo blazing
among the bushwood, I've felt that the real fool's talk was with the man
who could doubt that all this was meant to make the world happier for
us."

"You've been thinking too much in them woods," said Ephraim Savage,
gazing at him uneasily.  "Don't let your sail be too great for your
boat, lad, nor trust to your own wisdom.  Your father was from the Bay,
and you were raised from a stock that cast the dust of England from
their feet rather than bow down to Baal.  Keep a grip on the word and
don't think beyond it.  But what is the matter with the old man?
He don't  seem easy in his mind."

The old merchant had been leaning over the bulwarks, looking back with a
drawn face and weary eyes at the red curving track behind them which
marked the path to Paris.  Adele had come up now, with not a thought to
spare upon the dangers and troubles which lay in front of her as she
chafed the old man's thin cold hands, and whispered words of love and
comfort into his ears.  But they had come to the point where the gentle
still-flowing river began for the first time to throb to the beat of the
sea.  The old man gazed forward with horror at the bowsprit as he saw it
rise slowly upwards into the air, and clung frantically at the rail as
it seemed to slip away from beneath him.

"We are always in the hollow of God's hand," he whispered, "but oh,
Adele, it is a dreadful thing to feel His fingers moving under us."

"Come with me, uncle," said De Catinat, passing his arm under that of
the old man.  "It is long since you have rested.  And you, Adele, I pray
that you will go and sleep, my poor darling, for it has been a weary
journey.  Go now, to please me, and when you wake, both France and your
troubles will lie behind you."

When father and daughter had left the deck, De Catinat made his way aft
again to where Amos Green and the captain were standing.

"I am glad to get them below, Amos," said he, "for I fear that we may
have trouble yet."

"And how?"

"You see the white road which runs by the southern bank of the river.
Twice within the last half-hour I have seen horsemen spurring for dear
life along it.  Where the spires and smoke are yonder is Honfleur, and
thither it was that these men went.  I know not who could ride so madly
at such an hour unless they were the messengers of the king.  Oh, see,
there is a third one!"

On the white band which wound among the green meadows a black dot could
be seen which moved along with great rapidity, vanished behind a clump
of trees, and then reappeared again, making for the distant city.
Captain Savage drew out his glass and gazed at the rider.

"Ay, ay," said he, as he snapped it up again.  "It is a soldier, sure
enough.  I can see the glint of the scabbard which he carries on his
larboard side.  I think we shall have more wind soon.  With a breeze we
can show our heels to anything in French waters, but a galley or an
armed boat would overhaul us now."

De Catinat, who, though he could speak little English, had learned in
America to understand it pretty well, looked anxiously at Amos Green.
"I fear that we shall bring trouble on this good captain," said he,
"and that the loss of his cargo and ship may be his reward for having
befriended us.  Ask him whether he would not prefer to land us on the
north bank.  With our money we might make our way into the Lowlands."

Ephraim Savage looked at his passenger with eyes which had lost
something of their sternness.  "Young man," said he, "I see that you can
understand something of my talk."

De Catinat nodded.

"I tell you then that I am a bad man to beat.  Any man that was ever
shipmates with me would tell you as much.  I just jam my helm and keep
my course as long as God will let me.  D'ye see?"

De Catinat again nodded, though in truth the seaman's metaphors left him
with but a very general sense of his meaning.

"We're comin' abreast of that there town, and in ten minutes we shall
know if there is any trouble waiting for us.  But I'll tell you a story
as we go that'll show you what kind o' man you've shipped with.  It was
ten years ago that I speak of, when I was in the _Speedwell_, sixty-ton
brig, tradin' betwixt Boston and Jamestown, goin' south with lumber and
skins and fixin's, d'ye see, and north again with tobacco and molasses.
One night, blowin' half a gale from the south'ard, we ran on a reef two
miles to the east of Cape May, and down we went with a hole in our
bottom like as if she'd been spitted on the steeple o' one o' them
Honfleur churches.  Well, in the morning there I was washin' about, nigh
out of sight of land, clingin' on to half the foreyard, without a sign
either of my mates or of wreckage.  I wasn't so cold, for it was early
fall, and I could get three parts of my body on to the spar, but I was
hungry and thirsty and bruised, so I just took in two holes of my
waist-belt, and put up a hymn, and had a look round for what I could
see.  Well, I saw more than I cared for.  Within five paces of me there
was a great fish, as long pretty nigh as the spar that I was grippin'.
It's a mighty pleasant thing to have your legs in the water and a beast
like that all ready for a nibble at your toes."

"_Mon Dieu!_" cried the French soldier.  "And he have not eat you?"

Ephraim Savage's little eyes twinkled at the reminiscence.

"I ate him," said he.

"What!" cried Amos.

"It's a mortal fact.  I'd a jack-knife in my pocket, Same as this one,
and I kicked my legs to keep the brute off, and I whittled away at the
spar until I'd got a good jagged bit off, sharp at each end, same as a
nigger told me once down Delaware way.  Then I waited for him, and
stopped kicking, so he came at me like a hawk on a chick-a-dee.  When he
turned up his belly I jammed my left hand with the wood right into his
great grinnin' mouth, and I let him have it with my knife between the
gills.  He tried to break away then, but I held on, d'ye see, though he
took me so deep I thought I'd never come up again.  I was nigh gone when
we got to the surface, but he was floatin' with the white up, and twenty
holes in his shirt front.  Then I got back to my spar, for we'd gone a
long fifty fathoms under water, and when I reached it I fainted dead
away."

"And then?"

"Well, when I came to, it was calm, and there was the dead shark
floatin' beside me.  I paddled my spar over to him and I got loose a few
yards of halliard that were hangin' from one end of it.  I made a
clove-hitch round his tail, d'ye see, and got the end of it slung over
the spar and fastened, so as I couldn't lose him.  Then I set to work
and I ate him in a week right up to his back fin, and I drank the rain
that fell on my coat, and when I was picked up by the _Gracie_ of
Gloucester, I was that fat that I could scarce climb aboard.
That's what Ephraim Savage means, my lad, when he says that he is a
baddish man to beat."

Whilst the Puritan seaman had been detailing his reminiscence, his eyes
had kept wandering from the clouds to the flapping sails and back.
Such wind as there was came in little short puffs, and the canvas either
drew full or was absolutely slack.  The fleecy shreds of cloud above,
however, travelled swiftly across the blue sky.  It was on these that
the captain fixed his gaze, and he watched them like a man who is
working out a problem in his mind.  They were abreast of Honfleur now,
and about half a mile out from it.  Several sloops and brigs were lying
there in a cluster, and a whole fleet of brown-sailed fishing-boats were
tacking slowly in.  Yet all was quiet on the curving quay and on the
half-moon fort over which floated the white flag with the golden
_fleur-de-lis_.  The port lay on their quarter now and they were drawing
away more quickly as the breeze freshened.  De Catinat glancing back had
almost made up his mind that their fears were quite groundless when they
were brought back in an instant and more urgently than ever.

Round the corner of the mole a great dark boat had dashed into view,
ringed round with foam from her flying prow, and from the ten pairs of
oars which swung from either side of her.  A dainty white ensign drooped
over her stern, and in her bows the sun's light was caught by a heavy
brass carronade.  She was packed with men, and the gleam which twinkled
every now and again from amongst them told that they were armed to the
teeth.  The captain brought his glass to bear upon them and whistled.
Then he glanced up at the clouds once more.

"Thirty men," said he, "and they go three paces to our two.  You, sir,
take your blue coat off this deck or you'll bring trouble upon us.
The Lord will look after His own if they'll only keep from foolishness.
Get these hatches off, Tomlinson.  So!  Where's Jim Sturt and Hiram
Jefferson?  Let them stand by to clap them on again when I whistle.
Starboard!  Starboard!  Keep her as full as she'll draw.  Now, Amos, and
you, Tomlinson, come here until I have a word  with you."

The three stood in consultation upon the poop, glancing back at their
pursuers.  There could be no doubt that the wind was freshening; it blew
briskly in their faces as they looked back, but it was not steady yet,
and the boat was rapidly overhauling them.  Already they could see the
faces of the marines who sat in the stern, and the gleam of the lighted
linstock which the gunner held in his hand.

"_Hola!_" cried an officer in excellent English.  "Lay her to or we
fire"

"Who are you, and what do you want?" shouted Ephraim Savage, in a voice
that might have been heard from the bank.

"We come in the king's name, and we want a party of Huguenots from Paris
who came on board of your vessel at Rouen."

"Brace back the foreyard and lay her to," shouted the captain.  "Drop a
ladder over the side there and look smart!  So!  Now we are ready for
them."

The yard was swung round and the vessel lay quietly rising and falling
on the waves.  The boat dashed alongside, her brass cannon trained upon
the brigantine, and her squad of marines with their fingers upon their
triggers ready to open fire.  They grinned and shrugged their shoulders
when they saw that their sole opponents were three unarmed men upon the
poop.  The officer, a young active fellow with a bristling moustache,
like the whiskers of a cat, was on deck in an instant with his drawn
sword in his hand.

"Come up, two of you!" he cried.  "You stand here at the head of the
ladder, sergeant.  Throw up a rope and you can fix it to this stanchion.
Keep awake down there and be all ready to fire!  You come with me,
Corporal Lemoine.  Who is captain of this ship?"

"I am, sir," said Ephraim Savage submissively.

"You have three Huguenots aboard?"

"Tut! tut!  Huguenots, are they?  I thought they were very anxious to
get away, but as long as they paid their passage it was no business of
mine.  An old man, his daughter, and a young fellow about your age in
some sort of livery."

"In uniform, sir! The uniform of the king's guard.  Those are the folk I
have come for."

"And you wish to take them back?"

"Most certainly."

"Poor folk!  I am sorry for them."

"And so am I, but orders are orders and must be done."

"Quite so.  Well, the old man is in his bunk asleep.  The maid is in a
cabin below.  And the other is sleeping down the hold there where we
had to put him, for there is no room elsewhere."

"Sleeping, you say?  We had best surprise him."

"But think you that you dare do it alone!  He has no arms, it is true,
but he is a well-grown young fellow.  Will you not have twenty men up
from the boat?"

Some such thought had passed through the officer's head, but the
captain's remark put him upon his mettle.

"Come with me, corporal," said he.  "Down this ladder, you say?"

"Yes, down the ladder and straight on.  He lies between those two cloth
bales."  Ephraim Savage looked up with a smile playing about the corners
of his grim mouth.  The wind was whistling now in the rigging, and the
stays of the mast were humming like two harp strings.  Amos Green
lounged beside the French sergeant who guarded the end of the rope
ladder, while Tomlinson, the mate, stood with a bucket of water in his
hand exchanging remarks in very bad French with the crew of the boat
beneath him.

The officer made his way slowly down the ladder which led into the hold,
and the corporal followed him, and had his chest level with the deck
when the other had reached the bottom.  It may have been something in
Ephraim Savage's face, or it may have been the gloom around him which
startled the young Frenchman, but a sudden suspicion flashed into his
mind.

"Up again, corporal!" he shouted, "I think that you are best at the
top."

"And I think that you are best down below, my friend," said the Puritan,
who gathered the officer's meaning from his gesture.  Putting the sole
of his boot against the man's chest he gave a shove which sent both him
and the ladder crashing down on to the officer beneath him.  As he did
so he blew his whistle, and in a moment the hatch was back in its place
and clamped down on each side with iron bars.

The sergeant had swung round at the sound of the crash, but Amos Green,
who had waited for the movement, threw his arms about him and hurled him
overboard into the sea.  At the same instant the connecting rope was
severed, the foreyard creaked back into position again, and the
bucketful of salt water soused down over the gunner and his gun, putting
out his linstock and wetting his priming.  A shower of balls from the
marines piped through the air or rapped up against the planks, but the
boat was tossing and jerking in the short choppy waves and to aim was
impossible.  In vain the men tugged and strained at their oars while the
gunner worked like a maniac to relight his linstock and to replace his
priming.  The boat had lost its weigh, while the brigantine was flying
along now with every sail bulging and swelling to bursting-point.
Crack! went the carronade at last, and five little slits in the mainsail
showed that her charge of grape had flown high.  Her second shot left no
trace behind it, and at the third she was at the limit of her range.
Half an hour afterwards a little dark dot upon the horizon with a golden
speck at one end of it was all that could be seen of the Honfleur
guard-boat.  Wider and wider grew the low-lying shores, broader and
broader was the vast spread of blue waters ahead, the smoke of Havre lay
like a little cloud upon the northern horizon, and Captain Ephraim
Savage paced his deck with his face as grim as ever, but with a dancing
light in his gray eyes.

"I knew that the Lord would look after His own," said he complacently.
"We've got her beak straight now, and there's not as much as a dab of
mud betwixt this and the three hills of Boston.  You've had too much of
these French wines of late, Amos, lad.  Come down and try a real Boston
brewing with a double stroke of malt in the mash tub."



CHAPTER XXV.


A BOAT OF THE DEAD.

For two days the _Golden Rod_ lay becalmed close to the Cape La Hague,
with the Breton coast extending along the whole of the southern horizon.
On the third morning, however, came a sharp breeze, and they drew
rapidly away from land, until it was but a vague dim line which blended
with the cloud banks.  Out there on the wide free ocean, with the wind
on their cheeks and the salt spray pringling upon their lips, these
hunted folk might well throw off their sorrows and believe that they had
left for ever behind them all tokens of those strenuous men whose
earnest piety had done more harm than frivolity and wickedness could
have accomplished.  And yet even now they could not shake off their
traces, for the sin of the cottage is bounded by the cottage door, but
that of the palace spreads its evil over land and sea.

"I am frightened about my father, Amory," said Adele, as they stood
together by the shrouds and looked back at the dim cloud upon the
horizon which marked the position of that France which they were never
to see again.

"But he is out of danger now."

"Out of danger from cruel laws, but I fear that he will never see the
promised land."

"What do you mean, Adele?  My uncle is hale and hearty."

"Ah, Amory, his very heart-roots were fastened in the Rue St. Martin,
and when they were torn his life was torn also.  Paris and his business,
they were the world to him."

"But he will accustom himself to this new life."

"If it only could be so!  But I fear, I fear, that he is over old for
such a change.  He says not a word of complaint.  But I read upon his
face that he is stricken to the heart.  For hours together he will gaze
back at France, with the tears running silently down his cheeks.
And his hair has turned from gray to white within the week."

De Catinat also had noticed that the gaunt old Huguenot had grown
gaunter, that the lines upon his stern face were deeper, and that his
head fell forward upon his breast as he walked.  He was about, however,
to suggest that the voyage might restore the merchant's health, when
Adele gave a cry of surprise and pointed out over the port quarter.
So beautiful was she at the instant with her raven hair blown back by
the wind, a glow of colour struck into her pale cheeks by the driving
spray, her lips parted in her excitement, and one white hand shading her
eyes, that he stood beside her with all his thoughts bent upon her grace
and her sweetness.

"Look!" she cried.  "There is something floating upon the sea.  I saw it
upon the crest of a wave."

He looked in the direction in which she pointed, but at first he saw
nothing.  The wind was still behind them, and a brisk sea was running of
a deep rich green colour, with long creamy curling caps to the larger
waves.  The breeze would catch these foam-crests from time to time, and
then there would be a sharp spatter upon the decks, with a salt smack
upon the lips, and a pringling in the eyes.  Suddenly as he gazed,
however, something black was tilted up upon the sharp summit of one of
the seas, and swooped out of view again upon the further side.  It was
so far from him that he could make nothing of it, but sharper eyes than
his had caught a glance of it.  Amos Green had seen the girl point and
observed what it was which had attracted her attention.

"Captain Ephraim," cried he, "there's a boat on the starboard quarter."

The New England seaman whipped up his glass and steadied it upon the
bulwark.

"Ay, it's a boat," said he, "but an empty one.  Maybe it's been washed
off from some ship, or gone adrift from shore.  Put her hard down, Mr.
Tomlinson, for it just so happens that I am in need of a boat at
present."

Half a minute later the _Golden Rod_ had swung round and was running
swiftly down towards the black spot which still bobbed and danced upon
the waves.  As they neared her they could see that something was
projecting over her side.

"It's a man's head!" cried Amos Green.

But Ephraim Savage's grim face grew grimmer.  "It's a man's foot," said
he.  "I think that you had best take the gal below to the cabin."

Amid a solemn hush they ran alongside this lonely craft which hung out
so sinister a signal.  Within ten yards of her the foreyard was hauled
aback and they gazed down upon her terrible crew.

She was a little thirteen-foot cockle-shell, very broad for her length
and so flat in the bottom that she had been meant evidently for river or
lake work.  Huddled together beneath the seats were three folk, a man in
the dress of a respectable artisan, a woman of the same class, and a
little child about a year old.  The boat was half full of water and the
woman and child were stretched with their faces downwards, the fair
curls of the infant and the dark locks of the mother washing to and fro
like water-weeds upon the surface.  The man lay with a slate-coloured
face, his chin cocking up towards the sky, his eyes turned upwards to
the whites, and his mouth wide open showing a leathern crinkled tongue
like a rotting leaf.  In the bows, all huddled in a heap, and with a
single paddle still grasped in his hand, there crouched a very small man
clad in black, an open book lying across his face, and one stiff leg
jutting upwards with the heel of the foot resting between the rowlocks.
So this strange company swooped and tossed upon the long green Atlantic
rollers.

A boat had been lowered by the _Golden Rod_, and the unfortunates were
soon conveyed upon deck.  No particle of either food or drink was to be
found, nor anything save the single paddle and the open Bible which lay
across the small man's face.  Man, woman, and child had all been dead a
day at the least, and so with the short prayers used upon the seas they
were buried from the vessel's side.  The small man had at first seemed
also to be lifeless, but Amos had detected some slight flutter of his
