home unsold. But I tell thee in Ghent or Bruges, or even in Rotterdam,
they would tear it out of thy hands. But it is a common saying that a
stranger's eye sees clearest. Courage, Pietro Vanucci! I reverence thee
and though myself a scurvy painter, do forgive thee for being a great
one. Forgive thee? I thank God for thee and such rare men as thou art;
and bow the knee to thee in just homage. Thy picture is immortal, and
thou, that hast but a chest to sit on, art a king in thy most royal art.
Viva, il maestro! Viva!"

At this unexpected burst the painter, with all the abandon of his
nation, flung himself on Gerard's neck. "They said it was a maniac's
dream," he sobbed.

"Maniacs themselves! no, idiots!" shouted Gerard.

"Generous stranger! I will hate men no more since the world hath such as
thee. I was a viper to fling thy poor dinner away; a wretch, a monster."

"Well, monster, wilt be gentle now, and sup with me?"

"Ah! that I will. Whither goest thou?"

"To order supper on the instant. We will have the picture for third
man."

"I will invite it whiles thou art gone. My poor picture, child of my
heart."

"Ah, master, 'twill look on many a supper after the worms have eaten you
and me."

"I hope so," said Pietro.



CHAPTER LVII

About a week after this the two friends sat working together, but not in
the same spirit. Pietro dashed fitfully at his, and did wonders in a few
minutes, and then did nothing, except abuse it; then presently resumed
it in a fury, to lay it down with a groan. Through all which kept calmly
working, calmly smiling, the canny Dutchman.

To be plain, Gerard, who never had a friend he did not master, had put
his Onagra in harness. The friends were painting playing cards to boil
the pot.

When done, the indignant master took up his picture to make his daily
tour in search of a customer.

Gerard begged him to take the cards as well, and try and sell them.
He looked all the rattle-snake, but eventually embraced Gerard in the
Italian fashion, and took them, after first drying the last-finished
ones in the sun, which was now powerful in that happy clime.

Gerard, left alone, executed a Greek letter or two, and then mended
a little rent in his hose. His landlady found him thus employed, and
inquired ironically whether there were no women in the house.

"When you have done that," said she "come and talk to Teresa, my friend
I spoke to thee of, that hath a husband not good for much, which brags
his acquaintance with the great."

Gerard went down, and who should Teresa be but the Roman matron.

"Ah, madama," said he, "is it you? The good dame told me not that. And
the little fair-haired boy, is he well is he none the worse for his
voyage in that strange boat?"

"He is well," said the matron.

"Why, what are you two talking about?" said the landlady, staring at
them both in turn; "and why tremble you so, Teresa mia?"

"He saved my child's life," said Teresa, making an effort to compose
herself.

"What! my lodger? and he never told me a word of that. Art not ashamed
to look me in the face?"

"Alas! speak not harshly to him," said the matron. She then turned to
her friend and poured out a glowing description of Gerard's conduct,
during which Gerard stood blushing like a girl, and scarce recognizing
his own performance, gratitude painted it so fair.

"And to think thou shouldst ask me to serve thy lodger, of whom I knew
nought but that he had thy good word, oh, Fiammina; and that was enough
for me. Dear youth, in serving thee I serve myself."

Then ensued an eager description, by the two women, of what had been
done, and what should be done, to penetrate the thick wall of fees,
commissions, and chicanery, which stood between the patrons of art and
an unknown artist in the Eternal City.

Teresa smiled sadly at Gerard's simplicity in leaving specimens of his
skill at the doors of the great.

"What!" said she, "without promising the servants a share--without even
feeing them, to let the signors see thy merchandise! As well have flung
it into Tiber."

"Well-a-day!" sighed Gerard. "Then how is an artist to find a patron?
for artists are poor, not rich."

"By going to some city nobler and not so greedy as this," said Teresa.
"La corte Romana non vuol' pecora senza lana."

She fell into thought, and said she would come again to-morrow.

The landlady felicitated Gerard. "Teresa has got something in her head,"
said she.

Teresa was scarce gone when Pietro returned with his picture, looking
black as thunder. Gerard exchanged a glance with the landlady, and
followed him upstairs to console him.

"What, have they let thee bring home thy masterpiece?"

"As heretofore."

"More fools they, then."

"That is not the worse."

"Why, what is the matter?"

"They have bought the cards," yelled Pietro, and hammered the air
furiously right and left.

"All the better," said Gerard cheerfully.

"They flew at me for them. They were enraptured with them. They tried
to conceal their longing for them, but could not. I saw, I feigned, I
pillaged; curse the boobies."

And he flung down a dozen small silver coins on the floor and jumped
on them, and danced on them with basilisk eyes, and then kicked them
assiduously, and sent them spinning and flying, and running all abroad.
Down went Gerard on his knees, and followed the maltreated innocents
directly, and transferred them tenderly to his purse.

"Shouldst rather smile at their ignorance, and put it to profit," said
he.

"And so I will," said Pietro, with concentrated indignation. "The
brutes! We will paint a pack a day; we will set the whole city gambling
and ruining itself, while we live like princes on its vices and
stupidity. There was one of the queens, though, I had fain have kept
back. 'Twas you limned her, brother. She had lovely red-brown hair and
sapphire eyes, and above all, soul."

"Pietro," said Gerard softly, "I painted that one from my heart."

The quick-witted Italian nodded, and his eyes twinkled.

"You love her so well, yet leave her."

"Pietro, it is because I love her so dear that I have wandered all this
weary road."

This interesting colloquy was interrupted by the landlady crying from
below, "Come down, you are wanted." He went down, and there was Teresa
again.

"Come with me, Ser Gerard."



CHAPTER LVIII

Gerard walked silently beside Teresa, wondering in his own mind, after
the manner of artists, what she was going to do with him; instead of
asking her. So at last she told him of her own accord. A friend had
informed her of a working goldsmith's wife who wanted a writer. "Her
shop is hard by; you will not have far to go."

Accordingly they soon arrived at the goldsmith's wife.

"Madama," said Teresa, "Leonora tells me you want a writer: I have
brought you a beautiful one; he saved my child at sea. Prithee look on
him with favour."

The goldsmith's wife complied in one sense. She fixed her eyes on
Gerard's comely face, and could hardly take them off again. But her
reply was unsatisfactory. "Nay, I have no use for a writer. Ah! I mind
now, it is my gossip, Claelia, the sausage-maker, wants one; she told
me, and I told Leonora."

Teresa made a courteous speech and withdrew.

Claelia lived at some distance, and when they reached her house she was
out. Teresa said calmly, "I will await her return," and sat so still,
and dignified, and statuesque, that Gerard was beginning furtively to
draw her, when Claelia returned.

"Madama, I hear from the goldsmith's wife, the excellent Olympia,
that you need a writer" (here she took Gerard by the hand and led him
forward); "I have brought you a beautiful one; he saved my child from
the cruel waves. For our Lady's sake look with favour on him."

"My good dame, my fair Ser," said Claelia, "I have no use for a writer;
but now you remind me, it was my friend Appia Claudia asked me for one
but the other day. She is a tailor, lives in the Via Lepida."

Teresa retired calmly.

"Madama," said Gerard, "this is likely to be a tedious business for
you."

Teresa opened her eyes.

"What was ever done without a little patience?" She added mildly, "We
will knock at every door at Rome but you shall have justice."

"But, madama, I think we are dogged. I noticed a man that follows us,
sometimes afar, sometimes close."

"I have seen it," said Teresa coldly; but her cheek coloured faintly.
"It is my poor Lodovico."

She stopped and turned, and beckoned with her finger.

A figure approached them somewhat unwillingly.

When he came up, she gazed him full in the face, and he looked sheepish.

"Lodovico mio," said she, "know this young Ser, of whom I have so often
spoken to thee. Know him and love him, for he it was who saved thy wife
and child."

At these last words Lodovico, who had been bowing and grinning
artificially, suddenly changed to an expression of heartfelt gratitude,
and embraced Gerard warmly.

Yet somehow there was something in the man's original manner, and his
having followed his wife by stealth, that made Gerard uncomfortable
under this caress. However, he said, "We shall have your company, Ser
Lodovico?"

"No, signor," replied Lodovico, "I go not on that side Tiber."

"Addio, then," said Teresa significantly.

"When shall you return home, Teresa mia?"

"When I have done mine errand, Lodovico."

They pursued their way in silence. Teresa now wore a sad and almost
gloomy air.

To be brief, Appia Claudia was merciful, and did not send them over
Tiber again, but only a hundred yards down the street to Lucretia, who
kept the glove shop; she it was wanted a writer; but what for, Appia
Claudia could not conceive. Lucretia was a merry little dame, who
received them heartily enough, and told them she wanted no writer, kept
all her accounts in her head. "It was for my confessor, Father Colonna;
he is mad after them."

"I have heard of his excellency," said Teresa.

"Who has not?"

"But, good dame, he is a friar; he has made vow of poverty. I cannot let
the young man write and not be paid. He saved my child at sea.

"Did he now?" And Lucretia cast an approving look on Gerard. "Well, make
your mind easy; a Colonna never wants for money. The good father has
only to say the word, and the princes of his race will pour a thousand
crowns into his lap. And such a confessor, dame! the best in Rome. His
head is leagues and leagues away all the while; he never heeds what you
are saying. Why, I think no more of confessing my sins to him than of
telling them to that wall. Once, to try him, I confessed, along with
the rest, as how I had killed my lodger's little girl and baked her in
a pie. Well, when my voice left off confessing, he started out of his
dream, and says he, a mustering up a gloom, 'My erring sister, say three
Paternosters and three Ave Marias kneeling, and eat no butter nor eggs
next Wednesday, and pax vobiscum!' and off a went with his hands behind
him, looking as if there was no such thing as me in the world."

Teresa waited patiently, then calmly brought this discursive lady back
to the point: "Would she be so kind as go with this good youth to the
friar and speak for him?"

"Alack! how can I leave my shop? And what need? His door is aye open to
writers, and painters, and scholars, and all such cattle. Why, one day
he would not receive the Duke d'Urbino, because a learned Greek was
closeted with him, and the friar's head and his so close together over a
dusty parchment just come in from Greece, as you could put one cowl over
the pair. His wench Onesta told me. She mostly looks in here for a chat
when she goes an errand."

"This is the man for thee, my friend," said Teresa.

"All you have to do," continued Lucretia, "is to go to his lodgings (my
boy shall show them you), and tell Onesta you come from me, and you are
a writer, and she will take you up to him. If you put a piece of silver
in the wench's hand, 'twill do you no harm: that stands to reason."

"I have silver," said Teresa warmly.

"But stay," said Lucretia, "mind one thing. What the young man saith he
can do, that he must be able to do, or let him shun the good friar like
poison. He is a very wild beast against all bunglers. Why, 'twas but
t'other day, one brought him an ill-carved crucifix. Says he, 'Is this
how you present "Salvator Mundi?" who died for you in mortal agony; and
you go and grudge him careful work. This slovenly gimcrack, a crucifix?
But that it is a crucifix of some sort, and I am a holy man, I'd dust
your jacket with your crucifix,' says he. Onesta heard every word
through the key-hole; so mind."

"Have no fears, madama," said Teresa loftily. "I will answer for his
ability; he saved my child."

Gerard was not subtle enough to appreciate this conclusion; and was so
far from sharing Teresa's confidence that he begged a respite. He would
rather not go to the friar to-day: would not to-morrow do as well?

"Here is a coward for ye," said Lucretia.

"No, he is not a coward," said Teresa, firing up; "he is modest."

"I am afraid of this high-born, fastidious friar," said Gerard,
"Consider he has seen the handiwork of all the writers in Italy, dear
dame Teresa; if you would but let me prepare a better piece of work than
yet I have done, and then to-morrow I will face him with it."

"I consent," said Teresa.

They walked home together.

Not far from his own lodging was a shop that sold vellum. There was a
beautiful white skin in the window. Gerard looked at it wistfully; but
he knew he could not pay for it; so he went on rather hastily. However,
he soon made up his mind where to get vellum, and parting with Teresa at
his own door, ran hastily upstairs, and took the bond he had brought all
the way from Sevenbergen, and laid it with a sigh on the table. He then
prepared with his chemicals to erase the old writing; but as this was
his last chance of reading it, he now overcame his deadly repugnance
to bad writing, and proceeded to decipher the deed in spite of its
detestable contractions. It appeared by this deed that Ghysbrecht Van
Swieten was to advance some money to Floris Brandt on a piece of land,
and was to repay himself out of the rent.

On this Gerard felt it would be imprudent and improper to destroy the
deed. On the contrary, he vowed to decipher every word, at his leisure.
He went downstairs, determined to buy a small piece of vellum with his
half of the card-money.

At the bottom of the stairs he found the landlady and Teresa talking. At
sight of him the former cried, "Here he is. You are caught, donna mia.
See what she has bought you?" And whipped out from under her apron the
very skin of vellum Gerard had longed for.

"Why, dame! why, donna Teresa!" And he was speechless with pleasure and
astonishment.

"Dear donna Teresa, there is not a skin in all Rome like it. However
came you to hit on this one? 'Tis glamour."

"Alas, dear boy, did not thine eye rest on it with desire? and didst thou
not sigh in turning away from it? And was it for Teresa to let thee want
the thing after that?"

"What sagacity! what goodness, madama! Oh, dame, I never thought I
should possess this. What did you pay for it?"

"I forget. Addio, Fiammina. Addio, Ser Gerard. Be happy, be prosperous,
as you are good." And the Roman matron glided away while Gerard was
hesitating, and thinking how to offer to pay so stately a creature for
her purchase.

The next day in the afternoon he went to Lucretia, and her boy took him
to Fra Colonna's lodgings. He announced his business, and feed Onesta,
and she took him up to the friar. Gerard entered with a beating heart.
The room, a large one, was strewed and heaped with objects of art,
antiquity, and learning, lying about in rich profusion, and confusion.
Manuscripts, pictures, carvings in wood and ivory, musical instruments;
and in this glorious chaos sat the friar, poring intently over an
Arabian manuscript.

He looked up a little peevishly at the interruption. Onesta whispered in
his ear.

"Very well," said he. "Let him be seated. Stay; young man, show me how
you write?" And he threw Gerard a piece of paper, and pointed to an
inkhorn.

"So please you, reverend father," said Gerard, "my hand it trembleth too
much at this moment; but last night I wrote a vellum page of Greek, and
the Latin version by its side, to show the various character."

"Show it me?"

Gerard brought the work to him in fear and trembling; then stood
heart-sick, awaiting his verdict.

When it came it staggered him. For the verdict was, a Dominican falling
on his neck.

The next day an event took place in Holland, the effect of which on
Gerard's destiny, no mortal at the time, nor even my intelligent reader
now, could, I think, foresee.

Marched up to Eli's door a pageant brave to the eye of sense, and to the
vulgar judgment noble, but to the philosophic, pitiable more or less.

It looked one animal, a centaur; but on severe analysis proved two. The
human half were sadly bedizened with those two metals, to clothe his
carcass with which and line his pouch, man has now and then disposed of
his soul: still the horse was the vainer brute of the two; he was far
worse beflounced, bebonneted, and bemantled, than any fair lady regnante
crinolina. For the man, under the colour of a warming-pan, retained
Nature's outline. But it was subaudi equum! Scarce a pennyweight of
honest horse-flesh to be seen. Our crinoline spares the noble parts of
women, and makes but the baser parts gigantic (why this preference?);
but this poor animal from stem to stern was swamped in finery. His ears
were hid in great sheaths of white linen tipped with silver and blue.
His body swaddled in stiff gorgeous cloths descending to the ground,
except just in front, where they left him room to mince. His tail,
though dear to memory, no doubt, was lost to sight, being tucked in
heaven knows how. Only his eyes shone out like goggles, through two
holes pierced in the wall of haberdashery, and his little front hoofs
peeped in and out like rats.

Yet did this compound, gorgeous and irrational, represent power;
absolute power: it came straight from a tournament at the Duke's court,
which being on a progress, lay last night at a neighbouring town--to
execute the behests of royalty.

"What ho!" cried the upper half, and on Eli emerging, with his wife
behind him, saluted them. "Peace be with you, good people. Rejoice! I am
come for your dwarf."

Eli looked amazed, and said nothing. But Catherine screamed over his
shoulder, "You have mistook your road, good man; here abides no dwarf."

"Nay, wife, he means our Giles, who is somewhat small of stature: why
gainsay what gainsayed may not be?"

"Ay!" cried the pageant, "that is he, and discourseth like the big
taber.

"His breast is sound for that matter," said Catherine sharply.

"And prompt with his fists though at long odds."

"Else how would the poor thing keep his head in such a world as this?"

"'Tis well said, dame. Art as ready with thy weapon as he; art his
mother, likely. So bring him forth, and that presently. See, they lead a
stunted mule for him. The Duke hath need of him, sore need; we are clean
out o' dwarven, and tiger-cats, which may not be, whiles earth them
yieldeth. Our last hop o' my thumb tumbled down the well t'other day."

"And think you I'll let my darling go to such an ill-guided house as
you, where the reckless trollops of servants close not the well mouth,
but leave it open to trap innocents, like wolven?"

The representative of autocracy lost patience at this unwonted
opposition, and with stern look and voice bade her bethink her whether
it was the better of the two; "to have your abortion at court fed like a
bishop and put on like a prince, or to have all your heads stricken off
and borne on poles, with the bellman crying, 'Behold the heads of hardy
rebels, which having by good luck a misbegotten son, did traitorously
grudge him to the Duke, who is the true father of all his folk, little
or mickle?'

"Nay," said Eli sadly, "miscall us not. We be true folk, and neither
rebels nor traitors. But 'tis sudden, and the poor lad is our true flesh
and blood, and hath of late given proof of more sense than heretofore."

"Avails not threatening our lives," whimpered Catherine; "we grudge him
not to the Duke; but in sooth he cannot go; his linen is all in holes.
So there is an end."

But the male mind resisted this crusher.

"Think you the Duke will not find linen, and cloth of gold to boot? None
so brave, none so affected, at court, as our monsters, big or wee."

How long the dispute might have lasted, before the iron arguments of
despotism achieved the inevitable victory, I know not; but it was cut
short by a party whom neither disputant had deigned to consult.

The bone of contention walked out of the house, and sided with monarchy.

"If my folk are mad, I am not," he roared. "I'll go with you and on the
instant."

At this Catherine set up a piteous cry. She saw another of her brood
escaping from under her wing into some unknown element. Giles was not
quite insensible to her distress, so simple yet so eloquent. He said,
"Nay, take not on, mother! Why, 'tis a godsend. And I am sick of this,
ever since Gerard left it."

"Ah, cruel Giles! Should ye not rather say she is bereaved of Gerard:
the more need of you to stay aside her and comfort her."

"Oh! I am not going to Rome. Not such a fool. I shall never be farther
than Rotterdam; and I'll often come and see you; and if I like not the
place, who shall keep me there? Not all the dukes in Christendom."

"Good sense lies in little bulk," said the emissary approvingly.
"Therefore, Master Giles, buss the old folk, and thank them for
misbegetting of thee; and ho! you--bring hither his mule."

One of his retinue brought up the dwarf mule. Giles refused it with
scorn. And on being asked the reason, said it was not just.

"What! would ye throw all into one scale! Put muckle to muckle, and
little to wee! Besides, I hate and scorn small things. I'll go on the
highest horse here, or not at all."

The pursuivant eyed him attentively a moment. He then adopted a
courteous manner. "I shall study your will in all things reasonable.
(Dismount, Eric, yours is the highest horse.) And if you would halt in
the town an hour or so, while you bid them farewell, say but the word,
and your pleasure shall be my delight."

Giles reflected.

"Master," said he, "if we wait a month, 'twill be still the same: my
mother is a good soul, but her body is bigger than her spirit. We shall
not part without a tear or two, and the quicker 'tis done the fewer; so
bring yon horse to me."

Catherine threw her apron over her face and sobbed. The high horse was
brought, and Giles was for swarming up his tail, like a rope; but one
of the servants cried out hastily, "Forbear, for he kicketh." "I'll kick
him," said Giles. "Bring him close beneath this window, and I'll learn
you all how to mount a horse which kicketh, and will not be clomb by
the tail, the staircase of a horse." And he dashed into the house, and
almost immediately reappeared at an upper window, with a rope in his
hand. He fastened an end somehow, and holding the other, descended
as swift and smooth as an oiled thunderbolt in a groove, and lighted
astride his high horse as unperceived by that animal as a fly settling
on him.

The official lifted his hands to heaven in mawkish admiration. "I have
gotten a pearl," thought he, "and wow but this will be a good day's work
for me."

"Come, father, come, mother, buss me, and bless me, and off I go."

Eli gave him his blessing, and bade him be honest and true, and a credit
to his folk. Catherine could not speak, but clung to him with many sobs
and embraces; and even through the mist of tears her eye detected in a
moment the little rent in his sleeve he had made getting out of window,
and she whipped out her needle and mended it then and there, and her
tears fell on his arm the while, unheeded--except by those unfleshly
eyes, with which they say the very air is thronged.

And so the dwarf mounted the high horse, and rode away complacent with
the old hand laying the court butter on his back with a trowel.

Little recked Perpusillus of two poor silly females that sat by the
bereaved hearth, rocking themselves, and weeping, and discussing all his
virtues, and how his mind had opened lately, and blind as two beetles to
his faults, who rode away from them, jocund and bold.

Ingentes animos angusto pectore versans.

Arrived at court he speedily became a great favourite.

One strange propensity of his electrified the palace; but on account
of his small size, and for variety's sake, and as a monster, he was
indulged on it. In a word, he was let speak the truth.

It is an unpopular thing.

He made it an intolerable one.

Bawled it.



CHAPTER LIX

Happy the man who has two chain-cables: Merit, and Women.

Oh, that I, like Gerard, had a 'chaine des dames' to pull up by.

I would be prose laureat, or professor of the spasmodic, or something,
in no time. En attendant, I will sketch the Fra Colonna.

The true revivers of ancient learning and philosophy were two writers of
fiction--Petrarch and Boccaccio.

Their labours were not crowned with great, public, and immediate
success; but they sowed the good seed; and it never perished, but
quickened in the soil, awaiting sunshine.

From their day Italy was never without a native scholar or two,
versed in Greek; and each learned Greek who landed there was received
fraternally. The fourteenth century, ere its close, saw the birth
of Poggio, Valla, and the elder Guarino; and early in the fifteenth
Florence under Cosmo de Medici was a nest of Platonists. These, headed
by Gemistus Pletho, a born Greek, began about A.D. 1440 to write down
Aristotle. For few minds are big enough to be just to great A without
being unjust to capital B.

Theodore Gaza defended that great man with moderation; George of
Trebizond with acerbity, and retorted on Plato. Then Cardinal Bessarion,
another born Greek, resisted the said George, and his idol, in a tract
"Adversus calumniatorem Platonis."

Pugnacity, whether wise or not, is a form of vitality. Born without
controversial bile in so zealous an epoch, Francesco Colonna, a young
nobleman of Florence, lived for the arts. At twenty he turned Dominican
friar. His object was quiet study. He retired from idle company, and
faction fights, the humming and the stinging of the human hive, to St.
Dominic and the Nine Muses.

An eager student of languages, pictures, statues, chronology, coins,
and monumental inscriptions. These last loosened his faith in popular
histories.

He travelled many years in the East, and returned laden with spoils;
master of several choice MSS., and versed in Greek and Latin, Hebrew and
Syriac. He found his country had not stood still. Other lettered princes
besides Cosmo had sprung up. Alfonso King of Naples, Nicolas d'Este,
Lionel d'Este, etc. Above all, his old friend Thomas of Sarzana had been
made Pope, and had lent a mighty impulse to letters; had accumulated
5000 MSS. in the library of the Vatican, and had set Poggio to translate
Diodorus Siculus and Xenophon's Cyropaedia, Laurentius Valla to
translate Herodotus and Thucydides, Theodore Gaza, Theophrastus; George
of Trebizond, Eusebius, and certain treatises of Plato, etc. etc.

The monk found Plato and Aristotle under armistice, but Poggio and
Valla at loggerheads over verbs and nouns, and on fire with odium
philologicum. All this was heaven; and he settled down in his native
land, his life a rosy dream. None so happy as the versatile,
provided they have not their bread to make by it. And Fra Colonna was
Versatility. He knew seven or eight languages, and a little mathematics;
could write a bit, paint a bit, model a bit, sing a bit, strum a bit;
and could relish superior excellence in all these branches. For
this last trait he deserved to be as happy as he was. For, gauge the
intellects of your acquaintances, and you will find but few whose minds
are neither deaf, nor blind, nor dead to some great art or science--

"And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out."

And such of them as are conceited as well as stupid shall even parade
instead of blushing for the holes in their intellects.

A zealot in art, the friar was a sceptic in religion.

In every age there are a few men who hold the opinions of another age,
past or future. Being a lump of simplicity, his sceptism was as naif as
his enthusiasm. He affected to look on the religious ceremonies of his
day as his models, the heathen philosophers, regarded the worship of
gods and departed heroes: mummeries good for the populace. But here his
mind drew unconsciously a droll distinction. Whatever Christian ceremony
his learning taught him was of purely pagan origin, that he respected,
out of respect for antiquity; though had he, with his turn of mind,
been a pagan and its contemporary, he would have scorned it from his
philosophic heights.

Fra Colonna was charmed with his new artist, and having the run of half
the palaces in Rome, sounded his praises so, that he was soon called
upon to resign him. He told Gerard what great princes wanted him. "But I
am so happy with you, father," objected Gerard. "Fiddlestick about being
happy with me," said Fra Colonna; "you must not be happy; you must be a
man of the world; the grand lesson I impress on the young is, be a man
of the world. Now these Montesini can pay you three times as much as I
can, and they shall too-by Jupiter."

And the friar clapped a terrific price on Gerard's pen. It was acceded
to without a murmur. Much higher prices were going for copying than
authorship ever obtained for centuries under the printing press.

Gerard had three hundred crowns for Aristotle's treatise on rhetoric.

The great are mighty sweet upon all their pets, while the fancy lasts;
and in the rage for Greek MSS. the handsome writer soon became a pet,
and nobles of both sexes caressed him like a lap dog.

It would have turned a vain fellow's head; but the canny Dutchman
saw the steel hand beneath the velvet glove, and did not presume.
Nevertheless it was a proud day for him when he found himself seated
with Fra Colonna at the table of his present employer, Cardinal
Bessarion. They were about a mile from the top of that table; but never
mind, there they were and Gerard had the advantage of seeing roast
pheasants dished up with all their feathers as if they had just flown
out of a coppice instead of off the spit: also chickens cooked in
bottles, and tender as peaches. But the grand novelty was the napkins,
surpassingly fine, and folded into cocked hats, and birds' wings, and
fans, etc., instead of lying flat. This electrified Gerard; though my
readers have seen the dazzling phenomenon without tumbling backwards
chair and all.

After dinner the tables were split in pieces, and carried away, and lo,
under each was another table spread with sweetmeats. The signoras and
signorinas fell upon them and gormandized; but the signors eyed them
with reasonable suspicion.

"But, dear father," objected Gerard, "I see not the bifurcal daggers,
with which men say his excellency armeth the left hand of a man."

"Nay, 'tis the Cardinal Orsini which hath invented yon peevish
instrument for his guests to fumble their meat withal. One, being in
haste, did skewer his tongue to his palate with it, I hear; O tempora,
O mores! The ancients, reclining godlike at their feasts, how had they
spurned such pedantries."

As soon as the ladies had disported themselves among the sugar-plums,
the tables were suddenly removed, and the guests sat in a row against
the wall. Then came in, ducking and scraping, two ecclesiastics with
lutes, and kneeled at the cardinal's feet and there sang the service
of the day; then retired with a deep obeisance: In answer to which
the cardinal fingered his skull cap as our late Iron Duke his hat: the
company dispersed, and Gerard had dined with a cardinal and one that had
thrice just missed being pope.

But greater honour was in store.

One day the cardinal sent for him, and after praising the beauty of his
work took him in his coach to the Vatican; and up a private stair to a
luxurious little room, with a great oriel window. Here were inkstands,
sloping frames for writing on, and all the instruments of art. The
cardinal whispered a courtier, and presently the Pope's private
secretary appeared with a glorious grimy old MS. of Plutarch's Lives.
And soon Gerard was seated alone copying it, awe-struck, yet half
delighted at the thought that his holiness would handle his work and
read it.

The papal inkstands were all glorious externally; but within the ink
was vile. But Gerard carried ever good ink, home-made, in a dirty little
inkhorn: he prayed on his knees for a firm and skilful hand, and set to
work.

One side of his room was nearly occupied by a massive curtain divided
in the centre; but its ample folds overlapped. After a while Gerard
felt drawn to peep through that curtain. He resisted the impulse. It
returned. It overpowered him. He left Plutarch; stole across the matted
floor; took the folds of the curtain, and gently gathered them up with
his fingers, and putting his nose through the chink ran it against a
cold steel halbert. Two soldiers, armed cap-a-pie, were holding their
glittering weapons crossed in a triangle. Gerard drew swiftly back; but
in that instant he heard the soft murmur of voices, and saw a group of
persons cringing before some hidden figure.

He never repeated his attempt to pry through the guarded curtain; but
often eyed it. Every hour or so an ecclesiastic peeped in, eyed him,
chilled him, and exit. All this was gloomy, and mechanical. But the next
day a gentleman, richly armed, bounced in, and glared at him. "What is
toward here?" said he.

Gerard told him he was writing out Plutarch, with the help of the
saints. The spark said he did not know the signor in question. Gerard
explained the circumstances of time and space that had deprived the
Signor Plutarch of the advantage of the spark's conversation.

"Oh! one of those old dead Greeks they keep such a coil about."

"Ay, signor, one of them, who, being dead, yet live."

"I understand you not, young man," said the noble, with all the dignity
of ignorance. "What did the old fellow write? Love stories?" and his
eyes sparkled: "merry tales, like Boccaccio."

"Nay, lives of heroes and sages."

"Soldiers and popes?"

"Soldiers and princes."

"Wilt read me of them some day?"

"And willingly, signor. But what would they say who employ me, were I to
break off work?"

"Oh, never heed that; know you not who I am? I am Jacques Bonaventura,
nephew to his holiness the Pope, and captain of his guards. And I came
here to look after my fellows. I trow they have turned them out of
their room for you." Signor Bonaventura then hurried away. This lively
companion, however, having acquired a habit of running into that little
room, and finding Gerard good company, often looked in on him, and
chattered ephemeralities while Gerard wrote the immortal lives.

One day he came a changed and moody man, and threw himself into chair,
crying, "Ah, traitress! traitress!" Gerard inquired what was his ill?
"Traitress! traitress!" was the reply. Whereupon Gerard wrote Plutarch.
Then says Bonaventura, "I am melancholy; and for our Lady's sake read
me a story out of Ser Plutarcho, to soothe my bile: in all that Greek is
there nought about lovers betrayed?"

Gerard read him the life of Alexander. He got excited, marched about the
room, and embracing the reader, vowed to shun "soft delights," that bed
of nettles, and follow glory.

Who so happy now as Gerard? His art was honoured, and fabulous prices
paid for it; in a year or two he should return by sea to Holland, with
good store of money, and set up with his beloved Margaret in Bruges, or
Antwerp, or dear Augsburg, and end their days in peace, and love, and
healthy, happy labour. His heart never strayed an instant from her.

In his prosperity he did not forget poor Pietro. He took the Fra Colonna
to see his picture. The friar inspected it severely and closely, fell on
the artist's neck, and carried the picture to one of the Colonnas, who
gave a noble price for it.

Pietro descended to the first floor; and lived like a gentleman.

But Gerard remained in his garret. To increase his expenses would have
been to postpone his return to Margaret. Luxury had no charms for the
single-hearted one, when opposed to love.

Jacques Bonaventura made him acquainted with other gay young fellows.
They loved him, and sought to entice him into vice, and other expenses.
But he begged humbly to be excused. So he escaped that temptation. But a
greater was behind.



CHAPTER LX

FRA COLONNA had the run of the Pope's library, and sometimes left
off work at the same hour and walked the city with Gerard, on which
occasions the happy artist saw all things en beau, and was wrapped up in
the grandeur of Rome and its churches, palaces, and ruins.

The friar granted the ruins, but threw cold water on the rest.

"This place Rome? It is but the tomb of mighty Rome." He showed Gerard
that twenty or thirty feet of the old triumphal arches were underground,
and that the modern streets ran over ancient palaces, and over the tops
of columns; and coupling this with the comparatively narrow limits of
the modern city, and the gigantic vestiges of antiquity that peeped
aboveground here and there, he uttered a somewhat remarkable simile. "I
tell thee this village they call Rome is but as one of those swallows'
nests ye shall see built on the eaves of a decayed abbey."

"Old Rome must indeed have been fair then," said Gerard.

"Judge for yourself, my son; you see the great sewer, the work of the
Romans in their very childhood, and shall outlast Vesuvius. You see the
fragments of the Temple of Peace. How would you look could you see also
the Capitol with its five-and-twenty temples? Do but note this Monte
Savello; what is it, an it pleases you, but the ruins of the ancient
theatre of Marcellus? and as for Testacio, one of the highest hills in
modern Rome, it is but an ancient dust heap; the women of old Rome flung
their broken pots and pans there, and lo--a mountain.

"'Ex pede Herculem; ex ungue leonem.'"

Gerard listened respectfully, but when the holy friar proceeded by
analogy to imply that the moral superiority of the heathen Romans was
proportionally grand, he resisted stoutly. "Has then the world lost
by Christ His coming?" said he; but blushed, for he felt himself
reproaching his benefactor.

"Saints forbid!" said the friar. "'Twere heresy to say so." And having
made this direct concession, he proceeded gradually to evade it by
subtle circumlocution, and reached the forbidden door by the spiral back
staircase. In the midst of all which they came to a church with a knot
of persons in the porch. A demon was being exorcised within. Now Fra
Colonna had a way of uttering a curious sort of little moan, when things
Zeno or Epicurus would not have swallowed were presented to him as
facts. This moan conveyed to such as had often heard it not only strong
dissent, but pity for human credulity, ignorance, and error, especially
of course when it blinded men to the merits of Pagandom.

The friar moaned, and said, "Then come away.

"Nay, father, prithee! prithee! I ne'er saw a divell cast out."

The friar accompanied Gerard into the church, but had a good shrug
first. There they found the demoniac forced down on his knees before the
altar with a scarf tied round his neck, by which the officiating priest
held him like a dog in a chain.

Not many persons were present, for fame had put forth that the last
demon cast out in that church went no farther than into one of the
company: "as a cony ferreted out of one burrow runs to the next."

When Gerard and the friar came up, the priest seemed to think there were
now spectators enough; and began.

He faced the demoniac, breviary in hand, and first set himself to learn
the individual's name with whom he had to deal.

"Come out, Ashtaroth. Oho! it is not you then. Come out, Belial. Come
out, Tatzi. Come out, Eza. No; he trembles not. Come out, Azymoth. Come
out, Feriander. Come out, Foletho. Come out, Astyma. Come out, Nebul.
Aha! what, have I found ye? 'tis thou, thou reptile; at thine old
tricks. Let us pray!

"Oh, Lord, we pray thee to drive the foul fiend Nebul out of this thy
creature: out of his hair, and his eyes, out of his nose, out of his
mouth, out of his ears, out of his gums, out of his teeth, out of his
shoulders, out of his arms, legs, loins, stomach, bowels, thighs, knees,
calves, feet, ankles, finger-nails, toe-nails, and soul. Amen."

The priest then rose from his knees, and turning to the company, said,
with quiet geniality, "Gentles, we have here as obstinate a divell as
you may see in a summer day." Then, facing the patient, he spoke to
him with great rigour, sometimes addressing 'the man and sometimes the
fiend, and they answered him in turn through the same mouth, now saying
that they hated those holy names the priest kept uttering, and now
complaining they did feel so bad in their inside.

It was the priest who first confounded the victim and the culprit in
idea, by pitching into the former, cuffing him soundly, kicking him, and
spitting repeatedly in his face. Then he took a candle and lighted it,
and turned it down, and burned it till it burned his fingers; when he
dropped it double quick. Then took the custodial; and showed the patient
the Corpus Domini within. Then burned another candle as before, but more
cautiously: then spoke civilly to the demoniac in his human character,
dismissed him, and received the compliments of the company.

"Good father," said Gerard, "how you have their names by heart. Our
northern priests have no such exquisite knowledge of the hellish
squadrons."

"Ay, young man, here we know all their names, and eke their ways, the
reptiles. This Nebul is a bitter hard one to hunt out."

He then told the company in the most affable way several of his
experiences; concluding with his feat of yesterday, when he drove a
great hulking fiend out of a woman by her mouth, leaving behind him
certain nails, and pins, and a tuft of his own hair, and cried out in a
voice of anguish, "'Tis not thou that conquers me. See that stone on
the window sill. Know that the angel Gabriel coming down to earth once
lighted on that stone: 'tis that has done my business."

The friar moaned. "And you believed him?"

"Certes! who but an infidel has discredited a revelation so precise."

"What, believe the father of lies? That is pushing credulity beyond the
age."

"Oh, a liar does not always lie."

"Ay doth he whenever he tells an improbable story to begin, and shows
you a holy relic; arms you against the Satanic host. Fiends (if any) be
not so simple. Shouldst have answered him out of antiquity--

'Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.'

Some blackguard chopped his wife's head off on that stone, young man;
you take my word for it." And the friar hurried Gerard away.

"Alack, father, I fear you abashed the good priest."

"Ay, by Pollux," said the friar, with a chuckle; "I blistered him with
a single touch of 'Socratic interrogation.' What modern can parry the
weapons of antiquity."

One afternoon, when Gerard had finished his day's work, a fine lackey
came and demanded his attendance at the Palace Cesarini. He went, and
was ushered into a noble apartment; there was a girl seated in it,
working on a tapestry. She rose and left the room, and said she would
let her mistress know.

A good hour did Gerard cool his heels in that great room, and at last
he began to fret. "These nobles think nothing of a poor fellow's time."
However, just as he was making up his mind to slip out, and go about
his business, the door opened, and a superb beauty entered the room,
followed by two maids. It was the young princess of the house of
Cesarini. She came in talking rather loudly and haughtily to her
dependents, but at sight of Gerard lowered her voice to a very feminine
tone, and said, "Are you the writer, messer?"

"I am, Signora.

"'Tis well."

She then seated herself; Gerard and her maids remained standing.

"What is your name, good youth?"

"Gerard, signora."

"Gerard? body of Bacchus! is that the name of a human creature?"

"It is a Dutch name, signora. I was born at Tergou, in Holland."

"A harsh name, girls, for so well-favoured a youth; what say you?"

The maids assented warmly.

"What did I send for him for?" inquired the lady, with lofty languor.
"Ah, I remember. Be seated, Ser Gerardo, and write me a letter to Ercole
Orsini, my lover; at least he says so."

Gerard seated himself, took out paper and ink, and looked up to the
princess for instructions.

She, seated on a much higher chair, almost a throne, looked down at him
with eyes equally inquiring.

"Well, Gerardo."

"I am ready, your excellence."

"Write, then."

"I but await the words."

"And who, think you, is to provide them?"

"Who but your grace, whose letter it is to be?"

"Gramercy! what, you writers, find you not the words? What avails your
art without the words? I doubt you are an impostor, Gerardo."

"Nay, Signora, I am none. I might make shift to put your highness's
speech into grammar, as well as writing. But I cannot interpret your
silence. Therefore speak what is in your heart, and I will empaper it
before your eyes."

"But there is nothing in my heart. And sometimes I think I have got no
heart."

"What is in your mind, then?"

"But there is nothing in my mind; nor my head neither."

"Then why write at all?"

"Why, indeed? That is the first word of sense either you or I have
spoken, Gerardo. Pestilence seize him! why writeth he not first? then I
could say nay to this, and ay to that, withouten headache. Also is it a
lady's part to say the first word?"

"No, signora: the last."

"It is well spoken, Gerardo. Ha! ha! Shalt have a gold piece for thy
wit. Give me my purse!" And she paid him for the article on the nail a
la moyen age. Money never yet chilled zeal. Gerard, after getting a gold
piece so cheap, felt bound to pull her out of her difficulty, if the wit
of man might achieve it. "Signorina," said he, "these things are only
hard because folk attempt too much, are artificial and labour phrases.
Do but figure to yourself the signor you love--"

"I love him not."

"Well, then, the signor you love not-seated at this table, and dict to
me just what you would say to him."

"Well, if he sat there, I should say, 'Go away.'"

Gerard, who was flourishing his pen by way of preparation, laid it down
with a groan.

"And when he was gone," said Floretta, "your highness would say, 'Come
back.'"

"Like enough, wench. Now silence, all, and let me think. He pestered me
to write, and I promised; so mine honour is engaged. What lie shall I
tell the Gerardo to tell the fool?" and she turned her head away from
them and fell into deep thought, with her noble chin resting on her
white hand, half clenched.

She was so lovely and statuesque, and looked so inspired with thoughts
celestial, as she sat thus, impregnating herself with mendacity, that
Gerard forgot all, except art, and proceeded eagerly to transfer that
exquisite profile to paper.

He had very nearly finished when the fair statue turned brusquely round
and looked at him.

"Nay, Signora," said he, a little peevishly; "for Heaven's sake change
not your posture--'twas perfect. See, you are nearly finished."

All eyes were instantly on the work, and all tongues active.

"How like! and done in a minute: nay, methinks her highness's chin is
not quite so."

"Oh, a touch will make that right."

"What a pity 'tis not coloured. I'm all for colours. Hang black and
white! And her highness hath such a lovely skin. Take away her skin, and
half her beauty is lost."

"Peace. Can you colour, Ser Gerardo?"

"Ay, signorina. I am a poor hand at oils; there shines my friend Pietro;
but in this small way I can tint you to the life, if you have time to
waste on such vanity."

"Call you this vanity? And for time, it hangs on me like lead. Send for
your colours now--quick, this moment--for love of all the saints."

"Nay, signorina, I must prepare them. I could come at the same time."

"So be it. And you, Floretta, see that he be admitted at all hours.
Alack! Leave my head! leave my head!"

"Forgive me, Signora; I thought to prepare it at home to receive the
colours. But I will leave it. And now let us despatch the letter."

"What letter?"

"To the Signor Orsini."

"And shall I waste my time on such vanity as writing letters--and to
that empty creature, to whom I am as indifferent as the moon? Nay, not
indifferent, for I have just discovered my real sentiments. I hate him
