custom. Are you alone?"

"At present, yes."

"Shew us where you sleep, that we may know where to come for you. You
won't want us these three days, I see."

"Ye are pleasant welcomers!" said Adrian;--"but listen to me. Can ye
find the living as well as bury the dead? I seek one in this city who,
if you discover her, shall be worth to you a year of burials!"

"No, no! that is out of our line. As well look for a dropped sand on the
beach, as for a living being amongst closed houses and yawning vaults;
but if you will pay the poor gravediggers beforehand, I promise you, you
shall have the first of a new charnel-house;--it will be finished just
about your time."

"There!" said Adrian, flinging the wretches a few pieces of
gold--"there! and if you would do me a kinder service, leave me, at
least while living; or I may save you that trouble." And he turned from
the room.

The Becchino who had been spokesman followed him. "You are generous,
Signor, stay; you will want fresher food than these filthy fragments.
I will supply thee of the best, while--while thou wantest it. And
hark,--whom wishest thou that I should seek?"

This question arrested Adrian's departure. He detailed the name, and
all the particulars he could suggest of Irene; and, with sickened heart,
described the hair, features, and stature of that lovely and hallowed
image, which might furnish a theme to the poet, and now gave a clue to
the gravedigger.

The unhallowed apparition shook his head when Adrian had concluded.
"Full five hundred such descriptions did I hear in the first days of the
Plague, when there were still such things as mistress and lover; but
it is a dainty catalogue, Signor, and it will be a pride to the poor
Becchino to discover or even to bury so many charms! I will do my best;
meanwhile, I can recommend you, if in a hurry, to make the best use of
your time, to many a pretty face and comely shape--"

"Out, fiend!" muttered Adrian: "fool to waste time with such as thou!"

The laugh of the gravedigger followed his steps.

All that day did Adrian wander through the city, but search and question
were alike unavailing; all whom he encountered and interrogated seemed
to regard him as a madman, and these were indeed of no kind likely
to advance his object. Wild troops of disordered, drunken revellers,
processions of monks, or here and there, scattered individuals gliding
rapidly along, and shunning all approach or speech, made the only
haunters of the dismal streets, till the sun sunk, lurid and yellow,
behind the hills, and Darkness closed around the noiseless pathway of
the Pestilence.



Chapter 6.III. The Flowers Amidst the Tombs.

Adrian found that the Becchino had taken care that famine should not
forestall the plague; the banquet of the dead was removed, and
fresh viands and wines of all kinds,--for there was plenty then in
Florence!--spread the table. He partook of the refreshment, though but
sparingly, and shrinking from repose in beds beneath whose gorgeous
hangings Death had been so lately busy, carefully closed door and
window, wrapped himself in his mantle, and found his resting-place on
the cushions of the chamber in which he had supped. Fatigue cast him
into an unquiet slumber, from which he was suddenly awakened by the
roll of a cart below, and the jingle of bells. He listened, as the cart
proceeded slowly from door to door, and at length its sound died away in
the distance.--He slept no more that night!

The sun had not long risen ere he renewed his labours; and it was yet
early when, just as he passed a church, two ladies richly dressed came
from the porch, and seemed through their vizards to regard the young
Cavalier with earnest attention. The gaze arrested him also, when one of
the ladies said, "Fair sir, you are overbold: you wear no mask; neither
do you smell to flowers."

"Lady, I wear no mask, for I would be seen: I search these miserable
places for one in whose life I live."

"He is young, comely, evidently noble, and the plague hath not touched
him: he will serve our purpose well," whispered one of the ladies to the
other.

"You echo my own thoughts," returned her companion; and then turning to
Adrian, she said, "You seek one you are not wedded to, if you seek so
fondly?"

"It is true."

"Young and fair, with dark hair and neck of snow; I will conduct you to
her."

"Signor!"

"Follow us!"

"Know you who I am, and whom I seek?"

"Yes."

"Can you in truth tell me aught of Irene?"

"I can: follow me."

"To her?"

"Yes, yes: follow us!"

The ladies moved on as if impatient of further parley. Amazed, doubtful,
and, as if in a dream, Adrian followed them. Their dress, manner, and
the pure Tuscan of the one who had addressed him, indicated them of
birth and station; but all else was a riddle which he could not solve.

They arrived at one of the bridges, where a litter and a servant on
horseback holding a palfrey by the bridle were in attendance. The ladies
entered the litter, and she who had before spoken bade Adrian follow on
the palfrey.

"But tell me--" he began.

"No questions, Cavalier," said she, impatiently; "follow the living in
silence, or remain with the dead, as you list."

With that the litter proceeded, and Adrian mounted the palfrey
wonderingly, and followed his strange conductors, who moved on at a
tolerably brisk pace. They crossed the bridge, left the river on one
side, and, soon ascending a gentle acclivity, the trees and flowers
of the country began to succeed dull walls and empty streets. After
proceeding thus somewhat less than half an hour, they turned up a green
lane remote from the road, and came suddenly upon the porticoes of a
fair and stately palace. Here the ladies descended from their litter;
and Adrian, who had vainly sought to extract speech from the attendant,
also dismounted, and following them across a spacious court, filled on
either side with vases of flowers and orange-trees, and then through a
wide hall in the farther side of the quadrangle, found himself in one of
the loveliest spots eye ever saw or poet ever sung. It was a garden plot
of the most emerald verdure, bosquets of laurel and of myrtle opened on
either side into vistas half overhung with clematis and rose, through
whose arcades the prospect closed with statues and gushing fountains; in
front, the lawn was bounded by rows of vases on marble pedestals filled
with flowers, and broad and gradual flights of steps of the whitest
marble led from terrace to terrace, each adorned with statues and
fountains, half way down a high but softly sloping and verdant hill.
Beyond, spread in wide, various, and luxurious landscape, the vineyards
and olive-groves, the villas and villages, of the Vale of Arno,
intersected by the silver river, while the city, in all its calm, but
without its horror, raised its roofs and spires to the sun. Birds of
every hue and song, some free, some in net-work of golden wire, warbled
round; and upon the centre of the sward reclined four ladies unmasked
and richly dressed, the eldest of whom seemed scarcely more than twenty;
and five cavaliers, young and handsome, whose jewelled vests and golden
chains attested their degree. Wines and fruits were on a low table
beside; and musical instruments, chess-boards, and gammon-tables, lay
scattered all about. So fair a group, and so graceful a scene, Adrian
never beheld but once, and that was in the midst of the ghastly
pestilence of Italy!--such group and such scene our closet indolence may
yet revive in the pages of the bright Boccaccio!

On seeing Adrian and his companions approach, the party rose instantly;
and one of the ladies, who wore upon her head a wreath of laurel-leaves,
stepping before the rest, exclaimed, "well done, my Mariana! welcome
back, my fair subjects. And you, sir, welcome hither."

The two guides of the Colonna had by this time removed their masks; and
the one who had accosted him, shaking her long and raven ringlets over a
bright, laughing eye and a cheek to whose native olive now rose a slight
blush, turned to him ere he could reply to the welcome he had received.

"Signor Cavalier," said she, "you now see to what I have decoyed you.
Own that this is pleasanter than the sights and sounds of the city we
have left. You gaze on me in surprise. See, my Queen, how speechless
the marvel of your court has made our new gallant; I assure you he
could talk quickly enough when he had only us to confer with: nay, I was
forced to impose silence on him."

"Oh! then you have not yet informed him of the custom and origin of the
court he enters!" quoth she of the laurel wreath.

"No, my Queen; I thought all description given in such a spot as our
poor Florence now is would fail of its object. My task is done, I resign
him to your Grace!"

So saying the lady tripped lightly away, and began coquettishly sleeking
her locks in the smooth mirror of a marble basin, whose waters trickled
over the margin upon the grass below, ever and anon glancing archly
towards the stranger, and sufficiently at hand to overhear all that was
said.

"In the first place, Signor, permit us to inquire," said the lady who
bore the appellation of Queen, "thy name, rank, and birth-place."

"Madam," returned Adrian, "I came hither little dreaming to answer
questions respecting myself; but what it pleases you to ask, it must
please me to reply to. My name is Adrian di Castello, one of the Roman
house of the Colonna."

"A noble column of a noble house!" answered the Queen. "For us,
respecting whom your curiosity may perhaps be aroused, know that we six
ladies of Florence, deserted by or deprived of our kin and protectors,
formed the resolution to retire to this palace, where, if death comes,
it comes stripped of half its horrors; and as the learned tell us that
sadness engenders the awful malady, so you see us sworn foes to sadness.
Six cavaliers of our acquaintance agreed to join us. We pass our days,
whether many or few, in whatever diversions we can find or invent. Music
and the dance, merry tales and lively songs, with such slight change of
scene as from sward to shade, from alley to fountain, fill up our time,
and prepare us for peaceful sleep and happy dreams. Each lady is by
turns Queen of our fairy court, as is my lot this day. One law forms the
code of our constitution--that nothing sad shall be admitted. We would
live as if yonder city were not, and as if (added the fair Queen, with a
slight sigh) youth, grace, and beauty, could endure for ever. One of our
knights madly left us for a day, promising to return; we have seen him
no more; we will not guess what hath chanced to him. It became necessary
to fill up his place; we drew lots who should seek his substitute;
it fell upon the ladies who have--not, I trust, to your
displeasure--brought you hither. Fair sir, my explanation is made."

"Alas, lovely Queen," said Adrian, wrestling strongly, but vainly,
with the bitter disappointment he felt--"I cannot be one of your happy
circle; I am in myself a violation of your law. I am filled with but one
sad and anxious thought, to which all mirth would seem impiety. I am a
seeker amongst the living and the dead for one being of whose fate I
am uncertain; and it was only by the words that fell from my fair
conductor, that I have been decoyed hither from my mournful task. Suffer
me, gracious lady, to return to Florence."

The Queen looked in mute vexation towards the dark-eyed Mariana,
who returned the glance by one equally expressive, and then suddenly
stepping up to Adrian she said,--

"But, Signor, if I should still keep my promise, if I should be able to
satisfy thee of the health and safety of--of Irene."

"Irene!" echoed Adrian in surprise, forgetful at the moment that he had
before revealed the name of her he sought--"Irene--Irene di Gabrini,
sister of the once renowned Rienzi!"

"The same," replied Mariana, quickly; "I know her, as I told you. Nay,
Signor, I do not deceive thee. It is true that I cannot bring thee to
her; but better as it is,--she went away many days ago to one of the
towns of Lombardy, which, they say, the Pestilence has not yet pierced.
Now, noble sir, is not your heart lightened? and will you so soon be a
deserter from the Court of Loveliness; and perhaps," she added, with a
soft look from her large dark eyes, "of Love?"

"Dare I, in truth, believe you, Lady?" said Adrian, all delighted, yet
still half doubting.

"Would I deceive a true lover, as methinks you are? Be assured. Nay,
Queen, receive your subject."

The Queen extended her hand to Adrian, and led him to the group that
still stood on the grass at a little distance. They welcomed him as a
brother, and soon forgave his abstracted courtesies, in compliment to
his good mien and illustrious name.

The Queen clapped her hands, and the party again ranged themselves
on the sward. Each lady beside each gallant. "You, Mariana, if not
fatigued," said the Queen, "shall take the lute and silence these noisy
grasshoppers, which chirp about us with as much pretension as if they
were nightingales. Sing, sweet subject, sing; and let it be the song our
dear friend, Signor Visdomini, (I know not if this be the same Visdomini
who, three years afterwards, with one of the Medici, conducted so
gallant a reinforcement to Scarperia, then besieged by Visconti
d'Oleggio.) made for a kind of inaugural anthem to such as we admitted
to our court."

Mariana, who had reclined herself by the side of Adrian, took up the
lute, and, after a short prelude, sung the words thus imperfectly
translated:--

The Song of the Florentine Lady.

Enjoy the more the smiles of noon If doubtful be the morrow; And know
the Fort of Life is soon Betray'd to Death by Sorrow!

Death claims us all--then, Grief, away! We'll own no meaner master; The
clouds that darken round the day But bring the night the faster.

Love--feast--be merry while on earth, Such, Grave, should be thy moral!
Ev'n Death himself is friends with Mirth, And veils the tomb with
laurel. (At that time, in Italy, the laurel was frequently planted over
the dead.)

While gazing on the eyes I love, New life to mine is given--If joy the
lot of saints above, Joy fits us best for Heaven.

To this song, which was much applauded, succeeded those light and witty
tales in which the Italian novelists furnished Voltaire and Marmontel
with a model--each, in his or her turn, taking up the discourse, and
with an equal dexterity avoiding every lugubrious image or mournful
reflection that might remind those graceful idlers of the vicinity of
Death. At any other time the temper and accomplishments of the young
Lord di Castello would have fitted him to enjoy and to shine in that
Arcadian court. But now he in vain sought to dispel the gloom from
his brow, and the anxious thought from his heart. He revolved the
intelligence he had received, wondered, guessed, hoped, and dreaded
still; and if for a moment his mind returned to the scene about him, his
nature, too truly poetical for the false sentiment of the place,
asked itself in what, save the polished exterior and the graceful
circumstance, the mirth that he now so reluctantly witnessed differed
from the brutal revels in the convent of Santa Maria--each alike in its
motive, though so differing in the manner--equally callous and equally
selfish, coining horror into enjoyment. The fair Mariana, whose partner
had been reft from her, as the Queen had related, was in no mind to lose
the new one she had gained. She pressed upon him from time to time the
wine-flask and the fruits; and in those unmeaning courtesies her
hand gently lingered upon his. At length, the hour arrived when the
companions retired to the Palace, during the fiercer heats of noon--to
come forth again in the declining sun, to sup by the side of the
fountain, to dance, to sing, and to make merry by torchlight and the
stars till the hour of rest. But Adrian, not willing to continue the
entertainment, no sooner found himself in the apartment to which he
was conducted, than he resolved to effect a silent escape, as under
all circumstances the shortest, and not perhaps the least courteous,
farewell left to him. Accordingly, when all seemed quiet and hushed in
the repose common to the inhabitants of the South during that hour, he
left his apartment, descended the stairs, passed the outer court, and
was already at the gate, when he heard himself called by a voice that
spoke vexation and alarm. He turned to behold Mariana.

"Why, how now, Signor di Castello, is our company so unpleasing, is our
music so jarring, or are our brows so wrinkled, that you should fly as
the traveller flies from the witches he surprises at Benevento? Nay, you
cannot mean to leave us yet?"

"Fair dame," returned the cavalier, somewhat disconcerted, "it is in
vain that I seek to rally my mournful spirits, or to fit myself for the
court to which nothing sad should come. Your laws hang about me like a
culprit--better timely flight than harsh expulsion."

As he spoke he moved on, and would have passed the gate, but Mariana
caught his arm.

"Nay," said she, softly; "are there no eyes of dark light, and no neck
of wintry snow, that can compensate to thee for the absent one? Tarry
and forget, as doubtless in absence even thou art forgotten!"

"Lady," answered Adrian, with great gravity, not unmixed with an
ill-suppressed disdain, "I have not sojourned long enough amidst the
sights and sounds of woe, to blunt my heart and spirit into callousness
to all around. Enjoy, if thou canst, and gather the rank roses of the
sepulchre; but to me, haunted still by funeral images, Beauty fails to
bring delight, and Love,--even holy love--seems darkened by the Shadow
of Death. Pardon me, and farewell."

"Go, then," said the Florentine, stung and enraged at his coldness; "go
and find your mistress amidst the associations on which it pleases your
philosophy to dwell. I did but deceive thee, blind fool! as I had hoped
for thine own good, when I told thee Irene--(was that her name?)--was
gone from Florence. Of her I know nought, and heard nought, save from
thee. Go back and search the vault, and see whether thou lovest her
still!"



Chapter 6.IV. We Obtain What We Seek, and Know it Not.

In the fiercest heat of the day, and on foot, Adrian returned to
Florence. As he approached the city, all that festive and gallant scene
he had quitted seemed to him like a dream; a vision of the gardens and
bowers of an enchantress, from which he woke abruptly as a criminal
may wake on the morning of his doom to see the scaffold and the
deathsman;--so much did each silent and lonely step into the funeral
city bring back his bewildered thoughts at once to life and to death.
The parting words of Mariana sounded like a knell at his heart. And
now as he passed on--the heat of the day, the lurid atmosphere, long
fatigue, alternate exhaustion and excitement, combining with the
sickness of disappointment, the fretting consciousness of precious
moments irretrievably lost, and his utter despair of forming any
systematic mode of search--fever began rapidly to burn through his
veins. His temples felt oppressed as with the weight of a mountain; his
lips parched with intolerable thirst; his strength seemed suddenly to
desert him; and it was with pain and labour that he dragged one languid
limb after the other.

"I feel it," thought he, with the loathing nausea and shivering dread
with which nature struggles ever against death; "I feel it upon me--the
Devouring and the Viewless--I shall perish, and without saving her; nor
shall even one grave contain us!"

But these thoughts served rapidly to augment the disease which began to
prey upon him; and ere he reached the interior of the city, even thought
itself forsook him. The images of men and houses grew indistinct and
shadowy before his eyes; the burning pavement became unsteady and
reeling beneath his feet; delirium gathered over him, and he went on his
way muttering broken and incoherent words; the few who met fled from
him in dismay. Even the monks, still continuing their solemn and sad
processions, passed with a murmured bene vobis to the other side from
that on which his steps swerved and faltered. And from a booth at the
corner of a street, four Becchini, drinking together, fixed upon him
from their black masks the gaze that vultures fix upon some dying
wanderer of the desert. Still he crept on, stretching out his arms like
a man in the dark, and seeking with the vague sense that yet struggled
against the gathering delirium, to find out the mansion in which he
had fixed his home; though many as fair to live, and as meet to die in,
stood with open portals before and beside his path.

"Irene, Irene!" he cried, sometimes in a muttered and low tone,
sometimes in a wild and piercing shriek, "where art thou? Where? I come
to snatch thee from them; they shall not have thee, the foul and ugly
fiends! Pah! how the air smells of dead flesh! Irene, Irene! we will
away to mine own palace and the heavenly lake--Irene!"

While thus benighted, and thus exclaiming, two females suddenly emerged
from a neighbouring house, masked and mantled.

"Vain wisdom!" said the taller and slighter of the two, whose mantle, it
is here necessary to observe, was of a deep blue, richly broidered with
silver, of a shape and a colour not common in Florence, but usual in
Rome, where the dress of ladies of the higher rank was singularly bright
in hue and ample in fold--thus differing from the simpler and more
slender draperies of the Tuscan fashion--"Vain wisdom, to fly a
relentless and certain doom!"

"Why, thou wouldst not have us hold the same home with three of the
dead in the next chamber--strangers too to us--when Florence has so many
empty halls? Trust me, we shall not walk far ere we suit ourselves with
a safer lodgment."

"Hitherto, indeed, we have been miraculously preserved," sighed the
other, whose voice and shape were those of extreme youth; "yet would
that we knew where to fly--what mount, what wood, what cavern, held my
brother and his faithful Nina! I am sick with horrors!"

"Irene, Irene! Well then, if thou art at Milan or some Lombard town, why
do I linger here? To horse, to horse! Oh, no! no!--not the horse with
the bells! not the death-cart." With a cry, a shriek, louder than
the loudest of the sick man's, broke that young female away from her
companion. It seemed as if a single step took her to the side of Adrian.
She caught his arm--she looked in his face--she met his unconscious eyes
bright with a fearful fire. "It has seized him!"--(she then said in a
deep but calm tone)--"the Plague!"

"Away, away! are you mad?" cried her companion; "hence, hence,--touch me
not now thou hast touched him--go!--here we part!"

"Help me to bear him somewhere, see, he faints, he droops, he
falls!--help me, dear Signora, for pity, for the love of God!"

But, wholly possessed by the selfish fear which overcame all humanity
in that miserable time, the elder woman, though naturally kind, pitiful,
and benevolent, fled rapidly away, and soon vanished. Thus left alone
with Adrian, who had now, in the fierceness of the fever that preyed
within him, fallen on the ground, the strength and nerve of that young
girl did not forsake her. She tore off the heavy mantle which encumbered
her arms, and cast it from her; and then, lifting up the face of her
lover--for who but Irene was that weak woman, thus shrinking not from
the contagion of death?--she supported him on her breast, and called
aloud and again for help. At length the Becchini, in the booth before
noticed, (hardened in their profession, and who, thus hardened,
better than the most cautious, escaped the pestilence,) lazily
approached--"Quicker, quicker, for Christ's love!" said Irene. "I have
much gold; I will reward you well: help me to bear him under the nearest
roof."

"Leave him to us, young lady: we have had our eye upon him," said one of
the gravediggers. "We'll do our duty by him, first and last."

"No--no! touch not his head--that is my care. There, I will help you;
so,--now then,--but be gentle!"

Assisted by these portentous officers, Irene, who would not release
her hold, but seemed to watch over the beloved eyes and lips, (set and
closed as they were,) as if to look back the soul from parting, bore
Adrian into a neighbouring house, and laid him on a bed; from which
Irene (preserving as only women do, in such times, the presence of mind
and vigilant providence which make so sublime a contrast with their
keen susceptibilities) caused them first to cast off the draperies and
clothing, which might retain additional infection. She then despatched
them for new furniture, and for whatsoever leech money might yet bribe
to a duty, now chiefly abandoned to those heroic Brotherhoods who,
however vilified in modern judgment by the crimes of some unworthy
members, were yet, in the dark times, the best, the bravest, and the
holiest agents, to whom God ever delegated the power to resist the
oppressor--to feed the hungry--to minister to woe; and who, alone,
amidst that fiery Pestilence, (loosed, as it were, a demon from the
abyss, to shiver into atoms all that binds the world to Virtue and to
Law,) seemed to awaken, as by the sound of an angel's trumpet, to that
noblest Chivalry of the Cross--whose faith is the scorn of self--whose
hope is beyond the Lazar-house--whose feet, already winded for
immortality, trample, with a conqueror's march, upon the graves of
Death!

While this the ministry and the office of love,--along that street in
which Adrian and Irene had met at last--came singing, reeling, roaring,
the dissolute and abandoned crew who had fixed their quarters in the
Convent of Santa Maria de' Pazzi, their bravo chief at their head, and
a nun (no longer in nun's garments) upon either arm. "A health to the
Plague!" shouted the ruffian: "A health to the Plague!" echoed his
frantic Bacchanals.

"A health to the Plague, may she ever, as now, Loose the rogue from his
chain, and the nun from her vow; To the gaoler a sword--to the captive a
key, Hurrah for Earth's Curse! 'tis a blessing to me."

"Holla!" cried the chief, stopping; "here, Margherita; here's a brave
cloak for thee, my girl: silver enow on it to fill thy purse, if it ever
grow empty; which it may, if ever the Plague grow slack."

"Nay," said the girl, who, amidst all the havoc of debauch, retained
much of youth and beauty in her form and face; "nay, Guidotto; perhaps it
has infection."

"Pooh, child, silver never infects. Clap it on, clap it on. Besides,
fate is fate, and when it is thine hour there will be other means
besides the gavocciolo."

So saying, he seized the mantle, threw it roughly over her shoulders,
and dragged her on as before, half pleased with the finery, half
frightened with the danger; while gradually died away, along the lurid
air and the mournful streets, the chant of that most miserable mirth.



Chapter 6.V. The Error.

For three days, the fatal three days, did Adrian remain bereft of
strength and sense. But he was not smitten by the scourge which
his devoted and generous nurse had anticipated. It was a fierce and
dangerous fever, brought on by the great fatigue, restlessness, and
terrible agitation he had undergone.

No professional mediciner could be found to attend him; but a good
friar, better perhaps skilled in the healing art than many who claimed
its monopoly, visited him daily. And in the long and frequent absences
to which his other and numerous duties compelled the monk, there was one
ever at hand to smooth the pillow, to wipe the brow, to listen to the
moan, to watch the sleep. And even in that dismal office, when, in
the frenzy of the sufferer, her name, coupled with terms of passionate
endearment, broke from his lips, a thrill of strange pleasure crossed
the heart of the betrothed, which she chid as if it were a crime. But
even the most unearthly love is selfish in the rapture of being loved!
Words cannot tell, heart cannot divine, the mingled emotions that broke
over her when, in some of these incoherent ravings, she dimly understood
that for her the city had been sought, the death dared, the danger
incurred. And as then bending passionately to kiss that burning brow,
her tears fell fast over the idol of her youth, the fountains from which
they gushed were those, fathomless and countless, which a life could not
weep away. Not an impulse of the human and the woman heart that was not
stirred; the adoring gratitude, the meek wonder thus to be loved, while
deeming it so simple a merit thus to love;--as if all sacrifice in her
were a thing of course,--to her, a virtue nature could not paragon,
worlds could not repay! And there he lay, the victim to his own fearless
faith, helpless--dependent upon her--a thing between life and death,
to thank, to serve--to be proud of, yet protect, to compassionate, yet
revere--the saver, to be saved! Never seemed one object to demand at
once from a single heart so many and so profound emotions; the romantic
enthusiasm of the girl--the fond idolatry of the bride--the watchful
providence of the mother over her child.

And strange to say, with all the excitement of that lonely watch,
scarcely stirring from his side, taking food only that her strength
might not fail her,--unable to close her eyes,--though, from the same
cause, she would fain have taken rest, when slumber fell upon her
charge--with all such wear and tear of frame and heart, she seemed
wonderfully supported. And the holy man marvelled, in each visit, to see
the cheek of the nurse still fresh, and her eye still bright. In her
own superstition she thought and felt that Heaven gifted her with a
preternatural power to be true to so sacred a charge; and in this fancy
she did not wholly err:--for Heaven did gift her with that diviner
power, when it planted in so soft a heart the enduring might and energy
of Affection! The friar had visited the sick man late on the third
night, and administered to him a strong sedative. "This night," said he
to Irene, "will be the crisis: should he awaken, as I trust he may, with
a returning consciousness, and a calm pulse, he will live; if not, young
daughter, prepare for the worst. But should you note any turn in the
disease, that may excite alarm, or require my attendance, this scroll
will inform you where I am, if God spare me still, at each hour of the
night and morning."

The monk retired, and Irene resumed her watch.

The sleep of Adrian was at first broken and interrupted--his features,
his exclamations, his gestures, all evinced great agony, whether mental
or bodily: it seemed, as perhaps it was, a fierce and doubtful struggle
between life and death for the conquest of the sleeper. Patient, silent,
breathing but by long-drawn gasps, Irene sate at the bed-head. The lamp
was removed to the further end of the chamber, and its ray, shaded by
the draperies, did not suffice to give to her gaze more than the outline
of the countenance she watched. In that awful suspense, all the thoughts
that hitherto had stirred her mind lay hushed and mute. She was only
sensible to that unutterable fear which few of us have been happy enough
not to know. That crushing weight under which we can scarcely breathe
or move, the avalanche over us, freezing and suspended, which we
cannot escape from, beneath which, every moment, we may be buried and
overwhelmed. The whole destiny of life was in the chances of that single
night! It was just as Adrian at last seemed to glide into a deeper
and serener slumber, that the bells of the death-cart broke with their
boding knell the palpable silence of the streets. Now hushed, now
revived, as the cart stopped for its gloomy passengers, and coming
nearer and nearer after every pause. At length she heard the heavy
wheels stop under the very casement, and a voice deep and muffled
calling aloud, "Bring out the dead!" She rose, and with a noiseless
step, passed to secure the door, when the dull lamp gleamed upon the
dark and shrouded forms of the Becchini.

"You have not marked the door, nor set out the body," said one gruffly;
"but this is the third night! He is ready for us."

"Hush, he sleeps--away, quick, it is not the Plague that seized him."

"Not the Plague?" growled the Becchino in a disappointed tone;
"I thought no other illness dared encroach upon the rights of the
gavocciolo!"

"Go--here's money; leave us."

And the grisly carrier sullenly withdrew. The cart moved on, the bell
renewed its summons, till slowly and faintly the dreadful larum died in
the distance.

Shading the lamp with her hand, Irene stole to the bed side, fearful
that the sound and the intrusion had disturbed the slumberer. But his
face was still locked, as in a vice, with that iron sleep. He stirred
not--the breath scarcely passed his lips--she felt his pulse, as the
wan hand lay on the coverlid--there was a slight beat--she was
contented--removed the light, and, retiring to a corner of the room,
placed the little cross suspended round her neck upon the table, and
prayed, in her intense suffering, to Him who had known death, and
who--Son of Heaven though he was, and Sovereign of the Seraphim--had
also prayed, in his earthly travail, that the cup might pass away.

The Morning broke, not, as in the North, slowly and through shadow,
but with the sudden glory with which in those climates Day leaps
upon earth--like a giant from his sleep. A sudden smile--a burnished
glow--and night had vanished. Adrian still slept; not a muscle seemed to
have stirred; the sleep was even heavier than before; the silence became
a burthen upon the air. Now, in that exceeding torpor so like unto
death, the solitary watcher became alarmed and terrified. Time
passed--morning glided to noon--still not a sound nor motion. The
sun was midway in Heaven--the Friar came not. And now again touching
Adrian's pulse, she felt no flutter--she gazed on him, appalled and
confounded; surely nought living could be so still and pale. "Was it
indeed sleep, might it not be--" She turned away, sick and frozen; her
tongue clove to her lips. Why did the father tarry?--she would go to
him--she would learn the worst--she could forbear no longer. She glanced
over the scroll the Monk had left her: "From sunrise," it said, "I shall
be at the Convent of the Dominicans. Death has stricken many of the
brethren." The Convent was at some distance, but she knew the spot, and
fear would wing her steps. She gave one wistful look at the sleeper and
rushed from the house. "I shall see thee again presently," she murmured.
Alas! what hope can calculate beyond the moment? And who shall claim the
tenure of 'The Again?'

It was not many minutes after Irene had left the room, ere, with a long
sigh, Adrian opened his eyes--an altered and another man; the fever was
gone, the reviving pulse beat low indeed, but calm. His mind was once
more master of his body, and, though weak and feeble, the danger was
past, and life and intellect regained.

"I have slept long," he muttered; "and oh, such dreams! And methought
I saw Irene, but could not speak to her, and while I attempted to grasp
her, her face changed, her form dilated, and I was in the clutch of
the foul gravedigger. It is late--the sun is high--I must be up and
stirring. Irene is in Lombardy. No, no; that was a lie, a wicked lie;
she is at Florence, I must renew my search."

As this duty came to his remembrance, he rose from the bed--he was
amazed at his own debility: at first he could not stand without support
from the wall; by degrees, however, he so far regained the mastery of
his limbs as to walk, though with effort and pain. A ravening hunger
preyed upon him, he found some scanty and light food in the chamber,
which he devoured eagerly. And with scarce less eagerness laved his
enfeebled form and haggard face with the water that stood at hand. He
now felt refreshed and invigorated, and began to indue his garments,
which he found thrown on a heap beside the bed. He gazed with surprise
and a kind of self-compassion upon his emaciated hands and shrunken
limbs, and began now to comprehend that he must have had some severe but
