weary."

"But Paris?" I asked.  "When march we on Paris?"  My master's face
clouded.  "They should have set forth for Paris the very day after the
sacring, which was the seventeenth of July.  But envoys had come in from
the Duke of Burgundy, and there were parleys with them as touching peace.
Now, peace will never be won save at the point of the lance.  But a truce
of a fortnight has been made with Burgundy, and then he is to give up
Paris to the King.  Yet, ere a fortnight has passed, the new troops from
England will have come over to fight us, and not against the heretics of
Bohemia, though they have taken the cross and the vow.  And the King has
gone to Saint Marcoul, forsooth, seeing that, unless he goes there to do
his devotions, he may not touch the sick and heal the crewels. {29}
Faith, they that have the crewels might even wait till the King has come
to his own again; they have waited long enough to learn patience while he
was Dauphin.  It should be Paris first, and Saint Marcoul and the crewels
afterwards, but anything to waste time and keep out of the brunt of the
battle."  Here he struck his hand on the table so that the vessels
leaped.  "I fear what may come of it," he said.  "For every day that
passes is great loss to us and much gain to our enemies of England, who
will anon garrison Paris."

"Faint-heart," cried Elliot, plucking his beard.  "You will never believe
in the Maid, who has never yet failed to help us, by the aid of the
saints."

"The saints help them that help themselves," he answered.  "And Paris
town has walls so strong, that once the fresh English are entered in,
even the saints may find it a hard bargain.  But you, Elliot, run up and
see if my chamber be ready, for I am well weary."  She ran forth, and my
master, turning to me, said in a low voice, "I have something for your
own ear, but I feared to grieve her.  In a booth at Reims I saw her
jackanapes doing his tricks, and when he came round questing with his
bowl the little beast knew me and jumped up into my arms, and wailed as
if he had been a Christian.  Then I was for keeping him, but I was set on
by three or four stout knaves, and, I being alone, and the crowd taking
their part, I thought it not well to draw sword, and so break the King's
peace that had just then begun to be King.  But my heart was sore for the
poor creature, and, in very truth, I bring back no light heart, save to
see you twain again, for I fear me that the worst of the darg {30} is
still to do.  But here comes Elliot, so no word of the jackanapes."

Therewith he went off to his chamber, and I to mine, with less pleasure
than I had looked for.  Still, the thought came into my heart that, the
longer the delay of the onslaught on Paris, the better chance I had to
take part therein; and the harder the work, the greater the glory.

The boding words of my master proved over true.  The King was sacred on
July the sixteenth, and Paris then stood empty of English soldiers, being
garrisoned by Burgundians only.  But, so soon as he was anointed, the
King began to parley with Burgundy, and thus they spun out the time,
till, on July the twenty-fifth, a strong army of Englishmen had entered
Paris.  Whether their hearts were high may not be known, but on their
banner they had hung a distaff, and had painted the flag with the words--

   "Ores viegne la Belle,"

meaning, "Let the fair Maid come, and we shall give her wool to spin."
Next we heard, and were loth to believe it, that a new truce of fifteen
days more had been made with Burgundy.  The Maid, indeed, said openly
that she loved not the truce, and that she kept it only for the honour of
the King, which was dearer to her than her life, as she proved in the
end.

Then came marchings, this way and that, all about the Isle of France,
Bedford leaving Paris to fight the King, and then refusing battle, though
the Maid rode up to the English palisades, and smote them with her sword,
defying the English to come out, if they were men.  So the English betook
them back to Paris, after certain light skirmishes only.  Meanwhile some
of his good towns that had been in the hands of the English yielded to
the King, or rather to the Maid.  Among these the most notable was
Compiegne, a city as great as Orleans.  Many a time it had been taken and
retaken in the wars, but now the burgesses swore that they would rather
all die, with their wives and children, than open their gates again to
the English.  And this oath they kept well, as shall be seen in the end.




CHAPTER XIX--HOW NORMAN LESLIE RODE AGAIN TO THE WARS


Tidings of these parleys, and marches, and surrenders of cities came to
us at Tours, the King sending letters to his good towns by messengers.
One of these, the very Thomas Scott of whom I have before spoken, a man
out of Rankelburn, in Ettrick Forest, brought a letter for me, which was
from Randal Rutherford.

"Mess-John Urquhart writes for me, that am no clerk," said Randal, "and,
to spare his pains, as he writes for the most of us, I say no more than
this: come now, or come never, for the Maid will ride to see Paris in
three days, or four, let the King follow or not as he will."

There was no more but a cross marked opposite the name of Randal
Rutherford, and the date of place and day, August the nineteenth, at
Compiegne.

My face fired, for I felt it, when I had read this, and I made no more
ado, but, covenanting with Thomas Scott to be with him when he rode forth
at dawn, I went home, put my harness in order, and hired a horse from him
that kept the hostelry of the "Hanging Sword," whither also I sent my
harness, for that I would sleep there.  This was all done in the late
evening, secretly, and, after supper, I broke the matter to my master and
Elliot.  Her face changed to a dead white, and she sat silent, while my
master took the word, saying, in our country speech, that "he who will to
Cupar, maun to Cupar," and therewith he turned, and walked out and about
in the garden.

We were alone, and now was the hardest of my work to do, to comfort
Elliot, when, in faith, I sorely needed comfort myself.  But honour at
once and necessity called me to ride, being now fit to bear harness, and
foreseeing no other chance to gain booty, or even, perchance, my spurs.
Nor could I endure to be a malingerer.  She sat there, very white, her
lip quivering, but her eyes brave and steadfast.

I kneeled beside her, and in my hands I took her little hand, that was
cold as ice.

"It is for the Maid, and for you, Elliot," I whispered; and she only bent
her head on my shoulder, but her cold hand gripped mine firmly.

"She did say that you should come back unharmed of sword," whispered
Elliot, looking for what comfort she might.  "But, O my dear! you may be
taken, and when shall I see you again?  Oh! this life is the hardest
thing for women, who must sit and tremble and pray at home.  Sure no
danger of war is so terrible!  Ah, must you really go?"

Then she clung so closely about me, that it seemed as if I could never
escape out of her arms, and I felt as if my heart must break in twain.

"How could I look men in the face, and how could I ever see the Maid
again, if I go not?" I said; and, loosening her grasp, she laid her hands
on my shoulders, and so gazed on me steadfastly, as if my picture could
be fixed on the tablets of her brain.

"On your chin is coming a little down, at last," she said, smiling
faintly, and then gave a sob, and her lips met mine, and our very souls
met; but, even then, we heard my master's steps hobbling to the door, and
she gave a cry, and fled to her chamber.  And this was our
leave-taking--brief, but I would not have had it long.

"It is ill work parting, Heaven help us," said my master.  "Faith, I
remember, as if it were to-day, how I set forth for Verneuil; a long time
I was gone, and came back a maimed man.  But it is fortune of war!  The
saints have you in their keeping, my son, and chiefly St. Andrew.  Come
back soon, and whole, and rich, for, meseems, if I lose one of you, I am
to lose both."

Therewith he embraced me, and I set forth to the hostel where I was to
lie that night.

Now, see how far lighter is life to men than to women, for, though I left
the house with the heaviest heart of any man in Tours, often looking back
at the candleshine in my lady's casement, yet, when I reached the
"Hanging Sword," I found Thomas Scott sitting at his wine, and my heart
and courage revived within me.  He lacked nothing but one to listen, and
soon was telling tales of the war, and of the road, and of how this one
had taken a rich prisoner, and that one had got an arrow in his thigh,
and of what chances there were to win Paris by an onslaught.

"For in no other can we take it," said he, "save, indeed, by miracle.  For
they are richly provisioned, and our hope is that, if we can make a
breach, there may be a stir of the common folk, who are well weary of the
English and the Burgundians."

Now, with his talk of adventures, and with high hopes, I was so heartened
up, that, to my shame, my grief fell from me, and I went to my bed to
dream of trenches and escalades, glory and gain.  But Elliot, I fear me,
passed a weary night, and a sorry, whereas I had scarce laid my head on
my pillow, as it seemed, when I heard Thomas shouting to the grooms, and
clatter of our horses' hoofs in the courtyard.  So I leaped up, though it
was scarce daylight, and we rode northwards before the full coming of the
dawn.

Here I must needs write of a shameful thing, which I knew not then, or I
would have ridden with a heavier heart, but I was told concerning the
matter many years after, by Messire Enguerrand de Monstrelet, a very
learned knight, and deep in the counsels of the Duke of Burgundy.

"You were all sold," he said to me, at Dijon, in the year of our Lord
fourteen hundred and forty-seven--"you were all sold when you marched
against Paris town.  For the Maid, with D'Alencon, rode from Compiegne
towards Paris, on the twenty-third of August, if I remember well"; and
here he turned about certain written parchments that lay by him.  "Yea,
on the twenty-third she left Compiegne, but on the twenty-eighth of that
month the Archbishop of Reims entered the town, and there he met the
ambassadors of the Good Duke of Burgundy.  There he and they made a
compact between them, binding your King and the Duke, that their truce
should last till Noel, but that the duke might use his men in the defence
of Paris against all that might make onfall.  Now, the Archbishop and the
King knew well that the Maid was, in that hour, marching on Paris.  To
what purpose make a truce, and leave out of the peace the very point
where war should be?  Manifestly the French King never meant to put forth
the strength of his army in helping the Maid.  There was to be truce
between France and Burgundy, but none between England and the Maid."

So Messire Enguerrand told me, a learned knight and a grave, and thus was
the counsel of the saints defeated by the very King whom they sought to
aid.  But of this shameful treaty we men-at-arms knew nothing, and so
hazarded our lives against loaded dice.




CHAPTER XX--CONCERNING THE MAID AND THE BIRDS


We rode northwards, first through lands that I had travelled in before to
Orleans, and so into a country then strange to me, passing by way of
Lagny, with intent to go to Senlis, where we deemed the King lay.  The
whole region being near Paris, and close under the English power, was
rich and peaceful of aspect, the corn being already reaped, and standing
in sheaves about the fields, whether to feed Englishmen or Frenchmen,
none could tell.  For the land was in a kind of hush, in expectancy and
fear, no man knowing how things should fall out at Paris.  Natheless the
Prior of Lagny, within that very week wherein we came, had gone to St.
Denis, and yielded his good town into the hands of the Duc d'Alencon for
the King.  And the fair Duke had sent thither Messire Ambrose de Lore, a
very good knight, with Messire Jehan Foucault, and many men-at-arms.

To Messire Ambrose we were brought, that we might give and take his news.
I remember well that I dropped out of the saddle at the door of his
lodgings, and could scarce stand on my legs, so weary was I with the long
and swift riding.  Never had I ridden so far, and so fast, fresh horses
standing saddled and bridled for Thomas Scott and me at every stage, but
the beast which I had hired I sent back from the first stage to mine host
of the "Hanging Sword."  Not without labour I climbed the stairs to the
chamber of Messire Ambrose, who bade us sit down, and called for wine to
be given us, whereof Thomas Scott drank well, but I dared take none, lest
my legs should wholly refuse their office.

When Thomas had told how all the country lay at the King's peace, and how
our purpose was to ride to the King at Senlis, the knight bade us rather
make what haste we might to St. Denis.  "For there, by to-morrow or next
day, the King is like to be, and the assault will be delivered on Paris,
come of it what will."

With this he bade us good speed, but, to guess from his countenance, was
in no high hopes.  And, at supper, whereto we had the company of certain
of his men-at-arms, I could well perceive that they were not in the best
heart.  For now we heard how the Maid, being sorrowful for the long
delays, had bidden the Duc d'Alencon ride forth with her from Compiegne
"to see Paris closer than yet she had seen it."  The Duc d'Alencon, who
in late days has so strangely forgotten the loyalty of his youth, was
then fain to march with her, for they two were the closest friends that
might be.  Therefore they had passed by way of Senlis, where they were
joined by some force of men-at-arms, and so, on the third day's march,
they came to St. Denis, where they were now lying.  Here it is that the
kings of France have been buried for these eight hundred years, in the
great Abbey.

"Nom Dieu!" said one of those who spoke with us.  "You might deem that
our King is nowise pressed to see the place where his forefathers lie.
For D'Alencon is riding, now and again, to Senlis, to rouse the King, and
make him march to St. Denis, with the army, that the assault may be
given.  But if they were bidding him to his own funeral, instead of to a
gentle passage of arms, he could not make more excuses.  There are
skirmishes under Paris walls, and at the gates, day by day, and the Maid
rides here and there, considering of the best place for the onslaught.
But the King tarries, and without him and the army they can venture on no
great valiance.  Nevertheless, come he must, if they bring him bound in a
cart.  Wherefore, if you want your part in what is toward, you do well to
make no long tarrying here."

I was of the same mind, and as the King was shortly to be looked for at
St. Denis, we rode thither early next morning, with what speed we might.
On our left, like a cloud, was the smoke of Paris, making me understand
what a great city it was, much greater than Orleans.  Before us, far
away, were the tall towers of the chapel of St. Denis, to be our guide!
We heard, also, the noise of ordnance being fired, and therefore made the
greater haste, and we so rode that, about six hours after noon, on the
Eve of the Nativity of our Blessed Lady, we reached the gates of the
town.  Here we found great press of folk, men coming and going, some
carrying the wounded, for there had been a skirmish that day, at one of
the Paris gates, whence came the sound of cannon and culverins, and we
had won little advantage.

At the gates of St. Denis we asked where the quarters of the Scots men-at-
arms might be, and were told in the chapel, whither we needed no guide.
But, as we went up the street, we saw women leaning forth from the
windows, laughing with the men-at-arms, and beckoning to them, and by the
tavern doors many were sitting drinking, with girls beside them, and
others were playing dice, and many an oath we heard, and foul words, as
is customary in a camp.  Verily I saw well that this was not the army of
men clean confessed and of holy life who had followed the Maid from Blois
to Orleans.  In place of priests, here were harlots, and, for hymns,
ribald songs, for men had flocked in from every quarter; soldiers of the
robber companies, Bretons, Germans, Italians, Spaniards, all talking in
their own speech, rude, foul, and disorderly.  So we took our way, as
best we knight, through the press, hearing oaths enough if our horses
trod over near any man, and seeing daggers drawn.

It was a pleasure to come out on the great parvise, where the red, white,
and green of our Scots were the commonest colours, and where the air was
less foul and noisome than in the narrow wynds.  High above us the great
towers of the abbey shone red and golden in the light of the sinking sun,
while beneath all was brown, dusk, and dim with smoke.  On these towers I
could gladly have looked long, and not wearied.  For they are all carven
with the holy company of the martyrs and saints, like the Angels whom
Jacob saw ascending by the ladder into heaven; even so that blessed
company seemed to scale upwards from the filth of the street, and the
darkness, and the din, right on towards the golden heights of the City of
God.  And beneath them lie the sacred bones of all the kings of France,
from the days of St. Dagobert even to our own time, all laid there to
rest where no man shall disturb them, till the Angels' Trumpet calls, and
the Day of Judgment is at hand.  Verily it is a solemn place for a
Christian man to think on, and I was gazing thereupon, as in a dream,
when one plucked my sleeve, and turning, I saw Randal Rutherford, all his
teeth showing in a grin.

"Welcome," he cried.  "You have made good speed, and the beginning of a
fray is better than the end of a feast.  And, by St. Boswell, to-morrow
we shall have it, lad!  The King came in to-day--late is better than
never--and to-morrow we go with the Maid, to give these pock-puddings a
taste of Scottish steel."

"And the Maid, where is she, Randal?"

"She lodges beyond the Paris gate, at the windmill, wherefrom she drove
the English some days agone."

"Wherefore not in the town?" I asked.

"Mayhap because she likes to be near her work, and would that all were of
her mind.  And mayhap she loves not the sight of the wenches whom she was
wont to drive from the camp, above all now that she has broken the Holy
Sword of Fierbois, smiting a lass with the flat of the blade."

"I like not the omen," said I.

"Freits follow them that freits fear," said Randal, in our country
speech.  "And the Maid is none of these.  'Well it was,' said she, 'that
I trusted not my life to a blade that breaks so easily,' and, in the next
skirmish, she took a Burgundian with her own hands, and now wears his
sword, which is a good cut and thrust piece.  But come," he cried, "if
needs you must see the Maid, you have but to walk to the Paris gate, and
so to the windmill hard by.  And your horse I will stable with our own,
and for quarters, we living Scots men-at-arms fare as well as the dead
kings of France, for to-night we lie in the chapel."

I dismounted, and he gave me an embrace, and, holding me at arms'-length,
laughed--

"You never were a tall man, Norman, but you look sound, and whole, and
tough for your inches, like a Highlandman's dirk.  Now be off on your
errand, and when it is done, look for me yonder at the sign of 'The
Crane,'" pointing across the parvise to a tavern, "for I keep a word to
tell in your lug that few wot of, and that it will joy you to hear.  To-
morrow, lad, we go in foremost."

And so, smiling, he took my horse and went his way, whistling, "Hey,
tuttie, tattie!"

