also ordered some men at a given signal to simulate desertion; they
were to throw away their shields and spears and larger swords but
secretly to retain their daggers, so that after his antagonists had
received them as unarmed, they might attack them unexpectedly.

The Romans having had in view since early morning the troops arrayed
about Hannibal were now arming themselves and taking their places. The
trumpets incited both parties, the signals were raised, and then
ensued the clash of battle and a contest which assumed a variety of
aspects. Until noon the advantage had not fallen distinctly to either
side. Then the wind came up and the false deserters were received as
men destitute of arms and got behind the Romans, alleging the very
natural reason that they wanted to be out of the way of the
Carthaginian attack. At this moment the men rose from ambush on both
sides, Hannibal with his cavalry charged the front ranks, the enemy
confused the Romans on every hand, the wind and the dust cloud
assailed their faces violently, causing perplexity, and interfered
with their breathing, which was already growing quick and labored from
exertion, so that deprived of sight, deprived of voice, they perished
in a wild melee, preserving no semblance of order. So great a
multitude fell that Hannibal did not even try to find out the number
of the common people, and in regard to the number of the knights and
members of the senate he did not write to the Carthaginians at home
but indicated it by the finger-rings; these he measured off by the
quart and sent away. Only the senators and the knights wore
finger-rings. Yet after all a number made good their escape even on
this occasion, among them Terentius; Paulus was killed. Hannibal did
not pursue nor did he hasten to Rome. He might have set out at once
for Rome with either his entire army or at least a portion of it and
have quickly ended the war; yet he did not do so, although Maharbal
urged him to do so. Hence he was censured as being able to win
victories but not understanding how to use them. Since they had
delayed this time, they could never again have an opportunity to make
haste. Therefore Hannibal regretted it, feeling that he had committed
a blunder, and was ever crying out: "Oh Cannae, Cannae!"

IX, 2.--The Romans, who had been in such imminent danger of being
destroyed, won back their superiority through Scipio. He was a son of
the Publius Scipio in Spain, and had saved the life of his father when
the latter was wounded: [Sidenote: FRAG. 56^24] HE WAS AT THIS TIME
SERVING IN THE ARMY, HAD FLED TO CANUSIUM, AND LATER ACHIEVED RENOWN.
BY COMMON CONSENT OF THE FUGITIVES ASSEMBLED AT CANUSIUM HE RECEIVED
THE LEADERSHIP, SET IN ORDER AFFAIRS AT THAT PLACE, SENT GARRISONS TO
THE REGIONS IN PROXIMITY, AND BOTH PLANNED AND EXECUTED ALL MEASURES
WELL.

The people of Rome heard of the defeat but did not believe it. When
they at last came to believe it, they were filled with sorrow and met
in the senate-house, but were ready to break up without accomplishing
anything, when finally Fabius proposed that they send scouts to bring
a report of what had really happened and what Hannibal was doing. He
advised them not to lament but to go about in silence that the
necessary measures might be taken, and furthermore to collect as large
a force as they might and to call upon adjoining settlements for aid.
After this, upon learning that Hannibal was in Apulia and receiving a
letter from Terentius stating that he was alive and what he was doing,
they recovered a little of their courage. Marcus Junius was named
dictator and Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus master of the horse.
Immediately they enrolled not only those of the citizens who were in
their prime but also those even who were past the fighting age; they
added to their forces prisoners on promise of pardon and slaves on
promise of freedom and a brigand here and there; moreover they called
on their allies to help, reminding them of any kindness ever shown
them and promising in addition to give to some of them grain, to
others money, as they had never done before; they also sent emissaries
to Greece to either persuade or hire men to serve as their allies.

Hannibal, learning that the Romans had united their troops and were
engaged in preparations, still delayed at Cannae despairing of a
capture by assault. Of the captives he released the allied contingent
without ransom as before, but the Romans he kept, hoping to dispose of
them by sale, since this would make him better off but the Romans
worse off. When no one came from Rome in quest of the captives, he
ordered them to send some of their number home after ransom, provided
they had first taken oath to return. When even then the Romans refused
to ransom them, he shipped those who were of any value to Carthage,
and of the rest he put some to death after maltreating them and forced
the others to fight as gladiators, pitting friends and relatives
against each other. Those who were sent for ransom returned in order
to be true to their oaths, but later fled. They were disfranchised by
the censors and committed suicide.

Hannibal sent his brother Mago to report the victory to the
Carthaginians and to ask them for money and troops. He on his arrival
counted over the rings and described the success naturally in even
more glowing terms than it deserved; everything that he asked was
voted and they would not listen to Hanno who opposed it and advised
them to end the war while they seemed to have the upper hand. However,
they never put their vote into effect, but delayed. Hannibal
meanwhile had advanced into Campania, had seized a Samnite fortress,
and marched upon Neapolis. He sent before him a few soldiers with the
booty and when the people of the city, thinking them alone, rushed out
upon them, he unexpectedly appeared in person and slew a large number.
He did not capture the city, nor did he lay siege to it for long. The
reason will presently be plain. Of the Campanian inhabitants of Capua
a part clung to Roman friendship, but others favored Hannibal. After
his success at Cannae and when some of their men taken captive had been
released the populace was clamorous to revolt to Hannibal, but the men
of rank waited for some time. Finally the crowd made a rush upon them
as they were assembled in the senate-house and would have made away
with them all but for the action of some one of the crowd who saw how
great a misfortune this would be. This person denounced the senators
as by all means deserving to perish, but said that they ought first to
choose others to fill their places, for the State could not endure
without some men to concert measures for them. Having gained the
assent of the Capuan people he ejected each one of them from the
senate-house, asking the populace, as he did so, whom they chose in
his place. Thus, as they found themselves unable to choose others on
short notice, they let all the old senators go unharmed, because they
appeared to be necessary. Later they became reconciled with one
another and made peace with Hannibal. This is why he quickly retired
from Neapolis and came to Capua. He held a conference with the people
and made many attractive offers, among other things promising to give
them the supreme direction of Italy; for he was anxious that they
should be animated by hope and, feeling that they would be working for
themselves, develop greater zeal in the struggle.

At the revolt of Capua the rest of Campania also became restive, and
the news of the town's secession troubled the Romans. As for Hannibal,
he started on a campaign against the Nucerini. Under stress of siege
and owing to lack of food they thrust out that portion of the
population which was not available for fighting. Hannibal would not
receive them, however, and gave them assurance of safety only in case
they should go back to the city. [Sidenote: FRAG. 56^25] THEREFORE THE
REST ALSO AGREED TO LEAVE THE CITY CARRYING ONE CHANGE OF CLOTHING. AS
SOON, HOWEVER, AS HANNIBAL WAS MASTER OF THE SITUATION, HE SHUT THE
SENATORS INTO BATH-HOUSES AND SUFFOCATED THEM, AND IN THE CASE OF THE
OTHERS, ALTHOUGH HE HAD TOLD THEM TO GO AWAY WHERE THEY PLEASED, HE
CUT DOWN ON THE ROAD MANY EVEN OF THEM. A NUMBER OF THEM SAVED THEIR
LIVES ONLY BY TAKING REFUGE IN THE WOODS. THEREUPON THE REST BECAME
AFRAID AND WOULD NO LONGER COME TO TERMS WITH HIM, BUT RESISTED WHILE
THEY WERE ABLE. The people of Nola were planning to range themselves
under his banner, but when they saw what had been done to their
countrymen, they quietly let Marcellus in and later repulsed Hannibal
when he assaulted their city. Repelled from Nola he captured the
people of Acerrae by starving them out. [Sidenote: FRAG. 56^29] HE
MADE THE SAME TERMS WITH THEM AS WITH THE DWELLERS IN NUCERIA AND ALSO
ACCORDED THEM THE SAME TREATMENT. After that he directed his forces
against Casilinum in which Romans and about a thousand of the allies
had taken refuge. These put to death the native citizens who were
meditating how to betray them, repulsed Hannibal several times and
held out nobly against hunger. When food was failing them they sent a
man across the river on an inflated skin to inform the dictator. The
latter put jars filled with wheat into the river at night and bade
them keep their eyes on the current in the darkness. For a while he
thus supplied them with nutriment without being discovered, but
eventually a jar was dashed against some obstacle and shattered; then
the Carthaginians became aware of what was going on and put chains
across the river. After a number had perished of hunger and of their
wounds, they abandoned one half of the city, cut down the bridge, and
held out in the other half. They now threw turnip seed from the wall
upon a spot outside, doing this in order to alarm the enemy and make
them believe that they were likely to endure for a long time.
Hannibal, indeed, thinking that they must have plenty of food and
astonished at their endurance invited them to capitulate and released
them for money. The Romans outside were glad to ransom them, and more
than that they showed them honor.

IX, 3.--While these events took place the messengers returned from
Delphi saying that the Pythia admonished them to shake off sloth and
devote themselves to the war. Then they were filled with new
strength. They overtook Hannibal and encamped near him so as to watch
his movements. Junius the dictator ordered the Romans to do exactly as
the Carthaginians were commanded to do. So they took their food and
sleep at the same time, visited the sentries in the same manner, and
were doing everything else in similar fashion. When Hannibal
understood the situation, he waited for a stormy night and announced
to some of his soldiers a skirmish for after nightfall. Junius did the
same thing. Thereupon Hannibal ordered different detachments to attack
him in succession at different times in order that his opponent might
be involved in constant labor as a result of sleeplessness and the
storm. He himself rested with the troops not in action. When day was
about to break, he recalled the army, as was expected, and the Romans
put away their weapons and retired to rest; then all of a sudden he
attacked them, with the result that he killed a number and captured
the entrenchments, which were deserted.

Conditions in Sicily and Sardinia grew unsettled but did not receive
any consideration at the hands of the Romans. [Sidenote: B.C. 215
(_a.u._ 539)] The consuls chosen were Gracchus, previously master of
the horse, and Postumius Albinus. Albinus was ambuscaded and destroyed
with his entire army by the Boii as he was traversing a wooded
mountain. The barbarians cut off his head, scooped out the interior
and after gilding it used it for a bowl in their sacred
ceremonials.--Portents occurred at this time. A cow brought forth a
horse and fire shone out at sea. The consuls Gracchus and Fabius
encamped and kept watch of Hannibal while he stayed in Capua, to see
what he did. They spent their time in sending scouts in every
direction, defending the allies, trying to win back the revolted and
injuring their adversaries' interests. Hannibal, so long as he
obtained a barely sufficient supply of food at the cost of
encountering dangers, led a temperate life, as did his army; but after
they had taken Capua and wintered there in idleness with ample
provisions, they began to lose their physical strength by not laboring
and their intellectual force by tranquillity, and in changing their
ancestral habits they learned an accomplishment new to them,--that of
being defeated in battle.--When the work of war finally became
pressing, Hannibal transferred his quarters to the mountains and gave
the army exercise. But they could not get strong in a short space of
time. He was encouraged by the arrival of reinforcements from home,
especially in the matter of elephants. He now set out against Nola
intending to capture it or else to draw Marcellus, who was ravaging
Samnium, away from that region. As he could accomplish nothing, he
withdrew from the city and laid waste the country, until he suffered a
decisive defeat in battle,--an event which grieved him. Many Spaniards
and even many Libyans now forsook him and deserted to the Romans,--a
new experience for him. Consequently, despairing of his own and the
soldiers' prospects he abandoned that entire region and retired to
Capua. Afterward he left there also to take up a different position.

[Sidenote: B.C. 217 (_a.u._ 537)] The Scipios had crossed the river
Iber and were ravaging the country; they had secured control of
various cities and when Hasdrubal for this reason hastened to oppose
them, they had conquered him in battle. The Carthaginians learning
this thought that Hasdrubal needed more assistance than did Hannibal,
and fearing that the Scipios might attempt to cross into Libya also
they sent only a small body of troops to Hannibal, but despatched the
largest detachment with Mago to Spain with the utmost speed; and they
bade him after the reduction of Spain to remain to guard their
interests there, whereas Hasdrubal was to be sent with a body of
troops against Italy. [Sidenote: B.C. 216 (_a.u._ 538)] The Scipios,
made aware of the plan, no longer gave battle for fear that Hasdrubal
perhaps might win a victory and then hasten to Italy. However, as the
Carthaginians went on injuring the part of the country that was
friendly to the Romans, Publius engaged in a struggle with such of his
opponents as attacked him and won a victory; Gnaeus intercepted the
enemy who were retiring from this battle and annihilated them. As a
result of this disaster and because numerous cities were transferring
their allegiance to the Romans and some of the Libyans had gone over
to their side, Hasdrubal remained there longer than he was intending.
The Scipios sent their accessions at once to Italy, and they
themselves continued to adjust affairs in Spain. They captured the
subjects of Saguntum who had caused them the war and their reverses,
and they tore down the hostile settlement and sold the men. After this
they took possession of Saguntum and restored it to its original
inhabitants. They were so scrupulous in regard to the plunder that
they sent nothing home. They allowed the partners of their campaign to
do so, but for themselves they sent only some jackstones to their
children. Hence the senate upon the request of Gnaeus for leave of
absence that he might go home and borrow a dowry for his daughter, who
was of age to be married, voted that a dowry be given her from the
public funds.

IX, 4.--In the course of the same period both Sicily and Sardinia had
become openly hostile. But the disturbance in these regions soon
subsided. [Sidenote: B.C. 215 (_a.u._ 539)] Hasdrubal, who was aiding
them, was captured and Manlius Torquatus recovered almost the entire
island. For the time being affairs in Sicily were quiet, but afterward
disturbance reigned anew. King Philip of Macedonia showed himself a
most open partisan of the Carthaginians. In his desire to add Greece
to his possessions he made an agreement with Hannibal that they should
conduct the war in common, and that the Carthaginians should get Italy
but he should have Greece and Epirus together with the islands. The
agreement was made on this basis, but through the capture of the
herald who had been sent to Hannibal by Philip the Romans learned what
was taking place and forthwith despatched the praetor Marcus Valerius
Laevinus[30] against him. They intended to make him anxious about
internal affairs, so that he should stay at home. The plan worked.
[Sidenote: B.C. 214 (_a.u._ 540)] Philip had progressed as far as
Corcyca with the intention of sailing to Italy, but on learning that
Laevinus was already at Brundusium he returned home. When Laevinus had
sailed as far as Corcyca, Philip set out against the Roman allies; he
had captured Oricum and was besieging Apollonia. Laevinus made an
expedition against him anew, recovered Oricum and rescued Apollonia.
Then Philip after burning the ships which he had used retired
homewards overland.

[Footnote 30: Zonaras consistently spells this name _Lavinius_.]

The people of Rome chose Fabius and Marcellus consuls. Hannibal was
then traveling about in what is called Calabria and in adjacent
regions, and they assigned the care of him to Gracchus, who had held
office before them. The latter routed Hanno (who had come from
Bruttium and confronted him near Beneventum), and then going on he
watched Hannibal closely, kept ravaging the possessions of rebels and
won some cities safely back. The consuls themselves turned their steps
toward Campania, for they were anxious to subdue it and so leave no
element of hostility behind their backs when they should march against
Hannibal. They then divided forces. Fabius overran the districts of
Campania and Samnium. Marcellus crossed into Sicily and proceeded to
besiege Syracuse. The town had submitted to him, but then had revolted
again through the treachery of some men by the use of a false message.
He would have subdued it very speedily,--for he assaulted the wall by
both land and sea at once,--had not Archimedes with his inventions
enabled the citizens to resist an extremely long time. By his devices
he suspended stones and heavy-armed soldiers in the air whom he would
let down suddenly and soon draw up again. Even ships that carried
towers he would dash one upon another; he would pull them up and
[Sidenote: (FRAG. 56^31?)] LIFTING THEM HIGH WOULD LET GO ALL IN A
MASS so that when they fell into the water they were sunk by the
impact. At last in an incredible manner he destroyed the whole Roman
fleet by conflagration. By tilting a kind of mirror toward the sun he
concentrated the sun's beams on it; and as the thickness and
smoothness of the mirror cooeperated to ignite the air from these beams
he kindled a great flame, all of which he directed upon the ships that
lay at anchor in the path of the fire, and he consumed them all.
Marcellus, therefore, despairing of capturing the city on account of
the inventiveness of Archimedes thought to take it by famine after a
regular investment. This duty he assigned to Pulcher while he himself
turned his attention to those who had participated in the revolt of
Syracuse. Any who yielded were granted pardon, but those who resisted
he treated harshly, and he captured a number of the cities by force,
some also by betrayal. In the meantime Himilco had come from Carthage
with an army, had occupied Agrigentum and Heraclea and had reached
Syracuse. There he was first defeated, then was in turn victorious,
and finally was beaten by a sudden assault on the part of Marcellus.

IX, 5.--Thereafter Marcellus was still investing Syracuse. Hannibal
was passing his time in Calabria. [Sidenote: B.C. 212 (_a.u._ 542)]
The Romans, moreover, had again experienced many and disagreeable
reverses. The consuls had received a setback near Capua, Gracchus had
died in Lucania, Tarentum and other cities had revolted, Hannibal,
previously cowed, remained in Italy and had marched upon Rome, and
both the Scipios had perished. Elated by these events Hannibal
undertook to render assistance to Capua. He went as far as Beneventum,
then, ascertaining that Claudius had returned from Samnium into
Lucania on account of the death of Gracchus, he became afraid that the
Romans might secure control of parts of it, and he advanced no farther
but turned to meet Claudius.--Upon the death of the Scipios the whole
of Spain was thrown into disorder. Some towns voluntarily went over to
the Carthaginians and others under compulsion, even if they did later
swing back to the Roman side.

Marcellus, finding that he was accomplishing naught by assault on
Syracuse, thought of the following scheme. There was a vulnerable spot
in the Syracusans' wall, which they called Galeagra; it had never
before been recognized as such, but the fact was at this time
discovered. He waited till the whole town of Syracuse celebrated an
