in thought with me to that Middle-West region. The farms there are very
level, and also highly productive. The big "bonanza" farms, as they are
called, range in size from two thousand to ten thousand acres. Some of
these are so large that even on level ground one cannot look entirely
across them--so large, indeed, that laborers working at opposite ends do
not see one another for months at a time.

[Illustration: A Wheat-Field.]

During the planting and harvesting seasons temporary laborers come from
all over the country. They are well housed and well fed. The farms are
divided into sections, and each section has its own lodging-house,
dining-hall, barns, and so on. Even then, dinner is carried to the workers
in the field, because they are often a mile or two from the dining-hall.
The height of the harvest season is at the end of July.

In the autumn, after the wheat has been harvested, the straw is burned and
the land is ploughed. In the following April when the soil is dry enough
to harrow, the seeds, after being carefully selected and thoroughly
cleaned, are planted. For the harvesting a great deal of new machinery is
purchased every year. One of these huge machines can cut and stack in one
day the grain from a hundred acres of land. Then the grain is threshed at
once in the field, before the rain can do it harm.

[Illustration: Grain-Elevators at Buffalo.]

Through the spout of the thresher the grain falls into the box wagon,
which carries it to the grain-elevator, or building for storing grain.
Here it remains until it is loaded automatically into the cars, which take
it to the great elevator centres. The wheat is not touched by hands from
the time it passes into the thresher until it reaches private kitchens in
the form of flour.

The great elevator centres are Duluth, St. Paul, Minneapolis, Chicago, and
Buffalo. Some elevators in these centres can store as much as a million or
more bushels each. They are built of steel and equipped with steam-power
or electricity. The wheat is taken from grain-laden vessels or cars,
carried up into the elevator, and deposited in various bins, according to
its grade. On the opposite side of the elevator the wheat is reloaded into
cars or canal-boats.

In 1914 the United States produced nine hundred and thirty million
bushels, or between one-fourth and one-fifth of all the wheat produced in
the world.


CATTLE-RAISING

The third great industry is that of cattle-raising. To find the ranches we
will go a little farther west, perhaps to Kansas. A wide belt stretching
westward from the one-hundredth meridian to the foot-hills of the Rocky
Mountains is arid land. It includes parts of Texas, Kansas, Nebraska, the
Dakotas, Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado. Although the rainfall here is
mostly too light to grow corn and wheat without irrigation, these dry
plains have sufficient growth to support great herds of sheep and cattle,
and supply us with a large part of our beef. Cattle by the hundred
thousand feed on these vast unfenced regions.

On the great ranches of this belt, which, we are told, are fast
disappearing, there are two important round-ups of the cattle every year.
Between times they roam free over vast areas of land. In the spring they
are driven slowly toward a central point. Then the calves are branded, or
marked by a hot iron, with the owner's special brand. These brands are
registered and are recognized by law. This is done in order that each
owner may be certain of his own cattle. In July or August the cattle are
rounded up again, and this time the mature and fatted animals are selected
that they may be driven to the shipping-station on the railroad and loaded
on the cars.

[Illustration: Cattle on the Western Plains.]

The journey to the stock-yards often requires from four to seven days.
Once in about thirty hours the cattle are released from the cars in order
to be fed and watered. Then the journey begins again.

At the stock-yards the cattle are unloaded and driven into pens. From
there the fat steers and cows are sent directly to market. The lean ones
go to farmers in the Middle West who make a specialty of fattening them
for market, doing it in a few weeks.

In the year 1910 there were ninety-six million six hundred and fifty-eight
thousand cattle in the United States. This means that there was one for
every human being in the whole country. But the number of beef-cattle is
decreasing, as the larger ranches where they graze are disappearing, as we
have said, and are being divided into small farms.


COAL

By means of these three industries--cotton, wheat, and cattle--we are
provided with food and clothing. But besides these necessaries, we must
have fuel. We need it both for heat in our households and for running most
of our engines in factories and on trains. Our chief fuel is coal.

To see coal-mining, western Pennsylvania is a good place for us to visit.
Were you to go into a mine there you might easily imagine yourself in a
different world. In descending the shaft you suddenly become aware that
you are cut off from beautiful sunlight and fresh air. You find that to
supply these every-day benefits, which you have come to accept as
commonplace, there are ventilating machines working to bring down the
fresh air from above, and portable lamps, which will not cause explosion,
to supply light, and that, where there is water, provision has been made
for drainage.

The walls of the mine, also, have to be strongly supported, in order that
they may not fall and crush the workers or fill up the shaft. In
deep-shaft mines, coal is carried to the surface by cages hoisted through
the shaft. It is sorted and cleaned above ground.

One of the largest uses of coal is found in the factories where numerous
articles of iron and steel are made. The world of industry depends so much
upon iron that it is called the metal of civilization.

[Illustration: Iron Smelters.]

The iron and coal industries are closely related, for coal is used to make
iron into steel. If you stay in Pennsylvania you may catch a glimpse of
the process by which iron is made usable.

As it comes from the mine it is not pure, but is mixed with ore from which
it must be separated. In the regions of iron-mines you will see towering
aloft here and there huge chimneys, or blast-furnaces, at times sending
forth great clouds of black smoke and at times lighting the sky with the
lurid glow of flames. In these big blast-furnaces, the iron ore and coal
are piled in layers. Then a very hot fire is made, so hot that the iron
melts and runs down into moulds of sand, where it is collected. This
process is called smelting.

The iron thus obtained, though pure, is not hard enough for most purposes.
It must be made into steel. Steel, you understand, is iron which has again
been melted and combined with a small amount of carbon to harden it.

At first this was an expensive process, but during the last century ways
of making steel were discovered which greatly lowered its cost. As a
result, steel took the place of iron in many ways, the most important
being in the manufacture of rails for our railroad systems. Since steel
rails are stronger than iron, they make it possible to use larger
locomotives and heavier trains, and permit a much higher rate of speed and
more bulky traffic. All this means, as you can easily see, cheaper and
more rapid transportation, which is so important in all our industrial
life.

Steel has an extensive use, also, in the structure of bridges, of large
buildings, of steamships and war vessels, as well as in the making of
heating equipment, tools, household utensils, and hundreds of other
articles which we are constantly using in our daily life. If you should
write down all the uses for this metal which you can think of, you would
be surprised at the length of your list.

These four great industries give us a little idea of how men make use of
the products of the farm, the mine, and the factory in supplying human
needs. Each fulfils its place, and we are dependent upon all. That means
that we are all dependent upon one another. There would be little in life
for any one if he were to do without all that others have done for him.

[Illustration: Iron Ore Ready for Shipment.]

There is something which each member of a community can do to make life
better for others. If he does this willingly and well, he co-operates with
his fellow men and assists in the great upbuilding of the nation. And the
amount of _service_ the man or woman, boy or girl can render those about
him is the measure of his worth to his neighborhood, his State, or his
country.

It is good for us to ask ourselves this question: How can I be helpful in
the community where I live, which has done so much for me? If we try to
give faithful service, working cheerfully with others, we are truly
patriotic. Are you a patriot?


SOME THINGS TO THINK ABOUT

1. What are the four great industries taken up in this chapter? Can you
tell in what ways each of these is of special value to us?

2. Use your map in locating the cotton region; the wheat-growing region;
the cattle-raising region.

3. In what ways are coal, iron, and steel especially useful?

4. How are we all dependent upon one another? How may we be truly
patriotic?




THE END




INDEX

  Adams, John
  Adams, Samuel
  Alamo
  Anna, Santa
  Antietam, battle of
  Appomattox Court House, Lee's surrender at
  Atlanta, capture of

  Backwoodsmen, life among
  Barlow, Joel
  Bon Homme Richard (bo-nom'-re-shar')
  Boone, Daniel
  Boone, Squire
  "Boston Tea Party"
  Brandywine Creek
  Bull Run, battle of
  Bunker Hill, battle of
  Burgoyne (ber-goin'), General, his invasion

  Cabinet, the President's
  Calhoun, John C.
  Camden, battle of
  Carson, Kit
  Cattle-raising
  Cedar Creek, battle of
  Cherokee Indians
  Civil War
  Clark, George Rogers
  Clark, William
  Clay, Henry
  Clermont
  Clinton, DeWitt
  Coal
  Colonies become States
  Compromise, Missouri
  Compromise of 1850
  Concord, battle of
  Confederate States of America, organization of
  Congress, Continental, first meeting of
    second meeting of
  Congress, United States
  Continental Army
  Cornwallis, General
  Cotton
  Cotton-gin, invention of
  Cowpens, battle of
  Creek Indians
  Custis, Mrs. Martha

  Davis, Jefferson
  Dawes, William
  Declaration of Independence
  Donelson, Fort
  Dorchester Heights
  Douglas, Stephen A.

  Early, General, at Cedar Creek
  Emancipation Proclamation
  Erie Canal

  Ferguson, Major
  Fitch, John
  Flatboat
  Florida, purchase of
  France aids the Americans
  Franklin, Benjamin
  Fremont, John C.
  French villages, old, life in
  Fulton, Robert

  Gage, General
  Gates, General
  George III
  Gettysburg, battle of
  Gold, discovery of, in California
  Grant, Ulysses
  Greene, Nathanael
  Guilford Court House, battle of

  Hale, Nathan
  Hamilton, Alexander
  Hamilton, Colonel
  Hancock, John
  Hayne, Senator
  Henderson, Richard
  Henry, Fort
  Henry, Patrick
  Hessians
  Houston, Sam
  Howe, General
  Hutchinson, Governor

  Independence of the United States
  Iron

  Jackson, Andrew
  Jackson, Thomas J. ("Stonewall")
  Jay, John
  Jefferson, Thomas
  Johnston, Albert Sydney
  Johnston, Joseph E.
  Jones, John Paul

  Kaskaskia (Kas-kas'-ki-a)
  Kentucky
  King's Mountain, battle of
  Knox, Henry

  La Fayette (Lae f[=a]-yet)
  Lee, Robert E.
  Lewis and Clark's Expedition
  Lewis, Meriwether
  Lexington, battle of
  Lincoln, Abraham;
    and slavery;
    and the Emancipation Proclamation;
    assassinated
  Lincoln, General
  Livingston, Chancellor
  Livingston, Robert R.
  Long Island, battle of
  Louisiana Purchase

  McClellan, General
  Mandan Indians
  Marion, Francis
  Meade, General
  Mexican Cession
  Mexican War
  Minutemen
  Missouri Compromise
  Mohawk Valley
  Monroe, James
  Morgan, Daniel
  Morse, Samuel F.B.

  Napoleon I
  National Road
  Negroes
  New Orleans in 1803
  Nullification

  Old North Church
  Old South Church

  Pack-horse
  Partisan warfare in the South
  Pitcairn, Major
  Pitt, William
  Pittsburg Landing, battle of
  Prescott, Samuel
  Prescott, William
  Protective tariff
  Provincial Congress
  Putnam, General

  Railroad
  Randolph, Edmund
  Republican Party
  Revere, Paul
  Revolution, causes of
  Robertson, James
  Rotch, Benjamin
  Rowe, John
  Rumsey, John

  Scott, General
  Secession of South Carolina and ten more slave States
  Seminole Indians
  Serapis (se-ra-pis)
  Sevier, John
  Shelby, Isaac
  Shenandoah Valley, Sheridan in
  Sheridan, Philip H.
  Sherman, William Tecumseh
  Sherrill, Kate
  Shiloh, battle of
  Slavery
  Smith, Colonel
  Sons of Liberty
  South Carolina
  Stamp Act
  Steamboat
  Steel
  Stephens, Alexander H.
  Stuart, J.E.B.
  Sutter, Captain
