a spirit which soon knocked away the masts and spars of their opponents,
and spread death and destruction on board their ships.  The action had
continued for two hours, several French ships having struck, when a fire
was perceived on board the _Orient_, which in an hour afterwards blew up
with a tremendous explosion, the burning wreck falling far and wide
around, and setting fire to several ships, friends and foes, in the
neighbourhood.  So awful was the effect, that for ten minutes not a gun
was fired on either side.  Thus the battle raged all night long, till
soon after dawn the French frigate _Artemise_, after striking her
colours, also caught fire, and with a terrific explosion blew up.

In the morning the enemy's ships still in a condition to make sail got
under way and endeavoured to escape.  Of the thirteen French ships of
the line, by this time, one had blown up, eight had surrendered, and two
had escaped.  Of the remaining two, one, the _Timoleon_, was on shore,
with her colours flying; the other, the _Tonnant_, lay about two miles
from her, a mere wreck, but also with her colours up.  On the approach,
however, of the _Theseus_ and _Leander_, she hauled them down; while the
crew of the _Timoleon_ set her on fire, and she soon afterwards blew up.
Thus, in the memorable "Battle of the Nile," the French lost eleven
line-of-battle ships, besides frigates.  In this action the British lost
218 killed and 678 wounded.  Among the latter was Horatio Nelson, who
was struck above his already darkened eye by a splinter; while all the
ships were considerably cut up.  On board the _Orient_ fell the
Commodore Casa Bianca, as well as his gallant young son, who had refused
to quit his post; and the French commander-in-chief, Brueys, who, after
receiving two severe wounds, was nearly cut in two by a shot.  While
still breathing, he desired not to be carried below, but to be left to
die upon deck, exclaiming in a firm voice, "Un amiral Francais doit
mourir sur son banc de quart."

"A French admiral ought to die on his quarter-deck."

While the ship was in flames, the boats of the British ships put off to
save the hapless crew, seventy of whom were thus rescued.  The heroic
conduct of the captain of the _Tonnant_, Du Petit Thonars, deserves to
be recorded.  He first lost both his arms, and then one of his legs;
even then, still able to speak, he gave his dying commands to his crew
not to surrender the ship.  Of the English fleet, the _Culloden_
unhappily got on shore while going into action, and only by great
exertions did she get off, after the battle was over.  That the French
fought with the utmost gallantry is acknowledged by all, while we must
rank the victory of the Nile among the most brilliant achievements of
the British Navy.

After the battle every effort was made to repair the damages the ships
had received, and to fit the prizes for the voyage to England.  Nelson
sent the prisoners taken on board them on shore in a cartel, on their
parole not to serve again during the war; but Napoleon, with his usual
disregard for treaties, formed them into a battalion, which he called
the "nautic."  Three of the prizes, being in too shattered a condition
to be refitted, were burnt; another, the _Peuple-Souverain_, being
considered unfit to proceed farther than Gibraltar, was there turned
into a guard-ship.  The five remaining vessels arrived safely at
Plymouth; three of them being new and magnificent ships, the _Tonnant,
Franklin_, and _Spartiate_, were added to the British Navy, the name of
the former being changed to _Canopus_.  Rewards were liberally bestowed
upon the victors; Sir Horatio Nelson was created a peer of Great Britain
by the title of Baron Nelson of the Nile and of Burnham Thorpe, while a
pension was settled on him of 2000 pounds a-year by the English
Parliament, and 1000 pounds a-year by the Irish; the East India Company
presenting him with 10,000 pounds.

After the defeat of his fleet at Aboukir, Napoleon determined to invade
Syria.  His plans, however, were thwarted by Sir Sidney Smith, who
having captured the fleet which was bringing the battering-cannon and
ammunition from Damietta for the siege of Saint Jean d'Acre, made use of
it to fortify that town, into which, with a small body of seamen and a
few officers, he threw himself, and put it into a state of defence,
while he organised the Turkish troops who formed its garrison.
Napoleon, obtaining fresh guns, in a short time laid siege to Acre.
Though he made several desperate attempts to storm it, they were on each
occasion repulsed by the valour of the Turks, aided by the fire from the
English and sultan's ships.  During one of the many engagements the
_Theseus_ frigate caught fire, and the poop and after-part of the ship
was almost blown to pieces, several of her officers and men being
killed.  The fire was put out by the courage of the surviving officers
and crew.

Napoleon, enraged at his defeat, made every effort to destroy Sir Sidney
Smith.  Two attempts to assassinate him, however, happily failed.  At
length an Arab dervish appeared with a letter to the pacha, proposing a
cessation of arms for the purpose of burying the dead bodies, which in
vast numbers were piled up under the ramparts.  While this proposal was
under consideration, with unexampled treachery, Napoleon attempted to
storm the town; but the garrison were on the alert, and the assailants
were driven back with great slaughter.  The Arab tribes having been
induced to cut off the supply of provisions for the French army, on the
20th of May Napoleon raised the siege, and leaving his guns behind him,
precipitately retreated towards Egypt.  Such is a brief outline of one
of the most daring exploits ever performed by a naval man.

Of a very different character, though one in which consummate bravery
was displayed, was the cutting-out of the _Hermione_ frigate.  She had
been in the year 1799 under the command of Captain Hugh Pigot, one of
those tyrant commanders who are truly said to make their ships "hells
afloat."  While cruising off Porto Rico, as the crew were reefing
top-sails, the captain shouted that he would flog the last man off the
mizen-topsail yard.  Two, in their attempt to spring over their
comrades' backs, missing their hold, fell on the quarter-deck and were
killed.  The captain, it is said, on seeing it, merely observed, "Throw
the lubbers overboard."  The crew, who were probably a bad lot to begin
with, for such a captain could not have obtained a good ship's company,
from a long succession of tyrannical acts, had become infinitely worse.
The next day they rose on their officers, murdered the greater number,
including the captain, and carried the ship into La Guayra, a port of
the Spanish Main.  Hearing that the _Hermione_, which had been fitted
out by the Spaniards and strongly armed, was lying in the harbour of
Puerto Cabello, Captain Hamilton, commanding the _Surprise_, a 28-gun
frigate, determined to cut her out.  Coming off the port on the 21st of
October, he discovered her moored head and stern between two strong
batteries on either side of the harbour, with her sails bent and ready
for sea.  After waiting off the port till the 24th without mentioning
his intentions, he addressed his crew, reminding them of many
enterprises they had undertaken, and pointing out to them that unless
they should at once attempt the capture of the frigate, some more
fortunate vessel would carry off the prize.  Three hearty cheers showed
him that he might depend on his crew.  "I shall lead you myself," he
added.  "Here are the orders for the six boats to be employed, with the
names of the officers and men to be engaged on the service."

Every arrangement had been judiciously made.  The crew were to be
dressed in blue; the password was Britannia, the answer Ireland.  The
boarders were to take the first spell at the oars; then, as they neared
the _Hermione_, they were to be relieved by the regular crews.  The
expedition was to proceed in two divisions, the one to board on the
starboard, the other on the larboard bow, gangway, and quarter.  Sharp
axes were provided for those who were to cut the bower cable, while
others were told off to cut the stern cable, and certain men were to go
aloft to loose the sails.  In the event of their reaching the ship
undiscovered, the boarders only were to board, while the boats' crews
were to take the ship in tow directly the cables were cut; but should
they be discovered, the crews of each boat were to board and all aid in
the enterprise.  The rendezvous was to be on the _Hermione's_
quarter-deck.  At half-past seven the boats were hoisted out, the crews
mustered, and away they pulled from the _Surprise_.  As it happened,
within a mile of the _Hermione_ the expedition was discovered by two
gunboats, and the alarm being given, firing commenced.  Captain Hamilton
on this pushed for the frigate, believing that all his boats would do
the same, but some, misunderstanding his orders, engaged the gunboats.
On approaching, lights were seen at every port, with the ship's company
at quarters.  Captain Hamilton pushed for the bows, and climbing up, his
foot slipped and his pistol went off; but he soon succeeded in gaining a
footing on the forecastle, and those who had been ordered to loose the
sails immediately got the foresail ready for bending and hauling out to
the yard-arms, thus forming a screen to themselves, for not a Spaniard
was there to interfere with them.  On looking down from the forecastle,
they saw the crew of the _Hermione_ at quarters on the main-deck, firing
away into the darkness, utterly unconscious that the enemy were on
board.  Captain Hamilton, with the gunner and fourteen men, now made his
way to the quarter-deck--part of them, however, under the gunner, being
driven back by the Spaniards, who gained possession of the forecastle.
Another party of English also neglecting to rendezvous on the
quarter-deck, the captain was left for some minutes to defend himself
against the attack of four Spaniards, one of whom stunned him, when he
fell.  Happily, some of his men came to the rescue, and a party of
marines climbing over the larboard gangway, now gave a favourable turn
to affairs.  The rest of the boats coming up, the marines formed, fired
a volley, and ran down with fixed bayonets on the main-deck.  About
sixty Spaniards retreated to the cabin, and surrendered.  For some time,
however, fighting continued on the main-deck and under the forecastle.
The cables were cut, the sails were loosed, while the gunner and two
men, though severely wounded, standing at the helm, the boats took the
frigate in tow, and she stood out of Puerto Cabello.  The batteries
immediately opened, and a Portuguese reported that he heard the Spanish
prisoners threatening to blow up the frigate.  A few muskets fired down
the hatchway restored order, and in less than an hour after Captain
Hamilton was on board, all opposition had ceased, and the _Hermione_ was
his prize.  By 2 p.m. the ship was out of gunshot of the batteries, the
towing-boats were called alongside, and her crews came on board.  In
this wonderful enterprise the British had only 12 wounded, while the
Spaniards, out of a crew of 365, lost 119 killed and 97 wounded, most of
them dangerously.  The cutting-out of the _Hermione_ may well be
considered one of the most desperate services ever performed, and no man
was ever more deserving of the knighthood he received than Captain
Hamilton, who had planned every detail, and personally led the bold
attack.  He himself was among the most severely wounded; besides a blow
on his head, he received a sabre wound on the left thigh, another by a
pike in his right thigh, and a contusion on the shin-bone by grape-shot;
one of his fingers was badly cut, and he was also much bruised.

For some time previously to this, detectives, if they may be so-called,
were stationed at each of the ports to discover the members of the crew
who had been on board the _Hermione_ at the time of the mutiny.  No
mercy was shown to those who had taken part in it.  A large number were
hung; it used to be said, indeed, that more suffered than actually then
belonged to her, though they might have done so at some former period.

Sir Edward Hamilton long lived to enjoy his honours.

The days when fabulous amounts of prize-money were to be picked up had
not yet passed by, although the rich Spanish galleons which went to sea
in the times of Drake were seldom to be found.  In October of this year,
1799, fortune smiled on the officers and ships' companies of two British
frigates.  The _Naiad_, of 38 guns, Captain Pierrepoint, while cruising
in latitude 44 degrees 1 minute north, and longitude 12 degrees 35
minutes west, came in sight of two frigates, to which, notwithstanding
the disparity of force, he gave chase.  They proved to be the Spanish
34-gun frigates _Santa Brigida_ and _Thetis_, from Vera Cruz, bound to
Spain.  He followed them all night, when, early in the morning of the
16th, another ship was seen in the south-west, which hoisting her number
showed herself to be the 38-gun frigate _Ethalion_, Captain James Young;
and soon afterwards two other 32-gun frigates, the _Alcmene_, Captain
Digby, and the _Triton_, Captain J. Gore appeared.  The Spaniards,
hoping to escape, steered different courses, but each were pursued by
two British frigates, which, before long coming up with them, compelled
them to haul down their colours.  Fortunately, a breeze coming off the
land, the captors with their prizes were enabled to stand off the coast,
just in time to save themselves from being attacked by four large ships,
which came out of Vigo.  While the English frigates were preparing to
receive the enemy, the four ships put back into port.  The prizes were
found to have on board a cargo of specie, besides other merchandise, to
an amount which gave each captain upwards of 40,000 pounds, each
lieutenant 5000 pounds, each warrant officer upwards of 2000 pounds,
each midshipman nearly 800 pounds, each seaman and marine 182 pounds.
Even the seamen and marines might have been well contented with the gold
pieces they had to chink in their pockets; though in too many instances
they were probably all dissipated before they had been many days on
shore.  Yet complaints were general of the uneven way in which
prize-money was distributed.  It was a common saying among sailors, that
when the pay-clerk went on board ships to pay prize-money, he clambered
with his money-bags into the main-top and showered down the money at
random; all which remained upon the splinter-netting (a coarse rope
netting spread as a kind of awning) was for the men, and all that went
through for the officers.  The captain of a ship not under the admiral's
flag received three-eighths of the net proceeds.  In this instance the
three-eighths were divided among the four captains who assisted in the
capture of the two Spanish frigates.  On the treasure being landed, it
was escorted in sixty-three artillery waggons, by horse and foot
soldiers, and armed seamen and marines, attended by bands of music, and
a vast multitude, to the dungeons of the citadel of Plymouth, whence it
was afterwards removed, much in the same style, and deposited in the
Bank of England.

Still more fortunate, a few years later, was Lord Cochrane, when, in
command of the _Pallas_, he captured three rich prizes in succession, of
which the value could not have been far short of 300,000 pounds.  As,
however, he only took one fourth, his share amounted to about 75,000
pounds.  As it was, however, he nearly lost not only a large portion of
his booty, but his liberty, as, while returning home after he had taken
the last prize, three of the enemy's line-of-battle ships were seen.
The wind freshening to half a gale, the _Pallas_ was standing on,
carrying all the sail she could, when it was found that the enemy were
gaining on her.  In this desperate emergency Lord Cochrane ordered every
stitch of sail to be suddenly taken in, and the three ships of the
enemy, one being on the weather, another on the lee beam, and the third
nearly on the weather quarter, unable to get their canvas off and haul
to the wind, shot miles away to leeward.  The _Pallas_ on this wore
round and made sail on the opposite tack.  The enemy, however, were soon
again in chase, but night coming on, a lantern in a cask was put
overboard, and the _Pallas_, altering her course, got clear of her
pursuers, and reached Plymouth in safety.  As he sailed up the harbour
Lord Cochrane had a gold candlestick, five feet in height, fixed to the
mast-head, and, as may be supposed, he never after this had any
difficulty in manning his ship, when gold candlesticks were to be picked
up, in addition to "pewter" and "cobs," the nickname given by seamen to
silver and dollars.  They have always been found ready to volunteer on
board dashing frigates sent to stations where such prizes were supposed
to abound.

The last important action was that known as the Battle of the Baltic.
Napoleon had induced the Northern powers of Denmark, Sweden, and Russia
to form a league, denominated an armed neutrality, for the French being
unable to keep the sea, he hoped under their flags to obtain provisions
and ammunition for his armies.  To counteract this formidable
confederacy, the English sent a fleet of 18 sail of the line, with a few
frigates, and a number of bomb-vessels and gunboats, in the first place
to attack the Danish fleet, and then to take in hand the other two
confederates.  After many delays, and attempts to induce the Danes to
come to terms, on the 2nd of April, 1801, a portion of the fleet, which
had been intrusted by Sir Hyde Parker to Lord Nelson, appeared before
Copenhagen, and commenced an attack on the floating batteries and forts
prepared by the Danes for the defence of their city.  There is not space
to give the details of the battle.  The Danes fought heroically, their
floating batteries being remanned over and over again from the shore.
After three hours' cannonading, from which both parties suffered
severely, Sir Hyde Parker, understanding that two of the British
line-of-battle ships were in distress, threw out a signal for
discontinuing the action.  On its being reported to Nelson, he shrugged
his shoulders, repeating the words, "Leave off action?  Now, damn me if
I do.  You know, Foley, I have only one eye--I have a right to be blind
sometimes;" then putting the glass to his blind eye, in that mood of
mind which sports with bitterness, he exclaimed, "I really do not see
the signal--keep mine for closer battle flying!  That's the way I answer
such signals.  Nail mine to the mast."

At 1:30 p.m. the Danish fire slackened, and at 2 p.m. ceased along
nearly the whole of the line.  Among the British officers who fell was
the gallant Captain Riou, who was cut in two while carrying his frigate,
the _Amazon_, into action.  After the flags of all the chief batteries
had been struck, some of the lighter vessels that had got adrift fired
on the boats which approached to take possession of them.  Nelson
prepared a letter to send to the Crown Prince of Denmark, threatening to
destroy the prizes unless this proceeding was put a stop to.  He
concluded his letter, "The brave Danes are the brothers and should never
be the enemies of England."  A wafer was then given him, but he ordered
a candle to be brought from the cock-pit, and sealed the letter with
wax, affixing a larger seal than is ordinarily used, remarking as he did
so, "This is no time to appear hurried and informal."

The remainder of the batteries having at length ceased firing, a flag of
truce arrived from the shore, when the action, which had continued for
five hours, was brought to a close, the total loss of killed being 255,
and of wounded 688.  The Danish loss amounted to between 1600 and 1800.
The result of the victory was the secession of Denmark from the league,
and the Emperor of Russia dying soon afterwards, the armed neutrality
was dissolved.

Napoleon now began to hope more ardently than ever that he should ere
long land his victorious legions on British ground.  To carry them over,
he had collected a large flotilla, chiefly at Boulogne.  By Lord
Nelson's orders, a desperate attempt was made by the boats of the
squadron to destroy them.  Some were gun brigs of between 200 and 250
tons; others were flats, vessels capable of carrying a crew of 30 men
and 150 soldiers, with either a mortar or a long 24-pounder, as well as
swivels and small-arms.  Though some few were captured, all attempts at
their destruction failed.  The British cruisers, however, kept too good
a watch to allow them to put to sea.

Numerous cutting-out expeditions took place during the war, in which
both officers and men displayed the greatest possible amount of courage
and determination.  One of the most daring and successful on record was
the capture of the French 20-gun ship-corvette _Chevrette_, while lying
under some batteries in Camaret Bay, by the boats of the _Doris_,
_Beaulieu_, and _Uremic_, forming part of the Channel Fleet under
Admiral Cornwallis, stationed off Brest Harbour.  At the first attempt
the boats were discovered, and the _Chevrette_ ran a mile and a-half
farther up the bay, and took on board a party of soldiers.
Notwithstanding this, the next night, the 21st, the boats of the three
frigates, joined by the barge and pinnace of the _Robust_, 74, amounting
in all to 15, and containing about 280 officers and men, under the
command of Lieutenant Losack, the second in command being Lieutenant
Keith Maxwell of the _Beaulieu_, left their ships at 9:30 p.m.  As they
were pulling into the bay, Lieutenant Losack, with six boats, went in
chase of a boat supposed to be sent as a look-out from the _Chevrette_,
and as he did not return, Lieutenant Maxwell proceeded on without him.
About 1 a.m. the flotilla coming in sight of the _Chevrette_, she opened
a heavy fire on them of grape and musketry, and at the same time they
were assailed by a fire of musketry from the shore.  Undaunted by this,
the British boarded the ship, some on the starboard bow and quarter, and
others on the larboard bow, bravely opposed by the Frenchmen, who were
armed with muskets and pistols, sabres, tomahawks, and pikes.  Some,
indeed, attempted to enter the boats, but were driven back by the
British, who, having lost their pistols and muskets, made their way
cutlass in hand.  Some who had been directed to loose the sails, fought
their way on to the corvette's yards.  Here they found the foot-ropes
strapped up, but, notwithstanding every obstacle, the sails were let
fall in less than three minutes after the boarders had gained the deck.
The cable having, in the meantime, been cut outside, a light breeze
blowing from the land, and the quartermaster of the _Beaulieu_, Henry
Wallis, fighting his way to the helm, and though bleeding from his
wounds, taking charge of the wheel, the ship drifted out of the bay.  On
seeing the canvas loose, some of the Frenchmen leaped overboard, and
others sprang down the hatchways, thus allowing the British to gain
possession of the quarter-deck and forecastle, now nearly covered with
the bodies of the slain.  For some time, however, the Frenchmen who had
fled below kept up a sharp fire of musketry, but the English, firing
down in return, compelled them to yield.  On her way out the prize was
exposed to a heavy fire of round and grape from the batteries, but, the
wind increasing, she got out of grape-shot.  Not till then did
Lieutenant Losack and his companions get on board.  Two officers were
killed, one of whom was Lieutenant Sinclair of the marines, while
defending Mr Crofton, a midshipman, who had been severely wounded while
boarding.  The other, Robert Warren, a midshipman.  Another, Lieutenant
Waller Burke, was mortally wounded.  Altogether, 11 were killed and 57
wounded, and I marine drowned in the _Beaulieu's_ barge, which was sunk
by a shot from the corvette.  The gallantry of the boatswain of the
_Beaulieu_, Mr John Brown, was also conspicuous.  After attempting to
force his way in to the _Chevrette's_ fore-quarter-gallery, he climbed
up over the taffrail, when standing up for some time exposed to the
enemy's fire, waving his cutlass, he shouted out, "Make a lane there;"
then, gallantly dashing among the Frenchmen, he fought his way to the
forecastle.  Here he continued driving back the French, who attempted to
regain the post, all the time carrying out the orders he received from
the quarter-deck, while he assisted in casting the ship and making sail
as coolly as if he had been carrying on duty under ordinary
circumstances.

During the war, which ended at the peace of Amiens, on the 27th of
March, 1802, England had captured 80 sail of the line, and numberless
other ships, besides various islands in the West Indies and other parts
of the world, from the French, Spaniards, and Dutch.  Though most of the
latter were given up, the navy of England had gained a renown which can
never be obliterated.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

GEORGE THE THIRD--FROM A.D. 1803 TO END OF WAR A.D. 1814.

The "piping times of peace" were not destined to last long.  Napoleon,
indeed, had never ceased making preparations for war from the time the
treaty of Amiens was signed.  On the 16th of May the British Government,
discovering his aims, issued letters of marque and ordered general
reprisals; and at the same time Holland, being in reality a province of
France, all ships belonging to the Batavian Republic in English ports
were detained.  Admiral Cornwallis, in command of the Channel Fleet, of
10 sail of the line and frigates, which was lying in Cawsand Bay, had
his flag flying on board the _Dreadnought_, 98.  With these he proceeded
the next day to cruise off Ushant, and watch the motions of the French
ships in Brest Harbour; other small squadrons being sent, as soon as
they were ready, off the other French ports, containing either ships of
the line or gunboats, of which Napoleon was collecting vast numbers for
the invasion of England.  In a short time that war, which was to last
ten years, commenced in earnest.  The French gunboats were, however,
kept pretty close prisoners by the English cruisers, and whenever any of
them ventured out from under the protection of their batteries, they
were attacked, captured, driven on shore, or compelled to seek shelter
in the nearest port under their lee; while many of them were gallantly
cut out and carried off in triumph, even when moored in positions where
they could receive assistance from the forts on shore.

Out of the numberless gallant deeds performed by the crews of boats and
small vessels engaged in this service, one must be instanced for its
singularity, and the bravery displayed by the commanding officer and his
followers.  A hired cutter, the _Sheerness_, carrying 8 4-pounders and
30 men and boys, under the command of Lieutenant Henry Rowed, while
watching Brest Harbour, observed two chasse-marees close inshore.
Having sent a boat with seven men and the mate to cut off one of them,
the commander proceeded in the cutter in chase of the other, which was
about five miles off, under the protection of a battery.  A calm coming
on, he, with the boatswain, John Marks, and three other men, jumped into
a small boat and pulled away for the chase.  The latter, after some
time, ran on shore under the battery, where thirty soldiers were
observed drawn up on the beach.  Notwithstanding the heavy fire they at
once opened, Lieutenant Rowed dashed alongside.  The Frenchmen having
deserted their vessel, he began making efforts to get her off; in this,
as the tide was rising, he at length succeeded, and going ahead in the
boat, towed her away from the shore.  He had pulled about a third of a
mile, when suddenly a French boat, with an officer and nine men armed
with muskets, were seen alongside, having pulled up in the wake of the
vessel.  Before the French could have time to attack them, John Marks
sprang on board the chasse-maree, and seizing a boat-stretcher, stood
prepared to prevent any of the enemy from getting up the side.  The
astonishment of the Frenchmen gave time to the lieutenant and his three
men to climb on board and to prepare their firearms and cutlasses.  The
French, who attempted to get up the side, were driven back, when they
sheered off, but discharged their muskets at the English as they pulled
away, while the battery also opened fire.  Wonderful as it may seem,
though forty-nine musket-balls were found sticking in the prize, not a
man was hurt; and both chasse-marees were carried off.

For some time the principal fighting was between the English cruisers in
the channel and the invasion flotilla, as Napoleon's gunboats were
called; and as their stings might annoy, though they could not inflict
serious injury, attempts were made to destroy them by fire-vessels or
catamarans--which was the name given to a species of nautical infernal
machine--though without much success.  The catamaran consisted of a
coffer of about 21 feet long and 3 and a half broad, somewhat in shape
like a log of mahogany, wedge-shaped at each end.  It was covered with
thick planking, and lined with lead, thoroughly caulked and tarred,
while over all was a coat of canvas, payed over with hot pitch.  To give
an idea of its size, the vessel weighed about two tons.  Inside was a
piece of clock-work, the mainspring of which, on withdrawing a peg
placed on the outside, would, after going six or ten minutes, draw the
trigger of a lock, and explode the vessel.  Every other part was filled
with about 40 barrels of gunpowder and other inflammable matter.  As
much ballast was placed in it as would keep the upper surface of the
deck even with the water's edge.  It had no mast, and had to be towed
towards the scene of its operations.  The tow-rope was at one end, and
to the other was fixed a rope with a grappling-iron at its extremity,
kept afloat by pieces of cork.  This grappling-iron, it was intended,
should hook itself to the cable of the vessel it was to destroy, and
thus swing the catamaran alongside.  It was, indeed, on a larger scale,
though with less destructive power, something like Harvey's torpedo of
the present day.

Lord Keith, who was with a squadron off Boulogne, first made use of four
of the machines, in the hopes of destroying some of a flotilla of 150
vessels moored in a double line outside the pier.  Three exploded one
after another, doing very little harm; but a heavily armed launch, which
had chased one of the boats towing a catamaran, ran foul of it, when the
launch and every one on board was blown into the air.

Numerous other engagements took place, and frequently the portions of
the flotilla moving from the different ports towards Boulogne were
severely handled by the British cruisers.  Occasionally, small English
vessels, venturing too close inshore for the purpose of attacking them,
were captured by the French.

At length Napoleon managed to collect a vast number of prames and
gun-vessels, with other craft, the whole flotilla amounting to 2293, of
which the larger were armed.  These were intended to carry 163,645 men,
of whom 16,783 were sailors, besides 9059 horses.  This flotilla was
organised in six grand divisions.  One, denominated the left wing, was
stationed at Etaples, to convey the troops under Marshal Ney from the
camp of Mottrieux.  Two other divisions were in the port of Boulogne, to
convey the troops from the two camps on either side of it, under Soult.
A fourth was at the port of Vimereux to carry the corps of Marshal
Lannes.  The Gallo-Batavian flotilla, assembled off Ambleteuse, formed
the fifth grand division, destined to transport the troops under Marshal
Davoust; while the sixth, at Calais, was to carry the Italian infantry,
and various divisions of mounted and dismounted dragoons.

On the 3rd of August, 1805, Napoleon came to Boulogne to inspect the
flotilla, and so completely organised was it by this time, that although
the extremities of the camps were more than two miles from the point of
embarkation, an hour and a-half only was occupied in getting men and
horses on board.  All he wanted was the arrival of his fleet under
Villeneuve, to protect his mighty flotilla during its passage across the
channel, and then, as his generals at all events believed, the conquest
of England was certain.

Meantime Nelson, who at the breaking out of the war had been appointed
to the command of the fleet in the Mediterranean, was watching
Villeneuve, resolved to prevent him from appearing on the spot where his
fleet was so anxiously looked for by Napoleon.  On the 18th of May,
1803, he had hoisted his flag on board his old ship, the _Victory_, and
on the 20th had sailed from Spithead, first bound to Brest, and from
thence to the Mediterranean.  Here he remained for nearly two years,
without once setting foot on shore, watching and waiting for the Toulon
fleet, endeavouring to induce them to come out and give him battle.  At
length, on the 18th of January, 1805, the French fleet did come out, but
a heavy gale blowing.  Nelson was then at anchor off the coast of
Sardinia.  Supposing that they had gone to Egypt, he sailed in chase,
but found that they had put back into Toulon.  Hence again Villeneuve
sailed, and escaping through the straits, was joined by the Spanish
fleet at Cadiz, which had 4500 troops on board.  The combined fleet of
the enemy now numbered 20 sail of the line and 10 frigates, while Nelson
had but 10 sail of the line and 3 frigates.  With these, however, he
chased Villeneuve to the West Indies, where, after threatening several
of the islands, he fled back to Europe, with Nelson after him.  When
about twenty leagues west of Finisterre, on the 22nd of July, the French
admiral was attacked by Sir Robert Calder, with 15 line-of-battle ships,
but escaped into Cadiz, with the loss of two of the Spanish ships.
Nelson, meantime, had sought the enemy on the north-west coast of
