scattered sand on the writing and pocketed the paper. "To-day you have
learned a very useful lesson which life teaches to most of us, namely,
that the inevitable must rule our little fancies. Let us see; I think
that by now the soldiers will have executed their task, so, as you have
done what I wished, you can go, for I shall know where to find you if I
want you. But, if you will take my advice, which I offer as that of one
friend to another, you will hold your tongue about the events of this
afternoon. Unless you speak of it, nobody need ever know that you have
furnished certain useful information, for in the Gevangenhuis the
names of witnesses are not mentioned to the accused. Otherwise you may
possibly come into trouble with your heretical friends and relatives.
Good afternoon. Brother, be so good as to open the door for this
gentleman."

A minute later Adrian found himself in the street, towards which he had
been helped by the kick of a heavy boot. His first impulse was to run,
and he ran for half a mile or more without stopping, till at length he
paused breathless in a deserted street, and, leaning against the wheel
of an unharnessed waggon, tried to think. Think! How could he think? His
mind was one mad whirl; rage, shame, disappointed passion, all boiled in
it like bones in a knacker's cauldron. He had been fooled, he had lost
his love, and, oh! infamy, he had betrayed his kindred to the hell of
the Inquisition. They would be tortured and burnt. Yes, even his mother
and Elsa might be burned, since those devils respected neither age nor
sex, and their blood would be upon his head. It was true that he had
signed under compulsion, but who would believe that, for had they not
taken down his talk word for word? For once Adrian saw himself as he
was; the cloaks of vanity and self-love were stripped from his soul, and
he knew what others would think when they came to learn the story. He
thought of suicide; there was water, here was steel, the deed would not
be difficult. No, he could not; it was too horrible. Moreover, how dared
he enter the other world so unprepared, so steeped in every sort of
evil? What, then, could he do to save his character and those whom his
folly had betrayed? He looked round him; there, not three hundred yards
away, rose the tall chimney of the factory. Perhaps there was yet time;
perhaps he could still warn Foy and Martin of the fate which awaited
them.

Acting on the impulse of the moment, Adrian started forward, running
like a hare. As he approached the building he saw that the workmen had
left, for the big doors were shut. He raced round to the small entrance;
it was open--he was through it, and figures were moving in the office.
God be praised! They were Foy and Martin. To them he sped, a white-faced
creature with gaping mouth and staring eyes, to look at more like a
ghost than a human being.

Martin and Foy saw him and shrank back. Could this be Adrian, they
thought, or was it an evil vision?

"Fly!" he gasped. "Hide yourselves! The officers of the Inquisition
are after you!" Then another thought struck him, and he stammered, "My
father and mother. I must warn them!" and before they could speak he had
turned and was gone, as he went crying, "Fly! Fly!"

Foy stood astonished till Martin struck him on the shoulder, and said
roughly:

"Come, let us get out of this. Either he is mad, or he knows something.
Have you your sword and dagger? Quick, then."

They passed through the door, which Martin paused to lock, and into the
courtyard. Foy reached the gate first, and looked through its open bars.
Then very deliberately he shot the bolts and turned the great key.

"Are you brain-sick," asked Martin, "that you lock the gate on us?"

"I think not," replied Foy, as he came back to him. "It is too late to
escape. Soldiers are marching down the street."

Martin ran and looked through the bars. It was true enough. There
they came, fifty men or more, a whole company, headed straight for the
factory, which it was thought might be garrisoned for defence.

"Now I can see no help but to fight for it," Martin said cheerfully, as
he hid the keys in the bucket of the well, which he let run down to the
water.

"What can two men do against fifty?" asked Foy, lifting his steel-lined
cap to scratch his head.

"Not much, still, with good luck, something. At least, as nothing but a
cat can climb the walls, and the gateway is stopped, I think we may as
well die fighting as in the torture-chamber of the Gevangenhuis, for
that is where they mean to lodge us."

"I think so too," answered Foy, taking courage. "Now how can we hurt
them most before they quiet us?"

Martin looked round reflectively. In the centre of the courtyard stood a
building not unlike a pigeon-house, or the shelter that is sometimes set
up in the middle of a market beneath which merchants gather. In fact it
was a shot tower, where leaden bullets of different sizes were cast and
dropped through an opening in the floor into a shallow tank below to
cool, for this was part of the trade of the foundry.

"That would be a good place to hold," he said; "and crossbows hang upon
the walls."

Foy nodded, and they ran to the tower, but not without being seen, for
as they set foot upon its stair, the officer in command of the soldiers
called upon them to surrender in the name of the King. They made
no answer, and as they passed through the doorway, a bullet from an
arquebus struck its woodwork.

The shot tower stood upon oaken piles, and the chamber above, which was
round, and about twenty feet in diameter, was reached by a broad ladder
of fifteen steps, such as is often used in stables. This ladder ended
in a little landing of about six feet square, and to the left of the
landing opened the door of the chamber where the shot were cast. They
went up into the place.

"What shall we do now?" said Foy, "barricade the door?"

"I can see no use in that," answered Martin, "for then they would batter
it down, or perhaps burn a way through it. No; let us take it off its
hinges and lay it on blocks about eight inches high, so that they may
catch their shins against it when they try to rush us."

"A good notion," said Foy, and they lifted off the narrow oaken door and
propped it up on four moulds of metal across the threshold, weighting
it with other moulds. Also they strewed the floor of the landing with
three-pound shot, so that men in a hurry might step on them and fall.
Another thing they did, and this was Foy's notion. At the end of the
chamber were the iron baths in which the lead was melted, and beneath
them furnaces ready laid for the next day's founding. These Foy set
alight, pulling out the dampers to make them burn quickly, and so melt
the leaden bars which lay in the troughs.

"They may come underneath," he said, pointing to the trap through which
the hot shot were dropped into the tank, "and then molten lead will be
useful."

Martin smiled and nodded. Then he took down a crossbow from the walls,
for in those days, when every dwelling and warehouse might have to
be used as a place of defence, it was common to keep a good store of
weapons hung somewhere ready to hand, and went to the narrow window
which overlooked the gate.

"As I thought," he said. "They can't get in and don't like the look of
the iron spikes, so they are fetching a smith to burst it open. We must
wait."

Very soon Foy began to fidget, for this waiting to be butchered by an
overwhelming force told upon his nerves. He thought of Elsa and his
parents, whom he would never see again; he thought of death and all the
terrors and wonders that might lie beyond it; death whose depths he must
so soon explore. He had looked to his crossbow, had tested the string
and laid a good store of quarrels on the floor beside him; he had taken
a pike from the walls and seen to its shaft and point; he had stirred
the fires beneath the leaden bars till they roared in the sharp draught.

"Is there nothing more to do?" he asked.

"Yes," replied Martin, "we might say our prayers; they will be the
last," and suiting his action to the word, the great man knelt down, an
example which Foy followed.

"Do you speak," said Foy, "I can't think of anything."

So Martin began a prayer which is perhaps worthy of record:--

"O Lord," he said, "forgive me all my sins, which are too many to count,
or at least I haven't the time to try, and especially for cutting off
the head of the executioner with his own sword, although I had no death
quarrel with him, and for killing a Spaniard in a boxing match. O Lord,
I thank you very much because you have arranged for us to die fighting
instead of being tortured and burnt in the gaol, and I pray that we
may be able to kill enough Spaniards first to make them remember us for
years to come. O Lord, protect my dear master and mistress, and let the
former learn that we have made an end of which he would approve, but if
may be, hide it from the Paster Arentz, who might think that we ought to
surrender. That is all I have to say. Amen."

Then Foy did his own praying, and it was hearty enough, but we need
scarcely stop to set down its substance.

Meanwhile the Spaniards had found a blacksmith, who was getting to work
upon the gate, for they could see him through the open upper bars.

"Why don't you shoot?" asked Foy. "You might catch him with a bolt."

"Because he is a poor Dutchman whom they have pressed for the job, while
they stand upon one side. We must wait till they break down the gate.
Also we must fight well when the time comes, Master Foy, for, see, folk
are watching us, and they will expect it," and he pointed upwards.

Foy looked. The foundry courtyard was surrounded by tall gabled houses,
and of these the windows and balconies were already crowded with
spectators. Word had gone round that the Inquisition had sent soldiers
to seize one of the young Van Goorls and Red Martin--that they were
battering at the gates of the factory. Therefore the citizens, some of
them their own workmen, gathered there, for they did not think that Red
Martin and Foy van Goorl would be taken easily.

The hammering at the gate went on, but it was very stout and would not
give.

"Martin," said Foy presently, "I am frightened. I feel quite sick. I
know that I shall be no good to you when the pinch comes."

"Now I am sure that you are a brave man," answered Martin with a short
laugh, "for otherwise you would never have owned that you feel afraid.
Of course you feel afraid, and so do I. It is the waiting that does it;
but when once the first blow has been struck, why, you will be as happy
as a priest. Look you, master. So soon as they begin to rush the ladder,
do you get behind me, close behind, for I shall want all the room to
sweep with my sword, and if we stand side by side we shall only hinder
each other, while with a pike you can thrust past me, and be ready to
deal with any who win through."

"You mean that you want to shelter me with your big carcase," answered
Foy. "But you are captain here. At least I will do my best," and putting
his arms about the great man's middle, he hugged him affectionately.

"Look! look!" cried Martin. "The gate is down. Now, first shot to you,"
and he stepped to one side.

As he spoke the oaken doors burst open and the Spanish soldiers began
to stream through them. Suddenly Foy's nerve returned to him and he grew
steady as a rock. Lifting his crossbow he aimed and pulled the trigger.
The string twanged, the quarrel rushed forth with a whistling sound,
and the first soldier, pierced through breastplate and through breast,
sprang into the air and fell forward. Foy stepped to one side to string
his bow.

"Good shot," said Martin taking his place, while from the spectators in
the windows went up a sudden shout. Martin fired and another man fell.
Then Foy fired again and missed, but Martin's next bolt struck the last
soldier through the arm and pinned him to the timber of the broken gate.
After this they could shoot no more, for the Spaniards were beneath
them.

"To the doorway," said Martin, "and remember what I told you. Away with
the bows, cold steel must do the rest."

Now they stood by the open door, Martin, a helmet from the walls upon
his head, tied beneath his chin with a piece of rope because it was too
small for him, the great sword Silence lifted ready to strike, and
Foy behind gripping the long pike with both hands. Below them from the
gathered mob of soldiers came a confused clamour, then a voice called
out an order and they heard footsteps on the stair.

"Look out; they are coming," said Martin, turning his head so that Foy
caught sight of his face. It was transfigured, it was terrible. The
great red beard seemed to bristle, the pale blue unshaded eyes rolled
and glittered, they glittered like the blue steel of the sword Silence
that wavered above them. In that dread instant of expectancy Foy
remembered his vision of the morning. Lo! it was fulfilled, for before
him stood Martin, the peaceful, patient giant, transformed into a Red
Vengeance.

A man reached the head of the ladder, stepped upon one of the loose
cannon-balls and fell with an oath and a crash. But behind him came
others. Suddenly they turned the corner, suddenly they burst into view,
three or four of them together. Gallantly they rushed on. The first of
them caught his feet in the trap of the door and fell headlong across
it. Of him Martin took no heed, but Foy did, for before ever the soldier
could rise he had driven his pike down between the man's shoulders, so
that he died there upon the door. At the next Martin struck, and Foy
saw this one suddenly grow small and double up, which, if he had found
leisure to examine the nature of that wound, would have surprised him
very little. Another man followed so quickly that Martin could not lift
the sword to meet him. But he pointed with it, and next instant was
shaking his carcase off its blade.

After this Foy could keep no count. Martin slashed with the sword, and
when he found a chance Foy thrust with the pike, till at length there
were none to thrust at, for this was more than the Spaniards had
bargained. Two of them lay dead in the doorway, and others had been
dragged or had tumbled down the ladder, while from the onlookers at the
windows without, as they caught sight of them being brought forth slain
or sorely wounded, went up shout upon shout of joy.

"So far we have done very well," said Martin quietly, "but if they come
up again, we must be cooler and not waste our strength so much. Had I
not struck so hard, I might have killed another man."

But the Spaniards showed no sign of coming up any more; they had seen
enough of that narrow way and of the red swordsman who awaited them in
the doorway round the corner. Indeed it was a bad place for attackers,
since they could not shoot with arquebuses or arrows, but must pass in
to be slaughtered like sheep at the shambles in the dim room beyond. So,
being cautious men who loved their lives, they took a safer counsel.

The tank beneath the shot-tower, when it was not in use, was closed
with a stone cover, and around this they piled firewood and peats from
a stack in the corner of the yard, and standing in the centre out of the
reach of arrows, set light to it. Martin lay down watching them through
a crack in the floor. Then he signed to Foy, and whispered, and going
to the iron baths, Foy drew from them two large buckets of molten lead,
each as much as a man could carry. Again Martin looked through the
crack, waiting till several of the burners were gathered beneath. Then,
with a swift motion he lifted up the trap-door, and as those below
stared upwards wondering, full into their faces came the buckets of
molten lead. Down went two of them never to speak more, while others ran
out shrieking and aflame, tearing at their hair and garments.

After this the Spaniards grew more wary, and built their fires round
the oak piers till the flames eating up them fired the building, and the
room above grew full of little curling wreaths of smoke.

"Now we must choose," said Martin, "whether we will be roasted like
fowls in an oven, or go down and have our throats cut like pigs in the
open."

"For my part, I prefer to die in the air," coughed Foy.

"So say I, master. Listen. We can't get down the stair, for they are
watching for us there, so we must drop from the trap-door and charge
through the fire. Then, if we are lucky, back to back and fight it out."

Half a minute later two men bearing naked swords in their hands might be
seen bursting through the barrier of flaming wood. Out they came safely
enough, and there in an open space not far from the gateway, halted
back to back, rubbing the water from their smarting eyes. On them, a
few seconds later, like hounds on a wounded boar, dashed the mob of
soldiers, while from every throat of the hundreds who were watching went
up shrill cries of encouragement, grief, and fear. Men fell before them,
but others rushed in. They were down, they were up again, once more they
were down, and this time only one of them rose, the great man Martin. He
staggered to his feet, shaking off the soldiers who tried to hold him,
as a dog in the game-pit shakes off rats. He was up, he stood across
the body of his companion, and once more that fearful sword was sweeping
round, bringing death to all it touched. They drew back, but a soldier,
old in war, creeping behind him suddenly threw a cloak over his head.
Then the end came, and slowly, very slowly, they overmatched his
strength, and bore him down and bound him, while the watching mob
groaned and wept with grief.



CHAPTER XX

IN THE GEVANGENHUIS

When Adrian left the factory he ran on to the house in the Bree Straat.

"Oh! what has happened?" said his mother as he burst into the room where
she and Elsa were at work.

"They are coming for him," he gasped. "The soldiers from the
Gevangenhuis. Where is he? Let him escape quickly--my stepfather."

Lysbeth staggered and fell back into her chair.

"How do you know?" she asked.

At the question Adrian's head swam and his heart stood still. Yet his
lips found a lie.

"I overheard it," he said; "the soldiers are attacking Foy and Martin in
the factory, and I heard them say that they were coming here for him."

Elsa moaned aloud, then she turned on him like a tiger, asking:

"If so, why did you not stay to help them?"

"Because," he answered with a touch of his old pomposity, "my first duty
was towards my mother and you."

"He is out of the house," broke in Lysbeth in a low voice that was
dreadful to hear. "He is out of the house, I know not where. Go, son,
and search for him. Swift! Be swift!"

So Adrian went forth, not sorry to escape the presence of these
tormented women. Here and there he wandered to one haunt of Dirk's after
another, but without success, till at length a noise of tumult drew him,
and he ran towards the sound. Presently he was round the corner, and
this was what he saw.

Advancing down the wide street leading to the Gevangenhuis came a body
of Spanish soldiers, and in the centre of them were two figures whom
it was easy for Adrian to recognise--Red Martin and his brother Foy.
Martin, although his bull-hide jerkin was cut and slashed and his helmet
had gone, seemed to be little hurt, for he was still upright and proud,
walking along with his arms lashed behind him, while a Spanish officer
held the point of a sword, his own sword Silence, near his throat ready
to drive it home should he attempt to escape. With Foy the case was
different. At first Adrian thought that he was dead, for they were
carrying him upon a ladder. Blood fell from his head and legs, while
his doublet seemed literally to be rent to pieces with sword-cuts and
dagger-thrusts; and in truth had it not been for the shirt of mail which
he wore beneath, he must have been slain several times over. But Foy was
not dead, for as Adrian watched he saw his head turn upon the ladder and
his hand rise up and fall again.

But this was not all, for behind appeared a cart drawn by a grey horse,
and in it were the bodies of Spanish soldiers--how many Adrian could not
tell, but there they lay with their harness still on them. After these
again, in a long and melancholy procession, marched other Spanish
soldiers, some of them sorely wounded, and, like Foy, carried upon doors
or ladders, and others limping forward with the help of their comrades.
No wonder that Martin walked proudly to his doom, since behind him came
the rich harvest of the sword Silence. Also, there were other signs to
see and hear, since about the cavalcade surged and roared a great mob of
the citizens of Leyden.

"Bravo, Martin! Well fought, Foy van Goorl!" they shouted, "We are proud
of you! We are proud of you!" Then from the back of the crowd someone
cried, "Rescue them!" "Kill the Inquisition dogs!" "Tear the Spaniards
to pieces!"

A stone flew through the air, then another and another, but at a word of
command the soldiers faced about and the mob drew back, for they had
no leader. So it went on till they were within a hundred yards of the
Gevangenhuis.

"Don't let them be murdered," cried the voice. "A rescue! a rescue!" and
with a roar the crowd fell upon the soldiers. It was too late, for the
Spaniards, trained to arms, closed up and fought their way through,
taking their prisoners with them. But they cost them dear, for the
wounded men, and those who supported them, were cut off. They were cut
off, they were struck down. In a minute they were dead, every one of
them, and although they still held its fortresses and walls, from that
hour the Spaniards lost their grip of Leyden, nor did they ever win it
back again. From that hour to this Leyden has been free. Such were the
first fruits of the fight of Foy and Martin against fearful odds.

The great doors of oak and iron of the Gevangenhuis clashed to behind
the prisoners, the locks were shot, and the bars fell home, while
outside raved the furious crowd.

The place was not large nor very strong, merely a drawbridge across the
narrow arm of a moat, a gateway with a walled courtyard beyond, and over
it a three-storied house built in the common Dutch fashion, but with
straight barrel windows. To the right, under the shadow of the archway,
which, space being limited, was used as an armoury, and hung with
weapons, lay the court-room where prisoners were tried, and to the left
a vaulted place with no window, not unlike a large cellar in appearance.
This was the torture-chamber. Beyond was the courtyard, and at the back
of it rose the prison. In this yard were waiting the new governor of the
jail, Ramiro, and with him a little red-faced, pig-eyed man dressed in
a rusty doublet. He was the Inquisitor of the district, especially
empowered as delegate of the Blood Council and under various edicts and
laws to try and to butcher heretics.

The officer in command of the troops advanced to make his report.

"What is all that noise?" asked the Inquisitor in a frightened, squeaky
voice. "Is this city also in rebellion?"

"And where are the rest of you?" said Ramiro, scanning the thin files.

"Sir," answered the officer saluting, "the rest of us are dead. Some
were killed by this red rogue and his companion, and the mob have the
others."

Then Ramiro began to curse and to swear, as well he might, for he knew
that when this story reached headquarters, his credit with Alva and the
Blood Council would be gone.

"Coward!" he yelled, shaking his fist in the face of the officer.
"Coward to lose a score or more of men in taking a brace of heretics."

"Don't blame me, sir," answered the man sullenly, for the word stirred
his bile, "blame the mob and this red devil's steel, which went through
us as though we were wet clay," and he handed him the sword Silence.

"It fits the man," muttered Montalvo, "for few else could wield such a
blade. Go hang it in the doorway, it may be wanted in evidence," but to
himself he thought, "Bad luck again, the luck that follows me whenever I
pit myself against Lysbeth van Hout." Then he gave an order, and the two
prisoners were taken away up some narrow stairs.

At the top of the first flight was a solid door through which they
passed, to find themselves in a large and darksome place. Down the
centre of this place ran a passage. On either side of the passage, dimly
lighted by high iron-barred windows, were cages built of massive oaken
bars, and measuring each of them eight or ten feet square, very dens
such as might have served for wild beasts, but filled with human beings
charged with offences against the doctrines of the Church. Those who
chance to have seen the prison of the Inquisition at The Hague as it
still stands to-day, will know what they were like.

Into one of these dreadful holes they were thrust, Foy, wounded as he
was, being thrown roughly upon a heap of dirty straw in the corner.
Then, having bolted and locked the door of their den, the soldiers left
them.

As soon as his eyes grew accustomed to the light, Martin stared about
him. The conveniences of the dungeon were not many; indeed, being built
above the level of the ground, it struck the imagination as even more
terrible than any subterranean vault devoted to the same dreadful
purpose. By good fortune, however, in one corner of it stood an
earthenware basin and a large jug of water.

"I will take the risk of its being poisoned," thought Martin to himself,
as lifting the jug he drank deep of it, for what between fighting, fire
and fury there seemed to be no moisture left in him. Then, his burning
thirst satisfied at last, he went to where Foy lay unconscious and began
to pour water, little by little, into his mouth, which, senseless as he
was, he swallowed mechanically and presently groaned a little. Next,
as well as he could, Martin examined his comrade's wounds, to find that
what had made him insensible was a cut upon the right side of the head,
which, had it not been for his steel-lined cap, must certainly have
killed him, but as it was, beyond the shock and bruise, seemed in no way
serious.

His second hurt was a deep wound in the left thigh, but being on the
outside of the limb, although he bled much it had severed no artery.
Other injuries he had also upon the forearms and legs, also beneath the
chain shirt his body was bruised with the blows of swords and daggers.
But none of these were dangerous.

Martin stripped him as tenderly as he might and washed his wounds. Then
he paused, for both of them were wearing garments of flannel, which is
unsuitable for the dressing of hurts.

"You need linen," said a woman's voice, speaking from the next den.
"Wait awhile and I will give you my smock."

"How can I take your garment, lady, whoever you may be," answered
Martin, "to bind about the limbs of a man even if he is wounded?"

"Take it and welcome," said the unknown in sweet, low tones, "I want it
no more; they are going to execute me to-night."

"Execute you to-night?" muttered Martin.

"Yes," replied the voice, "in the court-room or one of the cellars,
I believe, as they dare not do it outside because of the people. By
beheading--am I not fortunate? Only by beheading."

"Oh! God, where art Thou?" groaned Martin.

"Don't be sorry for me," answered the voice, "I am very glad. There were
three of us, my father, my sister, and I, and--you can guess--well, I
wish to join them. Also it is better to die than to go through what I
have suffered again. But here is the garment. I fear that it is stained
about the neck, but it will serve if you tear it into strips," and a
trembling, delicate hand, which held the linen, was thrust between the
oaken bars.

Even in that light, however, Martin saw that the wrist was cut and
swollen. He saw it, and because of that tender, merciful hand he
registered an oath about priests and Spaniards, which, as it chanced, he
lived to keep very thoroughly. Also, he paused awhile wondering whether
if all this was of any good, wondering if it would not be best to let
Foy die at once, or even to kill him.

"What are you thinking about, sir?" asked the lady on the other side of
the bars.

"I am thinking," answered Martin, "that perhaps my young master here
would be better dead, and that I am a fool to stop the bleeding."

"No, no," said the sweet voice, "do your utmost and leave the rest to
God. It pleases God that I should die, which matters little as I am but
a weak girl; it may please Him that this young man shall live to be of
service to his country and his faith. I say, bind up his wounds, good
sir."

"Perhaps you are right," answered Martin. "Who knows, there's a key to
every lock, if only it can be found." Then he set to work upon Foy's
wounds, binding them round with strips of the girl's garment dipped in
water, and when he had done the best he could he clothed him again, even
to the chain shirt.

"Are you not hurt yourself?" asked the voice presently.

"A little, nothing to speak of; a few cuts and bruises, that's all; this
bull's hide turned their swords."

"Tell me whom you have been fighting," she said.

So, to while away the time while Foy still lay senseless, Martin told
her the story of the attack upon the shot tower, of how they had driven
the Spaniards down the ladder, of how they had drenched them with molten
lead, and of their last stand in the courtyard when they were forced
from the burning building.

"Oh! what a fearful fight--two against so many," said the voice with a
ring of admiration in it.

"Yes," answered Martin, "it was a good fight--the hottest that ever I
was in. For myself I don't much care, for they've paid a price for my
