Halbert Glendinning soon recognized Christie of the Clinthill, and made
his companion aware that the henchman of Julian Avenel was approaching.

"Ha, youngling!" said Christie to Halbert, as he came up to them, "thou
hast made good my word at last, and come to take service with my noble
master, hast thou not? Thou shalt find a good friend and a true; and
ere Saint Barnaby come round again, thou shalt know every pass betwixt
Millburn Plain and Netherby, as if thou hadst been born with a jack
on thy back, and a lance in thy hand.--What old carle hast thou with
thee?--He is not of the brotherhood of Saint Mary's--at least he has
not the buist [Footnote: _Buist_--The brand, or mark, set upon sheep or
cattle, by their owners.] of these black cattle."

"He is a wayfaring man," said Halbert, "who has concerns with Julian of
Avenel. For myself, I intend to go to Edinburgh to see the court and the
Queen, and when I return hither we will talk of your proffer. Meantime,
as thou hast often invited me to the castle, I crave hospitality there
to-night for myself and my companion."

"For thyself and welcome, young comrade," replied Christie; "but we
harbour no pilgrims, nor aught that looks like a pilgrim."

"So please you," said Warden, "I have letters of commendation to thy
master from a sure friend, whom he will right willingly oblige in higher
matters than in affording me a brief protection.--And I am no pilgrim,
but renounce the same, with all its superstitious observances." He
offered his letters to the horseman, who shook his head.

"These," he said, "are matters for my master, and it will be well if he
can read them himself; for me, sword and lance are my book and psalter,
and have been since I was twelve years old. But I will guide you to the
castle, and the Baron of Avenel will himself judge of your errand."

By this time the party had reached the causeway, along which Christie
advanced at a trot, intimating his presence to the warders within the
castle by a shrill and peculiar whistle. At this signal the farther
drawbridge was lowered. The horseman passed it, and disappeared under
the gloomy portal which was beyond it.

Glendinning and his companion advancing more leisurely along the rugged
causeway, stood at length under the same gateway, over which frowned,
in dark red freestone, the ancient armorial bearings of the house of
Avenel, which represented a female figure shrouded and muffled, which
occupied the whole field. The cause of their assuming so singular a
device was uncertain, but the figure was generally supposed to represent
the mysterious being called the White Lady of Avenel. [Footnote: There
is an ancient English family, I believe, which bears, or did bear, a
ghost or spirit passant sable in a field argent. This seems to have been
a device of a punning or _canting_ herald.] The sight of this mouldering
shield awakened in the mind of Halbert the strange circumstances which
had connected his fate with that of Mary Avenel, and with the doings of
the spiritual being who was attached to her house, and whom he saw
here, represented in stone, as he had before seen her effigy upon
the seal-ring of Walter Avenel, which, with other trinkets formerly
mentioned, had been saved from pillage, and brought to Glendearg, when
Mary's mother was driven from her habitation.

"You sigh, my son," said the old man, observing the impression made on
his youthful companion's countenance, but mistaking the cause; "if you
fear to enter, we may yet return."

"That can ye not," said Christie of the Clinthill, who emerged at that
instant from the side-door under the archway. "Look yonder, and choose
whether you will return skimming the water like a wild-duck, or winging
the air like a plover."

They looked, and saw that the drawbridge which they had just crossed was
again raised, and now interposed its planks betwixt the setting sun and
the portal of the castle, deepening the gloom of the arch under which
they stood. Christie laughed and bid them follow him, saying, by way of
encouragement, in Halbert's ear, "Answer boldly and readily to whatever
the Baron asks you. Never stop to pick your words, and above all show no
fear of him--the devil is not so black as he is painted."

As he spoke thus, he introduced them into the large stone hall, at the
upper end of which blazed a huge fire of wood. The long oaken table,
which, as usual, occupied the midst of the apartment, was covered
with rude preparations for the evening meal of the Baron and his chief
domestics, five or six of whom, strong, athletic, savage-looking men,
paced up and down the lower end of the hall, which rang to the jarring
clang of their long swords that clashed as they moved, and to the heavy
tramp of their high-heeled jack-boots. Iron jacks, or coats of buff,
formed the principal part of their dress, and steel-bonnets, or large
slouched hats with Spanish plumes drooping backwards, were their head
attire.

The Baron of Avenel was one of those tall, muscular, martial figures,
which are the favourite subjects of Salvator Rosa. He wore a cloak
which had been once gaily trimmed, but which, by long wear and
frequent exposure to the weather, was now faded in its colours. Thrown
negligently about his tall person, it partly hid, and partly showed, a
short doublet of buff, under which was in some places visible that light
shirt of mail which was called a _secret_, because worn instead of more
ostensible armour to protect against private assassination. A leathern
belt sustained a large and heavy sword on one side, and on the other
that gay poniard which had once called Sir Piercie Shafton master, of
which the hatchments and gildings were already much defaced, either by
rough usage or neglect.

Notwithstanding the rudeness of his apparel, Julian Avenel's manner
and countenance had far more elevation than those of the attendants
who surrounded him. He might be fifty or upwards, for his dark hair was
mingled with gray, but age had neither tamed the fire of his eye nor the
enterprise of his disposition. His countenance had been handsome, for
beauty was an attribute of the family; but the lines were roughened by
fatigue and exposure to the weather, and rendered coarse by the habitual
indulgence of violent passions.

He seemed in deep and moody reflection, and was pacing at a distance
from his dependents along the upper end of the hall, sometimes stopping
from time to time to caress and feed a gos-hawk, which sat upon his
wrist, with its jesses (_i. e._ the leathern straps fixed to its legs)
wrapt around his hand. The bird, which seemed not insensible to its
master's attention, answered his caresses by ruffling forward its
feathers, and pecking playfully at his finger. At such intervals
the Baron smiled, but instantly resumed the darksome air of sullen
meditation. He did not even deign to look upon an object, which few
could have passed and repassed so often without bestowing on it a
transient glance.

This was a woman of exceeding beauty, rather gaily than richly attired,
who sat on a low seat close by the huge hall chimney. The gold chains
round her neck and arms,--the gay gown of green which swept the
floor,--the silver embroidered girdle, with its bunch of keys, depending
in house-wifely pride by a silver chain,--the yellow silken _couvrechef_
(Scottice, _curch_) which was disposed around her head, and partly
concealed her dark profusion of hair,--above all, the circumstance so
delicately touched in the old ballad, that "the girdle was too short,"
the "gown of green all too strait," for the wearer's present shape,
would have intimated the Baron's lady. But then the lowly seat,--the
expression of deep melancholy, which was changed into a timid smile
whenever she saw the least chance of catching the eye of Julian
Avenel,--the subdued look of grief, and the starting tear for which
that constrained smile was again exchanged when she saw herself entirely
disregarded,--these were not the attributes of a wife, or they were
those of a dejected and afflicted female, who had yielded her love on
less than legitimate terms.

Julian Avenel, as we have said, continued to pace the hall without
paying any of that mute attention which is rendered to almost every
female either by affection or courtesy. He seemed totally unconscious of
her presence, or of that of his attendants, and was only roused from
his own dark reflections by the notice he paid to the falcon, to which,
however, the lady seemed to attend, as if studying to find either
an opportunity of speaking to the Baron, or of finding something
enigmatical in the expressions which he used to the bird. All this the
strangers had time enough to remark; for no sooner had they entered the
apartment than their usher, Christie of the Clinthill, after exchanging
a significant glance with the menials or troopers at the lower end of
the apartment, signed to Halbert Glendinning and to his companion to
stand still near the door, while he himself, advancing nearer the table,
placed himself in such a situation as to catch the Baron's observation
when he should be disposed to look around, but without presuming to
intrude himself on his master's notice. Indeed, the look of this man,
naturally bold, hardy, and audacious, seemed totally changed when he
was in presence of his master, and resembled the dejected and cowering
manner of a quarrelsome dog when rebuked by his owner, or when he finds
himself obliged to deprecate the violence of a superior adversary of his
own species.

In spite of the novelty of his own situation, and every painful feeling
connected with it, Halbert felt his curiosity interested in the female,
who sate by the chimney unnoticed and unregarded. He marked with what
keen and trembling solicitude she watched the broken words of Julian,
and how her glance stole towards him, ready to be averted upon the
slightest chance of his perceiving himself to be watched.

Meantime he went on with his dalliance with his feathered favourite, now
giving, now withholding, the morsel with which he was about to feed the
bird, and so exciting its appetite and gratifying it by turns. "What!
more yet?--thou foul kite, thou wouldst never have done--give thee part
thou wilt have all--Ay, prune thy feathers, and prink thyself gay--much
thou wilt make of it now--dost think I know thee not?--dost think I see
not that all that ruffling and pluming of wing and feathers is not
for thy master, but to try what thou canst make of him, thou greedy
gled?--well--there--take it then, and rejoice thyself--little boon goes
far with thee, and with all thy sex--and so it should."

He ceased to look on the bird, and again traversed the apartment. Then
taking another small piece of raw meat from the trencher, on which it
was placed ready cut for his use, he began once again to tempt and tease
the bird, by offering and withdrawing it, until he awakened its wild and
bold disposition. "What! struggling, fluttering, aiming at me with beak
and single? [Footnote: In the _kindly_ language of hawking, as Lady
Juliana Berners terms it, hawks' talons are called their _singles_]
So la! So la! wouldst mount? wouldst fly? the jesses are round thy
clutches, fool--thou canst neither stir nor soar but by my will--Beware
thou come to reclaim, wench, else I will wring thy head off one of these
days--Well, have it then, and well fare thou with it.--So ho, Jenkin!"
One of the attendants stepped forward--"Take the foul gled hence to
the mew--or, stay; leave her, but look well to her casting and to her
bathing--we will see her fly to-morrow.--How now, Christie, so soon
returned?"

Christie advanced to his master, and gave an account of himself and his
journey, in the way in which a police-officer holds communication with
his magistrate, that is, as much by signs as by words.

"Noble sir," said that worthy satellite, "the Laird of--," he named no
place, but pointed with his finger in a south-western direction,--
"may not ride with you the day he purposed, because the Lord Warden has
threatened that he will--"

Here another blank, intelligibly enough made up by the speaker touching
his own neck with his left fore-finger, and leaning his head a little to
one side.

"Cowardly caitiff!" said Julian; "by Heaven! the whole world turns sheer
naught--it is not worth a brave man's living in--ye may ride a day and
night, and never see a feather wave or hear a horse prance--the spirit
of our fathers is dead amongst us--the very brutes are degenerated--the
cattle we bring at our life's risk are mere carrion--our hawks are
riflers [Footnote: So called when they only caught their prey by the
feathers.]--our hounds are turnspits and trindle-tails--our men are
women--and our women are--"

He looked at the female for the first time, and stopped short in
the midst of what he was about to say, though there was something so
contemptuous in the glance, that the blank might have been thus filled
up--"Our women are such as she is."

He said it not, however, and as if desirous of attracting his attention
at all risks, and in whatever manner, she rose and came forward to him,
but with a timorousness ill-disguised by affected gaiety.--"Our women,
Julian--what would you say of the women?"

"Nothing," answered Julian Avenel, "at least nothing but that they are
kind-hearted wenches like thyself, Kate." The female coloured deeply,
and returned to her seat.--"And what strangers hast thou brought with
thee, Christie, that stand yonder like two stone statues?" said the
Baron.

"The taller," answered Christie, "is, so please you, a young fellow
called Halbert Glendinning, the eldest son of the old widow at
Glendearg."

"What brings him here?" said the Baron; "hath he any message from Mary
Avenel?"

"Not as I think," said Christie; "the youth is roving the country--he
was always a wild slip, for I have known him since he was the height of
my sword."

"What qualities hath he?" said the Baron.

"All manner of qualities," answered his follower--"he can strike a buck,
track a deer, fly a hawk, halloo to a hound--he shoots in the long
and crossbow to a hair's breadth--wields a lance or sword like myself
nearly--backs a horse manfully and fairly--I wot not what more a man
need to do to make him a gallant companion."

"And who," said the Baron, "is the old miser [Footnote: Miser, used in
the sense in which it often occurs in Spenser, and which is indeed its
literal import--"wretched old man."] who stands beside him?"

"Some cast of a priest as I fancy--he says he is charged with letters to
you."

"Bid them come forward," said the Baron; and no sooner had they
approached him more nearly, than, struck by the fine form and strength
displayed by Halbert Glendinning, he addressed him thus: "I am told,
young Swankie, that you are roaming the world to seek your fortune,--if
you will serve Julian Avenel, you may find it without going farther."

"So please you," answered Glendinning, "something has chanced to me that
makes it better I should leave this land, and I am bound for Edinburgh."

"What!--thou hast stricken some of the king's deer, I warrant,--or
lightened the meadows of Saint Mary's of some of their beeves--or thou
hast taken a moonlight leap over the border?"

"No, sir," said Halbert, "my case is entirely different."

"Then I warrant thee," said the Baron, "thou hast stabbed some brother
churl in a fray about a wench--thou art a likely lad to wrangle in such
a cause."

Ineffably disgusted at his tone and manner, Halbert Glendinning remained
silent, while the thought darted across his mind, what would Julian
Avenel have said, had he known the quarrel of which he spoke so lightly,
had arisen on account of his own brother's daughter! "But be thy cause
of flight what it will," said Julian, in continuation, "dost thou think
the law or its emissaries can follow thee into this island, or arrest
thee under the standard of Avenel?--Look at the depth of the lake, the
strength of the walls, the length of the causeway--look at my men,
and think if they are likely to see a comrade injured, or if I, their
master, am a man to desert a faithful follower, in good or evil. I tell
thee it shall be an eternal day of truce betwixt thee and justice,
as they call it, from the instant thou hast put my colours into thy
cap--thou shalt ride by the Warden's nose as thou wouldst pass an old
market-woman, and ne'er a cur which follows him shall dare to bay at
thee!"

"I thank you for your offers, noble sir," replied Halbert, "but I must
answer in brief, that I cannot profit by them--my fortunes lead me
elsewhere."

"Thou art a self-willed fool for thy pains," said Julian, turning from
him; and signing Christie to approach, he whispered in his ear, "there
is promise in that young fellow's looks, Christie, and we want men of
limbs and sinews so compacted--those thou hast brought to me of late are
the mere refuse of mankind, wretches scarce worth the arrow that ends
them: this youngster is limbed like Saint George. Ply him with wine and
wassail--let the wenches weave their meshes about him like spiders--thou
understandest?" Christie gave a sagacious nod of intelligence, and fell
back to a respectful distance from his master.--"And thou, old man,"
said the Baron, turning to the elder traveller, "hast thou been roaming
the world after fortune too?--it seems not she has fallen into thy way."

"So please you," replied Warden, "I were perhaps more to be pitied than
I am now, had I indeed met with that fortune, which, like others, I have
sought in my greener days."

"Nay, understand me, friend," said the Baron; "if thou art satisfied
with thy buckram gown and long staff, I also am well content thou
shouldst be as poor and contemptible as is good for the health of thy
body and soul--All I care to know of thee is, the cause which hath
brought thee to my castle, where few crows of thy kind care to settle.
Thou art, I warrant thee, some ejected monk of a suppressed convent,
paying in his old days the price of the luxurious idleness in which he
spent his youth.--Ay, or it may be some pilgrim with a budget of lies
from Saint James of Compostella, or Our Lady of Loretto; or thou mayest
be some pardoner with his budget of relics from Rome, forgiving sins at
a penny a-dozen, and one to the tale.--Ay, I guess why I find thee in
this boy's company, and doubtless thou wouldst have such a strapping lad
as he to carry thy wallet, and relieve thy lazy shoulders; but by the
mass I will cross thy cunning. I make my vow to sun and moon, I will
not see a proper lad so misleard as to run the country with an old knave
like Simmie and his brother. [Footnote: Two _quaestionarii_, or begging
friars, whose accoutrements and roguery make the subject of an old
Scottish satirical poem] Away with thee!" he added, rising in wrath,
and speaking so fast as to give no opportunity of answer, being probably
determined to terrify the elder guest into an abrupt flight--"Away with
thee, with thy clouted coat, scrip, and scallop-shell, or, by the name
of Avenel, I will have them loose the hounds on thee."

Warden waited with the greatest patience until Julian Avenel, astonished
that the threats and violence of his language made no impression on him,
paused in a sort of wonder, and said in a less imperious tone, "Why the
fiend dost thou not answer me?"

"When you have done speaking," said Warden, in the same composed manner,
"it will be full time to reply."

"Say on man, in the devil's name--but take heed--beg not here--were it
but for the rinds of cheese, the refuse of the rats, or a morsel that my
dogs would turn from--neither a grain of meal, nor the nineteenth part
of a gray groat, will I give to any feigned limmer of thy coat."

"It may be," answered Warden, "that you would have less quarrel with my
coat if you knew what it covers, I am neither a friar nor mendicant, and
would be right glad to hear thy testimony against these foul deceivers
of God's church, and usurpers of his rights over the Christian flock,
were it given in Christian charity."

"And who or what art thou, then," said Avenel, "that thou comest to this
Border land, and art neither monk, nor soldier, nor broken man?"

"I am an humble teacher of the holy word," answered Warden. "This letter
from a most noble person will speak why I am here at this present time."

He delivered the letter to the Baron, who regarded the seal with some
surprise, and then looked on the letter itself, which seemed to excite
still more. He then fixed his eyes on the stranger, and said, in a
menacing tone, "I think thou darest not betray me or deceive me?"

"I am not the man to attempt either," was the concise reply.

Julian Avenel carried the letter to the window, where he perused, or
at least attempted to peruse it more than once, often looking from the
paper and gazing on the stranger who had delivered it, as if he meant to
read the purport of the missive in the face of the messenger. Julian
at length called to the female,--"Catherine, bestir thee, and fetch
me presently that letter which I bade thee keep ready at hand in thy
casket, having no sure lockfast place of my own."

Catherine went with the readiness of one willing to be employed; and
as she walked, the situation which requires a wider gown and a longer
girdle, and in which woman claims from man a double portion of the most
anxious care, was still more visible than before. She soon returned with
the paper, and was rewarded with a cold--"I thank thee, wench; thou art
a careful secretary."

This second paper he also perused and reperused more than once, and
still, as he read it, bent from time to time a wary and observant eye
upon Henry Warden. This examination and re-examination, though both the
man and the place were dangerous, the preacher endured with the most
composed and steady countenance, seeming, under the eagle, or rather the
vulture eye of the baron, as unmoved as under the gaze of an ordinary
and peaceful peasant. At length Julian Avenel folded both papers, and
having put them into the pocket of his cloak, cleared his brow, and,
coming forward, addressed his female companion. "Catherine," said he,
"I have done this good man injustice, when I mistook him for one of the
drones of Rome. He is a preacher, Catherine--a preacher of the--the new
doctrine of the Lords of the Congregation."

"The doctrine of the blessed Scriptures," said the preacher, "purified
from the devices of men."

"Sayest thou?" said Julian Avenel--"Well, thou mayest call it what thou
lists; but to me it is recommended, because it flings off all those
sottish dreams about saints and angels and devils, and unhorses lazy
monks that have ridden us so long, and spur-galled us so hard. No
more masses and corpse-gifts--no more tithes and offerings to make men
poor--no more prayers or psalms to make men cowards-no more christenings
and penances, and confessions and marriages."

"So please you," said Henry Warden, "it is against the corruptions, not
against the fundamental doctrines, of the church, which we desire to
renovate, and not to abolish."

"Prithee, peace, man," said the Baron; "we of the laity care not what
you set up, so you pull merrily down what stands in our way. Specially
it suits well with us of the Southland fells; for it is our profession
to turn the world upside down, and we live ever the blithest life when
the downer side is uppermost."

Warden would have replied; but the Baron allowed him not time, striking
the table with the hilt of his dagger, and crying out,--"Ha! you
loitering knaves, bring our supper-meal quickly. See you not this holy
man is exhausted for lack of food? heard ye ever of priest or preacher
that devoured not his five meals a-day?"

The attendants bustled to and fro, and speedily brought in several large
smoking platters filled with huge pieces of beef, boiled and roasted,
but without any variety whatsoever; without vegetables, and almost
without bread, though there was at the upper end a few oat-cakes in a
basket. Julian Avenel made a sort of apology to Warden.

"You have been commended to our care, Sir Preacher, since that is your
style, by a person whom we highly honour."

"I am assured," said Warden, "that the most noble Lord--"

"Prithee, peace, man," said Avenel; "what need of naming names, so we
understand each other? I meant but to speak in reference to your safety
and comfort, of which he desires us to be chary. Now, for your safety,
look at my walls and water. But touching your comfort, we have no
corn of our own, and the meal-girnels of the south are less easily
transported than their beeves, seeing they have no legs to walk upon.
But what though? a stoup of wine thou shalt have, and of the best--thou
shalt sit betwixt Catherine and me at the board-end.--And, Christie, do
thou look to the young springald, and call to the cellarer for a flagon
of the best."

The Baron took his wonted place at the upper end of the board; his
Catherine sate down, and courteously pointed to a seat betwixt them for
their reverend guest. But notwithstanding the influence both of hunger
and fatigue, Henry Warden retained his standing posture.




Chapter the Twenty-Fifth.


  When lovely woman stoops to folly,
  And finds too late that men betray--

Julian Avenel saw with surprise the demeanour of the reverend stranger.
"Beshrew me," he said, "these new-fashioned religioners have fast-days,
I warrant me--the old ones used to confer these blessings chiefly on the
laity."

"We acknowledge no such rule," said the preacher--"We hold that our
faith consists not in using or abstaining from special meats on special
days; and in fasting we rend our hearts, and not our garments."

"The better--the better for yourselves, and the worse for Tom Tailor,"
said the Baron; "but come, sit down, or, if thou needs must e'en give us
a cast of thy office, mutter thy charm."

"Sir Baron," said the preacher, "I am in a strange land, where neither
mine office nor my doctrine are known, and where, it would seem, both
are greatly misunderstood. It is my duty so to bear me, that in my
person, however unworthy, my Master's dignity may be respected, and that
sin may take not confidence from relaxation of the bonds of discipline."

"Ho la! halt there," said the Baron; "thou wert sent hither for thy
safety, but not, I think, to preach to me, or control me. What is it
thou wouldst have, Sir Preacher? Remember thou speakest to one somewhat
short of patience, who loves a short health and a long draught."

"In a word, then," said Henry Warden, "that lady--"

"How?" said the Baron, starting--"what of her?--what hast thou to say of
that dame?"

"Is she thy house-dame?" said the preacher, after a moment's pause, in
which, he seemed to seek for the best mode of expressing what he had to
say--"Is she, in brief, thy wife?"

The unfortunate young woman pressed both her hands on her face, as if
to hide it, but the deep blush which crimsoned her brow and neck, showed
that her cheeks were also glowing; and the bursting tears, which found
their way betwixt her slender fingers, bore witness to her sorrow, as
well as to her shame.

"Now, by my father's ashes!" said the Baron, rising and spurning from
him his footstool with such violence, that it hit the wall on the
opposite side of the apartment--then instantly constraining himself,
he muttered, "What need to run myself into trouble for a fool's
word?"--then resuming his seat, he answered coldly and scornfully--"No,
Sir Priest or Sir Preacher, Catherine is not my wife--Cease thy
whimpering, thou foolish wench--she is not my wife, but she is
handfasted with me, and that makes her as honest a woman."

"Handfasted?"--repeated Warden.

"Knowest thou not that rite, holy man?" said Avenel, in the same tone of
derision; "then I will tell thee. We Border-men are more wary than
your inland clowns of Fife and Lothian--no jump in the dark for us--no
clenching the fetters around our wrists till we know how they will wear
with us--we take our wives, like our horses, upon trial. When we are
handfasted, as we term it, we are man and wife for a year and day--that
space gone by, each may choose another mate, or, at their pleasure, may
call the priest to marry them for life--and this we call handfasting."
[Footnote: This custom of handfasting actually prevailed in the upland
days. It arose partly from the want of priests. While the convents
subsisted, monks were detached on regular circuits through the wilder
districts, to marry those who had lived in this species of connexion. A
practice of the same kind existed in the Isle of Portland.]

"Then," said the preacher, "I tell thee, noble Baron, in brotherly love
to thy soul, it is a custom licentious, gross, and corrupted, and, if
persisted in, dangerous, yea, damnable. It binds thee to the frailer
being while she is the object of desire--it relieves thee when she is
most the subject of pity--it gives all to brutal sense, and nothing to
generous and gentle affection. I say to thee, that he who can meditate
the breach of such an engagement, abandoning the deluded woman and the
helpless offspring, is worse than the birds of prey; for of them the
males remain with their mates until the nestlings can take wing. Above
all, I say it is contrary to the pure Christian doctrine, which assigns
woman to man as the partner of his labour, the soother of his evil,
his helpmate in peril, his friend in affliction; not as the toy of his
looser hours, or as a flower, which, once cropped, he may throw aside at
pleasure."

"Now, by the Saints, a most virtuous homily!" said the Baron; "quaintly
conceived and curiously pronounced, and to a well-chosen congregation.
Hark ye, Sir Gospeller! trow ye to have a fool in hand? Know I not that
your sect rose by bluff Harry Tudor, merely because ye aided him to
change _his_ Kate; and wherefore should I not use the same Christian
liberty with _mine?_ Tush, man! bless the good food, and meddle not with
what concerns thee not--thou hast no gull in Julian Avenel."

"He hath gulled and cheated himself," said the preacher, "should he
even incline to do that poor sharer of his domestic cares the imperfect
justice that remains to him. Can he now raise her to the rank of a pure
and uncontaminated matron?--Can he deprive his child of the misery of
owing birth to a mother who has erred? He can indeed give them both
the rank, the state of married wife and of lawful son; but, in public
opinion, their names will be smirched and sullied with a stain which his
tardy efforts cannot entirely efface. Yet render it to them, Baron of
Avenel, render to them this late and imperfect justice. Bid me bind
you together for ever, and celebrate the day of your bridal, not with
feasting or wassail, but with sorrow for past sin, and the resolution
to commence a better life. Happy then will have the chance been that has
drawn me to this castle, though I come driven by calamity, and unknowing
where my course is bound, like a leaf travelling on the north wind."

The plain, and even coarse features, of the zealous speaker, were warmed
at once and ennobled by the dignity of his enthusiasm; and the wild
Baron, lawless as he was, and accustomed to spurn at the control whether
of religious or moral law, felt, for the first time perhaps in his life,
that he was under subjection to a mind superior to his own. He sat mute
and suspended in his deliberations, hesitating betwixt anger and shame,
yet borne down by the weight of the just rebuke thus boldly fulminated
against him.

The unfortunate young woman, conceiving hopes from her tyrant's silence
and apparent indecision, forgot both her fear and shame in her timid
expectation that Avenel would relent; and fixing upon him her anxious
and beseeching eyes, gradually drew near and nearer to his seat, till at
length, laying a trembling hand on his cloak, she ventured to utter, "O
noble Julian, listen to the good man!"

The speech and the motion were ill-timed, and wrought on that proud and
wayward spirit the reverse of her wishes.

The fierce Baron started up in a fury, exclaiming, "What! thou foolish
callet, art thou confederate with this strolling vagabond, whom thou
hast seen beard me in my own hall! Hence with thee, and think that I ana
proof both to male and female hypocrisy!"

The poor girl started back, astounded at his voice of thunder and looks
of fury, and, turning pale as death, endeavoured to obey his orders, and
tottered towards the door. Her limbs failed in the attempt, and she fell
on the stone floor in a manner which her situation might have rendered
fatal--The blood gushed from her face.--Halbert Glendinning brooked not
a sight so brutal, but, uttering a deep imprecation, started from
his seat, and laid his hand on his sword, under the strong impulse of
passing it through the body of the cruel and hard-hearted ruffian. But
Christie of the Clinthill, guessing his intention, threw his arms around
him, and prevented him from stirring to execute his purpose.

The impulse to such an act of violence was indeed but momentary, as it
instantly appeared that Avenel himself, shocked at the effects of his
violence, was lifting up and endeavouring to soothe in his own way the
terrified Catherine.

"Peace," he said, "prithee, peace, thou silly minion--why, Kate, though
I listen not to this tramping preacher, I said not what might happen
an thou dost bear me a stout boy. There--there--dry thy tears--Call thy
women.--So ho!--where be these queans?--Christie--Rowley--Hutcheon--drag
them hither by the hair of the head!"

A half dozen of startled wild-looking females rushed into the room,
and bore out her who might be either termed their mistress or their
companion. She showed little sign of life, except by groaning faintly
and keeping her hand on her side.

No sooner had this luckless female been conveyed from the apartment,
than the Baron, advancing to the table, filled and drank a deep goblet
of wine; then, putting an obvious restraint on his passions, turned to
the preacher, who stood horror-struck at the scene he had witnessed, and
said, "You have borne too hard on us, Sir Preacher--but coming with the
commendations which you have brought me, I doubt not but your meaning
was good. But we are a wilder folk than you inland men of Fife and
