the purpose), to try the whole case in England.  It is supposed--and I
think with reason--that Wolsey was the Queen's enemy, because she had
reproved him for his proud and gorgeous manner of life.  But, he did not
at first know that the King wanted to marry Anne Boleyn; and when he did
know it, he even went down on his knees, in the endeavour to dissuade
him.

The Cardinals opened their court in the Convent of the Black Friars, near
to where the bridge of that name in London now stands; and the King and
Queen, that they might be near it, took up their lodgings at the
adjoining palace of Bridewell, of which nothing now remains but a bad
prison.  On the opening of the court, when the King and Queen were called
on to appear, that poor ill-used lady, with a dignity and firmness and
yet with a womanly affection worthy to be always admired, went and
kneeled at the King's feet, and said that she had come, a stranger, to
his dominions; that she had been a good and true wife to him for twenty
years; and that she could acknowledge no power in those Cardinals to try
whether she should be considered his wife after all that time, or should
be put away.  With that, she got up and left the court, and would never
afterwards come back to it.

The King pretended to be very much overcome, and said, O! my lords and
gentlemen, what a good woman she was to be sure, and how delighted he
would be to live with her unto death, but for that terrible uneasiness in
his mind which was quite wearing him away!  So, the case went on, and
there was nothing but talk for two months.  Then Cardinal Campeggio, who,
on behalf of the Pope, wanted nothing so much as delay, adjourned it for
two more months; and before that time was elapsed, the Pope himself
adjourned it indefinitely, by requiring the King and Queen to come to
Rome and have it tried there.  But by good luck for the King, word was
brought to him by some of his people, that they had happened to meet at
supper, THOMAS CRANMER, a learned Doctor of Cambridge, who had proposed
to urge the Pope on, by referring the case to all the learned doctors and
bishops, here and there and everywhere, and getting their opinions that
the King's marriage was unlawful.  The King, who was now in a hurry to
marry Anne Boleyn, thought this such a good idea, that he sent for
Cranmer, post haste, and said to LORD ROCHFORT, Anne Boleyn's father,
'Take this learned Doctor down to your country-house, and there let him
have a good room for a study, and no end of books out of which to prove
that I may marry your daughter.'  Lord Rochfort, not at all reluctant,
made the learned Doctor as comfortable as he could; and the learned
Doctor went to work to prove his case.  All this time, the King and Anne
Boleyn were writing letters to one another almost daily, full of
impatience to have the case settled; and Anne Boleyn was showing herself
(as I think) very worthy of the fate which afterwards befel her.

It was bad for Cardinal Wolsey that he had left Cranmer to render this
help.  It was worse for him that he had tried to dissuade the King from
marrying Anne Boleyn.  Such a servant as he, to such a master as Henry,
would probably have fallen in any case; but, between the hatred of the
party of the Queen that was, and the hatred of the party of the Queen
that was to be, he fell suddenly and heavily.  Going down one day to the
Court of Chancery, where he now presided, he was waited upon by the Dukes
of Norfolk and Suffolk, who told him that they brought an order to him to
resign that office, and to withdraw quietly to a house he had at Esher,
in Surrey.  The Cardinal refusing, they rode off to the King; and next
day came back with a letter from him, on reading which, the Cardinal
submitted.  An inventory was made out of all the riches in his palace at
York Place (now Whitehall), and he went sorrowfully up the river, in his
barge, to Putney.  An abject man he was, in spite of his pride; for being
overtaken, riding out of that place towards Esher, by one of the King's
chamberlains who brought him a kind message and a ring, he alighted from
his mule, took off his cap, and kneeled down in the dirt.  His poor Fool,
whom in his prosperous days he had always kept in his palace to entertain
him, cut a far better figure than he; for, when the Cardinal said to the
chamberlain that he had nothing to send to his lord the King as a
present, but that jester who was a most excellent one, it took six strong
yeomen to remove the faithful fool from his master.

The once proud Cardinal was soon further disgraced, and wrote the most
abject letters to his vile sovereign; who humbled him one day and
encouraged him the next, according to his humour, until he was at last
ordered to go and reside in his diocese of York.  He said he was too
poor; but I don't know how he made that out, for he took a hundred and
sixty servants with him, and seventy-two cart-loads of furniture, food,
and wine.  He remained in that part of the country for the best part of a
year, and showed himself so improved by his misfortunes, and was so mild
and so conciliating, that he won all hearts.  And indeed, even in his
proud days, he had done some magnificent things for learning and
education.  At last, he was arrested for high treason; and, coming slowly
on his journey towards London, got as far as Leicester.  Arriving at
Leicester Abbey after dark, and very ill, he said--when the monks came
out at the gate with lighted torches to receive him--that he had come to
lay his bones among them.  He had indeed; for he was taken to a bed, from
which he never rose again.  His last words were, 'Had I but served God as
diligently as I have served the King, He would not have given me over, in
my grey hairs.  Howbeit, this is my just reward for my pains and
diligence, not regarding my service to God, but only my duty to my
prince.'  The news of his death was quickly carried to the King, who was
amusing himself with archery in the garden of the magnificent Palace at
Hampton Court, which that very Wolsey had presented to him.  The greatest
emotion his royal mind displayed at the loss of a servant so faithful and
so ruined, was a particular desire to lay hold of fifteen hundred pounds
which the Cardinal was reported to have hidden somewhere.

The opinions concerning the divorce, of the learned doctors and bishops
and others, being at last collected, and being generally in the King's
favour, were forwarded to the Pope, with an entreaty that he would now
grant it.  The unfortunate Pope, who was a timid man, was half distracted
between his fear of his authority being set aside in England if he did
not do as he was asked, and his dread of offending the Emperor of
Germany, who was Queen Catherine's nephew.  In this state of mind he
still evaded and did nothing.  Then, THOMAS CROMWELL, who had been one of
Wolsey's faithful attendants, and had remained so even in his decline,
advised the King to take the matter into his own hands, and make himself
the head of the whole Church.  This, the King by various artful means,
began to do; but he recompensed the clergy by allowing them to burn as
many people as they pleased, for holding Luther's opinions.  You must
understand that Sir Thomas More, the wise man who had helped the King
with his book, had been made Chancellor in Wolsey's place.  But, as he
was truly attached to the Church as it was even in its abuses, he, in
this state of things, resigned.

Being now quite resolved to get rid of Queen Catherine, and to marry Anne
Boleyn without more ado, the King made Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury,
and directed Queen Catherine to leave the Court.  She obeyed; but replied
that wherever she went, she was Queen of England still, and would remain
so, to the last.  The King then married Anne Boleyn privately; and the
new Archbishop of Canterbury, within half a year, declared his marriage
with Queen Catherine void, and crowned Anne Boleyn Queen.

She might have known that no good could ever come from such wrong, and
that the corpulent brute who had been so faithless and so cruel to his
first wife, could be more faithless and more cruel to his second.  She
might have known that, even when he was in love with her, he had been a
mean and selfish coward, running away, like a frightened cur, from her
society and her house, when a dangerous sickness broke out in it, and
when she might easily have taken it and died, as several of the household
did.  But, Anne Boleyn arrived at all this knowledge too late, and bought
it at a dear price.  Her bad marriage with a worse man came to its
natural end.  Its natural end was not, as we shall too soon see, a
natural death for her.




CHAPTER XXVIII--ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE EIGHTH


PART THE SECOND


The Pope was thrown into a very angry state of mind when he heard of the
King's marriage, and fumed exceedingly.  Many of the English monks and
friars, seeing that their order was in danger, did the same; some even
declaimed against the King in church before his face, and were not to be
stopped until he himself roared out 'Silence!'  The King, not much the
worse for this, took it pretty quietly; and was very glad when his Queen
gave birth to a daughter, who was christened ELIZABETH, and declared
Princess of Wales as her sister Mary had already been.

One of the most atrocious features of this reign was that Henry the
Eighth was always trimming between the reformed religion and the
unreformed one; so that the more he quarrelled with the Pope, the more of
his own subjects he roasted alive for not holding the Pope's opinions.
Thus, an unfortunate student named John Frith, and a poor simple tailor
named Andrew Hewet who loved him very much, and said that whatever John
Frith believed _he_ believed, were burnt in Smithfield--to show what a
capital Christian the King was.

But, these were speedily followed by two much greater victims, Sir Thomas
More, and John Fisher, the Bishop of Rochester.  The latter, who was a
good and amiable old man, had committed no greater offence than believing
in Elizabeth Barton, called the Maid of Kent--another of those ridiculous
women who pretended to be inspired, and to make all sorts of heavenly
revelations, though they indeed uttered nothing but evil nonsense.  For
this offence--as it was pretended, but really for denying the King to be
the supreme Head of the Church--he got into trouble, and was put in
prison; but, even then, he might have been suffered to die naturally
(short work having been made of executing the Kentish Maid and her
principal followers), but that the Pope, to spite the King, resolved to
make him a cardinal.  Upon that the King made a ferocious joke to the
effect that the Pope might send Fisher a red hat--which is the way they
make a cardinal--but he should have no head on which to wear it; and he
was tried with all unfairness and injustice, and sentenced to death.  He
died like a noble and virtuous old man, and left a worthy name behind
him.  The King supposed, I dare say, that Sir Thomas More would be
frightened by this example; but, as he was not to be easily terrified,
and, thoroughly believing in the Pope, had made up his mind that the King
was not the rightful Head of the Church, he positively refused to say
that he was.  For this crime he too was tried and sentenced, after having
been in prison a whole year.  When he was doomed to death, and came away
from his trial with the edge of the executioner's axe turned towards
him--as was always done in those times when a state prisoner came to that
hopeless pass--he bore it quite serenely, and gave his blessing to his
son, who pressed through the crowd in Westminster Hall and kneeled down
to receive it.  But, when he got to the Tower Wharf on his way back to
his prison, and his favourite daughter, MARGARET ROPER, a very good
woman, rushed through the guards again and again, to kiss him and to weep
upon his neck, he was overcome at last.  He soon recovered, and never
more showed any feeling but cheerfulness and courage.  When he was going
up the steps of the scaffold to his death, he said jokingly to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, observing that they were weak and shook beneath
his tread, 'I pray you, master Lieutenant, see me safe up; and, for my
coming down, I can shift for myself.'  Also he said to the executioner,
after he had laid his head upon the block, 'Let me put my beard out of
the way; for that, at least, has never committed any treason.'  Then his
head was struck off at a blow.  These two executions were worthy of King
Henry the Eighth.  Sir Thomas More was one of the most virtuous men in
his dominions, and the Bishop was one of his oldest and truest friends.
But to be a friend of that fellow was almost as dangerous as to be his
wife.

When the news of these two murders got to Rome, the Pope raged against
the murderer more than ever Pope raged since the world began, and
prepared a Bull, ordering his subjects to take arms against him and
dethrone him.  The King took all possible precautions to keep that
document out of his dominions, and set to work in return to suppress a
great number of the English monasteries and abbeys.

This destruction was begun by a body of commissioners, of whom Cromwell
(whom the King had taken into great favour) was the head; and was carried
on through some few years to its entire completion.  There is no doubt
that many of these religious establishments were religious in nothing but
in name, and were crammed with lazy, indolent, and sensual monks.  There
is no doubt that they imposed upon the people in every possible way; that
they had images moved by wires, which they pretended were miraculously
moved by Heaven; that they had among them a whole tun measure full of
teeth, all purporting to have come out of the head of one saint, who must
indeed have been a very extraordinary person with that enormous allowance
of grinders; that they had bits of coal which they said had fried Saint
Lawrence, and bits of toe-nails which they said belonged to other famous
saints; penknives, and boots, and girdles, which they said belonged to
others; and that all these bits of rubbish were called Relics, and adored
by the ignorant people.  But, on the other hand, there is no doubt
either, that the King's officers and men punished the good monks with the
bad; did great injustice; demolished many beautiful things and many
valuable libraries; destroyed numbers of paintings, stained glass
windows, fine pavements, and carvings; and that the whole court were
ravenously greedy and rapacious for the division of this great spoil
among them.  The King seems to have grown almost mad in the ardour of
this pursuit; for he declared Thomas a Becket a traitor, though he had
been dead so many years, and had his body dug up out of his grave.  He
must have been as miraculous as the monks pretended, if they had told the
truth, for he was found with one head on his shoulders, and they had
shown another as his undoubted and genuine head ever since his death; it
had brought them vast sums of money, too.  The gold and jewels on his
shrine filled two great chests, and eight men tottered as they carried
them away.  How rich the monasteries were you may infer from the fact
that, when they were all suppressed, one hundred and thirty thousand
pounds a year--in those days an immense sum--came to the Crown.

These things were not done without causing great discontent among the
people.  The monks had been good landlords and hospitable entertainers of
all travellers, and had been accustomed to give away a great deal of
corn, and fruit, and meat, and other things.  In those days it was
difficult to change goods into money, in consequence of the roads being
very few and very bad, and the carts, and waggons of the worst
description; and they must either have given away some of the good things
they possessed in enormous quantities, or have suffered them to spoil and
moulder.  So, many of the people missed what it was more agreeable to get
idly than to work for; and the monks who were driven out of their homes
and wandered about encouraged their discontent; and there were,
consequently, great risings in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire.  These were
put down by terrific executions, from which the monks themselves did not
escape, and the King went on grunting and growling in his own fat way,
like a Royal pig.

I have told all this story of the religious houses at one time, to make
it plainer, and to get back to the King's domestic affairs.

The unfortunate Queen Catherine was by this time dead; and the King was
by this time as tired of his second Queen as he had been of his first.  As
he had fallen in love with Anne when she was in the service of Catherine,
so he now fell in love with another lady in the service of Anne.  See how
wicked deeds are punished, and how bitterly and self-reproachfully the
Queen must now have thought of her own rise to the throne!  The new fancy
was a LADY JANE SEYMOUR; and the King no sooner set his mind on her, than
he resolved to have Anne Boleyn's head.  So, he brought a number of
charges against Anne, accusing her of dreadful crimes which she had never
committed, and implicating in them her own brother and certain gentlemen
in her service: among whom one Norris, and Mark Smeaton a musician, are
best remembered.  As the lords and councillors were as afraid of the King
and as subservient to him as the meanest peasant in England was, they
brought in Anne Boleyn guilty, and the other unfortunate persons accused
with her, guilty too.  Those gentlemen died like men, with the exception
of Smeaton, who had been tempted by the King into telling lies, which he
called confessions, and who had expected to be pardoned; but who, I am
very glad to say, was not.  There was then only the Queen to dispose of.
She had been surrounded in the Tower with women spies; had been
monstrously persecuted and foully slandered; and had received no justice.
But her spirit rose with her afflictions; and, after having in vain tried
to soften the King by writing an affecting letter to him which still
exists, 'from her doleful prison in the Tower,' she resigned herself to
death.  She said to those about her, very cheerfully, that she had heard
say the executioner was a good one, and that she had a little neck (she
laughed and clasped it with her hands as she said that), and would soon
be out of her pain.  And she _was_ soon out of her pain, poor creature,
on the Green inside the Tower, and her body was flung into an old box and
put away in the ground under the chapel.

There is a story that the King sat in his palace listening very anxiously
for the sound of the cannon which was to announce this new murder; and
that, when he heard it come booming on the air, he rose up in great
spirits and ordered out his dogs to go a-hunting.  He was bad enough to
do it; but whether he did it or not, it is certain that he married Jane
Seymour the very next day.

I have not much pleasure in recording that she lived just long enough to
give birth to a son who was christened EDWARD, and then to die of a
fever: for, I cannot but think that any woman who married such a ruffian,
and knew what innocent blood was on his hands, deserved the axe that
would assuredly have fallen on the neck of Jane Seymour, if she had lived
much longer.

Cranmer had done what he could to save some of the Church property for
purposes of religion and education; but, the great families had been so
hungry to get hold of it, that very little could be rescued for such
objects.  Even MILES COVERDALE, who did the people the inestimable
service of translating the Bible into English (which the unreformed
religion never permitted to be done), was left in poverty while the great
families clutched the Church lands and money.  The people had been told
that when the Crown came into possession of these funds, it would not be
necessary to tax them; but they were taxed afresh directly afterwards.  It
was fortunate for them, indeed, that so many nobles were so greedy for
this wealth; since, if it had remained with the Crown, there might have
been no end to tyranny for hundreds of years.  One of the most active
writers on the Church's side against the King was a member of his own
family--a sort of distant cousin, REGINALD POLE by name--who attacked him
in the most violent manner (though he received a pension from him all the
time), and fought for the Church with his pen, day and night.  As he was
beyond the King's reach--being in Italy--the King politely invited him
over to discuss the subject; but he, knowing better than to come, and
wisely staying where he was, the King's rage fell upon his brother Lord
Montague, the Marquis of Exeter, and some other gentlemen: who were tried
for high treason in corresponding with him and aiding him--which they
probably did--and were all executed.  The Pope made Reginald Pole a
cardinal; but, so much against his will, that it is thought he even
aspired in his own mind to the vacant throne of England, and had hopes of
marrying the Princess Mary.  His being made a high priest, however, put
an end to all that.  His mother, the venerable Countess of Salisbury--who
was, unfortunately for herself, within the tyrant's reach--was the last
of his relatives on whom his wrath fell.  When she was told to lay her
grey head upon the block, she answered the executioner, 'No!  My head
never committed treason, and if you want it, you shall seize it.'  So,
she ran round and round the scaffold with the executioner striking at
her, and her grey hair bedabbled with blood; and even when they held her
down upon the block she moved her head about to the last, resolved to be
no party to her own barbarous murder.  All this the people bore, as they
had borne everything else.

Indeed they bore much more; for the slow fires of Smithfield were
continually burning, and people were constantly being roasted to
death--still to show what a good Christian the King was.  He defied the
Pope and his Bull, which was now issued, and had come into England; but
he burned innumerable people whose only offence was that they differed
from the Pope's religious opinions.  There was a wretched man named
LAMBERT, among others, who was tried for this before the King, and with
whom six bishops argued one after another.  When he was quite exhausted
(as well he might be, after six bishops), he threw himself on the King's
mercy; but the King blustered out that he had no mercy for heretics.  So,
_he_ too fed the fire.

All this the people bore, and more than all this yet.  The national
spirit seems to have been banished from the kingdom at this time.  The
very people who were executed for treason, the very wives and friends of
the 'bluff' King, spoke of him on the scaffold as a good prince, and a
gentle prince--just as serfs in similar circumstances have been known to
do, under the Sultan and Bashaws of the East, or under the fierce old
tyrants of Russia, who poured boiling and freezing water on them
alternately, until they died.  The Parliament were as bad as the rest,
and gave the King whatever he wanted; among other vile accommodations,
they gave him new powers of murdering, at his will and pleasure, any one
whom he might choose to call a traitor.  But the worst measure they
passed was an Act of Six Articles, commonly called at the time 'the whip
with six strings;' which punished offences against the Pope's opinions,
without mercy, and enforced the very worst parts of the monkish religion.
Cranmer would have modified it, if he could; but, being overborne by the
Romish party, had not the power.  As one of the articles declared that
priests should not marry, and as he was married himself, he sent his wife
and children into Germany, and began to tremble at his danger; none the
less because he was, and had long been, the King's friend.  This whip of
six strings was made under the King's own eye.  It should never be
forgotten of him how cruelly he supported the worst of the Popish
doctrines when there was nothing to be got by opposing them.

This amiable monarch now thought of taking another wife.  He proposed to
the French King to have some of the ladies of the French Court exhibited
before him, that he might make his Royal choice; but the French King
answered that he would rather not have his ladies trotted out to be shown
like horses at a fair.  He proposed to the Dowager Duchess of Milan, who
replied that she might have thought of such a match if she had had two
heads; but, that only owning one, she must beg to keep it safe.  At last
Cromwell represented that there was a Protestant Princess in
Germany--those who held the reformed religion were called Protestants,
because their leaders had Protested against the abuses and impositions of
the unreformed Church--named ANNE OF CLEVES, who was beautiful, and would
answer the purpose admirably.  The King said was she a large woman,
because he must have a fat wife?  'O yes,' said Cromwell; 'she was very
large, just the thing.'  On hearing this the King sent over his famous
painter, Hans Holbein, to take her portrait.  Hans made her out to be so
good-looking that the King was satisfied, and the marriage was arranged.
But, whether anybody had paid Hans to touch up the picture; or whether
Hans, like one or two other painters, flattered a princess in the
ordinary way of business, I cannot say: all I know is, that when Anne
came over and the King went to Rochester to meet her, and first saw her
without her seeing him, he swore she was 'a great Flanders mare,' and
said he would never marry her.  Being obliged to do it now matters had
gone so far, he would not give her the presents he had prepared, and
would never notice her.  He never forgave Cromwell his part in the
affair.  His downfall dates from that time.

It was quickened by his enemies, in the interests of the unreformed
religion, putting in the King's way, at a state dinner, a niece of the
Duke of Norfolk, CATHERINE HOWARD, a young lady of fascinating manners,
though small in stature and not particularly beautiful.  Falling in love
with her on the spot, the King soon divorced Anne of Cleves after making
her the subject of much brutal talk, on pretence that she had been
previously betrothed to some one else--which would never do for one of
his dignity--and married Catherine.  It is probable that on his wedding
day, of all days in the year, he sent his faithful Cromwell to the
scaffold, and had his head struck off.  He further celebrated the
occasion by burning at one time, and causing to be drawn to the fire on
the same hurdles, some Protestant prisoners for denying the Pope's
doctrines, and some Roman Catholic prisoners for denying his own
supremacy.  Still the people bore it, and not a gentleman in England
raised his hand.

But, by a just retribution, it soon came out that Catherine Howard,
before her marriage, had been really guilty of such crimes as the King
had falsely attributed to his second wife Anne Boleyn; so, again the
dreadful axe made the King a widower, and this Queen passed away as so
many in that reign had passed away before her.  As an appropriate pursuit
under the circumstances, Henry then applied himself to superintending the
composition of a religious book called 'A necessary doctrine for any
Christian Man.'  He must have been a little confused in his mind, I
think, at about this period; for he was so false to himself as to be true
to some one: that some one being Cranmer, whom the Duke of Norfolk and
others of his enemies tried to ruin; but to whom the King was steadfast,
and to whom he one night gave his ring, charging him when he should find
himself, next day, accused of treason, to show it to the council board.
This Cranmer did to the confusion of his enemies.  I suppose the King
thought he might want him a little longer.

He married yet once more.  Yes, strange to say, he found in England
another woman who would become his wife, and she was CATHERINE PARR,
widow of Lord Latimer.  She leaned towards the reformed religion; and it
is some comfort to know, that she tormented the King considerably by
arguing a variety of doctrinal points with him on all possible occasions.
She had very nearly done this to her own destruction.  After one of these
conversations the King in a very black mood actually instructed GARDINER,
one of his Bishops who favoured the Popish opinions, to draw a bill of
accusation against her, which would have inevitably brought her to the
scaffold where her predecessors had died, but that one of her friends
picked up the paper of instructions which had been dropped in the palace,
and gave her timely notice.  She fell ill with terror; but managed the
King so well when he came to entrap her into further statements--by
saying that she had only spoken on such points to divert his mind and to
get some information from his extraordinary wisdom--that he gave her a
kiss and called her his sweetheart.  And, when the Chancellor came next
day actually to take her to the Tower, the King sent him about his
business, and honoured him with the epithets of a beast, a knave, and a
fool.  So near was Catherine Parr to the block, and so narrow was her
escape!

There was war with Scotland in this reign, and a short clumsy war with
France for favouring Scotland; but, the events at home were so dreadful,
and leave such an enduring stain on the country, that I need say no more
of what happened abroad.

A few more horrors, and this reign is over.  There was a lady, ANNE
ASKEW, in Lincolnshire, who inclined to the Protestant opinions, and
whose husband being a fierce Catholic, turned her out of his house.  She
came to London, and was considered as offending against the six articles,
and was taken to the Tower, and put upon the rack--probably because it
was hoped that she might, in her agony, criminate some obnoxious persons;
if falsely, so much the better.  She was tortured without uttering a cry,
until the Lieutenant of the Tower would suffer his men to torture her no
more; and then two priests who were present actually pulled off their
robes, and turned the wheels of the rack with their own hands, so rending
and twisting and breaking her that she was afterwards carried to the fire
in a chair.  She was burned with three others, a gentleman, a clergyman,
and a tailor; and so the world went on.

Either the King became afraid of the power of the Duke of Norfolk, and
his son the Earl of Surrey, or they gave him some offence, but he
resolved to pull _them_ down, to follow all the rest who were gone.  The
son was tried first--of course for nothing--and defended himself bravely;
but of course he was found guilty, and of course he was executed.  Then
his father was laid hold of, and left for death too.

But the King himself was left for death by a Greater King, and the earth
was to be rid of him at last.  He was now a swollen, hideous spectacle,
with a great hole in his leg, and so odious to every sense that it was
dreadful to approach him.  When he was found to be dying, Cranmer was
sent for from his palace at Croydon, and came with all speed, but found
him speechless.  Happily, in that hour he perished.  He was in the fifty-
sixth year of his age, and the thirty-eighth of his reign.

Henry the Eighth has been favoured by some Protestant writers, because
the Reformation was achieved in his time.  But the mighty merit of it
lies with other men and not with him; and it can be rendered none the
worse by this monster's crimes, and none the better by any defence of
them.  The plain truth is, that he was a most intolerable ruffian, a
disgrace to human nature, and a blot of blood and grease upon the History
of England.

