Cadoudal looked about him.

"It will lift in half an hour," said he. "Will you utilize the time by
eating a mouthful and drinking a glass?"

"Faith!" said the young man, "I must admit that the ride has hollowed
me."

"I make a point," said Georges, "of eating the best breakfast I can
before fighting."

"Then you are going to fight?"

"I think so."

"Against whom?"

"Why, the Republicans, and as we have to do with General Hatry, I doubt
if he surrenders without resistance."

"Do the Republicans know they are going to fight you?"

"They haven't the least idea."

"So it is to be a surprise?"

"Not exactly, inasmuch as when the fog lifts they will see us as soon as
we see them." Then, turning to the man who seemed to be in charge of
the provisions, Cadoudal added, "Brise-Bleu, is there anything for
breakfast?"

Brise-Bleu nodded affirmatively, went into the wood, and came out
dragging after him a donkey loaded with two baskets. He spread a cloak
on a rise of the ground, and placed on it a roast chicken, a bit of
cold salt pork, some bread and buckwheat cakes. This time Brise-Bleu had
provided luxury in the shape of a bottle of wine and a glass.

Cadoudal motioned Roland to the table and the improvised repast. The
young man sprang from his horse, throwing the bridle to a Chouan.
Cadoudal did likewise.

"Now," said the latter, turning to his men, "you have half an hour to
do as we do. Those who have not breakfasted in half an hour are notified
that they must fight on empty stomachs."

The invitation seemed equivalent to an order, so promptly and precisely
was it executed. Every man pulled from his bag or his pocket a bit of
bread or a buckwheat cake, and followed the example of his general, who
had already divided the chicken between Roland and himself. As there was
but one glass, both officers shared it.

While they were thus breakfasting, side by side, like two friends on a
hunt, the sun rose, and, as Cadoudal had predicted, the mist became less
and less dense. Soon the nearest trees could be distinguished; then the
line of the woods, stretching to the right from Meucon to Grand-champ,
while to the left the plain of Plescop, threaded by a rivulet, sloped
gradually toward Vannes. This natural declivity of the ground became
more and more perceptible as it neared the ocean.

On the road from Grandchamp to Plescop, a line of wagons were now
visible, the tail of which was still hidden in the woods. This line was
motionless; evidently some unforeseen obstacle had stopped it.

In fact, about a quarter of a mile before the leading wagon
they perceived the two hundred Chouans, under Monte-a-l'assaut,
Chante-en-hiver, Fend-l'air, and Giberne, barring the way.

The Republicans, inferior in number--we said that there were but a
hundred--had halted and were awaiting the complete dispersion of the
fog to determine the number and character of the men they were about to
meet. Men and wagons were now in a triangle, of which Cadoudal and his
hundred men formed one of the angles.

At sight of this small number of men thus surrounded by triple forces,
and of the well-known uniform, of which the color had given its name
to the Republican forces, Roland sprang hastily to his feet. As for
Cadoudal, he remained where he was, nonchalantly finishing his meal. Of
the hundred men surrounding the general, not one seemed to perceive the
spectacle that was now before their eyes; it seemed almost as if they
were waiting for Cadoudal's order to look at it.

Roland had only to cast his eyes on the Republicans to see that they
were lost. Cadoudal watched the various emotions that succeeded each
other on the young man's face.

"Well," asked the Chouan, after a moment's silence, "do you think my
dispositions well taken?"

"You might better say your precautions, general," replied Roland, with a
sarcastic smile.

"Isn't it the First Consul's way to make the most of his advantages when
he gets them?" asked Cadoudal.

Roland bit his lips; then, instead of replying to the royalist leader's
question, he said: "General, I have a favor to ask which I hope you will
not refuse."

"What is it?"

"Permission to let me go and be killed with my comrades."

Cadoudal rose. "I expected that request," he said.

"Then you will grant it?" cried Roland, his eyes sparkling with joy.

"Yes; but, first, I have a favor to ask of you," said the royalist
leader, with supreme dignity.

"Ask it, sir."

"To bear my flag of truce to General Hatry."

"For what purpose?"

"I have several proposals to make to him before the fight begins."

"I presume that among those proposals which you deign to intrust to me
you do not include that of laying down his arms?"

"On the contrary, colonel, you understand that that is the first of my
proposals."

"General Hatry will refuse it."

"That is probable."

"And then?"

"Then I shall give him his choice between two others, either of which he
can, I think, accept without forfeiting his honor."

"What are they?"

"I will tell you in due time. Begin with the first."

"State it."

"General Hatry and his hundred men are surrounded by a triple force. I
offer them their lives; but they must lay down their arms, and make oath
not to serve again in the Vendee for five years."

Roland shook his head.

"Better that than to see his men annihilated."

"Maybe so; but he would prefer to have his men annihilated, and be
annihilated with them."

"Don't you think," asked Cadoudal, laughing, "that it might be as well,
in any case, to ask him?"

"True," said Roland.

"Well, colonel, be so good as to mount your horse, make yourself known
to him, and deliver my proposal."

"Very well," replied Roland.

"The colonel's horse," said Cadoudal, motioning to the Chouan who
was watching it. The man led it up. The young man sprang upon it, and
rapidly covered the distance which separated him from the convoy.

A group of men were gathered on its flank, evidently composed of General
Hatry and his officers. Roland rode toward them, scarcely three gunshots
distant from the Chouans. General Hatry's astonishment was great when
he saw an officer in the Republican uniform approaching him. He left the
group and advanced three paces to meet the messenger.

Roland made himself known, related how he came to be among the Whites,
and transmitted Cadoudal's proposal to General Hatry.

As he has foreseen, the latter refused it. Roland returned to Cadoudal
with a proud and joyful heart. "He refuses!" he cried, as soon as his
voice could be heard.

Cadoudal gave a nod that showed he was not surprised by the refusal.

"Then, in that case," he answered, "go back with my second proposition.
I don't wish to have anything to reproach myself with in answering to
such a judge of honor as you."

Roland bowed. "What is the second proposition?"

"General Hatry shall meet me in the space that separates the two troops,
he shall carry the same arms as I--that is, his sabre and pistols--and
the matter shall be decided between us. If I kill him, his men are to
submit to the conditions already named, for we cannot take prisoners;
if he kills me his men shall pass free and be allowed to reach Vannes
safely. Come, I hope that's a proposition you would accept, colonel?"

"I would accept it myself," replied Roland.

"Yes," exclaimed Cadoudal, "but you are not General Hatry. Content
yourself with being a negotiator this time, and if this proposition,
which, if I were he, I wouldn't let escape me, does not please him, come
to me. I'm a good fellow, and I'll make him a third."

Roland rode off a second time; his coming was awaited by the Republicans
with visible impatience. He transmitted the message to General Hatry.

"Citizen," replied the general, "I must render account of my conduct
to the First Consul. You are his aide-de-camp, and I charge you on your
return to Paris to bear testimony on my behalf to him. What would you do
in my place? Whatever you would do, that I shall do."

Roland started; his face assumed the grave expression of a man who is
arguing a point of honor in his own mind. Then, at the end of a few
seconds, he said: "General, I should refuse."

"Your reasons, citizen?" demanded the general.

"The chances of a duel are problematic; you cannot subject the fate of
a hundred brave men to a doubtful chance. In an affair like this, where
all are concerned, every man had better defend his own skin as best he
can."

"Is that your opinion, colonel?"

"On my honor."

"It is also mine; carry my reply to the royalist general."

Roland galloped back to Cadoudal, and delivered General Hatry's reply.

Cadoudal smiled. "I expected it," he said.

"You couldn't have expected it, because it was I who advised him to make
it."

"You thought differently a few moments ago."

"Yes; but you yourself reminded me that I was not General Hatry. Come,
what is your third proposition?" said Roland impatiently; for he began
to perceive, or rather he had perceived from the beginning, that the
noble part in the affair belonged to the royalist general.

"My third proposition," said Cadoudal, "is not a proposition but an
order; an order for two hundred of my men to withdraw. General Hatry
has one hundred men; I will keep one hundred. My Breton forefathers
were accustomed to fight foot to foot, breast to breast, man to man, and
oftener one to three than three to one. If General Hatry is victorious,
he can walk over our bodies and tranquilly enter Vannes; if he is
defeated, he cannot say it is by numbers. Go, Monsieur de Montrevel, and
remain with your friends. I give them thus the advantage of numbers, for
you alone are worth ten men."

Roland raised his hat.

"What are you doing, sir?" demanded Cadoudal.

"I always bow to that which is grand, general; I bow to you."

"Come, colonel," said Cadoudal, "a last glass of wine; let each of us
drink to what we love best, to that which we grieve to leave behind, to
that we hope to meet in heaven."

Taking the bottle and the one glass, he filled it half full, and offered
it to Roland. "We have but one glass, Monsieur de Montrevel; drink
first."

"Why first?"

"Because, in the first place, you are my guest, and also because there
is a proverb that whoever drinks after another knows his thought."
Then, he added, laughing: "I want to know your thought, Monsieur de
Montrevel."

Roland emptied the glass and returned it to Cadoudal. The latter filled
his glass half full, as he had done for Roland, and emptied it in turn.

"Well," asked Roland, "now do you know my thought, general?"

"My thought," said Roland, with his usual frankness, "is that you are a
brave man, general. I shall feel honored if, at this moment when we are
going to fight against each other, you will give me your hand."

The two young men clasped hands, more like friends parting for a long
absence than two enemies about to meet on the battlefield. There was a
simple grandeur, full of majesty, in this action. Each raised his hat.

"Good luck!" said Roland to Cadoudal; "but allow me to doubt it. I must
even confess that it is from my lips, not my heart."

"God keep you, sir," said Cadoudal, "and I hope that my wish will be
realized. It is the honest expression of my thoughts."

"What is to be the signal that you are ready?" inquired Roland.

"A musket shot fired in the air, to which you will reply in the same
way."

"Very good, general," replied Roland. And putting his horse to a gallop,
he crossed the space between the royalist general and the Republican
general for the third time.

"Friends," said Cadoudal, pointing to Roland, "do you see that young
man?"

All eyes were bent upon Roland. "Yes," came from every mouth.

"He came with a safe-guard from our brothers in the Midi; his life is
sacred to you; he may be captured, but it must be living--not a hair of
his head must be touched."

"Very good, general," replied the Chouans.

"And now, my friends, remember that you are the sons of those thirty
Bretons who fought the thirty British between Ploermel and Josselin, ten
leagues from here, and conquered them." Then, in a low voice, he added
with a sigh, "Unhappily we have not to do with the British this time."

The fog had now lifted completely, and, as usually happens, a few rays
of the wintry sun tinged the plain of Plescop with a yellow light.

It was easy therefore to distinguish the movements of the two troops.
While Roland was returning to the Republicans, Branche-d'Or galloped
toward the two hundred men who were blocking the way. He had hardly
spoken to Cadoudal's four lieutenants before a hundred men were seen to
wheel to the right and a hundred more to wheel to the left and march in
opposite directions, one toward Plumergat, the other toward Saint-Ave,
leaving the road open. Each body halted three-quarters of a mile down
the road, grounded arms and remained motionless. Branche-d'Or returned
to Cadoudal.

"Have you any special orders to give me, general?" he asked.

"Yes, one," answered Cadoudal, "take eight men and follow me. When you
see the young Republican, with whom I breakfasted, fall under his horse,
fling yourself upon him, you and your eight men, before he has time to
free himself, and take him prisoner."

"Yes, general."

"You know that I must have him safe and sound."

"That's understood, general"

"Choose your eight men. Monsieur de Montrevel once captured, and his
parole given, you can do as you like."

"Suppose he won't give his parole?"

"Then you must surround him so that he can't escape, and watch him till
the fight is over."

"Very well," said Branche-d'Or, heaving a sigh; "but it'll be a little
hard to stand by with folded arms while the others are having their
fun."

"Pooh! who knows?" said Cadoudal; "there'll probably be enough for every
body."

Then, casting a glance over the plain and seeing his own men stationed
apart, and the Republicans massed for battle, he cried: "A musket!"

They brought one. Cadoudal raised it above his head and fired in the
air. Almost at the same moment, a shot fired in the same manner from the
midst of the Republicans answered like an echo to that of Cadoudal.

Two drums beating the advance and a bugle were heard. Cadoudal rose in
his stirrups.

"Children," he cried, "have you all said your morning prayers?"

"Yes, yes!" answered almost every voice. "If any of you forgot them, or
did not have time, let them pray now."

Five or six peasants knelt down and prayed.

The drums and bugle drew nearer.

"General, general," cried several voices impatiently, "they are coming."

The general motioned to the kneeling peasants.

"True," replied the impatient ones.

Those who prayed rose one by one, according as their prayers had been
long or short. By the time they were all afoot, the Republicans had
crossed nearly one-third of the distance. They marched, bayonets fixed,
in three ranks, each rank three abreast.

Roland rode at the head of the first rank, General Hatry between the
first and second. Both were easily recognized, being the only men on
horseback. Among the Chouans, Cadoudal was the only rider, Branche-d'Or
having dismounted to take command of the eight men who were to follow
Georges.

"General," said a voice, "the prayer is ended, and every one is
standing."

Cadoudal looked around him to make sure it was true; then he cried in a
loud voice: "Forward! Enjoy yourselves, my lads!"

This permission, which to Vendeans and Chouans, was equivalent to
sounding a charge, was scarcely given before the Chouans spread over the
fields to cries of "Vive le roi!" waving their hats with one hand and
their guns with the other.

Instead of keeping in rank like the Republicans, they scattered like
sharpshooters, forming an immense crescent, of which Georges and his
horse were the centre.

A moment later the Republicans were flanked and the firing began.
Cadoudal's men were nearly all poachers, that is to say, excellent
marksmen, armed with English carbines, able to carry twice the length of
the army musket. Though the first shots fired might have seemed wide of
range, these messengers of death nevertheless brought down several men
in the Republican ranks.

"Forward!" cried the general.

The soldiers marched on, bayonets fixed; but in a few moments there was
no enemy before them. Cadoudal's hundred men had turned skirmishers;
they had separated, and fifty men were harassing both of the enemy's
flanks. General Hatry ordered his men to wheel to the right and left.
Then came the order: "Fire!"

Two volleys followed with the precision and unanimity of well
disciplined troops; but they were almost without result, for the
Republicans were firing upon scattered men. Not so with the Chouans, who
fired on a mass; with them every shot told.

Roland saw the disadvantage of the position. He looked around and, amid
the smoke, distinguished Cadoudal, erect and motionless as an equestrian
statue. He understood that the royalist leader was waiting for him.

With a cry he spurred his horse toward him. As if to save him part of
the way, Cadoudal put his horse to a gallop. But a hundred feet from
Cadoudal he drew rein. "Attention!" he said to Branche-d'Or and his
companions.

"Don't be alarmed, general; here we are," said Branche-d'Or.

Cadoudal drew a pistol from his holster and cocked it. Roland, sabre in
hand, was charging, crouched on his horse's neck. When they were twenty
paces apart, Cadoudal slowly raised his hand in Roland's direction. At
ten paces he fired.

The horse Roland was riding had a white star on its forehead. The ball
struck the centre of that star, and the horse, mortally wounded, rolled
over with its rider at Cadoudal's feet.

Cadoudal put spurs to his own horse and jumped both horse and rider.

Branche-d'Or and his men were ready. They sprang, like a pack of
jaguars, upon Roland, entangled under the body of his horse. The young
man dropped his sword and tried to seize his pistols, but before he
could lay hand upon the holsters two men had him by the arms, while the
four others dragged his horse from between his legs. The thing was
done with such unanimity that it was easy to see the manoeuvre had been
planned.

Roland roared with rage. Branche-d'Or came up to him and put his hat in
his hand.

"I do not surrender!" shouted Roland.

"Useless to do so, Monsieur de Montrevel," replied Branche-d'Or with the
utmost politeness.

"What do you mean?" demanded Roland, exhausting his strength in a
struggle as desperate as it was useless.

"Because you are captured, sir."

It was so true that there could be no answer.

"Then kill me!" cried Roland.

"We don't want to kill you, sir," replied Branche-d'Or.

"Then what do you want?"

"Give us your parole not to fight any more, and you are free."

"Never!" exclaimed Roland.

"Excuse me, Monsieur de Montrevel," said Branche-d'Or, "but that is not
loyal!"

"What!" shrieked Roland, in a fury, "not loyal! You insult me, villain,
because you know I can't defend myself or punish you."

"I am not a villain, and I didn't insult you, Monsieur de Montrevel; but
I do say that by not giving your word, you deprive the general of nine
men, who might be useful to him and who are obliged to stay here to
guard you. That's not the way the Big Round Head acted toward you. He
had two hundred men more than you, and he sent them away. Now we are
only eighty-nine against one hundred."

A flame crossed Roland's face; then almost as suddenly he turned pale as
death.

"You are right, Branche-d'Or," he replied. "Succor or no succor, I
surrender. You and your men can go and fight with your comrades."

The Chouans gave a cry of joy, let go their hold of Roland, and
rushed toward the Republicans, brandishing their hats and muskets, and
shouting: "Vive le roi!"

Roland, freed from their grip, but disarmed physically by his fall,
morally by his parole, went to the little eminence, still covered by
the cloak which had served as a tablecloth for their breakfast, and sat
down. From there he could see the whole combat; not a detail was lost
upon him.

Cadoudal sat erect upon his horse amid fire and smoke, like the Demon of
War, invulnerable and implacable.

Here and there the bodies of a dozen or more Chouans lay stretched upon
the sod. But it was evident that the Republicans, still massed together,
had lost double that number. Wounded men dragged themselves across the
open space, meeting, rearing their bodies like mangled snakes, to fight,
the Republicans with their bayonets, and the Chouans with their knives.
Those of the wounded Chouans who were too far off to fight their wounded
enemies hand to hand, reloaded their guns, and, struggling to their
knees, fired and fell again.

On either side the struggle was pitiless, incessant, furious; civil
war--that is war without mercy or compassion--waved its torch above the
battlefield.

Cadoudal rode his horse around these living breastworks, firing at
twenty paces, sometimes his pistols, sometimes a musket, which he
discharged, cast aside, and picked up again reloaded. At each discharge
a man fell. The third time he made this round General Hatry honored him
with a fusillade. He disappeared in the flame and smoke, and Roland
saw him go down, he and his horse, as if annihilated. Ten or a dozen
Republicans sprang from the ranks and met as many Chouans; the struggle
was terrible, hand to hand, body to body, but the Chouans, with their
knives, were sure of the advantage.

Suddenly Cadoudal appeared, erect, a pistol in each hand; it was the
death of two men; two men fell. Then through the gap left by these ten
or twelve he flung himself forward with thirty men. He had picked up an
army musket, and, using it like a club, he brought down a man with each
blow. He broke his way through the battalion, and reappeared at the
other side. Then, like a boar which returns upon the huntsman he has
ripped up and trampled, he rushed back through the gaping wound and
widened it. From that moment all was over.

General Hatry rallied a score of men, and, with bayonets down, they
fell upon the circle that enveloped them. He marched at the head of his
soldiers on foot; his horse had been killed. Ten men had fallen before
the circle was broken, but at last he was beyond it. The Chouans wanted
to pursue them, but Cadoudal, in a voice of thunder, called them back.

"You should not have allowed him to pass," he cried, "but having passed
he is free to retreat."

The Chouans obeyed with the religious faith they placed in the words of
their chief.

"And now," said Cadoudal, "cease firing; no more dead; make prisoners."

The Chouans drew together and surrounded the heaps of dead, and the few
living men, more or less wounded, who lay among the dead.

Surrendering was still fighting in this fatal war, where on both sides
the prisoners were shot--on the one side, because Chouans and Vendeans
were considered brigands; on the other, because they knew not where to
put the captives.

The Republicans threw their guns away, that they might not be forced to
surrender them. When their captors approached them every cartridge-box
was open; every man had fired his last shot.

Cadoudal walked back to Roland.

During the whole of this desperate struggle the young man had remained
on the mound. With his eyes fixed on the battle, his hair damp with
sweat, his breast heaving, he waited for the result. Then, when he saw
the day was lost, his head fell upon his hands, and he still sat on, his
forehead bowed to the earth.

Cadoudal reached him before he seemed to hear the sound of footsteps. He
touched the young man's shoulder. Roland raised his head slowly without
attempting to hide the two great tears that were rolling down his
cheeks.

"General," said Roland, "do with me what you will. I am your prisoner."

"I can't make the First Consul's ambassador a prisoner," replied
Cadoudal, laughing, "but I can ask him to do me a service."

"Command me, general."

"I need a hospital for the wounded, and a prison for prisoners; will you
take the Republican soldiers, wounded and prisoners, back to Vannes."

"What do you mean, general?" exclaimed Roland.

"I give them, or rather I confide them to you. I regret that your horse
was killed; so is mine. But there is still that of Brise-Bleu; accept
it."

The young man made a motion of rejection.

"Until you can obtain another, of course," added Cadoudal, bowing.

Roland felt that he must put himself, at least in simplicity, on a level
with the man with whom he was dealing.

"Shall I see you again, general?" he asked, rising.

"I doubt it, sir. My operations call me to the coast near Port-Louis;
your duty recalls you to the Luxembourg."

"What shall I tell the First Consul, general?"

"What you have seen, sir. He must judge between the Abbe Bernier's
diplomacy and that of Georges Cadoudal."

"After what I have seen, sir, I doubt if you ever have need of me," said
Roland; "but in any case remember that you have a friend near the First
Consul."

And he held out his hand to Cadoudal. The royalist took it with the same
frankness and freedom he had shown before the battle.

"Farewell, Monsieur de Montrevel," said he, "I need not ask you to
justify General Hatry. A defeat like that is fully as glorious as a
victory."

During this time Brise-Bleu's horse had been led up for the Republican
colonel.

He sprang into the saddle.

"By the bye," said Cadoudal, "as you go through La Roche-Bernard, just
inquire what has happened to citizen Thomas Milliere."

"He is dead," said a voice.

Coeur-de-Roi and his four men, covered with mud and sweat, had just
arrived, but too late for the battle.

Roland cast a last glance at the battlefield, sighed, and, waving a last
farewell to Cadoudal, started at a gallop across the fields to await, on
the road to Vannes, the wagon-load of wounded and the prisoners he was
asked to deliver to General Hatry.

Cadoudal had given a crown of six sous to each man.

Roland could not help reflecting that the gift was made with the money
of the Directory sent to the West by Morgan and the Companions of Jehu.




CHAPTER XXXV. A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE

Roland's first visit on arriving in Paris was to the First Consul. He
brought him the twofold news of the pacification of the Vendee, and the
increasingly bitter insurrection in Brittany.

Bonaparte knew Roland; consequently the triple narrative of Thomas
Milliere's murder, the execution of Bishop Audrein, and the fight at
Grandchamp, produced a deep impression upon him. There was, moreover,
in the young man's manner a sombre despair in which he could not be
mistaken.

Roland was miserable over this lost opportunity to get himself killed.
An unknown power seemed to watch over him, carrying him safe and sound
through dangers which resulted fatally to others. Sir John had found
twelve judges and a death-warrant, where he had seen but a phantom,
invulnerable, it is true, but inoffensive.

He blamed himself bitterly for singling out Cadoudal in the fight, thus
exposing himself to a pre-arranged plan of capture, instead of flinging
himself into the fray and killing or being killed.

The First Consul watched him anxiously as he talked; the longing for
death still lingered in his mind, a longing he hoped to cure by this
return to his native land and the endearments of his family.

He praised and defended General Hatry, but, just and impartial as a
soldier should be, he gave full credit to Cadoudal for the courage and
generosity the royalist general had displayed.

Bonaparte listened gravely, almost sadly; ardent as he was for foreign
war with its glorious halo, his soul revolted at the internecine strife
which drained the life-blood of the nation and rent its bowels. It was
a case in which, to his thinking, negotiation should be substituted for
war. But how negotiate with a man like Cadoudal?

Bonaparte was not unaware of his own personal seductions when he chose
to exercise them. He resolved to see Cadoudal, and without saying
anything on the subject to Roland, he intended to make use of him for
the interview when the time came. In the meantime he wanted to see if
Brune, in whose talent he had great confidence, would be more successful
than his predecessors.

He dismissed Roland, after telling him of his mother's arrival and her
installation in the little house in the Rue de la Victoire.

Roland sprang into a coach and was driven there at once. He found Madame
de Montrevel as happy and as proud as a woman and a mother could be.
Edouard had gone, the day before, to the Prytanee Francais, and she
herself was preparing to return to Amelie, whose health continued to
give her much anxiety.

As for Sir John, he was not only out of danger, but almost well again.
He was in Paris, had called upon Madame de Montrevel, and, finding that
she had gone with Edouard to the Prytanee, he had left his card. It bore
his address, Hotel Mirabeau, Rue de Richelieu.

It was eleven o'clock, Sir John's breakfast hour, and Roland had every
chance of finding him at that hour. He got back into his carriage, and
ordered the coachman to stop at the Hotel Mirabeau.

He found Sir John sitting before an English breakfast, a thing rarely
seen in those days, drinking large cups of tea and eating bloody chops.

As soon as the Englishman saw Roland he gave a cry of joy and ran
to meet him. Roland himself had acquired a deep affection for that
exceptional nature, where the noblest qualities of the heart seemed
striving to hide themselves beneath national eccentricities.

Sir John was pale and thin, but in other respects he was well. His wound
had completely healed, and except for a slight oppression, which was
diminishing daily and would soon disappear altogether, he had almost
recovered his former health. He now welcomed Roland with a tenderness
scarcely to be expected from that reserved nature, declaring that the
joy he felt in seeing him again was all he wanted for his complete
recovery.

He begged Roland to share the meal, telling him to order his own
breakfast, a la Francaise. Roland accepted. Like all soldiers who had
fought the hard wars of the Revolution, when bread was often lacking,
Roland cared little for what he ate; he had acquired the habit of eating
whatever was put before him as a precaution against the days when there
might be nothing at all. Sir John's attention in asking him to make a
French breakfast was scarcely noticed by him at all.

But what Roland did notice was Sir John's preoccupation of mind. It was
evident that Sir John had something on his lips which he hesitated to
utter. Roland thought he had better help him.

So, when breakfast was nearly over, Roland, with his usual frankness,
which almost bordered upon brutality at times, leaned his elbows on the
table, settled his chin in his hands, and said: "Well, my dear Sir John,
you have something to say to your friend Roland that you don't dare put
into words."

Sir John started, and, from pale as he was, turned crimson.

"Confound it!" continued Roland, "it must be hard to get out; but, Sir
John, if you have many things to ask me, I know but few that I have the
right to refuse you. So, go on; I am listening."

And Roland closed his eyes as if to concentrate all his attention on
what Sir John was about to say. But the matter was evidently, from Sir
John's point of view, so extremely difficult to make known, that at the
end of a dozen seconds, finding that Sir John was still silent, Roland
opened his eyes.

The Englishman was pale again; but this time he was paler than before.
Roland held out his hand to him.

"Why," he said, "I see you want to make some compliment about the way
you were treated at the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines."

"Precisely, my friend; for the happiness or misery of my life will date
from my sojourn at the chateau."

Roland looked fixedly at Sir John. "The deuce!" he exclaimed, "can I be
so fortunate--" Then he stopped, remembering that what he was about to
say was most unconventional from the social point of view.

"Oh!" exclaimed Sir John, "my dear Roland, finish what you were saying."

"You wish it?"

"I implore you."

"But if I am mistaken; if I should say something nonsensical."

"My friend, my friend, go on."

"Well, as I was saying, my lord, can I be so fortunate as to find your
lordship in love with my sister?"

Sir John gave a cry of joy, and with a rapid movement, of which so
phlegmatic a man might have been thought incapable, he threw himself in
Roland's arms.

"Your sister is an angel, my dear Roland," he exclaimed, "and I love her
with all my heart."

"Are you entirely free to do so, my lord?"

"Entirely. For the last twelve years, as I told you, I have had my
fortune under my own control; it amounts to twenty-five thousand pounds
sterling a year."

"Too much, my dear fellow, for a woman who can only bring you fifty
thousand francs."

"Oh!" said the Englishman, with that national accent that returned to
him occasionally in moments of strong excitement, "if I must get rid of
a part of it, I can do so."

"No," replied Roland, laughing, "that's not necessary. You're rich; it's
unfortunate, but what's to be done?--No, that's not the question. Do you
love my sister?"

"I adore her."

"And she," resumed Roland, "does she love you?"

"Of course you understand," returned Sir John, "that I have not asked
her. I was bound, my dear Roland, to speak to you first, and if the
matter were agreeable, to beg you to plead my cause with your mother.
After I have obtained the consent of both, I shall make my offer. Or
rather, you will make it for me, for I should never dare."

"Then I am the first to receive your confidence?"

"You are my best friend, and it ought to be so."

"Well, my dear friend, as far as I am concerned, your suit is
won--naturally."

"Your mother and sister remain."

"They will be one. You understand that my mother will leave Amelie free
to make her own choice; and I need not tell you that if it falls
upon you she will be delighted. But there is a person whom you have
forgotten."

"Who is that?" said Sir John, in the tone of a man who, having weighed
all chances for and against, believes he knows them all, and is met by
an obstacle he has never thought of.

"The First Consul," said Roland.

"God--" ejaculated the Englishman, swallowing the last words of the
national oath.

"He spoke to me just before I left for the Vendee of my sister's
marriage," continued Roland; "saying that it no longer concerned my
mother and myself, for he would take charge of it."

"Then," said Sir John, "I am lost."

"Why so?"
