
The archbishop was so little prepared for this burst, that he remained
speechless. Hastings pressed the king's arm, as if to caution him
against so imprudent a display of resentment; but the king walked on,
not heeding him, and in great disturbance. Hastings interchanged looks
with the archbishop, and followed his royal master.

"My king," he said, in an earnest whisper, "whatever you decide, do not
again provoke unhappy feuds laid at rest. Already this morning I
sought your chamber, but you were abroad, to say that I have received
intelligence of a fresh rising of the Lancastrians in Lincolnshire,
under Sir Robert Welles, and the warlike knight of Scrivelsby, Sir
Thomas Dymoke. This is not yet an hour to anger the pride of the
Neviles!"

"O Hastings! Hastings!" said the king, in a tone of passionate emotion,
"there are moments when the human heart cannot dissemble! Howbeit your
advice is wise and honest! No, we must not anger the Neviles!"

He turned abruptly; rejoined the archbishop, who stood on the spot on
which the king had left him, his arms folded on his breast, his face
calm, but haughty.

"My most worshipful cousin," said Edward, "forgive the well-known
heat of my hasty moods! I had hoped that Richard would, by a foreign
alliance, have repaired the occasion of confirming my dynasty abroad,
which Clarence lost. But no matter! Of these things we will speak anon.
Say naught to Richard till time ripens maturer resolutions: he is a
youth yet. What strange tidings are these from Lincolnshire?"

"The house of your purveyor, Sir Robert de Burgh, is burned, his lands
wasted. The rebels are headed by lords and knights. Robin of Redesdale,
who, methinks, bears a charmed life, has even ventured to rouse the
disaffected in my brother's very shire of Warwick."

"O Henry," exclaimed the king, casting his eyes towards the turret
that held his captive, "well mightest then call a crown 'a wreath of
thorns!'"

"I have already," said the archbishop, "despatched couriers to my
brother, to recall him from Warwick, whither he went on quitting your
Highness. I have done more; prompted by a zeal that draws me from the
care of the Church to that of the State, I have summoned the Lords
St. John, De Fulke, and others, to my house of the More,--praying your
Highness to deign to meet them, and well sure that a smile from your
princely lips will regain their hearts and confirm heir allegiance, at a
moment when new perils require all strong arms."

"You have done most wisely. I will come to your palace,--appoint your
own day."

"It will take some days for the barons to arrive from their castles. I
fear not ere the tenth day from this."

"Ah," said the king, with a vivacity that surprised his listeners, aware
of his usual impetuous energy, "the delay will but befriend us; as
for Warwick, permit me to alter your arrangements; let him employ the
interval, not in London, where he is useless, but in raising men in
the neighbourhood of his castle, and in defeating the treason of this
Redesdale knave. We will give commission to him and to Clarence to levy
troops; Hastings, see to this forthwith. Ye say Sir Robert Welles leads
the Lincolnshire varlets; I know the nature of his father, the Lord
Welles,--a fearful and timorous one; I will send for him, and the
father's head shall answer for the son's faith. Pardon me, dear cousin,
that I leave you to attend these matters. Prithee visit our queen,
meanwhile, she holds you our guest."

"Nay, your Highness must vouchsafe my excuse; I also have your royal
interests too much at heart to while an hour in my pleasurement. I will
but see the friends of our House now in London, and then back to the
More, and collect the force of my tenants and retainers."

"Ever right, fair speed to you, cardinal that shall be! Your arm,
Hastings."

The king and his favourite took their way into the state chambers.

"Abet not Gloucester in this alliance,--abet him not!" said the king,
solemnly.

"Pause, sire! This alliance gives to Warwick a wise counsellor, instead
of the restless Duke of Clarence. Reflect what danger may ensue if an
ambitious lord, discontented with your reign, obtains the hand of the
great earl's coheiress, and the half of a hundred baronies that command
an army larger than the crown's."

Though these reasonings at a calmer time might well have had their
effect on Edward, at that moment they were little heeded by his
passions. He stamped his foot violently on the floor. "Hastings!" he
exclaimed, "be silent! or--" He stopped short, mastered his emotion.
"Go, assemble our privy council. We have graver matters than a boy's
marriage now to think of."

It was in vain that Edward sought to absorb the fire of his nature in
state affairs, in all needful provisions against the impending perils,
in schemes of war and vengeance. The fatal frenzy that had seized him
haunted him everywhere, by day and by night. For some days after the
unsuspected visit which he had so criminally stolen to his guest's
chamber, something of knightly honour, of religious scruple, of common
reason,--awakened in him the more by the dangers which had sprung up and
which the Neviles were now actively employed in defeating,--struggled
against his guilty desire, and roused his conscience to a less feeble
resistance than it usually displayed when opposed to passion; but the
society of Anne, into which he was necessarily thrown so many hours in
the day, and those hours chiefly after the indulgences of the banquet,
was more powerful than all the dictates of a virtue so seldom exercised
as to have none of the strength of habit. And as the time drew near when
he must visit the archbishop, head his army against the rebels (whose
force daily increased, despite the captivity of Lord Welles and
Sir Thomas Dymoke, who, on the summons of the king, had first taken
sanctuary, and then yielded their persons on the promise of pardon and
safety), and restore Anne to her mother,--as this time drew near, his
perturbation of mind became visible to the whole court; but, with the
instinct of his native craft, he contrived to conceal its cause. For the
first time in his life he had no confidant--he did not dare trust his
secret to Hastings. His heart gnawed itself. Neither, though constantly
stealing to Anne's side, could he venture upon language that might
startle and enlighten her. He felt that even those attentions, which
on the first evening of her arrival had been noticed by the courtiers,
could not be safely renewed. He was grave and constrained, even when by
her side, and the etiquette of the court allowed him no opportunity for
unwitnessed conference. In this suppressed and unequal struggle with
himself the time passed, till it was now but the day before that fixed
for his visit to the More. And, as he rose at morning from his restless
couch, the struggle was over, and the soul resolved to dare the crime.
His first thought was to separate Anne from Sibyll. He affected to
rebuke the queen for giving to his high-born guest an associate below
her dignity, and on whose character, poor girl, rested the imputation
of witchcraft; and when the queen replied that Lady Anne herself had
so chosen, he hit upon the expedient of visiting Warner himself, under
pretence of inspecting his progress,--affected to be struck by the
sickly appearance of the sage, and sending for Sibyll, told her, with
an air of gracious consideration, that her first duty was to attend her
parent; that the queen released her for some days from all court duties;
and that he had given orders to prepare the room adjoining Master
Warner's, and held by Friar Bungey, till that worthy had retired with
his patroness from the court, to which she would for the present remove.

Sibyll, wondering at this novel mark of consideration in the careless
king, yet imputing it to the high value set on her father's labours,
thanked Edward with simple earnestness, and withdrew. In the anteroom
she encountered Hastings, on his way to the king. He started in
surprise, and with a jealous pang: "What! thou, Sibyll! and from the
king's closet! What led thee thither?"

"His grace's command." And too noble for the pleasure of exciting the
distrust that delights frivolous minds as the proof of power, Sibyll
added, "The king has been kindly speaking to me of my father's health."
The courtier's brow cleared; he mused a moment, and said, in a whisper,
"I beseech thee to meet me an hour hence at the eastern rampart."

Since the return of Lord Hastings to the palace there had been an
estrangement and distance in his manner, ill suiting one who enjoyed the
rights of an accepted suitor, and wounding alike to Sibyll's affection
and her pride; but her confidence in his love and truth was entire. Her
admiration for him partook of worship, and she steadily sought to reason
away any causes for alarm by recalling the state cares which pressed
heavily upon him, and whispering to herself that word of "wife," which,
coming in passionate music from those beloved lips, had thrown a mist
over the present, a glory over the future! and in the king's retention
of Adam Warner, despite the Duchess of Bedford's strenuous desire
to carry him off with Friar Bungey, and restore him to his tasks of
alchemist and multiplier, as well as in her own promotion to the queen's
service, Sibyll could not but recognize the influence of her powerful
lover. His tones now were tender, though grave and earnest. Surely, in
the meeting he asked, all not comprehended would be explained. And so,
with a light heart, she passed on.

Hastings sighed as his eye followed her from the room, and thus said he
to himself, "Were I the obscure gentleman I once was, how sweet a lot
would that girl's love choose to me from the urn of fate! But, oh! when
we taste of power and greatness, and master the world's dark wisdom,
what doth love shrink to?--an hour's bliss and a life's folly." His
delicate lip curled, and breaking from his soliloquy, he entered the
king's closet. Edward was resting his face upon the palms of his hands,
and his bright eyes dwelt upon vacant space, till they kindled into
animation as they lighted on his favourite.

"Dear Will," said the king, "knowest thou that men say thou art
bewitched?"

"Beau sire, often have men, when a sweet face hath captured thy great
heart, said the same of thee!"

"It may be so with truth, for verily love is the arch-devil's birth."

The king rose, and strode his chamber with a quick step; at last
pausing,--

"Hastings," he said, "so thou lovest the multiplier's pretty daughter?
She has just left me. Art thou jealous?"

"Happily your Highness sees no beauty in looks that have the gloss of
the raven, and eyes that have the hue of the violet."

"No, I am a constant man, constant to one idea of beauty in a thousand
forms,--eyes like the summer's light-blue sky, and locks like its
golden sunbeams! But to set thy mind at rest, Will, know that I have
but compassionated the sickly state of the scholar, whom thou prizest so
highly; and I have placed thy fair Sibyll's chamber near her father's.
Young Lovell says thou art bent on wedding the wizard's daughter."

"And if I were, beau sire?"

Edward looked grave.

"If thou wert, my poor Will, thou wouldst lose all the fame for shrewd
wisdom which justifies thy sudden fortunes. No, no; thou art the flower
and prince of my new seignorie,--thou must mate thyself with a name and
a barony that shall be worthy thy fame and thy prospects. Love beauty,
but marry power, Will. In vain would thy king draw thee up, if a
despised wife draw thee down!"

Hastings listened with profound attention to these words. The king did
not wait for his answer, but added laughingly,--

"It is thine own fault, crafty gallant, if thou dost not end all her
spells."

"What ends the spells of youth and beauty, beau sire?"

"Possession!" replied the king, in a hollow and muttered voice.

Hastings was about to answer, when the door opened, and the officer in
waiting announced the Duke of Clarence. "Ha!" said Edward, "George comes
to importune me for leave to depart to the government of Ireland, and I
have to make him weet that I think my Lord Worcester a safer viceroy of
the two."

"Your Highness will pardon me; but, though I deemed you too generous in
the appointment, it were dangerous now to annul it."

"More dangerous to confirm it. Elizabeth has caused me to see the folly
of a grant made over the malmsey,--a wine, by the way, in which poor
George swears he would be content to drown himself. Viceroy of Ireland!
My father had that government, and once tasting the sweets of royalty,
ceased to be a subject! No, no, Clarence--"

"Can never meditate treason against a brother's crown. Has he the wit or
the energy or the genius for so desperate an ambition?"

"No; but he hath the vanity. And I will wager thee a thousand marks to
a silver penny that my jester shall talk giddie Georgie into advancing a
claim to be soldan of Egypt or Pope of Rome!"




CHAPTER IV. THE FOSTER-BROTHERS.

Sir Marmaduke Nevile was sunning his bravery in the Tower Green, amidst
the other idlers of the court, proud of the gold chain and the gold
spurs which attested his new rank, and not grieved to have exchanged the
solemn walls of Middleham for the gay delights of the voluptuous palace,
when to his pleasure and surprise, he perceived his foster-brother enter
the gateway; and no sooner had Nicholas entered, than a bevy of the
younger courtiers hastened eagerly towards him.

"Gramercy!" quoth Sir Marmaduke, to one of the bystanders, "what hath
chanced to make Nick Alwyn a man of such note, that so many wings
of satin and pile should flutter round him like sparrows round an
owl?--which, by the Holy Rood, his wise face somewhat resembleth."

"Know you not that Master Alwyn, since he hath commenced trade for
himself, hath acquired already the repute of the couthliest goldsmith
in London? No dague-hilts, no buckles are to be worn, save those that he
fashions; and--an he live, and the House of York prosper--verily, Master
Alwyn the goldsmith will ere long be the richest and best man from
Mile-end to the Sanctuary."

"Right glad am I to hear it," said honest Marmaduke, heartily; and
approaching Alwyn, he startled the precise trader by a friendly slap on
the shoulder.

"What, man, art thou too proud to remember Marmaduke Nevile? Come to my
lodgment yonder, and talk of old days over the king's canary."

"I crave your pardon, dear Master Nevile."

"Master--avaunt! Sir Marmaduke,--knighted by the hand of Lord
Warwick,--Sir Marmaduke Nevile, lord of a manor he hath never yet seen,
sober Alwyn."

Then drawing his foster-brother's arm in his, Marmaduke led him to the
chamber in which he lodged.

The young men spent some minutes in congratulating each other on their
respective advances in life: the gentleman who had attained competence
and station simply by devotion to a powerful patron, the trader who had
already won repute and the prospect of wealth by ingenuity, application,
and toil; and yet, to do justice, as much virtue went to Marmaduke's
loyalty to Warwick as to Alwyn's capacities for making a fortune. Mutual
compliments over, Alwyn said hesitatingly,--

"And dost thou find Mistress Sibyll more gently disposed to thee than
when thou didst complain to me of her cruelty?"

"Marry, good Nicholas, I will be frank with thee. When I left the court
to follow Lord Warwick, there were rumours of the gallantries of Lord
Hastings to the girl, which grieved me to the heart. I spoke to her
thereof bluntly and honourably, and got but high looks and scornful
words in return. Good fellow, I thank thee for that squeeze of the hand
and that doleful sigh. In my absence at Middleham, I strove hard to
forget one who cared so little for me. My dear Alwyn, those Yorkshire
lasses are parlously comely, and mighty douce and debonaire. So I
stormed cruel Sibyll out of my heart perforce of numbers."

"And thou lovest her no more?"

"Not I, by this goblet! On coming back, it is true, I felt pleased
to clank my gold spurs in her presence, and curious to see if my new
fortunes would bring out a smile of approval; and verily, to speak
sooth, the donzell was kind and friendly, and spoke to me so cheerly of
the pleasure she felt in my advancement, that I adventured again a few
words of the old folly. But my lassie drew up like a princess, and I am
a cured man."

"By your troth?"

"By my troth!"

Alwyn's head sank on his bosom in silent thought. Sir Marmaduke emptied
his goblet; and really the young knight looked so fair and so gallant,
in his new surcoat of velvet, that it was no marvel if he should find
enough food for consolation in a court where men spent six hours a day
in making love,--nor in vain.

"And what say they still of the Lord Hastings?" asked Alwyn, breaking
silence. "Nothing, I trow and trust, that arraigns the poor lady's
honour, though much that may scoff at her simple faith in a nature so
vain and fickle. 'The tongue's not steel, yet it cuts,' as the proverb
saith of the slanderer."

"No! scandal spares her virtue as woman, to run down her cunning
as witch! They say that Hastings hath not prevailed, nor sought to
prevail,--that he is spell-bound. By Saint Thomas, from a maid of such
character Marmaduke Nevile is happily rescued!"

"Sir Marmaduke," then said Alwyn, in a grave and earnest voice, "it
behooves me, as true friend, though humble, and as honest man, to give
thee my secret, in return for thine own. I love this girl. Ay, ay! thou
thinkest that love is a strange word on a craftsman's lips, but 'cold
flint hides hot fire.' I would not have been thy rival, Heaven forefend!
hadst thou still cherished a hope, or if thou now wilt forbid my
aspiring; but if thou wilt not say me nay, I will try my chance in
delivering a pure soul from a crafty wooer."

Marmaduke stared in great surprise at his foster-brother; and though, no
doubt, he spoke truth when he said he was cured of his love for Sibyll,
he yet felt a sort of jealousy at Alwyn's unexpected confession, and
his vanity was hurt at the notion that the plain-visaged trader should
attempt where the handsome gentleman had failed.--However, his blunt,
generous, manly nature after a brief struggle got the better of these
sore feelings; and holding out his hand to Alwyn, he said, "My dear
foster-brother, try the hazard and cast thy dice, if thou wilt. Heaven
prosper thee, if success be for thine own good! But if she be given to
witchcraft (plague on thee, man, sneer not at the word), small comfort
to bed and hearth can such practices bring!"

"Alas!" said Alwyn, "the witchcraft is on the side of Hastings,--the
witchcraft of fame and rank, and a glozing tongue and experienced art.
But she shall not fall, if a true arm can save her; and 'though Hope be
a small child; she can carry a great anchor.'"

These words were said so earnestly, that they opened new light into
Marmaduke's mind; and his native generosity standing in lieu of
intellect, he comprehended sympathetically the noble motives which
actuated the son of commerce.

"My poor Alwyn," he said, "if thou canst save this young maid,--whom
by my troth I loved well, and who tells me yet that she loveth me as a
sister loves,--right glad shall I be. But thou stakest thy peace of mind
against hers! Fair luck to thee, say I again,--and if thou wilt risk thy
chance at once (for suspense is love's purgatory), seize the moment. I
saw Sibyll, just ere we met, pass to the ramparts, alone; at this sharp
season the place is deserted; go."

"I will, this moment!" said Alwyn, rising and turning very pale; but
as he gained the door, he halted--"I had forgot, Master Nevile, that I
bring the king his signet-ring, new set, of the falcon and fetter-lock."

"They will keep thee three hours in the anteroom. The Duke of Clarence
is now with the king. Trust the ring to me, I shall see his highness ere
he dines."

Even in his love, Alwyn had the Saxon's considerations of business; he
hesitated--"May I not endanger thereby the king's favour and loss of
custom?" said the trader.

"Tush, man! little thou knowest King Edward; he cares naught for the
ceremonies: moreover, the Neviles are now all-puissant in favour. I
am here in attendance on sweet Lady Anne, whom the king loves as a
daughter, though too young for sire to so well-grown a donzell; and a
word from her lip, if need be, will set all as smooth as this gorget of
lawn!"

Thus assured, Alwyn gave the ring to his friend, and took his way at
once to the ramparts. Marmaduke remained behind to finish the canary and
marvel how so sober a man should form so ardent a passion. Nor was he
much less surprised to remark that his friend, though still speaking
with a strong provincial accent, and still sowing his discourse with
rustic saws and proverbs, had risen in language and in manner with the
rise of his fortunes. "An he go on so, and become lord mayor," muttered
Marmaduke, "verily he will half look like a gentleman!"

To these meditations the young knight was not long left in peace. A
messenger from Warwick House sought and found him, with the news that
the earl was on his road to London, and wished to see Sir Marmaduke the
moment of his arrival, which was hourly expected. The young knight's
hardy brain somewhat flustered by the canary, Alwyn's secret, and this
sudden tidings, he hastened to obey his chief's summons, and forgot,
till he gained the earl's mansion, the signet ring intrusted to him by
Alwyn. "What matters it?" said he then, philosophically,--"the king hath
rings eno' on his fingers not to miss one for an hour or so, and I dare
not send any one else with it. Marry, I must plunge my head in cold
water, to get rid of the fumes of the wine."




CHAPTER V. THE LOVER AND THE GALLANT--WOMAN'S CHOICE.

Alwyn bent his way to the ramparts, a part of which then resembled
the boulevards of a French town, having rows of trees, green sward, a
winding walk, and seats placed at frequent intervals for the repose
of the loungers. During the summer evenings, the place was a favourite
resort of the court idlers; but now, in winter, it was usually deserted,
save by the sentries, placed at distant intervals. The trader had not
gone far in his quest when he perceived, a few paces before him, the
very man he had most cause to dread; and Lord Hastings, hearing the
sound of a footfall amongst the crisp, faded leaves that strewed the
path, turned abruptly as Alwyn approached his side.

At the sight of his formidable rival, Alwyn had formed one of those
resolutions which occur only to men of his decided, plain-spoken,
energetic character. His distinguishing shrewdness and penetration had
given him considerable insight into the nobler as well as the weaker
qualities of Hastings; and his hope in the former influenced the
determination to which he came. The reflections of Hastings at that
moment were of a nature to augur favourably to the views of the humbler
lover; for, during the stirring scenes in which his late absence
from Sibyll had been passed, Hastings had somewhat recovered from her
influence; and feeling the difficulties of reconciling his honour
and his worldly prospects to further prosecution of the love, rashly
expressed but not deeply felt, he had determined frankly to cut the
Gordian knot he could not solve, and inform Sibyll that marriage between
them was impossible. With that view he had appointed this meeting, and
his conference with the king but confirmed his intention. It was in this
state of mind that he was thus accosted by Alwyn:--

"My lord, may I make bold to ask for a few moments your charitable
indulgence to words you may deem presumptuous?"

"Be brief, then, Master Alwyn,--I am waited for."

"Alas, my lord! I can guess by whom,--by the one whom I seek myself,--by
Sibyll Warner."

"How, Sir Goldsmith!" said Hastings, haughtily, "what knowest thou of my
movements, and what care I for thine?"

"Hearken, my Lord Hastings,--hearken!" said Alwyn, repressing his
resentment, and in a voice so earnest that it riveted the entire
attention of the listener--"hearken, and judge not as noble judges
craftsman, but as man should judge man. As the saw saith, 'We all lie
alike in our graves.' From the first moment I saw this Sibyll Warner I
loved her. Yes; smile disdainfully, but listen still. She was obscure
and in distress. I loved her not for her fair looks alone; I loved her
for her good gifts, for her patient industry, for her filial duty, for
her struggles to give bread to her father's board. I did not say to
myself, 'This girl will make a comely fere, a delicate paramour!' I
said, 'This good daughter will make a wife whom an honest man may take
to his heart and cherish!'" Poor Alwyn stopped, with tears in his
voice, struggled with his emotions, and pursued: "My fortunes were more
promising than hers; there was no cause why I might not hope. True, I
had a rival then; young as myself, better born, comelier; but she loved
him not. I foresaw that his love for her--if love it were--would cease.
Methought that her mind would understand mine; as mine--verily I say
it--yearned for hers! I could not look on the maidens of mine own rank,
and who had lived around me, but what--oh, no, my lord, again I say, not
the beauty, but the gifts, the mind, the heart of Sibyll, threw them
all into the shade. You may think it strange that I--a plain, steadfast,
trading, working, careful man--should have all these feelings; but I
will tell you wherefore such as I sometimes have them, nurse them, brood
on them, more than you lords and gentlemen, with all your graceful arts
in pleasing. We know no light loves! no brief distractions to the one
arch passion! We sober sons of the stall and the ware are no general
gallants,--we love plainly, we love but once, and we love heartily. But
who knows not the proverb, 'What's a gentleman but his pleasure?'--and
what's pleasure but change? When Sibyll came to the palace, I soon heard
her name linked with yours; I saw her cheek blush when you spoke. Well,
well, well! after all, as the old wives tell us, 'Blushing is virtue's
livery.' I said, 'She is a chaste and high-hearted girl.' This will
pass, and the time will come when she can compare your love and mine.
Now, my lord, the time has come. I know that you seek her. Yea, at
this moment, I know that her heart beats for your footstep. Say but
one word,--say that you love Sibyll Warner with the thought of wedding
her,--say that, on your honour, noble Hastings, as gentleman and peer,
and I will kneel at your feet, and beg your pardon for my vain follies,
and go back to my ware, and work, and not repine. Say it! You are
silent? Then I implore you, still as peer and gentleman, to let the
honest love save the maiden from the wooing that will blight her
peace and blast her name! And now, Lord Hastings, I wait your gracious
answer."

The sensations experienced by Hastings, as Alwyn thus concluded, were
manifold and complicated; but, at the first, admiration and pity were
the strongest.

"My poor friend," said he, kindly, "if you thus love a demoiselle
deserving all my reverence, your words and your thoughts bespeak you no
unworthy pretender; but take my counsel, good Alwyn. Come not--thou from
the Chepe--come not to the court for a wife. Forget this fantasy."

"My lord, it is impossible! Forget I cannot, regret I may.

"Thou canst not succeed, man," resumed the nobleman, more coldly,
"nor couldst if William Hastings had never lived. The eyes of women
accustomed to gaze on the gorgeous externals of the world are blinded
to plain worth like thine. It might have been different had the donzell
never abided in a palace; but as it is, brave fellow, learn how these
wounds of the heart scar over, and the spot becomes hard and callous
evermore. What art thou, Master Nicholas Alwyn," continued Hastings,
gloomily, and with a withering smile--"what art thou, to ask for a bliss
denied to me--to all of us,--the bliss of carrying poetry into life,
youth into manhood, by winning--the FIRST LOVED? But think not, sir
lover, that I say this in jealousy or disparagement. Look yonder, by the
leafless elm, the white robe of Sibyll Warner. Go and plead thy suit."

"Do I understand you, my lord?" said Alwyn, somewhat confused and
perplexed by the tone and the manner Hastings adopted. "Does report err,
and you do not love this maiden?"

"Fair master," returned Hastings, scornfully, "thou hast no right that
I trow of to pry into my thoughts and secrets; I cannot acknowledge
my judge in thee, good jeweller and goldsmith,--enough, surely, in all
courtesy, that I yield thee the precedence. Tell thy tale, as movingly,
if thou wilt, as thou hast told it to me; say of me all that thou
fanciest thou hast reason to suspect; and if, Master Alwyn, thou woo and
win the lady, fail not to ask me to thy wedding!"

There was in this speech and the bearing of the speaker that superb
levity, that inexpressible and conscious superiority, that cold,
ironical tranquillity, which awe and humble men more than grave disdain
or imperious passion. Alwyn ground his teeth as he listened, and gazed
in silent despair and rage upon the calm lord. Neither of these men
could strictly be called handsome. Of the two, Alwyn had the advantage
of more youthful prime, of a taller stature, of a more powerful, though
less supple and graceful, frame. In their very dress, there was little
of that marked distinction between classes which then usually prevailed,
for the dark cloth tunic and surcoat of Hastings made a costume even
simpler than the bright-coloured garb of the trader, with its broad
trimmings of fur, and its aiglettes of elaborate lace. Between man
and man, then, where was the visible, the mighty, the insurmountable
difference in all that can charm the fancy and captivate the eye, which,
as he gazed, Alwyn confessed to himself there existed between the two?
Alas! how the distinctions least to be analyzed are ever the sternest!
What lofty ease in that high-bred air; what histories of triumph seemed
to speak in that quiet eye, sleeping in its own imperious lustre; what
magic of command in that pale brow; what spells of persuasion in that
artful lip! Alwyn muttered to himself, bowed his head involuntarily, and
passed on at once from Hastings to Sibyll, who now, at the distance of
some yards, had arrested her steps, in surprise to see the conference
between the nobleman and the burgher.

But as he approached Sibyll, poor Alwyn felt all the firmness and
courage he had exhibited with Hastings melt away. And the trepidation
which a fearful but deep affection ever occasions in men of his
character, made his movements more than usually constrained and awkward,
as he cowered beneath the looks of the maid he so truly loved.

"Seekest thou me, Master Alwyn?" asked Sibyll, gently, seeing that,
though he paused by her side, he spoke not.

"I do," returned Alwyn, abruptly, and again he was silent. At length,
lifting his eyes and looking round him, he saw Hastings at the distance,
leaning against the rampart, with folded arms; and the contrast of his
rival's cold and arrogant indifference, and his own burning veins and
bleeding heart, roused up his manly spirit, and gave to his tongue the
eloquence which emotion gains when it once breaks the fetters it forges
for itself.

"Look, look, Sibyll!" he said, pointing to Hastings "look! that man you
believe loves you. If so--if he loved thee,--would he stand yonder--mark
him--aloof, contemptuous, careless--while he knew that I was by your
side?"

Sibyll turned upon the goldsmith eyes full of innocent surprise,--eyes
that asked, plainly as eyes could speak, "And wherefore not, Master
Alwyn?"

Alwyn so interpreted the look, and replied, as if she had spoken:
"Because he must know how poor and tame is that feeble fantasy which
alone can come from a soul worn bare with pleasure, to that which I
feel and now own for thee,--the love of youth, born of the heart's first
vigour; because he ought to fear that that love should prevail with
thee; because that love ought to prevail. Sibyll, between us there are
not imparity and obstacle. Oh, listen to me,--listen still! Frown not,
turn not away." And, stung and animated by the sight of his rival, fired
by the excitement of a contest on which the bliss of his own life and
the weal of Sibyll's might depend, his voice was as the cry of a mortal
agony, and affected the girl to the inmost recesses of her soul. "Oh,
Alwyn, I frown not!" she said sweetly; "oh, Alwyn, I turn not away! Woe
is me to give pain to so kind and brave a heart; but--"

"No, speak not yet. I have studied thee, I have read thee as a scholar
would read a book. I know thee proud; I know thee aspiring; I know thou
art vain of thy gentle blood, and distasteful of my yeoman's birth.
There, I am not blind to thy faults, but I love thee despite them; and
to please those faults I have toiled, schemed, dreamed, risen. I offer
to thee the future with the certainty of a man who can command it.
Wouldst thou wealth?--be patient (as ambition ever is): in a few years
thou shalt have more gold than the wife of Lord Hastings can command;
thou shalt lodge more statelily, fare more sumptuously; [This was no
vain promise of Master Alwyn. At that time a successful trader made a
fortune with signal rapidity, and enjoyed greater luxuries than most of
the barons. All the gold in the country flowed into the coffers of
the London merchants.] thou shalt walk on cloth-of-gold if thou wilt!
Wouldst thou titles?--I will win them. Richard de la Pole, who founded
the greatest duchy in the realm, was poorer than I, when he first served
in a merchant's ware. Gold buys all things now. Oh, would to Heaven it
could but buy me thee!"

"Master Alwyn, it is not gold that buys love. Be soothed. What can I say
to thee to soften the harsh word 'Nay'?"

"You reject me, then, and at once? I ask not your hand now. I will wait,
tarry, hope,--I care not if for years; wait till I can fulfil all I
promise thee!"

Sibyll, affected to tears, shook her head mournfully; and there was a
long and painful silence. Never was wooing more strangely circumstanced
than this,--the one lover pleading while the other was in view; the one,
ardent, impassioned, the other, calm and passive; and the silence of the
last, alas! having all the success which the words of the other lacked.
It might be said that the choice before Sibyll was a type of the choice
ever given, but in vain, to the child of genius. Here a secure and
peaceful life, an honoured home, a tranquil lot, free from ideal
visions, it is true, but free also from the doubt and the terror, the
storms of passion; there, the fatal influence of an affection, born of
imagination, sinister, equivocal, ominous, but irresistible. And the
child of genius fulfilled her destiny!

"Master Alwyn," said Sibyll, rousing herself to the necessary exertion,
"I shall never cease gratefully to recall thy generous friendship, never
cease to pray fervently for thy weal below. But forever and forever let
this content thee,--I can no more."

Impressed by the grave and solemn tone of Sibyll, Alwyn hushed the groan
that struggled to his lips, and gloomily replied: "I obey you, fair
mistress, and I return to my workday life; but ere I go, I pray you
misthink me not if I say this much: not alone for the bliss of hoping
for a day in which I might call thee mine have I thus importuned, but,
not less--I swear not less--from the soul's desire to save thee from
what I fear will but lead to woe and wayment, to peril and pain, to
weary days and sleepless nights. 'Better a little fire that warms than
a great that burns.' Dost thou think that Lord Hastings, the vain, the
dissolute--"

"Cease, sir!" said Sibyll, proudly; "me reprove if thou wilt, but lower
not my esteem for thee by slander against another!"

"What!" said Alwyn, bitterly; "doth even one word of counsel chafe thee?
I tell thee that if thou dreamest that Lord Hastings loves Sibyll Warner
as man loves the maiden he would wed, thou deceivest thyself to thine
own misery. If thou wouldst prove it, go to him now,--go and say, 'Wilt
thou give me that home of peace and honour, that shelter for my father's
old age under a son's roof which the trader I despise proffers me in
vain?"

"If it were already proffered me--by him?" said Sibyll, in a low voice,
and blushing deeply.

Alwyn started. "Then I wronged him; and--and--" he added generously,
though with a faint sickness at his heart, "I can yet be happy in
thinking thou art so. Farewell, maiden, the saints guard thee from one
memory of regret at what hath passed between us!"

He pulled his bonnet hastily over his brows, and departed with unequal
and rapid strides. As he passed the spot where Hastings stood leaning
his arm upon the wall, and his face upon his hand, the nobleman looked
up, and said,--

"Well, Sir Goldsmith, own at least that thy trial hath been a fair one!"
Then struck with the anguish written upon Alwyn's face, he walked up
to him, and, with a frank, compassionate impulse, laid his hand on
his shoulder. "Alwyn," he said, "I have felt what you feel now; I have
survived it, and the world hath not prospered with me less! Take with
you a compassion that respects, and does not degrade you."

"Do not deceive her, my lord,--she trusts and loves you! You never
deceived man,--the wide world says it,--do not deceive woman! Deeds kill
men, words women!" Speaking thus simply, Alwyn strode on, and vanished.

Hastings slowly and silently advanced to Sibyll. Her rejection of Alwyn
had by no means tended to reconcile him to the marriage he himself had
proffered. He might well suppose that the girl, even if unguided by
affection, would not hesitate between a mighty nobleman and an obscure
goldsmith. His pride was sorely wounded that the latter should have even
thought himself the equal of one whom he had proposed, though but in
a passionate impulse, to raise to his own state. And yet as he neared
Sibyll, and, with a light footstep, she sprang forward to meet him, her
eyes full of sweet joy and confidence, he shrank from an avowal which
must wither up a heart opening thus all its bloom of youth and love to
greet him.

"Ah, fair lord," said the maiden, "was it kindly in thee to permit
poor Alwyn to inflict on me so sharp a pain, and thou to stand calmly
distant? Sure, alas! that had thy humble rival proffered a crown, it had
been the same to Sibyll! Oh, how the grief it was mine to cause
grieved me; and yet, through all, I had one selfish, guilty gleam of
pleasure,--to think that I had not been loved so well, if I were all
unworthy the sole love I desire or covet!"

"And yet, Sibyll, this young man can in all, save wealth and a sounding
name, give thee more than I can,--a heart undarkened by moody memories,
a temper unsoured by the world's dread and bitter lore of man's frailty
and earth's sorrow. Ye are not far separated by ungenial years, and
might glide to a common grave hand in hand; but I, older in heart than
in age, am yet so far thine elder in the last, that these hairs will
be gray, and this form bent, while thy beauty is in its prime, and--but
thou weepest!"

"I weep that thou shouldst bring one thought of time to sadden my
thoughts, which are of eternity. Love knows no age, it foresees no
grave! its happiness and its trust behold on the earth but one glory,
melting into the hues of heaven, where they who love lastingly pass
calmly on to live forever! See, I weep not now!"

"And did not this honest burgher," pursued Hastings, softened and
embarrassed, but striving to retain his cruel purpose, "tell thee to
distrust me; tell thee that my vows were false?"

"Methinks, if an angel told me so, I should disbelieve!"

"Why, look thee, Sibyll, suppose his warning true; suppose that at this
hour I sought thee with intent to say that that destiny which ambition
weaves for itself forbade me to fulfil a word hotly spoken; that I could
not wed thee,--should I not seem to thee a false wooer, a poor trifler
with thy earnest heart; and so, couldst thou not recall the love of him
whose truer and worthier homage yet lingers in thine ear, and with him
be happy?"

Sibyll lifted her dark eyes, yet humid, upon the unrevealing face of
the speaker, and gazed on him with wistful and inquiring sadness; then,
shrinking from his side, she crossed her arms meekly on her bosom, and
thus said,--

"If ever, since we parted, one such thought hath glanced across
thee--one thought of repentance at the sacrifice of pride, or the
lessening of power--which (she faltered, broke off the sentence, and
resumed)--in one word, if thou wouldst retract, say it now, and I will
not accuse thy falsehood, but bless thy truth."

"Thou couldst be consoled, then, by thy pride of woman, for the loss of
an unworthy lover?"

"My lord, are these questions fair?"

Hastings was silent. The gentler part of his nature struggled severely
with the harder. The pride of Sibyll moved him no less than her trust;
and her love in both was so evident, so deep, so exquisitely contrasting
the cold and frivolous natures amidst which his lot had fallen, that
he recoiled from casting away forever a heart never to be replaced.
Standing on that bridge of life, with age before and youth behind, he
felt that never again could he be so loved, or, if so loved by one so
worthy of whatever of pure affection, of young romance, was yet left to
his melancholy and lonely soul.

He took her hand, and, as she felt its touch, her firmness forsook her,
her head drooped upon her bosom, and she burst into an agony of tears.

"Oh, Sibyll, forgive me! Smile on me again, Sibyll!" exclaimed Hastings,
subdued and melted. But, alas! the heart once bruised and galled
recovers itself but slowly, and it was many minutes before the softest
words the eloquent lover could shape to sound sufficed to dry those
burning tears, and bring back the enchanting smile,--nay, even then the
smile was forced and joyless. They walked on for some moments, both in
thought, till Hastings said: "Thou lovest me, Sibyll, and art worthy of
all the love that man can feel for maid; and yet, canst thou solve me
this question, nor chide me that I ask it, Dost thou not love the world
and the world's judgments more than me? What is that which women call
honour? What makes them shrink from all love that takes not the form and
circumstance of the world's hollow rites? Does love cease to be love,
unless over its wealth of trust and emotion the priest mouths his empty
blessing? Thou in thy graceful pride art angered if I, in wedding thee,
should remember the sacrifice which men like me--I own it fairly--deem
as great as man can make; and yet thou wouldst fly my love if it wooed
thee to a sacrifice of thine own."

Artfully was the question put, and Hastings smiled to himself in
imagining the reply it must bring; and then Sibyll answered, with the
blush which the very subject called forth,

"Alas, my lord, I am but a poor casuist, but I feel that if I asked thee
to forfeit whatever men respect,--honour and repute for valour, to be
traitor and dastard,--thou couldst love me no more; and marvel you if,
when man woos woman to forfeit all that her sex holds highest,--to be in
woman what dastard and traitor is in man,--she hears her conscience
and her God speak in a louder voice than can come from a human lip? The
goods and pomps of the world we are free to sacrifice, and true love
heeds and counts them not; but true love cannot sacrifice that which
makes up love,--it cannot sacrifice the right to be loved below; the
hope to love on in the realm above; the power to pray with a pure soul
for the happiness it yearns to make; the blessing to seem ever good and
honoured in the eyes of the one by whom alone it would be judged. And
therefore, sweet lord, true love never contemplates this sacrifice; and
if once it believes itself truly loved, it trusts with a fearless faith
in the love on which it leans."

"Sibyll, would to Heaven I had seen thee in my youth! Would to Heaven I
were more worthy of thee!" And in that interview Hastings had no
heart to utter what he had resolved, "Sibyll, I sought thee but to say
Farewell."




CHAPTER VI. WARWICK RETURNS--APPEASES A DISCONTENTED PRINCE--AND CONFERS
WITH A REVENGEFUL CONSPIRATOR.

It was not till late in the evening that Warwick arrived at his vast
residence in London, where he found not only Marmaduke Nevile ready to
receive him, but a more august expectant, in George Duke of Clarence.
Scarcely had the earl crossed the threshold, when the duke seized his
arm, and leading him into the room that adjoined the hall, said,--

"Verily, Edward is besotted no less than ever by his wife's leech-like
family. Thou knowest my appointment to the government of Ireland;
Isabel, like myself, cannot endure the subordinate vassalage we must
brook at the court, with the queen's cold looks and sour words. Thou
knowest, also, with what vain pretexts Edward has put me of; and now,
this very day, he tells me that he hath changed his humour,--that I
am not stern enough for the Irish kernes; that he loves me too well to
banish me, forsooth; and that Worcester, the people's butcher but the
queen's favourite, must have the post so sacredly pledged to me. I see
in this Elizabeth's crafty malice. Is this struggle between king's blood
and queen's kith to go on forever?"

"Calm thyself, George; I will confer with the king tomorrow, and hope
to compass thy not too arrogant desire. Certes, a king's brother is
the fittest vice-king for the turbulent kernes of Ireland, who are
ever flattered into obeisance by ceremony and show. The government was
pledged to thee--Edward can scarcely be serious. Moreover, Worcester,
though forsooth a learned man--Mort-Dieu! methinks that same learning
fills the head to drain the heart!--is so abhorred for his cruelties
that his very landing in Ireland will bring a new rebellion to add to
our already festering broils and sores. Calm thyself, I say. Where didst
thou leave Isabel?"

"With my mother."

"And Anne?--the queen chills not her young heart with cold grace?"

"Nay, the queen dare not unleash her malice against Edward's will; and,
to do him justice, he hath shown all honour to Lord Warwick's daughter."

"He is a gallant prince, with all his faults," said the father,
heartily, "and we must bear with him, George; for verily he hath bound
men by a charm to love him. Stay thou and share my hasty repast, and
over the wine we will talk of thy views. Spare me now for a moment;
I have to prepare work eno' for a sleepless night. This Lincolnshire
rebellion promises much trouble. Lord Willoughby has joined it; more
than twenty thousand men are in arms. I have already sent to convene the
knights and barons on whom the king can best depend, and must urge their
instant departure for their halls, to raise men and meet the foe. While
Edward feasts, his minister must toil. Tarry a while till I return." The
earl re-entered the hall, and beckoned to Marmaduke, who stood amongst a
group of squires.

"Follow me; I may have work for thee." Warwick took a taper from one of
the servitors, and led the way to his own more private apartment. On the
landing of the staircase, by a small door, stood his body-squire--"Is
the prisoner within?"

"Yes, my lord."

"Good!"--The earl opened the door by which the squire had mounted guard,
and bade Marmaduke wait without.

The inmate of the chamber, whose dress bore the stains of fresh travel
and hard riding, lifted his face hastily as the earl entered.

"Robin Hilyard," said Warwick, "I have mused much how to reconcile my
service to the king with the gratitude I owe to a man who saved me from
great danger. In the midst of thy unhappy and rebellious designs thou
wert captured and brought to me; the papers found on thee attest a
Lancastrian revolt, so ripening towards a mighty gathering, and so
formidable from the adherents whom the gold and intrigues of King Louis
have persuaded to risk land and life for the Red Rose, that all the
king's friends can do to save his throne is now needed. In this revolt
thou hast been the scheming brain, the master hand, the match to the
bombard, the fire brand to the flax. Thou smilest, man! Alas! seest thou
not that it is my stern duty to send thee bound hand and foot before the
king's council, for the brake to wring from thee thy guilty secrets, and
the gibbet to close thy days?"

"I am prepared," said Hilyard; "when the bombard explodes, the match
has become useless; when the flame smites the welkin, the firebrand is
consumed!"

"Bold man! what seest thou in this rebellion that can profit thee?"

"I see, looming through the chasms and rents made in the feudal order by
civil war, the giant image of a free people."

"And thou wouldst be a martyr for the multitude, who deserted thee at
Olney?"

"As thou for the king who dishonoured thee at Shene!"

Warwick frowned, and there was a moment's pause; at last, said the earl:
"Look you, Robin, I would fain not have on my hands the blood of a man
who saved my life. I believe thee, though a fanatic and half madman,--I
believe thee true in word as rash of deed. Swear to me on the cross
