devolves on one of the young men. They have seldom more than one wife,
yet the plurality of wives is not denyed them by their customs. These
families when ascociated form nations or bands of nations each
acknoledging the authority of it's own chieftain who dose not appear to
be heriditary, nor his power to extend further than a mear repremand
for any improper act of an individual; the creation of a chief depends
upon the upright deportment of the individual & his ability and
disposition to render service to the community; and his authority or
the deference paid him is in exact equilibrio with the popularity or
voluntary esteem he has acquired among the individuals of his band or
nation. Their laws like those of all uncivilized Indians consist of a
set of customs which have grown out of their local situations. not
being able to speak their language we have not been able to inform
ourselves of the existence of any peculiar customs among them.




[Clark, January 19, 1806]
Tuesday 19th of January 1806
This morning Sent out two parties of hunters, one party towards Point
adams and the other party up Ne tel River by water. we were visited to
day by two Clatsop men and a woman who brought for Sale Some Sea otter
Skins of which we purchased one gave in exchange the remainder of our
blue heeds Consisting of 6 fathoms, and the Same quantity of Small
white beids and a knife. we also purchased a Small quantity of train
oil for a par of Brass arm bands, and a hat for Som fishinghooks. these
hats are of their own manufactory and are Composed of Cedar bark and
bear grass interwoven with the fingers and ornimented with various
Colours and figures, they are nearly water proof, light, and I am
Convinced are much more dureable than either Chip or Straw,--These hats
form a article of traffic with Clatsops an Chinnooks who dispose of
them to the whites, the form of the Hats is that which was in voge in
the U States and Great Britain in 1800 & 1801 with a high Crown rather
larger at the top than where it joins the brim, the brim narrow about 2
or 21/2 inches.

Several families of those people usially reside together in the Same
room; they appear to be the father mother with their Sons and their
Sons wives and children; their provisions appears to be in common and
the greatest harmoney appears to exist among them. the old man is not
always respected as the head of the family that duty generally devolves
on one of the young men. They have Sildom more than• one wife, yet
plurality of wives are not denyed them by their Customs. those families
when associated form bands of nations each acknowledgeing the authority
of its own Chieftains, who does not appear to be herititary, or has
power to extend further than a mear repremand for any improper
deportment of the indevidual; the Creation of a Chief depends upon the
upright Conduct of the individual his abiltity and disposition to
render Service to the Comunity, and his authority and the defference
paid him is in extent equilibrio with the popolarity or volintary
esteem he has acquired among the individuals of his band, or nation.
Their Laws like all uncivilized Indians Consist of a Set of customs
which has grown out of their local Situations. not being able to Speak
their language we have not been able to inform ourselves of the
existance of any peculiar Customs among them.




[Lewis, January 20, 1806]
Tuesday January 20th 1806.
Visited this morning by three Clatsops who remained with us all day;
the object of their visit is mearly to smoke the pipe. on the morning
of the eighteenth we issued 6 lbs. of jirked Elk pr. man, this evening
the Sergt. repoted that it was all exhausted; the six lbs. have
therefore lasted two days and a half only. at this rate our seven Elk
will last us only 3 days longer, yet no one seems much concerned about
the state of the stores; so much for habit. we have latterly so
frequently had our stock of provisions reduced to a minimum and
sometimes taken a small touch of fasting that three days full allowance
excites no concern. In those cases our skill as hunters afford us some
consolation, for if there is any game of any discription in our
neighbourhood we can track it up and kill it. most of the party have
become very expert with the rifle. The Indians who visited us today
understood us sufficiently to inform us that the whites did not barter
for the pounded fish; that it was purchased and consumed by the
Clatsops, Chinnooks, Cathlahmah's and Skillutes. The native roots which
furnish a considerable proportion of the subsistence of the indians in
our neighbourhood are those of a species of Thistle, fern and rush; the
Liquorice, and a small celindric root the top of which I have not yet
seen, this last resembles the sweet pittatoe very much in it's flavor
and consistency.




[Clark, January 20, 1806]
Wednesday 20th January 1806
Visited this morning by three Clapsots who remained with us all day;
the object of their visit is mearly to Smoke the pipe. on the morning
of the 18 inst. we issued 6 wt. of jurked meat pr. man, this evening
the Serjt. reports that is all exhosted; the 6 w. have therefore lasted
2 days and a half only. at this rate our Seven Elk will only last us 3
days longer, yet no one appears much concerned about the State of the
Stores; So much for habet. we have latterly so frequently had our Stock
of provisions reduced to a minimum and Sometimes taken a Small tuck of
fasting that 3 days full allowance exites no concern. In those Cases
our Skill as hunters affords us Some Consolation, for if there is any
game of any discription in our neighbourhood we can track it up and
kill it. most of the party have become very expert with the rifle. The
Indians who visit us to day understood us Sufficiently to inform us
that the white who visit them did not barter for the pounded fish; that
it was purchased and Consumed by the Clatsops, Chin nooks, Cath lah
mahs and Skil lutes, and Kil a moxs.

The native roots which furnish a considerable proportion of the
Subsistance of the indians in our neighbourhoodd are those of a Species
of Thistle, fern, and rush; the Licquorice, and a Small celindric root
the top of which I have not yet Seen, this last resembles the Sweet
potato verry much in its flavour and Consistency.




[Lewis, January 21, 1806]
Wednesday January 21st 1806.
Two of the hunters Shannon & Labuish returned having killed three Elk.
Ordered a party to go in quest of the meat early tomorrow morning and
the hunters to return and continue the chase. the Indians left us about
12 O'Clk. The root of the thistle, called by the natives shan-ne-tahque
is a perpendicular fusiform and possesses from two to four radicles; is
from 9 to 15 Inces in length and about the size a mans thumb; the rhind
somewhat rough and of a brown colour; the consistence when first taken
from the earth is white and nearly as crisp as a carrot; when prepared
for uce by the same process before discribed of the white bulb or
pashshequo quawmash, it becomes black, and is more shugary than any
fuit or root that I have met with in uce among the natives; the sweet
is precisely that of the sugar in flavor; this root is sometimes eaten
also when first taken from the ground without any preperation; but in
this way is vastly in-ferior. it delights most in a deep rich dry lome
which has a good mixture of sand. the stem of this plant is simple
ascending celindric and hisped. the root leaves yet possess their
virdure and are about half grown of a plale green. the cauline leaf as
well as the stem of the last season are now dead, but in rispect to
it's form &c. it is simple, crenate, & oblong, reather more obtuse at
it's apex than at the base or insertion; it's margin armed with
prickles while it's disks are hairy, it's insertion decurrent and
position declining. the flower is also dry and mutilad. the pericarp
seems much like that of the common thistle. it rises to the hight of
from 3 to 4 feet.-




[Clark, January 21, 1806]
Thursday 21st of January 1806
Two of the hunters Shannon & Labieche returned haveing killed three
Elk, ordered a party to go in quest of the meat early tomorrow morning
and the hunters to return and continue the chase-. the Indians left us
about 12 oClock.

The root of the thistle called by the nativs Chan-ne-tak-que is
pirpendicular and possesses from two to 4 radicles; is from 9 to 15
inches in length and is Commonly about the Size of a mans thum the
rhine Somewhat rough and of a brown Colour; the Consistence when first
taken from the earth is white and nearly as Crisp as a Carrot, when
prepared for use by the Same process before discribed of the white bulb
or gash she quo, qua-mosh, it becomes black and is more Sugary than any
root I have met with among the nativs; the Sweet is prosisely that of
the Sugar in flavor, this root is Sometimes eaten when first taken from
the ground without any preperation, in this way it is well tasted but
soon weathers and becoms hard and insipped. it delights most in a deep
rich moist lome which has a good mixture of Sand--The Stems of this
plant is Simple ascending celindric and hisped. the root leaves, posses
their virdue and are about half grown of a deep Green. the Cauline leaf
as well as the Stem of the last Season are now dead, but in respect to
it's form &c. it is Simple Crenated and oblong, rather more obtuce at
it's apex than the base or insertion, it's margin armed with prickles
while it's disks are hairy, its insertion decurrent and position
declineing. the flower is also dry and mutilated the pericarp seems
much like that of the Common thistle it rises to the hight of from 3 to
4 feet.




[Lewis, January 22, 1806]
Thursday January 22nd 1806.
The party sent for the meat this morning returned with it in the
Evening; it was in very inferior order, in short the animals were poor.
Reubin Fields also remained with the other hunters Shannon & Labuish
our late supply of salt is out. we have not yet heared a sentence from
the other two parties of hunter's who are below us towards Point Adams
and the Praries.

There are three species of fern in this neighbourhood the root one of
which the natves eat; this grows very abundant in the open uplands and
praries where the latter are not sandy and consist of deep loose rich
black lome. the root is horizontal sometimes a little deverging or
obliquely descending, frequently dividing itself as it procedes into
two equal branches and shooting up a number of stems; it lies about 4
Inces beneath the surface of the earth. the root is celindric, with few
or no radicles and from the size of a goose quill to that of a man's
finger; the center of the root is divided into two equal parts by a
strong flat & white ligament like a piece of thin tape on either side
of this there is a white substance which when the root is roasted in
the embers is much like wheat dough and not very unlike it in flavour,
though it has also a pungency which becomes more visible after you have
chewed it some little time; this pungency was disagreeable to me, but
the natives eat it very voraciously and I have no doubt but it is a
very nutricious food. the bark of the root is black, somewhat rough,
thin and brittle, it easily seperates in flakes from the part which is
eaten as dose also the internal liggament. this root perennil. in rich
lands this plant rises to the hight of from 4 to five feet. the stem is
smooth celindric, slightly groved on one side erect about half it's
hight on the 2 first branches thence reclining backwards from the
grooved side; it puts forth it's branches which are in reallyty long
footstalks by pares from one side only and near the edges of the
groove, these larger footstalks are also grooved cilindric and
gradually tapering towards the extremity, puting forth alternate
footstalks on either side of the grove near it's edge; these lesser
footstalks the same in form as the first put forth from forty to fifty
alternate pinate leaves which are sessile, horizontal, multipartite for
half their length from the point of insertion and terminating in a long
shaped apex, and are also revolute with the upper disk smoth and the
lower slightly cottanny. these alternate leaves after proceeding half
the length of the footstalk cease to be partite and assume the tongue
like form altogether. this plant produces no flower or fruit whatever,
is of a fine green colour in summer and a beautiful) plant. the top is
annual and is of course dead at present.-




[Clark, January 22, 1806]
Friday 22nd January 1806
The party Sent for the meat this morning returned with it in the
evening; it was in verry inferior order, in Short the animals were
pore. Rieuben Field Shannon and Labiech remained in the woods to hunt.
our late Supply of Salt is out. we have not heard a word of the other
hunters who are below us towards point adams and the Praries. Some rain
this day at intervales

There are three Species of fern in this neighbourhood the root one of
which the nativs eate; that of which the nativs eate produce no flowers
whatever or fruit of a fine green Colour and the top is annual, and in
Course dead at present.

I observe no difference between the licorice of this Countrey and that
Common to maney parts of the United States where it is sometimes
Cultivated in our gardins-. this plant delights in a deep lose Sandy
Soil; here it grows verry abundant and large; the nativs roste it in
the embers and pound it Slightly with a Small Stick in order to make it
Seperate more readily from the Strong liggaments which forms the center
of the root; this they discard and chew and Swallow the ballance of the
root; this last is filled with a number of thin membrencies like
network, too tough to be masticated and which I find it necessary also
to discard. This root when roasted possesses an agreeable flavour not
unlike the Sweet potato. The root of the thistle (described yesterday)
after undergoing the process of Sweting or bakeing in a kiln is
Sometimes eaten with the train oil also, at other times pounded fine
and mixed with Cold water, untill reduced to the Consistancy of Gruel;
in this way I think it verry agreeable. but the most valuable of all
their roots is foreign to this neighbourhood I mean the Wappetoe.

The Wappetoe, or bulb of the Sagitifolia or common arrow head, which
grows in great abundance in the marshey grounds of that butifull and
fertile vally on the Columbia commenceing just above the quick Sand
River and extending downwards for about 70 miles. this bulb forms a
principal article of trafic between the inhabitents of the vally and
those of their neighbourhood or Sea coast.




[Lewis, January 23, 1806]
Friday January 23rd 1806.
This morning dispatched Howard and Warner to the Camp of the Saltmakes
for a supply of salt. The men of the garison are still busily employed
in dressing Elk's skins for cloathing, they find great difficulty for
the want of branes; we have not soap to supply the deficiency, nor can
we procure ashes to make the lye; none of the pines which we use for
fuel affords any ashes; extrawdinary as it may seem, the greene wood is
consoomed without leaving the residium of a particle of ashes.

The root of the rush used by the natives is a sollid bulb about one
inch in length and usually as thick as a man's thumb, of an ovate form
depressed on two or more sides, covered with a thin smothe black rind.
the pulp is white brittle and easily masticated either raw or roasted
the latter is the way in which it is most usually prepared for uce.
this root is reather insipid in point of flavour, it grows in greatest
abundance along the sea coast in the sandy grounds and is most used by
the Killamucks and those inhabiting the coast. each root sends up one
stock only which is annual, the root being perenniel. the bulb is
attatched to the bottom of the caulis or stem by a firm small and
strong radicle of about one Inch long; this radicle is mearly the
prolongation of the caulis and decends perpendicilarly; a little above
the junction of this radicle with the caulis, the latter is surrounded
in a whorl with a set of small radicles from 6 to 9 inches long which
are obliquely descending. the caulis is celindric erect hollow and
jointed, and is about the size or reather larger than the largest
quill. it rises to the hight of 3 or 4 feet, not branching nor dose it
either bear flower or seed that I can discover tho I am far from
denying that it dose so sometimes, but I have not been able to discover
it. the stem is rough like the sand rush and is much like it when green
or in it's succulent state. at each joint it puts out from twenty to
thirty long lineal stellate or radiate & horizontal leaves which
surround the stem. above each joint about half an inch the stem is
sheathed like the sand rush.




[Clark, January 23, 1806]
Saturday 23rd of January 1806
This morning dispatched Howard & Werner to the Camp of the Salt makers
for a Supply of Salt. the men of the garrison are Still busily employed
in dressing Elk Skins for cloathing, they fine great dificuelty for the
want of branes; we have not Soap to Supply the deficiency, nor can we
precure ashes to make the lye; none of the pine which we use for fuel
afford any ashes; extrawdinary as it may seem, the green wood is
cosumed without leaveing the risideum of a particle of ashes.-

The root of the rush used by the nativs is a Solid bulb about one inch
in length and usially as thick as a mans thumb, of an ovel form
depressed on two or more Sides, covered with a thin black rine. the
pulp is white brittle and easily masticated either raw or rosted, the
latter is the way it is most commonly prepared for use. this root is
reather insippid in point of flavour, it grows in the Greatest
abundance along the Sea coast in the wet Sandy grounds and is most used
by the Kil a mox and those inhabiting the Sea coast. each root Sends up
its Stalk which is annual, the root being perennial. the bulb is
atached to the bottom of the Stem by a firm Small and Strong radicle
which is mearly the prolongation of the Stem which is hollow and
jointed and is rather larger than the largest quill. it rises to the
hight of 3 or 4 feet, not branching no does it either bear flower or
Seed that I could discover tho I am far from denying that it does So
Sometimes, and perhaps every year, but I have not been able to discover
it, the Stem is rough like the Sand rush, and it's much like it when
green, at each joint it puts out from 20 to 30 radiate & horizontal
leaves which Surrounds the Stem. above each joint about half an inch
the Stem is Shethed like the Sand rush.

The instruments used by the nativs in digging their roots is a Strong
Stick of three feet and a half long Sharpened at the lower end and its
upper inserted into a part of an Elks or buck's horn which Serves as a
handle; Standing transvirsely in the Stick--or it is in this form as
thus A is the lower part which is a little hooked B is the upper part
or handle of Horn.




[Lewis, January 24, 1806]
Saturday January 24th 1806.
Drewyer and Baptiest La Paage returned this morning in a large Canoe
with Comowooll and six Clatsops. they brought two deer and the flesh of
three Elk & one Elk's skin, having given the flesh of one other Elk
which they killed and three Elk's skins to the Indians as the price of
their assistance in transporting the ballance of the meat to the Fort;
these Elk and deer were killed near point Adams and the Indians carryed
them on their backs about six miles, before the waves were sufficiently
low to permit their being taken on board their canoes. the Indians
remained with us all day. The Indians witnissed Drewyer's shooting some
of those Elk, which has given them a very exalted opinion of us as
marksmen and the superior excellence of our rifles compared with their
guns; this may probably be of service to us, as it will deter them from
any acts of hostility if they have ever meditated any such. My Air-gun
also astonishes them very much, they cannot comprehend it's shooting so
often and without powder; and think that it is great medicine which
comprehends every thing that is to them incomprehensible.

I observe no difference between the liquorice of this country and that
common to many parts of the United states where it is also sometimes
cultivated in our gardens. this plant delights in a deep loose sandy
soil; here it grows very abundant and large; the natives roast it in
the embers and pound it slightly with a small stick in order to make it
seperate more readily from the strong liggament which forms the center
of the root; this the natives discard and chew and swallow the ballance
of the root; this last is filled with a number of thin membrenacious
lamela like net work, too tough to be masticated and which I find it
necessary also to discard. this root when roasted possesses an
agreeable flavour not unlike the sweet pittaitoe. beside the small
celindric root mentioned on the 20th inst., they have also another
about the same form size and appearance which they use much with the
train oil, this root is usually boiled; to me it possesses a
disagreeable bitterness. the top of this plant I have never yet seen.
The root of the thistle after undergoing the prossess of sweating or
baking in a kiln is sometimes eaten with the train oil also, and at
other times pounded fine and mixed with could water untill reduced to
the consistency of sagamity or indian mush; in this way I think it very
agreeable. but the most valuable of all their roots is foreign to this
neighbourhood I mean the Wappetoe, or the bulb of the Sagitifolia or
common arrow head, which grows in great abundance in the marshey
grounds of that beatifull and firtile valley on the Columbia commencing
just above the entrance of Quicksand River, and extending downwards for
about 70 Miles. this bulb forms a principal article of traffic between
the inhabitants of the valley and those of this neighbourhood or sea
coast. The instrument used by the natives in diging their roots is a
strong stick of 31/2 feet long sharpened at the lower end and it's
upper inscerted into a part of an Elks or buck's horn which serves as a
handle, standing transversely with the stick or it is in this form A
the lower point, B the upper part or handle.




[Clark, January 24, 1806]
Sunday 24th of January 1806
Drewyer and Bapteist laPage returned this morning in a large Canoe with
Commowol and six Clatsops. they brought two Deer and three Elk and one
elk Skin, haveing given the flesh of one other Elk they killed and
three Elk skins to the Indians as the price of their assistance in
transporting the ballance of the meat to the Fort; these Deer and Elk
were killed near pt. Adams and those Indians Carried them on their
Backs near 4 miles, before the waves were Sufficiently low to permit
their being taken on board their Canoes. The indians remain'd with us
all day. The Clapsots witnessed Drewyers Shooting Some of those Elk,
which has given them a very exolted opinion of us as marksmen and the
Superior excellency of our rifles Compared with their guns; this may
probably be of service to us, as it will deter them from any acts of
hostility if they have ever meditated any such.

our air gun also astonishes them very much, they Cannot Comprehend its
Shooting So often and without powder, and think that it is great
medison which Comprehends every thing that is to them incomprehensible.

The nativs of this neighbourhood ware no further Covering than a light
roabe, their feet legs & every other part exposed to the frost Snow &
ice &c.




[Lewis, January 25, 1806]
Sunday January 25th 1806.
Commowooll and the Clatsops departed early this morning. At meridian
Colter returned and repoted that his comrade hunter Willard had
continued his hunt from point Adams towards the salt makers; and that
they had killed only those two deer which the Indians brought
yesterday. In the evening Collins one of the saltmakers returned and
reported that they had mad about one bushel of salt & that himself and
two others had hunted from the salt camp for five days without killing
any thing and they had been obliged to subsist on some whale which they
procured from the natives.

The native fruits and buries in uce among the Indians of this
neighbourhood are a deep purple burry about the size of a small cherry
called by them Shal-lun, a small pale red bury called Sol'-me; the
vineing or low Crambury, a light brown bury reather larger and much the
shape of the black haw; and a scarlet bury about the size of a small
cherry the plant called by the Canadin Engages of the N. W. sac a
commis produces this bury; this plant is so called from the
circumstance of the Clerks of those trading companies carrying the
leaves of this plant in a small bag for the purpose of smokeing of
which they are excessively fond. the Indians call this bury ____

I have lately learned that the natives whome I have heretofore named as
distinct nations, living on the sea coast S. E. of the Killamucks, are
only bands of that numerous nation, which continues to extend itself
much further on that coast than I have enumerated them, but of the
particular appellations of those distant bands I have not yet been
enabled to inform myself; their language also is somewhat different
from the Clatsops Chinnooks and Cathlahmahs; but I have not yet obtaind
a vocabulary which I shall do the first oportunity which offers.




[Clark, January 25, 1806]
Monday 25th of January 1806
Commowol and the Clatsops departed early this morning. Colter returned
and reported that his comrade hunter Willard had Continued his hunt
from Point Adams towards the Saltmakers; and that they had killed only
those two deer which the indians brought yesterday; in the evening
Collins one of the Saltmakers returned and reported that they had made
about one bushel of Salt and that himself and two others had hunted
from the Salt Camp for five days without killing any thing and they had
been obliged to Subsist on Some whale which they purchased from the
nativs-.

The native fruits and berries in use among the Indians of this
neighbourhood are a Deep purple about the Size of a Small cherry called
by them Shal lun, a Small pale red berry called Sol me; the vineing or
low brown berry, a light brown berry rather larger and much the Shape
of a black haw; and a Scarlet berry about the Size of a Small Chirry
the plant Called by the Canadian Engages of the N. W. Sac a commis
produces this berry; this plant is So Called from the circumstances of
the Clerks of these tradeing Companies Carrying the leaves of this
plant in a Small bag for the purpose of Smokeing of which they are
excessively fond the Indians Call this berry ____




[Lewis, January 26, 1806]
Monday January 26th 1806.
Werner and Howard who were sent for salt on the 23rd have not yet
returned, we are apprehensive that they have missed their way; neither
of them are very good woodsmen, and this thick heavy timbered pine
country added to the constant cloudy weather makes it difficult for
even a good woodsman to steer for any considerable distance the course
he wishes. we ordered Collins to return early in the morning and rejoin
the salt makers, and gave him some small articles of merchandize to
purchase provisions from the Indians, in the event of their still being
unfortunate in the chase. The Shallun or deep purple berry is in form
much like the huckkleberry and terminates bluntly with a kind of cap or
cover at the end like that fruit; they are attatched seperately to the
sides of the boughs of the shrub by a very short stem hanging
underneath the same and are frequently placed very near each other on
the same bough; it is a full bearer. the berry is easily geathered as
it seperates from the bough readily, while the leaf is strongly
affixed. the shrub which produces this fruit rises to the hight of 6 or
8 feet sometimes grows on the high lands but moste generally in the
swampy or marshey grounds; it is an evergreen. the stem or trunk is
from three to 10 Inches in circumference irregularly and much branched,
seldom more than one steem proceding from the same root, tho they are
frequently associated very thickly. the bark is somewhat rough and of a
redish brown colour. the wood is very firm and hard. the leaves are
alternate declining and attatched by a short fotstalk to the two
horizontal sides of the boughs; the form is a long oval, reather more
accute towards its apex than at the point of insertion; it's margin
slightly serrate, it's sides colapsing or partially foalding upwards or
channelled; it is also thick firm smothe and glossey, the upper surface
of a fine deep green, while the under disk is of a pale or whiteish
green. this shrub retains it's virdure very perfectly during the winter
and is a beautifull shrub.--the natives either eat these berrys when
ripe immediately from the bushes or dryed in the sun or by means of
their sweating kilns; very frequently they pound them and bake then in
large loaves of 10 or fifteen pounds; this bread keeps very well during
one season and retains the moist jeucies of the fruit much better than
by any other method of preservation. this bread is broken and stired in
could water until it be sufficiently thick and then eaten; in this way
the natives most generally use it.




[Clark, January 26, 1806]
Tuesday 26th of January 1806
We order Collins to return early in the morning and join the Salt
makers, and gave him Some Small articles of merchendize to purchase
Some provisions from the indians in the event of their Still being
unfortunate in the chase.

The or deep purple berry is in form much like the huckleberry and
termonate bluntly with a kind of Cap or cover at the end like that
fruit; they are attached Seperately to the Sides of the boughes of the
shrub by a very Short Stem ganging under neath the Same, and are
frequently placed verry near each other on the Same bough it is a full
bearer; the berry is easily gathered as it Seperates from the bough,
readily, while the leaf is Strongly affixed. the Shrub which produces
this fruit rises to the hight of 6 or 8 feet Sometimes grows on high
lands but most frequently in Swampy or marshey grounds; it is an ever
green. the Stem or trunk is from 3 to 10 inches in circumferance
irrigularly and much branched, Seldom more than one Stem proceeding
from the Same root, tho they are frequently associated very thickly.
the bark is Somewhat rough and of a redish brown Colour. the wood is
very firm and hard. the leaves are alternate declining and attachd by a
Short fotstalk to the two horozontal Sides of the bough's; the form is
a long oval, reather more accute towards its apex that at the point of
insertion; it's Sides partially folding upwards; or Channeled, it is
also thick Smothe and glossy, the upper Surfice of a fine deep green,
while the under disk is of a pale or whiteish green. this Shrub retains
its verdure verry perfectly dureing the winter and is a butifull
Shrub-. the nativs either eate those berries ripe imediately from the
bushes, or dried in the Sun or by means of the Swetting kiln; verry
frequently they pound them and bake them in large loaves 10 or 15
pounds weight; this bread keeps verry well dureing one Season and
retains the moist jouicies of the frute much better than any other
method of preperation. The bread is broken and Stured in Coald water
untill it be Sufficiently thick and then eaten, in this way the nativ's
most generally use it-.-.




[Lewis, January 27, 1806]
Tuesday January 27th 1806.
This morning Collins set out for the Salt works. in the evening Shannon
returned and reported that himself and party had killed ten Elk. he
left Labuche and R. fields with the Elk. two of those Elk he informed
us were at the distance of nine miles from this place near the top of a
mountain, that the rout by which they mus be brought was at least four
miles by land through a country almost inaccessible from the fallen
timber, brush and sink-holes, which were now disgused by the snow; we
therefore concluded to relinquish those two Elk for the present, and
ordered every man who could be speared from the fort to go early in the
morning in surch of the other eight.

Goodrich has recovered from the Louis veneri which he contracted from
an amorous contact with a Chinnook damsel. I cured him as I did Gibson
last winter by the uce of murcury. I cannot learn that the Indians have
any simples which are sovereign specifics in the cure of this disease;
and indeed I doubt very much wheter any of them have any means of
effecting a perfect cure. when once this disorder is contracted by them
it continues with them during life; but always ends in decipitude,
death, or premature old age; tho from the uce of certain simples
together with their diet, they support this disorder with but little
inconvenience for many years, and even enjoy a tolerable share of
health; particularly so among the Chippeways who I believe to be better
skilled in the uce of those simples than any nation of Savages in North
America. The Chippeways use a decoction of the root of the Lobelia, and
that of a species of sumac common to the Atlantic states and to this
country near and on the Western side of the Rocky Mountains. this is
the smallest species of the sumac, readily distinguished by it's winged
rib, or common footstalk, which supports it's oppositely pinnate
leaves. these decoctions are drank freely and without limitation. the
same decoctions are used in cases of the gonnaerea and are effecatious
and sovereign. notwithstanding that this disorder dose exist among the
Indians on the Columbia yet it is witnessed in but few individuals, at
least the males who are always sufficiently exposed to the observations
or inspection of the phisician. in my whole rout down this river I did
not see more than two or three with the gonnaerea and about double that
number with the pox.

The beary which the natives call solme is the production of a plant
about the size and much the shape of that common to the atlantic states
which produces the berry commonly called Solloman's seal berry. this
berry also is attatched to the top of the stem in the same manner; and
is of a globelar form, consisting of a thin soft pellecle which
encloses a soft pulp inveloping from three to four seeds, white, firm,
smothe, and in the form of a third or quarter of a globe, and large in
proportion to the fruit or about the size of the seed of the common
small grape. this berry when grown and unripe is not speckled as that
of the Solomon's seal berry is; this last has only one globular smoth
white firm seed in each berry.the Solme grows in the woodlands among
the moss and is an annual plant to all appearance.




[Clark, January 27, 1806]
Wednesday 27th January 1806
This morning Collins Set out to the Saltmakers Shannon returned and
reported that himself and party had killed 10 Elk. he lef Labiech & R
Field with the Elk, two of those Elk he informed us was at the distance
of 9 miles from this place near the top of a mountain, that the rout by
which they must be brought was at least 5 miles by land thro a Countrey
almost inexcessable, from the fallen timber brush, and Sink holes,
which were now disguised by the Snow; we therefore Concluded to
relinquish those two Elks for the present, and ordered every man that
Could be Speared from the Fort to go early in the morning in Serch of
the other Eight, which is at no great distance from the Netul river, on
which we are. Goudrich has recoverd from the louis veneri which he
contracted from a amorous Contact with a Chinnook damsel. he was Cured
as Gibson was with murcury by ____ I cannot lern that the Indians have
any Simples Sovereign Specifics in the cure of this disease; indeed I
doubt verry much whether any of them have any means of effecting a
perfect cure. when once this disorder is contracted by them it
Continues with them dureing life; but always ends in decepitude, death;
or premature old age; tho from the use of certain Simples together with
their diet, they Support this disorder with but little inconveniance
for maney years, and even enjoy a tolerable Share of health;
particularly So among the Chippeways who I beleive to be better Skilled
in the use of those Simples than any nation of Indians in North
America. The Chippaways use a decoction of the root of the Labelia, and
that of a Species of Sumac Common to the Atlantic States and to this
countrey near and on the western Side of the Rocky mountains. This is
the Smallest Specis of Sumake, readily distinguished by it's winged
rib, or common footstalk, which Supports it's oppositly pinnate leaves.
these decoctions are drank freely and without limatation. the Same
decoctions are used also in cases of the gonnarea and are effecatious
and sovereign. notwithstanding that this disorder does exist among the
indians on the Columbia yet it is witnessed in but fiew individuals
high up the river, or at least the males who are always Sufficiently
exposed to the observation or inspection of the phisician. in my whole
rout down this river I did not See more than two or three with Gonnarea
and about double that number with the Pox.

The berry which the nativs Call Sol me is the production of a plant
about the Size and much the Shape of that Common to the atlantic States
which produces the berry Commonly Called Sollomons Seal berry this
berry is also attached to the top of the Stem in the Same manner; and
is of a globular form Consisting of a thin Soft Pellicle rine which
encloses a Soft Pellicle pulp inveloping from 3 to 4 Seed, white firm,
Smothe, and in the form of a third or a quarter of a Globe, and large
in perportion to the fruit, or about the Size of the Seed of the Common
Small grape. the berry when grown and unripe is not Specked as the
Solomon's seal Berry is; this last haveing only one Globaler Smothe,
ferm, white Seed in each berry-. the Sol me grows in the wood lands
amonge the moss and on the high ridges. and is an annual plant to all
appearance




[Lewis, January 28, 1806]
Wednesday January 28th 1806.
Drewyer and Baptiest La Page set out this morning on a hunting
excurtion. about noon Howard and Werner returned with a supply of salt;
the badness of the weather and the difficulty of the road had caused
their delay. they inform us that the salt makers are still much
straitened for provision, having killed two deer only in the last six
days; and that there are no Elk in their neighbourhood. The party that
were sent this morning up Netul river for the Elk returned in the even
ing with three of them only; the Elk had been killed just before the
snow fell which had covered them and so altered the apparent face of
the country that the hunters could not find the Elk which they had
killed. the river on which Fort Clatsop stands we now call Ne-tul, this
being the name by which the Clatsops call it.

The Cranbury of this neighbourhood is precisely the same common to the
U States, and is the production of marshey or boggy grounds. The light
brown berry, is the fruit of a tree about the size shape and appearance
in every rispect with that in the U. States called the wild crab apple;
the leaf is also precisely the same as is also the bark in texture and
colour. the berrys grow in clumps at the end of the small branches;
each berry supported by a seperate stem, and as many as from 3 to 18 or
20 in a clump. the berry is ovate with one of it's extremities
attatched to the peduncle, where it is in a small degre concave like
the insertion of the stem of the crab apple. I know not whether this
fruit can properly be denominated a berry, it is a pulpy pericarp, the
outer coat of which is in a thin smoth, tho firm tough pillecle; the
pericarp containing a membranous capsule with from three to four cells,
each containing a seperate single seed in form and colour like that of
the wild crab. The wood of this tree is excessively hard when seasoned.
the natives make great uce of it to form their wedges with which they
split their boards of pine for the purpose of building houses. these
wedges they also employ in spliting their fire-wood and in hollowing
out their canoes. I have seen the natives drive the wedges of this wood
into solid dry pine which it cleft without fracturing or injuring the
wedg in the smallest degree. we have also found this wood usefull to us
for ax handles as well as glutts or wedges. the native also have wedges
made of the beams of the Elk's horns which appear to answer extremely
well. this fruit is exceedingly assid, and resembles the flavor of the
wild crab.




[Clark, January 28, 1806]
Thursday 28th January 1806
Drewyer and Baptiest Lapage Set out this morning on a hunting
excurtion. about noon Howard & Werner returned with a Supply of Salt;
the badness of the weather and the dificuelty of the road had detained
them. they informed us that the Salt makers are Still much Stratened
for provisions haveing killed two deer only in the last Six days; and
that there are no Elk in their neighbourhood.

The party that was Sent up the Netul river for the Elk returned this
evening with three of them only; The Elk had been killed just before
the Snow fell which had Covered them and So altered the apparant face
of the Countrey that the hunters Could not find them. The River on
which Fort Clat Sop Stands we now call Netul, this being the name by
which the Clatsops Call it.

The Cranberry of this neighbourhood is precisely the Same Common to the
united States, and is the production of boggy or mashey grounds.-.

The light-brown berry, is the fruit of a tree, about the Size Shape and
appearance in every respect with that in the united States called the
wild Crab apple; the leaf is also presisely the Same as is also the
bark in textue and colour. the berry grows in Clumps at the ends of the
Smaller branches; each berry Supported by a Stem, and as maney as from
3 to 18 or 20 in a Clump. the berry is oval with one of its extremitis
attatched to the peduncle, where it is in a Small degree Concave like
the insersion of the Stem of the Crab apple. I know not whether this
fruit Can properly be denomonated a berry, it is a pulpy pericarp, the
outer coat of which is a thin Smothe, capsule with from three to four
Cells, each containing a Seperate Single Seed in form and Colour like
that of the wild Crab apple The wood of this tree is excessively hard
when Seasoned. The nativs make great use of it to form their wedges of
which they Split their boards of Pine for the purpose of building
houses. those wedges they employ in common with those formed of the
Elks horn, in Splitting their fire wood and in hollowing out their
Canoes. I have Seen the nativs drive the wedges of this wood into a
solid dry pine which it cleft without fractureing injuring the wedge in
the Smallest degree. we have also found this wood useful) to us for ax
handles, as well as glutt or wedges. The bark of this tree is chewed by
our party in place of tobacco.

The fruit is exceedingly ascid and resembles the flavor of the wild
Crab.




[Lewis, January 29, 1806]
Thursday January 29th 1806.
Nothing worthy of notice occurred today. our fare is the flesh of lean
elk boiled with pure water, and a little salt. the whale blubber which
we have used very sparingly is now exhausted. on this food I do not
feel strong, but enjoy the most perfect health;--a keen appetite
supplys in a great degree the want of more luxurious sauses or dishes,
and still render my ordinary meals not uninteresting to me, for I find
myself sometimes enquiring of the cook whether dinner or breakfast is
ready.-

The Sac a commis is the growth of high dry situations, and invariably
in a piney country or on it's borders. it is generally found in the
open piney woodland as on the Western side of the Rocky mountain but in
this neighbourhood we find it only in the praries or on their borders
in the more open wood lands; a very rich soil is not absolutely
necessary, as a meager one frequently produces it abundantly. the
natives on this side of the Rockey mountains who can procure this berry
invariably use it; to me it is a very tasteless and insippid fruit.
this shrub is an evergreen, the leaves retain their virdure most
perfectly through the winter even in the most rigid climate as on lake
Winnipic. the root of this shrub puts forth a great number of stems
which seperate near the surface of the ground; each stem from the size
of a small quill to that of a man's finger; these are much branched the
branches forming an accute angle with the stem, and all more poperly
pocumbent than creeping, for altho it sometimes puts forth radicles
from the stem and branches which strike obliquely into the ground,
these radicles are by no means general, equable in their distances from
each other nor do they appear to be calculated to furnish nutriment to
the plant but reather to hold the stem or branch in it's place. the
bark is formed of several thin layers of a smoth thin brittle substance
of a dark or redish brown colour easily seperated from the woody stem
in flakes. the leaves with rispect to their position are scatered yet
closely arranged near the extremities of the twigs particularly. the
leaf is about 3/4 of an inch in length and about half that in width, is
oval but obtusely pointed, absolutely entire, thick, smoth, firm, a
deep green and slightly grooved. the leaf is supported by a small
footstalk of proportionable length. the berry is attatched in an
irregular and scattered manner to the small boughs among the leaves,
tho frequently closely arranged, but always supported by seperate short
and small peduncles, the insertion of which poduces a slight concavity
in the bury while it's opposite side is slightly convex; the form of
the berry is a spheroid; the shorter diameter being in a line with the
peduncle.--this berry is a pericarp the outer coat of which is a thin
firm tough pellicle, the inner part consists of a dry mealy powder of a
yellowish white colour invelloping from four to six proportionably
large hard light brown seeds each in the form of a section of a
spheroid which figure they form when united, and are destitute of any
membranous covering.--the colour of this fruit is a fine scarlet. the
natives usually eat them without any preperation. the fruit ripens in
september and remains on the bushes all winter. the frost appears to
take no effect on it. these berries are sometimes geathered and hung in
their lodges in bags where they dry without further trouble, for in
their most succulent state they appear to be almost as dry as flour.




[Clark, January 29, 1806]
Friday 29th January 1806
Nothing worthey of notice occured to day. our fare is the flesh of lean
Elk boiled with pure water and a little Salt. the whale blubber which
we have used very Spearingly is now exhosted. on this food I do not
feel Strong, but enjoy tolerable health-. a keen appetite Supplies in a
great degree the want of more luxurious Sauses or dishes, and Still
renders my ordanary meals not uninteresting to me, for I find myself
Sometimes enquireing of the Cook whether dinner Supper or Brackfast is
readyindeed my appetite is but Seldom gratified, not even after I have
eaten what I conceve a Sufficency.-

Maney of the nativs of the Columbia were hats & most commonly of a
conic figure without a brim confined on the head by means of a String
which passes under the chin and is attached to the two opposit Sides of
a Secondary rim within the hat--the hat at top termonates in a pointed
knob of a conic form, or in this Shape. these hats are made of the bark
of Cedar and beargrass wrought with the fingers So closely that it
Casts the rain most effectually in the Shape which they give them for
their own use or that just discribed, on these hats they work various
figures of different colours, but most commonly only black and white
are employed. these figures are faint representations of the whales,
the Canoes, and the harpooners Strikeing them. Sometimes Square dimonds
triangle &c. The form of a knife which Seems to be prefured by those
people is a double Edged and double pointed dagger the handle being
near the middle, the blades of uneaquel length, the longest from 9 to
10 incs. and the Shorter one from 3 to 5 inches. those knives they
Carry with them habitually and most usially in the hand, Sometimes
exposed, when in Company with Strangers under their Robes with this
knife they Cut & Clense their fish make their arrows &c. this is the
form of the Knife A is a Small loop of a Strong twine throng through
which they Sometimes they incert the thumb in order to prevent it being
wrested from their hand.-.




[Lewis, January 30, 1806]
Friday January 30th 1806.
Nothing transpired today worthy of notice. we are agreeably
disappointed in our fuel which is altogether green pine. we had
supposed that it burn but illy, but we have found that by spliting it
that it burns very well. The dress of the Clatsops and others in this
neighbourhood differs but little from that discribed of the skillutes;
they never wear leggins or mockersons which the mildness of this
climate I presume has rendered in a great measure unnecessary; and
their being obliged to be frequently in the water also renders those
articles of dress inconvenient. they wear a hat of a conic figure
without a brim confined on the head by means of a string which passes
under the chin and is attatched to the two opsite sides of a secondary
rim within the hat. the hat at top terminates in a pointed knob of a
connic form also, or in this shape. these hats are made of the bark of
cedar and beargrass wrought with the fingers so closely that it casts
the rain most effectually in the shape which they give them for their
own uce or that just discribed. on these hats they work various figures
of different colours, but most commonly only black and white are
employed. these figures are faint representations of whales the canoes
and the harpoonneers striking them. sometimes squares dimonds triangles
&c. The form of knife which seems to be prefered by these people is a
double edged and double pointed daggar; the handle being in the middle,
and the blades of unequal lengths, the longest usually from 9 to ten
inches and the shorter one from four to five. these knives they carry
with them habitually and most usually in the hand, sometimes exposed
but most usually particularly when in company with strangers, under
their robes with this knife they cut and clense their fish make their
arrows &c. this is somewhat the form of the knife--A is a small loop of
a strong twine through which they sometimes insert the thumb in order
to prevent it's being wrested from their hand.




[Clark, January 30, 1806]
Fort Clatsop on the Pacific Ocian
on the South Side of the Columbia River
Thursday 30th January 1806
Nothing transpired to day worthey of notice. we are agreeably
disapointed in our fuel which is altogether green pine. we had Supposed
that it burned badly, but we have found by Spliting it burns very well.

The dress of the Clatsops and others of the nativs in the neighbourhood
differ but little from that described of the Skilutes and Wau ki a
cums; they never ware ligins or mockersons which the mildness of the
Climate I presume has rendered in a great measure unnecessary; and
their being obliged to be frequently in the water also renders those
articles of dress inconveniant.

The Sac-a commis is the groth of high dry Situations, and invariably in
a piney Country, or on its borders; it is Generally found in the open
piney woodlands as on the Western Side of the Rocky mountains but in
this neighbourhood we find it in the praries or on the borders in the
more open woodland's; a very rich Soil is not absolutely necessary, as
a meager one frequently produces it abundantly. the nativs on the West
side of the Rocky mountains who can precure this berry invariably use
it; to me it is a very tasteless and insipid frute. This Shrub is an
evergreen, the leaves retain their virdue most perfectly throughout the
winter even in the most rigid climate as on Lake Winnipic. the root of
this shrub puts foth a great number of Stems, which seperate near the
surface of the ground; each Stem from the size of a Small quill, to
that of a mans finger. These are much branched forming an accute angle
with the Stem, and all more properly procumbent than crossing, for
altho it sometimes puts foth radicles from the Stems and branches which
Strike obliquely into the ground, those radicles are by no means
general, equable in their distances from each other nor do they appear
to be calculated to furnish nutriment to the plant but rather to hold
the Stem or branch in its place. the bark is formed of several thin
layers of a Smothe thin brittle substance of a redish brown colour
easily seperated from the woody Stem in flakes. the leaves with respect
to their possition are scatter'd yet closely arranged near the
extremities of the twigs particularly. the leaves are about 3/4 of an
inch in length and about half that in width, is oval but obtusely
pointed, absolutely entire, thick, Smoth, firm, a deep green and
slightly grooved. the leaf is Supported by a Small footstalk of
preportionable length. the berry is attached in an irregular and
Scattered manner to the Small boughs among the leaves, tho frequently
Closely arranged, but always Supported by a Seperate Short and Small
peduncles, the incersion of which produces a Small concavity in the
berry while its opposit side is Slightly convex; the form of the berry
is a Spheroid, the Shorter diameter being in a line with the peduncle
or Stem-. this berry is a pericarp the outer Coat of which is a thin
firm tough pellicle, the inner part consists of dry mealy powder of a
yellowish white colour invelloping from four to six propotionably large
hard light brown seeds each in the form of section of a spheroid which
figure they form when united, and are distitute of any membranous
covering.--the colour of this fruit is a fine scarlet. the nativs
usually eat them without any preparation. the fruit ripens in September
and remains on the bushes all winter. the frost appears to take no
effects on it. these berries are Sometimes gathered and hung in their
houses in bags where they dry without further trouble, for in their
succulent State they appear to be almost as dry as flour.




[Lewis, January 31, 1806]
Saturday January 31st 1806.
Sent a party of eight men up the river this morning to renew their
surch for the Elk and also to hunt; they proceded but a few miles
before they found the river so obstructed with ice that they were
obliged to return. Joseph Fields arrived this evening, informed us that
he had been hunting in company with Gibson and Willard for the last
five days in order to obtain some meat for himself and the other Salt
makers, and that he had been unsuccessfull untill yesday evening when
he had fortunately killed two Elk, about six miles distant from this
place and about 8 from the salt works; he left Gibson and Willard to
dry the meat of these Elk and had come for the assistance of some men
to carry the meat to the salt camp; for this purpose we ordered four
men to accompany him early in the morning. discovered that McNeal had
the pox, gave him medecine. Charbono found a bird dead lying near the
fort this morning and brought it to me I immediately recognized it to
be of the same kind of that which I had seen in the Rocky mountains on
the morning of the 20th of September last. this bird is about the size
as near as may be of the robbin. it's contour also is precisely the
same with that bird. it measures one foot 31/4 Inches from tip to tip
of the wings when extended. 91/4 inches from the extremity of the beak
to that of the tail. the tail is 33/4 inches in length, and composed of
eleven feathers of the same length. The beak is smoth, black, convex
and cultrated; one and 1/8 inches from the point to the opening of the
chaps and 3/4 only uncovered with feathers; the upper chap exceeds the
other a little in length. a few small black hairs garnish the sides of
the base of the upper chap. the eye is of a uniform deep sea green or
black, moderately large. it's legs feet and tallons are white; the legs
are an inch and a 1/4 in length and smoth; four toes on each foot, of
which that in front is the same length with the leg including the
length of the tallon, which is 4 lines; the three remaining toes are
3/4 of an inch, each armed with proportionably long tallons. the toes
are slightly imbricated. the tallons are curved and sharply pointed.
The crown of the head from the beak back to the neck, the back of the
neck imbracing reather more than half the circumpherence of the neck,
the back and tale, are of bluish dark brown; the two outer feathers of
the tale have a little dash of white near their tips not percemtible
when the tail is foalded. a fine black forms the ground of the wings;
two stripes of the same colour pass on either side of the head from the
base of the beak along the side of the head to it's junction with the
neck, and imbraces the eye to it's upper edge; a third stripe of the
same colour 3/4 of an inch in width passes from the sides of the neck
just above the butts of the wings across the croop in the form of a
gorget. the throat or under part of the neck brest and belly is of a
fine yellowish brick red. a narrow stripe of this colour also commences
just above the center of each eye, and extends backwards to the neck as
far as the black stripe reaches before discribed, to which, it appears
to answer as a border. the feathers which form the 1st and second
ranges of the coverts of the two joints of the wing next the body, are
beautifully tiped with this brick red; as is also each large feather of
the wing on the short side of it's plumage for 1/2 an inch in length
commening at the extremity of the feathers which form the first or main
covert of the wing. this is a beatifull little bird. I have never heard
it's note it appears to be silent. it feeds on berries, and I beleive
is a rare bird even in this country, or at least this is the second
time only that I have seen it.--between the legs of this bird the
feathers are white, and those which form the tuft underneath the tail
are a mixture of white and a brick red.




[Clark, January 31, 1806]
Friday January 31st 1806
Sent a party of Eight men with the hunters to renew their Serch for the
Elk, and also to hunt; they proceeded but a fiew miles before they
found the river So obstructed with ice that they were obliged to
return. Jo. Field arrives this evening, informs us That he had been
hunting in Company with gibson and willard for the last four days in
order to obtain some meat for himself and the other Salt-makers, and
that he had been unsucksessfull untill yesterday evening when he had
fortunately killed two Elk, about six miles distant from this place and
about 8 from the Salt works; he left gibson and willard to dry the meat
of those Elk, and had come for assistance to carry the meat to the Salt
Camp; for this purpose we ordered four men to accompany him early in
the morning. discovered that McNeal had the pox, gave him medicine.
Chabono found a bird dead lying near the Fort this morning and brought
it in, I reconized it to be the Same kind of that which I had Seen in
the Rocky Mountains at severl different times. this berd is about the
Size as near as may be of the robin. it's contour is also presisely the
Same with that bird. it measured one foot 3/4 inches from tip to tip of
the wings when extended. 91/4 inches from the extremity of the beak to
that of the tail. the tail is 33/4 inches in length, and Composed of 11
feathers of the Same length. The beak is Smoth, black, convex and
cultrated; 1 1/8 inchs from the point to the opening of the Chaps and
3/4 only uncovered with feathers, the upper Chap exceeds the other a
little in length. a fiew Small black hairs garnish the Side of the
upper chap. The Eye is of a uniform deep Sea green or black, moderately
large. it's legs feet and tallants are white; the legs are of 11/4 in
length and Smoth; four toes on each foot, of which that in front is the
Same length of the leg including the tallants, which is 4 lines; the 3
remaining toes are 3/4 of an inch, each armed with proportianably large
tallons. the toes are Slightly imbricated. the tallons are curved and
Sharply pointed. The Crown of the head from the beak back to the neck
imbracing rather more than half the circumphrence of the neck, the Back
and tail is of a bluish dark brown; the two outer feathers of the tail
have a little dash of white near the tips, not proceivable when the
tail is foalded. a fine black forms the ground of the wings; two
Stripes of the same colour passes on either side of the Head from the
base of the Back along the Side of the head to it's junction with the
neck, and embraces the eye to its upper edge; a third Stripe of the
Same Colour 3/4 of an inch in width passes from the Side of the neck
just above the buts of the wings across the troop in the form of a
gorget. the throat or under part of the neck brest and belly is of a
fine Yellowish brick red. a narrow Stripe of this Colour also Commences
just above the center of each eye, and extends backwards to the Neck as
far as the black Spots reaches before discribed, to which it appears to
answer as a border. the feathers which form the 1st and Second range of
the coverts of the two joints of the wings next the body are butifully
aped with this Brick red; as is also each large feather of the wing on
the Short Side of its plumage for 1/2 an inch in length Comencing at
the extremity of the feather which form the first or main Covert of the
wing. This is a butifull little bird. I have never herd its notes it
appears to be Silent. it feeds on berries, and I believe is a rare bird
even in this country-. between the legs of this bird the feathers are
white, and those which form the tuft underneath the tail are a mixture
of white and Brick red.




[Lewis, February 1, 1806]
Saturday February 1st 1806.
This morning a party of four men set out with Joseph Fields; Sergt.
Gass with a party of five men again set out up the Netul river in surch
of the Elk which had been killed some days since, and which could not
be found in consequence of the snow. The Canoes of the natives
inhabiting the lower portion of the Columbia River make their canoes
remarkably neat light and well addapted for riding high waves. I have
seen the natives near the coast riding waves in these canoes with
safety and apparently without concern where I should have thought it
impossible for any vessel of the same size to lived a minute. they are
built of whitecedar or Arborvita generally, but sometimes of the firr.
they are cut out of a solid stick of timber, the gunwals at the upper
edge foald over outwards and are about 5/8 of an inch thick and 4 or
five broad, and stand horrizontally forming a kind of rim to the canoe
to prevent the water beating into it. they are all furnished with more
or less crossbars in proportion to the size of the canoe. these bars
are round sticks about half the size of a man's arm, which are incerted
through holes (just) made in either side of the canoe just below the
rim of the gunwall and are further secured with strings of waytape;
these crossbars serve to lift and manage the canoe on land. when the
natives land they invariably take their canoes on shore, unless they
are heavily laden, and then even, if they remain all night, they
discharge their loads and take the canoes on shore. some of the large
canoes are upwards of 50 feet long and will carry from 8 to 10 thousand
lbs. or from 20 to thirty persons and some of them particularly on the
sea coast are waxed painted and ornimented with curious images at bough
and Stern; those images sometimes rise to the hight of five feet; the
pedestals on which these immages are fixed are sometimes cut out of the
solid stick with the canoe, and the imagary is formed of seperate small
peices of timber firmly united with tenants and motices without the
assistance of a single spike of any kind. when the natives are engaged
in navigating their canoes one sets in the stern and steers with a
paddle the others set by pears and paddle over the gunwall next them,
they all kneel in the bottom of the canoe and set on their feet. their
paddles are of a uniform shape of which this is an imitation these
paddles are made very thin and the middle of the blade is thick and
hollowed out siddonly and made thin at the sides while the center forms
a kind of rib. the blade occupys about one third of the length of the
paddle which is usually from 41/2 to 5 feet. I have observed four forms
of canoe only in uce among the nations below the grand chatarac of this
river they are as follow. this is the smallest size about 15 feet long
and calculated for one or two persons, and are most common among the
Cathlahmahs and Wack ki a cums among the marshey Islands. A the bow; B,
the stern; these are from twenty to thirty five feet and from two 1/2
to 3 feet in the beam and about 2 feet in the hole; this canoe is
common to all the nations below the grand rappids. it is here made
deeper and shorter in proportion than they really are.--the bowsprit
from C, to D is brought to a sharp edge tapering gradually from the
sides.

This is the most common forms of the canoe in uce among the Indians
from; the Chil-luck-kit-te-quaw inclusive to the Ocean and is usually
about 30 or 35 feet long, and will carry from ten to twelve persons. 4
men are competent to carry them a considerable distance say a mile
without resting. A is the end which they use as the bow, but which on
first sight I took to be the stern C. D. is a comb cut of the sollid
stick with the canoe and projects from the center of the end of the
canoe being about 1 inch thirck it's sides parallel and edge at C D.
sharp. it is from 9 to 11 Inches in length and extends from the
underpart of the bowsprit at A to the bottom of the canoe at D.--the
stern B. is mearly rounding and graduly ascending. 1 2 3 represents the
rim of the gunwalls about 4 Inches wide, reather ascending as they
recede from the canoe. 4 5 6 7 8 are the round holes through which the
cross bars are inserted.

This form of canoe we did not meet with untill we reached tidewater or
below the grand rappids. from thence down it is common to all the
nations but more particularly the Killamucks and others of the coast.
these are the largest canoes. B. is the bow and comb. C. the stern and
comb. their immages are representations of a great variety of grotesque
figures, any of which might be safely worshiped without committing a
breach of the commandments.

They have but few axes among them, and the only too usually imployed in
felling the trees or forming the canoe, carving &c is a chissel formed
of an old file about an Inch or an Inch and a half broad. this chissel
has sometimes a large block of wood for a handle; they grasp the
chissel just below the block with the right hand holding the edge down
while with the left they take hold of the top of the block and strike
backhanded against the wood with the edge of the chissel. a person
would suppose that the forming of a large canoe with an instrument like
this was the work of several years; but these people make them in a few
weeks. they prize their canoes very highly; we have been anxious to
obtain some of them, for our journey up the river but have not been
able to obtain one as yet from the natives in this neighbourhood.-
today we opened and examined all our ammunition, which had been secured
in leaden canesters. we found twenty seven of the best rifle powder, 4
of common rifle, three of glaized and one of the musqut powder in good
order, perfectly as dry as when first put in the canesters, altho the
whole of it from various accedents has been for hours under the water.
these cannesters contain four lbs. of powder each and 8 of lead. had it
not have been for that happy expedient which I devised of securing the
powder by means of the lead, we should not have had a single charge of
powder at this time. three of the canesters which had been accedentally
bruized and cracked, one which was carelessly stoped, and a fifth that
had been penetrated with a nail, were a little dammaged; these we gave
to the men to make dry; however exclusive of those five we have an
abundant stock to last us back; and we always take care to put a
proportion of it in each canoe, to the end that should one canoe or
more be lost we should still not be entirely bereft of ammunition,
which is now our only hope for subsistence and defence in a rout of
4000 miles through a country exclusively inhabited by savages.




[Clark, February 1, 1806]
Saturday February 1st 1806
This morning a party of four men Set out with Jo. Field; and Sergt.
Gass with a party of five men again Set out up the Netul river in Serch
of the Elk which had been killed Some days since, and which Could not
be found in Consequence of the Snow.

The Canoes of the nativs inhabitting the lower part of the Columbia
River from the Long narrows down make their canoes remarkably neat
light and well addapted for rideing high waves. I have Seen the nativs
near the Coast rideing waves in these Canoes in Safty and appearantly
without Concern when I Should it impossible for any vessel of the Same
Size to have lived or kept above water a minute. they are built of
Arborvitia or white Cedar generally, but Sometimes of fir. they are cut
out of a solid Stick of timber, the gunnals at the upper edge fold over
outwards and are about 5/8 of an inch thick and 4 or 5 broad, and Stand
out nearly Horizontially forming a kind of rim to the Canoe to prevent
the water beating into it. they are all furnished with more or less
Cross bars agreeably to thier sizes of the Canoe, those bars are round
Sticks about 1 inch and 1/2 diameter which are atached to the iner Side
of the canoes a little below the rim on either Side with throngs of
Cedar bark which is incerted through holes and made fast to the ends of
the Stick, which is made Smaller than the other part of the Stick to
prevent the cord Slipping off these cross bears Serve to Strengthen the
canoe, and by which they lift and manage her on land. when the nativs
land they invariably take their Canoes on Shore unless they are heavily
ladined, and then even, if they remain all night, they discharge their
loads and take the Canoe on Shore.

Some of the large Canoes are upwards of 50 feet long and will Carry
from 8 to 12 thousand lbs. or from 20 to 30 persons, and Some of them
particularly on the Sea Coast are waxed painted and ornimented with
curious images on bow and Stern; those images sometimes rise to the
hight of five feet; the pedestile on which these images are fixed, are
Sometimes cut out of the Solid Stick with the Canoe, and the image is
formed of Seperate pieces of timber firmly united with tenants and
mortices without the appearance of a Single Spike or nail of any kind.
when the nativs are engaged in navigateing their Canoes, one Sets in
the Stern and Stears with a paddle the others Set by pars and paddle
over their gunnals next them, they all kneel in the bottom of the Canoe
and Set on their feet. their paddles are of an uniform shape which this
is an imitation those paddles are made verry thin and the middle of the
blade is thick and hollowed out Suddenly, and made thin on the Sides,
the center forming a kind of ridge. the handle occupies about 1/8 of
the length of the paddle which is usually 4 to 41/2 feet in length. I
have observed five forms of Canoes only in use among the nativs below
the Grand Cataract of this river. they areas follows. this is the
Smallest Size about 15 feet long, 12 and Calculated for one two men
mearly to cross creeks, take over Short portages to navagate the ponds
and Still water, and is mostly in use amongst the Clatsops and
Chinnooks. this is the next Smallest and from 16 to 20 feet long and
calculated for two or 3 persons and are most common among the
Wau-ki-a-cums and Cath-lah-mahs among the marshey Islands, near their
villages. A the bow; B the Stern; those are from 20 to 40 feet in
length and from 21/2 to 31/2 feet in the beam and about 2 feet deep;
this Canoe is common to all the nations below the grand Rapids it here
made deeper and Shorter in pertotion than the Canoe realy is, the bow
sprit from C. to D. is brought to a Sharp edge tapering gradually from
the Sides. This is the most common form of the Canoes in use among the
indians from the Chil-luck-kit-te quaw inclusive to the ocian and is
commonly from about 30 to 35 feet long, and will carry from 10 to 12
persons. 4 men are competent to carry them a considerable distance Say
a mile without resting. A is the end the nativs use as the bow, but
which on first Sight I took to be the Stern c. d. is a comb cut of the
solid wood with the Canoe, and projects from the Center of the end of
the Canoe being about 1 inch thick, it's Sides parallel and edge at c,
d, Sharp it is from 9 to 11 inches in debth and extends from the under
part of the bow sprit at A to the bottom at, d,. the Stern B is nearly
rounding and gradually assending. 1, 2, 3, represents the rim of the
gunnals about 4 inches wide, reather ascending as they recede from the
Canoe. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, are the holes through which the String pass to
fasten the round pieces which pass Crosswise the Canoe to Strengthen &
lift her. This form of a canoe we did not meet with untill we reached
tide water or below the Great Rapids. from thence down it is common to
all the nations but more particularly the Kil a mox and others of the
Coast. these are the largest Canoes, I measured one at the Kilamox
villag S S W of us which was ____ feet long ____ feet wide and ____
feet deep, and they are most Commonly about that Size. B is the how,
and Comb. C, the stern and Comb. Their images are representations of a
great variety of grotesque figures, any of which might be Safely
worshiped without commiting a breach of the Commandments.

They have but fiew axes among them, and the only tool usially employd
in forming the Canoe, carveing &c is a chissel formed of an old file
about an inch or 11/2 inchs broad, this chissel has Sometimes a large
block of wood for a handle; they grasp the chissel just below the block
with the right hand holding the top of the block, and Strikes backwards
against the wood with the edge of the Chissel. a person would Suppose
that forming a large Canoe with an enstriment like this was the work of
Several years; but those people make them in a fiew weeks. They prize
their Canoes very highly; we have been anxious to obtain Some of them,
for our journy up the river but have not been able to obtain one as yet
from the nativs in this neighbourhood.

To day we opened and examined all our Ammunition, which has been
Secured in leaden Canistirs. we found twenty Sevin of the best Rifle
powder, 4 of Common rifle, 3 of Glaize and one of Musquet powder in
good order, perfectly as dry as when first put in the Canisters, altho
the whole of it from various accidince have been for hours under the
water. these Cannisters Contain 4 pounds of powder each and 8 of Lead.
had it not been for that happy expedient which Capt Lewis devised of
Securing the powder by means of the Lead, we Should have found great
dificuelty in keeping dry powder untill this time-; those Cannisters
which had been accidently brused and cracked, one which was carelessly
Stoped, and a fifth which had been penetrated with a nail; were wet and
damaged; those we gave to the men to Dry; however exclusive of those 5
we have an abundant Stock to last us back; and we always take Care to
put a purpotion of it in each canoe, to the end that Should one Canoe
or more be lost we Should Still not be entirely bereft of ammunition,
which is now our only hope for Subsistance and defences in the rout of
4,000 miles through a Country exclusively inhabited by Indians-many
bands of which are Savage in every Sense of the word-.




[Lewis, February 2, 1806]
Sunday February 2cd 1806.
Not any occurrence today worthy of notice; but all are pleased, that
one month of the time which binds us to Fort Clatsop and which
seperates us from our friends has now elapsed. one of the games of
amusement and wrisk of the Indians of this neighbourhood like that of
the Sosones consists in hiding in the hand some small article about the
size of a bean; this they throw from one hand to the other with great
dexterity accompanying their opperations with a particular song which
seems to have been addapted to the game; when the individul who holds
the peice has amused himself sufficiently by exchanging it from one
hand to the other, he hold out his hands for his compettitors to guess
which hand contains the peice; if they hit on the hand which contains
the peice they win the wager otherwise loose. the individual who holds
the peice is a kind of banker and plays for the time being against all
the others in the room; when he has lost all the property which he has
to venture, or thinks proper at any time, he transfers the peice to
some other who then also becoms banker. The Sosone and Minnetares &c
have a game of a singular kind but those divide themselves in two
parties and play for a common wager to which each individual
contributes to form the stock of his party. one of them holdes the
peice and some one of the opposite party gesses which hand contains if
he hits on the hand which contains it the peice is transferred to the
opposite party and the victor counts one, if he misses the party still
retain the peice and score one but the individual tranfers the peice to
some other of his own party; the game is set to any number they think
proper, and like the natives of this quarter they always accompany
their opperations with a particular song. the natives here have also
another game which consists in bowling some small round peices about
the size of Bacgammon men, between two small upright sticks placed a
few inches asunder, but the principals of the game I have not learn not
understanding their language sufficiently to obtain an explanation.
their boys amuse themselves with their bows and arrows as those do of
every Indian nation with which I am acquainted. these people are
excessively fond of their games of risk and bet freely every species of
property of which they are possessed. They have a smal dog which they
make usefull only in hunting the Elk.




[Clark, February 2, 1806]
Sunday February 2nd 1806
Not any accurrence to day worthy of notice; but all are pleased, that
one month of the time which binds us to fort Clatsop, and which
Seperates us from our friends, has now alapsed.

The games of amusements of the natives of this neighbourhood are
Several, one of which is verry similar to one which the Sosone's &
Minatare's are verry fond of and frequently play. they devide
themselves into two parties and play for a common wager to which each
individual Contributes to form the Stock of his party, one of them
holdes the piece which is usually about the Size of a Bean, and Some
one of the oposit party gesses which hand Contains, if he hits on the
hand which Contains it, the piece is transfired to the opposit party
and the victor Counts one, if he misses the party Still retains the
piece and scores one, but the individual transfirs the piece to Some
one of his own party; the game is Set to any number they think proper.
they always accompany their opperations with a particular Song. The
amusements of the boys of all nations which I am acquainted with are
generally the Bows and arrows.

All nations of Indians with which I am acquainted are excessive fond of
their games of risk, and bet away Species of property of which they are
possessed.

The nativs of this neighbourhood have a Small Dog which they make
usefull only in hunting the Elk.




[Lewis, February 3, 1806]
Monday February 3rd 1806.
About three o'clock Drewyer and La Page, returned; Drewyer had killed
seven Elk in the point below us, several miles distant but can be
approached with in 3/4 of a mile with canoes by means of a small creek
which discharges itself into the bay on this side of the Clatsop
village direct Sergt. pryor to go in quest of the meat, the wind was so
high that they were unable to set out untill a little before sunset,
when they departed; at 10 P.M. they return excessively could and
informed us that they could not make land on this side of the bay nor
get into the creek in consequence of the tide being out and much lower
than usual. we are apprehensive that the Clatsops who know where the
meat is will rob us of a part if not the whole of it. at half after 4
P.M. Sergt Gass returned with his party, they brought with them the
flesh of four other Elk which the hunters had found, being a part of
the ten which were killed up the Netul river the other day. he left R.
Fields, Shannon and Labuish to continue the hunt and made an
appointment to return to them on Friday. late in the evening the four
men who had been sent to assist the saltmakers in transporting meat
which they had killed to their camp, also returned, and brought with
them all the salt which had been made, consisting of about one busshel
only. with the means we have of boiling the salt water we find it a
very tedious opperation, that of making salt, notwithstanding we keep
the kettles boiling day and night. we calculate on three bushels
lasting us from hence to our deposits of that article on the Missouri.




[Clark, February 3, 1806]
Monday February 3rd 1806
About 3 oClock Drewyer & Lapage returned, Drewyer had killed Seven Elk
in the point below us, Several miles distant, but Can be approached
within 3/4 of a mile with Canoes by means of a Small Creak which
discharges itself into the Bay, on this Sid of the Clatsop Village.
Directed Serjt. Pryor to go in quest of the meat, the winds was So high
that they were unable to Set out until) a little before Sunset, when
they departed; at 10 P.M. they returned excessively Cold and informed
us that they could not make land on this Side of the bay or get into
the Creek in consequence of the tides being out and much lower than
usial. we are apprehensive that the Clatsops knowing where the meat is,
will rob us of a part if not the whole of it. at half after 4 P. M
Sergt. Gass returned with his party they brought with them the flesh of
4 other Elk which the hunters had found, being part of the 10 which
were killed up the Netul river the other day. He left Ro. Field,
Shannon & Labiesh to Continue the hunt, and made an appointment to
return to them on friday. late in the evening the four men who had been
Sent to assist the Saltmakers in transporting meat which they had
killed to their Camp also returned, and brought with them all the Salt
which had been made, consisting of about one Sushel only. with the
means we have of boiling the Salt water we find it a very tegious
opperation that of makeing Salt, notwithstanding the Kitties are kept
boiling day and night. we Calculate on three bushels lasting us from
hiere to our deposit of that article on the Missouri.




[Lewis, February 4, 1806]
Tuesday February 4th 1806.
Sergt. Pryor with a party of five men set out again in quest of the Elk
which Drewyer had killed. Drewyer and La Page also returned to continue
the chase in the same quarter. the Elk are in much better order in the
point near the praries than they are in the woody country arround us or
up the Netul. in the praries they feed on grass and rushes,
considerable quantities of which are yet green and succulet. in the
woody country their food is huckle berry bushes, fern, and an evergreen
shrub which resembles the lore) in some measure; the last constitutes
the greater part of their food and grows abundantly through all the
timbered country, particularly the hillsides and more broken parts of
it. There are sveral species of fir in this neighbourhood which I shall
discribe as well as my slender botanicall skit will enable me and for
the convenience of comparison with each other shal number them. (No 1.)
a species which grows to immence size; very commonly 27 feet in the
girth six feet above the surface of the earth, and in several instances
we have found them as much as 36 feet in the girth or 12 feet diameter
perfectly solid and entire. they frequently rise to the hight of 230
feet, and one hundred and twenty or 30 of that hight without a limb.
this timber is white and soft throughout and rives better than any
other species which we have tryed. the bark skales off in irregula
rounded flakes and is of a redish brown colour particularly of the
younger growth. the stem of this tree is simple branching, ascending,
not very defuse, and proliferous. the leaf of this tree is acerose,
1/10th of an Inch in width, and 3/4 of an Inch in length; is firm, stif
and accuminate; they are triangular, a little declining, thickly
scattered on all sides of the bough, but rispect the three uppersides
only and are also sessile growing from little triangular pedestals of
soft spungy elastic bark. at the junction of the boughs, the bud-scales
continue to incircle their rispective twigs for several yeas; at least
three years is common and I have counted as many as the growth of four
years beyond these scales. this tree affords but little rosin. it's
cone I have not yet had an opportunity to discover altho I have sought
it frequently; the trees of this kind which we have felled have had no
cones on them.




[Clark, February 4, 1806]
Tuesday February 4th 1806
Serjt. Pryor with a party of 5 men Set out again in quest of the Elk
which Drewyer had Killed. Drewyer also returned to continue the Chase
in the Same quarter. the Elk are in much better order in the point near
the praries than they are in the woodey Country around us or up the
Netul. in the praries they feed on grass and rushes, which are yet
green. in the woddey Countrey their food is huckleberry bushes, fern,
and the Shal-lon an evergreen Shrub, which resembles the Lorel in Some
measure; the last constitutes the greater part of their food and grows
abundant through all the timbered Country, particularly the hill Sides
and more broken parts of it. There are Several Species of Fir in this
neighbourhood which I shall discribe as well as my botanicale Skill
will enable me, and for the Convenience of Comparrison with each other
Shall number them. (No. i,) a Species which grows to an emence size;
verry commonly 27 feet in Surcumferonce at 6 feet above the surface of
the earth, and in Several instances we have found them as much as 36
feet in the Girth, or 12 feet Diameter perfectly Solid & entire. they
frequently rise to the hight of 230 feet, and 120 or 30 of that hight
without a limb. this timber is white and Soft throughout and rives
better than any other Species we have tried the bark Shales off in
arregular rounded flakes and is of a redish brown Colour, particularly
of the younger growth, the Stem of this tree is simple branching,
assending, not very defuse, and proliferous, the leaf of this tree is
accerose 1/2 a line in width, and 3/4 of an inch in length; is firm
Stiff and accuminate; they are triangular, little declineing, thickly
scattered on all Sides of the Bough, but respect the three upper Sides
only Growing from little triangular pedistals of Soft Spungy Elastic
bark. at the junction of these bough's, the bud-scales continue to
incircle the respective twigs for several years; at least 3 years is
common and I have counted as maney as the groth of 4 years beyond these
Scales. this tree affords but little rozin. it's cone I have not yet
had an oppertunity to discover altho I have Sought it frequently; the
trees of this kind which we have fell'd have had no cones on them.




[Lewis, February 5, 1806]
Wednesday February 5th 1806.
Late this evening one of the hunters fired his gun over the swamp of
the Netul opposite to the fort and hooped. I sent sergt. Gass and a
party of men over; the tide being in, they took advantage of a little
creek which makes up in that direction nearly to the highlands, and in
their way fortunately recovered our Indian Canoe, so long lost and much
lamented. The Hunter proved to be Reubin Fields, who reported that he
had killed six Elk on the East side of the Netul a little above us; and
that yesterday he had heard Shannon and Labuishe fire six or seven
shots after he had seperated from them and supposed that they had also
killed several other Elk. Filds brought with him a phesant which
differed but little from those common to the Atlantic states; it's
brown is reather brighter and more of a redish tint. it has eighteen
feathers in the tale of about six inches in length. this bird is also
booted as low as the toes. the two tufts of long black feathers on each
side of the neck most conspicuous in the male of those of the Atlantic
states is also observable in every particular with this.--Fir No. 2 is
next in dignity in point of size. it is much the most common species,
it may be sad to constitute at least one half of the timber in this
neighbourhood. it appears to be of the spruse kind. it rises to the
hight of 160 to 180 feet very commonly and is from 4 to 6 feet in
diameter, very streight round and regularly tapering. the bark is thin
of a dark colour, and much divided with small longitudinal
intersticies; that of the boughs and young trees is somewhat smoth but
not so much so as the balsom fir nor that of the white pine of our
country. the wood is white throughout and reather soft but very tough,
and difficult to rive. The trunk of this tree is a simple branching
diffused stem and not proliferous as the pines & firs usially are but
like most other trees it puts forth buds from the sides of the small
boughs as well as their extremities. the stem usually terminates in a
very slender pointed top like the cedar. The leaves are petiolate, the
footstalk small short and oppressed; acerose reather more than half a
line in width and very unequal in length, the greatest length being
little more than half an inch, while others intermixed on every part of
the bough are not more than a 1/4 in length. flat with a small
longitudinal channel in the upper disk which is of a deep green and
glossey, while the uder disk is of a whiteish green only; two ranked,
obtusely pointed, soft and flexable. this tree affords but little
rosin. the cone is remarkably small not larger than the end of a man's
thumb soft, flexable and of an ovate form, produced at the ends of the
small twigs.




[Clark, February 5, 1806]
Wednesday February 5th 1806
Late this evening one of the hunters fired off his gun over the marsh
of the Netul opposit to the fort & hhoped. we Sent Sergt. Gass and a
party of men over; the tide being in they took advantage of a little
Creek which makes up in that direction nearly to the high lands, and in
their way fortunately recovered our Indian Canoe So long lost and much
lamented. The hunter provd. to be Reubin Field, who reported that he
had killed Six Elk on the East Side of the Netul a little above us; and
that he had parted with Shannon and Labiesh yesterday after he had herd
them fire Six or Seven Shot after he had Seperated from them, and
Supposed that they had also killed Several other Elk. Fields brought
with him a Pheasant which differs but little from those Common to the
United States--Fur No. 2 is next in dignity in point of Size. it is
much the most common Species, it may be Said to Constitute one half of
the timber of this neigh-bourhood. it appears to be of the Spruce kind.
it rises to the higth of 160 or 180 feet very Commonly and is from 4 to
6 feet in diameter, very Streight round and regularly tapering. the
bark is thin of a dark colour, and much divided with Small longitudinal
interstices; that of the boughs and young trees are Somewhat Smoth but
not So much so as the balsom fir, nor that of the white pine of our
Countrey. the wood is white throughout and rather Soft but rather tough
and dificuelt to rive. The trunk of this tree is Simple branching,
deffused Stem and not proliferous as the pine and fir usially are, but
like most other trees it puts foth buds from the Sides of the Small
boughes as well as from their extremities. the Stem usially termonate
in a very slender pointed top like the Cedar. The leaves are petiolate,
the footstalk Small Short and oppressed; acerose reather more than 1/2
a line in wedth and very uneaqual in length, the greatest length being
a little more than half an inch, while others intermixed on every part
of the bough are not more than a 1/4 of an inch in length. flat with a
Small longitudinal channel in the upper disk which is of a Deep green
and glossy, while the under disk is of a whitish green only; two
ranked, obtusely pointed, Soft and flexable. this tree affords but
little rosin. the Cone is remarkably Small, not larger than the end of
a mans thumb Soft, flexable and of an oval form, produced at the end of
a Small twig.




[Lewis, February 6, 1806]
Thursday February 6th 1806.
Sent Sergts. Gass and Ordway this morning with R. Fields and a party of
men to bring in the Elk which Field had killed. Late in the evening
Sergt. Pryor returned with the flesh of about 2 Elk and 4 skins the
Indians having purloined the ballance of seven Elk which Drewyer killed
the other day. I find that there are 2 vilages of Indians living on the
N. side of the Columbia near the Marshy Islands who call themselves
Wackki-a-cum. these I have hertofore Considered as Cath-lah-mahs. they
speak the same language and are the same in every other rispect.

No. 3 A species of fir which one of my men informs me is precisely the
same with that called the balsam fir of Canada. it grows here to
considerable size, being from 21/2 to 4 feet in diameter and rises to
the hight of eighty or an hundred feet. it's stem is simple branching,
ascending and proliferous. it's leaves are sessile, acerose, one 1/8 of
an inch in 1/16th of an inch in width, thickly scattered on all sides
of the twigs as far as the growth of four preceeding years and rispect
the three undersides only the uper side being neglected and the under
side but thinly furnished; gibbous, a little declining, obtusely
pointed, soft flexible, and the upper disk longitudinally marked with a
slight channel; this disk is of a glossy deep green, the under one
green tho paler and not glossy. this tree affords considerable
quantities of a fine clear arromatic balsam in appearance and taste
like the Canadian balsam. smal pustules filled with this balsam rise
with a blister like appearance on the body of the tree and it's
branches; the bark which covers these pustules is soft thin smoth and
easily punctured. the bark of the tree generally is thin of a dark
brown colour and reather smooth tho not as much so as the white pine of
our county. the wood is white and soft.--(No. 4) is a species of fir
which in point of size is much that of No. 2. the stem simple branching
ascending and proliferous; the bark of a redish dark brown and thicker
than that of No. 3. it is divided with small longitudinal interstices,
but these are not so much ramifyed as in species No. 2. the leaves with
rispect to their position in regard to each other is the same with the
balsam fir, as is the leaf in every other rispect except that it not
more than 2/3ds the width and little more than half the length of the
other, nor is it's upper disk of so deep a green nor so glossey. it
affords no balsam and but little rosin. the wood also white soft and
reather porus tho tough.--No 5. is a species of fir which arrives to
the size of Nos. 2 and 4, the stem simple branching, diffuse and
proliferous. the bark thin, dark brown, much divided with small
longitudinal interstices and sometimes scaleing off in thin rolling
flakes. it affords but little rosin and the wood is redish white 2/3ds
of the diameter in the center, the ballance white, somewhat porus and
tough. the twigs are much longer and more slender than in either of the
other species. the leaves are acerose, 1/20th of an inch in width, and
an inch in length, sessile, inserted on all sides of the bough,
streight, their extremities pointing obliquely toward the extremities
of the bough and more thickly placed than in either of the other
species; gibbous and flexeable but more stif than any except No. 1 and
more blontly pointed than either of the other species; the upper disk
has a small longitudinal channel and is of a deep green tho not so
glossy as the balsam fir, the under disk is of a pale green.--No. 65
the white pine; or what is usually so called in Virginia. I see no
difference between this and that of the mountains in Virginia; unless
it be the uncommon length of cone of this found here, which are
sometimes 16 or 18 inches in length and about 4 inches in
circumpherence. I do not recollect those of virginia perfectly but it
strikes me that they are not so long. this species is not common I have
only seen it but in one instance since I have been in this
neighbourhood which was on the border of Haley's bay on the N. side of
the Columbia near the Ocean.




[Clark, February 6, 1806]
Thursday February 6th 1806
Sent Serjt. Gass and party this morning with Ru Field to bring in the
Elk which Field had killed. late in the evening Serjt. Pryor returned
with the fish of about 2 Elk and four skins the Indians haveing taken
the ballance of Seven Elk which Drewyer killed the other day. I find
that those people will all Steal.

No. 3 a Species of fir, which one of my men inform me is presisely the
Same with that called the balsam fir of Canada. it grows here to
considerable Size, being from 21/2 to 4 feet in diameeter and rises to
the hight of 100 or 120 feet. it's Stem is Simple branching assending
and proliferous-. it's leaves are cessile, acerose, 1/8 of an inch in
length and 1/16 of an inch in width, thickly scattered on all Sides of
the twigs as far as the groth of four proceeding years, and respects
the three undersides only, the upper Side being neglected and the under
Side but thinly furnished; gibbous a little declineing, obtusely
pointed, Soft flexable, and the upper disk longitudinally marked with a
Slight Channel; this disk is of a glossy deep green, the under one
green tho paler and not glossy. This tree affords a considerable
quantity of a fine Clear arromatic Balsom in appearance and taste like
the Canadian balsom. Small pustuls filled with the balsom rise with a
blister like appearance on the body of the tree and it's branches; the
bark which covers these pustules is Soft thin Smothe and easily
punctured. the bark of the tree is generally thin of a dark brown
colour and reather Smooth tho not as much so as the white pine of the
U. States the wood is white and Soft.

No. 4 a Species of fir which in point of Size is much that of No 2,-.
the Stem Simple branching assending and proliferous; the bark of a
redish dark brown and thicker than that of No. 3. it is devided with
Small longitudinal interstices, but these are not So much ramefied as
in the Specis No. 2. the leaves with respect to their possition in
reguard to each other is the Same with the balsam fir, as is the leaf
in every other respect than that, it is not more than 2/3ds the width
and little more than half the length of the other, nor is it's upper
disk of so deep a green nor glossy. it affords no balsam, and but
little rosin. the wood also white Soft and reather porus tho tough-.-
No. 5 is a species of fir which arives to the Size of No. 2, and No. 4.
the Stem Simple branching, diffuse and proliferous. the bark thin dark
brown, much divided with Small longitudinal interstices scaleing off in
thin rolling flakes. it affords but little rosin and the wood is redish
white 2/3ds of the diamieter in the Center the ballance white Somewhat
porus and tough. the twigs are much longer and more slender than in
either of the other speceies. the leaves are acerose 1/20 of an inch in
width, and an inch in length, sessile, inserted on all Sides of the
bough, Streight, their extremities pointing obliquely towards the
extremities of the bough and more thickly placed than in either of the
other Species; gibbous and flexable but more stiff than any except No.
1 and more blontly pointed than either of the other Species; the upper
disk has a Small longitudinal Channel and is of a deep green tho not so
Glossy as the balsam fir, the under disk is of a pail green. No. 6 the
White pine; or what is usially So Called in Virginia. I see no
difference between this and that of the mountains in Virginia; unless
it be the uncommon length of the cone of this found here, which are
Sometimes 16 or 18 inches in length and about 4 inches in Surcumfrance.
I do not recollect those of Virginia, but it Strikes me that they are
not So long. this Species is not common I have Seen it only in three
instances since I have been in this neighbourhood, I saw a few on
Haleys bay on the North Side of the Columbia River, a fiew scattering
on the Sea coast to the North on one of which I engraved my name-and
Some on the S S E Side of E co la Creek near the Kil a mox nation, at
which place I Saw the white & red Cedar




[Lewis, February 7, 1806]
Friday February 7th 1806.
This evening Sergt. Ordway and Wiser returned with a part of the meat
which R. Fields had killed; the ballance of the party with Sergt. Gass
remained in order to bring the ballance of the meat to the river at a
point agreed on where the canoe is to meet them again tomorrow morning.
This evening we had what I call an excellent supper it consisted of a
marrowbone a piece and a brisket of boiled Elk that had the appearance
of a little fat on it. this for Fort Clatsop is living in high stile.
In this neighbourhood I observe the honeysuckle common in our country I
first met with it on the waters of the Kooskooske near the Chopunnish
nation, and again below the grand rappids In the Columbian Valley on
tidewater. The Elder also common to our country grows in great
abundance in the rich woodlands on this side of the rocky Mountains;
tho it differs Here in the colour of it's berry, this being of a pale
sky blue while that of the U States is a deep perple. The seven bark or
nine-bark as it is called in the U States is also common in this
quarter. There is a species of huckleberry common to the piny lands
from the commencement of the Columbian valley to the seacoast; it rises
to the hight of 6 or 8 feet. is a simple branching some what defuse
stem; the main body or trunk is cilindric and of a dark brown, while
the colateral branches are green smooth, squar, and put forth a number
of alternate branches of the same colour and form from the two
horizontal sides only. the fruit is a small deep perple berry which the
natives inform us is very good. the leaf is thin of a pale green and
small being 3/4 of an inch in length and 3/8 in width; oval
terminateing more accutely at the apex than near the insertion of the
footstalk which is at the base; veined, nearly entire, serrate but so
slightly so that it is scarcely perceptible; footstalk short and there
position with rispect to each other is alternate and two ranked,
proceeding from the horizontal sides of the bough only. The small pox
has distroyed a great number of the natives in this quarter. it
prevailed about 4 years since among the Clatsops and distroy several
hundred of them, four of their chiefs fell victyms to it's ravages.
those Clatsops are deposited in their canoes on the bay a few miles
below us. I think the late ravages of the small pox may well account
for the number of remains of vilages which we find deserted on the
river and Sea coast in this quarter.




[Clark, February 7, 1806]
Friday February 7th 1806
This evening Serjt Ordway and wiser returned with a part of the meat
which R. Field had killed; the balance of the Party with Serjt. Gass
remained in order to bring the ballance of the meat to the river at a
point agreeed on, where the Canoe is to meet them again tomorrow
morning. This evening we had what I call an excellent supper it
consisted of a marrowbone, a piece of brisket of boiled Elk that had
the appearance of a little fat on it. this for Fort Clatsop is liveing
in high Stile, and in fact fiesting-.

In this neighbourhood I observe the honeysuckle common in the U States,
I first met with it on the waters of the Kooskooske near the Chopunnish
Nation, and again below the grand rapids in the Columbian Vally on tide
water. The Elder also common to our Countrey grows in great abundance
in the rich wood land on this Side of the rocky mountains, tho it
differs here in the Colour of its berry, this being of a pale Sky blue
while that of the U, States is a deep purple. The Seven or nine bark as
it is called in the U, States is also Common in this quarter. There is
a Species of huckkleberry Common to the piney lands from the
Commencement of the Columbian Vally to the Sea coast; it rises to the
hight of 6 or 8 feet, is a Simple branching, Somewhat defused Stem; the
main body or trunk is cilindric branches are green Smothe squar, and
put foth a number of alternet branches of the Same Colour and form from
the two horizontal Sides only. the frute is a small deep purple berry
which the nativs inform us is very good, the leaf is thin of a pale
green and Small being 3/4 of an inch in length and 3/8 in width; oval
terminateing more accoutely at the apax, than near the insersion of the
footstalk which is at the base vened nearly entire; footstalks Short
and their position in respect to each other is alternate and too
ranked, proceeding from the horizontal Side of the bough only.

The Small Pox had distroyed a great number of the nativs in this
quarter. it provailed about 4 or 5 yrs Sinc among the Clatsops, and
distroy'd Several hundreds of them, four of their Chiefs fell a victym
to it's ravages. these Clatsops are Deposited in their Canoes on the
bay a fiew miles below us. I think the late ravages of the Small Pox,
may well account for the number of remains of villages which I Saw on
my rout to the Kil a mox in Several places-.




[Lewis, February 8, 1806]
Saturday February 8th 1806.
Sent Sergt. Ordway and two men this morning to join the party with
Sergt. Gass and bring the ballance of R. Fields's Elk. in the evening
they returned with the balance of the flesh of five Elk, that of one of
them having become tainted and unfit for uce. late in the evening
Sergt. Pryor returned with Shannon Labuish and his party down the
Netul. they brought with them the flesh of 4 Elk which those two
hunters had killed. we have both dined and suped on Elk's tongues and
marrow bones.

I have discovered that the shrub and fruit discribed on the 26th of
January is not that which the Indians call the Shal-lon, but that is
such as is there discribed, and the berry is estemed and used by the
natives as there mentioned except that it is not like the shallon,
baked in large loaves, but is simply dryed in the sun for winter uce,
when they either eat them in thir dryed state or boil them in water.
The Shallon is the production of a shrub which I have heretofore taken
to be a speceis of loral and mentioned as abounding in this
neighbourhood and that the Elk fed much on it's leaves. it generally
rises to the hight of 3 feet but not unusually attains to that of 5
feet. it grows very thick and is from the size of a goos quill to that
of a man's thumb, celindric, the bark of the older or larger part of
the stock is of a redish brown colour while that of the younger
branches and succulent shoots are red where most exposed to the sun and
green elsewhere. the stem is simple branching reclining, and partially
fluxouse, or at least the smaler stocks or such parts of them and the
boughs as produce the leaves, take a different direction at the
insertion of every petiole. the leaf is oval four & 3/4 inches in
length and 21/2 in width. petiolate, the petiole short only 3/8th of an
inch in length, celindric with a slight channel on it's upper side
where it is generally red; undivided or entire, slightly serrate, the
apex termineating in an accute point; the upper disk of a glossey deep
green, the under disk of a pale green; veined. the leaves are also
alternate and two ranked. the root is horizontal puting forth
perpendicular radicles. this shrub is an evergreen. the fruit is a deep
perple berry about the size of a buck short or common black cherry, of
an ovate form tho reather more bluntly pointed, than at the insertion
of the peduncle; at the extremity, the thin coloured membranous
pellicle, which forms the surface of the pericarp, is divided into five
accute angular points, which meet in the center, and contains a soft
pulp of the same colour invelloping a great number of small brown
kidney formed seeds. each berry is supported by a seperate celindric
peduncle of half an inch in length; these to the number of ten or
twelve issue from a common peduncle or footstalk which is fuxouse and
forms the termination of the twig of the present years growth; each
peduncle supporting a berry is furnished with one oblong bracte placed
at it's insertion on the common footstalk which when the fruit is ripe
withers with the peduncle.




[Clark, February 8, 1806]
Saturday February 8th 1806
Sent Serjt. Ordway and two men this morning to joint the party with
Serjt. Gass, and bring the ballance of R. Field's Elk. in the evening
they returned with the ballance of the flesh of five Elk, that of one
of them having become tainted and unfit for use. late in the evening
Serjt. Pryor returned with Shannon Labieshe and his party down the
Netul. they brought with them the flesh of 4 Elk which those two
hunters had killed.

we have both Dined and Suped on Elks tongues and marrowbones. a great
Luxury for Fort Clatsop.

The Shat lon is a production of Shrub which I have taken heretofore to
be a Species of Loral and mentioned as abounding in this neighbourhood,
and that the Elk feed much on its leaves. it generally rises to the
hight of 3 feet, and not unusially attain to that of 5 feet. it grows
very thick and is from the size of that of a goose quil to that of a
mans thumb, Celendric. the bark of the older or larger part of the
Stalk is of a redish brown Colour, whilst that of the younger branches
& succulent Shoots are red where most exposed to the Sun and green
elsewhere. the Stem is Simple branching, reclineing and partially
fuxouse, or at least the Smaller Stalks or Such parts of them and their
boughs which produce the leaves, take a different direction at the
insertion of every petiole. A, A, the leaves as they grow from the
Stalk B. B. B the Stalk between each leaf.

The leaf is oval 4 and 3/4 inches in length, and 2 and a half in width.
petiolate, the potiale Short only 3/8 of an inch in length cilindric
with a Slight Channel on its upper Side where it is generally red;
undevided, or entire, Slightly serrate, the apex termonateing in an
accute point; the upper disk of a glossy deep Green, the under disk of
a pail Green, veined. the leaves are also alternate and two ranked. the
root is horozontal, putting foth pirpendicular radicles. This Shrub is
an evergreen. the frute is a deep purple berry about the Size of a buck
Shot or common black cherry, of an ovale form, tho reather more bluntly
pointed than at the insertion of the peduncle, at the extremity, the
thin coloured membranus pellicle, which forms the Surfice of the
paricarp, is divided into 4 anguar points, which meet at the Center,
and Contains a Soft pulp of the Same Colour invelloping a great number
of Small brown kidney formed Seedeach berry is Supported by a Seperate
celindric peduncle of half an inch in length, these to the number of 10
or 12 issue from a common peduncle of footstalk which forms the
termination of the twig of the present years groth; each peduncle
Supporting a berry is furnished with one oblong bracte placed at it's
insertion on the common footstalk, which when the frute is ripe withers
with the peduncle-.




[Lewis, February 9, 1806]
Sunday February 9th 1806
This morning Collins and Wiser set out on a hunting excurtion; they
took our Indian canoe and passed the Netul a little above us. in the
evening Drewyer returned; had killed nothing but one beaver. he saw one
black bear, which is the only one which has been seen in this
neighbourhood since our arrival; the Indians inform us that they are
abundant but are now in their holes.

in the marshy ground frequently overflown by the tides there grows a
species of fir which I take to be the same of No. 5 which it resembles
in every particular except that it is more defusely branched and not so
large, being seldom more than 30 feet high and 18 inches or 2 feet in
diameter; it's being more defusely branched may proceed from it's open
situation seldom growing very close. the cone is 21/2 inches in length
and 33/4 in it's greatest circumpherence, which is near it's base, and
from which it tapers regularly to a point. it is formed of imbricated
scales of a bluntly rounded form, thin not very firm and smoth. a thin
leaf is inserted into the pith of the cone, which overlays the center
of and extends 1/2 an inch beyond the point of each scale. the form of
this leaf is somewhat thus overlaying one of the imbricated scales.

The stem of the black alder of this country before mentioned as
arriving to great size, is simply branching and defuse. the bark is
smooth of a light colour with white coloured spreading spots or
blotches, resembling much that of the beech; the leaf fructification &c
is precisely that of the common alder of our country. these trees grow
seperately from different roots and not in clusters or clumps as those
of the Atlantic states. fearing that our meat would spoil we set six
men to jurking it.




[Clark, February 9, 1806]
Sunday February 9th 1806
This morning Collins & Wiser Set out on a hunting excurtion; in the
evening Drewyer returned; had Killed nothing but one Beaver. he Saw one
black Bear, which is the only one which has been seen in the
neighbourhood Since our arrival. the Indians inform us that they are
abundant but are now in their holes.

In the marshey grounds frequently overflown by the tides there grows a
Species of fir which I took to be the Same of No. 5. from examonation I
find it a distinct species of fir. it is more perfusely branched. This
tree Seldom rises to a greater hight than 35 or 40 feet and is from 2
to 4 feet in Diamieter; the Bark the Same with that of No. 1. only
reather more rugid. the leaf is acerose, 2/10 of an inch in width and
3/4 in length, they are firm Stiff and Somewhat accuminated, ending in
a Short pointed hard tendril, gibbous thickly scattered on all Sides of
the bough as respects the 3 upper Sides only; those which have their
insertion on the underside incline side--wise with their points upwards
giveing the leaf the Shape of a Sythe. the others are perpindicular or
pointing upwards, growing as in No. 1 from Small triangular pedestals
of a Soft Spungy elastic bark. the under disk of these leaves or that
which grows nearest to the Base of the bough is of a dark glossy green,
while the upper or opposit side is of a whiteish pale green; in this
respect differing from almost all leaves. The boughs retain their
leaves as far back as almost to the Sixth year's groth. the peculiarity
of the budscales observed in No. 1 is obsd. in this Species. The Cone
is 31/2 Inches in length, and 3 in circumfranse, of an ovale figure
being thickest in the middle and tapering and terminateing in two
obtuce points. it composes several flexable, thin, obtusely jointed
Smoth and redish brown imbricated scales. each scale Covering two small
winged Seed and being itself Covered in the center by a small thin
inferior scale accutely pointed. The Cone is Some what of this figure.
they proceed from the sides as well as the extremities of the bough,
but in the former case allways at or near the Commencement of Some one
years groth which in Some instances are as far back as the third year

The Stem of the Black Alder of this countrey before mentioned as
ariveing at great Size, is Simple branching and defuse. the bark is
Smoth of a light Colour with white Coloured Spredding Spots or
blotches, resembling much that of beech. the leaf is procisely that of
the Common alder of the United States or Virginia. those trees grow
Seperately from different roots and not in Clusters or Clumps, as those
of the atlantic States, casts its folage about the 1st of December.

Fearing that our meat would Spoil we Set Six men to jurking it to day,
which they are obliged to perform in a house under shelter from the
repeated rains.




[Lewis, February 10, 1806]
Monday February 10th 1806.
Drewyer visited his traps today but caught no beaver. Collins and Wiser
returned had killed no Elk. Willard arrived late in the evening from
the Saltworks, had cut his knee very badly with his tommahawk. he had
killed four Elk not far from the Salt works the day before yesterday,
which he had butched and took a part of the meat to camp, but having
cut his knee was unable to be longer ucefull at the works and had
returned. he informed us that Bratton was very unwell, and that Gibson
was so sick that he could not set up or walk alone and had desired him
to ask us to have him brought to the Fort. Coalter also returned this
evening. continue the operation of drying our meat.

There is a tree common to the Columbia river below the entrance of
cataract river which in it's appearance when divested of it's foliage,
much resembles the white ash; the appearance of the wood and bark is
also that of the ash. it's stem is simple branching and diffuse. the
leaf is petiolate, plane, scattered, palmate lobate, divided by four
deep sinuses; the lobes are repand, or terminate in from 3 to 5 accute
angular points, while their margins are indented with irregular and
somewhat circular incissures. the petiole is celendric smooth and 7
inches long. the leaf 8 inches in length and 12 in bredth. this tree is
frequently 3 feet in diameter and rises to 40 or 50 feet high. the
fruit is a winged seed somewhate like the maple. in the same part of
the country there is also another growth which resembles the white
maple in it's appearance, only that it is by no means so large; seldom
being more than from 6 to 9 inches in diamater, and from 15 to 20 feet
high; they frequently grow in clusters as if from the same bed of roots
spreading and leaning outwards. the twigs are long and slender. the
stems simple branching. the bark smooth and in colour resembling that
of the white maple. the leaf is petiolate, plane, scattered nearly
circular, with it's margin cut with accute angular incissures of an
inch in length and from six to 8 in number the accute angular points
formed by which incissures are crenate, or cut with small accute
angular incissures. or in this form. it is 3 inches in length, and 4 in
width. the petiole celindric smooth and one and a 1/4 inches long. the
fruit or flower not known.




[Clark, February 10, 1806]
Monday February 10th 1806
Collins and Wiser returned without killing any Elk. Willard arrived
late this evening from the Salt Camp, he had cut his knee very badly
with his tomahawk. he had killed four Elk not far from the Salt Camp,
the day before yesterday, which he had butchered and took a part of the
meat to the Camp, but haveing Cut his Knee was unable to be longer
Servisable at the works & had returned. he informed us that Bratten was
very unwell, and that Gibson was So Sick that he could not Set up or
walk alone, and had desired him to ask us to have him brought to the
Fort. Colter also returnd. this evening. continue the opperation of
dryin our meat.

There is a tree common to the Columbia river below the enterance of
Cataract River which in its appearance when divested of its folage,
much resembles the white ash; the appearance of the wood and bark is
also that of the ash. it's Stem is Simple branching and diffuse. the
lief is petiolate, plane, scattered palmate lobate, divided by four
deep Sinusus; the lobes are repand or terminate in from 3 to 5 accute
angular points, while their margins are indented with irregular and
Somewhat Circular incissures. the peteole is Celindric Smoth and 7
inches long. the leaf 8 inches in length and 12 in bredth. this tree is
frequently 2 & 3 feet in diamieter, and rises to 50 or 60 feet high-the
froot is a winged Seed Somewhat like the maple. In the Same part of the
countrey there is also another groth, which resembles the white maple
in its appearance, only that it is by no means so large, seldom being
more than from 6 to 9 inches in diamieter, and from 20 to 30 feet high;
they frequently grow in clusters as if from the same bed or root,
Spreading and leaning outwards. the twigs are long and Slender. the
Stems simple branching. the bark Smoth and in Colour resembles that of
the white maple. the leaf is patiolate, plain, scattered nearly
circular, with it's margin cut with accute anglar incissures of an inch
in length and from 6 to 8 in number, the accute angular points formed,
by which incissures, are crenate, or cut with small angular incissures.
or in this form. it is 3 inches in length, and 4 in width. the petiole
is cilendric smoth and 11/4 inches long. the froot or flour I have not
as yet found out &c.




[Lewis, February 11, 1806]
Tuesday February 11th 1806.
This morning Sergt. Gass Reubin Fields and Thompson passed the Netul
opposite to us on a hunting expedition. sent Sergt Pryor with a party
of four men to bring Gibson to the fort. also sent Colter and Wiser to
the Salt works to carry on the business with Joseph Fields; as Bratton
had been sick we desired him to return to the Fort also if he thought
proper; however in the event of his not coming Wiser was directed to
return.
