such wonderful results with so little money, that we should meet with
scepticism as to the correctness of the facts alleged. Such cases were,
however, too common to be doubted. My answer to the puzzling financial
question would be this: examine and study the story of the home life, the
work of _Mrs_. Weld, that unsalaried helper in clerical labor; therein
the secret lies.

In many cases, in spite of the never failing and never ceasing economy,
care, and assistance of the hard-working, thrifty wife, in spite of
tributes, tithes and windfalls--in country parishes especially--the
minister, unless he fortunately had some private wealth, felt it incumbent
upon him to follow some money-making vocation on week-days. Many were
farmers on week-days. Many took into their families young men who wished
to be taught, or fitted for college. Rev. Mr. Halleck in the course of his
useful and laborious life educated over three hundred young Puritans in his
own household. It is not recorded how Mrs. Halleck enjoyed the never ending
cooking for this regiment of hungry young men. Some parsons learned to draw
up wills and other legal documents, and thus became on a small scale the
lawyers of the town. Others studied the mystery of medicine, and bought a
small stock of the nauseous drugs of the times, which they retailed
with accompanying advice to their parishioners. Some were coopers, some
carpenters, rope-makers, millers, or cobblers. One cobbler clergyman in
Andover, Vermont, worked at his shoe-mending all the week with his Bible
open on his bench before him, and he marked the page containing any text
which bore on the subject of his coming sermon, with a marker of waxed
shoe-thread. Often the Bible, in his pulpit on Sunday, had thirty or forty
of these shoe-thread guides hanging down from it.

One minister, having been reproved for his worldliness in amassing a large
enough fortune to buy a good farm, answered his complaining congregation
thus: "I have obtained the money to buy this farm by neglecting to follow
the maxim to 'mind my own business.' My business was to study the word of
God and attend to my parish duties and preach good sermons. All this I
acknowledge I have not done, for I have been meddling with your business.
_That_ was to support me and my family; that _you_ have not done.
But remember this: while I have performed your duties, you have not done
mine, so I think you cannot complain."

Some of the early ministers, in addition to preaching in the meeting-house,
did not disdain to take care of the edifice. Parson Everitt of Sandwich was
paid three dollars a year for sweeping out the meeting-house in which he
preached; and after he resigned this position of profit, the duties were
performed by the town physician "as often as there shalbe ocation to keepe
it deesent." The thrifty Mr. Everitt had a pleasing variety of occupations;
he was also a successful farmer, a good fence-builder, and he ran a
fulling-mill.

So, altogether, as they were wholly exempt from taxation, the New England
parsons did not fare ill, though Mr. Cotton said that "ministers and milk
were the only cheap things in New England," and he deemed various ills,
such as attacks by fierce Indians, loss of cattle, earthquakes, and failure
of crops, to be divine judgments for the small ministerial pay; while
Cotton Mather, in one of his pompous and depressing jokes, called the
minister's stipend "Synecdotical Pay." A search in a treatise on rhetoric
or in a dictionary will discover the point of this witticism--if it be
worth searching for.




XXII.

The Plain-Speaking Puritan Pulpit.



One thing which always interests and can but amuse every reader of the
old Puritan sermons is the astonishingly familiar way in which these New
England divines publicly shared their domestic joys and sorrows with
the members of their congregations; and we are equally surprised at the
ingenuity which they displayed in finding texts that were suitable for
the various occasions and events. The Reverend Mr. Turell was specially
ingenious. Of him Dr. Holmes wrote,--

  "You've heard, no doubt, of Parson Turell;
  Over at Medford he used to dwell,--
  Married one of the Mathers' folks."

His wife, Jane Coleman, was a handsome brunette. The bridegroom preached
his first sermon after his wedding on this text, "I am black but comely, O
ye daughters of Jerusalem." When he married a second time he chose as his
text, "He is altogether lovely, this is my beloved, and this my friend, O
daughters of Jerusalem!" It is possible that each of Parson Turell's brides
may have chosen the text from which he preached her honeymoon sermon. It
was the universal custom for many years thoughout New England to allow a
bride the privilege of selecting for the parson who had solemnized her
marriage, or at whose church she first appeared after the wedding, the text
from which he should preach on the bridal Sabbath. Thus when John Physick
and Mary Prescott were married in Portland, on July 4, 1770, the bride gave
to Rev. Mr. Deane this text: "Mary hath chosen that good part;" and from it
Parson Deane preached the "wedding sermon." When Abby Smith, daughter of
Parson Smith, married 'Squire John Adams, whom her father disliked and
would not invite home to dinner, she chose this text for her wedding
sermon: "John came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and ye say he
hath a devil." The high-spirited bride had the honor of living to be the
wife of one President of the United States, and mother of another.

Another ingenious clergyman gave out one morning as his text, "Unto us a
son is born;" and thus notified the surprised congregation of an event
which they had been awaiting for some weeks. Another preached on the text,
"My servant lieth at home sick," which was literally true. Another, a
bachelor, dared to announce this abbreviated text: "A wonder was seen in
heaven--a woman." Dr. Mather Byles, of Boston, being disappointed through
the non-appearance of a minister named Prince, who had been expected to
deliver the sermon, preached himself upon the text, "Put not your trust
in princes." But Dr. Byles was one who would always "court a grin when he
should win a soul."

One minister felt it necessary to reprove a money-making parishioner who
had stored and was holding in reserve (with the hope of higher prices) a
large quantity of corn which was sadly needed for consumption in the town.
The parson preached from this appropriate text, Proverbs xi. 26. "He that
withholdeth his corn, the people shall curse him; but blessings shall be
upon the head of him that selleth it." As the minister grew warmer in his
explanation and application of the text, the money-seeking corn-storer
defiantly and unregenerately sat up stiff and unmoved, until at last the
preacher, provoked out of prudence and patience, roared out, "Colonel
Ingraham, Colonel Ingraham! you know I mean you; why don't you hang down
your head?" In a similar case another stern parson employed the text,
"Ephraim is joined to his idols, let him alone;" though the personalities
of the sermon made unnecessary the open reference in the text to the
offender's name.

The ministers were such autocrats in the Puritan community that they never
hesitated to show their authority in any manner in the pulpit. Judge Sewall
records with much bitterness a libel which his pastor, Mr. Pemberton,
launched at him in the meeting through the medium of the psalm which
he gave out to be sung. They had differed over the adjustment of some
church-matter and on the following Sunday the clergyman assigned to be sung
the libellous and significant psalm. Such lines as these must have been
hard indeed for Judge Sewall to endure:--

  "Speak, oh ye Judges of the Earth
    if just your Sentence be
  Or must not Innocence appeal
    to Heav'n from your decree

  "Your Wicked Hearts and Judgments are
    alike by Malice sway'd
  Your griping Hands by mighty Bribes
    to violence betrayed.

  "No Serpent of parch'd Afric's breed
    doth Ranker poison bear
  The drowsy Adder will as soon
    unlock his Sullen Ear

  "Unmov'd by good Advice, and dead
    As Adders they remain
  From whom the skilful Charmer's voice
    can no attention gain."

Small wonder that Judge Sewall writhed under the infliction of these lines
as they were doubly thrust upon him by the deacon's "lining" and the
singing of the congregation; and the words, "The drowsy Adder will as soon
unlock his Sullen Ear" seemed to particularly irritate him; doubtless he
felt sure that no one could doubt his integrity, but feared that some might
think him stupid and obstinate.

Another arbitrary clergyman, having had an altercation with some unruly
singers in the choir, gave out with much vehemence on the following Sunday
the hymn beginning,--

  "And are you wretches yet alive
  And do you yet rebel?"

with a very significant glower towards the singers' gallery. In a similar
situation another minister gave out to the rebellious choir the hymn
commencing,--

  "Let those refuse to sing
  Who never knew our God."

A visiting clergyman, preaching in a small and shabby church built in a
parish of barren and stony farm-land, very spitefully and sneeringly read
out to be sung the hymn of Watts' beginning,--

  "Lord, what a wretched land is this,
  That yields us no supplies!"

But his malicious intent was frustrated and the tables were adroitly turned
by the quick-witted choir-master, who bawled out in a loud voice as if
in answer, "Northfield,"--the name of the minister's own home and
parish,--while he was really giving out to the choir, as was his wont, the
name of the tune to which the hymn was to be sung.

Nor did the parsons hesitate to be personal even in their prayers. Rev. Mr.
Moody, who was ordained pastor at York in the year 1700, reproved in an
extraordinary manner a young man who had called attention to some fine new
clothing which he wore by coming in during prayer time and thus attracting
the notice of the congregation. Mr. Moody, in an elevated tone of voice,
at once exclaimed, "And O Lord! we pray Thee, cure Ned Ingraham of that
ungodly strut," etc. Another time he prayed for a young lady in the
congregation and ended his invocation thus, "She asked me not to pray for
her in public, but I told her I would, and so I have, Amen."

Rev. Mr. Miles, while praying for rain, is said to have used this
extraordinary phraseology: "O Lord, Thou knowest we do not want Thee to
send us a rain which shall pour down in fury and swell our streams and
carry away our hay-cocks, fences, and bridges; but, Lord, we want it to
come drizzle-drozzle, drizzle-drozzle, for about a week, Amen."

They did not think it necessary always to give their congregations novel
thoughts and ideas nor fresh sermons. One minister, after being newly
ordained in his parish, preached the same sermon three Sundays in
succession; and a deacon was sent to him mildly to suggest a change. "Why,
no," he answered, "I can see no evidence yet that this one has produced any
effect."

Rev. Mr. Daggett, of Yale College, had an entire system of sermons which
took him four years to preach throughout. And for three successive years he
delivered once a year a sermon on the text, "Is Thy servant a dog that he
should do this thing?" And the fourth year he varied it with, "And the dog
did it."

Dr. Coggswell, of Canterbury, Connecticut, had a sermon which he thrust
upon his people every spring for many years as being suitable to the time
when a young man's fancy turns to thoughts of love. In it he soberly
reproved the young church attendants for gazing so much at each other in
the meeting. This annual anti-amatory advice never failed to raise a smile
on the face of each father and son in the congregation as he listened to
the familiar and oft-repeated words.

The Puritan ministers gave advice in their sermons upon most personal and
worldly matters. Roger Williams instructed the women of his parish to wear
veils when they appeared in public; but John Cotton preached to them
one Sunday morning and proved to them that veils were a sign of undue
subjection to their husbands; and in the afternoon the fair Puritans
appeared with bare faces and showed that women had even at that early day
"rights."

How the varieties of headgear did torment the parsons! They denounced
from many a pulpit the wearing of wigs. Mr. Noyes preached long and often
against the fashion. Eliot, the noble preacher and missionary to the
Indians, found time even in the midst of his arduous and incessant duties
to deliver many a blast against "prolix locks,"--"with boiling zeal," as
Cotton Mather said,--and he labelled them a "luxurious feminine protexity;"
but lamented late in life that "the lust for wigs is become insuperable."
He thought the horrors in King Philip's War were a direct punishment from
God for wig-wearing. Increase Mather preached warmly against wigs, saying
that "such Apparel is contrary to the light of Nature and to express
Scripture," and that "Monstrous Perriwigs such as some of our church
members indulge in make them resemble ye locusts that came out of ye
Bottomless Pit." To learn how these "Horrid Bushes of Vanity" were
despised by a real live Puritan wig-hater one needs only to read the
many disparaging, regretful, and bitter references to wig-wearing and
wig-wearers in Judge Sewall's diary, which reached a culmination when a
widow whom he was courting suggested most warmly that he ought to wear,
what his very soul abominated, a periwig.

Eliot had also a strong aversion to tobacco, and denounced its use in
severe terms; but his opposition in this case was as ineffectual as it was
against wigs. Allen said, "In contempt of all his admonitions the head
would be adorned with curls of foreign growth, and the pipe would send up
volumes of smoke."

Rev. Mr. Rogers preached against long natural hair,--the "disguisement of
long ruffianly hair,"--as did also President Chauncey of Harvard College;
while Mr. Wigglesworth's sermon on the subject has often been reprinted,
and is full of logical arguments. This offence was named on the list of
existing evils which was made by the General Court: that "the men wore long
hair like women's hair," while the women were complained of for "cutting
and curling and laying out of hair, especially among the younger sort."
Still, the Puritan magistrates, omnipotent as they were, did not dare to
force the be-curled citizens to cut their long love-locks, though they
instructed and bribed them to do so. A Salem man was, in 1687, fined ten
shillings for a misdemeanor, but "in case he shall cutt off his long har of
his head into a sevill (civil?) frame in the mean time shall have abated
five shillings of his fine." John Eliot hated long natural hair as well
as false hair. Cotton Mather said of him, in a very unpleasant figure of
speech, "The hair of them that professed religion grew too long for him to
swallow." Other fashions and habits brought forth denunciations from the
pulpit,--hooped petticoats, gold-laced coats (unless worn by gentlemen),
pointed shoes, chaise-owning, health-drinking, tavern-visiting, gossiping,
meddling, tale-bearing, and lying.

Political and business and even medical and sanitary subjects were popular
in the early New England pulpit. Mr. Peters preached many a long sermon
to urge the formation of a stock company for fishing, and canvassed all
through the commonwealth for the same purpose. Cotton Mather said plainly
that ministers ought to instruct themselves and their congregations in
politics; and in Connecticut it was ordered by law that each minister
should give sound and orthodox advice to his congregation at the time of
civil elections.

Every natural phenomenon, every unusual event called forth a sermon, and
the minister could find even in the common events of every-day life plain
manifestations of Divine wrath and judgment. He preached with solemn
delight upon comets, and earthquakes, and northern lights, and great storms
and droughts, on deaths and diseases, and wonders and scandals (for there
were scandals even in puritanical New England), on wars both at home and
abroad, on shipwrecks, on safe voyages, on distinguished visitors, on noted
criminals and crimes,--in fact, upon every subject that was of spiritual or
temporal interest to his congregation or himself. And his people looked
for his religious comment upon passing events just as now-a-days we read
articles upon like subjects in the newspaper. Thus was the Puritan minister
not only a preacher, but a teacher, adviser, and friend, and a pretty
plain-spoken one too.




XXIII.

The Early Congregations.



On Sunday morning in New England in the olden time, the country
church-members whose homes were near the meeting-house walked reverently
and slowly across the green meadows or the snowy fields to meeting.
Townspeople, at the sound of the bell or drum or horn, walked decorously
and soberly along the irregular streets to the house of God. Farmers who
lived at a greater distance were up betimes to leave their homes and ride
across the fields and through the narrow bridle-paths, which were then the
universal and almost the only country roads. These staid Puritan planters
were mounted on sturdy farmhorses, and a pillion was strapped on behind
each saddle, and on it was seated wife, daughter, or perhaps a young
child--I should like to have seen the church-going dames perched up proudly
in all their Sunday finery, masked in black velvet, a sober Puritan
travesty of a gay carnival fashion. Riding-habits were hardly known until
a century ago, and even after their introduction were never worn
a-pillion-riding, so the Puritan women rode in their best attire.
Sometimes, in unusually muddy or dusty weather, a very daintily dressed
"nugiperous" dame would don a linen "weather skirt" to protect her fine
silken petticoats.

The wealthier Puritans were mounted on fine pacing horses, "once so highly
prized, now so odious deemed;" for trotting horses were not in much demand
or repute in America until after the Revolutionary War. There were, until
that date, professional horse-trainers, whose duties were to teach horses
to pace; though by far the best saddle-horses were the natural-gaited
"Narragansett Pacers," the first distinctively American race of horses.
These remarkably easy-paced animals were in such demand in the West Indies
for the use of the wives and daughters of the wealthy sugar-planters, and
in Philadelphia and New York for rich Dutch and Quaker colonists, that
comparatively few of them were allowed to remain in New England, and they
were, indeed too high-priced for poor New England colonists. The natural
and singular pace of these Narragansett horses, which did not incline the
rider from side to side, nor jolt him up and down, and their remarkable
sureness of foot and their great endurance, rendered them of much value
in those days of travel in the saddle. They were also phenomenally
broad-backed,--shaped by nature for saddle and pillion.

When trotting-horses became fashionable, the trainers placed logs of wood
at regular intervals across the road, and by exercising the animals
over this obstructed path forced them to raise their feet at the proper
intervals, and thus learn to trot.

Long distances did many of the pre-revolutionary farmers of New England
have to ride to reach their churches, and long indeed must have been the
time occupied in these Sunday trips, for a horse was too well-burdened with
saddle and pillion and two riders to travel fast. The worshippers must
often have started at daybreak. When we see now an ancient pillion--a relic
of olden times--brought out in jest or curiosity, and strapped behind a
saddle on a horse's back, and when we see the poor steed mounted by two
riders, it seems impossible for the over-burdened animal to endure a long
journey, and certainly impossible for him to make a rapid one.

Horse-flesh, and human endurance also, was economized in early days by what
was called the "ride and tie" system. A man and his wife would mount saddle
and pillion, ride a couple of miles, dismount, tie the steed, and walk
on. A second couple, who had walked the first two miles, soon mounted the
rested horse, rode on past the riders for two or three miles, dismounted,
and tied the animal again. In that way four persons could ride very
comfortably and sociably half-way to meeting, though they must have had
to make an early start to allow for the slow gait and long halts. At the
church the disburdened horses were tied during the long services to palings
and to trees near the meeting-house (except the favored animals that found
shelter in the noon-houses) and the scene must have resembled the outskirts
of a gypsy camp or an English horse-fair. Such obedience did the Puritans
pay to the letter of the law that when the Newbury people were forbidden,
in tying their horses outside the church paling, to leave them near enough
to the footpath to be in the way of church pedestrians, it did not prevent
the stupid or obstinate Newburyites from painstakingly bringing their
steeds within the gates and tying them to the gate-posts where they were
much more seriously and annoyingly in the way.

It is usual to describe and to think of the Puritan congregations as like
assemblies of Quakers, solemn, staid, and uniform and dull of dress; but
I can discover in historical records nothing to indicate simplicity,
soberness, or even uniformity of apparel, except the uniformity of fashion,
which was powerful then as now. The forbidding rules and regulations
relating to the varied and elaborate forms of women's dress--and of men's
attire as well--would never have been issued unless such prohibited apparel
had been common and universally longed-for, and unless much diversity and
elegance of dress had abounded.

Indeed the daughters of the Pilgrims were true "daughters of Zion, walking
with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, and mincing as they go." Save
for the "nose jewels," the complaining and exhaustive list of the prophet
Isaiah might serve as well for New England as for Judah and Jerusalem:
"their cauls and their round tires like moons; the chains and the bracelets
and the mufflers; the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the head
bands, and the tablets, and the ear-rings; the rings and nose jewels; the
changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the
crisping pins; the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods and the
veils." Nor has the day yet come to pass in the nineteenth century when the
bravery of the daughters has been taken away.

Pleasant it is to think of the church appearance of the Puritan goodmen and
goodwives. Priscilla Alden in a Quakeress' drab gown would doubtless have
been pleasant to behold, but Priscilla garbed in a "blew Mohere peticote,"
a "tabby bodeys with red livery cote," and an "immoderate great rayle" with
"Slashes," with a laced neckcloth or cross cloth around her fair neck, and
a scarlet "whittle" over all this motley finery; with a "outwork quoyf or
ciffer" (New England French for coiffure) with "long wings" at the side,
and a silk or tiffany hood on her drooping head,--Priscilla in this attire
were pretty indeed.

