rode from the Alhambra. The sound of his trumpets, the tramp of his
steeds, the voice of his heralds, simultaneously reached the multitude;
and, ere they had leisure to decide their course, the king was in the
midst of them.

"What madness is this, O my people?" cried Boabdil, spurring into the
midst of the throng,--"whither would ye go?"

"Against the Christian!--against the Goth!" shouted a thousand voices.
"Lead us on! The santon is risen from the dead, and will ride by thy
right hand!"

"Alas!" resumed the king, "ye would march against the Christian king!
Remember that our hostages are in his power: remember that he will
desire no better excuse to level Granada with the dust, and put you and
your children to the sword. We have made such treaty as never yet was
made between foe and foe. Your lives, laws, wealth--all are saved.
Nothing is lost, save the crown of Boabdil. I am the only sufferer. So
be it. My evil star brought on you these evil destinies: without me, you
may revive, and be once more a nation. Yield to fate to-day, and you may
grasp her proudest awards to-morrow. To succumb is not to be subdued.
But go forth against the Christians, and if ye win one battle, it is
but to incur a more terrible war; if you lose, it is not honourable
capitulation, but certain extermination, to which you rush! Be
persuaded, and listen once again to your king."

The crowd were moved, were softened, were half-convinced. They turned,
in silence, towards their santon; and Almamen did not shrink from the
appeal; but stood forth, confronting the king.

"King of Granada!" he cried aloud, "behold thy friend--thy prophet! Lo!
I assure you victory!"

"Hold!" interrupted Boabdil; "thou hast deceived and betrayed me too
long! Moors! know ye this pretended santon? He is of no Moslem creed. He
is a hound of Israel who would sell you to the best bidder. Slay him!"

"Ha!" cried Almamen, "and who is my accuser?"

"Thy servant-behold him!" At these words the royal guards lifted their
torches, and the glare fell redly on the death-like features of Ximen.

"Light of the world! there be other Jews that know him," said the
traitor.

"Will ye suffer a Jew to lead ye, O race of the Prophet?" cried the
king.

The crowd stood confused and bewildered. Almamen felt his hour was come;
he remained silent, his arms folded, his brow erect.

"Be there any of the tribes of Moisa amongst the crowd?" cried Boabdil,
pursuing his advantage; "if so, let them approach and testify what they
know." Forth came--not from the crowd, but from amongst Boabdil's train,
a well-known Israelite.

"We disown this man of blood and fraud," said Elias, bowing to the
earth; "but he was of our creed."

"Speak, false santon! art thou dumb?" cried the king.

"A curse light on thee, dull fool!" cried Almamen, fiercely. "What
matters who the instrument that would have restored to thee thy throne?
Yes! I, who have ruled thy councils, who have led thine armies, I am of
the race of Joshua and of Samuel--and the Lord of Hosts is the God of
Almamen!"

A shudder ran through that mighty multitude: but the looks, the mien,
and the voice of the man awed them, and not a weapon was raised against
him. He might, even then, have passed scathless through the crowd; he
might have borne to other climes his burning passions and his torturing
woes: but his care for life was past; he desired but to curse his dupes,
and to die. He paused, looked round and burst into a laugh of such
bitter and haughty scorn, as the tempted of earth may hear in the halls
below from the lips of Eblis.

"Yes," he exclaimed, "such I am! I have been your idol and your lord.
I may be your victim, but in death I am your vanquisher. Christian and
Moslem alike my foe, I would have trampled upon both. But the Christian,
wiser than you, gave me smooth words; and I would have sold ye to his
power; wickeder than you, he deceived me; and I would have crushed him
that I might have continued to deceive and rule the puppets that ye call
your chiefs. But they for whom I toiled, and laboured, and sinned--for
whom I surrendered peace and ease, yea, and a daughter's person and a
daughter's blood--they have betrayed me to your hands, and the Curse of
Old rests with them evermore--Amen! The disguise is rent: Almamen, the
santon, is the son of Issachar the Jew!"

More might he have said, but the spell was broken. With a ferocious
yell, those living waves of the multitude rushed over the stern fanatic;
six cimiters passed through him, and he fell not: at the seventh he
was a corpse. Trodden in the clay--then whirled aloft--limb torn from
limb,--ere a man could have drawn breath nine times, scarce a vestige of
the human form was left to the mangled and bloody clay.

One victim sufficed to slake the wrath of the crowd. They gathered like
wild beasts whose hunger is appeased, around their monarch, who in vain
had endeavored to stay their summary revenge, and who now, pale and
breathless, shrank from the passions he had excited. He faltered forth a
few words of remonstrance and exhortation, turned the head of his steed,
and took his way to his palace.

The crowd dispersed, but not yet to their homes. The crime of Almamen
worked against his whole race. Some rushed to the Jews' quarter, which
they set on fire; others to the lonely mansion of Almamen.

Ximen, on quitting the king, had been before the mob. Not anticipating
such an effect of the popular rage, he had hastened to the house, which
he now deemed at length his own. He had just reached the treasury of
his dead lord--he had just feasted his eyes on the massive ingots and
glittering gems; in the lust of his heart he had just cried aloud, "And
these are mine!" when he heard the roar of the mob below the wall,--when
he saw the glare of their torches against the casement. It was in vain
that he shrieked aloud, "I am the man that exposed the Jew!" the wild
wind scattered his words over a deafened audience. Driven from his
chamber by the smoke and flame, afraid to venture forth amongst the
crowd, the miser loaded himself with the most precious of the store: he
descended the steps, he bent his way to the secret vault, when suddenly
the floor, pierced by the flames, crashed under him, and the fire rushed
up in a fiercer and more rapid volume, as the death-shriek broke through
that lurid shroud.

Such were the principal events of the last night of the Moorish dynasty
in Granada.




CHAPTER VII. THE END.

Day dawned upon Granada: the populace had sought their homes, and a
profound quiet wrapped the streets, save where, from the fires committed
in the late tumult, was yet heard the crash of roofs or the crackle of
the light and fragrant timber employed in those pavilions of the summer.
The manner in which the mansions of Granada were built, each separated
from the other by extensive gardens, fortunately prevented the flames
from extending. But the inhabitants cared so little for the hazard,
that not a single guard remained to watch the result. Now and then some
miserable forms in the Jewish gown might be seen cowering by the ruins
of their house, like the souls that, according to Plato, watched in
charnels over their own mouldering bodies. Day dawned, and the beams
of the winter sun, smiling away the clouds of the past night, played
cheerily on the murmuring waves of the Xenil and the Darro.

Alone, upon a balcony commanding that stately landscape, stood the last
of the Moorish kings. He had sought to bring to his aid all the lessons
of the philosophy he had cultivated. "What are we," thought the musing
prince, "that we should fill the world with ourselves--we kings! Earth
resounds with the crash of my falling throne: on the ear of races unborn
the echo will live prolonged. But what have I lost?--nothing that was
necessary to my happiness, my repose; nothing save the source of all my
wretchedness, the Marah of my life! Shall I less enjoy heaven and
earth, or thought or action, or man's more material luxuries of food
or sleep--the common and the cheap desires of all? Arouse thee, then, O
heart within me! many and deep emotions of sorrow or of joy are yet left
to break the monotony of existence."

He paused; and, at the distance, his eyes fell upon the lonely minarets
of the distant and deserted palace of Muza Ben Abil Gazan.

"Thou went right, then," resumed the king--"thou wert right, brave
spirit, not to pity Boabdil: but not because death was in his power;
man's soul is greater than his fortunes, and there is majesty in a life
that towers above the ruins that fall around its path." He turned away,
and his cheek suddenly grew pale, for he heard in the courts below
the tread of hoofs, the bustle of preparation: it was the hour for his
departure. His philosophy vanished: he groaned aloud, and re-entered
the chamber just as his vizier and the chief of his guard broke upon his
solitude.

The old vizier attempted to speak, but his voice failed him.

"It is time, then, to depart," said Boabdil, with calmness; "let it be
so: render up the palace and the fortress, and join thy friend, no more
thy monarch, in his new home."

He stayed not for reply: he hurried on, descended to the court, flung
himself on his barb, and, with a small and saddened train, passed
through the gate which we yet survey, by a blackened and crumbling tower
overgrown with vines and ivy; thence, amidst gardens, now appertaining
to the convent of the victor faith, he took his mournful and unwitnessed
way. When he came to the middle of the hill that rises above those
gardens, the steel of the Spanish armour gleamed upon him as the
detachment sent to occupy the palace marched over the summit in steady
order and profound silence.

At the head of this vanguard rode, upon a snow-white palfrey, the Bishop
of Avila, followed by a long train of barefooted monks. They halted as
Boabdil approached, and the grave bishop saluted him with the air of
one who addresses an infidel and an inferior. With the quick sense of
dignity common to the great, and yet more to the fallen, Boabdil felt,
but resented not, the pride of the ecclesiastic. "Go, Christian," said
he, mildly, "the gates of the Alhambra are open, and Allah has bestowed
the palace and the city upon your king: may his virtues atone the faults
of Boabdil!" So saying, and waiting no answer, he rode on, without
looking to the right or left. The Spaniards also pursued their way. The
sun had fairly risen above the mountains, when Boabdil and his train
beheld, from the eminence on which they were, the whole armament of
Spain; and at the same moment, louder than the tramp of horse, or the
flash of arms, was heard distinctly the solemn chant of Te Deum, which
preceded the blaze of the unfurled and lofty standards. Boabdil, himself
still silent, heard the groans and exclamations of his train; he turned
to cheer or chide them, and then saw, from his own watch-tower, with the
sun shining full upon its pure and dazzling surface, the silver cross of
Spain. His Alhambra was already in the hands of the foe, while, beside
that badge of the holy war, waved the gay and flaunting flag of St.
Iago, the canonised Mars of the chivalry of Spain.

At that sight the king's voice died within him: he gave the rein to his
barb, impatient to close the fatal ceremonial, and did not slacken his
speed till almost within bow-shot of the first ranks of the army. Never
had Christian war assumed a more splendid or imposing aspect. Far as
the eye could reach extended the glittering and gorgeous lines of that
goodly power, bristling with sunlit spears and blazoned banners; while
beside murmured, and glowed, and danced, the silver and laughing Xenil,
careless what lord should possess, for his little day, the banks that
bloomed by its everlasting course. By a small mosque halted the flower
of the army. Surrounded by the arch-priests of that mighty hierarchy,
the peers and princes of a court that rivalled the Rolands of
Charlemagne, was seen the kingly form of Ferdinand himself, with Isabel
at his right hand and the highborn dames of Spain, relieving, with their
gay colours and sparkling gems, the sterner splendour of the crested
helmet and polished mail.

Within sight of the royal group, Boabdil halted--composed his aspect
so as best to conceal his soul,--and, a little in advance of his scanty
train, but never, in mien and majesty, more a king, the son of Abdallah
met his haughty conqueror.

At the sight of his princely countenance and golden hair, his comely
and commanding beauty, made more touching by youth, a thrill of
compassionate admiration ran through that assembly of the brave
and fair. Ferdinand and Isabel slowly advanced to meet their late
rival--their new subject; and, as Boabdil would have dismounted, the
Spanish king place his hand upon his shoulder. "Brother and prince,"
said he, "forget thy sorrows; and may our friendship hereafter console
thee for reverses against which thou hast contended as a hero and a
king-resisting man, but resigned at length to God!"

Boabdil did not affect to return this bitter, but unintentional mockery
of compliment. He bowed his head, and remained a moment silent; then,
motioning to his train, four of his officers approached, and kneeling
beside Ferdinand, proffered to him, upon a silver buckler, the keys of
the city.

"O king!" then said Boabdil, "accept the keys of the last hold which has
resisted the arms of Spain! The empire of the Moslem is no more. Thine
are the city and the people of Granada: yielding to thy prowess, they
yet confide in thy mercy."

"They do well," said the king; "our promises shall not be broken. But,
since we know the gallantry of Moorish cavaliers, not to us, but to
gentler hands, shall the keys of Granada be surrendered."

Thus saying, Ferdinand gave the keys to Isabel, who would have addressed
some soothing flatteries to Boabdil: but the emotion and excitement were
too much for her compassionate heart, heroine and queen though she was;
and, when she lifted her eyes upon the calm and pale features of the
fallen monarch, the tears gushed from them irresistibly, and her voice
died in murmurs. A faint flush overspread the features of Boabdil, and
there was a momentary pause of embarrassment which the Moor was the
first to break.

"Fair queen," said he, with mournful and pathetic dignity; "thou canst
read the heart that thy generous sympathy touches and subdues: this
is thy last, nor least glorious, conquest. But I detain ye: let not my
aspect cloud your triumph. Suffer me to say farewell."

"May we not hint at the blessed possibility of conversion?" whispered
the pious queen through her tears to her royal consort.

"Not now--not now, by St. Iago!" returned Ferdinand, quickly, and in
the same tone, willing himself to conclude a painful conference. He then
added, aloud, "Go, my brother, and fair fortune with you! Forget the
past."

Boabdil smiled bitterly, saluted the royal pair with profound and silent
reverence, and rode slowly on, leaving the army below, as he ascended
the path that led to his new principality beyond the Alpuxarras. As
the trees snatched the Moorish cavalcade from the view of the king,
Ferdinand ordered the army to recommence its march; and trumpet and
cymbal presently sent their music to the ear of the Moslems.

Boabdil spurred on at full speed till his panting charger halted at
the little village where his mother, his slaves, and his faithful Amine
(sent on before) awaited him. Joining these, he proceeded without delay
upon his melancholy path.

They ascended that eminence which is the pass into the Alpuxarras. From
its height, the vale, the rivers, the spires, the towers of Granada,
broke gloriously upon the view of the little band. They halted,
mechanically and abruptly; every eye was turned to the beloved scene.
The proud shame of baffled warriors, the tender memories of home--of
childhood--of fatherland, swelled every heart, and gushed from every
eye. Suddenly, the distant boom of artillery broke from the citadel and
rolled along the sunlit valley and crystal river. A universal wail burst
from the exiles! it smote--it overpowered the heart of the ill-starred
king, in vain seeking to wrap himself in Eastern pride or stoical
philosophy. The tears gushed from his eyes, and he covered his face with
his hands.

Then said his haughty mother, gazing at him with hard and disdainful
eyes, in that unjust and memorable reproach which history has
preserved--"Ay, weep like a woman over what thou couldst not defend like
a man!"

Boabdil raised his countenance, with indignant majesty, when he felt his
hand tenderly clasped, and, turning round, saw Amine by his side.

"Heed her not! heed her not, Boabdil!" said the slave; "never didst
thou seem to me more noble than in that sorrow. Thou wert a hero for thy
throne; but feel still, O light of mine eyes, a woman for thy people!"

"God is great!" said Boabdil; "and God comforts me still! Thy lips;
which never flattered me in my power, have no reproach for me in my
affliction!"

He said, and smiled upon Amine--it was her hour of triumph.

The band wound slowly on through the solitary defiles: and that place
where the king wept, and the woman soothed, is still called "El, ultimo
suspiro del Moro,--THE LAST SIGH OF THE MOOR!"








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Leila, Complete, by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEILA, COMPLETE ***

***** This file should be named 9761.txt or 9761.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/7/6/9761/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
