    Sec.Sec.19--29. Summary. If the senses are healthy and unimpaired, they give
    perfectly true information about external things. Not that I maintain
    the truth of _every_ sensation, Epicurus must see to that. Things which
    impede the action of the senses must always be removed, in practice we
    always do remove them where we can (19). What power the cultivated
    senses of painters and musicians have! How keen is the sense of touch!
    (20). After the perceptions of sense come the equally clear perceptions
    of the mind, which are in a certain way perceptions of sense, since
    they come through sense, these rise in complexity till we arrive at
    definitions and ideas (21). If these ideas may possibly be false, logic
    memory, and all kinds of arts are at once rendered impossible (22).
    That true perception is possible, is seen from moral action. Who would
    act, if the things on which he takes action might prove to be false?
    (23) How can wisdom be wisdom if she has nothing certain to guide her?
    There must he some ground on which action can proceed (24). Credence
    must be given to the thing which impels us to action, otherwise action
    is impossible (25). The doctrines of the New Academy would put an end
    to all processes of reasoning. The fleeting and uncertain can never be
    discovered. Rational proof requires that something, once veiled, should
    be brought to light (26). Syllogisms are rendered useless, philosophy
    too cannot exist unless her dogmas have a sure basis (27). Hence the
    Academics have been urged to allow their _dogma_ that perception is
    impossible, to be a certain perception of their minds. This, Carneades
    said, would be inconsistent, since the very dogma excludes the
    supposition that there can be _any_ true perception (28). Antiochus
    declared that the Academics could not be held to be philosophers if
    they had not even confidence in their one dogma (29).

Sec.19. _Sensibus_: it is important to observe that the word _sensus_ like
[Greek: aisthesis] means two things, (1) one of the _five_ senses, (2) an
individual act of sensation. _Deus_: for the supposed god cf. _T.D._ II.
67. _Non videam_: this strong statement is ridiculed in 80. _De remo
inflexo et de collo columbae_: cf. 79, 82. The [Greek: kope enalos
keklasmene] and [Greek: peristeras trachelos] are frequently mentioned,
along with numerous other instances of the deceptiveness of sense, by Sext.
Emp., e.g. _Pyrrhon. Hypot._ I. 119-121, _Adv. Math._ VII. 244, 414.
Cicero, in his speech of the day before, had probably added other examples,
cf. Aug. _Cont. Ac._ III. 27. _Epicurus hoc viderit_: see 79, 80. Epic.
held all sensation, _per se_, to be infallible. The chief authorities for
this are given in R. and P. 343, 344, Zeller 403, footnote. _Lumen mutari_:
cf. _Brut._ 261. _Intervalla ... diducimus_: for this cf. Sext. _Pyrrh_. I.
118 [Greek: pemptos esti logos] (i.e. the 5th sceptic [Greek: tropos] for
showing sense to be untrustworthy) [Greek: ho para tas theseis] (_situs_)
[Greek: kai ta diastemata] (_intervalla_) [Greek: kai tous topous].
_Multaque facimus usque eo_: Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 258 [Greek: panta
poiei mechris an tranen kai plektiken spase phantasian]. _Sui iudicii_: see
for the gen. _M.D.F._ II. 27; there is an extraordinary instance in Plaut.
_Persa_ V. 2, 8, quoted by Goer. _Sui cuiusque_: for this use of _suus
quisque_ as a single word see _M.D.F._ V. 46.

Sec.20. _Ut oculi ... cantibus_: Halm after Dav. treats this as a gloss: on
the other hand I think it appropriate and almost necessary. _Quis est quin
cernat_: read Madvig's strong remarks on Goerenz's note here (_D.F._ II.
27). _Umbris ... eminentia_: Pliny (see Forc.) often uses _umbra_ and
_lumen_, to denote background and foreground, so in Gk. [Greek: skia] and
[Greek: skiasma] are opposed to [Greek: lampra]; cf. also [Greek:
skiagraphein], _adumbrare_, and Aesch. _Agam_. 1328. Cic. often applies
metaphorically to oratory the two words here used, e.g. _De Or._ III. 101,
and after him Quintilian, e.g. II. 17, 21. _Inflatu_: cf. 86 (where an
answer is given) and [Greek: anabole]. _Antiopam_: of Pacuvius.
_Andromacham_: of Ennius, often quoted by Cic., as _De Div._ I. 23.
_Interiorem_: see R. and P. 165 and Zeller's _Socrates and the Socratic
Schools_, 296. _Quia sentiatur_: [Greek: aisthesis] being their only
[Greek: kriterion]. Madv. (without necessity, as a study of the passages
referred to in R. and P. and Zeller will show) conj. _cui adsentiatur_,
comparing 39, 58; cf. also 76. _Inter eum ... et inter_: for the repetition
of _inter_ cf. _T.D._ IV. 32 and Madv. _Gram._ 470. _Nihil interesse_: if
the doctrine of the Academics were true, a man might really be in pain when
he fancied himself in pleasure, and _vice versa_; thus the distinction
between pleasure and pain would be obscured. _Sentiet ... insaniat_: For
the sequence cf. _D.F._ I. 62 and Wesenberg's fine note on _T.D._ V. 102.

Sec.21. _Illud est album_: these are [Greek: axiomata], judgments of the mind,
in which alone truth and falsehood reside; see Zeller 107 sq. There is a
passage in Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 344, 345 which closely resembles ours;
it is too long to quote entire: [Greek: aisthesesi men oun monais labein
talethes] (which resides only in the [Greek: axioma]) [Greek: ou dynatai
anthropos. ... physei gar eisin alogoi ... dei de eis phantasian achthenai
tou toioutou pragmatos "touto leukon esti kai touto glyky estin." toi de
toioutoi pragmati ouketi tes aistheseos ergon estin epiballein ... syneseos
te dei kai mnemes]. _Ille deinceps_: _deinceps_ is really out of place; cf.
24 _quomodo primum_ for _pr. quom._ _Ille equus est_: Cic. seems to
consider that the [Greek: axioma], which affirms the existence of an
abstract quality, is prior to that which affirms the existence of a
concrete individual. I can quote no parallel to this from the Greek texts.
_Expletam comprehensionem_: full knowledge. Here we rise to a definition.
This one often appears in Sextus: e.g. _Adv. Math._ VII. [Greek: anthropos
esti zoon logikon thneton, nou kai epistemes dektikon]. The Stoic [Greek:
horoi], and this among them, are amusingly ridiculed, _Pyrrh. Hyp._ II.
208--211. _Notitiae_: this Cic. uses as a translation both of [Greek:
prolepsis] and [Greek: ennoia], for which see Zeller 79, 89. In I. 40
_notiones rerum_ is given. _Sine quibus_: [Greek: dia gar ton ennoion ta
pragmata lambanetai] Diog. VII. 42.

Sec.22. _Igitur_: for the anacoluthia cf. Madv. _Gram._ 480. _Consentaneum_:
so Sextus constantly uses [Greek: akolouthon]. _Repugnaret_: cf. I. 19 and
n. _Memoriae certe_: n. on 106. _Continet_: cf. _contineant_ in 40. _Quae
potest esse_: Cic. nearly always writes _putat esse_, _potest esse_ and the
like, not _esse putat_ etc., which form is especially rare at the end of a
clause. _Memoria falsorum_: this difficulty is discussed in Plato
_Sophist._ 238--239. _Ex multis animi perceptionibus_: the same definition
of an art occurs in _N.D._ II. 148, _D.F._ III. 18 (see Madv.), Quint, II.
17, 41, Sext. _Pyrrh. Hyp._ III. 188 [Greek: technen einai systema ek
katalepseon syngegymnasmenon] _ib._ III. 250. _Quam_: for the change from
plural to singular (_perceptio in universum_) cf. n. on I. 38, Madv. _D.F._
II. 61, _Em._ 139. _Qui distingues_: Sext. _Adv. Math._ VIII. 280 [Greek:
ou dioisei tes atechnias he techne]. Sextus often comments on similar
complaints of the Stoics. _Aliud eiusmodi genus sit_: this distinction is
as old as Plato and Arist., and is of constant occurrence in the late
philosophy. Cf. Sext. _Adv. Math._ XI. 197 who adds a third class of
[Greek: technai] called [Greek: apotelesmatikai] to the usual [Greek:
theoretikai] and [Greek: praktikai], also Quint. II. 18, 1 and 2, where
[Greek: poietike] corresponds to the [Greek: apot.] of Sext. _Continget_:
"will be the natural consequence." The notion that the verb _contingit_
denotes necessarily _good_ fortune is quite unfounded; see Tischer on
_T.D._ III. 4. _Tractabit_: [Greek: mellei metacheirizesthai].

Sec.23. _Cognitio_: like Germ. _lehre_, the branch of learning which concerns
the virtues. Goer. is quite wrong in taking it to be a trans. of [Greek:
katalepsis] here. _In quibus_: the antecedent is not _virtutum_, as Petrus
Valentia (p. 292 ed. Orelli) supposes and gets into difficulty thereby, but
_multa_. This is shown by _etiam_; not _merely_ the virtues but _also_ all
[Greek: episteme] depends on [Greek: katalepseis]; cf. I. 40, 41, with
notes, Zeller 88, R. and P. 367. _Stabilem_: [Greek: bebaion kai
ametaptotou]. _Artem vivendi_: "_tralaticium hoc apud omnes philosophos_"
_M.D.F._ I. 42. Sextus constantly talks about [Greek: he oneiropoloumene
peri ton bion techne] (_Pyrrh. Hyp._ III. 250) the existence of which he
disproves to his own satisfaction (_Adv. Math._ XI. 168 sq). _Ille vir
bonus_: in all ancient systems, even the Epicurean, the happiness of the
_sapiens_ must be proof against the rack; cf. esp. _D.F._ III. 29, 75,
_T.D._ V. 73, Zeller 450, and the similar description of the [Greek:
sophos] in Plato's _Gorgias_. _Potius quam aut_: Lamb. _ut_; but I think
C.F. Hermann is right in asserting after Wopkens that Cic. _never_ inserts
_ut_ after _potius quam_ with the subj. Tischer on _T.D._ II. 52 affirms
that _ut_ is frequently found, but gives no exx. For the meaning cf. _De
Off._ I. 86, Aug. _Cont. Ac._ II. 12 who says the _sapiens_ of the Academy
must be _desertor officiorum omnium_. _Comprehensi ... constituti_: cf. the
famous _abiit, evasit, excessit, crupit_. _Iis rebus_: note the assumption
that the _sensation_ corresponds to the _thing_ which causes it. _Adsensus
sit ... possint_: nearly all edd. before Halm read _possunt_, but the subj.
expresses the possibility as present to the mind of the supposed _vir
bonus_. Cf. Madv. _Gram._ 368.

Sec.24. _Primum_: out of place, see on 21. _Agere_: the dogmatist always held
that the sceptic must, if consistent, be [Greek: anenergetos en bioi]
(Sext. _Pyrrh. Hyp._ I. 23). _Extremum_: similar attempts to translate
[Greek: telos] are made in D.F. I. 11, 29, V. 17. _Cum quid agere_: cf. I.
23 for the phrase _Naturae accommodatum_. a purely Stoic expression,
[Greek: homoiomenon te physei]; cf. 38 and _D.F._ V. 17, also III. 16,
Zeller 227, footnote, R. and P. 390. _Impellimur_: [Greek: kinoumetha],
Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 391, as often.

Sec.25. _Oportet videri_: "ought to be seen." For this use cf. 39, 81 and 122
of this book. _Videri_ at the end of this section has the weak sense, "to
seem." Lucretius often passes rapidly from the one use to the other; cf. I.
262 with I. 270, and Munro's n., also _M.D.F._ II. 52, _Em. Liv._ p. 42.
_Non poterit_: as the Academics allege. _Naturae ... alienum_: Cic. uses
this adjective with the dat, and also with the ablative preceded by _ab_; I
doubt whether the phrase _maiestate alienum_ (without the preposition) can
be right in _De Div._ II. 102, where the best texts still keep it. _Non
occurrit ... aget_: occurrit is probably the perfect. Cf. n. on 127.

Sec.26. _Quid quod si_: Goer., outrageously reads _quid quod si, si_.
_Tollitur_: the verb _tollere_ occurs as frequently in this sense as
[Greek: anairein] does in Sextus. _Lux lumenque_: Bentl. _dux_ The
expression _dux vitae_ is of course frequent (cf. _N.D._ I. 40, _T.D._ V. 5
and Lucretius), but there is no need to alter. _Lux_ is properly natural
light, _lumen_ artificial, cf. _Ad Att._ XVI. 13, 1. _lumina dimiseramus,
nec satis lucebat_, D.F. III. 45 _solis luce ... lumen lucernae_. There is
the same difference between [Greek: phos] and [Greek: phengos], the latter
is used for the former ([Greek: phengos heliou]) just as _lumen_ is for
_lux_ (_si te secundo lumine his offendere_--_Ad Att._ VII. 26, 1) but not
often _vice versa_. Trans. "the luminary and the lamp of life," and cf.
Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 269 where the [Greek: phantasia] is called [Greek:
phengos]. _Finis_: so in the beginning of the _Nicom. Eth._ Aristot.
assumes that the actual existence of human exertion is a sufficient proof
that there is a [Greek: telos]. _Aperta_: a reminiscence of the frequently
recurring Greek terms [Greek: ekkalyptein, ekkalyptikos] etc., cf. Sextus
_passim_, and _D.F._ I. 30. _Initium ... exitus_ = [Greek: arche ...
telos]. _Tenetur_: MSS. _tenet_, the nom. to which Guietus thought to be
_ratio_ above. [Greek: Apodeixis]: cf. the definition very often given by
Sext. e.g. _Pyrrh. Hyp._ II. 143 [Greek: logos di' homologoumenon lemmaton]
(premisses) [Greek: kata synagogen epiphoran] (conclusion) [Greek:
ekkalypton adelon], also Diog. VII. 45, [Greek: logon dia ton mallon
katalambanomenon to hetton katalambanomenon perainonta] (if the reading be
right).

Sec.27. _Notio_: another trans. of [Greek: ennoia]. _Conclusisse_: although
the Greeks used [Greek: symperasma] instead of [Greek: epiphora] sometimes
for the conclusion of the syllogism, they did not use the verb [Greek:
symperainein] which has been supposed to correspond to _concludere_. It is
more likely to be a trans. of [Greek: synagein], and _conclusum argumentum_
of [Greek: synaktikos logos], which terms are of frequent occurrence.
_Rationibus progredi_: to a similar question Sextus answers, [Greek: ouk
estin anankaion tas ekeinon] (the dogmatists) [Greek: dogmatologias
probainein, plasmatodeis hyparchousas] (_Adv. Math._ VIII. 367).
_Sapientiae ... futurum est_: for the dat. with _facio_ and _fio_ see Madv.
_Gram._ 241, obs. 5, _Opusc._ I. 370, _D.F._ II. 79, and cf. 96 of this
book. _Lex veri rectique_: cf. 29; the _constitutio veri_ and the
determination of what is _rectum_ in morals are the two main tasks of
philosophy. _Sapientique satis non sit_: so Manut. for the _sapientisque
sit_ of the MSS. Halm after Dav. reads _sapientis, neque satis sit_, which
I think is wrong, for if the ellipse be supplied the construction will run
_neque dubitari potest quin satis sit_, which gives the exact opposite of
the sense required. _Ratum_: cf. 141.

Sec.28. _Perceptum_: thoroughly known and grasped. Similar arguments are very
frequent in Sextus, e.g. _Adv. Math._ VIII. 281, where the dogmatist argues
that if proof be impossible, as the sceptic says, there must be a proof to
show it impossible; the sceptic doctrine must be _provable_. Cf. 109 of
this book. _Postulanti_: making it a necessity for the discussion; cf. _De
Leg._ I. 21. _Consentaneum esse_: [Greek: akolouthon einai]. _Ut alia_:
_although_ others. _Tantum abest ut--ut_: cf. Madv. _Gram._ 440 a.

Sec.29. _Pressius_: cf. _De Fato_ 31, 33, _N.D._ II. 20, _T.D._ IV. 14,
_Hortensius_ fragm. 46 ed. Nobbe. The word is mocked in 109. _Decretum_: of
course the Academics would say they did not hold this [Greek: dogma] as
_stabile fixum ratum_ but only as _probabile_. Sextus however _Pyrrh. Hyp._
I. 226 (and elsewhere) accuses them of making it in reality what in words
they professed it not to be, a fixed dogma. _Sentitis enim_: cf. _sentis_
in _D.F._ III. 26. _Fluctuare_: "to be at sea," Halm _fluctuari_, but the
deponent verb is not elsewhere found in Cic. _Summa_: cf. _summa
philosophiae_ _D.F._ II. 86. _Veri falsi_: cf. n. on 92. _Quae visa_: so
Halm for MSS. _quaevis_, which edd. had changed to _quae a quovis_.
_Repudiari_: the selection depended on the _probabile_ of course, with the
Academics. _Veri falsique_: these words were used in different senses by
the dogmatist and the sceptic, the former meant by them "the undestructibly
true and false." This being so, the statements in the text are in no sense
arguments, they are mere assertions, as Sext. says, [Greek: psile phasei
ison pheretai psile phasis] (_A.M._ VII. 315), [Greek: phasei men phasis
epischethesetai] (_ib._ 337). _Cognoscendi initium_: cf. 26, "This I have,"
the Academic would reply, "in my _probabile_." _Extremum expetendi_: a
rather unusual phrase for the ethical _finis_. _Ut moveri non possint_: so
[Greek: kineisthai] is perpetually used in Sext. _Est ut opinor_: so Halm
after Ernesti for _sit_ of the MSS. I think it very likely that the MSS.
reading is right, and that the whole expression is an imitation of the
Greek [Greek: hikanos eioestho] and the like. The subj. is supported by
_D.F._ III. 20, _De Off._ I. 8, _Ad Att._ XIII. 14, 3, where _ut opinor_ is
thrown in as here, and by _Ac._ II. 17, _D.F._ III. 21, 24, _N.D._ I. 109,
where _si placet_ is appended in a similar way.

    Sec.Sec.30--36. Summary. With respect to physical science, we might urge that
    nature has constructed man with great art. His mind is naturally formed
    for the attainment of knowledge (30). For this purpose the mind uses
    the senses, and so gradually arrives at virtue, which is the perfection
    of the reason. Those then who deny that any certainty can be attained
    through the senses, throw the whole of life into confusion (31). Some
    sceptics say "we cannot help it." Others distinguish between the
    absolute absence of certainty, and the denial of its absolute presence.
    Let us deal with these rather than with the former (32). Now they on
    the one hand profess to distinguish between true and false, and on the
    other hold that no absolutely certain method for distinguishing between
    true and false is possible (33). This is absurd, a thing cannot be
    known at all unless by such marks as can appertain to no other thing.
    How can a thing be said to be "evidently white," if the possibility
    remains that it may be really black? Again, how can a thing be
    "evident" at all if it may be after all a mere phantom (34)? There is
    no definite mark, say the sceptics, by which a thing may be known.
    Their "probability" then is mere random guess work (35). Even if they
    only profess to decide after careful pondering of the circumstances, we
    reply that a decision which is still possibly false is useless (36).

Sec.30. _Physicis_: neuter not masc.; cf. I. 6. _Libertatem et licentiam_:
_et_ = "and even." _Libertas_ = [Greek: parresia] as often in Tacitus.
_Abditis rebus et obscuris_: cf. n. on I. 15, and the word [Greek:
syneskiasmenos] Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 26. _Lucem eripere_: like _tollere_
(n. on 26), cf. 38, 103 and _N.D._ I. 6. For the sense see n. on 16, also
61. _Artificio_: this word is used in Cic. as equivalent to _ars_ in all
its senses, cf. 114 and _De Or._ II. 83. _Fabricata esset_: the expression
is sneered at in 87. _Quem ad modum primum_: so Halm rightly for MSS.
_prima_ or _primo_, which latter is not often followed by _deinde_ in
Cicero. _Primum_ is out of position, as in 24. _Appetitio pulsa_: = _mota_,
set in motion. For [Greek: horme] see 24. _Intenderemus_: as in the exx.
given in 20. _Fons_: "reservoir," rather than "source" here. It will be
noted that [Greek: synkatathesis] must take place before the [Greek: horme]
is roused. _Ipse sensus est_: an approach to this theory is made in Plat.
_Theaet._ 185, 191. Cf. especially Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 350 [Greek: kai
hoi men diapherein auten ton aistheseon, hos hoi pleious, hoi de auten
einai tas aistheseis ... hes staseos erxe Straton]. All powers of sensation
with the Stoics, who are perhaps imitated here, were included in the
[Greek: hegemonikon], cf. n. on I. 38. _Alia quasi_: so Faber for _aliqua_.
"_In vera et aperta partitione nec Cicero nec alius quisquam aliquis--alius
dixit, multo minus alius--aliquis_," _M.D.F._ III. 63. Goer. on the other
hand says he can produce 50 exx. of the usage, he forbears however, to
produce them. _Recondit_: so the [Greek: ennoiai] are called [Greek:
apokeimenai noeseis] (Plut. _De Sto. Repug._ p. 1057 a). In Sext. _Adv.
Math._ VII. 373 [Greek: mneme] is called [Greek: thesaurismos phantasion].
_Similitudinibus_: [Greek: kath' homoiosin] Sext. _Pyrr. Hyp._ II. 75. Cic.
uses this word as including all processes by which the mind gets to know
things not immediately perceived by sense. In _D.F._ III. 33 it receives
its proper meaning, for which see Madv. there, and the passages he quotes,
"analogies" will here best translate the word, which, is used in the same
wide sense in _N.D._ II. 22 38. _Construit_: so MSS. Orelli gave
_constituit_. _Notitiae_: cf. 22. Cic. fails to distinguish between the
[Greek: physikai ennoiai] or [Greek: koinai] which are the [Greek:
prolepseis], and those [Greek: ennoiai] which are the conscious product of
the reason, in the Stoic system. Cf. _M.D.F._ III. 21, V. 60, for this and
other inaccuracies of Cic. in treating of the same subject, also Zeller 79.
_Rerumque_: "facts". _Perfecta_: _sapientia_, _virtus_, _perfecta ratio_,
are almost convertible terms in the expositions of Antiocheanism found in
Cic. Cf. I. 20.

Sec.31. _Vitaeque constantiam_: which philosophy brings, see 23.
_Cognitionem_: [Greek: epistemen]. _Cognitio_ is used to translate [Greek:
katalepsis] in _D.F._ II. 16, III. 17, cf. n. on I. 41. _Ut dixi ...
dicemus_: For the repetition cf. 135, 146, and _M.D.F._ I. 41. The future
tense is odd and unlike Cic. Lamb. wrote _dicimus_, I would rather read
_dicamus_; cf. n. on 29. _Per se_: [Greek: kath' auten], there is no need
to read _propter_, as Lamb. _Ut virtutem efficiat_: note that virtue is
throughout this exposition treated as the result of the exercise of the
_reason_. _Evertunt_: cf. _eversio_ in 99. _Animal ... animo_: Cic. allows
_animus_ to all animals, not merely _anima_; see Madv. _D.F._ V. 38. The
rule given by Forc. s.v. _animans_ is therefore wrong. _Temeritate_:
[Greek: propeteia], which occurs _passim_ in Sext. The word, which is
constantly hurled at the dogmatists by the sceptics, is here put by way of
retort. So in Sext. _Adv. Math._ VII. 260, the sceptic is called [Greek:
embrontetos] for rejecting the [Greek: kataleptike phantasia].

Sec.32. _Incerta_: [Greek: adela]. _Democritus_: cf. I. 44. _Quae ...
abstruserit_: "_because_ she has hidden." _Alii autem_: note the ellipse of
the verb, and cf. I. 2. _Etiam queruntur_: "actually complain;" "go so far
as to complain." _Inter incertum_: cf. Numenius in Euseb. _Pr. Ev._ XIV. 7,
12, [Greek: diaphoran einai adelou kai akataleptou, kai panta men einai
akatalepta ou panta de adela] (quoted as from Carneades), also 54 of this
book. _Docere_: "to prove," cf. n. on 121. _Qui haec distinguunt_: the
followers of Carneades rather than those of Arcesilas; cf. n. on I. 45.
_Stellarum numerus_: this typical uncertainty is constantly referred to in
Sext. e.g. _P.H_. II. 90, 98, _A.M_. VII. 243, VIII. 147, 317; where it is
reckoned among things [Greek: aionion echonta agnosian]. So in the Psalms,
God only "telleth the number of the stars;" cf. 110. _Aliquos_:
contemptuous; [Greek: aponenoemenous tinas]. Cf. _Parad._ 33 _agrestis
aliquos_. _Moveri_: this probably refers to the speech of Catulus; see
Introd. p. 51. Aug. _Cont. Ac._ III. 15 refers to this passage, which must
have been preserved in the second edition.
