marched into Cambridge at the head of a company of militia which he had
collected at New Haven; it was he who suggested the expedition against
Ticonderoga and who marched into the fortress side by side with Ethan
Allen; it was he who led an expedition against Quebec, accomplishing one
of the most remarkable marches in history, and, after a brilliant
campaign, retreated only before overwhelming numbers; on Lake Champlain
he engaged in a naval battle, one of the most desperate ever fought by
an American fleet, which turned back a British invasion and delayed
Burgoyne's advance for a year; while visiting his home at New Haven, a
British force invaded Connecticut, and Arnold, raising a force of
volunteers, drove them back to their ships and nearly captured them;
then, rejoining the northern army, he rendered the most gallant service,
turned Saint Leger back from Oriskany and won virtually unaided the two
battles of Saratoga, which resulted in Burgoyne's surrender.

It will be seen from this that, to the end of 1777, no man in the
American army had rendered his country more signal service. Indeed,
there was none who even remotely approached Arnold in glory of
achievement. But from the first he had been the victim of petty
persecution, and of circumstances which kept from him the credit rightly
due him; and a cabal against him in the Congress prevented his receiving
his proper rank in the service. We have seen how Gates made no reference
to him in reporting the brilliant victory at Saratoga; and the same
thing had happened to him again and again. His close friendship with
Washington caused the latter's enemies to do him all the harm they
could, and Arnold, disgusted at his country's ingratitude, gradually
drifted into Tory sentiments. He married the daughter of a Tory,
associated largely with Tories during a winter at Philadelphia, and at
last resolved to end the war, as he thought, in favor of England by
delivering the line of the Hudson to the British. The result of this
would be to divide the colonies in two and to render effective
co-operation almost impossible.

So he sought and obtained command of West Point in order to carry out
this purpose, began his preparations, and had all his plans laid, when
the merest accident revealed the plot to Washington. Arnold escaped by
fleeing to a British man-of-war in the river, and after a short service
against his country, marked by a raid along the Virginia shore, he
sailed for England, where his last years were spent in poverty and
embittered by remorse. His last great act of treachery blotted out the
brilliant achievements which had gone before, and his name lives only as
that of the most infamous traitor in American history.

Of the great names which come down to us from the Revolution, the one
which seems most admirable after that of Washington himself is that of
Nathanael Greene, not so much because of his military skill, although
that was of the highest order, as because of his pure patriotism, his
lack of selfishness, and his utter devotion to the cause for which he
fought. He was with Washington at Trenton, Princeton, and Monmouth, and
did much to save the army of the battle of the Brandywine. After Gates's
terrible defeat at Camden, he was put in command of the army of the
South, and conducted the most brilliant campaign of the war, defeating
the notorious Sir Guy Tarleton, and forcing Cornwallis north into
Virginia, where he was to be entrapped at Yorktown, and ending the war
which had devastated the South by capturing Charleston. After
Washington, he was perhaps the greatest general the war produced;
certainly he was the purest patriot, and his name should never be
forgotten by a grateful country.

Linked forever with Greene in the annals of southern warfare, are three
men--Francis Marion, Thomas Sumter, and "Light Horse Harry" Lee--three
true knights and Christian gentlemen, worthy of all honor. The first of
these, indeed, may fairly be called the Bayard of American history, the
cavalier without fear and without reproach. Born in South Carolina in
1732, he had seen some service in the Cherokee war, and at once, upon
news of the fight at Lexington, raised a regiment and played an
important part in driving the British from Charleston in 1776--a
victory so decisive that the southern states were freed from attack for
over two years.

After the crushing defeat of Gates at Camden Marion's little band was
the only patriot force in South Carolina, but he harassed the British so
effectively that he soon became genuinely feared. No one ever knew where
he would attack, for the swiftness of his movements seemed almost
superhuman. No hardship disturbed him; he endured heat and cold with
indifference; his food was of the simplest. Every school-boy knows the
story of how, inviting a British officer to dinner, he sat down
tranquilly before a log on which were a few baked potatoes, which formed
the whole meal, and how the Englishman went away with the conviction
that such a foe as that could never be conquered. No instance of
rapacity or cruelty was ever charged against him, nor did he ever injure
any woman or child.

As a partisan leader, Sumter was second only to Marion, and for two
years the patriot fortunes in the South were in their hands. Together
they joined Greene when he took charge of the southern army, and proved
invaluable allies. Sumter lived to the great age of ninety-eight, and
was the last surviving general officer of the Revolution. He was, too,
the last survivor of the Braddock expedition, which he had accompanied
at the age of twenty-one, and which had been cut to pieces on the
Monongahela twenty years before the battle of Lexington was fought.

"Light Horse Harry" Lee, whose "Legion" won such fame in the early
years of the Revolution and whose services with Greene in the South were
of the most brilliant character, also lived well into the nineteenth
century. It was he who, in 1799, appointed by Congress to deliver an
address in commemoration of Washington, uttered the famous phrase,
"First in war, first in peace, first in the hearts of his countrymen."
His son, Robert Edward Lee, was destined to become perhaps the greatest
general in our history.

       *       *       *       *       *

So passed the era of the Revolution, and for thirty years the new
country was called upon to face no foreign foe; but pressing upon her
frontier was an enemy strong and cruel, who knew not the meaning of the
word "peace." Set on by the British during the Revolution, the Indians
continued their warfare long after peace had been declared. In the
wilderness north of the Ohio they had their villages, from which they
issued time after time to attack the white settlements to the south and
east. No one knew when or where they would strike, and every village and
hamlet along the frontier was liable to attack at any time. The farmer
tilling his fields was shot from ambush; the hunter found himself
hunted; children were carried away to captivity, and women, looking up
from their household work, found an Indian on the threshold.

The land which the Indians held was so beautiful and fertile that
settlers ventured into it, despite the deadly peril, and in 1787, the
Northwest Territory was formed by Congress, and General Arthur St.
Clair appointed its governor. A Scotchman, brave but impulsive, with a
good military training, St. Clair had made an unfortunate record in the
Revolution. Put in command of the defenses of Ticonderoga in the summer
of 1777, to hold it against the advancing British army under Burgoyne,
he had permitted the enemy to secure possession of a position which
commanded the fort, and he was forced to abandon it. The British started
in hot pursuit, and several actions took place in which the Americans
lost their baggage and a number of men. St. Clair had really been placed
in an impossible position, but his forced abandonment of the fort
impressed the public very unfavorably. He still had the confidence of
Washington, who assigned him to the important task of governing the new
Northwest Territory, and subduing the Indians who overran it. With
Braddock's bitter experience still vividly before him, Washington warned
St. Clair to beware of a surprise in any expedition he might lead
against the Indians, and the events which followed showed how badly that
warning was needed.

In the fall of 1791, St. Clair collected a large force at Fort
Washington, on the site of the present city of Cincinnati, and prepared
to advance against the Miami Indians. He had fourteen hundred men, but
he himself was suffering with gout and had to be conveyed most of the
way in a hammock. By the beginning of November, the army had reached the
neighborhood of the Miami villages, and there, on the morning of the
fourth, was surprised, routed and cut to pieces. Less than five hundred
escaped from the field, the Indians spreading along the road and
shooting down the crazed fugitives at leisure. St. Clair's military
reputation had received its death blow, but Washington, with wonderful
forbearance, permitted him to retain the governorship of the Territory,
from which he was removed by Jefferson in 1802. He lived sixteen years
longer, poor and destitute, having used his own fortune to defray the
expenses of his troops in the Revolution--a debt which, to the lasting
disgrace of the government, it neglected to cancel. He grew old and
feeble, and was thrown from a wagon, one day, and killed. Upon the
little stone which marks his grave is this inscription: "The earthly
remains of Major-General Arthur St. Clair are deposited beneath this
humble monument, which is erected to supply the place of a nobler one
due from his country."

The task which proved St. Clair's ruin was to be accomplished by another
survivor of the Revolution--"Mad" Anthony Wayne; "Mad" because of his
fury in battle, the fierceness of his charge, and his recklessness of
danger--attributes which he shared with Benedict Arnold. He was thirty
years of age at the opening of the Revolution, handsome, full of fire,
and hungering for glory. He was to win his full share of it, and to
prove himself, next to Washington and Greene, the best general in the
army.

His favorite weapon was the bayonet, and he drilled his troops in the
use of it until they were able to withstand the shock of the renowned
British infantry, who have always prided themselves on their prowess
with cold steel. His first service was with Arnold in Canada; he was
with Washington at the Brandywine; and at Germantown, hurling his troops
upon the Hessians, he drove them back at the point of the bayonet, and
retreated only under orders when the general attack failed. At Monmouth,
it was he and his men who, standing firm as a rock, repulsed the first
fierce bayonet charge of the British guards and grenadiers.

So it is not remarkable that, when Washington found an unusually
hazardous piece of work in hand, he should have selected Wayne to carry
it through. The British held a strong fort called Stony Point, which
commanded the Hudson and which Washington was anxious to capture. It was
impossible to besiege it, since British frigates held the river, and it
was so strong that an open assault could never carry it. It stood on a
rocky promontory, surrounded on three sides by water and connected with
the land only by a narrow, swampy neck. The only chance to take the
place was by a night attack, and Wayne eagerly welcomed the opportunity
to try it.

On the afternoon of July 15, 1779, Wayne, at the head of about thirteen
hundred men, started for the fort. He arrived near it after nightfall,
and dividing his force into three columns, moved forward to the attack.
He relied wholly upon the bayonet, and not a musket was loaded. The
advance was soon discovered by the British sentries, and a heavy fire
opened upon the Americans, but they pressed forward, swarmed up the
long, sloping embankment of the fort, and in a moment were over the
walls.

A bullet struck Wayne in the head, and he staggered and fell. Two of his
officers caught him up and started to take him to the rear, but he
struggled to his feet.

"No, no," he cried, "I'm going in at the head of my men! Take me in at
the head of my men!"

And at the head of his men he was carried into the fort.

For a few moments, the bayonets flashed and played, then the British
broke and ran, and the fort was won. No night attack was ever delivered
with greater skill and boldness.

Wayne soon recovered from his wound, and took an active part in driving
Cornwallis into the trap at Yorktown. Then he had retired from the army,
expecting to spend the remainder of his life in peace; but Washington,
remembering the man, knew that he was the one above all others to teach
the Ohio Indians a lesson, and called him to the work. Wayne accepted
the task, and five thousand men were placed under his command and
started westward over the mountains.

He spent the winter in organizing and drilling his forces on the bank of
the Ohio where Cincinnati now stands, but which was then merely a fort
and huddle of houses. He made the most careful preparations for the
expedition, and early in the spring, he commenced his march northward
into the Indian country. The savages gathered to repulse him at a spot
on the Maumee where, years before, a tornado had cut a wide swath
through the forest, rendering it all but impenetrable. Here, on the
twentieth of August, 1794, he advanced against the enemy, and, throwing
his troops into the "Fallen Timbers," in which the Indians were
ambushed, routed them out, cut them down, and administered a defeat so
crushing that they could not rally from it, and their whole country was
laid waste with fire and sword. Wayne did his work well, burning their
villages, and destroying their crops, so that they would have no means
of sustenance during the coming winter. Thoroughly cowed by this
treatment, the Indians sued for peace, and at Greenville, nearly a year
later, Wayne made a treaty in which twelve tribes took part. It marked
the beginning of a lasting peace, which opened the "Old Northwest" to
the white settler.

       *       *       *       *       *

No soldier of the Revolution, with the exception of Washington, was
elevated to the presidency, nor did any of them attain an exalted place
in the councils of the Nation. Statecraft and military genius rarely go
hand in hand, and it was not until 1828 that a man whose reputation had
been made chiefly on the battlefield was sent to the White House. Andrew
Jackson was the only soldier, with one exception, who came out of the
War of 1812 with any great reputation, and it is only fair to add that
his victory at New Orleans was due more to the rashness of the British
in advancing to a frontal attack against a force of entrenched
sharpshooters than to any remarkable generalship on the American side.

The war with Mexico found two able generals ready to hand, and laid the
foundations of the reputations of many more. "Old Rough and Ready"
Zachary Taylor, who commanded during the campaign which ended with the
brilliant victory at Buena Vista, had been tested in the fire of
frontier warfare, and won the presidency in 1848; and Franklin Pierce,
who commanded one of the divisions which captured the City of Mexico,
won the same prize four years later. It was in this war that Grant, Lee,
Johnston, Davis, Meade, Hooker, Thomas, Sherman, and a score of others
who were to win fame fifteen years later, got their baptism of fire.
Their history belongs to the period of the Civil War and will be told
there; but the chief military glory of the war with Mexico centres about
a man who divided the honors of the War of 1812 with Andrew Jackson but
who failed to achieve the presidency, and whose usefulness had ended
before the Civil War began--Winfield Scott.

A Virginian, born in 1786, Scott entered the army at an early age, and
had reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel at the opening of the second
war with England. Two years later, he was made a brigadier-general, and
commanded at the fierce and successful battles of Chippewa and Lundy's
Lane. At the close of the war, he was made a major-general, and received
the thanks of Congress for his services. In 1841, he became
commander-in-chief of the armies of the United States; but, at the
opening of the war with Mexico, President Polk, actuated by partisan
jealousy, kept Scott in Washington and assigned Zachary Taylor to the
command of the armies in the field. Scott had already an enviable
reputation, and had been an aspirant for the presidency, and Polk feared
that a few victories would make him an invincible candidate. Perhaps he
was afraid that Scott would develop into another Andrew Jackson.

However, it was impossible to keep the commander-in-chief of the army
inactive while a great war was in progress, and early in 1847, he was
sent to the front, and on March 9 began one of the most successful and
brilliant military campaigns in history. Landing before Vera Cruz, he
captured that city after a bombardment of twenty days, and, gathering
his army together, started on an overland march for the capital of
Mexico. Santa Anna, with a great force, awaited him in a strong position
at Cerro Gordo, but Scott seized the key of it in a lofty height
commanding the Mexican position, and soon won a decisive victory. The
American army swept on like a tidal wave, and city after city fell
before it, until, on the twentieth of August, it reached the city of the
Montezumas. An armistice delayed the advance until September 7, but on
that day offensive operations were begun. Great fortifications strongly
manned guarded the town, but they were carried one after another by
assault, and on September 14, General Scott marched at the head of his
army through the city gates. The war was ended--a war in which the
Americans had not lost a single battle, and had gained a vast empire.

General Scott came out of the war with a tremendous reputation; but he
lacked personal magnetism. A certain stateliness and dignity kept people
at a distance, and, together with an exacting discipline, won him the
sobriquet of "Old Fuss and Feathers." In 1852, he was the candidate of
the Whig party for President; but the party was falling to pieces, he
himself had no great personal following, and he was defeated by the
Democratic candidate, one of his own generals, Franklin Pierce. He
remained in command of the army until the outbreak of the Civil War. Age
and infirmities prevented his taking the field, and after the disastrous
defeat at Bull Run, he resigned the command. General Scott was renowned
for his striking physique, more majestic, perhaps, even than that of
Washington. He has, indeed, been called the most imposing general in
history.

       *       *       *       *       *

With General Scott ends another era of our history, and we come to a
consideration of the soldiers made famous by the greatest war of the
nineteenth century--the civil conflict which threatened, for a time, to
disrupt the Union. It was a war waged on both sides with desperate
courage and tenacity, and it developed a number of commanders not,
perhaps, of the very first rank, but standing high in the second.

The first real success of the war was won by George B. McClellan. A
graduate of West Point, veteran of the war with Mexico, and military
observer of the war in the Crimea, he had resigned from the army in 1857
to engage in the railroad business, with headquarters at Cincinnati. At
the opening of the war, he was commissioned major-general, and put in
command of the Department of Ohio. His first work was to clear western
Virginia of Confederates, which he did in a series of successful
skirmishes, lasting but a few weeks. He lost only eight men, while the
Confederates lost sixteen hundred, besides over a thousand taken
prisoners. The achievement was of the first importance, since it saved
for the Union the western section of Virginia which, a year later, was
admitted as a separate state. It is worth remembering that in this
campaign, McClellan's opponent was no less a personage than Robert E.
Lee.

The success was the greater as contrasted with the disaster at Bull Run,
and in August, 1861, McClellan was placed in command of the Army of the
Potomac, gathered about Washington and still discouraged and
disorganized from that defeat and rout. His military training had been
of the most thorough description, especially upon the technical side,
and no better man could have been found for the task of whipping that
great army into shape. He soon proved his fitness for the work, and four
months later, he had under him a trained and disciplined force, the
equal of any that ever trod American soil. He forged the instrument
which, in the end, a stronger man than he was to use. Let that always
be remembered to his credit.

He had become a sort of popular hero, idolized by his soldiers, for he
possessed in greater degree than any other commander at the North that
personal magnetism which wins men. But it was soon evident that he
lacked those qualities of aggressiveness, energy, and initiative
essential to a great commander; that he was unduly cautious. He seems to
