done in the night; and all the bodies which were thrown into the great
pits in the several churchyards or burying grounds, as has been
observed, were so removed in the night, and everything was covered and
closed before day. So that in the daytime there was not the least signal
of the calamity to be seen or heard of, except what was to be observed
from the emptiness of the streets, and sometimes from the passionate
outcries and lamentations of the people, out at their windows, and from
the numbers of houses and shops shut up.

Nor was the silence and emptiness of the streets so much in the city as
in the outparts, except just at one particular time, when, as I have
mentioned, the plague came east, and spread over all the city. It was
indeed a merciful disposition of God, that as the plague began at one
end of the town first, as has been observed at large, so it proceeded
progressively to other parts, and did not come on this way, or eastward,
till it had spent its fury in the west part of the town; and so as it
came on one way it abated another. For example:--

It began at St. Giles's and the Westminster end of the town, and it was
in its height in all that part by about the middle of July, viz., in St.
Giles-in-the-Fields, St. Andrew's, Holborn, St. Clement's-Danes, St.
Martin's-in-the-Fields, and in Westminster. The latter end of July it
decreased in those parishes, and, coming east, it increased prodigiously
in Cripplegate, St. Sepulchre's, St. James's, Clerkenwell, and St.
Bride's and Aldersgate. While it was in all these parishes, the city and
all the parishes of the Southwark side of the water, and all Stepney,
Whitechapel, Aldgate, Wapping, and Ratcliff, were very little touched;
so that people went about their business unconcerned, carried on their
trades, kept open their shops, and conversed freely with one another in
all the city, the east and northeast suburbs, and in Southwark, almost
as if the plague had not been among us.

Even when the north and northwest suburbs were fully infected, viz.,
Cripplegate, Clerkenwell, Bishopsgate, and Shoreditch, yet still all the
rest were tolerably well. For example:--

From the 25th of July to the 1st of August the bill stood thus of all
diseases:--

    St. Giles's, Cripplegate               554
    St. Sepulchre's                        250
    Clerkenwell                            103
    Bishopsgate                            116
    Shoreditch                             110
    Stepney Parish                         127
    Aldgate                                 92
    Whitechapel                            104
    All the 97 parishes within the walls   228
    All the parishes in Southwark          205
                                         -----
                                         1,889

So that, in short, there died more that week in the two parishes of
Cripplegate and St. Sepulchre's by forty-eight than all the city, all
the east suburbs, and all the Southwark parishes put together. This
caused the reputation of the city's health to continue all over England,
and especially in the counties and markets adjacent, from whence our
supply of provisions chiefly came, even much longer than that health
itself continued; for when the people came into the streets from the
country by Shoreditch and Bishopsgate, or by Old Street and Smithfield,
they would see the outstreets empty, and the houses and shops shut, and
the few people that were stirring there walk in the middle of the
streets; but when they came within the city, there things looked better,
and the markets and shops were open, and the people walking about the
streets as usual, though not quite so many; and this continued till the
latter end of August and the beginning of September.

But then the case altered quite; the distemper abated in the west and
northwest parishes, and the weight of the infection lay on the city and
the eastern suburbs, and the Southwark side, and this in a frightful
manner.

Then indeed the city began to look dismal, shops to be shut, and the
streets desolate. In the High Street, indeed, necessity made people stir
abroad on many occasions; and there would be in the middle of the day a
pretty many[259] people, but in the mornings and evenings scarce any to
be seen even there, no, not in Cornhill and Cheapside.

These observations of mine were abundantly confirmed by the weekly bills
of mortality for those weeks, an abstract of which, as they respect the
parishes which I have mentioned, and as they make the calculations I
speak of very evident, take as follows.

The weekly bill which makes out this decrease of the burials in the west
and north side of the city stands thus:--

    St. Giles's, Cripplegate               456
    St. Giles-in-the-Fields                140
    Clerkenwell                             77
    St. Sepulchre's                        214
    St. Leonard, Shoreditch                183
    Stepney Parish                         716
    Aldgate                                629
    Whitechapel                            532
    In the 97 parishes within the walls  1,493
    In the 8 parishes on Southwark side  1,636
                                         -----
                                         6,076

Here is a strange change of things indeed, and a sad change it was;
and, had it held for two months more than it did, very few people would
have been left alive; but then such, I say, was the merciful disposition
of God, that when it was thus, the west and north part, which had been
so dreadfully visited at first, grew, as you see, much better; and, as
the people disappeared here, they began to look abroad again there; and
the next week or two altered it still more, that is, more to the
encouragement of the other part of the town. For example:--

                                      Sept. 19-26.
    St. Giles's, Cripplegate               277
    St. Giles-in-the-Fields                119
    Clerkenwell                             76
    St. Sepulchre's                        193
    St. Leonard, Shoreditch                146
    Stepney Parish                         616
    Aldgate                                496
    Whitechapel                            346
    In the 97 parishes within the walls  1,268
    In the 8 parishes on Southwark side  1,390
                                         -----
                                         4,927

                                     Sept. 26-Oct. 3.
    St. Giles's, Cripplegate               196
    St. Giles-in-the-Fields                 95
    Clerkenwell                             48
    St. Sepulchre's                        137
    St. Leonard, Shoreditch                128
    Stepney Parish                         674
    Aldgate                                372
    Whitechapel                            328
    In the 97 parishes within the walls  1,149
    In the 8 parishes on Southwark side  1,201
                                         -----
                                         4,328

And now the misery of the city, and of the said east and south parts,
was complete indeed; for, as you see, the weight of the distemper lay
upon those parts, that is to say, the city, the eight parishes over the
river, with the parishes of Aldgate, Whitechapel, and Stepney, and this
was the time that the bills came up to such a monstrous height as that I
mentioned before, and that eight or nine, and, as I believe, ten or
twelve thousand a week died; for it is my settled opinion that they[260]
never could come at any just account of the numbers, for the reasons
which I have given already.

Nay, one of the most eminent physicians, who has since published in
Latin an account of those times and of his observations, says that in
one week there died twelve thousand people, and that particularly there
died four thousand in one night; though I do not remember that there
ever was any such particular night so remarkably fatal as that such a
number died in it. However, all this confirms what I have said above of
the uncertainty of the bills of mortality, etc., of which I shall say
more hereafter.

And here let me take leave to enter again, though it may seem a
repetition of circumstances, into a description of the miserable
condition of the city itself, and of those parts where I lived, at this
particular time. The city, and those other parts, notwithstanding the
great numbers of people that were gone into the country, was[261] vastly
full of people; and perhaps the fuller because people had for a long
time a strong belief that the plague would not come into the city, nor
into Southwark, no, nor into Wapping or Ratcliff at all; nay, such was
the assurance of the people on that head, that many removed from the
suburbs on the west and north sides into those eastern and south sides
as for safety, and, as I verily believe, carried the plague amongst them
there, perhaps sooner than they would otherwise have had it.

Here, also, I ought to leave a further remark for the use of posterity,
concerning the manner of people's infecting one another; namely, that it
was not the sick people only from whom the plague was immediately
received by others that were sound, but the well. To explain myself: by
the sick people, I mean those who were known to be sick, had taken
their beds, had been under cure, or had swellings or tumors upon them,
and the like. These everybody could beware of: they were either in their
beds, or in such condition as could not be concealed.

By the well, I mean such as had received the contagion, and had it
really upon them and in their blood, yet did not show the consequences
of it in their countenances; nay, even were not sensible of it
themselves, as many were not for several days. These breathed death in
every place, and upon everybody who came near them; nay, their very
clothes retained the infection; their hands would infect the things they
touched, especially if they were warm and sweaty, and they were
generally apt to sweat, too.

Now, it was impossible to know these people, nor did they sometimes, as
I have said, know themselves, to be infected. These were the people that
so often dropped down and fainted in the streets; for oftentimes they
would go about the streets to the last, till on a sudden they would
sweat, grow faint, sit down at a door, and die. It is true, finding
themselves thus, they would struggle hard to get home to their own
doors, or at other times would be just able to go into their houses, and
die instantly. Other times they would go about till they had the very
tokens come out upon them, and yet not know it, and would die in an hour
or two after they came home, but be well as long as they were abroad.
These were the dangerous people; these were the people of whom the well
people ought to have been afraid: but then, on the other side, it was
impossible to know them.

And this is the reason why it is impossible in a visitation to prevent
the spreading of the plague by the utmost human vigilance; viz., that it
is impossible to know the infected people from the sound, or that the
infected people should perfectly know themselves. I knew a man who
conversed freely in London all the season of the plague in 1665, and
kept about him an antidote or cordial, on purpose to take when he
thought himself in any danger; and he had such a rule to know, or have
warning of the danger by, as indeed I never met with before or since:
how far it may be depended on, I know not. He had a wound in his leg;
and whenever he came among any people that were not sound, and the
infection began to affect him, he said he could know it by that signal,
viz., that the wound in his leg would smart, and look pale and white: so
as soon as ever he felt it smart it was time for him to withdraw, or to
take care of himself, taking his drink, which he always carried about
him for that purpose. Now, it seems he found his wound would smart many
times when he was in company with such who thought themselves to be
sound, and who appeared so to one another; but he would presently rise
up, and say publicly, "Friends, here is somebody in the room that has
the plague," and so would immediately break up the company. This was,
indeed, a faithful monitor to all people, that the plague is not to be
avoided by those that converse promiscuously in a town infected, and
people have it when they know it not, and that they likewise give it to
others when they know not that they have it themselves; and in this
case, shutting up the well or removing the sick will not do it, unless
they can go back and shut up all those that the sick had conversed with,
even before they knew themselves to be sick; and none knows how far to
carry that back, or where to stop, for none knows when, or where, or
how, they may have received the infection, or from whom.

This I take to be the reason which makes so many people talk of the air
being corrupted and infected, and that they need not be cautious of whom
they converse with, for that the contagion was in the air. I have seen
them in strange agitations and surprises on this account. "I have never
come near any infected body," says the disturbed person; "I have
conversed with none but sound healthy people, and yet I have gotten the
distemper." "I am sure I am struck from Heaven," says another, and he
falls to the serious part.[262] Again the first goes on exclaiming, "I
have come near no infection, or any infected person; I am sure it is in
the air; we draw in death when we breathe, and therefore it is the hand
of God: there is no withstanding it." And this at last made many people,
being hardened to the danger, grow less concerned at it, and less
cautious towards the latter end of the time, and when it was come to its
height, than they were at first. Then, with a kind of a Turkish
predestinarianism,[263] they would say, if it pleased God to strike
them, it was all one whether they went abroad, or staid at home: they
could not escape it. And therefore they went boldly about, even into
infected houses and infected company, visited sick people, and, in
short, lay in the beds with their wives or relations when they were
infected. And what was the consequence but the same that is the
consequence in Turkey, and in those countries where they do those
things, namely, that they were infected too, and died by hundreds and
thousands?

I would be far from lessening the awe of the judgments of God, and the
reverence to his providence, which ought always to be on our minds on
such occasions as these. Doubtless the visitation itself is a stroke
from Heaven upon a city, or country, or nation, where it falls; a
messenger of his vengeance, and a loud call to that nation, or country,
or city, to humiliation and repentance, according to that of the prophet
Jeremiah (xviii. 7, 8): "At what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to
destroy it; if that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them."
Now, to prompt due impressions of the awe of God on the minds of men on
such occasions, and not to lessen them, it is that I have left those
minutes upon record.

I say, therefore, I reflect upon no man for putting the reason of those
things upon the immediate hand of God and the appointment and direction
of his providence; nay, on the contrary, there were many wonderful
deliverances of persons from infection, and deliverances of persons
when infected, which intimate singular and remarkable providence in the
particular instances to which they refer; and I esteem my own
deliverance to be one next to miraculous, and do record it with
thankfulness.

But when I am speaking of the plague as a distemper arising from natural
causes, we must consider it as it was really propagated by natural
means. Nor is it at all the less a judgment for its being under the
conduct of human causes and effects; for as the Divine Power has formed
the whole scheme of nature, and maintains nature in its course, so the
same Power thinks fit to let his own actings with men, whether of mercy
or judgment, to go on in the ordinary course of natural causes, and he
is pleased to act by those natural causes as the ordinary means,
excepting and reserving to himself, nevertheless, a power to act in a
supernatural way when he sees occasion. Now it is evident, that, in the
case of an infection, there is no apparent extraordinary occasion for
supernatural operation; but the ordinary course of things appears
sufficiently armed, and made capable of all the effects that Heaven
usually directs by a contagion. Among these causes and effects, this of
the secret conveyance of infection, imperceptible and unavoidable, is
more than sufficient to execute the fierceness of divine vengeance,
without putting it upon supernaturals and miracles.

The acute, penetrating nature of the disease itself was such, and the
infection was received so imperceptibly, that the most exact caution
could not secure us while in the place; but I must be allowed to
believe--and I have so many examples fresh in my memory to convince me
of it, that I think none can resist their evidence,--I say, I must be
allowed to believe that no one in this whole nation ever received the
sickness or infection, but who received it in the ordinary way of
infection from somebody, or the clothes, or touch, or stench of
somebody, that was infected before.

The manner of its first coming to London proves this also, viz., by
goods brought over from Holland, and brought thither from the Levant;
the first breaking of it out in a house in Longacre where those goods
were carried and first opened; its spreading from that house to other
houses by the visible unwary conversing with those who were sick, and
the infecting the parish officers who were employed about persons dead;
and the like. These are known authorities for this great foundation
point, that it went on and proceeded from person to person, and from
house to house, and no otherwise. In the first house that was infected,
there died four persons. A neighbor, hearing the mistress of the first
house was sick, went to visit her, and went home and gave the distemper
to her family, and died, and all her household. A minister called to
pray with the first sick person in the second house was said to sicken
immediately, and die, with several more in his house. Then the
physicians began to consider, for they did not at first dream of a
general contagion; but the physicians being sent to inspect the bodies,
they assured the people that it was neither more or less than the
plague, with all its terrifying particulars, and that it threatened an
universal infection; so many people having already conversed with the
sick or distempered, and having, as might be supposed, received
infection from them, that it would be impossible to put a stop to it.

