I?"

"She is Seaton's wife, sweet one, bound to him by the voice of heaven,
by the holiest of ties; the noble knights who head our foes will protect
her in all honorable keeping; but for thee, Agnes, even if the ills I
dread be as naught, there is yet one I have dared not name, lest it
should pain thee, yet one that is most probable as 'tis most fearful;
thou canst not hide thy name, and as a daughter of Buchan, oh, will they
not give thee to a father's keeping?"

"The murderer of my brother--my mother's jailer! Oh, Nigel, Nigel, to
look on him were more than death!" she wildly exclaimed. "Yet, yet once
known as Agnes of Buchan, this will, this must be; but leave thee now,
leave thee to a tyrant's doom, if indeed, indeed thou fallest in his
hands--leave thee, when faithful love and woman's tenderness are more
than ever needed--leave thee for a fear like this, no, no, I will not.
Nigel, I will rest with thee. Speak not, answer not; give us one short
moment, and then--oh, all the ills may be averted by one brief word--and
I, oh, can I speak it?" She paused in fearful agitation, and every limb
shook as if she must have fallen; the blood rushed up to cheek, and
brow, and neck, as, fixing her beautiful eyes on Nigel's face, she said,
in a low yet thrilling voice, "Let the voice of heaven hallow the vows
we have so often spoken, Nigel. Give me a right, a sacred right to bear
thy name, to be thine own, at the altar's foot, by the holy abbot's
blessing. Let us pledge our troth, and then let what will come, no man
can part us. I am thine, only thine!"

Without waiting for a reply, she buried her face in his bosom, and Nigel
could feel her heart throb as if 'twould burst its bounds, her frame
quiver as if the torrent of blood, checked and stayed to give strength
for the effort, now rushed back with such overwhelming force through its
varied channels as to threaten life itself.

"Agnes, my own noble, self-devoted love! oh, how may I answer thee?" he
cried, tears of strong emotion coursing down his cheek--tears, and the
warrior felt no shame. "How have I been deserving of love like this--how
may I repay it? how bless thee for such words? Mine own, mine own! this
would indeed guard thee from the most dreaded ills; yet how may I link
that self-devoted heart to one whose thread of life is well-nigh spun?
how may I make thee mine, when a few brief weeks of misery and horror
must part us, and on earth, forever?"

"No, no; thou knowest not all a wife may do, my Nigel," she said, as she
raised her head from his bosom, and faintly smiled, though her frame
still shook; "how she may plead even with a tyrant, and find mercy; or
if this fail, how she may open iron gates and break through bonds, till
freedom may be found. Oh, no, we shall not wed to part, beloved; but
live and yet be happy, doubt it not; and then, oh, then forget the words
that joined us, made us one, had birth from other lips than thine;--thou
wilt forget, forgive this, Nigel?"

"Forget--forgive! that to thy pure, unselfish soul I owe the bliss which
e'en at this hour I feel," he answered, passionately kissing the
beautiful brow upturned to his; "forget words that have proved--had I
needed proof--how purely, nobly, faithfully I am beloved; how utterly,
how wholly thou hast forgotten all of self for me! No, no! were thy
words proved true, might I indeed live blessed with thee the life
allotted man, each year, each month I would recall this hour, and bless
thee for its love. But oh, it may not be!" and his voice so suddenly
lost its impassioned fervor, that the breast of Agnes filled with new
alarm. "Dearest, best! thou must not dream of life, of happiness with
me. I may not mock thee with such blessed, but, alas! delusive hopes; my
doom hath gone forth, revealed when I knew it not, confirmed by that
visioned seer but few short weeks ago. Agnes, my noble Agnes, wherefore
shouldst thou wed with death? I know that I must die!"

The solemn earnestness of his words chased the still lingering glow from
the lips and cheek of the maiden, and a cold shiver passed through her
frame, but still she clung to him, and said--

"It matters not; my maiden love, my maiden troth is pledged to thee--in
life or in death I am thine alone. I will not leave thee," she said,
firmly and calmly. "Nigel, if it be indeed as thou sayest, that
affliction, and--and all thou hast spoken, must befall thee, the more
need is there for the sustaining and the soothing comfort of a woman's
love. Fear not for me, weak as I may have seemed, there is yet a spirit
in me worthy of thy love. I will not unman thee for all thou mayest
encounter. No, even if I follow thee to--to death, it shall be as a
Bruce's wife. Ask not how I will contrive to abide by thee undiscovered,
when, if it must be, the foe is triumphant; it will take time, and we
have none to lose. Thou hast promised to forget all I have urged, all,
save my love for thee; then, oh, fear me not, doubt me not, thine Agnes
will not fail thee!"

Nigel gazed at her almost with surprise; she was no longer the gentle
timid being who but a few minutes since had clung weeping to his bosom
as a child. She was indeed very pale, and on her features was the
stillness of marble; but she stood erect and unfaltering in her innocent
loveliness, sustained by that mighty spirit which dwelt within. An
emotion of deep reverence took possession of that warrior heart, and
unable to resist the impulse, he bent his knee before her.

"Then let it be so," he said, solemnly, but oh, how fervently. "I will
not torture mine own heart and thine by conjuring thee to fly; and now,
here, at thy feet, Agnes, noble, generous being, let me swear solemnly,
sacredly swear, that should life be preserved to me longer than I now
dream of, should I indeed be spared to lavish on thee all a husband's
love and care, never, never shalt thou have cause to regret this day! to
mourn thy faithful love was shown as it hath been--to weep the hour
that, in the midst of danger, and darkness, and woe, hath joined our
earthly fates, and made us one. And now," he continued, rising and
folding her once more in his arms, "wilt thou meet me at the altar ere
the truce concludes? 'tis but a brief while, a very brief while, my
love; yet if it can be, I know thou wilt not shrink."

"I will not," she answered. "The hour thou namest I will meet thee. Lady
Seaton," she added, slightly faltering, and the vivid blush rose to her
temples, "I would see her, speak with her; yet--"

"She shall come to thee, mine own, prepared to love and hail thee
sister, as she hath long done. She will not blame thee dearest; she
loves, hath loved too faithfully herself. Fear not, I will leave naught
for thee to tell that can bid that cheek glow as it doth now. She, too,
will bless thee for thy love."

He imprinted a fervent kiss on her cheek, and hastily left her. Agnes
remained standing as he had left her for several minutes, her hands
tightly clasped, her whole soul speaking in her beautiful features, and
then she sunk on her knees before a rudely-carved image of the Virgin
and child, and prayed long and fervently. She did not weep, her spirit
had been too painfully excited for such relief, but so wrapt was she in
devotion, she knew not that Lady Seaton, with a countenance beaming in
admiration and love, stood beside her, till she spoke.

"Rouse thee, my gentle one," she said, tenderly, as she twined her arm
caressingly around her; "I may not let thee linger longer even here, for
time passes only too quickly, and I shall have but little time to attire
my beautiful bride for the altar. Nigel hath been telling such a tale of
woman's love, that my good lord hath vowed, despite his weakness and his
wounds, none else shall lead thee to the altar, and give thee to my
brother, save himself. I knew that not even Nigel's influence would bid
thee leave us, dearest," she continued, as Agnes hid her face in her
bosom, "but I dreamed not such a spirit dwelt within this childlike
heart, sweet one; thy lot must surely be for joy!"




CHAPTER XX.


It was something past the hour of nine, when Agnes, leaning on the arm
of Sir Christopher Seaton, and followed by Lady Seaton and two young
girls, their attendants, entered the church, and walked, with an
unfaltering step and firm though modest mien, up to the altar, beside
which Nigel already stood. She was robed entirely in white, without the
smallest ornament save the emerald clasp which secured, and the
beautiful pearl embroidery which adorned her girdle. Her mantle was of
white silk, its little hood thrown back, disclosing a rich lining of the
white fox fur. Lady Seaton had simply arranged her hair in its own
beautiful curls, and not a flower or gem peeped through them; a silver
bodkin secured the veil, which was just sufficiently transparent to
permit her betrothed to look upon her features, and feel that, pale and
still as they were, they evinced no change in her generous purpose. He,
too, was pale, for he felt those rites yet more impressively holy than
he had deemed them, even when his dreams had pictured them peculiarly
and solemnly holy; for he looked not to a continuance of life and
happiness, he felt not that ceremony set its seal upon joy, and bound
it, as far as mortality might hope, forever on their hearts. He was
conscious only of the deep unutterable fulness of that gentle being's
love, of the bright, beautiful lustre with which it shone upon his path.
The emotion of his young and ardent breast was perhaps almost too holy,
too condensed, to be termed joy; but it was one so powerful, so blessed,
that all of earth and earthly care was lost before it. The fears and
doubts which he had so lately felt, for the time completely faded from
his memory. That there were foes without and yet darker foes within he
might have known perhaps, but at that moment they did not occupy a
fleeting thought. He had changed his dress for one of richness suited to
his rank, and though at the advice of his friends he still retained the
breastplate and some other parts of his armor, his doublet of azure
velvet, cut and slashed with white satin, and his long, flowing mantle
lined with sable, and so richly decorated with silver stars that its
color could scarcely be distinguished, removed all appearance of a
martial costume, and well became the graceful figure they adorned; two
of the oldest knights and four other officers, all gayly attired as the
hurry of the moment would permit, had at his own request attended him to
the altar.

Much surprise this sudden intention had indeed caused, but it was an
excitement, a change from the dull routine of the siege, and
consequently welcomed with joy, many indeed believing Sir Nigel had
requested the truce for the purpose. Sir Christopher, too, though pale
and gaunt, and compelled to use the support of a cane in walking, was
observed to look upon his youthful charge with all his former hilarity
of mien, chastened by a kindly tenderness, which seemed indeed that of
the father whom he personated; and Lady Seaton had donned a richer garb
than was her wont, and stood encouragingly beside the bride. About
twenty men-at-arms, their armor and weapons hastily burnished, that no
unseemly soil should mar the peaceful nature of the ceremony by
recalling thoughts of war, were ranged on either side. The church was
lighted, dimly in the nave and aisles, but softly and somewhat with a
holy radiance where the youthful couple knelt, from the large waxen
tapers burning in their silver stands upon the altar.

The Abbot of Scone was at his post, attended by the domestic chaplain of
Kildrummie; there was a strange mixture of admiration and anxiety on the
old man's face, but Agnes saw it not; she saw nothing save him at whose
side she knelt.

Nigel, even in the agitation of mind in which he had quitted Agnes--an
agitation scarcely conquered in hastily informing his sister and her
husband of all that had passed between them, and imploring their
countenance and aid--yet made it his first care strictly to make the
round of the walls, to notice all that might be passing within the
courts, and see that the men-at-arms were at their posts. In consequence
of the truce, for the conclusion of which it still wanted some little
time, there were fewer men on the walls than usual, their commanders
having desired them to take advantage of this brief cessation of
hostilities and seek refreshment and rest. A trumpet was to sound at the
hour of ten, half an hour before the truce concluded, to summon them
again to their posts. The men most acute in penetration, most firm and
steady in purpose, Nigel selected as sentries along the walls; the post
of each being one of the round towers we have mentioned, the remaining
spaces were consequently clear. Night had already fallen, and anxiously
observing the movements on the walls; endeavoring to discover whether
the various little groups of men and women in the ballium meant any
thing more than usual, Sir Nigel did not notice various piles or stacks
of straw and wood which were raised against the wall in many parts where
the shadows lay darkest, and some also against the other granaries which
were contained in low, wooden buildings projecting from the wall.
Neither he nor his friends, nor even the men-at-arms, noticed them, or
if they did, imagined them in the darkness to be but the stones and
other weights generally collected there, and used to supply the engines
on the wails.

With the exception of the sentries and the men employed by Nigel, all
the garrison had assembled in the hall of the keep for their evening
meal, the recollection of whose frugality they determined to banish by
the jest and song; there were in consequence none about the courts, and
therefore that dark forms were continually hovering about beneath the
deep shadows of the walls, increasing the size of the stacks, remained
wholly undiscovered.

Agnes had entered the church by a covered passage, which united the keep
to its inner wall, and thence by a gallery through the wall itself,
dimly lighted by loopholes, to the edifice, whose southern side was
formed by this same wall. It was therefore, though in reality situated
within the ballium or outer court, nearer by many hundred yards to the
dwelling of the baron than to the castle walls, its granaries, towers,
etc. This outward ballium indeed was a very large space, giving the
appearance of a closely-built village or town, from the number of low
wooden and thatched-roofed dwellings, which on either side of the large
open space before the great gate were congregated together. This account
may, we fear at such a moment, seem somewhat out of place, but events in
the sequel compel us to be thus particular. A space about half a mile
square surrounded the church, and this position, when visited, by Sir
Nigel at nine o'clock, was quiet and deserted; indeed there was very
much less confusion and other evidences of disquiet within the dwellings
than was now usual, and this circumstance perhaps heightened the calm
which, as we have said, had settled on Sir Nigel's mind.

There was silence within that little sacred edifice, the silence of
emotion; for not one could gaze upon that young fair girl, could think
of that devoted spirit, which at such a time preferred to unite her fate
with a beloved one than seek safety and freedom in flight, without being
conscious of a strange swelling of the heart and unwonted moisture in
the eye; and there was that in the expression of the beautiful features
of Nigel Bruce none could remark unmoved. He was so young, so gifted, so
strangely uniting the gift of the sage, the poet, with the glorious
achievements of the most perfect knight, that he had bound himself alike
to every heart, however varied their dispositions, however opposite
their tastes; and there was not one, from the holy Abbot of Scone to the
lowest and rudest of the men-at-arms, who would not willingly, aye,
joyfully have laid down life for his, have gladly accepted chains to
give him freedom.

The deep, sonorous voice of the abbot audibly faltered as he commenced
the sacred service, and looked on the fair beings kneeling, in the
beauty and freshness of their youth, before him. Accustomed, however, to
control every human emotion, he speedily recovered himself, and
uninterruptedly the ceremony continued. Modestly, yet with a voice that
never faltered, Agnes made the required responses; and so deep was the
stillness that reigned around not a word was lost, but, sweetly and
clearly as a silver clarion, it sunk on every ear and thrilled to every
heart; to his who knelt beside her, as if each tone revealed yet more
the devoted love which led her there. Towards the conclusion of the
service, and just as every one within the church knelt in general
prayer, a faint, yet suffocating odor, borne on what appeared a light
mist, was distinguished, and occasioned some slight surprise; by the
group around the altar, however, it was unnoticed; and the men-at-arms,
on looking towards the narrow windows and perceiving nothing but the
intense darkness of the night, hushed the rising exclamation, and
continued in devotion. Two of the knights, too, were observed to glance
somewhat uneasily around, still nothing was perceivable but the light
wreaths of vapor penetrating through the northern aisle, and dissolving
ere long the arches of the roof. Almost unconsciously they listened, and
became aware of some sounds in the distance, but so faint and
indefinable as to permit them to rest in the belief that it must be the
men-at-arms hurrying from the keep to the walls, although they were
certain the trumpet had not yet sounded. Determined not to heed such
vague sounds, they looked again to the altar. The abbot had laid a
trembling hand on either low-bent head, and was emphatically pronouncing
his blessing on their vows, calling on heaven in its mercy to bless and
keep them, and spare them to each other for a long and happy life; or if
it must be that a union commenced in danger should end in sorrow, to
keep them still, and fit them for a union in eternity. His words were
few but earnest, and for the first time the lip of Agnes was observed to
quiver--they were ONE. Agnes was clasped to the heart of her
husband; she heard him call her his own--his wife--that man should never
part them more. The voice of congratulation woke around her, but ere
either could gaze around to look their thanks, or clasp the eagerly
proffered hand, a cry of alarm, of horror, ran though the building. A
red, lurid light, impossible to be mistaken, illumined every window, as
from a fearful conflagration without; darkness had fled before it. On
all sides it was light--light the most horrible, the most awful, though
perchance the most fascinating the eye can behold; fearful shouts and
cries, and the rush of many feet, mingled with the now easily
distinguished roar of the devouring element, burst confusedly on the
ear. A minute sufficed to fling open the door of the church for knights
and men-at-arms to rush forth in one indiscriminate mass. Sir
Christopher would have followed them, utterly regardless of his
inability, had not his wife clung to him imploringly, and effectually
restrained him. The abbot, grasping the silver crosier by his side, with
a swift, yet still majestic stride, made his way through the church, and
vanished by the widely opened door. Agnes and Sir Nigel stood
comparatively alone; not a cry, not a word passed her lips; every
feature was wrapped in one absorbing look upon her husband. He had
clasped his hands convulsively together, his brow was knit, his lip
compressed, his eye fixed and rigid, though it gazed on vacancy.

"It hath fallen, it hath fallen!" he muttered. "Fool, fool that I was
never to dream of this! Friends, followers, all I hold most dear,
swallowed up in this fell swoop! God of mercy, how may it be born! And
thou, thou," he added, in increased agony, roused from that stupor by
the wild shouts of "Sir Nigel, Sir Nigel! where is he? why does he tarry
in such an hour?" that rung shrilly on the air. "Agnes, mine own, it is
not too late even now to fly. Ha! son of Dermid, in good tune thou art
here; save her, in mercy save her! I know not when, or how, or where we
may meet again; I may not tarry here." He clasped her in his arms,
imprinted an impassioned kiss on her now death-like cheek, placed her at
once in the arms of the seer (who, robed as a minstrel, had stood
concealed behind a projecting pillar during the ceremony, and now
approached), and darted wildly from the church. What a scene met his
gaze! All the buildings within the ballium, with the sole exception of
the church, were in one vivid blaze of fire; the old dry wood and thatch
of which they were composed, kindling with a mere spark. The wind blew
the flames in the direction of the principal wall, which was already
ignited from the heaps of combustibles that had been raised within for
the purpose; although it was likely that, from its extreme thickness and
strength, the fire had there done but partial evil, had not the
conflagration within the court spread faster and nearer every moment,
and from the blazing rafters and large masses of thatch caught by the
wind and hurled on the very wall, done greater and more irreparable
mischief than the combustibles themselves. Up, up, seeming to the very
heavens, the lurid flames ascended, blazing and roaring, and lighting
the whole scene as with the glare of day. Fantastic wreaths of red fire
danced in the air against the pitchy blackness of the heavens, rising
and falling in such graceful, yet terrible shapes, that the very eye
felt riveted in admiration, while the heart quailed with horror.
Backwards and forwards gleamed the forms of men in the dusky glare; and
oaths and cries, and the clang of swords, and the shrieks of women,
terrified by the destruction they had not a little assisted to
ignite--the sudden rush of horses bursting from their stables, and
flying here and there, scared by the unusual sight and horrid
sounds--the hissing streams of water which, thrown from huge buckets on
the flames, seemed but to excite them to greater fury instead of
lessening their devouring way--the crackling of straw and wood, as of
the roar of a hundred furnaces--these were the varied sounds and sights
that burst upon the eye and ear of Nigel, as, richly attired as he was,
his drawn sword in his hand, his fair hair thrown back from his
uncovered brow and head, he stood in the very centre of the scene. One
glance sufficed to perceive that the rage of the men-at-arms was turned
on their treacherous countrymen; that the work of war raged even
then--the swords of Scotsmen were raised against each other. Even women
fell in that fierce slaughter, for the demon of revenge was at work, and
sought but blood. In vain the holy abbot, heedless that one sudden gust
and his flowing garments must inevitably catch fire, uplifted his
crosier, and called on them to forbear. In vain the officers rushed
amidst the infuriated men, bidding them keep their weapons and their
lives for the foe, who in such a moment would assuredly be upon them; in
vain they commanded, exhorted, implored; but on a sudden, the voice of
Sir Nigel Bruce was heard above the tumult, loud, stern, commanding. His
form was seen hurrying from group to group, turning back with his own
sword the weapons of his men, giving life even to those who had wrought
this woe; and there was a sudden hush, a sudden pause.

"Peace, peace!" he cried. "Would ye all share the madness of these men?
They have hurled down destruction, let them reap it; let them live to
thrive and fatten in their chains; let them feel the yoke they pine for.
For us, my friends and fellow-soldiers, let us not meet our glorious
fate with the blood of Scotsmen on our swords. We have striven for our
country; we have striven gloriously, faithfully, and now we have but to
die for her. Ha! do I speak in vain? Again--back, coward! wouldst thou
slay a woman?" and, with a sudden bound, he stood beside one of the
soldiers, who was in the act of plunging his dagger in the breast of a
kneeling and struggling female. One moment sufficed to wrench the dagger
from his grasp, and release the woman from his hold.

"It is ill done, your lordship; it is the fiend, the arch-fiend that has
planned it all," loudly exclaimed the man. "She has been heard to mutter
threats of vengeance, and blood and fire against thee, and all belonging
to thee. Let her not go free, my lord; thou mayest repent it still."

"Repent giving a woman life?--bah! Thou art a fool, though a faithful
one," answered Sir Nigel; but even he started as he recognized the
features of Jean Roy. She gave him no time to restrain her, however;
for, sliding from his hold, she bounded several paces from him, singing,
as she did so, "Repent, ye shall repent! Where is thy buxom bride? Jean
Roy will see to her safety. A bonny courtship ye shall have!" Tossing up
her arms wildly, she vanished as she spoke; seeming in that light in
very truth more like a fiend than woman. A chill sunk on the heart of
Nigel, but, "No, no," he said, internally, as again he sought the spot
where confusion and horror waxed thickest; "Dermid will care for Agnes,
and guard her. I will not think of that mad woman's words." Yet even as
he rushed onwards, giving directions, commands, lending his aid to every
effort made for extinguishing the fire, a prayer for his wife was
uttered in his heart.

The fire continued its rapid progress, buttress after buttress, tower
after tower caught on the walls, causing the conflagration to continue,
even when, by the most strenuous efforts, it had been partially
extinguished amongst the dwellings of the court. The wind blowing from
the north fortunately preserved the keep, inner wall, and even the
church, uninjured, save that the scorched and blackened sides of the
latter gave evidence of the close vicinity of the flames, and how
narrowly it had escaped. With saddened hearts, the noble defenders of
Scotland's last remaining bulwark, beheld their impregnable wall, the
scene of such dauntless valor, such unconquered struggles, against which
the whole force of their mighty foes had been of no avail--that wall
crumbling into dust and ashes in their very sight, opening a broad
passage to the English foe. Yet still there was no evidence that to
yield were preferable than to die; still, though well-nigh exhausted
with their herculean efforts to quench the flames, there was no
cessation, no pause, although the very height of the wall prevented
success, for they had not the facilities afforded by the engines of the
present day. Sir Nigel, his knights, nay, the venerable abbot himself,
seconded every effort of the men. It seemed as if little more could add
to the horror of the scene, and yet the shouts of "The granaries, the
granaries--merciful heaven, all is consumed!" came with such appalling
consciousness on every ear, that for a brief while, the stoutest arm
hung powerless, the firmest spirit quailed. Famine stood suddenly before
them as a gaunt, terrific spectre, whose cold hand it seemed had grasped
their very hearts. Nobles and men, knights and soldiers, alike stood
paralyzed, gazing at each other with a blank, dim, unutterable despair.
The shrill blast of many trumpets, the roll of heavy drums, broke that
deep stillness. "The foe! the foe!" was echoed round, fiercely, yet
rejoicingly. "They are upon us--they brave the flames--well done! Now
firm and steady; to your arms--stand close. Sound trumpets--the
defiance, the Bruce and Scotland!" and sharply and clearly, as if but
just arrayed for battle, as if naught had chanced to bend those gallant
spirits to the earth, the Scottish clarions sent back their answering
blast, and the men gathered in compact array around their gallant
leader.

"My horse--my horse!" shouted Nigel Bruce, as he sprung from rank to
rank of the little phalanx, urging, commanding, entreating them to make
one last stand, and fall as befitted Scottish patriots. The keep and
inner ballium was still their own as a place of retreat, however short a
period it might remain so. A brave defence, a glorious death would still
do much for Scotland.

Shouts, cheers, blessings on his name awoke in answer, as unfalteringly,
as bravely as those of the advancing foes. Prancing, neighing, rearing,
the superb charger was at length brought to the dauntless leader.

"Not thus, my lord; in heaven's name, do not mount thus, unarmed,
bareheaded as thou art!" exclaimed several voices, and two or three of
his esquires crowded round him. "Retire but for a brief space within the
church."

"And turn my back upon my foes, Hubert; not for worlds! No, no; bring me
the greaves, gauntlets, and helmet here, if thou wilt, and an they give
me time, I will arm me in their very teeth. Haste ye, my friends, if ye
will have it so; for myself these garments would serve me well enough;"
but ere he ceased to speak they had flown to obey, and returned ere a
dozen more of the English had made their way across the crumbling wall.
Coolly, composedly, Nigel threw aside his mantle and doublet, and
permitted his esquires to assist in arming him, speaking at the same
time in a tone so utterly unconcerned, that ere their task was finished,
his coolness had extended unto them. He had allowed some few of the
English to make an unmolested way; his own men were drawn up in close
lines against the inner wall, so deep in shadow that they were at first
unobserved by the English. He could perceive by the still, clear light
of the flames, troop after troop of the besiegers were marching forward
in the direction both of the causeway and the river; several were
plunging in the moat, sword in hand, and attack threatened on every
side. He waited no longer; springing on his charger, with a movement so
sudden and unexpected, the helmet fell from his esquire's hand, and
waving his sword above his undefended head, he shouted aloud his
war-cry, and dashed on, followed by his men, to the spot where a large
body of his foes already stood.

Desperately they struggled, most gallantly they fought; man after man of
the English fell before them. On, on they struggled; a path seemed
cleared before them; the English were bearing back, despite their
continued reinforcements from the troops, that so thronged the causeway
