Wednesday, the 27th of November, towards midnight. Las Casas, II. 11.

[299-1] See Journal of First Voyage, December 25.

[299-2] The Bay of Caracol, four leagues west of Fort Dauphin. (Major.)

[299-3] "Toward midnight a canoe came full of Indians and reached the
ship of the Admiral, and they called for him saying 'Almirante,
Almirante.'" Las Casas, II. 11.

[300-1] The hawk bell was a small open bell used in hawking. The
discoverers used hawk bells as a small measure as of gold dust.

[302-1] See above, p. 289, note 1.

[302-2] The mark was a weight of eight ounces, two-thirds of a Troy
pound. The mark of gold in Spain was equivalent to 50 castellanos, or in
bullion value to-day about $150.

[303-1] Melchior Maldonado, apparently the Melchiorius from whom Peter
Martyr derived some of his material for his account of the second voyage.
See his _De Rebus Oceanicis_, ed. 1574, p. 26.

[304-1] The familiar hammock.

[304-2] The original reads "cinco o seiscientos labrados de pedreria,"
which Major translated "five or six hundred pieces of jewellery," and
Thacher "five or six hundred cut stones." The dictionaries recognize
_labrado_ as a noun only in the plural _labrados_, "tilled lands."
Turning to Bernaldez, _Historia de los Reyes Catolicos_, in which Dr.
Chanca's letter was copied almost bodily, we find, II. 27, "cinco o seis
labrados de pedreria," which presents the same difficulty. The omission
of _cientos_ is notable, however. I think the original text of Dr.
Chanca's letter read "cinco 6 seis cintos labrados de pedreria," _i.e._,
five or six belts worked with jewellery. _Cintos_ being written blindly
was copied _cientos_ by Antonio de Aspa, from whom our text of Dr.
Chanca's letter has come down (Navarrete, I. 224), and was omitted
perhaps accidentally in Bernaldez's copy. This conjecture is rendered
almost certain by the _Historie_, where it is recorded that "the Cacique
gave the Admiral eight belts worked with small beads made of white,
green, and red stones," p. 148, London ed. of 1867. This passage enables
us to correct the text of Las Casas, II. 14, changing "ochocientas
cuentas menudas de piedra," "eight hundred small beads of stone," to
"ocho cintos de cuentas menudas," etc., "eight belts of small beads," and
again, _ciento de oro_ to _cinto de oro_. In the Syllacio-Coma letter the
gift is _balteos duodecim_, "twelve belts." Thacher, _Columbus_, II. 235.
_Cf._ Las Casas's description of the girdle or belt that this chief wore
when Columbus first saw him, Dec. 22, above, p. 194.

[305-1] These were not only the first horses seen in the New World since
the extinction of the prehistoric varieties, but the first large
quadrupeds the West Indians had seen.

[306-1] Port Dauphin. (Navarrete.)

[307-1] That is, three months from the time the fleet left Spain,
September 25, 1493. Neither the _Historie_ nor Las Casas mentions the
date of landing. In the Syllacio-Coma letter the date is given as "eight
days from Christmas." See Thacher, _Columbus_, II. 236, 257.

[307-2] Port Isabelique, or Isabella, ten leagues to the east of Monte
Cristi. (Navarrete.)

[308-1] _Cosas introfatibles_ in the Spanish. The translation follows the
French version. The text perhaps is corrupt. The word _introfatibles_ is
not found in any of the Spanish dictionaries nor is it a learned compound
whose meaning is apparent from its etymology. Professor H.R. Lang
suggests that _cosas corruptibles_ may be the proper reading. The
sentence is omitted in the corresponding passage in Bernaldez, II. 30.

[308-2] The river Isabella.

[308-3] I can offer no explanation for this name, which is found only in
Dr. Chanca's letter. Bernaldez, who copied Dr. Chanca, gives Isabela as
the name of the city, II. 30, and the _Historie_ and Las Casas, who
preserve for us the gist of Columbus's own narrative, both say that "he
named the city Isabela in memory of Queen Isabela." Las Casas, II. 21.
_Historie_, p. 150.

[308-4] Yams, the _Dioscorea sativa_. Columbus had seen the yam in Guinea
an applied the African negro name, _igname_, _name_, whence the English,
yam. See note to Journal, November 4.

[326-1] By the Indians Dr. Chanca means the Tainos, the native
inhabitants of Espanola.

[326-2] "Every woman wears a tiny apron called a _queyu_, suspended by
tying its strings around her waist." Im Thurn, _Among the Indians of
Guiana_, 194.

[326-3] On this body painting, see Im Thurn, _ibid._

[310-1] A species of the _N.O. Bombaceae_; perhaps the _Eriodendron
anfractuosum_. (Major.) The English name is silk-cotton tree. The fibre,
however, cannot be woven. Von Martius suggests the _Bombax ceiba_.

[310-2] _Cf._ Hazard, _Santo Domingo_, p. 350, "the cotton plant which
instead of being a simple bush planted from the seed each year, is here a
tree, growing two or three years, which needs only to be trimmed and
pruned to produce a large yield of the finest cotton."

[310-3] Probably the so-called Carnauba wax or perhaps palm-tree wax.
_Cf._ the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_, art. "Wax."

[311-1] The Spanish here is _linaloe_, but the reference seems to be to
the medicinal aloes and not to lign aloes. On lign aloes, see Columbus's
Journal, November 12, and note.

[311-2] The myrobolan is an East Indian fruit with a stone, of the prune
genus. Crude or preserved myrobolans were a more important article of
commerce in the Middle Ages than now. There were five varieties, one of
which, the _Mirobalani citrini_, were so named because they were
lemon-colored. Heyd, _Histoire du Commerce du Levant au Moyen-Age_, II.
641. A species of myrobolan grows in South America.

[311-3] The product of the _Bursera gummifera_.

[311-4] _Cf._ Columbus's Journal, November 4, and note.

[311-5] _Agi_, also written _Axi_, is the _Capsicum annuum_ or Spanish
pepper. Most of the cayenne or red pepper of commerce comes from the
allied species, _Capsicum frutescens_. In Mexico the name of this
indigenous pepper plant was Quauhchilli, _Chili_ tree. _Chili_ was taken
over into Spanish as the common name for capsicum and has come down in
English in the familiar Chili sauce. See Peschel, _Zeitalter der
Entdeckungen_, p. 139; De Candolle, _Origin of Cultivated Plants_, pp.
289-290. _Encyclopaedia Britannica_, art. "Cayenne Pepper."

[312-1] _Cf._ Im Thurn, _Among the Indians of Guiana_, 266.

[312-2] The Admiral, "having described the country at length and the
condition in which he was and where he had settled for the Catholic
sovereigns and sending them the specimen of gold which Guacanagari had
given him and that which Hojeda had brought, and informing them of all
that he saw to be needed, despatched the twelve ships before mentioned,
placing in command of them all Antonio de Torres, brother of the nurse of
the prince Don Juan, to whom he intrusted the gold and all his
despatches. They made sail the 2d of February, 1494." Las Casas,
_Historia de las Indias_, II. 25-26. Columbus's letter to Ferdinand and
Isabella mentioned here has not been preserved. That part of it which
related to future needs was apparently duplicated in the "memorial" which
he gave to Torres. This document is given in English in Thacher,
_Christopher Columbus_, II. 297-308, and Major, _Select Letters of
Christopher Columbus_, ed. 1870, pp. 72-107. See p. 73, _ibid._, for a
reference to letters of the Admiral no longer extant.

[313-1] Alonso de Hojeda was sent to explore the region of Cibao with
fifteen men. He found Cibao to be fifteen or twenty leagues from
Isabella. The other exploring party was headed by Gines de Gorbalan.
Further details of these expeditions are given in the Syllacio-Coma
letter. Thacher, _Columbus_, II. 258-260. According to Coma, or his
translator Syllacio, Cibao was identified with the Sheba of the Bible.
Columbus, on the other hand, identified Cibao and Cipango. _Cf._, _e.g._,
Peter Martyr, _De Rebus Oceanicis_, ed. 1574, p. 31.

[313-2] "The preceding is the transcript of that part of Doctor Chanca's
letter, which refers to intelligence respecting the Indies. The remainder
of the letter does not bear upon the subject, but treats of private
matters, in which Doctor Chanca requests the interference and support of
the Town Council of Seville (of which city he was a native), in behalf of
his family and property, which he had left in the said city. This letter
reached Seville in the month of [March] in the year fourteen hundred and
ninety-three [four]." This note is no doubt from the hand of Friar
Antonio de Aspa, who formed the collection of papers in which Navarrete
found the text of Dr. Chanca's letter. The collection was made about the
middle of the sixteenth century. See Navarrete, II. 224. The returning
fleet arrived at Cadiz in March, 1494. Bernaldez, _Historia de los Reyes
Catolicos_, (ed. 1870), II. 37.




NARRATIVE OF THE THIRD VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS AS CONTAINED IN LAS CASAS'S
HISTORY




INTRODUCTION


The narrative given here of the third voyage of Columbus in which he
discovered the mainland of South America is taken from the _Historia de
las Indias_ of Las Casas. In preparing his History Las Casas had the use
of a larger body of Columbus's papers than has come down to us. Among
these papers was a journal of this third voyage which was incorporated in
a condensed form by Las Casas in his History, just as he did in the case
of the journals of the first and second voyages. This narrative is found
in the second volume of the _Historia de las Indias_, pp. 220-317. The
translation is, as is mentioned in the preface to this volume, that given
in John Boyd Thacher's _Christopher Columbus_.

In certain places the text differs slightly from that in the printed
edition of Las Casas, as Mr. Thacher followed the critical text of Cesare
de Lollis prepared for the _Raccolta Colombiana_ by a collation of the
manuscript in the Archives at Madrid with the recently discovered
autograph manuscript of Las Casas. Mr. Thacher, following Lollis, omitted
passages that were obviously comments on the text by Las Casas. These
have been supplied either from Mr. Thacher's notes or translated by the
editor from the printed text. The editor has gone over the whole
translation and can testify to its exceptional accuracy. A few slight
changes have been made in the wording for the sake of greater clearness
or exactness.

Columbus described this voyage in a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella.
This letter is included in Major's _Select Letters of Columbus_ and in
P.L. Ford's _Writings of Columbus_. This letter is of great importance
in the study of Columbus's geographical ideas. Other contemporary
accounts of this voyage are contained in Ferdinand Columbus's _Historie_,
the life of his father, where the journal abridged by Las Casas is still
further condensed, in Peter Martyr's _De Rebus Oceanicis_, Dec. I., lib.
VI., and in the letter of Simone Verde and the three letters of Angelo
Trivigiano which will be found in Harrisse, _Christophe Colomb_, II.
95-98 and 119-123.

E.G.B.




NARRATIVE OF THE THIRD VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS AS CONTAINED IN LAS CASAS'S
HISTORY


_May 30-August 31, 1498_

He started then (our First Admiral)[319-1] "in the name of the Most Holy
Trinity" (as he says and as he was always accustomed to say) from the
port of San Lucar de Barrameda, Wednesday, May 30, 1498, with the
intention of discovering new land not yet discovered, with his six ships,
"greatly fatigued," he says, "with my voyage, since as I was hoping for
some quietude, when I left the Indies, I experienced double hardships;"
they being the result of the labors, new obstacles and difficulties with
which he obtained the funds for his starting upon the expedition and the
annoyances in connection therewith received from the royal officials and
the hindrance and the evil reports the people around about the Sovereigns
gave concerning the affairs in the Indies, wherefore it appeared to him
that what he already had done was not sufficient but that he must renew
his labors to gain new credit. And because war had then broken out with
France,[319-2] he had news of a French fleet which was waiting for the
Admiral beyond the Cape of St. Vincent, to capture him. On this account
he decided to steal away as they say and make a detour, directing his
course straight to the island of Madeira.

He arrived at the island of Puerto Sancto, Thursday, June 7, where he
stopped to take wood, water and supplies and to hear mass, and he found
all the island disturbed and all the farms, goods and flocks guarded,
fearing that the new-comers might be French; and then that night he left
for the island of Madeira and arrived there the following Sunday, June
10. He was very well received in the town[320-1] and with much rejoicing,
because he was well known there, having been a citizen thereof during
some time.[320-2] He remained there six days, providing himself fully
with water and wood and the other necessities for his journey.

Saturday, June 16, he left the island of Madeira with his six ships and
arrived at the island of Gomera[320-3] the following Tuesday. At this
island he found a French corsair with a French vessel and two large ships
which the corsair had taken from the Castilians, and when the Frenchman
saw the six vessels of the Admiral he left his anchors and one vessel and
fled with the other vessel. The Admiral sent a ship after him and when
the six Spaniards who were being carried away on the captured ship saw
this ship coming to their aid, they attacked six Frenchmen who were
guarding them and by force they placed them below decks and thus brought
them back.

Here in the island of Gomera the Admiral determined to send three ships
directly to the island of Espanola, so that, if he should be detained
here, they might give news of him and cheer and console the Christians
with the supplies: and principally that they might give joy to his
brothers, the Adelantado[321-1] and Don Diego, who were very desirous of
hearing from him. He named Pedro de Arana, a native of Cordova, as
captain of one ship,--a very honorable and prudent man, whom I knew very
well, brother of the mother of Don Ferdinand Columbus,[321-2] the second
son of the Admiral, and cousin of that Arana who remained in the fortress
with the 38 men whom the Admiral on his return found dead. The other
captain of the second ship was called Alonso Sanchez de Carvajal,
governor of the city of Bacea, an honorable gentleman. The third captain
for the remaining ship was Juan Antonio Columbo,[321-3] a Genoese, a
relation of the Admiral, a very capable and prudent man and one of
authority, with whom I had frequent conversation.

He gave them suitable instructions, in which instructions he ordered
that, one week one captain, and another week another, each by turns
should be captain-general of all the ships, as regarded the navigation
and the placing of the night lantern, which is a lighted lantern placed
in the stern of the ship in order that the other ships may know and
follow where the captain guides. He ordered them to go to the west,
quarter south-west,[321-4] for 850 leagues and told them that then they
would arrive at the island of Dominica. From Dominica they should go
west-north-west and they would then reach the island of Sant Juan,[321-5]
and it would be the southern part of it, because that was the direct way
to go to the New Isabella,[321-6] which now is Santo Domingo. Having
passed the island of Sant Juan, they should leave the island of Mona to
the north and from there they should make for the point of this
Espanola,[322-1] which he called Sant Raphael, which now is the Cabo del
Engano, from there to Saona, which he says makes a good harbor between it
and this Espanola. Seven leagues farther there is another island, which
is called Santa Catherina, and from there to the New Isabella, which is
the port of Santo Domingo, the distance is 25 leagues. And he told the
captains that wherever they should arrive and land they should purchase
all that they needed by barter and that for the little they might give
the Indians, although they might be the canibales,[322-2] who are said to
eat human flesh, they would obtain what they wished and the Indians would
give them all that they had; and if they should undertake to procure
things by force, the Indians would conceal themselves and remain hostile.
He says further in the instructions that he was going by the Cape Verde
Islands (which he says were called in ancient times Gorgodes[322-3] or
according to others Hesperides) and that he was going in the name of the
Holy Trinity with the intention of navigating to the south of these
islands so as to arrive below the equinoctial line and to follow the
course to the west until this island of Espanola should lie to the
northwest, to see if there are islands or lands. "Our Lord," he says,
"guides me and gives me things which may serve Him and the King and
Queen, our Lords, and which may be for the honor of the Christians, for I
believe that no one has ever gone this way and that this sea is entirely
unknown."[323-1] And here the Admiral finished his instructions.

Having then taken water and wood and other provisions, especially cheese,
of which there are many and good ones there, the Admiral made sail with
his six ships on Thursday, June 21, towards the island of Hierro,[323-2]
which is distant from Gomera about fifteen leagues, and of the seven
Canaries is the one farthest to the west. Passing it, the Admiral took
his course with one ship and two caravels for the islands of Cape Verde,
and dismissed the other three ships in the name of the Holy Trinity; and
he says that he entreated the Holy Trinity to care for him and for all of
them; and at the setting of the sun they separated and the three ships
took their course for this island. Here the Admiral makes mention to the
Sovereigns of the agreement they had made with the King of Portugal that
the Portuguese should not go to the westward of the Azores and Cape Verde
Islands, and also mentions how the Sovereigns sent for him that he should
be present at the meetings in regard to the partition,[323-3] and that he
could not go on account of the grave illness which he had incurred in the
discovery of the mainland of the Indies, that is to say of Cuba, which he
always regarded as the mainland even until the present time as he could
not circumnavigate it. He adds further that then occurred the death of
Don Juan, before he could carry out the matter.[323-4]

Then the Admiral continuing on his way arrived at the Cape Verde Islands,
which according to what he says, have a false name, because he never saw
anything green but all things dry and sterile. The first thing he saw was
the island of La Sal, Wednesday, June 27: and it is a small island. From
there he went to another which is called Buenavista and is very sterile,
where he anchored in a bay, and near it is a very small island. To this
island come all the lepers of Portugal to be cured and there are not more
than six or seven houses on it. The Admiral ordered the boats to go to
land to provide themselves with salt and flesh, because there are a great
number of goats on the island. There came to the ships a steward[324-1]
to whom that island belonged, named Roderigo Alonso, notary public of the
exchequer[324-2] of the King of Portugal, who offered to the Admiral what
there was on the island of which he might be in need. The Admiral thanked
him and ordered that he should be given some supplies from Castile, which
he enjoyed very much.

Here he relates how the lepers came there to be cured because of the
great abundance of turtles on that island, which commonly are as large as
shields. By eating the flesh and constantly bathing in the blood of these
turtles, the lepers become cured.[324-3] The turtles in infinite number
come there three months in the year, June, July, and August, from the
mainland, which is Ethiopia,[324-4] to lay eggs in the sand and with the
claws and legs they scratch places in the sand and spawn more than five
hundred eggs, as large as those of a hen except that they have not a hard
shell but a tender membrane which covers the yolk, like the membrane
which covers the yolk of the hen's egg after taking off the hard shell.
They cover the eggs in the sand as a person would do, and there the sun
hatches them, and the little live turtles come out and then run in search
of the sea as if they had come out of it alive. They take the turtles
there in this manner: At night with lights which are torches of dry wood,
they go searching for the track of the turtle which is easily traced, and
find the turtle tired and sleeping. They come up quickly and turn it over
with the belly up and leave it, sure that it cannot turn itself back, and
go in search of another. And the Indians do the same in the sea; if they
come upon one asleep and turn it over it remains safe for them to take it
whenever they wish. The Indians, however, have another greater device for
taking them on the sea, which will be explained God willing when we give
a description of Cuba.[325-1]

The healthy persons on that island of Buenavista who lead a laborious
life were six or seven residents who have no water except brackish water
from wells and whose employment is to kill the big goats and salt the
skins and send them to Portugal in the caravels which come there for
them, of which in one year they kill so many and send so many skins that
they are worth 2000 ducats to the notary public, to whom the island
belonged. Such a great multitude of goats, male and female, have been
grown there, from only eight original head. Those who live there neither
eat bread nor drink wine during four or five months, nor anything else
except goat flesh or fish or turtles. All this they told to the Admiral.

He left there Saturday, June 30, at night for the island of Santiago,
where he arrived on Sunday at the hour of vespers, because it is distant
28 leagues: and this is the principal one of the Cape Verde Islands. He
wished to take from this island a herd of black cattle in order to carry
them to Espanola as the Sovereigns had ordered, and he was there eight
days and could not get them; and because the island is very unhealthy
since men are burned with heat there and his people commenced to fall
ill, he decided to leave it. The Admiral says again that he wishes to go
to the south, because he intends with the aid of the Most Holy Trinity,
to find islands and lands, that God may be served and their Highnesses
and Christianity may have pleasure, and that he wishes to see what was
the idea of King Don Juan of Portugal, who said that there was mainland
to the south: and because of this, he says that he had a contention with
the Sovereigns of Castile, and finally the Admiral says that it was
concluded that the King of Portugal should have 370 leagues to the west
from the islands of the Azores[326-1] and Cape Verde, from north to
south, from pole to pole. And the Admiral says further that the said King
Don Juan was certain that within those limits famous lands and things
must be found.[326-2] Certain principal inhabitants of the island of
Santiago came to see them and they said that to the south-west of the
island of Huego, which is one of the Cape Verde Islands distant 12
leagues from this, may be seen an island, and that the King Don Juan was
greatly inclined to send to make discoveries to the south-west, and that
canoes had been found which start from the coast of Guinea and navigate
to the west with merchandise. Here the Admiral says again as if he was
speaking with the Sovereigns,--"He that is Three and One guides me by His
pity and mercy that I may serve Him and give great pleasure to your
Highnesses and to all Christianity, as was done in the discovery of the
Indies which resounded throughout all the world."

Wednesday, July 4, he ordered sail made from that island in which he says
that since he arrived there he never saw the sun or the stars, but that
the heavens were covered with such a thick mist that it seemed they could
cut it with a knife and the heat was so very intense that they were
tormented, and he ordered the course laid to the way of the south-west,
which is the route leading from these islands to the south, in the name,
he says, of the Holy and Indivisible Trinity, because then he would be on
a parallel with the land of the sierra of Loa[327-1] and cape of Sancta
Ana in Guinea, which is below the equinoctial line, where he says that
below that line of the world are found more gold and things of value; and
that after, he would navigate, the Lord pleasing, to the west, and from
there would go to this Espanola, in which route he would prove the theory
of the King John aforesaid; and that he thought to investigate the report
of the Indians of this Espanola who said that there had come to Espanola
from the south and south-east, a black people who have the tops of their
spears made of a metal which they call _guanin_, of which he had sent
samples to the Sovereigns to have them assayed, when it was found that of
32 parts, 18 were of gold, 6 of silver and 8 of copper.

Following this course to the south-west he commenced to find grasses like
those encountered in the direct way to these Indies; and the Admiral says
here that after having gone 480 miles which make 120 leagues, that at
nightfall he took the latitude and found that the North Star was in five
degrees. Yet it seems to me that he must have gone more than 200 leagues,
and that the text is in error because it is necessary to traverse more
than 200 leagues on that course from the Cape Verde Islands and Santiago
whence he started to put a ship within five degrees of the equator, as
any sailor will observe who will judge it by the map and by the latitude.
And he says that there, Friday, July 13, the wind deserted him and he
entered into heat so great and so ardent that he feared the ships would
take fire and the people perish. The ceasing of the wind and coming of
the excessive and consuming heat was so unexpected and sudden that there
was no person who dared to descend below to care for the butts of wine
and water, which swelled, breaking the hoops of the casks; the wheat
burned like fire; the pork and salted meat roasted and putrefied. This
ardent heat lasted eight days. The first day was clear with a sun which
burned them. God sent them less suffering because the seven following
days it rained and was clouded; however with all this, they could not
find any hope of saving themselves from perishing and from being burned,
and if the other seven days had been like the first, clear and with the
sun, the Admiral says here that it would have been impossible for a man
of them to have escaped alive. And thus they were divinely succored by
the coming of some showers and by the days being cloudy. He determined
from this, if God should give him wind in order to escape from this
suffering, to run to the west some days, and then if he found himself in
any moderation of temperature to return to the south, which was the way
he desired to follow. "May our Lord," says he, "guide me and give me
grace that I may serve Him, and bring pleasing news to your Highnesses."
He says he remembered, being in this burning latitude, that when he came
to the Indies in the past voyages, always when he reached 100 leagues
toward the west from the Azores Islands he found a change in the
temperature from north to south, and for this he wished to go to the west
to reach the said place.

The Admiral must have been on that same parallel or rather meridian, on
which Hanno the Carthaginian was with his fleet, who departing from Cadiz
and going out into the Ocean to the left[328-1] of Lybia or Ethiopia
after thirty days' voyaging toward the south, among other distresses that
he suffered the heat and fire were so intense that it seemed as if they
were roasting; they heard such thundering and lightning that their ears
pained them and their eyes were blinded and it appeared no otherwise than
as if flames of fire fell from heaven. Amianus narrates this--a Greek
historian, a follower of the truth, and very famous--in the _History of
India_ near the end, and Ludovico Celio quotes it in Book I., ch. XXII.,
of the _Lectiones Antiguas_.[329-1] Returning to these days of toil:--

Saturday, which they counted July 14, the Guards[329-2] being on the left
hand, he says the _North_ was in seven degrees: he saw black and white
jays,[329-3] which are birds that do not go far from land, and from this
he considered it a sign of land. He was sick at this point of the
journey, from gout and from not sleeping; but because of this he did not
cease to watch and work with great care and diligence.

Sunday and Monday, they saw the same birds and more swallows, and some
fish appeared which they called _botos_,[329-4] which are little smaller
than great calves, and which have the head very blunt. The Admiral says
here incidentally that the Azores Islands which in ancient times were
called Caseterides,[329-5] were situated at the end of the fifth
clime.[329-6]

Thursday, July 19, there was such intense and ardent heat that they
thought the men and ships would burn, but as our Lord at sight of the
afflictions which He gives is accustomed by interfering to the contrary
to alleviate them, He succored him by His mercy at the end of seven or
eight days, giving him very good weather to get away from that fire; with
which good weather he navigated towards the west 17 days, always
intending to return to the south, and place himself, as above said, in
such a region, that this Espanola should be to the north or
_septentrion_, where he thought he must find land before or beyond the
said place: and thus he intended to repair the ships which were already
opening from the past heat, and the supplies, of which he had a large
quantity, because of the necessity of taking them to this island and the
great difficulty in getting them from Castile, and which were becoming
worthless and damaged.

Sunday, July 22, in the afternoon, as they were going with good weather,
they saw innumerable birds pass from the west-south-west to the
north-east: he says that they were a great sign of land. They saw the
same the Monday following and the days after, on one of which days a
pelican came to the ship of the Admiral, and many others appeared another
day, and there were other birds which are called "frigate
pelicans."[330-1]

On the seventeenth day of the good weather which they were experiencing,
the Admiral was hoping to see land, because of the said signs of the
birds, and as he did not see it Monday, or the next day, Tuesday, July
31, as they lacked water, he decided to change his route, and this was to
the west, and to go to the right, and make for the island of Dominica, or
some of the islands of the Canibales, which to-day are called the
Caribes, and thus he ordered the course to the north, quarter north-east,
and went that way until midday. "But as His Divine Majesty," he says,
"has always used mercy with me, a sailor from Guelva,[330-2] my servant,
who was called Alonso Perez, by chance and conjecture ascended to the
round top and saw land to the west, and he was 15 leagues from it, and
that part which appeared were three rocks or mountains." These are his
words. He named this land "The Island of the Trinity,"[331-1] because he
had determined that the first land he discovered should be named thus.
"And it pleased our Lord," he says, "by His Exalted Majesty, that the
first lands seen were three rocks all united at the base, I say three
mountains, all at one time and in one glance." "His High Power by His
pity guides me," he says, "in such a manner, that He may have much
service, and your Highnesses much pleasure: as it is certain that the
discovery of this land in this place was as great a miracle as the
discovery of the first voyage." These are his words. He gave infinite
thanks to God as was his custom, and all praised the divine goodness, and
with great rejoicings and merriment the _Salve Regina_[331-2] was sung
with other devout songs which contain praises of God and our Lady,
according to the custom of sailors, at least our sailors of Spain, who in
tribulations and rejoicings are accustomed to say them.

Here he makes a digression and recapitulation of the services he has
rendered the Sovereigns, and of the will he always had keen to serve
them, "not as false tongues," says he, "and as false witnesses from envy
said."[331-3] And surely, I believe that such as these God took for
instruments to chasten him because he loved him since many without cause
and without object maligned him and disturbed these efforts, and brought
it about that the Sovereigns grew lukewarm and wearied of expense and of
keeping up their attachment and expectation that these Indies were likely
to be of profit, at least that it should be more than the expenses with
increase that came to them. He repeats a mention of the heat he suffered,
and how they were nevertheless now going by the same parallel, except
they had drawn near to the land when he ordered the course directed to
the west, because the land emits coolness from its fountains and rivers,
and by its waters causes moderation and softness; and because of this he
says the Portuguese who go to Guinea which is below the equinoctial line
are able to navigate because they go along the coast. He says further,
that now he was in the same parallel from which the King of Portugal
brought gold, from which he believed that whoever would search those seas
would find things of value. He confesses here that there is no man in the
world for whom God has shown so much grace, and entreats Him that He will
furnish something from which their Highnesses and Christianity may
receive great pleasure; and he says that, although he should not find any
other thing of benefit except these beautiful lands, which are so green
and full of groves and palms, that they are superior to the gardens of
Valencia in May, they would deserve to be highly valued. And in this he
speaks the truth and later on he will place a still higher value on it
with much reason. He says that it is a miraculous thing that the
Sovereigns of Castile should have lands so near the equinoctial as 6
degrees, Ysabela being distant from the said line 24 degrees.

Having seen the land then to the great consolation of all, he left the
course which he desired to follow in search of some of the islands of the
Canibales in order to provide himself with water, of which he was greatly
in need, and made a short excursion towards the land which he had seen,
towards a cape which appeared to be to the west, which he called "Cabo de
la Galera,"[332-1] from a great rock which it had, which from a distance
appeared like a galley sailing. They arrived there at the hour of
compline.[332-2] They saw a good harbor but it was not deep, and the
Admiral regretted that they could not enter it. He pursued his course to
the point he had seen, which was seven leagues toward the south. He did
not find a harbor. On all the coast he found that the groves reached to
the sea, the most beautiful coast that eyes ever saw. He says that this
island must be large; a canoe appeared at a distance filled with people
who must have been fishing, and made towards the land to some houses
which appeared there. The land was very cultivated and high and
beautiful.

Wednesday, August 1, he ran down the coast toward the west, five leagues,
and arrived at a point, where he anchored with all three ships, and took
