of information--how he pursed his lips, jutted his eyebrows, and kept
repeating, 'This must be seen to, indeed! this shall be barred to-morrow
in the morning!'  In this preoccupation, I believe he took leave of me
without observing it; our things were handed out; we heard the window
shut behind us; and became instantly lost in a horrid intricacy of
blackness and the shadow of woods.

A little wet snow kept sleepily falling, pausing, and falling again; it
seemed perpetually beginning to snow and perpetually leaving off; and the
darkness was intense.  Time and again we walked into trees; time and
again found ourselves adrift among garden borders or stuck like a ram in
the thicket.  Rowley had possessed himself of the matches, and he was
neither to be terrified nor softened.  'No, I will not, Mr. Anne, sir,'
he would reply.  'You know he tell me to wait till we were over the 'ill.
It's only a little way now.  Why, and I thought you was a soldier, too!'
I was at least a very glad soldier when my valet consented at last to
kindle a thieves' match.  From this, we easily lit the lantern; and
thenceforward, through a labyrinth of woodland paths, were conducted by
its uneasy glimmer.  Both booted and great-coated, with tall hats much of
a shape, and laden with booty in the form of a despatch-box, a case of
pistols, and two plump valises, I thought we had very much the look of a
pair of brothers returning from the sack of Amersham Place.

We issued at last upon a country by-road where we might walk abreast and
without precaution.  It was nine miles to Aylesbury, our immediate
destination; by a watch, which formed part of my new outfit, it should be
about half-past three in the morning; and as we did not choose to arrive
before daylight, time could not be said to press.  I gave the order to
march at ease.

'Now, Rowley,' said I, 'so far so good.  You have come, in the most
obliging manner in the world, to carry these valises.  The question is,
what next?  What are we to do at Aylesbury? or, more particularly, what
are you?  Thence, I go on a journey.  Are you to accompany me?'

He gave a little chuckle.  'That's all settled already, Mr. Anne, sir,'
he replied.  'Why, I've got my things here in the valise--a half a dozen
shirts and what not; I'm all ready, sir: just you lead on: _you'll_ see.'

'The devil you have!' said I.  'You made pretty sure of your welcome.'

'If you please, sir,' said Rowley.

He looked up at me, in the light of the lantern, with a boyish shyness
and triumph that awoke my conscience.  I could never let this innocent
involve himself in the perils and difficulties that beset my course,
without some hint of warning, which it was a matter of extreme delicacy
to make plain enough and not too plain.

'No, no,' said I; 'you may think you have made a choice, but it was
blindfold, and you must make it over again.  The Count's service is a
good one; what are you leaving it for?  Are you not throwing away the
substance for the shadow?  No, do not answer me yet.  You imagine that I
am a prosperous nobleman, just declared my uncle's heir, on the threshold
of the best of good fortune, and, from the point of view of a judicious
servant, a jewel of a master to serve and stick to?  Well, my boy, I am
nothing of the kind, nothing of the kind.'

As I said the words, I came to a full stop and held up the lantern to his
face.  He stood before me, brilliantly illuminated on the background of
impenetrable night and falling snow, stricken to stone between his double
burden like an ass between two panniers, and gaping at me like a
blunderbuss.  I had never seen a face so predestined to be astonished, or
so susceptible of rendering the emotion of surprise; and it tempted me as
an open piano tempts the musician.

'Nothing of the sort, Rowley,' I continued, in a churchyard voice.
'These are appearances, petty appearances.  I am in peril, homeless,
hunted.  I count scarce any one in England who is not my enemy.  From
this hour I drop my name, my title; I become nameless; my name is
proscribed.  My liberty, my life, hang by a hair.  The destiny which you
will accept, if you go forth with me, is to be tracked by spies, to hide
yourself under a false name, to follow the desperate pretences and
perhaps share the fate of a murderer with a price upon his head.'

His face had been hitherto beyond expectation, passing from one depth to
another of tragic astonishment, and really worth paying to see; but at
this it suddenly cleared.  'Oh, I ain't afraid!' he said; and then,
choking into laughter, 'why, I see it from the first!'

I could have beaten him.  But I had so grossly overshot the mark that I
suppose it took me two good miles of road and half an hour of elocution
to persuade him I had been in earnest.  In the course of which I became
so interested in demonstrating my present danger that I forgot all about
my future safety, and not only told him the story of Goguelat, but threw
in the business of the drovers as well, and ended by blurting out that I
was a soldier of Napoleon's and a prisoner of war.

This was far from my views when I began; and it is a common complaint of
me that I have a long tongue.  I believe it is a fault beloved by
fortune.  Which of you considerate fellows would have done a thing at
once so foolhardy and so wise as to make a confidant of a boy in his
teens, and positively smelling of the nursery?  And when had I cause to
repent it?  There is none so apt as a boy to be the adviser of any man in
difficulties such as mine.  To the beginnings of virile common sense he
adds the last lights of the child's imagination; and he can fling himself
into business with that superior earnestness that properly belongs to
play.  And Rowley was a boy made to my hand.  He had a high sense of
romance, and a secret cultus for all soldiers and criminals.  His
travelling library consisted of a chap-book life of Wallace and some
sixpenny parts of the 'Old Bailey Sessions Papers' by Gurney the
shorthand writer; and the choice depicts his character to a hair.  You
can imagine how his new prospects brightened on a boy of this
disposition.  To be the servant and companion of a fugitive, a soldier,
and a murderer, rolled in one--to live by stratagems, disguises, and
false names, in an atmosphere of midnight and mystery so thick that you
could cut it with a knife--was really, I believe, more dear to him than
his meals, though he was a great trencherman, and something of a glutton
besides.  For myself, as the peg by which all this romantic business
hung, I was simply idolised from that moment; and he would rather have
sacrificed his hand than surrendered the privilege of serving me.

We arranged the terms of our campaign, trudging amicably in the snow,
which now, with the approach of morning, began to fall to purpose.  I
chose the name of Ramornie, I imagine from its likeness to Romaine;
Rowley, from an irresistible conversion of ideas, I dubbed Gammon.  His
distress was laughable to witness: his own choice of an unassuming
nickname had been Claude Duval!  We settled our procedure at the various
inns where we should alight, rehearsed our little manners like a piece of
drill until it seemed impossible we should ever be taken unprepared; and
in all these dispositions, you maybe sure the despatch-box was not
forgotten.  Who was to pick it up, who was to set it down, who was to
remain beside it, who was to sleep with it--there was no contingency
omitted, all was gone into with the thoroughness of a drill-sergeant on
the one hand and a child with a new plaything on the other.

'I say, wouldn't it look queer if you and me was to come to the
post-house with all this luggage?' said Rowley.

'I dare say,' I replied.  'But what else is to be done?'

'Well, now, sir--you hear me,' says Rowley.  'I think it would look more
natural-like if you was to come to the post-house alone, and with nothing
in your 'ands--more like a gentleman, you know.  And you might say that
your servant and baggage was a-waiting for you up the road.  I think I
could manage, somehow, to make a shift with all them dratted
things--leastways if you was to give me a 'and up with them at the
start.'

'And I would see you far enough before I allowed you to try, Mr. Rowley!'
I cried.  'Why, you would be quite defenceless!  A footpad that was an
infant child could rob you.  And I should probably come driving by to
find you in a ditch with your throat cut.  But there is something in your
idea, for all that; and I propose we put it in execution no farther
forward than the next corner of a lane.'

Accordingly, instead of continuing to aim for Aylesbury, we headed by
cross-roads for some point to the northward of it, whither I might assist
Rowley with the baggage, and where I might leave him to await my return
in the post-chaise.

It was snowing to purpose, the country all white, and ourselves walking
snowdrifts, when the first glimmer of the morning showed us an inn upon
the highwayside.  Some distance off, under the shelter of a corner of the
road and a clump of trees, I loaded Rowley with the whole of our
possessions, and watched him till he staggered in safety into the doors
of the _Green Dragon_, which was the sign of the house.  Thence I walked
briskly into Aylesbury, rejoicing in my freedom and the causeless good
spirits that belong to a snowy morning; though, to be sure, long before I
had arrived the snow had again ceased to fall, and the eaves of Aylesbury
were smoking in the level sun.  There was an accumulation of gigs and
chaises in the yard, and a great bustle going forward in the coffee-room
and about the doors of the inn.  At these evidences of so much travel on
the road I was seized with a misgiving lest it should be impossible to
get horses, and I should be detained in the precarious neighbourhood of
my cousin.  Hungry as I was, I made my way first of all to the
postmaster, where he stood--a big, athletic, horsey-looking man, blowing
into a key in the corner of the yard.

On my making my modest request, he awoke from his indifference into what
seemed passion.

'A po'-shay and 'osses!' he cried.  'Do I look as if I 'ad a po'-shay and
'osses?  Damn me, if I 'ave such a thing on the premises.  I don't _make_
'osses and chaises--I '_ire_ 'em.  You might be God Almighty!' said he;
and instantly, as if he had observed me for the first time, he broke off,
and lowered his voice into the confidential.  'Why, now that I see you
are a gentleman,' said he, 'I'll tell you what!  If you like to _buy_, I
have the article to fit you.  Second-'and shay by Lycett, of London.
Latest style; good as new.  Superior fittin's, net on the roof, baggage
platform, pistol 'olsters--the most com-plete and the most gen-teel
turn-out I ever see!  The 'ole for seventy-five pound!  It's as good as
givin' her away!'

'Do you propose I should trundle it myself, like a hawker's barrow?' said
I.  'Why, my good man, if I had to stop here, anyway, I should prefer to
buy a house and garden!'

'Come and look at her!' he cried; and, with the word, links his arm in
mine and carries me to the outhouse where the chaise was on view.

It was just the sort of chaise that I had dreamed of for my purpose:
eminently rich, inconspicuous, and genteel; for, though I thought the
postmaster no great authority, I was bound to agree with him so far.  The
body was painted a dark claret, and the wheels an invisible green.  The
lamp and glasses were bright as silver; and the whole equipage had an air
of privacy and reserve that seemed to repel inquiry and disarm suspicion.
With a servant like Rowley, and a chaise like this, I felt that I could
go from the Land's End to John o' Groat's House amid a population of
bowing ostlers.  And I suppose I betrayed in my manner the degree in
which the bargain tempted me.

'Come,' cried the postmaster--'I'll make it seventy, to oblige a friend!'

'The point is: the horses,' said I.

'Well,' said he, consulting his watch, 'it's now gone the 'alf after
eight.  What time do you want her at the door?'

'Horses and all?' said I.

''Osses and all!' says he.  'One good turn deserves another.  You give me
seventy pound for the shay, and I'll 'oss it for you.  I told you I
didn't _make_ 'osses; but I _can_ make 'em, to oblige a friend.'

What would you have?  It was not the wisest thing in the world to buy a
chaise within a dozen miles of my uncle's house; but in this way I got my
horses for the next stage.  And by any other it appeared that I should
have to wait.  Accordingly I paid the money down--perhaps twenty pounds
too much, though it was certainly a well-made and well-appointed
vehicle--ordered it round in half an hour, and proceeded to refresh
myself with breakfast.

The table to which I sat down occupied the recess of a bay-window, and
commanded a view of the front of the inn, where I continued to be amused
by the successive departures of travellers--the fussy and the offhand,
the niggardly and the lavish--all exhibiting their different characters
in that diagnostic moment of the farewell: some escorted to the stirrup
or the chaise door by the chamberlain, the chambermaids and the waiters
almost in a body, others moving off under a cloud, without human
countenance.  In the course of this I became interested in one for whom
this ovation began to assume the proportions of a triumph; not only the
under-servants, but the barmaid, the landlady, and my friend the
postmaster himself, crowding about the steps to speed his departure.  I
was aware, at the same time, of a good deal of merriment, as though the
traveller were a man of a ready wit, and not too dignified to air it in
that society.  I leaned forward with a lively curiosity; and the next
moment I had blotted myself behind the teapot.  The popular traveller had
turned to wave a farewell; and behold! he was no other than my cousin
Alain.  It was a change of the sharpest from the angry, pallid man I had
seen at Amersham Place.  Ruddy to a fault, illuminated with vintages,
crowned with his curls like Bacchus, he now stood before me for an
instant, the perfect master of himself, smiling with airs of conscious
popularity and insufferable condescension.  He reminded me at once of a
royal duke, or an actor turned a little elderly, and of a blatant bagman
who should have been the illegitimate son of a gentleman.  A moment after
he was gliding noiselessly on the road to London.

I breathed again.  I recognised, with heartfelt gratitude, how lucky I
had been to go in by the stable-yard instead of the hostelry door, and
what a fine occasion of meeting my cousin I had lost by the purchase of
the claret-coloured chaise!  The next moment I remembered that there was
a waiter present.  No doubt but he must have observed me when I crouched
behind the breakfast equipage; no doubt but he must have commented on
this unusual and undignified behaviour; and it was essential that I
should do something to remove the impression.

'Waiter!' said I, 'that was the nephew of Count Carwell that just drove
off, wasn't it?'

'Yes, sir: Viscount Carwell we calls him,' he replied.

'Ah, I thought as much,' said I.  'Well, well, damn all these Frenchmen,
say I!'

'You may say so indeed, sir,' said the waiter.  'They ain't not to say in
the same field with our 'ome-raised gentry.'

'Nasty tempers?' I suggested.

'Beas'ly temper, sir, the Viscount 'ave,' said the waiter with feeling.
'Why, no longer agone than this morning, he was sitting breakfasting and
reading in his paper.  I suppose, sir, he come on some pilitical
information, or it might be about 'orses, but he raps his 'and upon the
table sudden and calls for curacoa.  It gave me quite a turn, it did; he
did it that sudden and 'ard.  Now, sir, that may be manners in France,
but hall I can say is, that I'm not used to it.'

'Reading the paper, was he?' said I.  'What paper, eh?'

'Here it is, sir,' exclaimed the waiter.  'Seems like as if he'd dropped
it.'

And picking it off the floor he presented it to me.

I may say that I was quite prepared, that I already knew what to expect;
but at sight of the cold print my heart stopped beating.  There it was:
the fulfilment of Romaine's apprehension was before me; the paper was
laid open at the capture of Clausel.  I felt as if I could take a little
curacoa myself, but on second thoughts called for brandy.  It was badly
wanted; and suddenly I observed the waiter's eye to sparkle, as it were,
with some recognition; made certain he had remarked the resemblance
between me and Alain; and became aware--as by a revelation--of the fool's
part I had been playing.  For I had now managed to put my identification
beyond a doubt, if Alain should choose to make his inquiries at
Aylesbury; and, as if that were not enough, I had added, at an expense of
seventy pounds, a clue by which he might follow me through the length and
breadth of England, in the shape of the claret-coloured chaise!  That
elegant equipage (which I began to regard as little better than a
claret-coloured ante-room to the hangman's cart) coming presently to the
door, I left my breakfast in the middle and departed; posting to the
north as diligently as my cousin Alain was posting to the south, and
putting my trust (such as it was) in an opposite direction and equal
speed.




CHAPTER XXII--CHARACTER AND ACQUIREMENTS OF MR.  ROWLEY


I am not certain that I had ever really appreciated before that hour the
extreme peril of the adventure on which I was embarked.  The sight of my
cousin, the look of his face--so handsome, so jovial at the first sight,
and branded with so much malignity as you saw it on the second--with his
hyperbolical curls in order, with his neckcloth tied as if for the
conquests of love, setting forth (as I had no doubt in the world he was
doing) to clap the Bow Street runners on my trail, and cover England with
handbills, each dangerous as a loaded musket, convinced me for the first
time that the affair was no less serious than death.  I believe it came
to a near touch whether I should not turn the horses' heads at the next
stage and make directly for the coast.  But I was now in the position of
a man who should have thrown his gage into the den of lions; or, better
still, like one who should have quarrelled overnight under the influence
of wine, and now, at daylight, in a cold winter's morning, and humbly
sober, must make good his words.  It is not that I thought any the less,
or any the less warmly, of Flora.  But, as I smoked a grim segar that
morning in a corner of the chaise, no doubt I considered, in the first
place, that the letter-post had been invented, and admitted privately to
myself, in the second, that it would have been highly possible to write
her on a piece of paper, seal it, and send it skimming by the mail,
instead of going personally into these egregious dangers, and through a
country that I beheld crowded with gibbets and Bow Street officers.  As
for Sim and Candlish, I doubt if they crossed my mind.

At the Green Dragon Rowley was waiting on the doorsteps with the luggage,
and really was bursting with unpalatable conversation.

'Who do you think we've 'ad 'ere, sir?' he began breathlessly, as the
chaise drove off.  'Red Breasts'; and he nodded his head portentously.

'Red Breasts?' I repeated, for I stupidly did not understand at the
moment an expression I had often heard.

'Ah!' said he.  'Red weskits.  Runners.  Bow Street runners.  Two on' em,
and one was Lavender himself!  I hear the other say quite plain, "Now,
Mr. Lavender, _if_ you're ready."  They was breakfasting as nigh me as I
am to that postboy.  They're all right; they ain't after us.  It's a
forger; and I didn't send them off on a false scent--O no!  I thought
there was no use in having them over our way; so I give them "very
valuable information," Mr. Lavender said, and tipped me a tizzy for
myself; and they're off to Luton.  They showed me the 'andcuffs, too--the
other one did--and he clicked the dratted things on my wrist; and I tell
you, I believe I nearly went off in a swound!  There's something so
beastly in the feel of them!  Begging your pardon, Mr. Anne,' he added,
with one of his delicious changes from the character of the confidential
schoolboy into that of the trained, respectful servant.

Well, I must not be proud!  I cannot say I found the subject of handcuffs
to my fancy; and it was with more asperity than was needful that I
reproved him for the slip about the name.

'Yes, Mr. Ramornie,' says he, touching his hat.  'Begging your pardon,
Mr. Ramornie.  But I've been very piticular, sir, up to now; and you may
