in our neighbourhood were stirred up by the emissaries of Swart Piet,
for though he had gone none knew where, his tools and agents remained
behind him. However this may have been, all over the country the black
men began to raid the stock, and in our case they ended by attacking the
stead also, a great number of them armed with guns. Fortunately we had a
little warning, and they were very sad Kaffirs that went away next day;
moreover, forty of them never went away at all. Just at dawn, when they
had been besieging the house for some hours, shouting, banging off their
guns, and trying to fire the roof by means of assegais with tufts of
blazing grass tied on to them, Jan, Ralph, and about twenty of our
people crept down under cover of the orchard wall and sallied out upon
them.

Almighty! how those men fought, especially Jan and Ralph. It was a
pleasure to see them, for I watched the whole thing from the _stoep_,
though I admit that I was anxious, since it was evident that neither of
them seemed to care whether he lived or died. However, as it turned out,
it was not they who died, but the Kaffirs, who went off with some few
cattle and afterwards left us in peace.

And now comes the strange part of the affair, though I scarcely like to
tell it, lest after all these years it should not be believed. Someone
connected with the London Missionary Society reported us to the
Government at the Cape for shooting poor, innocent black men, and it was
threatened that Jan and Ralph would be put upon their trial for murder
by the British Government. Indeed, I believe that this would have been
done had not we and others of our neighbourhood let it be clearly known
that before they were dragged to the common gaol there would be killing
not only of black but of white men.

Our case was only one of many, since in those times there was no
security for us Boers--we were robbed, we were slandered, we were
deserted. Our goods were taken and we were not compensated; the Kaffirs
stole our herds, and if we resisted them we were tried as murderers; our
slaves were freed, and we were cheated of their value, and the word of a
black man was accepted before our solemn oath upon the Bible.

No wonder that we grew tired of it and trekked, seeking to shake the
dust of British rule from off our feet, and to find a new home
for ourselves out of the reach of the hand of the accursed British
Government. Oh! I know that there are two sides to the story, and I
daresay that the British Government meant well, but at the least it was
a fool, and it always will be a fool with its Secretaries of State, who
know nothing sitting far away there in London, and its Governors, whose
only business is to please the Secretaries of State, that when the
country they are sent to rule grows sick of them, they may win another
post with larger pay.

Well, this tale is of people and not of politics, so I will say no more
of the causes that brought about the great trek of the Boers from the
old Colony and sent them forth into the wilderness, there to make war
with the savage man and found new countries for themselves. I know those
causes, for Jan and Ralph and I were of the number of the voortrekkers;
still, had it not been for the loss of Suzanne, I do not think that we
should have trekked, for we loved the home we had made upon the face of
the wild veldt.

But now that she was gone it was no home for us; every room of the
house, every tree in the garden, every ox and horse and sheep reminded
us of her. Yes, even the distant roar of the ocean and the sighing
of the winds among the grasses seemed to speak of her. These were the
flowers she loved, that was the stone she sat on, yonder was the path
which day by day she trod. The very air was thick with memories of her,
and the tones of her lost voice seemed to linger in the echoes of the
hills at night.

It was upon the anniversary of the marriage of Ralph and Suzanne, yes,
on the very day year of her taking by Piet Van Vooren, that we made up
our minds to go. We had dined and Ralph sat quite silent, his head bowed
a little upon his breast, as was his custom, while Jan spoke loudly of
the wrongs of the Boers at the hand of the British Government. I do
not think that he was much troubled with those wrongs just then, but he
talked because he wished to interest Ralph and turn his mind from sad
thoughts.

"What think you of it, son?" said Jan at length, for it is hard work
talking all by oneself, even when one has the British Government to
abuse, which was the only subject that made Jan a wordy man.

"I, father?" answered Ralph with a start, which showed me that his mind
was far away. "I do not quite know what I think. I should like to hear
what the English Government say about the matter, for I think that they
mean to be fair, only they do not understand the wants and troubles of
us Boers who live so far away. Also, without doubt the missionaries mean
well, but they believe that a black man has a bigger soul than a white
man, whereas we who know the black man see that there is a difference."

"Allemachter, son," said Jan, looking at him out of the corner of his
eye, "cannot you show some spirit? I hoped that being an Englishman
you would have stood up for your own people, and then we might have
quarrelled about it, which would have done us both good, but you only
sit and talk like a magistrate in his chair, looking at both sides of
the case at once, which is an evil habit for men who have to make their
way in the world. Well, I tell you that if you had seen the cursed
British Government hang your father and uncle at Slagter's Nek, and not
satisfied with that, hang them a second time, when the ropes broke, just
because they tried to shoot a few Hottentot policemen, you would not
think much of its fairness. And as for the missionaries of the London
Society, well, I should like to hang _them_, as would be right and
proper, seeing that they blacken the names of honest Boers."

Ralph only smiled at this onslaught, for he was not to be stirred from
his lethargy by talk about Slagter's Nek and the missionaries. For a
while there was silence, which presently was broken by Jan roaring at me
in a loud voice as though I were deaf.

"_Vrouw, let ons trek_," and, to give weight to his words, he brought
his great fist down with a bang upon the table, knocking off a plate and
breaking it.

I stooped to pick up the pieces, rating him for his carelessness as I
gathered them, for I wished to have time to think, although for a long
while I had expected this. When I had found them all I placed them upon
the table, saying:

"They cannot be mended, and--hearts or plates--what cannot be mended had
best be hidden away. Hearts and plates are brittle things, but the last
can be bought in iron, as I wish the first could be also. Yes, husband,
we will trek if you desire it."

"What say you, son?" asked Jan.

Ralph answered his question by another. "In which direction will the
emigrants trek?"

"North, I believe, to the Vaal River."

"Then, father, I say let us go," he replied with more spirit than he had
shown for a long while, "for I have searched and inquired to the south
and the east and the west, and in them I can hear of no mountain that
has ridges upon its eastern slopes shaped like the thumb and fingers of
a man's hand with a stream of water issuing from between the thumb and
first finger."

Now once more we were silent, for we saw that his madness had again
taken hold of Ralph's mind, and that was a sad silence.



CHAPTER XXV

THE GREAT TREK

On the morrow we began to make ready, and a month later we trekked from
our much loved home. Jan tried to sell the farm, which was a very good
one of over six thousand morgen, or twelve thousand English acres, well
watered, and having on it a dwelling house built of stone, with large
kraals and out-buildings, an orchard of fruit-trees, and twenty morgen
of crop lands that could be irrigated in the dry season, well fenced in
with walls built of loose stones. But no one would make a bid for it,
for there were few English about, and most of the farmers were trekking,
so at last he parted with it to a cowardly fellow, a Boer by birth, but,
as I believe, a spy of the British Government, who gave him fifty pounds
and an old waggon in exchange for the place and everything upon it
except the stock which we took with us.

Some years ago I heard that this man's grandson sold that same farm for
twenty thousand pounds in cash, and that now it is a place where they
breed horses, angora goats, and ostriches in great numbers. It makes me
mad to think that the descendant of that low spy should have profited
so largely out of the land which was ours, but so it often chances that
those whose hearts are small and mean reap the reward of the courage and
misfortunes of braver men. Nor should we grumble indeed, seeing that the
Lord has blessed us greatly in land and goods.

Ah! It was a sad home leaving. The day before we trekked Ralph rode
to visit his mother's grave for the last time, and then, following the
track which he had taken as a child, he went to the kloof where Suzanne
had found him, and sat down upon that stone on which as a child he had
knelt in prayer, and where in after years he and his lost wife had told
their love. Jan accompanied him upon this dismal journey, for to speak
truth we did not like to leave him more alone than we could help, since
his manner remained strange, and when he set out on his solitary rides
we could not be certain that we should ever see him come back again.

Next morning we trekked away, and my eyes were so full of tears as I sat
beneath the tent of the first waggon that the familiar landscape and the
home where I lived for twenty years and more were blotted from my sight.
But I could still hear the long-nosed spy who had bought the farm, and
who as waiting to enter into possession, talking to Jan.

"Good-bye, Heer Botmar," he said, "and good fortune to you upon your
journey. For my part I cannot understand you emigrants. The English
Government is an accursed Government, no doubt; still I would not sell
a farm and a house like this for fifty pounds and an old waggon in order
to wander in the wilderness to escape from it, there to be eaten by
lions or murdered by Kaffirs. Still, good-bye, and good luck to you, and
I hope that you are as content with your bargain as I am with mine."

"The Lord will be our guide, as He was to the Israelites of old,"
answered Jan in a somewhat troubled voice.

"Yes, yes; they all say that, Heer Botmar, and I trust that they are
right, for you will need nothing less than a cloud by day and a pillar
of fire in the darkness to protect you from all the dangers in your
path. Also I hope that the hosts of Pharaoh, in the shape of English
soldiers, will not fetch you back before you cross the border, for then,
when you have sold your birthright in Egypt, and are cut off from the
Promised Land, your lot will be hard, Heer Botmar."

"The Lord will guide and protect us," repeated Jan, and gave the word to
trek.

In my heart at the time I was inclined to agree with that cheat's
sneering words; and yet Jan was right, and not I, for of the truth the
Lord did guide and protect us. Has anything more wonderful happened in
the world than this journey of a few farmers, cumbered with women and
children, and armed only with old-fashioned muzzle-loading guns, into a
vast, unknown land, peopled by savages and wild beasts? Yet, look what
they did. They conquered Moselikatse; they broke the strength of Dingaan
and all his Zulu impis; they peopled the Free State, the Transvaal, and
Natal. That was the work of those few farmers, and I say that of their
own strength they could never have done it; the strength was given to
them from above; the Sword of God was in their hand, and He guided that
hand and blessed it.



Our first outspan was at the spot where Van Vooren had tried to murder
Ralph and carried off Suzanne upon her wedding-day. We did not stop
there long, for the place was bad for Ralph, who sat upon the box of the
waggon staring moodily at some blackened stones, which, as one of the
drivers told me--the same man who accompanied them upon their wedding
journey--had been brought from the kloof and used by Suzanne to set the
kettle on when they took their meal together. Led by this same driver
I walked to the edge of the cliff--for I had never visited the place
before--and looked at the deep sea-pool, forty feet below me, into which
Swart Piet had thrown Ralph after he had shot him. Also I went down to
the edge of the pool and climbed up again by the path along which Zinti
and Sihamba had staggered with his senseless body. Afterwards I returned
to the waggons with a heart full of thankfulness and wonder that he
should still be alive among us to-day, although alas, there was much for
which I could not feel thankful, at least not then.

Now it is of little use that I should set down the history of this
trek of ours day by day, for if I did my story would have no end. It
is enough to tell that in company with other emigrants we crossed the
Orange River, heading for Thaba Nchu, which had been the chief town
of Maroko before Moselikatse drove him out of the Marico country. Here
several bands of emigrants were to meet, and here they did meet, but not
until a year or more had passed since we left the colony and wandered
out into the veldt.

Ah! I tell you, my child, the veldt in those days was different indeed
from what it is now. The land itself remains the same except where white
men have built towns upon it, but all else is changed. Then it was black
with game when the grass was green; yes, at times I have seen it so
black for miles that we could scarcely see the grass. There were
all sorts of them, springbucks in myriads, blesbok and quagga and
wildebeeste in thousands, sable antelope, sassaby and hartebeeste in
herds, eland, giraffe and koodoo in troops; while the forests were
full of elephant and the streams of sea-cow. They are all gone now, the
beautiful wild creatures; the guns of the white men have killed them
out or driven them away, and I suppose that it is as well that they are
gone, for while the game is in such plenty the men will not work. Still
I for one am sorry to lose the sight of them, and had it not been for
their numbers we Boers should never have lasted through that long trek,
for often and often we lived upon buck's flesh and little else for weeks
together.

At Thaba Nchu we camped, waiting for other bands of emigrants, but
after four or five months some of our number grew so impatient that they
started off by themselves. Among these were the companies under the Heer
Triegaart and the Heer Rensenburg, who wished us to accompany him, but
Jan would not, I do not know why. It was as well, for the knob-nosed
Kaffirs killed him and everybody with him. Triegaart, who had separated
from him, trekked to Delagoa Bay, and reached it, where nearly all his
people died of fever.

After that we moved northwards in detachments, instead of keeping
together as we should have done, with the result that several of our
parties were fallen upon and murdered by the warriors of Moselikatse.
Our line of march was between where Bloemfontein and Winburg now stand
in the Orange Free State, and it was south of the Vaal, not far from the
Rhenoster River that Moselikatse attacked us.

I cannot tell the tale of all this way, I can only tell of what I saw
myself. We were of the party under the leadership of Carl Celliers,
afterwards an elder of the church at Kronnstadt. Celliers went on a
commission to Zoutpansberg to spy out the land, and it was while he was
away that so many families were cut off by Moselikatse, the remainder
of them, with such of their women and children as were left alive,
retreating to our laager. Then Celliers returned from his commission,
and we retired to a place called Vechtkop, near the Rhenoster River;
altogether we numbered not more than fifty or sixty souls, including
women and children.

Here we heard that Moselikatse was advancing to make an end of us, so
we made our laager as strong as we could, lashing the disselboom of each
waggon beneath the framework of that before it and filling the spaces
beneath and between with the crowns and boughs of sharp-thorned mimosa
trees, which we tied to the trek tows and brake chains so that they
could not be torn away. Also in the middle of the laager we made an
inner defence of seven waggons, in which were placed the women and
children, with the spare food and gunpowder, but the cattle we were
obliged to leave outside. Early on the morning when we had finished the
laager we heard that the impi of Moselikatse was close to us, and the
men to the number of over thirty rode out to look for it, leaving but a
few to defend the camp.

About an hour's ride away they found the Kaffirs, thousands of them, and
a Hottentot who could speak their tongue was instructed to call to them
and ask them why they attacked us. By way of answer they shouted out the
name of their chief and began to charge, whereupon our men dismounted
from their horses and opened fire upon them, mounting again before they
could come near. So the fight went on until the laager was reached, and
many Kaffirs were killed without any loss to the Boers, for luckily in
those days the natives had no firearms.

I remember that we women were moulding bullets when the men rode in,
and very thankful we were to find that not one of them was even wounded.
While they ate something we washed out their guns, and at intervals near
the places where each man must stand behind the waggons we piled little
heaps of powder and bullets upon buckskins and pieces of canvas laid on
the ground; also we did all we could to strengthen our defences still
further by binding ox-hides over the waggon wheels and thrusting in more
thorns between them.

Then, as the enemy was still preparing to attack us, the Heer Celliers
called us together, and there in the laager, while all knelt around him,
even to the smallest child, he put up a prayer to God asking that we
might be forgiven our sins, and that He would look upon us and protect
us in our great need.

It was a strange sight. There we all knelt in the quiet sunshine while
he prayed in an earnest voice, and we followed his words with our
hearts, every one of us, men and women, holding guns or axes in our
hands. Never had human beings more need for prayer, for through the
cracks between the waggons we could see Moselikatse's Zulus, six or
seven thousand of them, forming themselves into three bodies to rush
upon us and murder us, and that was a dreadful sight for fifty or sixty
people, of whom some were little children.

When we had finished praying, husbands and wives and parents and
children kissed each other, and then the little ones and some of the
women who were sick or aged were put behind the seven waggons in the
centre of the laager, round which were tied the horses, while the rest
of us went to our stations, men and women together. I stood behind Jan
and Ralph, who fought side by side, and, assisted by a girl of fourteen
years of age, loaded their spare guns. Now there was a great silence in
the camp, and suddenly in the silence, Jan, who was looking through his
loophole, whispered:

"Allemachter! here they come."

And come they did, with a rush and a roar from three sides at once,
while men drew in their breath and set their faces for the struggle.
Still no one fired, for the order was that we were to save our powder
until Celliers let off his gun. Already the savages were within thirty
paces of us, a countless mass of men packed like sheep in a kraal, their
fierce eyes shewing white as ivory in the sunlight, their cruel spears
quivering in their hands, when the signal was given and every gun, some
loaded with slugs and some with bullets, was discharged point-blank into
the thick of them.

Over they rolled by dozens, but that did not stop the rest, who, in
spite of our pitiless fire, rushed up to the waggons and gripped them
with their hands, striving to drag them apart, till the whole line of
them rocked and surged and creaked like boats upon the sea, while
the air grew thick with smoke rising straight up towards the sky, and
through the smoke assegais flashed as thick as rain.

But although some of the heavy laden waggons were dragged a foot or
more outward they held together, and the storm of spears flying over
our heads did little harm. Heavens! what a fight was that, the fight of
fifty against six thousand.

Not more than seven feet of space divided us from that shrieking sea of
foes into which we poured bullets at hazard, for there was no need to
aim, as fast as the guns could be loaded. Suddenly I heard the girl call
