
Humfrey was very sorry for them, having had some acquaintance with them
all his life, and he was dismayed to find himself, instead of watching
over Cicely, separated from her and made a jailer against his will.
And when he returned to the Queen's apartments, he found Cavendish
holding a taper, while Paulett and Wade were vigorously affixing cords,
fastened at each end by huge red seals bearing the royal arms, to every
receptacle, and rudely plucking back the curtains that veiled the ivory
crucifix.  Sir Amias's zeal would have "plucked down the idol," as he
said, but Wade restrained him by reminding him that all injury or
damage was forbidden.

Not till all was sealed, and a guard had been stationed at the doors,
would the Commissioners taste any dinner, and then their conversation
was brief and guarded, so that Humfrey could discover little.  He did,
indeed, catch the name of Babington in connection with the "Counter
prison," and a glance of inquiry to Cavendish, with a nod in return,
showed him that his suspicions were correct, but he learnt little or
nothing more till the two, together with Phillipps, drew together in
the deep window, with wine, apples, and pears on the ledge before them,
for a private discussion.  Humfrey went away to see that the sentries
at the staircase were relieved, and to secure that a sufficient meal
for the unfortunate captives in the upper stories had been allowed to
pass.  Will Cavendish went with him.  He had known these ladies and
gentlemen far more intimately than Humfrey had done, and allowed that
it was harsh measure that they suffered for their fidelity to their
native sovereign.

"No harm will come to them in the end," he said, "but what can we do?
That very faithfulness would lead them to traverse our purposes did we
not shut them up closely out of reach of meddling, and there is no
other place where it can be done."

"And what are these same purposes?" asked Humfrey, as, having fulfilled
his commission, the two young men strolled out into the garden and
threw themselves on the grass, close to a large mulberry-tree, whose
luscious fruit dropped round, and hung within easy reach.

"To trace out all the coils of as villainous and bloodthirsty a plot as
ever was hatched in a traitor's brain," said Will; "but they little
knew that we overlooked their designs the whole time.  Thou wast
mystified in London, honest Humfrey, I saw it plainly; but I might not
then speak out," he added, with all his official self-importance.

"And poor Tony hath brought himself within compass of the law?"

"Verily you may say so.  But Tony Babington always was a fool, and a
wrong-headed fool, who was sure to ruin himself sooner or later.  You
remember the decoy for the wild-fowl?  Well, never was silly duck or
goose so ready to swim into the nets as was he!"

"He always loved this Queen, yea, and the old faith."

"He sucked in the poison with his mother's milk, you may say.  Mrs.
Babington was naught but a concealed Papist, and, coming from her, it
cost nothing to this Queen to beguile him when he was a mere lad, and
make him do her errands, as you know full well.  Then what must my Lord
Earl do but send him to that bitter Puritan at Cambridge, who turned
him all the more that way, out of very contradiction.  My Lord thought
him cured of his Popish inclinations, and never guessed they had only
led him among those who taught him to dissemble."

"And that not over well," said Humfrey.  "My father never trusted him."

"And would not give him your sister.  Yea, but the counterfeit was good
enough for my Lord who sees nothing but what is before his nose, and
for my mother who sees nothing but what she _will_ see.  Well, he had
fallen in with those who deem this same Mary our only lawful Queen, and
would fain set her on the throne to bring back fire and faggot by the
Spanish sword among us."

"I deemed him well-nigh demented with brooding over her troubles and
those of his church."

"Demented in verity.  His folly was surpassing.  He put his faith in a
recusant priest--one John Ballard--who goes ruffling about as Captain
Fortescue in velvet hose and a silver-laced cloak."

"Ha!"

"Hast seen him?"

"Ay, in company with Babington, on the day I came to London, passing
through Westminster."

"Very like.  Their chief place of meeting was at a house at Westminster
belonging to a fellow named Gage.  We took some of them there.  Well,
this Ballard teaches poor Antony, by way of gospel truth, that 'tis the
mere duty of a good Catholic to slay the enemies of the church, and
that he who kills our gracious Queen, whom God defend, will do the
holiest deed; just as they gulled the fellow, who murdered the Prince
of Orange, and then died in torments, deeming himself a holy martyr."

"But it was not Babington whom I saw at Richmond."

"Hold, I am coming to that.  Let me tell you the Queen bore it in mind,
and asked after you.  Well, Babington has a number of friends, as
hot-brained and fanatical as himself, and when once he had swallowed
the notion of privily murdering the Queen, he got so enamoured of it,
that he swore in five more to aid him in the enterprise, and then what
must they do but have all their portraits taken in one picture with a
Latin motto around them.  What!  Thou hast seen it?"

"He showed it to me in Paul's Walk, and said I should hear of them, and
I thought one of them marvellously like the fellow I had seen in
Richmond Park."

"So thought her Majesty.  But more of that anon.  On the self-same day
as the Queen was to be slain by these sacrilegious wretches, another
band was to fall on this place, free the lady and proclaim her, while
the Prince of Parma landed from the Netherlands and brought fire and
sword with him."

"And Antony would have brought this upon us?" said Humfrey, still slow
to believe it of his old comrade.

"All for the true religion's sake," said Cavendish.  "They were ringing
bells and giving thanks, for the discovery and baffling thereof, when
we came down from London."

"As well they might," said Humfrey.  "But how was it detected and
overthrown?  Was it through Langston?"

"Ah, ha! we had had the strings in our hands all along.  Why, Langston,
as thou namest him, though we call him Maude, and a master spy called
Gifford, have kept us warned thoroughly of every stage in the business.
Maude even contrived to borrow the picture under colour of getting it
blessed by the Pope's agent, and lent it to Mr. Secretary Walsingham,
by whom it was privily shown to the Queen. Thereby she recognised the
rogue Barnwell, an Irishman it seems, when she was walking in the Park
at Richmond with only her women and Sir Christopher Hatton, who is
better at dancing than at fighting.  Not a sign did she give, but she
kept him in check with her royal eye, so that he durst not so much as
draw his pistol from his cloak; but she owned afterwards to my Lady
Norris that she could have kissed you when you came between, and all
the more, when you caught her meaning and followed her bidding
silently.  You will hear of it again, Humps."

"However that may be, it is a noble thing to have seen such courage in
a woman and a queen.  But how could they let it go so near?  I could
shudder now to think of the risk to her person!"

"There goes more to policy than you yet wot of," said Will, in his
patronising tone.  "In truth, Barnwell had started off unknown to his
comrades, hoping to have the glory of the achievement all to himself by
forestalling them, or else Mr. Secretary would have been warned in time
to secure the Queen."

"But wherefore leave these traitors at large to work mischief?"

"See you not, you simple Humfrey, that, as I said methinks some time
since, it is well sometimes to give a rogue rope enough and he will
hang himself?  Close the trap too soon, and you miss the biggest rat of
all.  So we waited until the prey seemed shy and about to escape.
Babington had, it seems, suspected Maude or Langston, or whatever you
call him, and had ridden out of town, hiding in St. John's Wood with
some of his fellows, till they were starved out, and trying to creep
into some outbuildings at Harrow, were there taken, and brought into
London the morning we came away.  Ballard, the blackest villain of all,
is likewise in ward, and here we are to complete our evidence."

"Nay, throughout all you have said, I have heard nothing to explain
this morning's work."

Will laughed outright.  "And so you think all this would have been done
without a word from their liege lady, the princess they all wanted to
deliver from captivity!   No, no, sir!  'Twas thus. There's an honest
man at Burton, a brewer, who sends beer week by week for this house,
and very good ale it is, as I can testify.  I wish I had a tankard of
it here to qualify these mulberries.  This same brewer is instructed by
Gifford, whose uncle lives in these parts, to fit a false bottom to one
of his barrels, wherein is a box fitted for the receipt of letters and
parcels.  Then by some means, through Langston I believe, Babington and
Gifford made known to the Queen of Scots and the French ambassador that
here was a sure way of sending and receiving letters.  The Queen's
butler, old Hannibal, was to look in the bottom of the barrel with the
yellow hoop, and one Barnes, a familiar of Gifford and Babington,
undertook the freight at the other end.  The ambassador, M. de
Chateauneuf, seemed to doubt at first, and sent a single letter by way
of experiment, and that having been duly delivered and answered, the
bait was swallowed, and not a week has gone by but letters have come
and gone from hence, all being first opened, copied, and deciphered by
worthy Mr. Phillipps, and every word of them laid before the Council."

"Hum!  We should not have reckoned that fair play when we went to
Master Sniggius's," observed Humfrey, as he heard his companion's tone
of exultation.

"Fair play is a jewel that will not pass current in statecraft,"
responded Cavendish.  "Moreover, that the plotter should be plotted
against is surely only his desert.  But thou art a mere sailor, my
Talbot, and these subtilties of policy are not for thee."

"For the which Heaven be praised!" said Humfrey.  "Yet having, as you
say, read all these letters by the way, I see not wherefore ye are come
down to seek for more."

Will here imitated the Lord Treasurer's nod as well as in him lay, not
perhaps himself knowing the darker recesses of this same plot. He did
know so much as that every stage in it had been revealed to Walsingham
and Burghley as it proceeded.  He did not know that the entire scheme
had been hatched, not by a blind and fanatical partisan of Mary's,
doing evil that what he supposed to be good, might come, but by Gifford
and Morgan, Walsingham's agents, for the express purpose of causing
Mary totally to ruin herself, and to compel Elizabeth to put her to
death, and that the unhappy Babington and his friends were thus
recklessly sacrificed.  The assassin had even been permitted to appear
in Elizabeth's presence in order to terrify her into the conviction
that her life could only be secured by Mary's death.  They, too, did
evil that good might come, thinking Mary's death alone could ensure
them from Pope and Spaniard; but surely they descended into a lower
depth of iniquity than did their victims.

Will himself was not certain what was wanted among the Queen's papers,
unless it might be the actual letters, from Babington, copies of which
had been given by Phillips to the Council, so he only looked sagacious;
and Humfrey thought of the Castle Well, and felt the satisfaction there
is in seeing a hunted creature escape.  He asked, however, about
Cuthbert Langston, saying, "He is--worse luck, as you may have
heard--akin to my father, who always pitied him as misguided, but
thought him as sincere in his folly as ever was this unlucky Babington."

"So he seems to have been till of late.  He hovered about in sundry
disguises, as you know, much to the torment of us all; but finally he
seems to have taken some umbrage at the lady, thinking she flouted his
services, or did not pay him high enough for them, and Gifford bought
him over easily enough; but he goes with us by the name of Maude, and
the best of it is that the poor fools thought he was hoodwinking us all
the time.  They never dreamt that we saw through them like glass.
Babington was himself with Mr. Secretary only last week, offering to go
to France on business for him--the traitor! Hark! there are more sounds
of horse hoofs.  Who comes now, I marvel!"

This was soon answered by a serving-man, who hurried out to tell
Humfrey that his father was arrived, and in a few moments the young man
was blessed and embraced by the good Richard, while Diccon stood by,
considerably repaired in flesh and colour by his brief stay under his
mother's care.

Mr. Richard Talbot was heartily welcomed by Sir Amias Paulett, who
regretted that his daughter was out of reach, but did not make any
offer of facilitating their meeting.

Richard explained that he was on his way to London on behalf of the
Earl.  Reports and letters, not very clear, had reached Sheffield of
young Babington being engaged in a most horrible conspiracy against the
Queen and country, and my Lord and my Lady, who still preserved a great
kindness for their former ward, could hardly believe it, and had sent
their useful and trustworthy kinsman to learn the truth, and to find
out whether any amount of fine or forfeiture would avail to save his
life.

Sir Amias thought it would be a fruitless errand, and so did Richard
himself, when he had heard as much of the history as it suited Paulett
and Wade to tell, and though they esteemed and trusted him, they did
not care to go beneath that outer surface of the plot which was filling
all London with fury.

When, having finished their after-dinner repose, they repaired to make
farther search, taking Cavendish to assist, they somewhat reluctantly
thought it due to Mr. Talbot to invite his presence, but he declined.
He and his son had much to say to one another, he observed, and not
long to say it in.

"Besides," he added, when he found himself alone with Humfrey, having
despatched Diccon on some errand to the stables, "'tis a sorry sight to
see all the poor Lady's dainty hoards turned out by strangers.  If it
must be, it must, but it would irk me to be an idle gazer thereon."

"I would only," said Humfrey, "be assured that they would not light on
the proofs of Cicely's birth."

"Thou mayst be at rest on that score, my son.  The Lady saw them, owned
them, and bade thy mother keep them, saying ours were safer hands than
hers.  Thy mother was sore grieved, Humfrey, when she saw thee not; but
she sends thee her blessing, and saith thou dost right to stay and
watch over poor little Cis."

"It were well if I were watching over her," said Humfrey, "but she is
mewed up at Tixall, and I am only keeping guard over poor Mistress
Seaton and the rest."

"Thou hast seen her?"

"Yea, and she was far more our own sweet maid than when she came back
to us at Bridgefield."

And Humfrey told his father all he had to tell of what he had seen and
heard since he had been at Chartley.  His adventures in London had
already been made known by Diccon.  Mr. Talbot was aghast, perhaps most
of all at finding that his cousin Cuthbert was a double traitor.  From
the Roman Catholic point of view, there had been no treason in his
former machinations on behalf of Mary, if she were in his eyes his
rightful sovereign, but the betrayal of confidence reposed in him was
so horrible that the good Master Richard refused to believe it, till he
had heard the proofs again and again, and then he exclaimed,

"That such a Judas should ever call cousin with us!"

There could be little hope, as both agreed, of saving the unfortunate
victims; but Richard was all the more bent on fulfilling Lord
Shrewsbury's orders, and doing his utmost for Babington.  As to
Humfrey, it would be better that he should remain where he was, so that
Cicely might have some protector near her in case of any sudden
dispersion of Mary's suite.

"Poor maiden!" said her foster-father, "she is in a manner ours, and we
cannot but watch over her; but after all, I doubt me whether it had not
been better for her and for us, if the waves had beaten the little life
out of her ere I carried her home."

"She hath been the joy of my life," said Humfrey, low and hoarsely.

"And I fear me she will be the sorrow of it.  Not by her fault, poor
wench, but what hope canst thou have, my son?"

"None, sir," said Humfrey, "except of giving up all if I can so defend
her from aught."  He spoke in a quiet matter-of-fact way that made his
father look with some inquiry at his grave settled face, quite calm, as
if saying nothing new, but expressing a long-formed quiet purpose.

Nor, though Humfrey was his eldest son and heir, did Richard Talbot try
to cross it.

He asked whether he might see Cicely before going on to London, but Sir
Amias said that in that case she would not be allowed to return to the
Queen, and that to have had any intercourse with the prisoners might
overthrow all his designs in London, and he therefore only left with
Humfrey his commendations to her, with a pot of fresh honey and a
lavender-scented set of kerchiefs from Mistress Susan.




CHAPTER XXX.

TETE-A-TETE.


During that close imprisonment at Tixall Cicely learnt to know her
mother both in her strength and weakness.  They were quite alone;
except that Sir Walter Ashton daily came to perform the office of
taster and carver at their meals, and on the first evening his wife
dragged herself upstairs to superintend the arrangement of their
bedroom, and to supply them with toilette requisites according to her
own very limited notions and possessions.  The Dame was a very homely,
hard-featured lady, deaf, and extremely fat and heavy, one of the old
uncultivated rustic gentry who had lagged far behind the general
civilisation of the country, and regarded all refinements as effeminate
French vanities.  She believed, likewise, all that was said against
Queen Mary, whom she looked on as barely restrained from plunging a
dagger into Elizabeth's heart, and letting Parma's hell-hounds loose
upon Tixall.  To have such a guest imposed on her was no small
grievance, and nothing but her husband's absolute mandate could have
induced her to come up with the maids who brought sheets for the bed,
pillows, and the like needments.  Mary tried to make her requests as
moderate as necessity would permit; but when they had been shouted into
her ears by one of the maids, she shook her head at most of them, as
articles unknown to her.  Nor did she ever appear again.  The
arrangement of the bed-chamber was performed by two maidservants, the
Knight himself meanwhile standing a grim sentinel over the two ladies
in the outer apartment to hinder their holding any communication
through the servants.  All requests had to be made to him, and on the
first morning Mary made a most urgent one for writing materials, books,
and either needlework or spinning.

Pen and ink had been expressly forbidden, the only book in the house
was a thumbed and torn primer, but Dame Joan, after much grumbling at
fine ladies' whims, vouchsafed to send up a distaff, some wool, a piece
of unbleached linen, and a skein of white thread.

Queen Mary executed therewith an exquisite piece of embroidery, which
having escaped Dame Joan's first impulse to burn it on the spot,
remained for many years the show and the wonder of Tixall.  Save for
this employment, she said she should have gone mad in her utter
uncertainty about her own fate, or that of those involved with her. To
ask questions of Ashton was like asking them of a post.  He would give
her no notion whether her servants were at Chartley or not, whether
they were at large or in confinement, far less as to who was accused of
the plot, and what had been discovered.  All that could be said for him
was that his churlishness was passive and according to his ideas of
duty.  He was a very reluctant and uncomfortable jailer, but he never
insulted, nor wilfully ill-used his unfortunate captive.

Thus Mary was left to dwell on the little she knew, namely, that
Babington and his fellows were arrested, and that she was supposed to
be implicated; but there her knowledge ceased, except that Humfrey's
warning convinced her that Cuthbert Langston had been at least one of
the traitors.  He had no doubt been offended and disappointed at that
meeting during the hawking at Tutbury.

"Yet I need scarcely seek the why or the wherefore," she said.  "I have
spent my life in a world of treachery.  No sooner do I take a step on
ground that seems ever so firm, than it proves a quicksand. They will
swallow me at last."

Daily--more than daily--did she and Cicely go over together that
hurried conversation on the moor, and try to guess whether Langston
intended to hint at Cicely's real birth.  He had certainly not
disclosed her secret as yet, or Paulett would never have selected her
as sprung of a loyal house, but he might guess at the truth, and be
waiting for an opportunity to sell it dearly to those who would regard
her as possessed of dangerous pretensions.

And far more anxiously did the Queen recur to examining Cicely on what
she had gathered from Humfrey.  This was in fact nothing, for he had
been on his guard against either telling or hearing anything
inconsistent with loyalty to the English Queen, and thus had avoided
conversation on these subjects.

Nor did the Queen communicate much.  Cicely never understood clearly
what she dreaded, what she expected to be found among her papers, or
what had been in the packet thrown into the well.  The girl did not
dare to ask direct questions, and the Queen always turned off indirect
inquiries, or else assured her that she was still a simple happy child,
and that it was better for her own sake that she should know nothing,
then caressed her, and fondly pitied her for not being admitted to her
mother's confidence, but said piteously that she knew not what the
secrets of Queens and captives were, not like those of Mistress Susan
about the goose to be dressed, or the crimson hose to be knitted for a
surprise to her good husband.

But Cicely could see that she expected the worst, and believed in a set
purpose to shed her blood, and she spent much time in devotion, though
sorely distressed by the absence of all those appliances which her
Church had taught her to rest upon.  And these prayers, which often
began with floods of tears, so that Cicely drew away into the window
with her distaff in order not to seem to watch them, ended with
rendering her serene and calm, with a look of high resignation, as
having offered herself as a sacrifice and martyr for her Church.

And yet was it wholly as a Roman Catholic that she had been hated,
intrigued against, and deposed in her own kingdom?  Was it simply as a
Roman Catholic that she was, as she said, the subject of a more cruel
plot than that of which she was accused?

Mysterious woman that she was, she was never more mysterious than to
her daughter in those seventeen days that they were shut up together!
It did not so much strike Cicely at the time, when she was carried
along with all her mother's impulses and emotions, without reflecting
on them, but when in after times she thought over all that then had
passed, she felt how little she had understood.

They suffered a good deal from the heat and closeness of the rooms, for
Mary was like a modern Englishwoman in her craving for free air, and
these were the dog-days.  They had contrived by the help of a diamond
that the Queen carried about with her, after the fashion of the time,
to extract a pane or two from the lattices so ingeniously that the
master of the house never found it out.  And as their two apartments
looked out different ways, they avoided the full sunshine, for they had
neither curtains nor blinds to their windows, by moving from one to the
other; but still the closeness was very oppressive, and in the heat of
the day, just after dinner, they could do nothing but lie on the table,
while the Queen told stories of her old life in France, till sometimes
they both went to sleep.  Most of her dainty needlework was done in the
long light mornings, for she hardly slept at all in the hot nights.
Cis scarcely saw her in bed, for she prayed long after the maiden had
fallen asleep, and was up with the light and embroidering by the window.

She only now began to urge Cicely to believe as she did, and to join
her Church, taking blame to herself for never having attempted it more
seriously.  She told of the oneness and the glory of Roman Catholicism
as she had seen it in France, held out its promises and professions,
and dwelt on the comfort of the intercession of the Blessed Virgin and
the Saints; assuring Cicely that there was nothing but sacrilege,
confusion, and cruelty on the other side.

Sometimes the maiden was much moved by the tender manner and persuasive
words, and she really had so much affection and admiration for her
mother as to be willing to do all that she wished, and to believe her
the ablest and most clear-sighted of human beings; but whenever Mary
was not actually talking to her, there was a curious swaying back of
the pendulum in her mind to the conviction that what Master Richard and
Mistress Susan believed must be the right thing, that led to
trustworthy goodness.  She had an enthusiastic love for the Queen, but
her faith and trust were in them and in Humfrey, and she could see
religious matters from their point of view better than from that of her
mother.

So, though the Queen often felt herself carrying her daughter along,
she always found that there had been a slipping back to the old
standpoint every time she began again.  She was considering with some
anxiety of the young maiden's future.

"Could I but send thee to my good sister, the Duchess of Lorraine, she
would see thee well and royally married," she said.  "Then couldst thou
be known by thine own name, and rank as Princess of Scotland.  If I can
only see my Courcelles again, she would take thee safely and prove
all--and thy hand will be precious to many.  It may yet bring back the
true faith to England, when my brave cousin of Guise has put down the
Bearnese, and when the poor stumbling-block here is taken away."

"Oh speak not of that, dear madam, my mother."

"I must speak, child.  I must think how it will be with thee, so
marvellously saved, and restored to be my comfort.  I must provide for
thy safety and honour.  Happily the saints guarded me from ever
mentioning thee in my letters, so that there is no fear that Elizabeth
should lay hands on thee, unless Langston should have spoken--the which
can hardly be.  But if all be broken up here, I must find thee a
dwelling with my kindred worthy of thy birth."

"Mr. and Mrs. Talbot would take me home," murmured Cicely.

"Girl!  After all the training I have bestowed on thee, is it possible
that thou wouldst fain go back to make cheeses and brew small beer with
those Yorkshire boors, rather than reign a princess? I thought thy
heart was nobler."

Cicely hung her head ashamed.  "I was very happy there," she said in
excuse.

"Happy--ay, with the milkmaid's bliss.  There may be fewer sorrows in
such a life as that--just as those comely kine of Ashton's that I see
grazing in the park have fewer sorrows than human creatures.  But what
know they of our joys, or what know the commonalty of the joy of
ruling, calling brave men one's own, riding before one's men in the
field, wielding counsels of State, winning the love of thousands? Nay,
nay, I will not believe it of my child, unless 'tis the base Border
blood that is in her which speaks."

Cicely was somewhat overborne by being thus accused of meanness of
tastes, when she had heard the Queen talk enviously of that same homely
life which now she despised so heartily.  She faltered in excuse,
"Methought, madam, you would be glad to think there was one loving
shelter ever open to me."

"Loving!  Ah!  I see what it is," said the Queen, in a tone of disgust.
"It is the sailor loon that has overthrown it all.  A couple of walks
in the garden with him, and the silly maid is ready to throw over all
nobler thoughts."

"Madam, he spoke no such word to me."

"'Twas the infection, child--only the infection."

"Madam, I pray you--"

"Whist, child.  Thou wilt be a perilous bride for any commoner, and let
that thought, if no other, keep thee from lowering thine eyes to such
as he.  Were I and thy brother taken out of the way, none would stand
between thee and both thrones!  What would English or Scots say to find
thee a household Joan, wedded to one of Drake's rude pirate fellows?  I
tell thee it would be the worse for him.  They have made it treason to
wed royal blood without Elizabeth's consent.  No, no, for his sake, as
well as thine own, thou must promise me never thus to debase thy royal
lineage."

"Mother; neither he nor I have thought or spoken of such a matter since
we knew how it was with me.

"And you give me your word?"

"Yea, madam," said Cicely, who had really never entertained the idea of
marrying Humfrey, implicit as was her trust in him as a brother and
protector.

"That is well.  And so soon as I am restored to my poor servants, if I
ever am, I will take measures for sending the French remnant to their
own land; nor shall my Courcelles quit thee till she hath seen thee
safe in the keeping of Madame de Lorraine or of Queen Louise, who is
herself a kinswoman of ours, and, they say, is piety and gentleness
itself."

"As you will, madam," said Cicely, her heart sinking at the thought of
the strange new world before her, but perceiving that she must not be
the means of bringing Humfrey into trouble and danger.

Perhaps she felt this the more from seeing how acutely her mother
suffered at times from sorrow for those involved in her disaster. She
gave Babington and his companions, as well as Nau and Curll, up for
lost, as the natural consequence of having befriended her; and she
blamed herself remorsefully, after the long experience of the fatal
consequences of meddling in her affairs, for having entered into
correspondence with the bright enthusiastic boy whom she remembered,
and having lured him without doubt to his death.

"Alack! alack!" she said, "and yet such is liberty, that I should
forget all I have gone through, and do the like again, if the door
seemed opened to me.  At least there is this comfort, cruel child, thy
little heart was not set on him, gracious and handsome though he
were--and thy mother's most devoted knight!  Ah! poor youth, it wrings
my soul to think of him.  But at least he is a Catholic, his soul will
be safe, and I will have hundreds of masses sung for him. Oh that I
knew how it goes with them!  This torture of silent suspense is the
most cruel of all."

Mary paced the room with impatient misery, and in such a round the
weary hours dragged by, only mitigated by one welcome thunderstorm, for
seventeen days, whose summer length made them seem the more endless.
Cicely, who had never before in her life been shut up in the house so
many hours, was pale, listless, and even fretful towards the Queen, who
bore with her petulance so tenderly as more than once to make her weep
bitterly for very shame.  After one of these fits of tears, Mary
pleaded earnestly with Sir Walter Ashton for permission for the maiden
to take a turn in the garden every day, but though the good gentleman's
complexion bore testimony that he lived in the fresh air, he did not
believe in its efficacy; he said he had no orders, and could do nothing
without warrant.  But that evening at supper, the serving-maid brought
up a large brew of herbs, dark and nauseous, which Dame Ashton had sent
as good for the young lady's megrim.

"Will you taste it, sir?" asked the Queen of Sir Walter, with a revival
of her lively humour.

"The foul fiend have me if a drop comes within my lips," muttered the
knight.  "I am not bound to taste for a tirewoman!" he added, leaving
it in doubt whether his objection arose from distaste to his lady's
messes, or from pride; and he presently said, perhaps half-ashamed of
himself, and willing to cast the blame on the other side,

"It was kindly meant of my good dame, and if you choose to flout at,
rather than benefit by it, that is no affair of mine."

He left the potion, and Cicely disposed of it by small instalments at
the windows; and a laugh over the evident horror it excited in the
master, did the captives at least as much good as the camomile,
