walk, but at first sight of a stranger retreated, as if in terror.
Waverley, remembering his habits, began to whistle a tune to which
he was partial, which Davie had expressed great pleasure in
listening to, and had picked up from him by the ear. Our hero's
minstrelsy no more equalled that of Blondel than poor Davie
resembled Coeur de Lion; but the melody had the same effect of
producing recognition. Davie again stole from his lurking-place,
but timidly, while Waverley, afraid of frightening him, stood
making the most encouraging signals he could devise. 'It's his
ghaist,' muttered Davie; yet, coming nearer, he seemed to
acknowledge his living acquaintance. The poor fool himself
appeared the ghost of what he had been. The peculiar dress in
which he had been attired in better days showed only miserable
rags of its whimsical finery, the lack of which was oddly supplied
by the remnants of tapestried hangings, window-curtains, and
shreds of pictures with which he had bedizened his tatters. His
face, too, had lost its vacant and careless air, and the poor
creature looked hollow-eyed, meagre, half-starved, and nervous to
a pitiable degree. After long hesitation, he at length approached
Waverley with some confidence, stared him sadly in the face, and
said, 'A' dead and gane--a' dead and gane.'

'Who are dead?' said Waverley, forgetting the incapacity of Davie
to hold any connected discourse.

'Baron, and Bailie, and Saunders Saunderson, and Lady Rose that
sang sae sweet--a' dead and gane--dead and gane;

    But follow, follow me,
    While glowworms light the lea,
    I'll show ye where the dead should be--
      Each in his shroud,
      While winds pipe loud,
      And the red moon peeps dim through the cloud.
    Follow, follow me;
    Brave should he be
    That treads by night the dead man's lea.'

With these words, chanted in a wild and earnest tone, he made a
sign to Waverley to follow him, and walked rapidly towards the
bottom of the garden, tracing the bank of the stream which, it may
be remembered, was its eastern boundary. Edward, over whom an
involuntary shuddering stole at the import of his words, followed
him in some hope of an explanation. As the house was evidently
deserted, he could not expect to find among the ruins any more
rational informer.

Davie, walking very fast, soon reached the extremity of the
garden, and scrambled over the ruins of the wall that once had
divided it from the wooded glen in which the old tower of Tully-
Veolan was situated. He then jumped down into the bed of the
stream, and, followed by Waverley, proceeded at a great pace,
climbing over some fragments of rock and turning with difficulty
round others. They passed beneath the ruins of the castle;
Waverley followed, keeping up with his guide with difficulty, for
the twilight began to fall. Following the descent of the stream a
little lower, he totally lost him, but a twinkling light which he
now discovered among the tangled copse-wood and bushes seemed a
surer guide. He soon pursued a very uncouth path; and by its
guidance at length reached the door of a wretched hut. A fierce
barking of dogs was at first heard, but it stilled at his
approach. A voice sounded from within, and he held it most prudent
to listen before he advanced.

'Wha hast thou brought here, thou unsonsy villain, thou?' said an
old woman, apparently in great indignation. He heard Davie
Gellatley in answer whistle a part of the tune by which he had
recalled himself to the simpleton's memory, and had now no
hesitation to knock at the door. There was a dead silence
instantly within, except the deep growling of the dogs; and he
next heard the mistress of the hut approach the door, not probably
for the sake of undoing a latch, but of fastening a bolt. To
prevent this Waverley lifted the latch himself.

In front was an old wretched-looking woman, exclaiming, 'Wha comes
into folk's houses in this gate, at this time o' the night?' On
one side, two grim and half-starved deer greyhounds laid aside
their ferocity at his appearance, and seemed to recognise him. On
the other side, half concealed by the open door, yet apparently
seeking that concealment reluctantly, with a cocked pistol in his
right hand and his left in the act of drawing another from his
belt, stood a tall bony gaunt figure in the remnants of a faded
uniform and a beard of three weeks' growth. It was the Baron of
Bradwardine. It is unnecessary to add, that he threw aside his
weapon and greeted Waverley with a hearty embrace.





CHAPTER LXIV

COMPARING OF NOTES


Thearon's story was short, when divested of the adages and
commonplaces, Latin, English, and Scotch, with which his erudition
garnished it. He insisted much upon his grief at the loss of
Edward and of Glennaquoich, fought the fields of Falkirk and
Culloden, and related how, after all was lost in the last battle,
he had returned home, under the idea of more easily finding
shelter among his own tenants and on his own estate than
elsewhere. A party of soldiers had been sent to lay waste his
property, for clemency was not the order of the day. Their
proceedings, however, were checked by an order from the civil
court. The estate, it was found, might not be forfeited to the
crown to the prejudice of Malcolm Bradwardine of Inch-Grabbit, the
heir-male, whose claim could not be prejudiced by the Baron's
attainder, as deriving no right through him, and who, therefore,
like other heirs of entail in the same situation, entered upon
possession. But, unlike many in similar circumstances, the new
laird speedily showed that he intended utterly to exclude his
predecessor from all benefit or advantage in the estate, and that
it was his purpose to avail himself of the old Baron's evil
fortune to the full extent. This was the more ungenerous, as it
was generally known that, from a romantic idea of not prejudicing
this young man's right as heir-male, the Baron had refrained from
settling his estate on his daughter.

This selfish injustice was resented by the country people, who
were partial to their old master, and irritated against his
successor. In the Baron's own words, 'The matter did not coincide
with the feelings of the commons of Bradwardine, Mr. Waverley; and
the tenants were slack and repugnant in payment of their mails and
duties; and when my kinsman came to the village wi' the new
factor, Mr. James Howie, to lift the rents, some wanchancy person
--I suspect John Heatherblutter, the auld gamekeeper, that was out
wi' me in the year fifteen--fired a shot at him in the gloaming,
whereby he was so affrighted, that I may say with Tullius In
Catilinam, "Abiit, evasit, erupit, effugit." He fled, sir, as one
may say, incontinent to Stirling. And now he hath advertised the
estate for sale, being himself the last substitute in the entail.
And if I were to lament about sic matters, this would grieve me
mair than its passing from my immediate possession, whilk, by the
course of nature, must have happened in a few years; whereas now
it passes from the lineage that should have possessed it in
scecula saculorum. But God's will be done, humana perpessi sumus.
Sir John of Bradwardine--Black Sir John, as he is called--who was
the common ancestor of our house and the Inch-Grabbits, little
thought such a person would have sprung from his loins. Mean time,
he has accused me to some of the primates, the rulers for the
time, as if I were a cut-throat, and an abettor of bravoes and
assassinates and coupe-jarrets. And they have sent soldiers here
to abide on the estate, and hunt me like a partridge upon the
mountains, as Scripture says of good King David, or like our
valiant Sir William Wallace--not that I bring myself into
comparison with either. I thought, when I heard you at the door,
they had driven the auld deer to his den at last; and so I e'en
proposed to die at bay, like a buck of the first head. But now,
Janet, canna ye gie us something for supper?' 'Ou ay, sir, I'll
brander the moor-fowl that John Heatherblutter brought in this
morning; and ye see puir Davie's roasting the black hen's eggs. I
daur say, Mr. Wauverley, ye never kend that a' the eggs that were
sae weel roasted at supper in the Ha'-house were aye turned by our
Davie? there's no the like o' him ony gate for powtering wi' his
fingers amang the het peat-ashes and roasting eggs.' Davie all
this while lay with his nose almost in the fire, nuzzling among
the ashes, kicking his heels, mumbling to himself, turning the
eggs as they lay in the hot embers, as if to confute the proverb,
that 'there goes reason to roasting of eggs,' and justify the
eulogium which poor Janet poured out upon

    Him whom she loved, her idiot boy.

'Davie's no sae silly as folk tak him for, Mr. Wauverley; he wadna
hae brought you here unless he had kend ye was a friend to his
Honour; indeed the very dogs kend ye, Mr. Wauverley, for ye was
aye kind to beast and body. I can tell you a story o' Davie, wi'
his Honour's leave. His Honour, ye see, being under hiding in thae
sair times--the mair's the pity--he lies a' day, and whiles a'
night, in the cove in the dern hag; but though it's a bieldy
eneugh bit, and the auld gudeman o' Corse-Cleugh has panged it wi'
a kemple o' strae amaist, yet when the country's quiet, and the
night very cauld, his Honour whiles creeps doun here to get a warm
at the ingle and a sleep amang the blankets, and gangs awa in the
morning. And so, ae morning, siccan a fright as I got! Twa unlucky
red-coats were up for black-fishing, or some siccan ploy--for the
neb o' them's never out o' mischief--and they just got a glisk o'
his Honour as he gaed into the wood, and banged aff a gun at him.
I out like a jer-falcon, and cried--"Wad they shoot an honest
woman's poor innocent bairn?" And I fleyt at them, and threepit it
was my son; and they damned and swuir at me that it was the auld
rebel, as the villains ca'd his Honour; and Davie was in the wood,
and heard the tuilzie, and he, just out o' his ain head, got up
the auld grey mantle that his Honour had flung off him to gang the
faster, and he cam out o' the very same bit o' the wood, majoring
and looking about sae like his Honour, that they were clean
beguiled, and thought they had letten aff their gun at crack-
brained Sawney, as they ca' him; and they gae me saxpence, and twa
saumon fish, to say naething about it. Na, na, Davie's no just
like other folk, puir fallow; but he's no sae silly as folk tak
him for. But, to be sure, how can we do eneugh for his Honour,
when we and ours have lived on his ground this twa hundred years;
and when he keepit my puir Jamie at school and college, and even
at the Ha'-house, till he gaed to a better place; and when he
saved me frae being ta'en to Perth as a witch--Lord forgi'e them
that would touch sic a puir silly auld body!--and has maintained
puir Davie at heck and manger maist feck o' his life?'

Waverley at length found an opportunity to interrupt Janet's
narrative by an inquiry after Miss Bradwardine.

'She's weel and safe, thank God! at the Duchran,' answered the
Baron; 'the laird's distantly related to us, and more nearly to my
chaplain, Mr. Rubrick; and, though he be of Whig principles, yet
he's not forgetful of auld friendship at this time. The Bailie's
doing what he can to save something out of the wreck for puir
Rose; but I doubt, I doubt, I shall never see her again, for I
maun lay my banes in some far country.'

'Hout na, your Honour,' said old Janet, 'ye were just as ill aff
in the feifteen, and got the bonnie baronie back, an' a'. And now
the eggs is ready, and the muir-cock's brandered, and there's ilk
ane a trencher and some saut, and the heel o' the white loaf that
cam frae the Bailie's, and there's plenty o' brandy in the
greybeard that Luckie Maclearie sent doun, and winna ye be
suppered like princes?'

'I wish one Prince, at least, of our acquaintance may be no worse
off,' said the Baron to Waverley, who joined him in cordial hopes
for the safety of the unfortunate Chevalier.

They then began to talk of their future prospects. The Baron's
plan was very simple. It was, to escape to France, where, by the
interest of his old friends, he hoped to get some military
employment, of which he still conceived himself capable. He
invited Waverley to go with him, a proposal in which he
acquiesced, providing the interest of Colonel Talbot should fail
in procuring his pardon. Tacitly he hoped the Baron would sanction
his addresses to Rose, and give him a right to assist him in his
exile; but he forbore to speak on this subject until his own fate
should be decided. They then talked of Glennaquoich, for whom the
Baron expressed great anxiety, although, he observed, he was 'the
very Achilles of Horatius Flaccus,--

Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer; which,' he continued, 'has
been thus rendered (vernacularly) by Struan Robertson:--

    A fiery etter-cap, a fractious chiel,
    As het as ginger, and as stieve as steel.'

Flora had a large and unqualified share of the good old man's
sympathy.

It was now wearing late. Old Janet got into some kind of kennel
behind the hallan; Davie had been long asleep and snoring between
Ban and Buscar. These dogs had followed him to the hut after the
mansion-house was deserted, and there constantly resided; and
their ferocity, with the old woman's reputation of being a witch,
contributed a good deal to keep visitors from the glen. With this
view, Bailie Macwheeble provided Janet underhand with meal for
their maintenance, and also with little articles of luxury for his
patron's use, in supplying which much precaution was necessarily
used. After some compliments, the Baron occupied his usual couch,
and Waverley reclined in an easy chair of tattered velvet, which
had once garnished the state bed-room of Tully-Veolan (for the
furniture of this mansion was now scattered through all the
cottages in the vicinity), and went to sleep as comfortably as if
he had been in a bed of down.





CHAPTER LXV

MORE EXPLANATION


With the first dawn of day, old Janet was scuttling about the
house to wake the Baron, who usually slept sound and heavily.

'I must go back,' he said to Waverley,'to my cove; will you walk
down the glen wi' me?' They went out together, and followed a
narrow and entangled foot-path, which the occasional passage of
anglers or wood-cutters had traced by the side of the stream. On
their way the Baron explained to Waverley that he would be under
no danger in remaining a day or two at Tully-Veolan, and even in
being seen walking about, if he used the precaution of pretending
that he was looking at the estate as agent or surveyor for an
English gentleman who designed to be purchaser. With this view he
recommended to him to visit the Bailie, who still lived at the
factor's house, called Little Veolan, about a mile from the
village, though he was to remove at next term. Stanley's passport
would be an answer to the officer who commanded the military; and
as to any of the country people who might recognise Waverley, the
Baron assured him he was in no danger of being betrayed by them.

'I believe,' said the old man, 'half the people of the barony know
that their poor auld laird is somewhere hereabout; for I see they
do not suffer a single bairn to come here a bird-nesting; a
practice whilk, when I was in full possession of my power as
baron, I was unable totally to inhibit. Nay, I often find bits of
things in my way, that the poor bodies, God help them! leave
there, because they think they may be useful to me. I hope they
will get a wiser master, and as kind a one as I was.'

A natural sigh closed the sentence; but the quiet equanimity with
which the Baron endured his misfortunes had something in it
venerable and even sublime. There was no fruitless repining, no
turbid melancholy; he bore his lot, and the hardships which it
involved, with a good-humored, though serious composure, and used
no violent language against the prevailing party.

'I did what I thought my duty,' said the good old man, 'and
questionless they are doing what they think theirs. It grieves me
sometimes to look upon these blackened walls of the house of my
ancestors; but doubtless officers cannot always keep the soldier's
hand from depredation and spuilzie, and Gustavus Adolphus himself,
as ye may read in Colonel Munro his "Expedition with the Worthy
Scotch Regiment called Mackay's Regiment" did often permit it.
Indeed I have myself seen as sad sights as Tully-Veolan now is
when I served with the Marechal Duke of Berwick. To be sure we may
say with Virgilius Maro, Fuimus Troes--and there's the end of an
auld sang. But houses and families and men have a' stood lang
eneugh when they have stood till they fall with honour; and now I
hae gotten a house that is not unlike a domus ultima'--they were
now standing below a steep rock. 'We poor Jacobites,' continued
the Baron, looking up, 'are now like the conies in Holy Scripture
(which the great traveller Pococke calleth Jerboa), a feeble
people, that make our abode in the rocks. So, fare you well, my
good lad, till we meet at Janet's in the even; for I must get into
my Patmos, which is no easy matter for my auld stiff limbs.'

With that he began to ascend the rock, striding, with the help of
his hands, from one precarious footstep to another, till he got
about half-way up, where two or three bushes concealed the mouth
of a hole, resembling an oven, into which the Baron insinuated,
first his head and shoulders, and then, by slow gradation, the
rest of his l ong body; his legs and feet finally disappearing,
coiled up like a huge snake entering his retreat, or a long
pedigree introduced with care and difficulty into the narrow
pigeon-hole of an old cabinet. Waverley had the curiosity to
clamber up and look in upon him in his den, as the lurking-place
might well be termed. Upon the whole, he looked not unlike that
ingenious puzzle called 'a reel in a bottle,' the marvel of
children (and of some grown people too, myself for one), who can
neither comprehend the mysteryhowit has got in or how it is to be
taken out. The cave was very narrow, too low in the roof to admit
of his standing, or almost of his sitting up, though he made some
awkward attempts at the latter posture. His sole amusement was the
perusal of his old friend Titus Livius, varied by occasionally
scratching Latin proverbs and texts of Scripture with his knife on
the roof and walls of his fortalice, which were of sandstone. As
the cave was dry, and filled with clean straw and withered fern,
'it made,' as he said, coiling himself up with an air of snugness
and comfort which contrasted strangely with his situation, 'unless
when the wind was due north, a very passable gite for an old
soldier.' Neither, as he observed, was he without sentries for the
purpose of reconnoitring. Davie and his mother were constantly on
the watch to discover and avert danger; and it was singular what
instances of address seemed dictated by the instinctive attachment
of the poor simpleton when his patron's safety was concerned.

With Janet, Edward now sought an interview. He had recognised her
at first sight as the old woman who had nursed him during his
sickness after his delivery from Gifted Gilfillan. The hut also,
although a little repaired and somewhat better furnished, was
certainly the place of his confinement; and he now recollected on
the common moor of Tully-Veolan the trunk of a large decayed tree,
called the try sting-tree, which he had no doubt was the same at
which the Highlanders rendezvoused on that memorable night. All
this he had combined in his imagination the night before; but
reasons which may probably occur to the reader prevented him from
catechising Janet in the presence of the Baron.

