out than to shorten the time of waiting for these miserable merchants."

With this his voice grew rough again, but as she raised her eyes to him
and cried beseechingly, "O, my lord!" he continued, more gently:

"There was not much more to be said. You shall be mine. Should the stars
confirm their first revelations, I shall raise you to-morrow to my side,
here in the city of Alexandria, and make the people do homage to you as
their empress. The priest of Alexandria is ready to conduct the marriage
ceremonial. Philostratus will inform my mother of my determination."

Melissa had listened to these arrangements with growing distress; her
breath came fast, and she was incapable of uttering a word; but Caesar
was delighted at the lovely confusion painted on her features, and
cried, in joyful excitement:

"How I have looked forward to this moment--and I have succeeded in
surprising her! This is what makes imperial power divine; by one wave of
the hand it can raise the lowest to the highest place!"

With this he drew Melissa toward him, kissed the trembling girl upon the
brow, and continued, in delighted tones:

"Time does not stand still, and only a few hours separate us from the
accomplishment of our desires. Let us lend them wings. We resolved
yesterday to show one another what we could do as singers and
lute-players. There lies my lyre--give it me, Philostratus. I know what
I shall begin with."

The philosopher brought and tuned the instrument; but Melissa had some
difficulty in keeping back her tears. Caracalla's kiss burned like a
brand of infamy on her brow. A nameless, torturing restlessness had come
over her, and she wished she could dash the lyre to the ground, when
Caracalla began to play, and called out to Philostratus:

"As you are leaving us to-morrow, I will sing the song which you honored
with a place in your heroic tale."

He turned to Melissa, and, as she owned to having read the work of the
philosopher, he went on "You know, then, that I was the model for his
Achilles. The departed spirit of the hero is enjoying in the island of
Leuke, in the Pontus, the rest which he so richly deserves, after a
life full of heroic deeds. Now he finds time to sing to the lyre, and
Philostratus put the following verses--but they are mine--into his
mouth.--I am about to play, Adventus! Open the door!"

The freedman obeyed, and the emperor peered into the antechamber to see
for himself who was waiting there.

He required an audience when he sang. The Circus had accustomed him to
louder applause than his beloved and one skilled musician could award
him. At last he swept the strings, and began singing in a well-trained
tenor, whose sharp, hard quality, however, offended the girl's critical
ear, the song to the echo on the shores of Pontus:

          Echo, by the rolling waters
          Bathing Pontus' rocky shore,
          Wake, and answer to the lyre
          Swept by my inspired hand!

          Wake, and raise thy voice in numbers
          Sing to Homer, to the bard
          Who has given life immortal
          To the heroes of his lay.

          He it was from death who snatched me;
          He who gave Patroclus life;
          Rescued, in perennial glory,
          Godlike Ajax from the dead!

          His the lute to whose sweet accents,
          Ilion owes undying fame,
          And the triumph and the praises
          Which surround her deathless name.

The "Sword of Persia" seemed peculiarly affected by his master's song,
which he accompanied by a long-drawn howl of woe; and, before the
imperial virtuoso had concluded, a discordant cry sounded for a short
time from the street, in imitation of the squeaking of young pigs. It
arose from the crowd who were waiting round the Serapeum to see Caesar
drive to the Circus; and Caracalla must have noticed it, for, when it
waxed louder, he gave a sidelong glance toward the place from which it
came, and an ominous frown gathered upon his brow.

But it soon vanished, for scarcely had he finished when stormy shouts of
applause rose from the antechamber. They proceeded from the friends of
Caesar, and the deep voices of the Germanic bodyguard, who, joining in
with the cries they had learned in the Circus, lent such impetuous force
to the applause, as even to satisfy this artist in the purple.

Therefore, when Philostratus spoke words of praise, and Melissa thanked
him with a blush, he answered with a smile: "There is something frank
and untrammeled in their manner of expressing their feelings outside.
Forced applause sounds differently. There must be something in my
singing that carries the hearers away. My Alexandrian hosts, however,
are overready to show me what they think. It did not escape me, and I
shall add it to the rest."

Then he invited Melissa to make a return for his song by singing
Sappho's Ode to Aphrodite. Pale, and as if obeying some strange
compulsion, she seated herself at the instrument, and the prelude
sounded clear and tuneful from her skillful fingers.

"Beautiful! Worthy of Mesomedes!" cried Caracalla, but Melissa could not
sing, for at the first note her voice was broken by stormy sobs.

"The power of the goddess whom she meant to extol!" said Philostratus,
pointing to her; and the tearful, beseeching look with which she met the
emperor's gaze while she begged him in low tones--"Not now! I can not do
it to-day!"--confirmed Caracalla in his opinion that the passion he had
awakened in the maiden was in no way inferior to his own-perhaps
even greater. He relieved his full heart by whispering to Melissa a
passionate, "I love you," and, desiring to show her by a favor how
kindly he felt toward her, added: "I will not let your fellow-citizens
wait outside any longer--Adventus! The deputation from the Circus!"

The chamberlain withdrew at once, and the emperor throwing himself back
on the throne, continued, with a sigh:

"I wonder how any of these rich tradesmen would like to undertake what
I have already gone through this day. First, the bath; then, while I
rested, Macrinus's report; after that, the inspection of the sacrifices;
then a review of the troops, with a gracious word to every one. Scarcely
returned, I had to receive the ambassadors from my mother, and then
came the troublesome affair with Vindex. Then the dispatches from Rome
arrived, the letters to be examined, and each one to be decided on and
signed. Finally the settling of accounts with the idiologos, who, as
high-priest of my choosing, has to collect the tribute from all the
temples in Egypt.... Next I gave audience to several people--to your
father among the rest. He is strange, but a thorough man, and a true
Macedonian of the old stock. He repelled both greeting and presents, but
he longed to be revenged--heavily and bloodily--on Zminis, who denounced
him and brought him to the galleys.... How the old fellow must have
raged and stormed when he was a prisoner! I treated the droll old
gray-beard like my father. The giant pleases me, and what skillful
fingers he has on his powerful hands! He gave me that ring with the
portraits of Castor and Pollux."

"My brothers were the models," remarked Melissa, glad to find something
to say without dissembling.

Caracalla examined the stone in the gold ring more closely, and
exclaimed in admiration: "How delicate the little heads are! At the
first glance one recognizes the hand of the happily gifted artist. Your
father's is one of the noblest and most refined of the arts. If I can
raise a statue to a lute-player, I can do so to a gem-cutter."

Here the deputation for the arrangement of the festival was announced,
but the emperor, calling out once more, "Let them wait," continued:

"You are a handsome race--the men powerful, the women as lovely as
Aphrodite. That is as it should be! My father before me took the wisest
and fairest woman to wife. You are the fairest--the wisest?--well, that
too, perhaps. Time will show. But Aphrodite never has a high forehead,
and, according to Philostratus, beauty and wisdom are hostile sisters
with you women."

"Exceptions," interposed the philosopher, as he pointed to Melissa,
"prove the rule."

"Describe her in that manner to my mother," said Caracalla. "I would not
let you go from me, were you not the only person who knows Melissa. I
may trust in your eloquence to represent her as she deserves. And now,"
he continued, hurriedly, "one thing more. As soon as the deputation
is dismissed and I have received a few other persons, the feast is
to begin. You would perhaps be entertained at it. However, it will be
better to introduce you to my 'friends' after the marriage ceremony.
After dark, to make up for it, there is the Circus, to which you will,
of course, accompany me."

"Oh, my lord!" exclaimed the maiden, frightened and unwilling. But
Caracalla cried, decisively: "No refusal, I must beg! I imagine that I
have proved sufficiently that I know how to shield you from what is not
fitting for a maiden. What I ask of you now is but the first step on the
new path of honor that awaits you as future empress."

Melissa raised both voice and hands in entreaty, but in vain. Caracalla
cut her short, saying in authoritative tones:

"I have arranged everything. You will go to the Circus. Not alone with
me-that would give welcome work to scandalous tongues. Your father shall
accompany you--your brothers, too, if you wish it. I shall not join you
till after the performance has begun. Your fellow-citizens will divine
the meaning of this visit. Besides, Theocritus and the rest have orders
to acquaint the people with the distinction that awaits you and the
Alexandrians. But why so pale? Your cheeks will regain their color
in the Circus. I know I am right--you will leave it delighted
and enthralled. You have only to learn for the first time how the
acclamations of tens of thousands take hold upon the heart and
intoxicate the senses. Courage, courage, Macedonian maiden! Everything
grand and unexpected, even unforeseen happiness, is alarming and
bewildering. But we become accustomed even to the impossible. A strong
spirit like yours soon gets over anything of the kind. But the time is
running on. One word more: You must be in the Circus by sunset. In any
case, you must be in your place before I come. Adventus will see that
you have a chariot or a litter, whichever you please. Theocritus will be
waiting at the entrance to lead you to your seats."

Melissa could restrain herself no longer, and, carried away by the wild
conflict of passions in her breast, she threw control and prudence to
the winds, and cried:

"I will not!" Then throwing back her head as if to call the heavens to
witness, she raised her great, wide-open eyes and gazed above.

But not for long. Her bold defiance had roused Caesar's utmost fury, and
he broke out with a growl of rage:

"You will not, you say? And you think, unreasoning fool, that this
settles the matter?"

He uttered a wild laugh, pressed his hand firmly on his left eyelid,
which began to twitch convulsively, and went on in a lower but defiantly
contemptuous tone:

"I know better! You shall! And you will not only go to the Circus, but
you will do it willingly, or at least with smiling lips. You will start
at sunset! At the time appointed I shall find you in your place. If
not!--Must I begin so soon to teach you that I can be serious? Have a
care, girl! You are dear to me; yet--by the head of my father!--if you
defy me, my Numidian lion-keepers shall drag you to the place you belong
to!"

Thus far Melissa had listened to the emperor's raging with panting bosom
and quivering nostrils, as at a performance, which must sooner or later
come to an end; and now she broke in regardless of the consequences:

"Send for them," she cried, "and order them to throw me to the wild
beasts! It will doubtless be a welcome surprise to the lookers-on. Which
of them can say they have ever seen the daughter of a free Roman citizen
who never yet came before the law, torn to pieces in the sand of
the arena? They delight in anything new! Yes, murder me, as you did
Plautilla, although I never offended either you or your mother! Better
die a hundred deaths than parade my dishonor before the eyes of the
multitude in the open Circus!"

She ceased, incapable of further resistance, threw herself weeping on
the divan, and buried her face in the cushions.

Confounded and bewildered by such audacity, the emperor had heard her
out. The soul of a hero dwelt in the frail body of this maiden! Majestic
as all-conquering Venus she had resisted him for the second tune, and
now how touching did she appear in her tears and weakness! He loved her,
and his heart yearned to raise her in his arms, to beg her forgiveness,
and fulfill her every wish. But he was a man and a monarch, and his
desire to show Melissa to the people in the Circus as his chosen bride
had become a fixed resolve during the past sleepless night. And indeed
he was incapable of renouncing any wish or a plan, even if he felt
inclined to do so. Yet he heartily regretted having stormed at the
gentle Greek girl like some wild barbarian, and thus himself thrown
obstacles in the way of attaining his desire. His hot blood had carried
him away again. Surely some demon led him so often into excesses which
he afterward repented of. This time the fiend had been strong in him,
and he must use every gentle persuasion he knew of to bend the deeply
offended maiden to his will.

He was relieved not to meet her intense gaze as he advanced toward her
and took Philostratus's place, who whispered to her to control herself
and not bring death and ruin upon them all.

"I Truly I meant well toward you, dearest," he began, in altered
tones. "But we are both like overfull vessels--one drop will make them
overflow. You--confess now that you forgot yourself. And I--On the
throne we grow unaccustomed to opposition. It is fortunate that the
flame of my anger dies out so quickly. But it lies with you to prevent
it from ever breaking out; for I should always endeavor to fulfill a
kindly expressed wish, if it were possible. This time, however, I must
insist--"

Melissa turned toward the emperor, and stretching out beseeching hands,
she cried:

"Bid me do anything, however hard, and it shall be done, but do not
force me to go with you to the Circus. If my mother were only alive!
Wherever I could go with her was right. But my father, not to speak of
my madcap brother Alexander, do not know what befits a maiden, nor does
anybody expect it of them."

"And rightly," interposed Caracalla. "Now I understand your opposition,
and thank you for it. But it fortunately lies in my power to remove your
objection. The women have to obey me, too. I shall at once issue the
necessary orders. You shall appear in the Circus surrounded by the
noblest matrons of the city. The wives of these citizens shall accompany
you. Even my mother will be sure to approve of this arrangement.
Farewell, then, till we meet again in the Circus!"

He spoke the last words with proud satisfaction, and with the grave
demeanor that Cilo had taught him to adopt in the curia.

He then gave the order to admit the Alexandrian citizens, and the words
of entreaty died upon the lips of the unfortunate imperial bride, for
the folding doors were thrown open and the deputation advanced through
them.

Old Adventus signed to Melissa, and with drooping head she followed
him through the rooms and corridors that led to the apartments of the
highpriest.




CHAPTER XXV.

Melissa had wept her fill on the breast of the lady Euryale, who
listened to her woes with motherly sympathy, and yet she felt as if a
biting frost had broken and destroyed the blossoms which only yesterday
had so richly and hopefully decked her young heart. Diodoros's love had
been to her like the fair and sunny summer days that turn the sour, hard
fruit into sweet and juicy grapes. And now the frost had nipped them.
The whole future, and everything round her, now looked gray, colorless,
and flat. Only two thoughts held possession of her mind: on the
one hand, that of her betrothed, from whom this visit to the Circus
threatened to separate her forever; and on the other, that of her
imperial lover, to escape whom she would have flown anywhere, even to
the grave.

Euryale remarked with concern how weary and broken Melissa looked--so
different from her usual bright self, while she listened to her
father and Alexander as they consulted with the lady as to the future.
Philostratus, who had promised his advice, did not appear; and to the
gem-cutter, no proposal could seem so unwelcome as that of leaving his
native city and his sick favorite, Philip.

He considered it senseless, and a result of the thoroughly wrong-headed
views of sentimental women, to reject the monarch of the world when
he made honorable proposals to an unpretending girl. But the lady
Euryale--of whom his late wife had always spoken with the highest
respect--and, supported by her, his son Alexander, had both represented
to him so forcibly that a union with the emperor would render Melissa
most unhappy, if it did not lead to death, that he had been reduced to
silence. Only, when they spoke of the necessity of flight, he burst
out again, declaring that the time had not yet come for such extreme
measures.

When Melissa now rejoined them, he spoke of the emperor's behavior
toward her as being worthy of a man of honor, and endeavored to touch
her heart by representing what an old man must feel who should be forced
to leave the house where his father and grandfather had lived before
him, and even the town whose earth held all that was dearest to him.

Here the tears which so easily rose to his eyes began to flow, and,
seeing that Melissa's tender heart was moved by his sorrow, he gained
confidence, and reproached his daughter for having kindled Caracalla's
love, by her radiant eyes--so like her mother's! Honestly believing that
his affection was returned, Caesar was offering her the highest honor in
his power; if she fled from him, he would have every right to complain
of having been basely deceived, and to call her a heartless wanton.

Alexander now came to his sister's aid, and reminded him how Melissa
had hazarded life and liberty to save him and her brothers. She had been
forced to look so kindly into the tyrant's face if only to sue for their
pardon, and it became him ill to make this a reproach to his daughter.

Melissa nodded gratefully to her brother, but Heron remained firm in
his assertion that to think of flight would be foolish, or at least
premature.

At this, Alexander repeated to him that Melissa had whispered in his
ear that she would rather die at once than live in splendor, but in
perpetual fear, by the side of an unloved husband; whereupon Heron began
to breathe hard, as he always did before an outburst of anger.

But a message, calling him to the emperor's presence, soon calmed him.

At parting, he kissed Melissa, and murmured "Would you really drive your
old father out of our dear home, away from his work, and his birds--from
his garden, and your mother's grave? Is it then so terrible to live as
empress, in splendor and honor? I am going to Caesar--you can not hinder
me from greeting him kindly from you?"

Without waiting for an answer, he left the room; but when he was outside
he took care to glance at himself in the mirror, arrange his beard and
hair, and place his gigantic form in a few of the dignified attitudes he
intended to adopt in the presence of the emperor.

Meanwhile Melissa had thrown off the indifference into which she had
fallen, and her old doubts raised their warning heads with renewed
force.

Alexander swore to be her faithful ally; Euryale once more assured her
of her assistance; and yet, more especially when she was moved with pity
for her father, who was to leave all he loved for her sake, she felt as
if she were being driven hither and thither, in some frail bark, at the
mercy of the waves.

Suddenly a new idea flashed through her mind. She rose quickly.

"I will go to Diodoros," she cried, "and tell him all! He shall decide."

"Just now?" asked Euryale, startled. "You would certainly not find
your betrothed alone, and since all the world knows of Caracalla's
intentions, and gazes curiously after you, your visit would instantly
be reported to Caesar. Nor is it advisable for you to present yourself
before your offended lover, when you have neither Andreas nor any one
else to speak for you and take your part."

Melissa burst into tears, but the matron drew her to her and continued
tenderly:

"You must give that up--but, Alexander, do you go to your friend, and be
your sister's mouthpiece!"

The artist consented with all the ardor of brotherly affection, and
having received from Melissa, whose courage began to rise again, strict
injunctions as to what he was to say to her lover, he departed on his
errand.

Wholly absorbed by the stormy emotions of her heart, the maiden had
forgotten time and every external consideration; but the lady Euryale
was thoughtful for her, and now led her to her chamber to have her hair
dressed for the Circus. The matron carefully avoided, for the present,
all mention of her young friend's flight, though her mind was constantly
occupied with it--and not in vain.

The skillful waiting-woman, whom she had bought from the house of
the priest of Alexander, who was a Roman knight, loosened the girl's
abundant brown hair, and, with loud cries of admiration, declared it
would be easy to dress such locks in the most approved style of fashion.
She then laid the curling-irons on the dish of coals which stood on a
slender tripod, and was about to twist it into ringlets; but Melissa,
who had never resorted to such arts, refused to permit it. The slave
assured her, however, as earnestly as if it were a matter of the highest
importance, that it was impossible to arrange the curls of a lady of
distinction without the irons. Euryale, too, begged Melissa to allow it,
as nothing would make her so conspicuous in her overdressed surroundings
as excessive simplicity. That was quite true, but it made the girl
realize so vividly what was before her, that she covered her face with
her hands and sobbed out:

"To be exposed to the gaze of the whole city--to its envy and its
scorn!"

The matron's warning inquiry, what had become of her favorite's
high-minded calm, and her advice to restrain her weeping, lest she
should appear before the public in the Amphitheater with tear-stained
eyes, helped her to compose herself.

The tire-woman had not finished her work when Alexander returned, and
Melissa dared not turn her head for fear of disturbing her in her task.
But when Alexander began his report with the exclamation, "Who knows
what foolish gossip has driven him to this?" she sprang up, regardless
of the slave's warning cry. And as her brother went on to relate how
Diodoros had left the Serapeum, in spite of the physician's entreaty
to wait at least until next morning, but that Melissa need not take it
greatly to heart, it was too much for the girl who had already that day
gone through such severe and varied experiences. The ground seemed to
heave beneath her feet; sick and giddy she put out her hand to find some
support, that she might not sink on her knees; in so doing, she caught
the tall tripod which held the dish of coals. It swayed and fell
clattering to the ground, bringing the irons with it. Its burning
contents fell partly on the floor and partly on the festal robe which
Melissa had thrown over a chair before loosening her hair. Alexander
caught her just in time to prevent her falling.

With her healthy nature, Melissa soon regained consciousness, and during
the first few moments her distress over the spoiled garment threw every
other thought into the background. Shaking her head gravely over the
black-edged holes which the coals had burned in the peplos and the
under-robes, Euryale secretly rejoiced at the accident. She remembered
that when her heart was torn and bleeding, after the death of her only
child, her thoughts were taken off herself by the necessary duty of
providing mourning garments for herself, her husband, and the slaves.
This trivial task had at least helped her to forget for a few hours the
bitterness of her grief.

Only anxious to lighten in some sort the fate of the sweet young
creature whom she had learned to love, she made much of the difficulty
of procuring a fresh dress for Melissa, though she was perfectly aware
that her sister-in-law possessed many such. Alexander was commissioned
to take one of the emperor's chariots--which always stood ready for
the use of the courtiers between the Serapeum and the springs on the
east--and to hasten to the lady Berenike. The lady begged that he, as an
artist, would assist in choosing the robe; and the less conspicuous and
costly it was the better.

To this Melissa heartily agreed, and, after Alexander had gone, Euryale
bore off her pale young charge to the eating-room, where she forced
her to take some old wine and a little food, which she would not touch
before. As the attendant filled the wine-cup, the high-priest himself
joined them, greeted Melissa briefly and with measured courtesy, and
begged his wife to follow him for a moment into the tablinum.

The attendant, a slave who had grown gray in the service of Timotheus,
now begged the young guest, as though he represented his mistress, to
take a little food, and not to sip so timidly from the winecup. But the
lonely repast was soon ended, and Melissa, strengthened and refreshed,
withdrew to the sleeping-apartment. Only light curtains hung at the
doors of the high-priest's hurriedly furnished rooms, and no one noticed
Melissa's entrance into the adjoining chamber.

She had never played the eavesdropper, but she had neither the presence
of mind to withdraw, nor could she avoid hearing that her own name was
mentioned.

It was the lady who spoke, and her husband answered in excited tones:

"As to your Christianity, and whatever there may be in it that is
offensive to me as high-priest of a heathen god, we will speak of that
later. It is not a question now of a difference of opinion, but of a
serious danger, which you with your easily-moved heart will bring down
upon yourself and me. The gem-cutter's daughter is a lovely creature--I
will not deny it--and worthy of your sympathy; besides which, you, as a
woman, can not bear to see her most sacred feelings wounded."

"And would you let your hands he idle in your lap," interposed his wife,
"if you saw a lovable, innocent child on the edge of a precipice, and
felt yourself strong enough to save her from falling? You can not have
asked yourself what would be the fate of a girl like Melissa if she were
Caracalla's wife."

"Indeed I have," Timotheus assured her gravely, "and nothing would
please me better than that the maiden should succeed in escaping that
fate. But--the time is short, and I must be brief--the emperor is our
guest, and honors me with boundless confidence. Just now he disclosed
to me his determination to make Melissa his wife, and I was forced to
approve it. Thus he looks to me to carry out his wishes; and if the
maiden escapes, and there falls on you, or, through you, on me, the
shadow of a suspicion of having assisted in her flight, he will have
every right to regard me as a traitor and to treat me as such. To others
my life is made sacred by my high office, but the man to whom a human
life--no matter whose--is no more than that of a sacrificial animal is
to you or me, that man would shed the blood of us both without a quiver
of the eyelid."

"Then let him!" cried Euryale, hotly. "My bereaved and worn-out life is
but a small price to pay for that of an innocent, blameless creature,
glowing with youth and all the happiness of requited love, and with a
right to the highest joys that life can offer."

"And I?" exclaimed Timotheus, angrily. "What am I to you since the death
of our child? For the sake of the first person that came to you as
a poor substitute for our lost daughter, you are ready to go to your
death, and to drag me with you into the gloom of Hades. There speaks the
Christian! Even that gentle philosopher on the throne, Marcus Aurelius,
was disgusted at your fellow-believers' hideous mania for death. The
Christian expects in the next world all that is denied to him in this.
But we think of this life, in which the Deity has placed us. To me
life is the highest blessing, and yours is dearer to me than my own.
Therefore I say, firmly and decidedly: Melissa must not make her escape
from this house. If she is determined to fly this night, let her do
so--I shall not hinder her. If your counsel is of service to her, I am
glad; but she must not enter this house again after the performance in
the Circus, unless she be firmly resolved to become Caesar's wife. If
she can not bring herself to this, the apartments which belong to us
must be closed against her, as against a dangerous foe."

"And whither can she go?" asked Euryale, sadly and with tearful eyes,
for there was no gainsaying so definite an order from her lord and
master. "The moment she is missed, they will search her father's
house; and, if she takes advantage of Berenike's ship, it will soon be
discovered that it was your brother's wife who helped her to escape from
Caracalla."

"Berenike will know what to do," answered Timotheus, composedly. "She,
if any one, knows how to take care of herself. She has the protection of
her influential brother-in-law, Coeranus; and just now there is nothing
she would not do to strike a blow at her hated enemy."

"How sorrow and revenge have worked upon that strange woman!" exclaimed
the lady, sadly. "Caracalla has injured her, it is true--"

"He has, and to-day he has added a further, deeper insult, for he forces
her to appear in the Amphitheater, with the wives of the other citizens
who bear the cost of this performance. I was there, and heard him say
to Seleukus, who was acting as spokesman, that he counted on seeing his
wife, of whom he had heard so much, in her appointed place this evening.

"This will add fuel to the fire of her hatred. If she only does not
allow her anger to carry her away, and to show it in a manner that she
will afterward regret!--But my time is short. I have to walk before
the sacred images in full ceremonial vestments, and accompanied by
the priest of Alexander. You, unfortunately, take no pleasure in such
spectacles. Once more, then--if the girl is determined to fly, she must
not return here. I repeat, if any one can help her to get away, it is
Berenike. Our sister-in-law must take the consequences. Caesar can not
accuse her of treason, at any rate, and her interference in the matter
will clear us of all suspicion of complicity."

No word of this conversation had escaped Melissa. She learned nothing
new from it, but it affected her deeply.

Warm-hearted as she was, she fully realized the debt of gratitude she
owed to the lady Euryale; and she could not blame the high-priest, whom
prudence certainly compelled to close his doors against her. And yet she
was wounded by his words. She had struggled so hard in these last days
to banish all thought of her own happiness, and shield her dear ones
from harm, that such selfishness appeared doubly cruel to her. Did
it not seem as if this priest of the great Deity to whom she had been
taught to pray, cared little what became of his nearest relatives, so
long as he and his wife were unmolested? That was the opposite of what
Andreas had praised as the highest duty, the last time she had walked
with him to the ferry; and since then Johanna had told her the story
of Christ's sufferings, and she understood the fervor with which the
freedman had spoken of the crucified Son of God--the great example of
all unselfishness.

In the enthusiasm of her warm young heart she felt that what she had
heard of the Christians' teacher was beautiful, and that she too would
not find it hard to die for those she loved.

With drooping head Euryale re-entered the room, and gazed with kind,
anxious eyes into the girl's face, as if asking her forgiveness.
Following the impulse of her candid heart, Melissa threw her fair young
arms round the aged lady, and, to her great surprise, after kissing her
warmly on brow and mouth and eyes, cried in tones of tender entreaty:

"Forgive me. I did not want to listen, and yet I could not choose but
hear. No word of your discourse escaped me. I know now that I must not
fly, and that I must bear whatever fate the gods may send me. I used
often to say to myself, 'Of how little importance is my life or my
happiness!' And now that I must give up my lover, come what may I care
not what the future has in store for me. I can never forget Diodoros;
and, when I think that everything is at an end between us, it is as if
my heart were torn in pieces. But I have found out, in these last days,
what heavy troubles one may bear without breaking down. If my flight is
to bring danger, if not death and ruin, upon so many good people, I had
better stay. The man who lusts after me--it is true, when I think of his
embrace my blood runs cold! But perhaps I shall be able to endure even
that. And then--if I crush my heart into silence, and renounce Diodoros
forever, and give myself up to Caesar--as I must--tell me you will not
then close your doors against me, but that I may stay with you till the
horrid hour comes when Caracalla calls me?"

The matron had listened with deep emotion to Melissa's victory over her
desires and her aversions. This heathen maiden, brought up in the right
way by a good mother, and to whom life had taught many a hard lesson,
was she not already treading in the footsteps of the Saviour? This child
was offering up the great and pure love of her heart to preserve others
from sorrow and danger; and what a different course of action was she
herself to pursue in obedience to her husband's orders--her husband,
whose duty it was to offer a shining example to the whole heathen world!

She thought of Abraham's sacrifice, and wondered if the Lord might not
perhaps be satisfied with Melissa's willingness to lay her love upon the
altar. In any case, whatever she, Euryale, could do to save her from the
worst fate that could befall a woman, that should be done, and this time
it was she who drew the other toward her and kissed her.

Her heart was full to overflowing, and yet she did not forget to warn
Melissa to be careful, when she was about to lay her head with its
artificially arranged curls upon the lady's breast.

"No, no," she said, tenderly warding off the maiden's embrace. Then,
laying her hands on the girl's shoulders, she looked her straight in the
face, and continued: "Here you will ever find a resting-place. When your
hair lies smoothly round your sweet face, as it did yesterday, then lay
it on my breast as often as you will. Aye, and it can and shall be here
in the Serapeum; though not in these rooms, which my lord and master
closes against you. I told you of the time being fulfilled for each one
of us, and when yours came you proved yourself to be the good tree of
which our Lord speaks as bearing good fruit. You look at me inquiringly;
how indeed should you understand the words of a Christian? But I shall
find time enough in the next few days to explain them to you; for--I say
it again--you shall remain near me while the emperor searches the city
and half the world over for you. Keep that firmly in your mind and let
it help to give you courage in the Circus."

"But my father?" cried Melissa, pointing to the curtain, through which
Heron's loud voice now became audible.

"Depend on me," whispered the lady, hurriedly; "and rest assured that he
will be warned in time. Do not betray my promise. If we were to take him
into our confidence now, he would spoil all. As soon as he is gone, and
your brother has returned, you two shall hear--"

They were interrupted by the steward, who, with a peculiar smile upon
his clean-shaven lips, came to announce Heron's visit.

The communicative gem-cutter had already confided to the servant what
it was that agitated him so greatly, but Melissa was astonished at the
change in her father's manner.

The shuffling gait of the gigantic, unwieldy man, who had grown gray
stooping over his work, had gained a certain majestic dignity. His
cheeks glowed, and the gray eyes, which had long since acquired a fixed
look from straining over the gemcutting, now beamed with a blissful
radiance. Something wonderful must have happened to him, and, without
waiting to be questioned by the lady, he poured out to her the news that
he would have been overjoyed to have shouted in the market-place for all
to hear.

The reception accorded to him at Caesar's table, he declared, had been
flattering beyond all words. The godlike monarch had treated him more
considerately, nay, sometimes with more reverence, than his own sons.
The best dishes had been put before him, and Caracalla had asked all
sorts of questions about his future consort, and, on hearing that
Melissa had sent him greetings, he had raised himself and drunk to him
as if he were a friend.

His table-companions, too, had treated Heron with every distinction.
Immediately on his arrival the monarch had desired them to honor him
as the father of the future empress. They had all agreed with him in
demanding that Zminis the Egyptian should be punished with death, and
had even encouraged him to give the reins to his righteous anger. He, if
any one, was in the habit of being moderate in all things, if only as
a good example to his sons; and he had proved in many a Dionysiac feast
that the god could not easily overpower him. The amount of wine he
had drunk to-day would generally have had no more effect upon him than
water, and yet he had felt now and then as if he were drunken, and the
whole festal hall turned round with him. Even now he would be quite
incapable of walking forward in a given straight line.

With the exclamation, "Such is life!--a few hours ago on the
rowing-bench, and fighting with the brander of the galleys for trying
to brand me with the slave-mark, and now one of the greatest among the
great!" he closed his tale, for a glance through the window showed him
that time pressed.

With strange bashfulness he then gazed at a ring upon his right hand,
and said hesitatingly that his own modesty made the avowal difficult to
him; but the fact was, he was not the same man as when he last left
the ladies. By the grace of the emperor he had been made a praetorian.
Caesar had at first wanted to make him a knight; but he esteemed his
Macedonian descent higher than that class, to which too many freed
slaves belonged for his taste. This he had frankly acknowledged, and the
emperor must have considered his objections valid, for he immediately
spoke a few words to the prefect Macrinus, and then told the others to
greet him as senator with the rank of praetorian.

Then indeed he felt as if the seat beneath him were transformed into a
wild steed carrying him away, through sea and sky-wherever it pleased.
He had had to hold tightly to the arm of the couch, and only remembered
that some one--who it was he did not know--had whispered to him to thank
Caesar.

"This," continued the gem-cutter, "restored me so far to myself that I
could express my gratitude to your future husband, my child. I am only
the second Egyptian who has entered the senate. Coeranus was the only
one before me. What favor! And how can I describe what followed? All the
distinguished members of the senate and the past consuls offered me a
brotherly embrace as their new colleague. When Caesar commanded me to
