She now determined to await his return, and nearly three hours she had
passed there, enduring all the torments of guilt and misery; but he
appeared not.  At last, hearing the matinbell, she started up, fearful
that her maids might discover her absence.  Compelled by some regard to
reputation, with an unwilling mind she left the shrine of her idolatry,
and once more crossed the cloisters.  While again drawing toward the
chapel, she saw Wallace himself issue from the door, supporting on his
bosom the fainting head of Lady Ruthven.  Edwin followed them.  Lady
Mar pulled the monk's cowl over her face and withdrew behind a pillar.
"Ah!" thought she, "absenting myself from my duty, I fled from thee!"
She listened with breathless attention to what might be said.

Lord Ruthven met them at that instant.  "This night's watching by the
bier of her brother," said Wallace, "has worn out your gentle lady; we
strove to support her through these sad vigils, but at last she sunk."
What Ruthven said in reply, when he took his wife in his arms, the
countess could not hear; but Wallace answered, "I have not seen her."

"I left her late in the evening drowned in tears," replied Ruthven, in
a more elevated tone, "I therefore suppose that in secret she offers
those prayers for her deceased husband, which my tender Janet pours
over his grave."

"Such tears," replied Wallace, "are Heaven's own balm; I know they
purify the heart whence they flow.  Yes; and the prayers we breathe for
those we love, unite our souls the closer to theirs.  Look up, dear
Lady Ruthven," said he, as she began to revive, "look up and hear how
you may, while still on earth, retain the society of your beloved
brother!  Seek his spirit at the footstool of God.  'Tis thus I live,
sister of my most venerated friend!  My soul is ever on the wing of
heaven, whether in the solitary hour, in joy, or in sorrow, for theeere
my treasure lives!"

"Wallace!  Wallace," cried Lady Ruthven, looking on his animated
countenance with wondering rapture; "and art thou a man of earth and of
the sword?  Oh! rather say, an angel; lent us here a little while to
teach us to live and to die!"

A glowing blush passed over the pale but benign cheek of Wallace.

"I am a soldier of Him who was, indeed, brought into the world to show
us, by his life and death, how to be virtuous and happy.  Know me, by
my life, to be his follower; and David himself wore not a more glorious
title!"

Lady mar, while she contemplated the matchless form before her,
exclaimed to herself, "Why is it animated by as faultless a soul?  Oh,
Wallace! wert thou less excellent, I might hope; but hell is in my
heart, and heaven in thine!"

She tore her eyes from a view which blasted while it charmed her, and
rushed from the cloisters.




Chapter LVII.

Durham.


The sun rose as the funeral procession of the Earl of Mar moved from
before the gates of the monastery at Falkirk.  Lord Ruthven and Edwin
mounted their horses.  The maids of the two ladies led them forth
toward the litters which were to convey them so long a journey.  Lady
Ruthven came first, and Wallace placed her tenderly in her carriage.
The countess next appeared, clad in the deep weeds of widowhood.  Her
child followed in the arms of its nurse.  At the sight of the innocent
babe, whom he had so often seen pressed to the fond bosom of the father
it was now following to his grace, tears rushed into the eyes of
Wallace.  Lady Mar hid the tumult of her feelings on the shoulder of
her maid.  He advanced to her respectfully, and handing her to her
vehicle, urged her to cherish life for the sake of her child.  She
threw herself with increased agitation on her pillow, and Wallace,
deeming the presence of her babe the surest comforter, laid it tenderly
by her side.  At that moment, before he had relinquished it, she bent
her face upon his hands, and bathing them with tears, faintly murmured,
"Oh!  Wallace, remember me!"  Lord Ruthven rode up to bid adieu to his
friend, and the litters moved on.  Wallace promised that both he and
Edwin should hear of him in the course of a few days; and
affectionately grasping the hand of the latter, bade him farewell.

Hear of him they should, but not see him; for it was his determination
to set off that night for Durham, where, he was informed, Edward now
lay, and, joined by his young queen, meant to sojourn till his wounds
were healed.  Believing that his presence in Scotland could no longer
be serviceable, and would engender continual intestine divisions,
Wallace did not hesitate in fixing his course.  His first object was to
fulfill his vow to Lord Mar.  He thought it probable, that Helen might
have been carried to the English court; and that in seeking her, he
might also attempt an interview with young Bruce; hoping to learn how
far he had succeeded in persuading his father to leave the vassalage of
Edward, and once more dare resuming the specter of his ancestors.

To effect his plan without hinderance, on the disappearance of the
funeral cavalcade, Wallace retired to his apartment to address a letter
to Lord Ruthven.  In this epistle he told the chief that he was going
on an expedition which he hoped would prove beneficial to his country;
but it was an enterprise of rashness, he would not make any one his
companion; he therefore begged Lord Ruthven to teach his friends to
consider with candor a flight they might otherwise deem unkind.

All the brother was in his letter to Edwin, conjuring him to prove his
affection for his friend by quietly abiding at home till they should
meet again in Scotland.

He wrote to Andrew Murray (now Lord Bothwell), addressing him as the
first of his compatriots who had struck a blow for Scotland; and, as
his dear friend and brother soldier, he confided to his care the
valiant troop which had followed him from Lanark.  "Tell them," said
he, "that in obeying you they still serve with me, they perform their
duty to Scotland at home--I abroad; our aim is the same; and we shall
meet again at the consummation of our labors."

These letters he inclosed in one to Scrymgeour, with orders to dispatch
two of them according to their directions; but that to Murray,
Scrymgeour was himself to deliver at the head of the Lanark veterans.

At the approach of twilight Wallace quitted the monastery, leaving his
packet with the porter, to present to Scrymgeour when he should arrive
at his usual hour.  As the chief meant to assume a border-minstrel's
garb, that he might travel the country unrecognized as its once adored
regent, he took his way toward a large hollow oak in Tor Wood, where he
had deposited his means of disguise.  When arrive there he disarmed
himself of all but his sword, dirk, and breastplate; he covered his
tartan gambeson with a minstrel's cassock, and staining his bright
complexion with the juice of a nut, concealed his brighter locks
beneath a close bonnet. Being thus equipped, he threw his harp over his
shoulder; and having first, in that solitude, where no eye beheld, no
ear heard but that of God, invoked a blessing on his enterprise, with a
buoyant spirit--rejoicing in the power in whose light he moved--he went
forth, and under the sweet serenity of a summer night pursued his way
along the broom-clad hills of Muiravenside.

All lay in profound rest--not a human creature crossed his path till the
carol of the lark summoned the husbandman to his toil, and spread the
thymy hills and daisied pastures with herds and flocks.  As the lowing
of cattle descending to the water, and the bleating of sheep, hailing
the morning beam, came on the breeze, mingled with the joyous voices of
their herdsmen, calling to each other from afar--as all met the ear of
Wallace--his conscious heart could not but whisper: "I have been the
happy instrument to effect this!  I have restored every man to his
paternal fields!  I have filled all these honest breasts with gladness!"

He stopped at a little moss-covered cabin on the burn-side, beneath
Craig Castle in Mid-Lothian, and was hospitably entertained by its
simple inhabitants.  Wallace repaid their kindness with a few ballads,
which he sung accompanied by his harp.  As he gave the last notes of
"King Arthur's Death in Glory," the worthy cotter raised his head from
the spade on which he leaned, and asked whether he could not sing the
glory of Scotland.

"Our renowned Wallace," said he, "is worth King Arthur and all the
stranger knights of his round table, for he not only conquers for us in
war, but establishes us in happy peace.  Who like him, of all our great
captains, ever took such care of the poor as to give them, not only the
bread which sustains temporal, but that which supports eternal life?
Sing us then his praises, minstrel, and tarry with us days instead of
hours."

The wife, and the children who clung around their melodious visitant,
joined in this request.  Wallace rose with a saddened smile, and
replied:

"I cannot do what you require; but I can yield you an opportunity to
oblige Sir William Wallace.  Will you take a letter from him, of which
I am the bearer, to Lord Dundaf at Berwick?  I have been seeking, what
I have now found, a faithful Scot, with whom I could confide this
trust.  It is to reveal to a father's heart the death of a son, for
whom Scotland must mourn to her latest generations."

The honest shepherd respectfully accepted this mission; and his wife,
loading her guest's scrip with her choicest fruits and cakes,
accompanied him, followed by the children, to the bottom of the hill.

In this manner, sitting at the board of the lowly, and sleeping beneath
the thatched roof, did Wallace pursue his way through Tweedale and
Ettrick Forest, till he reached the Cheviots.  From every lip he heard
his own praises, heard them with redoubled satisfaction, for he could
have no suspicion of their sincerity, as they were uttered without
expectation of their ever reaching the regent's ear.

It was the Sabbath day when he mounted the Cheviots.  He stood on one
of their summits, and leaning on his harp, contemplated the fertile
dales he left behind.  The gay villagers, in their best attires, were
thronging to their churches; while the aged, too infirm for the walk,
were sitting in the sun at their cottage doors, adoring the Almighty
Benefactor in his sublimer temple of the universe.  All spoke of
security and happiness.  "Thus I leave thee, beloved Scotland!  And on
revisiting these hills, may I still behold thy sons and daughters
rejoicing in the heaven-bestowed peace of their land!"

Having descended into Northumberland, his well-replenished script was
his provider; and when it was exhausted, he purchased food from the
peasantry; he would not accept the hospitality of a country he had so
lately trodden as an enemy.  Here he heard his name mentioned with
terror as well as admiration.  While many related circumstances of
misery to which the ravaging of their lands had reduced them, all
concurred in praising the moderation with which the Scottish leader
treated his conquests.

Late in the evening, he arrived on the banks of the river that
surrounds the episcopal city of Durham.  He crossed Framlinggate
Bridge.  His mistrel garb prevented his being stopped by the guard at
the gate; but as he entered its porch, a horse that was going through
started at his abrupt appearance.  Its rider suddenly exclaimed, "Fool,
thou dost not see Sir William Wallace!"  Then turning to the disguised
knight, "Harper," cried he, "you frighten my steed; draw back till I
pass."  Not displeased to find the terror him so great amongst the
enemies of Scotland, that they even addressed their animals as sharers
in the dread, Wallace stood out of the way, and saw the speaker to be a
young Southron knight, who with difficulty kept his seat on the restive
horse.  Rearing and plunging, it would have thrown its rider, had not
Wallace put forth his hand and seized the bridle.  By his assistance,
the animal was soothed; and the young lord thanking him for his
service, told him that, as a reward, he would introduce him to play
before the queen, who that day held a feast at the bishop's palace.
Wallace thought it probable he might see or hear of Lady Helen in this
assembly, or find access to Bruce, and he gladly accepted the offer.
The knight, who was Sir Piers Gaveston, ordering him to follow, turned
his horse toward the city, and conducted Wallace through the gates of
the citadel, to the palace within its walls.

On entering the banqueting-hall, he was placed by the knight in the
musicians' gallery, there to await his summons to her majesty.  This
entertainment being spread, and the room full of guests, the queen was
led in by the haughty bishop of the see, the king being too ill of his
wounds to allow his joining so large a company.  The beauty of the
lovely sister of Philip le Bel seemed to fill the gaze and hearts of
all bystanders, and none appeared to remember that Edward was absent.
Wallace hardly glanced on her youthful charms; his eyes roamed from
side to side in quest of a fairer, a dearer object--the captive
daughter of his dead friend!  She was not there; neither was De
Valence; but Buchan, Athol, and Soulis, were near the royal Margaret;
in all the pomp of feudal grandeur.  In vain waived the trophied
banners over their heads; they sat sullen and revengeful, for the
defeat on the Carron had obscured the treacherous victory of Falkirk;
and instead of having presented Edward to his young queen as the
conqueror of Scotland; she had found him, and them fugitives in the
castle of Durham!

Immediately on the royal band ceasing to play, Gaveston pressed toward
the queen, and told her he had presumed to introduce a traveling
minstrel into the gallery; hoping that she would order him to perform
for her amusement, as he could sing legends from the descent of the
Romans to the victories of her royal Edward.  With all her age's
eagerness in quest of novelties, she commanded him to be brought to her.

Gaveston having presented him, Wallace bowed with the respect due to
her sex and dignity, and to the esteem in which he held the character
of her royal brother.  Margaret desired him to place his harp before
her, and begin to sing.  As he knelt on one knee, and struck its
sounding chords, she stopped him by the inquiry, of whence he came?

"From the north country," was his reply.

"Were you ever in Scotland?" asked she.

"Many times."

The young lords crowded round to hear this dialogue between majesty and
lowliness.  She smiled, and turned toward them.

"Do not accuse me of disloyalty, but I have a curiosity to ask another
question."

"Nothing your majesty wishes to know," said Bishop Beck, "can be amiss."

"Then tell me," cried she--"for you wandering minstrels see all great
people, good or bad, else how could you make songs about them!--did you
ever see Sir William Wallace in your travels?"

"Often, madam."

"Pray tell me what he is like! you probably will be unprejudiced, and
that is what I can hardly expect in this case from any of these brave
lords."

Wishing to avoid further questioning on this subject, Wallace replied:

"I have never seen him so distinctly as to be enabled to prove any
right to your majesty's opinion of my judgment."

"Cannot you sing me some ballad about him?" inquired she, laughing;
"and if you are a little poetical in your praise, I can excuse you; for
my royal brother thinks this bold Scot would have shone brightly in a
fairer cause."

"My songs are dedicated to glory set in the grave," returned Wallace,
"therefore Sir William Wallace's faults or virtues will not be sung by
me."

"Then he is a very young man, I suppose? for you are not old, and yet
you speak of not surviving him.  I was in hopes," cried she, addressing
Beck, "that my lord the king would have brought this Wallace to have
supped with me here; but for once rebellion overcame its master."

Beck made some reply which Wallace did not hear, and the queen again
turning to him resumed:

"Minstrel, we French ladies are very fond of a good mien; and I shall
be a little reconciled to your northern realms if you tell me that Sir
William Wallace is anything like as handsome as some of the gay knights
by whom you see me surrounded."

Wallace smiled, and replied:

"The comeliness of Sir William Wallace lies in a strong arm and a
feeling heart; and if these be charms in the eyes of female goodness,
he may hope to be not quite an object of abhorrence to the sister of
Philip le Bel!"

The minstrel bowed as he spoke, and the young queen laughing again,
said:

"I wish not to come within the influence of either.  But sing me some
Scottish legend, and I will promise wherever I see the knight to treat
him with all courtesy due to valor."

Wallace again struck the chords of his harp; and with a voice whose
full and melodious tones rolled round the vast dome of the hall, he
sung the triumphs of Beuther.**  The queen fixed her eyes upon him; and
when he ended, she turned and whispered Gavestton:

"If the voice of this man had been Wallace's trumpet, I should not now
wonder at the discomfiture of England.  He almost tempted me from my
allegiance, as the warlike animation of his notes seemed to charge the
flying Southrons."

**In commemoration of the victory which this ancient Scottish prince
obtained over the Britons before the Christian era, the field of
conquest has ever since been called Rutherglen.

Speaking, she rose, and presenting a jeweled ring to the mistrel, left
the apartment.

The lords crowded out after her, and the musicians coming down from the
gallery, seated themselves with much rude jollity to regale on the
remnants of the feast.  Wallace, who had discovered the senachie of
Brue by the escutcheon of Annandale suspended at his neck, gladly saw
him approach.  He came to invite the stranger minstrel to partake of
their fare.  Wallace did not appear to decline it, and as the court
bard seemed rather devoted to the pleasures of wine, he found it not
difficult to draw from him what he wanted to know.  He learned that
young Bruce was still in the castle under arrest, "and," added the
senachie, "I shall feel no little mortification in being obliged, in
the course of half an hour, to relinquish these festivities for the
gloomy duties of his apartment."

This was precisely the point to which Wallace had wished to lead him;
and pleading disrelish of wine, he offered to supply his place in the
earl's chamber.  The half-intoxicated bard accepted the proposition
with eagerness; and as the shades of nigh had long closed in, he
conducted his illustrious substitute to the large round tower of the
castle, informing him as they went along, that he must continue playing
in a recess adjoining Bruce's room till the last vesper bell from the
abbey in the neighborhood should give the signal for his laying aside
the harp.  At that time the earl would be fallen asleep, and he might
then lie down on a pallet he would find in the recess.

All this Wallace promised punctually to obey; and being conducted by
the senachie up a spiral staircase, was left in the little anteroom.
The chief drew the cowl of his minstrel cloak over his face and set his
harp before him in order to play.  He could see through its strings
that a group of knights were in earnest conversation at the further end
of the apartment; but they spoke so low he could not distinguish what
was said.  One of the party turned round, and the light of a suspended
lamp discovered him to be the brave Earl Gloucester, whom Wallace had
taken, and released at Berwick.  The same ray showed another to be
Percy, Earl of Northumberland.  Wallace found the strangeness of his
situation.  He, the conqueror of Edward, to have been singing as a
mendicant in his halls; and having given laws to the two great men
before him, he now sat in their view unobserved and unfeared!  Their
figures concealed that of Bruce, but at last when all rose together, he
heard Gloucester say, in rather an elevated voice, "Keep up your
spirits.  This envy of your base countrymen must recoil upon
themselves.  It cannot be long before King Edward discovers the motives
of their accusations, and his noble nature will acquit you accordingly."

"My acquittal," replied Bruce, in a firm tone, "cannot restore what
Edward's injustice has rifled from me.  I abide by the test of my own
actions, and by it will open the door of my freedom.  Your king may
depend on it," added he, with a sarcastic smile, "that I am not a man
to be influenced against the right.  Where I owe duty I will pay it to
the uttermost farthing."

Not apprehending the true meaning of this speech, Percy immediately
answered, "I believe you, and so must all that world; for did you not
give brave proofs of it that fearful night on the Carron, in bearing
arms against the triumphant Wallace?"

"I did indeed give proofs of it," returned Bruce, "which I hope the
world will one day know, by bearing arms against the usurper of my
country's rights! and in defiance of injustice and of treason, before
men and angels I swear," cried he, "to perform my duty to the end--to
retrieve, to honor the insulted, the degraded name of Bruce!"

The two earls fell back before the vehement action which accompanied
this burst from the soul of Bruce; and Wallace caught a glimpse of his
youthful form, which stood pre-eminent in patriotic virtue between the
Southron lords: his fine countenance glowed, and his brave spirit
seemed to emanate in light from every part of his body.  "My prince and
brother!" exclaimed Wallace to himself, ready to rush forward and throw
himself at his feet, or into his arms.

Gloucester, as little as Northumberland, comprehending Bruce's
ambiguous declaration, replied, "Let not your heart, my brave friend,
burn too hotly against the king for this arrest.  He will be the more
urgent to obliterate by kindness this injustice when he understands the
aims of the Cummins.  I have myself felt his misplaced wrath; and who
now is more favored by Edward than Ralph de Monthermer?  My case will
be yours.  Good night, Bruce.  May propitious dreams repeat the  augury
of your true friends!"  Percy shook hands with the young earl, and the
two English lords left the room.

Wallace could now take a more leisurely survey of Bruce.  He no longer
wore gay embroidered hacqueton; his tunic was black velvet, and all the
rest of his garments accorded with the same mourning hue.  Soon after
the lords had quitted him, the buoyant elasticity of his figure, which
before seemed ready to rise from the earth, so was his soul elevated by
his sublime resolves, gave way to melancholy retrospections, and he
threw himself into a chair with his hands clasped upon his knee and his
eyes fixed in musing gaze upon the floor.  It was now that Wallace
touched the strings of his harp.  "The Death of Cathullin" wailed from
the sounding notes; but Bruce heard as though he heard them not; they
sooth his mood without his perceiving what it was that calmed, yet
deepened, the saddening thoughts which possessed him.  His posture
remained the same; and sigh after sigh gave the only response to the
strains of the bard.

Wallace grew impatient for the chimes of that vesper bell which, by
assuring Bruce's attendants that he was going to rest, would secure
from interruption the conference he meditated.  Two servants entered.
Bruce, scarcely looking up, bade them withdraw; he should not need
their attendance; he did not know when he should go to bed; and he
desired to be no further disturbed.  The men obeyed; and Wallace,
changing the melancholy strain of his harp, struck the chords to the
proud triumph he had played in the hall.  Not one note of either ballad
had he yet sung to Bruce; but when he came to the passage in the latter
appropriated to these lines--

    "Arise, glory of Albin, from thy cloud,
     And shine upon thy own!"

he could not forbear giving the words voice.  Bruce started from his
seat.  He looked toward the minstrel--he walked the room in great
disorder.  The pealing sounds of the harp, and his own mental
confusion, prevented his distinguishing that it was not the voice of
his senachie.  The words alone he heard; and they seemed a call which
his heart panted to obey.  The hand of Wallace paused upon the
instrument.  He looked around to see that observation was indeed at a
distance.  Not that he dreaded harm to himself, for his magnanimous
mind, courageous from infancy, by a natural instinct had never known
personal fear; but anxious not to precipitate Bruce into useless
danger, he first satisfied himself that all was safe, and then, as the
young earl sat in a paroxysm of racking reflections (for they brought
self-blame, or rather a blame on his father, which pierced him to the
heart), Wallace slowly advanced from the recess.  The agitated Bruce,
accidentally raising his head, beheld a man in a minstrel's garb, much
to tall to be his senachie, approaching him with a caution which he
thought portended treachery.  He sprung to his feet, and caught his
sword from the table; but, in that moment, Wallace threw off his cowl.
Bruce stood gazing on him, stiffened with astonishment.  Wallace, in a
low voice, exclaimed, "My prince! do you not know me?"  Bruce, without
speaking, threw his arms about his neck.  He was silent, as he hung on
him, but his tears flowed; he had much to say, but excess of emotion
rendered it unutterable.  As Wallace returned the fond embrace of
friendship, he gently said, "How is it that I not only see you a close
prisoner, but in these weeds?"  Bruce at last forced himself to
articulate: "I have known misery, in all its forms, since we parted;
but I have not power to name even my grief of griefs, while trembling
at the peril to which you have exposed yourself by seeking me!  The
vanquisher of Edward, the man who snatched Scotland from his grasp,
were he known to be within these walls, would be a prize for which the
boiling revenge of the tyrant would give half his kingdom!  Think,
then, my friend, how I shudder at this daring.  I am surrounded by
spies, and should you be discovered, Robert Bruce will then have the
curses of his country added to the judgments which already have fallen
on his head."  As he spoke, they sat down together, and he continued:
"Before I answer your questions, tell me what immediate cause could
bring you to seek the alien Bruce in prison, and by what stratagem you
came in this disguise into my apartment?  Tell me the last, that I may
judge, by the means, of your present safety!"

Wallace briefly related the events which had sent him from Scotland,
his reencounter with Piers Gaveston, and his arrangement with the
senachie.  To the first part of the narrative, Bruce listened with
indignation.  "I knew," exclaimed he, "from the boastings of Athol and
Buchan, that they had left in Scotland some dregs of heir own
refractory spirits; but I could not have guessed that envy had so
obliterated gratitude in the hearts of my countrymen.  The wolves have
now driven the shepherd from the fold," cried he, "and the flock will
soon be devoured!  Fatal was the hour for Scotland, and your friend,
when you yielded to the voice of faction, and relinquished the power
which would have finally given peace to the nation!"

Wallace recapitulated his reasons for having refrained from forcing the
obedience of the young Lord Badenoch and his adherents; for abdicating
a dignity he could no longer maintain without shedding the blood of the
misguided men who opposed him.  Bruce acknowledged the wisdom of this
conduct, but could not restrain his animadversions on the characters of
the Cummins.  He told Wallace that he had met the two sons of the late
Lord Badenoch in Guienne; that James, who now pretended such resentment
of his father's death, had ever been a rebellious son.  John, who yet
remained in France, appeared of a less violent temper; "but," added the
prince, "I have been taught by one who will never counsel me more, that
all the Cummins, male and female, would be ready at any time to
sacrifice earth and heaven to their ambition.  It is to Buchan and
Athol that I owe my prolonged confinement, and to them I may date the
premature death of my father."

The start of Wallace declared his shock at this information.  "How?"
exclaimed he, "The Earl of Carrick dead?  Fell, fell assassins of their
country!"  The swelling emotions of his soul would not allow him to
proceed, and Bruce resumed: "It is for him I wear these sable
garments--poor emblems of the mournings of my soul, mournings, not so
much for his loss (and that is grievous as ever son bore), but because
he lived not to let the world know what he really was; he lived not to
bring into light his long-obscured honor!  There, there, Wallace, is
the bitterness of this cup to me!"

"But can you not sweeten it, my dear prince," cried Wallace, "by
retrieving all that he was cut off from redeeming?  To open the way to
you I come."

"And I will enter where you point," returned Bruce; "but heavy is my
woe that, knowing the same spirit was in my father's bosom, he should
be torn from the opportunity to make it manifest.  Oh, Wallace! that he
should be made to lie down in a dishonored grave!  Had he lived, my
friend, he would have brightened that name which rumor has sullied, and
I should have doubly gloried in wearing the name he had rendered so
worthy of being coupled with the kingly title.  Noble was he in soul;
but he fell amidst a race of men whose art was equal to their venality,
and he became their dupe.  Betrayed by friendship, he sunk into the
snare; for he had no dishonor in his own breast to warn him of what
might be the villainy of others.  He believed the cajoling speeches of
Edward, who, on the first offense of Baliol, had promised to place my
father on the throne.  Month after month passed away, and the
engagement was unperformed.  The disturbance on the Continent seemed to
his confiding nature a sufficient excuse for these various delays; and
he waited in quiet expectation till your name, my friend, rose glorious
in Scotland.  My father and myself were then in Guienne; Edward
persuaded him that you affected the crown; and he returned with that
deceiver to draw his sword against his people and their ambitious
idol--for so he believed you to be; and grievous has been the expiation
of that fatal hour!  Your conference with him on the banks of the
Carron opened his eyes; he saw what his credulity had made Scotland
suffer; what a wreck he had made of his own fame; and from that moment
he resolved to follow another course.  But the habit of trusting the
affection of Edward inclined him rather to remonstrate on his rights
than immediately to take up arms against him; yet, resolved not to
strike a second blow on his people, when you assailed the Southron camp
he withdrew his few remaining followers, who had survived the
hard-fought day of Falkirk, into a remote defile.  On quitting you, I
came up with him in Mid=Lothian; and never having missed me from the
camp, he concluded that I had appeared thus late from having kept in
the rear of the division."

Bruce now proceeded to narrate to Wallace the particulars of his
father's meeting with the king at Durham.  Instead of that monarch
receiving the Earl of Carrick with his wonted familiar welcome, he
turned coldly from him when he approached, and suffered him to take his
usual seat at the royal table without deigning him the slightest
notice.  Young Bruce was absent from the banquet, having determined
never to mingle again in social communion with the man whom he now
regarded as the usurper of his father's rights.  The absence of the
filial eye which had once looked the insolent Buchan into his inherent
insignificance, now emboldened the audacity of this enemy of the house
of Carrick; and, supported by Athol on the one side, and Soulis on the
other, the base voluptuary seized a pause in the conversation (that he
might draw the attention of all present to the disgrace of the chief),
and said, with affected carelessness, "My Lord of Carrick, to-day you
dine with clean hands; the last time, I saw you at meat, they were
garnished with your own blood!"  The earl turned on him a look which
asked him to explain.  Lord Buchan laughed, and continued, "When we
last met at table, was it not in his majesty's tent after the victory
at Falkirk?  You were then red from the slaughter of those bastardized
people to whom I understand you now give the fond appellation of sons.
Having recognized the relationship, it was not probable we should again
see your hands in their former brave livery; and their present pallid
hue convinces more than myself, of the truth of our information."

"And me," cried Edward, rising on the couch to which his wounds
confined him, "that I have discovered a traitor!  You fled, Lord
Carrick, at the first attack which the Scots made on my camp, and you
drew thousands after you.  I know you too well to believe that
cowardice impelled the motion.  It was treachery, accursed treachery to
your friend and king; and you shall feel the weight of his resentment!"

"To this hour, Kind Edward," replied the earl, starting from his chair,
"I have been more faithful to you than to my country or my God!  I
heard, saw, and believed, only what you determined; and I became your
slave, your vile, oppressed slave! the victim of your artifice!  How
often have you pledged yourself that you fought in Scotland only for my
advantage!  I gave my faith and my power to you; and how often have you
promised, after the next successful battle, to restore me to the crown
of my ancestors!  I still believed you, and I still engaged all who yet
acknowledged the influence of Bruce, to support your name in Scotland.
Was not such the reiterated promise by which you allured me to the
field of Falkirk?  And when I had covered myself, as Lord Buchan too
truly says, with the blood of my children; when I asked my friend for
the crown I had served for, what was his answer?  'Have I naught to do
but to win kingdoms to make gifts of?'  Thus, then, did a king, a
friend, break his often-repreated word!  What wonder, then, that I
should feel the indignation of a prince and a friend; and leave the
false, alas! the perjured, to defenders whom he seemed more highly to
approve?  But of treachery, what have I shown?  Rather confidence, King
Edward; and the confidence that was awakened in the fields of Palestine
brought me hither to-day to remonstrate with you on my rights; when by
throwing myself into the arms of my people, I might have demanded them
at the head of a victorious army."

Edward, who had prepared by the Cummins to discredit all that Carrick
might say in his defense, turned with a look of contempt toward him,
and said, "You have persuaded to act like a madman, and as maniacs both
yourself and your son shall be guarded till I have leisure to consider
any rational evidence you may in future offer in your vindication."

"And is this the manner, King Edward, that you treat your friend, once
your preserver?"

"The vassal," replied Edward, "who presumes upon the condescension of
his prince, and acts as if he were really his equal, ought to meet the
punishment due to such arrogance.  You saved my life on the walls of
Acre; but you owed that duty to the son of your liege lord.  In the
fervor of youth I inconsiderately rewarded you with my friendship, and
the return is treason."  As he concluded he turned from Lord Carrick;
and the marshals immediately seizing the earl, took him to the keep of
the castle.**

**These speeches are historically true; as is also Edward's
after-treatment of the Earl of Carrick.

His son, who had been sought in the Carrick quarters, and laid under an
arrest, met his father in the guard-chamber.  Carrick could not speak;
but motioning to be conducted to the place appointed for his prison,
the men with equal silence led him through a range of apartments which
occupied the middle story, and stopping in the furthest, left him there
with his son.  Bruce was not surprised at his own arrest; but at that
of his father, he stood in speechless astonishment until the guards
withdrew; then, seeing Lord Carrick with a changing countenance throw
himself on the bed (for it was in his sleeping room they had left him),
he exclaimed, "What is the meaning of this, my father?  Has any charge
against me brought suspicion on you?"

"No, Robert, no," replied the earl; "it is I who have brought you into
this prison, and into disgrace; disgrace with all the world, for having
tacitly surrendered my inheritance to the invader of my country.
Honest men abhor, villains treat me with contumely; and he for whom I
incurred all this, because I would not, when my eyes were open to my
sin, again imbrue my hands in the blood of my country, now thrusts me
from him!  You are implicated in my crime; and for not joining the
Southrons to repel the Scots from the royal camp, we are both
prisoners!"

"Then," replied Bruce, "he shall feel that you have a son who has
virtue to be what he suspects; and from this hour I proclaim eternal
enmity to the betrayer of my father; to the ingrate who embraced you to
destroy!"

The indignation of the youthful prince wrought him to so vehement a
declaration of resolute and immediate hostility, that Lord Carrick was
obliged to give his transports way; but when he saw that his
denunciations were exhausted, though not the determined purpose of his
soul (for he trod the room with a step which seemed to shake its
foundations, with the power of his mighty mind), Carrick gazed on him
with pride, yet grief, and sighing heavily called him to approach him.
"Come to me, my Robert!" said he, "hear and abide by the last
injunctions of your father, for from this bed I may never rise more.  A
too late sense of the injuries my sanction has doubled on the people I
was born to protect, and the ingratitude of him for whom I have
offended my God and wronged my country, have broken my heart.  I shall
die, Robert, but you will avenge me!"

"May God so prosper me!"  cried Bruce, raising his arms to heaven.
Carrick resumed:

"Attend to me, my dear and brave son, and do not mistake the nature of
my last wish.  Do not allow the perhaps too forcible word I have used,
to hurry you into any personal revenge on Edward.  Let him live to feel
and to regret the outrages he has committed on the peace and honor of
his too faithful friend.  Pierce him on the side of his ambition, there
he is vulnerable, and there you will heal while you wound.  This would
be my revenge, dear Robert, that you should one day have his life in
your power, and in memory of what I now say, spare it.  When I am gone,
think not of private resentment.  Let your aim be the recovery of the
kingdom, which Edward rifled from your fathers.  Join the virtuous and
triumphant Wallace.  Tell him of my remorse, of my fate, and be guided
wholly by his counsels.  To insure the success of this enterprise, my
son--a success to which I look as to the only means of redeeming the
name I have lost, and of inspiring my separated spirit with courage to
meet the freeborn souls of my ancestors--urge not your own destruction
by any premature disclosure of your resolutions.  For my sake and for
your country's, suppress your resentment, threaten not the King of
England, provoke not the unworthy Scottish lords who have gained his
ear; but bury all in your own bosom till you can join Wallace.  Then,
by his arm, and your own, seat yourself firmly on the throne of your
fathers.  That moment will sufficiently avenge me on Edward!--and in
that moment, Robert! or at least as soon as circumstances can allow,
let the English ground which will then hold my body, give up its dead!
Remove me to a Scottish grave, and, standing over my ashes, proclaim to
them who might have been my people, that for every evil I suffered to
fall on Scotland, I have since felt answering pangs, and that dying, I
beg their forgiveness, and bequeath them my best blessing--my virtuous
son, to reign in my stead!"

These injunctions to assert his own honor and that of his father, were
readily sworn to by Bruce; but he could not so easily be made to quell
the imperious indignation which was precipitating him to an immediate
and loud revenge.  The dying earl trembled before the overwhelming
passion of his son's wrath and grief.  Treated with outrage and
contumely, he saw his father stricken to the earth before him, and he
could not bear to hear any temporizing with his murderers.  But all
this tempest of the soul the wisdom-inspired arguments of the earl at
last becalmed, but could not subdue.  He convinced his son's reason by
showing him that caution would insure the blow, and that his aim could
only be effected by remaining silent till he could publish his father's
honor, evidenced by his own heroism.  "Do this," added Carrick, "and I
shall live fair in the memories of men.  But be violent, threaten
Edward from these walls, menace the wretches who have trodden on the
gray hairs of their prince, and your voice will be heard no more; this
ground will drink your blood, and blindly judging infamy will forever
after point to our obscure graves!"

Such persuasives at last prevailed with Bruce, and next day, writing
the hasty lines which Wallace received at Falkirk, he intrusted them to
his senachie, who conveyed them to Scotland by means of the shepherd
youth.

Shortly after the dispatch of this letter, the presage of Lord Carrick
was verified; he was seized in the night with spasms, and died in the
arms of his son.

When Bruce related these particulars, his grief and indignation became
so violent, that Wallace was obliged to enforce the dying injunctions
of the father he thus vehemently deplored, to moderate the delirium of
his soul.  "Ah!" exclaimed the young earl, "I have indeed needed some
friend to save me from myself, some one to reconcile me to the Robert
Bruce who had so long slept in the fatal delusions which poisoned his
father and laid him low!  Oh! Wallace! at times I am mad.  I know not
whether this forbearance be not cowardice.  I doubt whether my father
meant what he spoke, that he did not yet seek to preserve the life of
his son at the expense of his honor, and I have been ready to
precipitate myself on the steel of Edward, so that he should but meet
the point of mine!"

Bruce then added, that in his more rational meditations, he had
resolved to attempt an escape in the course of a few days.  He
understood that a deputation of English barons, seeking a ratification
of their charter, were soon to arrive in Durham; the bustle attendant
on their business would, he hoped, draw attention from him, and afford
him the opportunity he sought.  "In that case," continued he, "I should
have made directly to Stirling, and had not Providence conducted you to
me, I might have unconsciously thrown myself into the midst of enemies.
James Cummin is too ambitious to have allowed my life to pass
unattempted."

Whilst he was yet speaking, the door of the chamber burst open, and
Bruce's two attendants rushed into the room with looks aghast.  Bruce
and Wallace started on their feet and laid their hands on their swords.
But instead of anything hostile appearing behind the servants, the
inebriated figure of the senachie staggered forward.  The men, hardly
awake, stood staring and trembling, and looking from the senachie to
Wallace; at last one, extricating his terror-struck tongue, and falling
on his knees, exclaimed: "Blessed St. Andrew! here is the senachie and
his wraith."  Bruce perceived the mistake of his servants, and
explaining to them that a traveling minstrel had obliged the senachie
by performing his duty, he bade them retire to rest, and think no more
of their alarm.  The intoxicated bard threw himself without ceremony on
his pallet in the recess, and the servants, though convinced, still
shaking with superstitious fright, entreated permission to bring their
heather beds into their lord's chamber.  To deny them was impossible,
and all further converse with Wallace that night being put an end to, a
couch was laid for him in an interior apartment, and with a grateful
pressure of the hands, in which their hearts silently embraced, the
chiefs separated to repose.




Chapter LVIII.

The Bishop's Palace.


The second matin bell sounded from the abbey before the eyes of Wallace
opened from the deep sleep which had sealed them.  A bath refreshed him
from every toil, then renewing the stain on his face and hands with the
juice of a nut which he carried about him, and once more covering his
martial figure and golden hair with the minstrel's cassock and cowl, he
rejoined his friend.

Bruce had previously affected to consider the senachie as still
disordered by his last night's excess, and ordering him from his
presence for at least a day, commanded that the traveling minstrel
should be summoned to supply his place.

The table was spread when Wallace entered, and several servants were in
attendance.  Bruce hastily rose and would have embraced him, so did his
comforted heart spring to meet his friend; but before these people it
would have been more than imprudent, and hailing him with only one of
his love-beaming looks, he made a sign to him to take his place at a
board near his own.  To prevent suspicioin in the attendants (some of
whom might be spies of Edward's), during the repast he discoursed with
Wallace on subjects relative to northern literature, repeating many
passages apposite to his own heroic sentiments, from Ossian and other
Scottish bards.

The meal finished, Wallace, to maintain his assumed character while the
servants were removing the table, was tuning his harp when the Earl of
Gloucester entered the room.  The earl told Bruce the king had required
the attendance of the border minstrel, and that after searching over
the castle, the royal seneschal had at last discovered he was in the
keep with him.  On this being intimated to Gloucester, he chose rather
to come himself to demand the harper from his friend, than to subject
him to the insolence of the royal servants.  The king desired to hear
"The Triumph," with which the minstrel had so much pleased the queen.
Bruce turned pale at this message; and was opening his mouth to utter a
denial, when Wallace, who read in his countenance what he was going to
say, and aware of the consequences, immediately spoke:

"If my lord Bruce will grant permission, I should wish to comply with
the King of England's request."

"Minstrel!" replied Bruce, casting on him a powerful expression of what
was passing in his mind, "you know not, perhaps that the King of
England is at enmity with me, and cannot mean well to any one who has
been my guest, or servant!  The Earl of Gloucester will excuse your
attendance in the presence."

"Not for my life or the minstrel's!" replied the earl; "the king would
suspect some mystery, and this innocent man might fall into peril.  But
as it is, his majesty merely wishes to hear him play and sing, and I
pledge myself he shall return in safety."

Further opposition would only have courted danger, and with as good a
grace as he could assume, Bruce gave his consent.  A page who followed
Gloucester took up the harp, and with a glance at his friend, which
spoke the fearless mind with which he ventured into the power of his
enemy, Wallace accompanied Gloucester out of the room.

The earl moved swiftly forward, and leading him through a double line
of guards, the folding-doors of the royal apartment were thrown open by
two knights in waiting, and Wallace found himself in the royal
presence.  Perforated with wounds which the chief's own hand had given
him, the king lay upon a couch overhung with a crimson-velvet canopy,
with long golden fringes which swept the floor.  His crown stood on a
cushion at his head, and his queen, the blooming Margaret of France,
sat full of smiles at his feet.  The young Countess of Gloucester
occupied a seat by her side.

The countess, who from indisposition had not been at court the
preceding day, fixed her eyes on the minstrel as he advanced into the
middle of the room, where the page, by Gloucester's orders, planted the
harp.  She observed the manner of his obeisance to the king and queen,
and to herself, and the queen whispering her with a smile, said, while
he was taking his station at the harp, "Have your British troubadours
usually such an air as that?  Am I right, or am I wrong?"

"Quite right," replied the countess in as low a voice; "I suppose he
has sung of kings and heroes till he cannot help assuming their step
and demeanor!"

"But how did he come by those eyes?" answered the queen.  "If singing
of Reuther's 'beamy gaze' have so richly endowed his own, by getting
him to teach me his art, I may warble myself into a complexion as fair
as any northern beauty!"

"But then his must not be the subject of your song," whispered the
countess with a laugh, "for methinks it is rather of the Ethiop hue!"

During this short dialogue, which was heard by none but the two ladies,
Edward was speaking with Gloucester, and Wallace leaned upon his harp.

"That is enough," said the king to his son-in-law; "now let me hear him
play."

The earl gave the word, and Wallace, striking the chords with the
master hand of genius, called forth such strains and uttered such tones
from his full and richly-modulated voice, that the king listened with
wonder, and the queen and countess scarcely allowed themselves to
breathe.  He sung the parting of Reuther and his bride, and their souls
seemed to pant upon his notes; he changed his measure, and their bosoms
heaved with the enthusiasm which spoke from his lips and hand, for he
urged the hero to battle, he described the conflict, he mourned the
slain, he sung the glorious triumph; as the last sweep of the harp
rolled its lofty diapason on the ear of the king, the monarch deigned
to pronounce him unequaled in his art.  Excess of delight so agitated
the more delicate frames of the ladies, that while they poured their
encomiums on the minstrel, they wiped the glistening tears form their
cheeks.  The queen approached him, laid her hand upon the harp, and
touching the strings with a light finger, said with a sweet smile, "You
must remain with the king's musicians, and teach me how to charm as you
do!"  Wallace replied to this innocent speech with a smile sweet as her
own, and bowed.

The countess drew near.  Though not much older than the youthful queen,
she had been married twice, and being therefore more acquainted with
the proprieties of life, her compliments were uttered in a form more
befitting her rank, and the supposed quality of the man to whom the
queen continued to pour forth her less considerate praises.

Edward desired Gloucester to bring the minstrel closer to him.  Wallace
approached the royal couch.  Edward looked at him from head to foot
before he spoke.  Wallace bore his eagle gaze with an undisturbed
countenance; he neither withdrew his eye from the king, nor did he
allow a conqueror's fire to emit from its glance.

"Who are you?" at length demanded Edward, who, surprised at the noble
mien and unabashed carriage of the minstrel, conceived some suspicions
of his quality.

Wallace saw what was passing in the king's mind, and determining by a
frank reply to uproot his doubts, mildly but fearlessly answered:

"A Scot."

"Indeed!" said the king, satisfied that no incendiary would dare thus
to proclaim himself.  "And how durst you, being of that outlawed
nation, venture into my court?  Feared you not to fall a sacrifice to
my indignation against the mad leader of your rebellious countrymen?"

"I fear nothing on earth," replied Wallace. "This garb is privileged,
none who respect that sacred law dare commit violence on a minstrel,
and against them who regard no law but that of their own wills, I have
this weapon to defend me."  As Wallace spoke he pointed to a dirk stuck
in his girdle.

"You are a bold man, and an honest man, I believe," replied the king;
"and as my queen desires it, I order your enrollment in my traveling
train of musicians.  You may leave the presence."

"Then follow me to my apartment," cried the queen; "countess, you will
accompany me, to see me take my first lesson."

A page took up the harp; and Wallace, bowing his head to the king, was
conducted by Gloucester to the anteroom of the queen's apartments.  The
earl there told him, that when dismissed by the queen, a page he would
leave would show him the way back to Lord Carrick.

The royal Margaret herself opened the door, so eager was she to admit
her teacher; and placing herself at the harp, she attempted a passage
of "The Triumph," which had particularly struck her, but she played
wrong.  Wallace was asked to set her right; he obeyed.  She was
quick--he clear in his explanations; and in less than half an hour he
made her execute the whole movement in a manner that delighted her.

"Why, minstrel," cried she, looking up in his face, "either your harp
is enchanted, or you are a magician.  I have studied three long years
to play the lute, and could never bring forth any tone that did not
make me ready to stop my own ears.  And now, countess," cried she,
again touching a few chords, "did you ever hear anything so enchanting?"

"I suppose," returned the countess, "all your former instructors have
been novices, and this Scot alone knows the art to which they
pretended."

"Do you hear what the countess says?" exclaimed the queen, affecting to
whisper to him; "she will not allow of any spiritual agency in my
wonderfully-awakened talent.  If you can contradict her, do; for I want
very much to believe in fairies, magicians, and all the enchanting
world!"

Wallace, with a respectful smile, answered, "I know of now spirit that
has interposed in your majesty's favor but that of your own genius; and
it is more efficient than the agency of all fairy-land."

The queen looked at him very gravely, and said, "If you really think
there are no such things as fairies and enchantments, for so your words
would imply, then everybody in your country must have genius, for they
seem to be excellent in everything.  Your warriors are so peerlessly
brave--all, excepting these Scottish lords who are such favorites with
the king!  I wonder what he can see in their uncouth faces, or find in
their rough indelicate conversation to admire.  If it had not been for
their besetting my gracious Edward, I am sure he never would have
suspected ill of the noble Bruce!"

"Queen Margaret!" cried the Countess of Gloucester, giving her a look
of respectful reprehension; "had not the minstrel better retire?"

The queen blushed, and recollected that she was giving too free a vent
to her sentiments; but she could not suffer Wallace to withdraw.

"I have yet to ask you," resumed she--"the warriors of Scotland being
so resistless, and their minstrels so perfect in their art--whether all
the ladies can be so beautiful as the Lady Helen Mar?"

The eagerness with which Wallace grasped at any tidings of her who was
so prime an object of his enterprise at once disturbed the composure of
his air, and had the penetrating eyes of the countess been then
directed toward him, she might have drawn some dangerous conclusions
from the start he gave at the mention of her name, and from the
heightened color which, in spite of his exertions to suppress all
evident emotion, maintained its station on his cheek.
