which Orestes heard with blandest smiles, while his heart was black
with curses; and Cyril answered by a very violent though a very true and
practical harangue on the text, 'How hardly shall they that have riches
enter into the kingdom of heaven.'

So respectability and moderation met with their usual hapless fate,
and, soundly cursed by both parties, in the vain attempt to please both,
wisely left the upper powers to settle their own affairs, and went home
to their desks and counters, and did a very brisk business all that week
on the strength of the approaching festival. One hapless innkeeper only
tried to carry out in practice the principles which the deputation from
his guild had so eloquently advocated; and being convicted of giving
away bread in the morning to the Nitrian monks, and wine in the evening
to the Prefect's guards, had his tavern gutted, and his head broken by
a joint plebiscitum of both the parties whom he had conciliated, who
afterwards fought a little together, and then, luckily for the general
peace, mutually ran away from each other.

Cyril in the meanwhile, though he was doing a foolish thing, was doing
it wisely enough. Orestes might curse, and respectability might deplore,
those nightly sermons, which shook the mighty arcades of the Caesareum,
but they could not answer them. Cyril was right and knew that he was
right. Orestes was a scoundrel, hateful to God, and to the enemies of
God. The middle classes were lukewarm covetous cowards: the whole system
of government was a swindle and an injustice; all men's hearts were mad
with crying, 'Lord, how long?' The fierce bishop had only to thunder
forth text on text, from every book of scripture, old and new, in order
to array on his side not merely the common sense and right feeling, but
the bigotry and ferocity of the masses.

In vain did the good Arsenius represent to him not only the scandal but
the unrighteousness of his new canonisation. 'I must have fuel, my good
father,' was his answer, 'wherewith to keep alight the flame of zeal. If
I am to be silent as to Heraclian's defeat, I must give them some other
irritant, which will put them in a proper temper to act on that defeat,
when they are told of it. If they hate Orestes, does he not deserve it?
Even if he is not altogether as much in the wrong in this particular
case as they fancy he is, are there not a thousand other crimes of
his which deserve their abhorrence even more? At all events, he must
proclaim the empire, as you yourself say, or we shall have no handle
against him. He will not dare to proclaim it if he knows that we are
aware of the truth. And if we are to keep the truth in reserve, we must
have something else to serve meanwhile as a substitute for it.'

And poor Arsenius submitted with a sigh, as he saw Cyril making a fresh
step in that alluring path of evil-doing that good might come, which led
him in after years into many a fearful sin, and left his name disgraced,
perhaps for ever, in the judgment of generations, who know as little
of the pandemonium against which he fought, as they do of the intense
belief which sustained him in his warfare; and who have therefore
neither understanding nor pardon for the occasional outrages and errors
of a man no worse, even if no better, than themselves.



CHAPTER XXI: THE SQUIRE-BISHOP


In a small and ill-furnished upper room of a fortified country house,
sat Synesius, the Bishop of Cyrene.

A goblet of wine stood beside him, on the table, but it was untasted.
Slowly and sadly, by the light of a tiny lamp, he went on writing a
verse or two, and then burying his face in his hand, while hot tears
dropped between his fingers on the paper; till a servant entering,
announced Raphael Aben-Ezra.

Synesius rose, with a gesture of surprise, and hurried towards the door.
'No, ask him to come hither to me. To pass through those deserted rooms
at night is more than I can bear.' And he waited for his guest at the
chamber door, and as he entered, caught both his hands in his, and tried
to speak; but his voice was choked within him.

'Do not speak,' said Raphael gently, leading him to his chair again. 'I
know all.'

'You know all? And are you, then, so unlike the rest of the world,
that you alone have come to visit the bereaved and the deserted in his
misery?'

'I am like the rest of the world, after all; for I came to you on my own
selfish errand, to seek comfort. Would that I could give it instead! But
the servants told me all, below.'

'And yet you persisted in seeing me, as if I could help you? Alas! I can
help no one now. Here I am at last, utterly alone, utterly helpless. As
I came from my mother's womb, so shall I return again. My last child--my
last and fairest--gone after the rest!--Thank God, that I have had even
a day's peace wherein to lay him by his mother and his brothers; though
He alone knows how long the beloved graves may remain unrifled. Let
it have been shame enough to sit here in my lonely tower and watch the
ashes of my Spartan ancestors, the sons of Hercules himself, my glory
and my pride, sinful fool that I was! cast to the winds by barbarian
plunderers.... When wilt thou make an end, O Lord, and slay me?'

'And how did the poor boy die?' asked Raphael, in hope of soothing
sorrow by enticing it to vent itself in words.

'The pestilence.--What other fate can we expect, who breathe an air
tainted with corpses, and sit under a sky darkened with carrion birds?
But I could endure even that, if I could work, if I could help. But to
sit here, imprisoned now for months between these hateful towers; night
after night to watch the sky, red with burning homesteads; day after day
to have my ears ring with the shrieks of the dying and the captives--for
they have begun now to murder every male down to the baby at the
breast--and to feel myself utterly fettered, impotent, sitting here like
some palsied idiot, waiting for my end! I long to rush out, and fall
fighting, sword in hand: but I am their last, their only hope.
The governors care nothing for our supplications. In vain have I
memorialised Gennadius and Innocent, with what little eloquence my
misery has not stunned in me. But there is no resolution, no unanimity
left in the land. The soldiery are scattered in small garrisons,
employed entirely in protecting the private property of their officers.
The Ausurians defeat them piecemeal, and, armed with their spoils,
actually have begun to beleaguer fortified towns; and now there is
nothing left for us, but to pray that, like Ulysses, we may be devoured
the last. What am I doing? I am selfishly pouring out my own sorrows,
instead of listening to yours.'

'Nay, friend, you are talking of the sorrows of your country, not of
your own. As for me, I have no sorrow--only a despair: which, being
irremediable, may well wait. But you--oh, you must not stay here. Why
not escape to Alexandria?'

'I will die at my post as I have lived, the father of my people. When
the last ruin comes, and Cyrene itself is besieged, I shall return
thither from my present outpost, and the conquerors shall find the
bishop in his place before the altar. There I have offered for years the
unbloody sacrifice to Him, who will perhaps require of me a bloody one,
that so the sight of an altar polluted by the murder of His priest,
may end the sum of Pentapolitan woe, and arouse Him to avenge His
slaughtered sheep! There, we will talk no more of it. This, at least, I
have left in my power, to make you welcome. And after supper you shall
tell me what brings you hither.'

And the good bishop, calling his servant, set to work to show his guest
such hospitality as the invaders had left in his power.

Raphael's usual insight had not deserted him when, in his utter
perplexity, he went, almost instinctively, straight to Synesius. The
Bishop of Cyrene, to judge from the charming private letters which he
has left, was one of those many-sided, volatile, restless men, who
taste joy and sorrow, if not deeply or permanently, yet abundantly and
passionately. He lived, as Raphael had told Orestes, in a whirlwind of
good deeds, meddling and toiling for the mere pleasure of action; and as
soon as there was nothing to be done, which, till lately, had happened
seldom enough with him, paid the penalty for past excitement in fits of
melancholy. A man of magniloquent and flowery style, not without a vein
of self-conceit; yet withal of overflowing kindliness, racy humour,
and unflinching courage, both physical and moral; with a very clear
practical faculty, and a very muddy speculative one--though, of course,
like the rest of the world, he was especially proud of his own weakest
side, and professed the most passionate affection for philosophic
meditation; while his detractors hinted, not without a show of reason,
that he was far more of an adept in soldiering and dog-breaking than in
the mysteries of the unseen world.

To him Raphael betook himself, he hardly knew why; certainly not for
philosophic consolation; perhaps because Synesius was, as Raphael used
to say, the only Christian from whom he had ever heard a hearty laugh;
perhaps because he had some wayward hope, unconfessed even to himself,
that he might meet at Synesius's house the very companions from whom
he had just fled. He was fluttering round Victoria's new and strange
brilliance like a moth round the candle, as he confessed, after supper,
to his host; and now he was come hither, on the chance of being able to
singe his wings once more.

Not that his confession was extracted without much trouble to the good
old man, who, seeing at once that Raphael had some weight upon his mind,
which he longed to tell, and yet was either too suspicious or too
proud to tell, set himself to ferret out the secret, and forgot all his
sorrows for the time, as soon as he found a human being to whom he might
do good. But Raphael was inexplicably wayward and unlike himself. All
his smooth and shallow persiflage, even his shrewd satiric humour,
had vanished. He seemed parched by some inward fever; restless,
moody, abrupt, even peevish; and Synesius's curiosity rose with his
disappointment, as Raphael went on obstinately declining to consult the
very physician before whom he presented himself as patient.

'And what can you do for me, if I did tell you?'

'Then allow me, my very dear friend, to ask this. As you deny having
visited me on my own account, on what account did you visit me?'

'Can you ask? To enjoy the society of the most finished gentleman of
Pentapolis.'

'And was that worth a week's journey in perpetual danger of death?'

'As for danger of death, that weighs little with a man who is careless
of life. And as for the week's journey, I had a dream one night, on my
way, which made me question whether I were wise in troubling a Christian
bishop with any thoughts or questions which relate merely to poor human
beings like myself, who marry and are given in marriage.'

'You forget, friend, that you are speaking to one who has married, and
loved--and lost.'

'I did not. But you see how rude I am growing. I am no fit company for
you, or any man. I believe I shall end by turning robber-chief, and
heading a party of Ausurians.'

'But,' said the patient Synesius 'you have forgotten your dream all this
while.

'Forgotten!--I did not promise to tell it you--did I?'

'No; but as it seems to have contained some sort of accusation against
my capacity, do you not think it but fair to tell the accused what it
was?'

Raphael smiled.

'Well then.... Suppose I had dreamt this. That a philosopher, an
academic, and a believer in nothing and in no man, had met at Berenice
certain rabbis of the Jews, and heard them reading and expounding a
certain book of Solomon--the Song of Songs. You, as a learned man, know
into what sort of trumpery allegory they would contrive to twist it; how
the bride's eyes were to mean the scribes who were full of wisdom, as
the pools of Heshbon were of water; and her stature spreading like a
palm-tree, the priests who spread out their hands when blessing the
people; and the left hand which should be under her head, the Tephilim
which these old pedants wore on their left wrists; and the right hand
which should hold her, the Mezuzah which they fixed on the right side of
their doors to keep off devils; and so forth.'

'I have heard such silly Cabbalisms, certainly.'

'You have? Then suppose that I went on, and saw in my dream how this
same academic and unbeliever, being himself also a Hebrew of the
Hebrews, snatched the roll out of the rabbis' hands, and told them that
they were a party of fools for trying to set forth what the book might
possibly mean, before they had found out what it really did mean; and
that they could only find out that by looking honestly at the plain
words to see what Solomon meant by it. And then, suppose that this same
apostate Jew, this member of the synagogue of Satan, in his carnal and
lawless imaginations, had waxed eloquent with the eloquence of devils,
and told them that the book set forth, to those who had eyes to see,
how Solomon the great king, with his threescore queens, and fourscore
concubines, and virgins without number, forgets all his seraglio and his
luxury in pure and noble love for the undefiled, who is but one; and
how as his eyes are opened to see that God made the one man for the one
woman, and the one woman to the one man, even as it was in the garden of
Eden, so all his heart and thoughts become pure, and gentle, and simple;
how the song of the birds, and the scent of the grapes, and the spicy
southern gales, and all the simple country pleasures of the glens of
Lebanon, which he shares with his own vine-dressers and slaves, become
more precious in his eyes than all his palaces and artificial pomp; and
the man feels that he is in harmony, for the first time in his life,
with the universe of God, and with the mystery of the seasons; that
within him, as well as without him, the winter is past, and the rain
is over and gone; the flowers appear on the earth, and the voice of the
turtle is heard in the land.... And suppose I saw in my dream how the
rabbis, when they heard those wicked words, stopped their ears with one
accord, and ran upon that son of Belial and cast him out, because
he blasphemed their sacred books by his carnal interpretations. And
suppose--I only say suppose--that I saw in my dream how the poor man
said in his heart, "I will go to the Christians; they acknowledge the
sacredness of this same book; and they say that their God taught them
that 'in the beginning God made man, male and female.' Perhaps they will
tell me whether this Song of Songs does not, as it seems to me to do,
show the passage upwards from brutal polygamy to that monogamy which
they so solemnly command, and agree with me, that it is because the
song preaches this that it has a right to take its place among the holy
writings? You, as a Christian bishop, should know what answer such a man
would receive.... You are silent? Then I will tell you what answer
he seemed to receive in my dream. "O blasphemous and carnal man, who
pervertest Holy Scripture into a cloak for thine own licentiousness, as
if it spoke of man's base and sensual affections, know that this book is
to be spiritually interpreted of the marriage between the soul and its
Creator, and that it is from this very book that the Catholic Church
derives her strongest arguments in favour of holy virginity, and the
glories of a celibate life."'

Synesius was still silent.

'And what do you think I saw in my dream that that man did when he found
these Christians enforcing, as a necessary article of practice, as well
as of faith, a baseless and bombastic metaphor, borrowed from that very
Neo-Platonism out of which he had just fled for his life? He cursed the
day he was born, and the hour in which his father was told, "Thou hast
gotten a man-child," and said, "Philosophers, Jews, and Christians,
farewell for ever and a day! The clearest words of your most sacred
books mean anything or nothing' as the case may suit your fancies; and
there is neither truth nor reason under the sun. What better is there
for a man, than to follow the example of his people, and to turn usurer,
and money-getter, and cajoler of fools in his turn, even as his father
was before him?"'

Synesius remained a while in deep thought, and at last-- 'And yet you
came to me?'

'I did, because you have loved and married; because you have stood out
manfully against this strange modern insanity, and refused to give up,
when you were made a bishop, the wife whom God had given you. You, I
thought, could solve the riddle for me, if any man could.'

'Alas, friend! I have begun to distrust, of late, my power of solving
riddles. After all, why should they be solved? What matters one more
mystery in a world of mysteries? "If thou marry, thou hast not sinned,"
are St. Paul's own words; and let them be enough for us. Do not ask me
to argue with you, but to help you. Instead of puzzling me with deep
questions, and tempting me to set up my private judgment, as I have
done too often already, against the opinion of the Church, tell me your
story, and test my sympathy rather than my intellect. I shall feel with
you and work for you, doubt not, even though I am unable to explain to
myself why I do it.'

'Then you cannot solve my riddle?'

'Let me help you,' said Synesius with a sweet smile, 'to solve it for
yourself. You need not try to deceive me. You have a love, an undefiled,
who is but one. When you possess her, you will be able to judge better
whether your interpretation of the Song is the true one; and if you
still think that it is, Synesius, at least, will have no quarrel against
you. He has always claimed for himself the right of philosophising in
private, and he will allow the same liberty to you' whether the mob do
or not.'

'Then you agree with me? Of course you do!'

'Is it fair to ask me whether I accept a novel interpretation, which
I have only heard five minutes ago, delivered in a somewhat hasty and
rhetorical form?'

'You are shirking the question,' said Raphael peevishly.

'And what if I am? Tell me, point-blank, most self-tormenting of
men, can I help you in practice, even though I choose to leave you to
yourself in speculation?'

'Well, then, if you will have my story, take it, and judge for yourself
of Christian common sense.'

And hurriedly, as if ashamed of his own confession, and yet compelled,
in spite of himself, to unbosom it, he told Synesius all, from his first
meeting with Victoria to his escape from her at Berenice.

The good bishop, to Aben-Ezra's surprise, seemed to treat the whole
matter as infinitely amusing. He chuckled, smote his hand on his
thigh, and nodded approval at every pause--perhaps to give the speaker
courage--perhaps because he really thought that Raphael's prospects were
considerably less desperate than he fancied....

'If you laugh at me, Synesius, I am silent. It is quite enough to endure
the humiliation of telling you that I am--confound it!--like any boy of
sixteen.'

'Laugh at you?--with you, you mean. A convent? Pooh, pooh! The old
Prefect has enough sense, I will warrant him, not to refuse a good match
for his child.'

'You forget that I have not the honour of being a Christian.'

'Then we'll make you one. You won't let me convert you, I know; you
always used to gibe and jeer at my philosophy. But Augustine comes
to-morrow.

'Augustine?'

'He does indeed; and we must be off by daybreak, with all the armed men
we can muster, to meet and escort him, and to hunt, of course, going and
coming; for we have had no food this fortnight, but what our own dogs
and bows have furnished us. He shall take you in hand, and cure you of
all your Judaism in a week; and then just leave the rest to me; I will
manage it somehow or other. It is sure to come right. No; do not be
bashful. It will be real amusement to a poor wretch who can find nothing
else to do--Heigho! And as for lying under an obligation to me, why
we can square that by your lending me three or four thousand gold
pieces--Heaven knows I want them!--on the certainty of never seeing them
again.'

Raphael could not help laughing in his turn.

'Synesius is himself still, I see, and not unworthy of his ancestor
Hercules; and though he shrinks from cleansing the Augean stable of my
soul, paws like the war-horse in the valley at the hope of undertaking
any lesser labours in my behalf. But, my dear generous bishop, this
matter is more serious, and I, the subject of it, have become more
serious also, than you fancy. Consider: by the uncorrupt honour of your
Spartan forefathers, Agis, Brasidas, and the rest of them, don't you
think that you are, in your hasty kindness, tempting me to behave in a
way which they would have called somewhat rascally?'

'How then, my dear man! You have a very honourable and praiseworthy
desire; and I am willing to help you to compass it.'

'Do you think that I have not cast about before now for more than one
method of compassing it for myself? My good man, I have been tempted a
dozen times already to turn Christian: but there has risen up in me the
strangest fancy about conscience and honour.... I never was scrupulous
before, Heaven knows--I am not over-scrupulous now--except about her.
I cannot dissemble before her. I dare not look in her face when I had
a lie in my right hand.... She looks through one-into one-like a
clear-eyed awful goddess.... I never was ashamed in my life till my eyes
met hers....'

'But if you really became a Christian?'

'I cannot. I should suspect my own motives. Here is another of these
absurd soul-anatomising scruples which have risen up in me. I should
suspect that I had changed my creed because I wished to change it--that
if I was not deceiving her I was deceiving myself. If I had not loved
her it might have been different: but now--just because I do love her,
I will not, I dare not, listen to Augustine's arguments, or my own
thoughts on the matter.'

'Most wayward of men!' cried Synesius, half peevishly; 'you seem to take
some perverse pleasure in throwing yourself into the waves again, the
instant you have climbed a rock of refuge!'

'Pleasure? Is there any pleasure in feeling oneself at death-grips with
the devil? I bad given up believing in him for many a year .... And
behold, the moment that I awaken to anything noble and right, I find the
old serpent alive and strong at my throat! No wonder that I suspect
him, you, myself--I, who have been tempted, every hour in the last week,
temptations to become a devil. Ay,' he went on, raising his voice, as
all the fire of his intense Eastern nature flashed from his black eyes,
'to be a devil! From my childhood till now never have I known what it
was to desire and not to possess. It is not often that I have had to
trouble any poor Naboth for his vineyard: but when I have taken a fancy
to it, Naboth has always found it wiser to give way. And now.... Do you
fancy that I have not had a dozen hellish plots flashing across me in
the last week? Look here! This is the mortgage of her father's whole
estate. I bought it--whether by the instigation of Satan or of God--of
a banker in Berenice, the very day I left them; and now they, and every
straw which they possess, are in my power. I can ruin them--sell them as
slaves--betray them to death as rebels--and last, but not least, cannot
I hire a dozen worthy men to carry her off, and cut the Gordian knot
most simply and summarily? And yet I dare not. I must be pure to
approach the pure; and righteous, to kiss the feet of the righteous.
Whence came this new conscience to me I know not, but come it has; and
I dare no more do a base thing toward her, than I dare toward a God,
if there be one. This very mortgage--I hate it, curse it, now that I
possess it--the tempting devil!'

'Burn it,' said Synesius quietly.

'Perhaps I may. At least, used it never shall be. Compel her? I am too
proud, or too honourable, or something or other, even to solicit her.
She must come to me; tell me with her own lips that she loves me, that
she will take me, and make me worthy of her. She must have mercy on me,
of her own free will, or--let her pine and die in that accursed prison;
and then a scratch with the trusty old dagger for her father, and
another for myself, will save him from any more superstitions, and me
from any more philosophic doubts, for a few aeons of ages, till we start
again in new lives--he, I suppose, as a jackass, and I as a baboon. What
matter? but unless I possess her by fair means, God do so to me, and
more also, if I attempt base ones!'

'God be with you, my son, in the noble warfare!' said Synesius, his eyes
filling with kindly tears.

'It is no noble warfare at all. It is a base coward fear, in one who
never before feared man or devil, and is now fallen low enough to be
afraid of a helpless girl!'

'Not so,' cried Synesius, in his turn; 'it is a noble and a holy fear.
You fear her goodness. Could you see her goodness, much less fear it,
were there not a Divine Light within you which showed you what, and how
awful, goodness was? Tell me no more, Raphael Aben-Ezra, that you do not
fear God; for he who fears Virtue, fears Him whose likeness Virtue is.
Go on--go on.... Be brave, and His strength will be made manifest in
your weakness.' ...............

It was late that night before Synesius compelled his guest to retire,
after having warned him not to disturb himself if he heard the
alarm-bell ring, as the house was well garrisoned, and having set the
water-clock by which he and his servants measured their respective
watches. And then the good bishop, having disposed his sentinels, took
his station on the top of his tower, close by the warning-bell; and as
he looked out over the broad lands of his forefathers, and prayed that
their desolation might come to an end at last, he did not forget to
pray for the desolation of the guest who slept below, a happier and more
healthy slumber than he had known for many a week. For before Raphael
lay down that night, he had torn to shreds Majoricus's mortgage,
and felt a lighter and a better man as he saw the cunning temptation
consuming scrap by scrap in the lamp-flame. And then, wearied out with
fatigue of body and mind, he forgot Synesius, Victoria, and the rest,
and seemed to himself to wander all night among the vine-clad glens
of Lebanon, amid the gardens of lilies, and the beds of spices; while
shepherds' music lured him on and on, and girlish voices, chanting the
mystic idyll of his mighty ancestor, rang soft and fitful through his
weary brain. ...............

Before sunrise the next morning, Raphael was faring forth gallantly,
well armed and mounted, by Synesius's side, followed by four or five
brace of tall brush-tailed greyhounds, and by the faithful Bran,
whose lop-ears and heavy jaws, unique in that land of prick-ears and
fox-noses, formed the absorbing subject of conversation among some
twenty smart retainers, who, armed to the teeth for chase and war, rode
behind the bishop on half-starved, raw-boned horses, inured by desert
training and bad times to do the maximum of work upon the minimum of
food.

For the first few miles they rode in silence, through ruined villages
and desolated farms, from which here and there a single inhabitant
peeped forth fearfully, to pour his tale of woe into the ears of the
hapless bishop, and then, instead of asking alms from him, to entreat
his acceptance of some paltry remnant of grain or poultry, which had
escaped the hands of the marauders; and as they clung to his hands, and
blessed him as their only hope and stay, poor Synesius heard patiently
again and again the same purposeless tale of woe, and mingled his tears
with theirs, and then spurred his horse on impatiently, as if to escape
from the sight of misery which he could not relieve; while a voice in
Raphael's heart seemed to ask him--'Why was thy wealth given to thee,
but that thou mightest dry, if but for a day, such tears as these?'

And he fell into a meditation which was not without its fruit in due
season, but which lasted till they had left the enclosed country, and
were climbing the slopes of the low rolling hills, over which lay the
road from the distant sea. But as they left the signs of war behind
them, the volatile temper of the good bishop began to rise. He petted
his hounds, chatted to his men, discoursed on the most probable quarter
for finding game, and exhorted them cheerfully enough to play the man,
as their chance of having anything to eat at night depended entirely on
their prowess during the day.

'Ah!' said Raphael at last, glad of a pretext for breaking his own chain
of painful thought, 'there is a vein of your land-salt. I suspect
that you were all at the bottom of the sea once, and that the old
Earth-shaker Neptune, tired of your bad ways, gave you a lift one
morning, and set you up as dry land, in order to be rid of you.'

'It may really be so. They say that the Argonauts returned back through
this country from the Southern Ocean, which must have been therefore far
nearer us than it is now, and that they carried their mystic vessel over
these very hills to the Syrtis. However, we have forgotten all about
the sea thoroughly enough since that time. I well remember my first
astonishment at the side of a galley in Alexandria, and the roar of
laughter with which my fellow-students greeted my not unreasonable
remark, that it looked very like a centipede.'

'And do you recollect, too, the argument which I had once with your
steward about the pickled fish which I brought you from Egypt; and the
way in which, when the jar was opened, the servants shrieked and
ran right and left, declaring that the fish-bones were the spines of
poisonous serpents?'

'The old fellow is as obstinate as ever, I assure you, in his disbelief
in salt water. He torments me continually by asking me to tell him the
story of my shipwreck, and does not believe me after all, though he has
heard it a dozen times. "Sir," he said to me solemnly, after you were
gone, "will that strange gentleman pretend to persuade me that anything
eatable can come out of his great pond there at Alexandria, when every
one can see that the best fountain in the country never breeds anything
but frogs and leeches?"'

As he spoke they left the last field behind them, and entered upon a
vast sheet of breezy down, speckled with shrubs and copse, and split
here and there by rocky glens ending in fertile valleys once thick with
farms and homesteads.

'Here,' cried Synesius, 'are our hunting-grounds. And now for one hour's
forgetfulness, and the joys of the noble art. What could old Homer have
been thinking of when he forgot to number it among the pursuits which
are glorious to heroes, and make man illustrious, and yet could laud in
those very words the forum?'

'The forum?' said Raphael. 'I never saw it yet make men anything but
rascals.'

'Brazen-faced rascals, my friend. I detest the whole breed of lawyers,
and never meet one without turning him into ridicule; effeminate
pettifoggers, who shudder at the very sight of roast venison, when they
think of the dangers by which it has been procured. But it is a cowardly
age, my friend--a cowardly age. Let us forget it, and ourselves.'

'And even philosophy and Hypatia?' said Raphael archly.

'I have done with philosophy. To fight like a Heracleid, and to die like
a bishop, is all I have left--except Hypatia, the perfect, the wise! I
tell you, friend, it is a comfort to me, even in my deepest misery, to
recollect that the corrupt world yet holds one being so divine--'

And he was running on in one of his high-flown laudations of his idol,
when Raphael checked him.

'I fear our common sympathy on that subject is rather weakened. I have
begun to doubt her lately nearly as much as I doubt philosophy.'

'Not her virtue?

'No, friend; nor her beauty, nor her wisdom; simply her power of making
me a better man. A selfish criterion, you will say. Be it so.... What a
noble horse that is of yours!'

'He has been--he has been; but worn out now, like his master and his
master's fortunes....'

'Not so, certainly, the colt on which you have done me the honour to
mount me.'

'Ah, my poor boy's pet!.... You are the first person who has crossed him
since--'

'Is he of your own breeding?' asked Raphael, trying to turn the
conversation.

'A cross between that white Nisaean which you sent me, and one of my own
mares.'

'Not a bad cross; though he keeps a little of the bull head and
greyhound flank of your Africans.'

'So much the better, friend. Give me bone--bone and endurance for this
rough down country. Your delicate Nisaeans are all very well for a few
minutes over those flat sands of Egypt: but here you need a horse who
will go forty miles a day over rough and smooth, and dine thankfully off
thistles at night. Aha, poor little man!'--as a jerboa sprang up from
a tuft of bushes at his feet--'I fear you must help to fill our
soup-kettle in these hard times.'

And with a dexterous sweep of his long whip, the worthy bishop entangled
the jerboas long legs, whisked him up to his saddle-bow, and delivered
him to the groom and the game-bag.

'Kill him at once. Don't let him squeak, boy!--he cries too like a
child....'

'Poor little wretch!' said Raphael. 'What more right, now, have we to
eat him than he to eat us?'

'Eh? If he can eat us, let him try. How long have you joined the
