send out a call for assistance. But don't send it until I tell you.'

"The captain went away and in ten minutes, I should estimate the time,
he came back. We could hear a terrific confusion outside, but there was
not the least thing to indicate that there was any trouble. The wireless
was working perfectly.

"'Send the call for assistance,' ordered the captain, barely putting
his head in the door.

"'What call shall I send?' Phillips asked.

"'The regulation international call for help. Just that.'

"Then the captain was gone Phillips began to send 'C. Q. D.' He flashed
away at it and we joked while he did so. All of us made light of the
disaster.

"The Carpathia answered our signal. We told her our position and said we
were sinking by the head. The operator went to tell the captain, and in
five minutes returned and told us that the captain of the Carpathia, was
putting about and heading for us


GREAT SCRAMBLE ON DECK

"Our captain had left us at this time and Phillips told me to run and
tell him what the Carpathia had answered. I did so, and I went through
an awful mass of people to his cabin. The decks were full of scrambling
men and women. I saw no fighting, but I heard tell of it.

"I came back and heard Phillips giving the Carpathia fuller directions.
Phillips told me to put on my clothes. Until that moment I forgot that I
was not dressed.

"I went to my cabin and dressed. I brought an overcoat to Phillips. It
was very cold. I slipped the overcoat upon him while he worked.

"Every few minutes Phillips would send me to the captain with little
messages. They were merely telling how the Carpathia was coming our way
and gave her speed.

"I noticed as I came back from one trip that they were putting off
women and children in life-boats. I noticed that the list forward was
increasing.

"Phillips told me the wireless was growing weaker. The captain came and
told us our engine rooms were taking water and that the dynamos might
not last much longer. We sent that word to the Carpathia.

"I went out on deck and looked around. The water was pretty close up
to the boat deck. There was a great scramble aft, and how poor Phillips
worked through it right to the end I don't know.

"He was a brave man. I learned to love him that night and I suddenly
felt for him a great reverence to see him standing there sticking to his
work while everybody else was raging about. I will never live to forget
the work of Phillips for the last awful fifteen minutes.

"I thought it was about time to look about and see if there was anything
detached that would float. I remembered that every member of the crew
had a special life-belt and ought to know where it was. I remembered
mine was under my bunk. I went and got it. Then I thought how cold the
water was.

"I remembered I had an extra jacket and a pair of boots, and I put them
on. I saw Phillips standing out there still sending away, giving the
Carpathia details of just how we were doing.

"We picked up the Olympic and told her we were sinking by the head and
were about all down. As Phillips was sending the message I strapped his
life-belt to his back. I had already put on his overcoat. Every minute
was precious, so I helped him all I could.

BAND PLAYS IN RAG-TIME

"From aft came the tunes of the band. It was a rag-time tune, I don't
know what. Then there was 'Autumn.' Phillips ran aft and that was the
last I ever saw of him.

"I went to the place where I had seen a collapsible boat on the boat
deck, and to my surprise I saw the boat and the men still trying to push
it off. I guess there wasn't a sailor in the crowd. They couldn't do
it. I went up to them and was just lending a hand when a large wave came
awash of the deck.

"The big wave carried the boat off. I had hold of a row-lock and I went
off with it. The next I knew I was in the boat.

"But that was not all. I was in the boat and the boat was upside down
and I was under it. And I remember realizing I was wet through, and that
whatever happened I must not breathe, for I was under water.

"I knew I had to fight for it and I did. How I got out from under the
boat I do not know, but I felt a breath of air at last.

"There were men all around me hundreds of them. The sea was dotted with
them, all depending on their life-belts. I felt I simply had to get away
from the ship. She was a beautiful sight then.

"Smoke and sparks were rushing out of her funnel, and there must have
been an explosion, but we had heard none. We only saw the big stream of
sparks. The ship was gradually turning on her nose just like a duck does
that goes down for a dive. I had one thing on my mind--to get away from
the suction. The band was still playing, and I guess they all went down.

"They were playing 'Autumn' then. I swam with all my might. I suppose I
was 150 feet away when the Titanic, on her nose, with her after-quarter
sticking straight up in the air, began to settle slowly.

"When at last the waves washed over her rudder there wasn't the least
bit of suction I could feel. She must have kept going just as slowly as
she had been.

"I forgot to mention that, besides the Olympic and Carpathia, we spoke
some German boat, I don't know which, and told them how we were. We also
spoke the Baltic. I remembered those things as I began to figure what
ships would be coming toward us.

"I felt, after a little while, like sinking. I was very cold. I saw a
boat of some kind near me and put all my strength into an effort to swim
to it. It was hard work. I was all done when a hand reached out from the
boat and pulled me aboard. It was our same collapsible.

"There was just room for me to roll on the edge. I lay there, not caring
what happened. Somebody sat on my legs; they were wedged in between
slats and were being wrenched. I had not the heart left to ask the man
to move. It was a terrible sight all around--men swimming and sinking.

"I lay where I was, letting the man wrench my feet out of shape. Others
came near. Nobody gave them a hand. The bottom-up boat already had more
men than it would hold and it was sinking.

"At first the larger waves splashed over my head and I had to breathe
when I could.

"Some splendid people saved us. They had a right-side-up boat, and it
was full to its capacity. Yet they came to us and loaded us all into it.
I saw some lights off in the distance and knew a steamship was coming to
our aid.

"I didn't care what happened. I just lay, and gasped when I could and
felt the pain in my feet. At last the Carpathia was alongside and the
people were being taken up a rope ladder. Our boat drew near, and one
b{y} one the men were taken off of it.

"The way the band kept playing was a noble thing. I heard it first while
we were working wireless, when there was a rag-time tune for us, and
the last I saw of the band, when I was floating out in the sea, with my
life-belt on, it was still on deck playing 'Autumn.' How they ever did
it I cannot imagine.

"That and the way Phillips kept sending after the captain told him his
life was his own, and to look out for himself, are two things that stand
out in my mind over all the rest."



CHAPTER XVIII. STORY OF THE STEWARD

PASSENGERS AND CREW DYING WHEN TAKEN ABOARD CARPATHIA--ONE WOMAN SAVED A
DOG--ENGLISH COLONEL SWAM FOR HOURS WHEN BOAT WITH MOTHER CAPSIZED

SOME of the most thrilling incidents connected with the rescue of the
Titanic's survivors are told in the following account given by a man
trained to the sea, a steward of the rescue ship Carpathia:

"At midnight on Sunday, April 14th, I was promenading the deck of the
steamer Carpathia, bound for the Mediterranean and three days out from
New York, when an urgent summons came to my room from the chief steward,
E. Harry Hughes. I then learned that the White Star liner Titanic,
the greatest ship afloat, had struck an iceberg and was in serious
difficulties.

"We were then already steaming at our greatest power to the scene of the
disaster, Captain Rostron having immediately given orders that every man
of the crew should stand by to exert his utmost efforts. Within a very
few minutes every preparation had been made to receive two or three
thousand persons. Blankets were placed ready, tables laid with hot soups
and coffee, bedding, etc., prepared, and hospital supplies laid out
ready to attend to any injured.

"The men were then mustered in the saloon and addressed by the chief
steward. He told them of the disaster and appealed to them in a few
words to show the world what stuff Britishers were made of, and to add
a glorious page to the history of the empire; and right well did the
men respond to the appeal. Every life-boat was manned and ready to
be launched at a moment's notice. Nothing further could be done but
anxiously wait and look out for the ship's distress signal.

"Our Marconi operator, whose unceasing efforts for many hours deserve
the greatest possible praise, was unable at this time to get any reply
to the urgent inquiries he was sending out, and he feared the worst.

"At last a blue flare was observed, to which we replied with a rocket.
Day was just dawning when we observed a boat in the distance.


ICEBERG AND FIRST BOAT SIGHTED

"Eastward on the horizon a huge iceberg, the cause of the disaster,
majestically reared two noble peaks to heaven. Rope ladders were already
lowered and we hove to near the life-boat, which was now approaching us
as rapidly as the nearly exhausted efforts of the men at the oars could
bring her.

"Under the command of our chief officer, who worked indefatigably at the
noble work of rescue, the survivors in


{illust. caption = Above: MAIN STAIRWAY ON TITANIC. TOP E DECK Below:
SECOND LANDING. C DECK. GRAND STAIRWAY}


{illust. caption = MRS. JOHN B. THAYER

Mrs. Thayer and her son were....}


{illust. caption = JOHN B. THAYER

Second Vice-President of the...}


the boat were rapidly but carefully hauled aboard and given into the
hands of the medical staff under the organization of Dr. McGee.

"We then learned the terrible news that the gigantic vessel, the
unsinkable Titanic, had gone down one hour and ten minutes after
striking.

"From this time onward life-boats continued to arrive at frequent
intervals. Every man of the Carpathia's crew was unsparing in his
efforts to assist, to tenderly comfort each and every survivor. In all,
sixteen boatloads were receives, containing altogether 720 persons, many
in simply their night attire, others in evening dress, as if direct from
an after-dinner reception, or concert. Most conspicuous was the coolness
and self-possession, particularly of the women.

"Pathetic and heartrending incidents were many. There was not a man of
the rescue party who was not moved almost to tears. Women arrived and
frantically rushed from one gangway to another eagerly scanning the
fresh arrivals in the boats for a lost husband or brother.


A CAPSIZED BOAT

"One boat arrived with the unconscious body of an English colonel. He
had been taking out his mother on a visit, to three others of her sons.
He had succeeded in getting her away in one of the boats and he himself
had found a place in another. When but a few-yards from the ill-fated
ship the boat containing his mother capsized before his eyes.

"Immediately he dived into the water and commenced a frantic search for
her. But in vain. Boat after boat endeavored to take him aboard, but he
refused to give up, continuing to swim for nearly three hours until
even his great strength of body and mind gave out and he was hauled
unconscious into a passing boat and brought aboard the Carpathia. The
doctor gives little hope of his recovery.

"There were, I understand, twelve newly married couples aboard the big
ship. The twelve brides have been saved, but of the husbands all but one
have perished. That one would not have been here, had he not been urged
to assist in manning a life-boat. Think of the self-sacrifice of these
eleven heroes, who stood on the doomed vessel and parted from their
brides forever, knowing full well that a few brief minutes would end all
things for themselves.

"Many similar pathetic incidents could be related. Sad-eyed women roam
aimlessly about the ship still looking vainly for husband, brother
or father. To comfort them is impossible. All human efforts are being
exerted on their behalf. Their material needs are satisfied in every
way. But who can cure a broken heart?


SAVED HER POMERANIAN

"One of the earliest boats to arrive was seen to contain a woman
tenderly clasping a pet Pomeranian. When assisted to the rope ladder and
while the rope was being fastened around her she emphatically refused to
give up for a second the dog which was evidently so much to her. He is
now receiving as careful and tender attention as his mistress.

"A survivor informs me that there was on the ship a lady who was taking
out a huge great Dane dog. When the boats were rapidly filling she
appeared on deck with her canine companion and sadly entreated that he
should be taken off with her. It was impossible. Human lives, those of
women and children, were the first consideration. She was urged to seize
the opportunity to save her own life and leave the dog. She refused to
desert him and, I understand, sacrificed her life with him.

"One elderly lady was bewailing to a steward that she had lost
everything. He indignantly replied that she should thank God her life
was spared, never mind her replaceable property. The reply was pathetic:

"'I have lost everything--my husband,' and she broke into
uncontrollable grief.


FOUR BOATS ADRIFT HE SAYS

"One incident that impressed me perhaps more than any other was the
burial on Tuesday afternoon of four of the poor fellows who succeeded
in safely getting away from the doomed vessel only to perish later from
exhaustion and exposure as a result of their gallant efforts to bring
to safety the passengers placed in their charge in the life-boats. They
were:

"W. H. Hoyte, Esq., first class passenger.

"Abraham Hornner, third class passenger.

"S. C. Siebert, steward.

"P. Lyons, sailor.

"The sailor and steward were unfortunately dead when taken aboard. The
passengers lived but a few minutes after. They were treated with the
greatest attention. The funeral service was conducted amid profound
silence and attended by a large number of survivors and rescuers. The
bodies, covered by the national flag, were reverently consigned to the
mighty deep from which they had been, alas, vainly, saved.

"Most gratifying to the officers and men of the Carpathia is the
constantly expressive appreciation of the survivors."

He then told of the meeting of the survivors in the cabin of the
Carpathia and of the resolution adopted, a statement of which has
already been given in another chapter.



