
There is a shrub which grows commonly in this neighbourhood which is
precisely the same with that in Virginia some times called the
quillwood. also another which grows near the water in somewhat moist
grounds & rises to the hight of 5 or 6 feet with a large, peteolate
spreading plane, crenate and somewhat woolly leaf like the rose
raspberry. it is much branched the bark of a redish brown colour and is
covered with a number of short hooked thorns which renders it extreemly
disagreeable to pass among; it dose not cast it's foliage untill about
the 1st of December. this is also the case with the black alder. There
is also found in this neighbourhood an evergreen shrub which I take to
be another variety of the Shallun and that discribed under that name in
mistake on the 26th of January. this shrub rises to the hight of from
four to five feet, the stem simple branching, defuse and much branched.
the bark is of a redish dark brown, that of the mane stein is somewhat
rough while that of the boughs is smooth. the leaves are petiolate the
petiole 1/40 of an inch long; oblong, obtuse at the apex and accute
angular at the insertion of the petiole; 3/4 of an inch in length and
Ysths in width; convex, somewhat revolute, serrate, smoth and of a
paler green than the evergreens usually are; they are also opposite and
ascending. the fruit is a small deep perple berry like the common
huckleberry of a pleasent flavor. they are seperately scattered &
attatched to the small boughs by short peduncles.-. the natives eat
this berry when ripe but seldom collect it in such quantities as to dry
it for winter uce.




[Clark, February 11, 1806]
Tuesday February 11th 1806.
This Morning Serjt. Gass R. Field and J. Thompson passed the Netul
opposit to us on a hunting expedition. Sent Serjeant Natl. Pryor with 4
men in a Canoe to bring gibson to the Fort. also Sent Colter & P. Weser
to the Salt works to carry on the business with Jos. Field; as bratten
is also Sick we derected that he Should return to the fort if he
continued unwell; There is Shrub which grows Commonly in this
neighbourhood which grows on the Steep Sides of the hills and also in
low moist grounds, and rise to the hight of 5 or 6 feet with a large
peteolate, Spreading plain crenate and Somewhat woolly leaf like the
rose raspberry. it is much branched the bark of a redish brown colour
and is covered with a number of Short hooked thorns which renders it
extreamly disagreeable to pass among, it does not cast its foliage
untill about the 1st of December.

There is a Species of bryor which is common in this neighbourhood of a
green colour which grows most abundant in the rich dry lands near the
water courses, but is also found in Small quantities in the piney lands
at a distance from the water Courses in the former Situations the Stem
is frequently the Size of a mans finger and rise perpendicularly to the
hight of 4 or 5 feet when it decends in an arch and becoms procumbent
or rests on Some neighbouring plant or Srubs; it is Simple unbranched
and celindric; in the latter Situation it is much Smaller, and usially
procumbent. the Stem is armed with Sharp and hooked bryors. the leaf is
peteolate, ternate and resembles in Shape and appearance that of the
purple Raspberry common to the atlantic States. The frute is a berry
resembling the Blackberry in every respect and is eaten when ripe and
much esteemed by the nativs but is not dryed for winters Consumption.
in the Countrey about the enterance of the quick Sand rivers I first
discovered this bryor, it grows So abundantly in the furtile Vally of
Columbia and on the Islands in that part of the river, that the
Countrey near the river is almost impenitrable in maney places. This
green Bryor retains its leaf or foliage and virdue untill late in
December. The Briory bush with a wide leaf is also one of its
ascociates.




[Lewis, February 12, 1806]
Wednesday February 12th 1806.
This morning we were visited by a Clatsop man who brought with him
three dogs as a remuneration for the Elk which him self and nation had
stolen from us some little time since, how ever the dogs took the alarm
and ran off; we suffered him to remain in the fort all night.

There are two species of ever green shrubs which I first met with at
the grand rappids of the Columbia and which I have since found in this
neighbourhood also; they grow in rich dry ground not far usually from
some watercourse. the roots of both species are creeping and celindric.
the stem of the 1st is from a foot to 18 inches high and as large as a
goosqull; it is simple unbranced and erect. it's leaves are cauline,
compound and spreading. the leafets are jointed and oppositely pinnate,
3 pare & terminating in one, sessile, widest at the base and tapering
to an accuminated point, an inch and a quarter the greatest width, and
3 inches & a 1/4 in length. each point of their crenate margins armed
with a subulate thorn or spine and are from 13 to 17 in number. they
are also veined, glossy, carinated and wrinkled; their points obliquely
pointing towards the extremity of the common footstalk.--The stem of
the 2nd is procumbent abot the size of the former, jointed and
unbranched. it's leaves are cauline, compound and oppositely pinnate;
the rib from 14 to 16 inches long celindric and smooth. the leafets
21/2 inches long and 1 inch wide. greatest width 1/2 inch from their
base, to which they are regularly rounded, and from the same point
tapering to an accute apex, wich is mostly, but not invariably
tirminated with a small subulate thorn. they are jointed and oppositely
pinnate, consisting of 6 pare and terminating in one, sessile serrate,
or like the teeth of a whipsaw, each point terminating in a small
subulate spine, being from 25 to 27 in number; veined, smooth, plane
and of a deep green, their points tending obliquely towards the
extremity of the rib or common footstalk. I do not know the fruit or
flower of either. the 1st resembles the plant common to many parts of
the U States called the mountain holley.




[Clark, February 12, 1806]
Wednesday February 12th 1806.
This morning we were visited by a Clatsop man who brought with him
three dogs as a remuneration for the Elk which himself and Nation had
Stolen from us Some little time Sence, however the dogs took the alarm
and ran off; we suffered him to remain in the fort all night.

There are two Species of evergreen Shrubs. this is the leaf of one
which I first met with at the grand rapids of the Columbia River, and
which I have sence found in this neighbourhood also; they usially grow
in rich dry ground not far from Some water course. the roots of both
Species are creeping and celindric. the Stem of the first (as above) is
from a foot to 18 inches high and as large as a Goose quil; it is
Simple and erect. its leaves are cauline, and Spredding. the leafits
are jointed & oppositly poinnate 3 par and termonateing in one, cessile
widest at the base and tapering to an accuminated point, an inch and
1/4 the greatest width; & 31/4 inches in length. each point of their
crenate margins armed with a thorn or Spine, and are from 13 to 17 in
number. they are also veined, glossy, corinated and wrinkled; their
points obliquely pointing towards the extremity of the Common footstalk.

The Stem of the 2nd is procumbent about the Size of the former, jointed
and umbracated. it's leaves are Cauline, compound and oppositly
pointed; the rib from 14 to 16 inches long Celendric and Smooth the
leafits 21/2 inches long and 1 inch wide. the greatest width 1/2 inch
from their base which they are regularly rounded, and from the Same
point tapering to an accute apex, which is mostly but not entirely
termonated with a Small Subulate thorn. they are jointed & oppositly
pointed consisting of 6 par and termonateing in one (in this form)
sessile, Serrate, or like the teeth of a whipsaw, each point
terminateing in a small subulate spine, being from 25 to 27 in numbr;
veined, Smoth, plane and of a deep green, their points tending
obliquely towards the extremity of the rib or common footstalk. I do
not know the fruit or flower of either. the 1st resembles a plant
Common to maney parts of the United States Called the Mountain Holly




[Lewis, February 13, 1806]
Thursday February 13th 1806.
The Clatsop left us this morning at 11 A.M. not any thing transpired
during the day worthy of notice. yesterday we completed the operation
of drying the meat, and think we have a sufficient stock to last us
this month. the Indians inform us that we shall have great abundance of
a small fish in March which from their discription must be the herring.
these people have also informed us that one More who sometimes touches
at this place and trades with the natives of this coast, had on board
of his vessel three Cows, and that when he left them he continued his
course along the N. W. coast. I think this strong circumstancial proof
that there is a stettlement of white persons at Nootka sound or some
point to the N. W. of us on the coast.

There is a species of bryer which is common in this neighbourhood of a
green colour which grows most abundant in the rich dry lands near the
watercourses, but is also found in small quantities in the piny lands
at a distance from the watercourses in the former situation the stem is
frequently the size of a man's finger and rises perpendicularly to the
hight of 4 or 5 feet when it decends in an arch and becomes procumbent
or rests on some neighbouring plants or shrubs; it is simple unbranched
and celindric; in the latter situation it is much smaller and usually
procumbent. the stem is armed with sharp and hooked bryers. the leaf is
peteolate ternate and resembles in shape and appearance that of the
perple raspberry common to the Atlantic states. the fruit is a berry
resembling the black berry in every rispect and is eaten when ripe and
much esteemed by the natives but is not dryed for winter consumption.
in the country about the entrance of the quicksand river I first
discovered this bryer. it groows so abundantly in the fertile valley of
Columbia and the Islands in that part of the river that the country
near the river is almost impenitrable in many places. the briary bush
with a wide leaf is also one of it's ascociates. the green bryer
retains it's foliage and verdure untill late in December.--There are
also two species of firn which are common to this country beside that
formerly discribed of which the natives eat the roots. these from their
disparity in point of size I shall designate the large and small firn.
both species continue green all winter.--The large farn, rises to the
height of 3 or four feet the stem is a common footstalk or rib which
proceedes immediately from the radix wich is somewhat flat on two sides
about the size of a man's arm and covered with innumerable black coarce
capillary radicles which issue from every pat of it's surface; one of
those roots or a collected bed of them will send fourth from twenty to
forty of those common footstalks all of which decline or bend outwards
from the common center. these ribs are cylindric and marked
longitudinally their whole length with a groove or channel on their
upper side. on either side of this grove a little below it's edge, the
leafets are inserted, being shortly petiolate for about 2/3 ds of the
length of the middle rib commencing at the bottom and from thence to
the extremity sessile. the rib is terminated by a single undivided
lanceolate gagged leafet. the leafets are lanceolate, from 2 to 4
inches in length gagged and have a small accute angular projection on
the upper edge near the base where it is spuar on the side which has
the projection and obliquely cut at the base on the other side of the
rib of the leafet. or which will give a better idea in this form. the
upper surface is Smooth and of a deep green the under disk of a pale
green and covered with a brown bubersence of a woolly appearance
particularly near the cental fiber or rib. these leafets are
alternately pinnate. they are in number from 110 to 140; shortest at
the two extremities of the common footstalk and longest in the center,
graduly lengthening and deminishing as they succeed each other.-

The small firn also rises with a common footstalk from the radix and
are from four to eight in number. about 8 inches long; the central rib
marked with a slight longitudinal groove throughout it's whole length.
the leafets are oppositely pinnate about 1/3 rd of the length of the
common footstalk from the bottom and thence alternately pinnate; the
footstalk terminating in a simple undivided nearly entire lanceolate
leafet. the leafets are oblong, obtuse, convex absolutely entire,
marked on the upper disk with a slight longitudinal groove in place of
the central rib, smooth and of a deep green. near the upper extremity
these leafets are decursively pinnate as are also those of the large f
rn. The grasses of this neighbourhood are generally coase harsh and
sedge-like, and grow in large tufts. there is none except in the open
grounds. near the coast on the tops of some of the untimbered hills
there is a finer and softer species which resembles much the green
swoard. the salt marshes also produce a coarse grass, Bull rushes and
the Cattail flagg. the two last the natives make great use in preparing
their mats bags &c.




[Clark, February 13, 1806]
Tuesday February 13th 1806.
The Clatsop left us this morning at 11 A.M. not anything transpired
dureing the day worthy of notice. yesterday we completed the opperation
of drying the meat, and think we have a Sufficient Stock to last us
this month. the Indians inform us that we shall have great abundance of
Small fish in March. which from the discription must be the Herring.
Those people have also informed us that one Moore who sometimes touches
at this place and traded with the nativs of this Coast, had on board
his Ship 3 Cows, and that when he left them he continued his course
along the N W. Coast. I think this (if those Cows were not Coats)
Strong circumstantial proof that their is a Settlement of white persons
at Nootka Sound or Some place to the N W. of us on the coast.

There are also two Species of firn which are common to this Countrey
besides that before mentioned of which the nativs eate the roots. these
two from their disparity in point of Size I shall distinguish the large
and Small firn. both species continue green all winter

The large fern, rise to the hight of 3 or 4 feet, the Stem is a Common
footstalk or rib which proceeds imediately from the radix which is
Somewhat flat on two Sides about the Size of a man's arm and covered
with innumerable black coarse capillary radicles which issue from every
part of its surface; one of those roots or a collected bead of them
will Send forth from 20 to 40 of those Common footstalks all of which
decline or bend outwards from the Common center. those ribs are
cylindric and marked longitudinally their whole length with a groove or
channel on their upper Side. on either Side of this groove a little
below it's edge, the leafets are inserted, being partly petiolate for
about 2/3ds of the length of the middle rib, commenceing at the bottom
and from thence to the extremity Sessile. the rib is termonated by a
Single undevided lanceolate gagged leafet. the leafets are lanceolate,
from 2 to 4 inches in length gagged and have a Small accute angular
projection and obliquely cut at the base on either Side of the rib of
the leafet. upper Surface is Smooth and of a deep Green, the under disk
of a pale Green and covered with a brown Substance of a woolly
appearance particalarly near the center fiber or rib these leafets are
alternately pointed they are in number from 110 to 140; shortest at the
two extremities of the common footstalk and longest in the center,
gradually lengthing and diminishing as they Suckceed each other

The Small firn also rises with a Common footstalk from the radix and
are from 4 to 8 in number, about 8 inches long; the Central rib marked
with a Slight longitudinal Groove through out it's whole length. the
leafets are oppositly pinnate about A of the length of the Common
footstalk from the bottom and thence alternately pinnate; the footstalk
termonating in a Simple undevided nearly entire lanceolate leafet. the
leafets are oblong, obtuse, convex absolutely entire, marked on the
upper disk with a Slight longitudinal grove in place of the central
rib, smooth and of a deep green; near the upper extremity those lefets
are decurscivily pinnate as are also those of the larg firn.

The Grass's of this neighbourhood are generally coarse harsh and Sedge
like, and grow in large tufts. there is none except in the open
grounds. near the Coast on the top of Some of the untimbered hills
there is a finer and Softer Species which resembles much the
Greensword. the Salt marshes also produce a Corse grass, Bullrushes and
the Cattail flaggs. of the two last the nativs make great use in
prepareing their mats bags &c. in those bags they Carry their fish
Berries roots &c.




[Lewis, February 14, 1806]
Friday February 14th 1806.
We are very uneasy with rispect to our sick men at the salt works.
Sergt. Pryor and party have not yet returned nor can we conceive what
causes their delay. Drewyer visited his traps today and caught a very
fine fat beaver on which we feasted this evening. on the 11th inst.
Capt Clark completed a map of the country through which we have been
passing from Fort Mandan to this place. in this map the Missouri
Jefferson's river the S. E. branch of the Columbia, Kooskooske and
Columbia from the entrance of the S. E. fork to the pacific Ocean as
well as a part of Flathead river and our tract across the Rocky
Mountains are laid down by celestial observation and survey. the rivers
are also connected at their sources with other rivers agreeably to the
information of the natives and the most probable conjecture arrising
from their capacities and the relative positions of their rispective
entrances which last have with but few exceptions been established by
celestial observation. we now discover that we have found the most
practicable and navigable passage across the Continent of North
America; it is that which we traveled with the exception of that part
of our rout from the neighbourhood of the entrance of Dearborn's River
untill we arrived on Clarks river at the entrance of Traveler's rest
creek; the distance between those two points would be traveled more
advantageously by land as the navigation of the Missouri above the
river Dearborn is laborious and 420 miles distant by which no advantage
is gained as the rout which we are compelled to travel by land from the
source of Jefferson's river to the entrance of Travelers rest Creek is
220 miles being further by 500 miles than that from the entrance of
Dearborn's river to the last mentioned point and a much worse rout if
Indian information is to be relyed on; from the same information the
Flathead river like that of the S. E. fork of the Columbia which heads
with Jefferson's and Maddison's Rivers can not be navigated through the
Rocky Mountains in consequence of falls & rappids and as a confermation
of this fact, we discovered that there were no salmon in the Flathead
river, which is the case in the S. E. branch of the Columbia although
it is not navigable. added to this, the Indians further inform us, that
the Flathead river runs in the direction of the Rocky Mountains for a
great distance to the North before it discharges itself into the
Columbia river, which last from the same information from the entrance
of the S. E. fork to that of Flathead river is obstructed with a great
number of difficult and dangerous rappids. considering therefore the
danger and difficulties attending the navigation of the Columbia in
this part, as well as the circuitous and distant rout formed by itself
and the Flathead river we conceive that even admitting the Flathead
river contrary to information to be as navigable as the Columbia river
below it's entrance, that the tract by land over the Rocky Mountains
usually traveled by the natives from the Entrance of Traveller's-rest
Creek to the forks of the Kooskooske is preferable; the same being a
distance of 184 Miles. The inferrence therefore deduced from those
premices are that the best and most Practicable rout across the
Continent is by way of the Missouri to the entrance of Dearborn's river
or near that place; from thence to flathead river at the entrance of
Traveller's rest Creek, from thence up Traveller's rest creek to the
forks, from whence you pursue a range of mounttains which divides the
waters of the two forks of this creek, and which still continuing it's
West wardly course divides the waters of the two forks of the
Kooskooske river to their junction; from thence to decend this river by
water to the S. E. branch of the Columbia, thence down that river to
the Columbia and with the latter to the Pacific Ocean.


============


[Clark, February 14, 1806]
Friday February 14th 1806
We are very uneasy with respect to our Sick men at the Salt works.
Serjt. Pryor and party haveing not yet returneded, nor can we conceive
what can be the Cause of their delay. Drewyer visited his traps & to
day and Cought a fine fat beaver on which we feasted this evening and
thought it a great delecessey.-.

I compleated a map of the Countrey through which we have been passing
from the Mississippi at the Mouth of Missouri to this place. In the Map
the Missouri Jefferson's river the S. E. branch of the Columbia or
Lewis's river, Koos-koos-ke and Columbia from the enterance of the S. E
fork to the pacific Ocian, as well as a part of Clark's river and our
track across the Rocky Mountains are laid down by celestial
observations and Survey. the rivers are also conected at their Sources
with other rivers agreeably to the information of the nativs and the
most probable conjecture arrising from their capacities and the
relative positions of their respective enterances which last have with
but fiew exceptions been established by celestial observations. We now
discover that we have found the most practicable and navigable passage
across the Continent of North America; it is that which we have
traveled with the exception of that part of our rout from the foot of
the Falls of the Missouri, or in neighbourhood of the enterance of the
Rocky Mountains untill we arive on Clarks river at the enterence of
Travelers-rest Creek; the distance between those two points would be
traveled more advantagiously by land as the navigation of the Missouri
above the Falls is crooked laborious and 521 miles distant by which no
advantage is gained as the rout which we are compelled to travel by
land from the Source of Jeffersons River to the enterance of Travellers
rest Creek is 220 miles being further by At. 600 miles than that from
the Falls of the Missourie to the last mentioned point (Travellers rest
Creek) and a much worse rout if indian information is to be relied on
which is from the So so nee or Snake Indians, and the Flatheads of the
Columbia west of the rocky mountains. from the Same information Clarks
river like that of the S. E. branch of the Columbia which heads with
Jefferson's and Maddisons river's can not be navagated thro the rocky
mountains in consequence of falls and rapids, and as a confirmation of
the fact we discovered that there were no Salmon in Clark's river,
which is not the Case in the S. E. branch of the Columbia altho it is
not navagable. added to this, the Indians of different quartes further
inform us, that Clark's river runs in the direction of the Rocky
Mountains for a great distance to the north before it discharges itself
into the Columbia river---from the Same information the Columbia from
the enterance of the S. E. branch to the enterance of Clark's river is
obstructed with a great number of dificuelt and dangerous rapids (and
the place Clark's river comes out of the Rocky mountains is a
tremendious falls &c which there is no possibillity of passing the
mountains either by land or water.) Considering therefore the dangers
and deficuelties attending the navigation of the Columbia in this part,
as well as the circuitous and distant rout formed by itself and that of
Clark's River we Conceive that even admitting that Clarks river
contrary to information to be as navagable as the Columbia below it's
enterance, that the tract by land over the Rocky Mountains usially
traveled by the nativs from the enterance of Travellers rest Creek to
the Forks of the Kooskooske is preferable; the Same being a distance of
184 miles. The inferrence therefore deduced from these premises are,
that the best and most practicable rout across the Continent is by way
of the Missouri to the Great Falls; thence to Clarks river at the
enterance of Travellers rest Creek, from thence up travillers rest
Creek to the forks, from whence you prosue a range of mountains which
divides the waters of the two forks of this Creek, and which still
Continues it's westwardly Course on the mountains which divides the
waters of the two forks of the Kooskooske river to their junction; from
thence to decend this river to the S. E. branch of the Columbia, thence
down that river to the Columbia, and down the Latter to the Pacific
Ocian-. There is a large river which falls into the Columbia on its
South Side at what point we could not lern; which passes thro those
extencive Columbian Plains from the South East, and as the Indians
inform us head in the mountains South of the head of Jeffersons River
and at no great distance from the Spanish Settlements, and that that
fork which heads with the River Rajhone and waters of the Missouri
passes through those extensive plains in which there is no wood, and
the river Crowded with rapids & falls many of which are impassable. the
other or westerly fork passes near a range of mountains and is the fork
which great numbers of Indian Bands of the So sone or Snake Indians,
this fork most probably heads with North River or the waters of
Callifornia. This River may afford a practicable land Communication
with New Mexico by means of its western fork. This river cannot be
navagable as an unpracticable rapid is within one mile of its enterance
into the Columbia, and we are fully purswaded that a rout by this river
if practicable at all, would lengthen the distance greatly and
incounter the Same dificuelties in passing the Rocky Mountains with the
rout by way of Travellers rest Creek & Clarks river.




[Lewis, February 15, 1806]
Saturday February 15th 1806.
Drewyer and Whitehouse set out this morning on a hunting excurtion
towards the praries of Point Adams. we have heard our hunters over the
Netul fire several shot today, but have had no account from them as
yet. about 3 P.M. Bratton arrived from the salt works and informed us
that Sergt. Pryor and party were on their way with Gibson who is so
much reduced that he cannot stand alone and that they are obliged to
carry him in a litter. Bratton himself appears much reduced with his
late indisposition but is now recovering fast. Bratton informed that
the cause of Sergt. Pryor's delay was attributeable to the winds which
had been so violent for several days as to render it impossible to get
a canoe up the creek to the point where it was necessary to pass with
Gibson. the S. W. winds are frequently very violent on the coast when
we are but little sensible of them at Fort Clatsop. in consequence of
the lofty and thickly timbered fir country which surrounds us on that
quarter from the South to the North East.

after dark Sergt. Pryor arrived with Gibson. we are much pleased in
finding him by no means as ill as we had expected. we do no conceive
him in danger by any means, tho he has yet a fever and is much reduced.
we beleive his disorder to have orriginated in a violent cold which he
contracted in hunting and pursuing Elk and other game through the swams
and marshes about the salt works. he is nearly free from pain tho a
gooddeel reduced and very languid. we gave him broken dozes of diluted
nitre and made him drink plentifully of sage tea, had his feet bathed
in warm water and at 9 P.M. gave him 35 drops of laudanum.

The quadrupeds of this country from the Rocky Mountains to the pacific
Ocean are 1st the domestic animals, consisting of the horse and the dog
only; 2cdly the native wild animals, consisting of the Brown white or
grizly bear, (which I beleive to be the same family with a mearly
accedental difference in point of colour) the black bear, the common
red deer, the black tailed fallow deer, the Mule deer, Elk, the large
brown wolf, the small woolf of the plains, the large wolf of the
plains, the tiger cat, the common red fox, black fox or fisher, silver
fox, large red fox of the plains, small fox of the plains or kit fox,
Antelope, sheep, beaver, common otter, sea Otter, mink, spuck, seal,
racoon, large grey squirrel, small brown squirrel, small grey squirrel,
ground squirrel, sewelel, Braro, rat, mouse, mole, Panther, hare,
rabbit, and polecat or skunk. all of which shall be severally noticed
in the order in which they occur as well as shuch others as I learn do
exist and which not been here recapitulated. The horse is confined
principally to the nations inhabiting the great plains of Columbia
extending from Latitude 40 deg. to 50 deg. N. and occuping the tract of country
lying between the rocky mountains and a range of Mountains which pass
the columbia river about the great falls or from Longitude 116 to 121
West. in this extesive tract of principally untimbered country so far
as we have leant the following nations reside (viz) the Sosone or snake
Indians, the Chopunnish, sokulks, Cutssahnims, Chymnapums, Ehelutes,
Eneshuh & Chilluckkittequaws. all of whom enjoy the bennefit of that
docile, generous and valuable anamal the horse, and all of them except
the three last have immence numbers of them. Their horses appear to be
of an excellent race; they are lofty eligantly formed active and
durable; in short many of them look like the fine English coarsers and
would make a figure in any country. some of those horses are pided with
large spots of white irregularly scattered and intermixed with the
black brown bey or some other dark colour, but much the larger portion
are of an uniform colour with stars snips and white feet, or in this
rispect marked much like our best blooded horses in virginia, which
they resemble as well in fleetness and bottom as in form and colours.
the natives suffer them to run at large in the plains, the grass of
which furnishes them with their only subsistence their masters taking
no trouble to lay in a winters store for them, but they even keep fat
if not much used on the dry grass of the plains during the winter. no
rain scarcely ever falls in these plains and the grass is short and but
thin. The natives appear to take no pains in scelecting their male
horses from which they breed, in short those of that discription which
I have noticed appeared much the most indifferent. whether the horse
was orrigeonally a native of this country or not it is out of my power
to determine as we can not understand the language of the natives
sufficiently to ask the question. at all events the country and climate
appears well adapted to this anamal. horses are said to be found wild
in many parts of this extensive plain country. the several tribes of
Sosones who reside towards Mexico on the waters of Clark's river or
particularly one of them called Sh&-bo-bo-ah have also a great number
of mules, which among the Indians I find are much more highly prized
than horses. an eligant horse may be purchased of the natives in this
country for a lew peads or other paltry trinkets which in the U States
would not cost more than one or two dollars. This abundance and
cheapness of horses will be extremely advantageous to those who may
hereafter attemt the fir trade to the East Indies by way of the
Columbia river and the Pacific Ocean.--the mules in the possession of
the Indians are principally stolen from the Spaniards of Mexeco; they
appear to be large and fine such as we have seen. Among the Sosones of
the upper part of the S. E. fork of the Columbia we saw several horses
with spanish brands on them which we supposed had been stolen from the
inhabitants of Mexeco.




[Clark, February 15, 1806]
Saturday February 15th 1806
Drewyer and Whitehouse Set out on a hunting excurtion towards the
mountains Southwest of us. we have heard our hunters over the Netul
fire Several Shot today, but have had no account of them as yet. 3 P.M.
Bratten arived from the Saltworks, and informed us that Serjt. Pryor
and party were on their way with gibson in a litter. he is verry bad
and much reduced with his present indisposition. Wm. Bratten appears
much reduced, and is yet verry unwell. he informs that the Cause of
Sergt. Pryor's delay was attributiable to the winds which had been so
violent for Several days as to render it impossible to get a Canoe up
the Creek to the point where it was necessary to pass with Gibson. the
S. W. winds are frequently very violent on the coast when we are but
little Sensible of them at Fort Clatsop. in Consequence of the lofty
and thickly timbered fir country which Surrounds us from that quarter,
from the South to the N. East.-. After Dark Sergt. Pryor arrived with
Gibson. we are much pleased in findeing him by no means as ill as we
had expected. we do not conceive him in danger by any means, tho he has
yet a fever and is much reduced. we believe his disorder to have
originated in a violent Cold which he contracted in hunting and
prosueing Elk and other game through the Swamps and marshes about the
salt works. he is nearly free from pain tho a good deel reduced and
very languid. we gave him double doses of diluted niter and made him
drink plentifully of Sage tea, had his feat bathed in worm water and at
9 P.M. gave him 35 drops of laudanum.

The quadrupeds of this countrey from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific
Ocian are first the Domestic Animals, consisting of the Horses and Dogs
only; 2ndly the Native Wild Animals, consisting of the White, brown, or
Grizly bear (which I believe to be the same family with a mearly
accidentail difference in point of Colour) The Black Bear, the Elk, the
Common red Deer, the Mule deer, the black tailed fallow Deer, the large
brown wolf, the Small wolf of the Plains, the large wolf of the Plains,
Panther, the tiger cat, the common red fox, the black fox or fisher,
the Silver fox, large red fox of the plains, Small fox of the plains or
kit fox, Antelope, Sheep, beaver, Common Otter, Sea Otter, minks, Seals
racoons, large Grey Squerrel, Small brown Squirrel, Small grey
Squirrel, Ground Squirrel, Sewelel, Braro, rat, mouse, mole, hare,
rabbet, and pole Cat or Skunk. all of which Shall be Severally noticed
in the order in which they occur as well as Such others as I learn do
exist, and which not been here recapitulated.

The Horse is principally Confined to the Nations inhabiting the great
Plains of Columbia extending from Latitude 40 deg. to 50 deg. N. and occupying the
tract of Countrey lying between the Rocky Mountains and a rang of
mountains which pass the Columbia River about the Great Falls or from
Longitude 116 deg. to 121 deg. West in this extensive tract of Principally
untimbered countrey So far as we have lernt the following nations
reside (viz) The Sosone, or Snake Indians inhabiting the South fork or
____ River, the Chopunnish, Sokulk's, Cutssahnims, Chym na pum,
Ehelutes, Eneshuh & Chilluckkittequaws. all of whome enjoy the benifit
of that docile generous and valueable Animal the Horse, and all of them
except the three last have emence numbers of them. their horses appear
to be of an excellent race; they are lofty eligantly formed active and
durable; in Short maney of them look like the fine English coursers and
would make a figure in any country. Some of those horses in pided with
large spots of white irrigularly scattered and intermixed with black,
brown, Bey or Some other dark colour, but much the larger portion are
of a uniform Colour with Stars, snips, and white feet, or in this
respect marked much like our best blooded horses in the U, States,
which they resemble as well in fleetness and bottom as in form and
Colour. the nativs Suffer them to run at large in the plains, the Grass
of which furnish them with their only Subsistance, their owners takeing
no trouble to lay in a winters Store for them, but they keep fat if not
much used on the dry grass of the plains dureing the winter. rain
scercely ever falls in those plains and the Grass is Short and but
thin. the nativs appear to take no pains in Selecting their male horses
from which they bread, in Short those of that discription which I have
noticed appear much the most indifferent. whether the horses was
originally a native of this Country or not, it is out of my power to
determine as we cannot understand the language of the nativs
Sufficiently to ask the question. at all events the Country and Climate
appears well adapted to this Animal. Horses are Said to be found wild
in maney parts of this extensive plain Country-. The Several tribes of
Sosones who reside near Mexico on the waters of Clark's river, or
particularly one of them called Shd-bo-bo-ah have also a great number
of Mules, which among the Inds. I find are much more highly prized than
horses. an eligant horse may be purchased of the nativs in this Country
for a fiew beeds or other paltry trinkits which in the United States
would not cost more than one or two dollars. This abundance and
Cheepness of horses will be extremely advantagious to those who may
hereafter attempt the fir trade to the East Indies by way of the
Columbia and the Pacific Ocian.-. The mules in the possession of the
Inds. are principally Stolen from the Spaniards of New Mexico; Such as
we have Seen appear to be large with Spanish brands. among the Sosones
of the upper part of Lewis's river we Saw Several horses with Spanish
brands on them which the nativs informed us Came from the South most
probably from the Settlement in New Mexico, on the heads of the North
river or waters of the Bay of California.




[Lewis, February 16, 1806]
Sunday February 16th 1806.
By several trials made today in order to adjust my Octant and ascertain
her error in the direct observation, I found that it was 2 deg. 1' 45" + or
additive beyond the fracture; this error was ascertained by a
comparison with my sextant the error of which had been previously
ascertained. the error of Octant in the direct observation on the
broken limb next to 0 or below 55 deg. 20 inclusive is 2 deg. additive only.--Sent
Shannon Labuish and Frazier this morning on a hunting excurtion up the
Kil-haw'-a-nak-kle river which discharges itself into the head of the
bay. no tidings yet of Sergt. Gass and party. Bratton is still very
weak and complains of a pain in the lower part of the back when he
moves which I suppose procedes from dability. I gave him barks.
Gibson's fever still continues obstenate tho not very high; I gave him
a doze of Dr. Rush's which in many instances I have found extreemly
efficatious in fevers which are in any measure caused by the presence
of boil. the nitre has produced a profuse perspiration this evening and
the pills operated late at night his fever after which abated almost
entirely and he had a good night's rest.

The Indian dog is usually small or much more so than the common cur.
they are party coloured; black white brown and brindle are the most
usual colours. the head is long and nose pointed eyes small, ears erect
and pointed like those of the wolf, hair short and smooth except on the
tail where it is as long as that of the curdog and streight. the
natives do not eat them nor appear to make any other use of them but in
hunting the Elk as has been before observed.--The brown white or grizly
bear are found in the rocky mountains in the timbered parts of it or
Westerly side but rarely; they are more common below the rocky Mountain
on the borders of the plains where there are copses of brush and
underwood near the watercouses. they are by no means as plenty on this
side of the rocky mountains as on the other, nor do I beleive that they
are found atall in the woody country, which borders this coast as far
in the interior as the range of mountains which, pass the Columbia
between the Great Falls and rapids of that river. the black bear
differs not any from those common to the United states and are found
under the rocky Mountains in the woody country on the borders of the
great plains of columbia and also in this tract of woody country which
lie between these plains and the Pacific Ocean. their oconimy and
habits are also the same with those of the United States.




[Clark, February 16, 1806]
Sunday February 16th 1806
Sent Shannon Labiesh and frazier on a hunting excurtion up the
Kilhaw-a-nak-kle river which discharges itself into the head of
Meriwethers Bay. no word yet of Sergt. Gass and party. Bratten is verry
weak and complains of a pain in the lower part of the back when he
moves which I suppose proceeds from debility. I gave him barks and Salt
peter. Gibsons fever Still Continues obstinate tho not verry high; we
gave him a dose of Dr. Rushes pills which in maney instancis I have
found extreamly efficasious in fevers which are in any measure Caused
by the presence of boil. the niter has produced a perfuse perspiration
this evening and the pils opperated late at night his feaver after
which abated almost intirely and he had a good nights rest.

The Indian Dogs are usually small or much more so than the common cur.
they are party coloured; black white brown and brindle are the more
usual colours. the head is long and nose pointed eyes Small, ears erect
and pointed like those of the wolf, hair Short and Smooth except on the
tail where it is as long as that of the Cur dog and streight. the
nativs do not eate them, or make any further use of them than in
hunting the Elk as has been before observed. Shannon an Labiesh brought
in to us to day a Buzzard or Vulture of the Columbia which they had
wounded and taken alive. I believe this to be the largest Bird of North
America. it was not in good order and yet it wayed 25 lbs had it have
been so it might very well have weighed 10 lbs. more or 35 lbs. between
the extremities of the wings it measured 9 feet 2 Inches; from the
extremity of the beak to that of the toe 3 feet 9 inches and a half.
from hip to toe 2 feet, girth of the head 9 inches 3/4. Girth of the
neck 71/2 inches; Girth of the body exclusive of the wings 2 feet 3
inches; girth of the leg 3 inches. the diameter of the eye 41/2 10ths
of an inch, the iris of a pale scarlet red, the puple of a deep Sea
green or black and occupies about one third of the diameter of the eye
the head and part of the neck as low as the figures 12 is uncovered
with feathers except that portion of it represented by dots foward and
under the eye. (See likeness on the other Side of this leaf) the tail
is Composed of twelve feathers of equal length, each 14 inches. the
legs are 43/4 inches in length and of a whitefish colour uncovered with
feathers, they are not entirely Smooth but not imbricated; the toes are
four in number three of which are foward and that in the center much
the longest; the fourth is Short and is inserted near the inner of the
three other toes and reather projecting foward. the thye is covered
with feathers as low as the Knee. the top or upper part of the toes are
imbricated with broad scales lying transversly; the nails are black and
in proportion to the Size of the bird comparitively with those of the
Hawk or Eagle, Short and bluntly pointed---the under Side of the wing
is Covered with white down and feathers. a white Stripe of about 2
inches in width, also marks the outer part of the wing, imbraceing the
lower points of the feathers, which cover the joints of the wing
through their whole length or width of that part of the wing. all the
other feathers of whatever part are of a Glossy Shineing black except
the down, which is not glossy, but equally black. the Skin of the beak
and head to the joining of the neck is of a pale orrange Yellow, the
other part uncovered with feathers is of a light flesh Colour. the Skin
is thin and wrinkled except on the beak where it is Smooth. This bird
fly's very clumsily. nor do I know whether it ever Seizes it's prey
alive, but am induced to believe it does not. we have Seen it feeding
on the remains of the whale and other fish which have been thrown up by
the waves on the Sea Coast. these I believe constitute their principal
food, but I have no doubt but that they also feed on flesh. we did not
meet with this bird untille we had decended the Columbia below the
great falls; and have found them more abundant below tide water than
above. this is the Same Species of Bird which R. Field killed on the
18th of Novr. last and which is noticed on that day tho not fully
discribed then I thought this of the Buzzard Specis. I now believe that
this bird is reather of the Vulture genus than any other, tho it wants
Some of their characteristics particularly the hair on the neck, and
the feathers on the legs. this is a handsom bird at a little distance.
it's neck is proportionably longer than those of the Hawks or Eagle.
Shannon also brought a Grey Eagle which appeared to be of the Same kind
common to the U, States. it weighed 15 pds. and measured 7 feet 7
inches between the extremities of the wings

Shannon and Labiesh informed us that when he approached this Vulture
after wounding it, that it made a loud noise very much like the barking
of a Dog. the tongue is long firm and broad, filling the under Chap and
partakeing of its transvirs curvature, or its Sides forming a
longitudinal Groove; obtuse at the point, the margin armed with firm
cartelagenous prickkles pointed and bending inwards.




[Lewis, February 17, 1806]
Monday February 17th 1806.
Collins and Windsor were permited to hunt today towards the praries in
Point Adams with a view to obtain some fresh meat for the sick. a
little before noon Shannon LaBuishe & Frazier returned with the flesh
and hide of an Elk which had been wouded by Sergt. Gass's party and
took the water where they pursued it and caught it. they did not see
Sergt. Gass or any of his party nor learn what further success they had
had. continue the barks with Bratton, and commenced them with Gibson
his fever being sufficiently low this morning to permit the uce of
them. I think therefore that there is no further danger of his
recovery.--at 2 P.M. Joseph Fields arrived from the Salt works and
informed us that they had about 2 Kegs of salt on hand which with what
we have at this place we suppose will be sufficient to last us to our
deposits of that article on the Missouri. we there directed a party of
six men to go with Fields in the morning in order to bring the salt and
kettles to the fort. Shannon brought me one of the large carrion Crow
or Buzzads of the Columbia which they had wounded and taken alive. I
bleive this to be the largest bird of North America. it was not in good
order and yet it weighed 25 lbs. had it have been so it might very well
have weighed 10 lbs mor or 35 lbs. between the extremities of the wings
it measured 9 feet 2 inches; from the extremity of the beak to that of
the toe 3 F. 91/2 In. from hip to toe 2 feet, girth of head 93/4 In.
girth of the neck 71/2 Inches; do. of body exclusive of the wings 2
feet 3 Inches; do of leg 3 inches. diameter of the eye 41/2/toths of an
inch. the iris of a pale scarlet red, the puple of deep sea green or
black and occupyed about one third of the diameter of the eye. the head
and a part of the neck as low as the figures 12 is uncovered with
feathers except that portion of it represented by dots (see likeness).
the tail is composed of 12 feathers of equal length, each 14 inches.
the legs are 43/4 inches in length and of a white colour un covered
with feathers, they are not entirely smooth but not imbricated; the
toes are four in number three of which are forward and that in the
center much the longes; the fourth is short and is inserted near the
inner of the three other toes and reather projecting forward. the thye
is covered with feathers as low as the knee. the top or upper part of
the toes are imbricated with broad scales lying transversly; the nails
are blak and in proportion to the size of the bird comparitively with
those of the halk or Eagle, short and bluntly pointed. the under side
of the wing is covered with white down and feathers. a white stripe of
about two inches in width, also marks the outer part of the wing,
imbracing the lower points of the feathers, which cover the joints of
the wing through their whole length or width of that part of the wing.
all the other feathers of whatever part are glossey shining black
except the down which is not glossey but equally black. the skin of the
beak and head to the joining of the neck is of a pale orrange yellow
the other part uncovered with feathers is of a light flesh colour. the
skin is thin and wrinkled except on the beak where it is smooth. this
bird flys very clumsily nor do I know whether it ever seizes it's prey
alive, but am induced to beleive that it dose not. we have seen it
feeding on the remains of the whale & other fish which have been thrown
up by the waves on the sea coast. these I beleive constitute their
prinsipal food, but I have no doubt but they also feed on flesh; we did
not met with this bird untill we had decended the Columbia below the
great falls, and have found them more abundant below tide-water than
above. I beleive that this bird is reather of the Vulture genus than
any other, tho it wants some of their charactaristics particularly the
hair on the neck and feathers on the legs.--this is a handsome bird at
a little distance. it's neck is proportionably longer than those of the
hawks or Eagle. Shannon also brought me a grey Eagle which appeared to
be of the same kind common to the U States; it weighed 15 lb. and
measured 7 Feet 7 Inches between the extremities of the wings.--At 4
P.M. Sergt. Gass and party arrived; they had killed eight Elk. Drewyer
and Whitehouse also returned late in the evening, had killed one Elk.-
Labuishe informed me that when he approached this vulture, after
wounding it, that it made a loud noise very much like the barking of a
dog & the tongue is large firm and broad, filling the under chap and
partaking of it's transverse curvature, or it's sides colapsing upwards
forming a longitudinal groove; obtuse at the point, the margin armed
with firm cartelaginous prickkles pointed and bending inwards.




[Clark, February 17, 1806]
Monday February 17th 1806
Collins and Windser were permited to hunt to day towards the praries in
point Adams with a view to obtain Some fresh meat for the Sick. a
little before noon Shannon and Labiesh & frazier Came with the flesh
and hide of an Elk which had been wounded by Serjt. Gasses party and
took the water where they pursued it and cought it. they did not See
Sergt. Gass or any of his party or learn what further Sucksess they
have had. Continu the barks with Bratten, and Commenced them with
gibson his feaver being Sufficiently low this morning to permit the use
of them. I think therefore that there is no further danger of his
recovery.---at 2 P.M. Joseph Field arrived from the Salt works and
informd us that they had about 2 Kegs of Salt on hand (say 3 bushels)
which with what we have at this place we suppose will be Sufficient to
last us to our deposit of that article on the Missouri. we directed a
party of Six men to go in the morning in order to bring the salt and
Kittles to the Fort. at 4 P.M. Serjt. Gass and party arrive; they had
killed 8 Elk. Drewyer and Whitehouse also return late in the evening,
they had killed one Elk, part of the meat of which they brought in with
them.

The Brown, White, or Grizly Bear are found in the rocky mountains in
the timbered part of it or Westerly Side but rarely; they are more
Common below or on the East Side of the Rocky Mountains on the borders
of the plains where there are Copses of bushes and underwood near the
water cources. they are by no means as plenty on this Side of the Rocky
Mountains as on the other, nor do I believe they are found at all in
the woody country which borders this coast as far in the interior as
the range of mountains which pass the Columbia between the enterance of
Clarks and the Quick sand Rivers or below the Great falls of Columbia.

The Black Bear differs not any from those Common to the U. States, and
are found under the Rocky Mountains in the woody country on the borders
of the Great Plain's of Columbia and also in this tract of woody
country which lie between these plains and the Pacific Ocian. their
econimy and habits are also the Same with those of the United States.-.




[Lewis, February 18, 1806]
Tuesday February 18th 1806.
This morning we dispatched a party to the Saltworks with Sergt. Ordway
and a second with Sergt. Gass after the Elk killed over the Netul. in
the evening Sergt. Ordway returned and reported that the waves ran so
high in the bay that he could not pass to the entrance of the creek
which we had directed him to assend with the canoe. Collins and Winsor
returned this evening with one deer which they had killed. the deer are
poor and their flesh by no means as good as that of the Elk which is
also poor but appears to be geting better than some weeks past.--in the
forenoon we were visited by eight Clasops and Chinnooks from whom we
purchased a Sea Otter's skin and two hats made of waytape and white
ceder bark. they remained untill late in the evening and departed for
their village. these people are not readily obstructed by waves in
their canoes.--Sergt. Ordway brought me a specemine of a species of
pine peculiar to the swamps and marshes frequently overflown by the
tide as this is a distinct species I shall call it No. 7. this tree
seldom rises to a greater hight than 35 feet and is from 21/2 to 4 feet
in diameter; the stem is simple branching diffuse and proliferous. the
bark the same with that of No. 1 only reather more rugged. the leaf is
acerose, 2/10ths of an inch in width and 3/4 in length. they are firm
stif and somewhat accuminated, ending in a short pointed hard tendril,
gibbous, thickly scattered on all sides of the bough but rispect the
three upper sides only. those which have there insersion on the
underside incline sidewise with their points upwards giving the leaf
the figure of a sythe. the others are perpendicular or pointing
upwards. is sessile growing as in No. 1 from small triangular pedestals
of a soft spungy elastic bark. the under disk of these leaves or that
which grows nearest towards the base of the bough is a deep glossey
green while the upper or opposite side is of a mealy whiteish pale
green; in this rispect differing from almost all leaves. the boughs
retain their leaves as far back as to the sixth years growth. the
peculiarity of the bud scales observed in No 1 is observed in this
species. The cone is 31/2 inches in length and 3 in circumpherence, of
an ovate figure being thickest in the middle and tapering and
terminating in two obtuse points. it is composes of small, flexible,
thin, obtusely pointed smooth and redish brown imbricated scales. each
scale covering two small winged seeds and being itself covered in the
center by a small thin inferior scale accutely pointed. the cone is
somewhat of this figure. they proceede from the side as well as the
extremities of the bough but in the former case always at or near the
commencement of some one years growth which is some instances are as
far back as the third year.




[Clark, February 18, 1806]
Tuesday February 18th 1806
This morning we dispatched a party to the Salt works with Sergt.
Ordway. and a Second party with Sergt. Gass after the Eight Elk killed
over the Netul. in the evening Sergt. Ordway returned and reported that
the waves ran So high in the Bay that he could not pass to the
enterance of a Creek which we had directed him to assend with the
Canoe. Collins & Windsir returned this evening with one Deer which they
had Killed. the deer are pore and their flesh by no means as good as
that of the Elk which is also poore but appears to be getting better
than Some weeks past. in the forenoon we were visited by a Clatsop &
Seven Chinnooks from whome I purchased a Sea otter's Skin and two hats
made of way tape and Silk grass and white cedar bark. they remained
untill late in the evening and departed for their village. those people
are not readily obstructed by waves in their Canoes. Since their
departure we have discovered that they have Stole an ax.--Whitehouse
brought me a roab which he purchased of the Indians formed of three
Skins of the Tiger Cat, this Cat differs from any which I have ever
Seen. it is found on the borders of the plains and the woody Country
lying along the Pacific Ocian. this animale is about the Size or
reather larger than the wild Cat of our Countrey and is much the Same
in form, agility and ferosity. the colour of the back, neck and Sides,
is a redish brown irrigular varigated with Small Spots of dark brown
the tail is about two inches long nearly white except the extremity
which is black; it termonates abruptly as if it had been cut off. the
belly is white with Small black spots. butifully varigated. the legs
are of the Same Colour with the Sides and back marked with transvers
stripes of black the ears are black on the outer Side Covered with fine
black hair, Short except at the upper point which is furnished with a
pencil of verry fine Streight black hair, 3/4 of an inch in length, the
fur of this animale is long and fine. much more So than the wild Cat of
the U States but less so than the Louserva of the N West. the nativs of
this Country make great use of the skins of this Cat, to form the robes
which they wear; three whole Skins is the complement usually employed,
and Sometimes four in each roab. Those Cats are not marked alike maney
of them have but fiew Spots of a darker Colour, particularly on the
Back.




[Lewis, February 19, 1806]
Wednesday February 19th 1806.
Sergt. Ordway set out again this morning with a party for the salt
works by land. in the evening Sergt. Gass returned with the flesh of
eight Elk, and seven skins; having left one skin with Shannon and
Labuishe who remained over the netul to continue the chase. we had the
Elk skins divided among the messes in order that they might be prepared
for covering our baggage when we set out in the spring. our sick are
recovering but they appear to strengthen but slowly. The common red
deer we found under the rocky mts. in the neighbourhood of the
Chopunnish, and about the great falls of the Columbia river and as low
down the same as the commencement of tide water. these do not appear to
differ essentially from those of our country being about the same size
shape and appearance in every rispect except their great length of tail
which is more than half as long again as our deer I measured one of
them which was 17 inches long. The Black tailed fallow deer are
peculiar to this coast and are a distinct species of deer partaking
equally of peculiarities of the mule deer and the common deer. their
ears are reather larger and their winter coat darker than the common
deer; the recepticle of the eye or drane is mor conspicuous; their legs
shorter and body thicker and larger than the common deer; their tail is
about the length of our deer or from 8 to 10 inches the hair on the
underside of which is white, and that of it's sides and top quite black
the horns resemble in form and colour those of the mule deer which it
also resembles in it's gate; that is bounding with all four feet off
the ground at the same time when runing at full speed and not loping as
the common deer or antelope do. they are sometimes found in the
woodlands but most frequently in the praries and open grounds. they may
be said generally to be a size larger than the common deer and that
less than the mule deer. they are very seldom found in good order, or
fat, even in the season which the common deer are so, and their flesh
is inferior to any species of deer which I have ever seen.-




[Clark, February 19, 1806]
Wednesday February 19th 1806.
Sergt. Ordway Set out again with a party to the Salt works by land. in
the evening Sergt. Gass returned with the flesh of Eight Elk, and Seven
Skins haveing left one Skin with Shannon and Labiche who remained over
the Netul to Continue the chase. we devided the Skins between the
messes in order that they might be prepared for Covering the baggage
when we Set out in the Spring. our Sick appear to Strengthen but Slowly
I gave Bratten 6 of Scotts pills which did not work him. he is very
weak and Complains of his back.

The black Fox or as they are more frequently Called by the N West
Trader Fisher is found in the woody country on this Coast. how this
Animal obtained the name of fisher I know not, but certain it is, that
the name is not appropriate, as it does not prey on or Seek it as a
prey-. they are extreeinly active Strong and made for climbing which
they do with great agility, and bound from tree to tree in pursute of
the squirel or Rackoon, their natural and most usual food. their Colour
is a jut Black except a Small Spot of white on the breast. the body is
long, legs Short and formed Something like the turnspit Dog, with a
remarkable long tail. it does not differ here from those of the United
States.

The Silver Fox this animale is very rare even in the Countrey where it
exists, I have never Seen more than the Skins of this Animal and those
were in the possession of the nativs of the woody Country below the
Great falls of the Columbia, from which I think it is most probably
they are the inhabitants of the woody country exclusively. from the
Skins, it appeard to be about the Size of the large red Fox of the
plains and much of its form with a large tail. the legs I think
somewhat longer it has a fine long deep fur poil. the poil is of a dark
lead colour and the long hairs intermixed with it, are either white or
black at the lower part, and white at top, the whole mixture forming a
butifull Silver Grey. I think this the handsomest of all the Fox
Species, except a Species of which I Saw one running, and Capt Lewis
had a good view of another of the Same Species on the Missouri near the
natural walls. The large red fox of the plains, and the Kit fox are the
Same which we met with on the Missouri and are the inhabitants almost
exclusively of the open plains, or of the copse of bushes within the
plain country. the Common red or grey fox of the United States is also
found in the woody country on this coast, nor does it appear to be
altered in respect to it's fur colour or any other particular. we have
Seen none of the large red fox.




[Lewis, February 20, 1806]
Thursday February 20th 1806.
Permited Collins to hunt this morning he returned in the evening
unsuccessfull as to the chase but brought with him some cranberries for
the sick. Gibson is on the recovery fast; Bratton has an obstenate
cough and pain in his back and still appears to be geting weaker.
McNeal from his inattention to his disorder has become worse.

This forenoon we were visited by Tdh-cum a principal Chief of the
Chinnooks and 25 men of his nation. we had never seen this cheif before
he is a good looking man of about 50 years of age reather larger in
statue than most of his nation; as he came on a friendly visit we gave
himself and party some thing to eat and plyed them plentifully with
smoke. we gave this cheif a small medal with which he seemed much
grati-fyed. in the evening at sunset we desired them to depart as is
our custom and closed our gates. we never suffer parties of such number
to remain within the fort all night; for notwithstanding their apparent
friendly disposition, their great averice and hope of plunder might
induce them to be treacherous. at all events we determined allways to
be on our guard as much as the nature of our situation will permit us,
and never place our selves at the mercy of any savages. we well know,
that the treachery of the aborigenes of America and the too great
confidence of our countrymen in their sincerity and friendship, has
caused the distruction of many hundreds of us. so long have our men
been accustomed to a friendly intercourse with the natives, that we
find it difficult to impress on their minds the necessity of always
being on their guard with rispect to them. this confidence on our part,
we know to be the effect of a series of uninterupted friendly
intercouse, but the well known treachery of the natives by no means
entitle them to such confidence, and we must check it's growth in our
own minds, as well as those of our men, by recollecting ourselves, and
repeating to our men, that our preservation depends on never loosing
sight of this trait in their character, and being always prepared to
meet it in whatever shape it may present itself.-

The Mule deer are the same with those of the plains of the Missouri so
frequently mentioned. we met with them under the Rocky mountains in the
Neighbourhood of the Chopunnish nation on the Kooskooske river, but
have not seen them since nor do we know whether they exist in the
interior of the great plains of Columbia or on their lower border near
the mountains which pass the river about the great falls. The Elk is
the same with that found in much the greatest portion of North America,
they are common to every part of this country, as well the timbered
lands as the plains, but are much more abundant in the former than the
latter The large brown woolf is like that of the Atlantic States and
are found only in the woody country on the Pacific Ocean imbracing the
mountains which pass the Columbia between the great falls and rapids of
the same. the large and small woolves of the plains are the inhabitants
principally of the open country and the woodlands on their borders and
resemble in their habits and appearance those of the plains of the
Missouri precisely. they are not abundant in the plains of Columbia
because there is but little game on which for them to subsist.




[Clark, February 20, 1806]
Thursday February 20th 1806.
Permited Collins to hunt this morning he returned in the evening
unsucksessfull as to the chase, but brought with him Some Cramberries
for the Sick. Gibson is on the recovery fast; Bratten has an obstinate
Cough and pain in his back and Still appears to be getting weaker. H.
McNeal from his inattention to his disorder has become worse. Willard
has a high fever and complains of the pain in his head and want of
appetite.

The forenoon we were visited by Tfih-cum a principal chief of the
Chinnooks and 25 men of his nation. we had never Seen this Chief before
he is a good looking man of about 50 years of age reather larger in
Statue than most of his nation; as he came on a friendly visit we gave
himself and party something to eate and plyed them plenty fully with
Smoke. we gave this chief a small Medal with which he Seamed much
pleased. in the evening at Sunset we desired them to depart as is our
custom and Close our gates. we never Suffer parties of Such numbers to
remain within the Fort all night; for not withstanding their apparent
friendly disposition, their great averis and hope of plunder might
induce them to be treacherous. at all events we are determined always
to be on our guard, as much as the nature of our Situation will permit
us, and never place our selves at the mercy of any Savages. we well
know, that the treachery of the Aborigenes of America and the too great
confidence of our country men in their friendship and fadility has
caused the distruction of maney hundreds of us. so long has our men
been accustomed to a friendly intercourse with the nativs, that we find
it dificult to impress on their minds the necessity of always being on
their Guard with respect to them. this confidence on our part we know
to be the effect of a serious of a friendly and unintorupted
intercourse. but the well Known treachery of the natives by no means
entitle them to Such confidence, and we must check it's groth in our
own minds as well as those of our men, by recollecting our selves, and
repeating to our men, that our preservation depends on our never
loseing Sight of this trate in their character, and being always
prepared to meet it in whatever Shape it may present itself

The Mule Deer are the Same with those of the Plains of the Missouri So
frequently mentioned. we met with them under the rocky mountains in the
neighbourhood of the Chopunnish Nation on the Koskooske river, but have
not Seen them Since nor do we know whether they exist in the interiors
of the great Plains of Columbia, or on the lower border near the
mountains which pass the river about the great falls. The Elk is the
Same with that found in much the greater portion of North America, they
are common to every part of this Country, as well the timbered lands as
the plains. but are much more abundant in the former than the latter




[Lewis, February 21, 1806]
Friday February 21st 1806.
Visited this morning by 3 Clatsop who remained with us all day; they
are great begers; I gave one of them a few nedles with which he
appeared much gratifyed. in the evening late they departed. Drewyer and
Collins went in pursuit of some Elk, the tracks of which Collins had
discovered yesterday; but it rained so hard that they could not pursue
them by their tracks and returned unsuccessfull. Drewyer saw a fisher
black fox but it escaped from him among the fallen timber. Sergt.
Ordway returned with the party from the salt camp which we have now
evacuated. they brought with them the salt and eutensils. our stock of
salt is now about 20 Gallons; 12 gallons of which we secured in 2 small
iron bound kegs and laid by for our voyage. gave Willard and bratton
each a doze of Scotts pills; on the former they operated and on the
latter they (lid not. Gibson still continues the barks three times a
day and is on the recovery fast.-

The tyger Cat is found on the borders of the plains and in the woody
country lying along the Pacific Ocean. this animal is about the size or
reather larger than the wild cat of our country and is much the same in
form, agility and ferosity. the colour of the back neck and sides is a
redish brown irregularly variegated with small spots of dark brown the
tail is about two inches long nearly white except the extremity which
is black; it terminates abruptly as if it had been cut off. the belly
is white with small black spots, beautifully variagated. the legs are
of the same colour with the sides and back marked with transverse
stripes of black the ears are black on the outer side covered with fine
short hair except at the upper point which furnished with a pensil of
fine, streight, black hair, = 3/4 of an inch in length. the fur of this
anamal is long and fine, much more so than the wild cat of the United
States but less so than that of Louservea of the N. West. the natives
in this quarter make great use of the skins of this Cat to form the
robes which they wear; four skins is the compliment usuly employed in
each robe. the Black fox, or as they most frequently called in the
neighbourhood of Detroit, Fisher is found in the woody country on this
coast. how this animal obtained the name of fisher I know not, but
certain it is, that the name is not appropriate, as it dose not prey on
fish or seek it as a prey. they are extreemly active strong and
prepared for climbing, which they do with great agility, and bound from
tree to tree in pursuit of the squirrel or Rackoon their natural and
most usual food. their colour is a jut black except a small spot of
white on the breast. the body is long, legs short and formed something
like the ternspit dog with a remarkable long tail. it dose not differ
here from those of the United States. The Silver fox this animal is
very rare even in the country where it exists; I have never seen more
than the Skins of this anamal and those were in the possession of the
natives of the woody Country below the great falls of the Columbia from
which I think that it is most probably the inhabtant of the woody
country exclusively. from the skin it appeared to be about the size of
the large red fox of the plains and much of it's form with a large
tail. the legs I think somewhat longer. it has a fine long deep fur
poll. the poil is of a dark lead colour and the long hairs intermixed
with it are either white or black at the lower part and white at the
top, the whole mixture forming a beatifull silver grey. I think this
the most beautifull of all the Foxes except species of which I saw one
only on the Missouri near the natural walls. the large red fox of the
plains and the Kit fox are the same which we met with on the Missouri
and are the inhabitants almost exclusively of the open plains, or of
the cops of brush within the pain country. The common red fox of the
United States is also found in the woody country on this coast nor dose
it appear to be altered in rispect to it's fur colour or any other
particular




[Clark, February 21, 1806]
Friday February 21st 1806
Visited this morning by three Clatsops, who remained with us all day;
they are great begers; Capt Lewis gave one of them a fiew nedles with
which he appeared much gratified, in the evening late they departed.

Drewyer and Collins went in pursute of Some Elk the tracks of which
Collins had discovered yesterday; but it rained So hard they Could not
pursue them by the tracks, and returned unsucksessfull. Drewyer Saw a
fisher but it escaped from him among the fallen timber. Sergt. Ordway
returned with the party from the Salt Camp which we have now avacuated.
they brought with them the Salt and utensels. our Stock of Salt is now
about 20 Gallons; 12 Gallons we had Secured in 2 Small iron bound Kegs
and laid by for our voyage. Gave Willard a dose of Scots pills; they
opperated very well. Gibson Still Continus the bark 3 times a day and
is on the recovery fast.

The large brown Wolf is like that of the atlantic States, and are found
only in the woody Country on the Pacific Ocean embraceing the mountains
which pass the Columbia between the Great Falls an Rapids of the same.
The large and Small Wolves of the inhabitents principally of the open
Country and the wood land on their borders, and resemble in their
habits those of the plains of Missouri presisely they are not abundant
in the Plains of Columbia because there is but little game on which for
them to subsist-




[Lewis, February 22, 1806]
Saturday February 22cd 1806.
We were visited today by two Clatsop women and two boys who brought a
parsel of excellent hats made of Cedar bark and ornamented with
beargrass. two of these hats had been made by measures which Capt Clark
and myself had given one of the women some time since with a request to
make each of us a hat; they fit us very well, and are in the form we
desired them. we purchased all their hats and distributed them among
the party. the woodwork and sculpture of these people as well as these
hats and their waterproof baskets evince an ingenuity by no means
common among the Aborigenes of America. in the evening they returned to
their village and Drewyer accompanied them in their canoe in order to
get the dogs which the Clatsops have agreed to give us in payment for
the Elk they stole from us some weeks since. these women informed us
that the small fish began to run which we suppose to be herring from
their discription. they also informed us that their Chief, Coma or
Comowooll, had gone up the Columbia to the valley in order to purchase
wappetoe, a part of which he in tended trading with us on his return.
one of our canoes brake the cord by which it was attatched and was
going off with the tide this evening; we sent Sergt. Pryor and a party
after her who recovered and brought her back. our sick consisting of
Gibson, Bratton, Sergt. Ordway, Willard and McNeal are all on the
recovery. we have not had as may sick at any one time since we left
Wood River. the general complaint seams to be bad colds and fevers,
something I beleive of the influenza.

The Antelope is found in the great plains of Columbia and are the same
of those on the Missouri found in every part of that untimbered
country. they are by no means as plenty on this side of the Rocky
Mountains as on the other. the natives here make robes of their skins
dressed with the hair on them. when the salmon begin to decline in the
latter end of the sunme and Autumn the natves leave the river, at least
a majority and remove to the plains at some distance for the purpose of
hunting the Antelope. they pursue them on horse back and shoot them
with their arrows. The sheep is found in various parts of the Rocky
mountains, but most commonly in those parts which are timbered and
steep. they are also found in greater abundance on the Chain of
mountains with form the commencement of the woody country on this coast
and which pass the Columbia between the great falls and rapids we have
never met with this anamal ourselves but have seen many of their skins
in possession of the natives dressed with the wooll on them and aso
seen the blankets which they manufacture of the wooll of this sheep.
from the skin the animal appears to be about the size of the common
sheep; of a white colour. the wooll is fine on most parts of the body
but not so long as that of our domestic sheep. the wooll is also curled
and thick. on the back and more particularly on the top of the neck the
wooll is intermixed with a considerable proportion of long streight
hairs. there is no wooll on a small part of the body behind the
sholders on each side of the brisquit which is covered with a short
fine hairs as in the domestic sheep. form the signs which the Indians
make in discribing this animal they have herect pointed horns, tho one
of our Engages La Page, assures us that he saw them in the black hills
where the little Missouri passes them, and that they were in every
rispect like the domestic sheep, and like them the males had lunated
horns bent backwards and twisted. I should be much pleased at meeting
with this animal, but have had too many proofs to admit a doubt of it's
existing and in considerable numbers in the mountains near this coast.
the Beaver and common Otter have before been mentioned in treating of
the occupations of the natives in hunting fishing &c. these do not
differ from those of other parts of the Continent.




[Clark, February 22, 1806]
Saturday February 22nd 1806
We were visited to day by two Clatsops women and two boys who brought a
parcel of excellent hats made of Cedar bark, and ornemented with bear
grass. two of those hats had been made by measure which Capt Lewis and
my Self had given a woman Some time Since, with a request to make each
of us a hat; they fit us very well, and are in the form we desired
them. we purchased the hats and distribeted them among the party. the
woodwork and sculpture of these people as well as those hats and the
water proof baskits evince an ingenuity by no means common among the
Aborigenes of America. in the evining they returned to their village
and Drewyer accompanied them in order to get Some dogs &c. These women
informed us that the Small fish began to run which we suppose to be
herring from their discription. they also informed us that their Chief
Conia Comawool, had gorn up the Columbia to the Vally in order to
purchase Wappatoe, a part of which he entended tradeing with us on his
return. our sick consisting of Gibson, Bratten, Willard McNeal and
Baptiest LaPage is Something better Serjt. Ordway is complaining of a
Coald & head ake. we have not had as many Sick at one time Since we
left the Settlements of the Illinois. the general Complaint appears to
be bad colds and fevers, with a violent pain in the head, and back,
something I believe of the influenza.

The Antelope is found in the great plains of Columbia and are the Same
with those of the Missouri found in every part of that untimbered
Country. they are by no means as plenty on this Side of the Rocky
Mountains as on the other. the nativs here make robes of their Skins
dressed withe the hair on them. when the Salmon begin to decline in the
latter end of Summer and autumn, the nativs leave the river, at least a
majority and move out into the plains at Some distance for the purpose
of hunting the Antelope. they pursue them on hors back and Shute them
with their arrows.

The Sheep is found in various parts of the Rocky Mountains, but most
Commonly on those parts which are timbered and Steep. they are also
found in greater abundance on the chain of mountains which forms the
Commencement of the woody country on this Coast and which pass the
Columbia between the great falls and rapids. we have never met with
this animal ourselves but have Seen maney of their Skins in the
possession of the nativs dressed with the wool on them and also Seen
and have the blankets which they manufacture of the wool of this Sheep.
from the Skin the animal appears to be about the Size of the common
Sheep; of a white colour. the wool is fine on most parts of the body,
but not so long as that of the domestic Sheep; the wool is also Curled
and thick. on the back and more particularly on the top of the neck the
wool is intermixed with a Considerable proportion of long Streight
hair. there is no wool on a Small part of the body behind the Sholders
on each Side of the brisquit which is covered with a Short fine hairs
as in the domestic Sheep. from the Signs which the Indians make in
discribing this animale they have herect pointed horns, tho one of our
Engages Lapage, assures us that he Saw them in the Black hills where
the Little Missouri river passes them, and that they were in every
respect like our domestic Sheep, and like them the mail had lunated
horns bent backwards and twisted. I should be much pleased at meeting
with this animal. but have had too maney proofs to admit a doubt of
it's existing and in considerable numbers in the mountains on this
Coast. The Beaver and Common Otter have before been mentioned in
treating of the Occupation of the nativs in hunting, fishing, &c. these
do not differ from those of other parts of the Continent-.-.




[Lewis, February 23, 1806]
Sunday February 23rd 1806.
not anything transpired during this day worthy of particular notice.
our sick are all on the recovery, except Sergt. Ordway who is but
little wose and not very ill tho more so than any of the others. the
men have provided themselves very amply with mockersons and leather
cloathing, much more so indeed than they ever have since they have been
on this voige.

The Sea Otter is found on the sea coast and in the salt water. this
anamal when fully grown is as large as a common mastive dog. the ears
and eyes are remarkaby small, particularly the former which is not an
inch in length thick fleshey and pointed covered with short hair. the
tail is about 10 inches in length thick where it joins the body and
tapering to a very sharp point; in common with the body it is covered
with a deep fir particularly on the upper side, on the under part the
fur is not so long. the legs are remarkably short and the feet, which
have five toes each are broad large and webbed. the legs are covered
with fur and the feet with short hair. the body of this animal is long
and nearly of the same thickness throughout. from the extremity of the
tail to that of the nose they will measure 5 feet or upwards. the
colour is a uniform dark brown and when in good order and season
perfectly black and glossey. it is the riches and I think the most
delicious fur in the world at least I cannot form an idea of any more
so. it is deep thick silkey in the extreem and strong. the inner part
of the fur when opened is lighter than the surface in it's natural
position. there are some fine black and shining hairs intermixed with
the fur which are reather longer and add much to it's beauty. the nose,
about the eyes ears and forehead in some of these otter is of a lighter
colour, sometimes a light brown. those parts in the young sucking Otter
of this species is sometimes of a cream coloured white, but always much
lighter than the other parts. the fur of the infant Otter is much
inferior in point of colour and texture to that of the full grown
otter, or even after it has been weaned. there is so great a difference
that I have for some time supposed it a different animal; the Indians
called the infant Otter Spuck, and the full grow or such as had
obtained a coat of good fur, E-luck'-ke. this still further confirmed
the opinion of their being distinct species; but I have since learned
that the Spuck is the young Otter. the colour of the neck, body, legs
and tail is a dark lead brown. The mink is found in the woody country
on this coast, and dose not differ in any particu from those of the
Atlantic coast. the seal are found here in great numbers, and as far up
the Columbia river as the great falls above which there are none. I
have reason to beleive from the information of the men that there are
several species of the seal on this coast and in the river but what the
difference is I am unable to state not having seen them myself
sufficiently near for minute inspection nor obtained the different
kinds to make a comparison. the skins of such as I have seen are
covered with a short coarse stiff and glossey hair of a redish hey
brown colour. tho the anamal while in the water or as we saw them
frequently in the river appear to be black and spoted with white
sometimes. when we first saw those animals at the great falls and
untill our arrival at this place we conseived they were the Sea Otter.
but the indians here have undeceived us.--I am not much acquainted with
the Seal but suppose that they are the same common also to the Atlantic
Ocean in the same parallel of latitude. the skins I have seen are
precisely such as our trunks are frequently covered with.




[Clark, February 23, 1806]
Sunday February 23rd 1806.
Not any thing transpired desering particular notice. our Sick are all
on the recovery. the men have provided themselves verry amply with
mockersons & leather clothing, much more So indeed than they have ever
been Since they have been on the voyage.

The Sea Otter is found only on the Sea Coast and in the Salt water.
Those animals which I took to be the Sea Otter from the Great Falls of
the Columbia to the mouth, proves to be the Phosia or Seal which at a
little distance has every appearance of the Sea Otters. The Sea otter
when fully grown is as large as the common mastif dog, the eail and
Eyes are remarkably Small, particularly the former which is not an inch
in length thick fleshey and pointed, Covered with short hair. the tail
is about 10 inches in length thick where it joins the body and tapering
to a very Sharp point; in common with the body it is covered with a
deep fur particularly on the upper Side, on the under part the fur is
not So long. the legs are remarkably Short and the feat which have five
toes each are broad large and webbed. the legs are covered with fur and
the feet with Short hair. the body of this Animal is long and nearly of
the Same thickness throughout. from the extremity of the tail to that
of the nose they will measure 5 feet or upwards. the colour is of a
uniform dark brown, and when in good order and Season perfectly Black
and Glossey. it is the richest and I think the most delightfull fur in
the world at least I cannot form an idea of any more so. it is deep
thick silky in the extream and Strong. the inner part of the fur when
open is lighter than the surface in its natural position. there are
Some fine black Shineing hairs intermixed with the fur which are
reather longer and add much to its beauty. the nose, about the eyes,
ears and forehead in Some of those otter is of a light Colour,
Sometimes a light brown. those parts in the young Suckling otters of
this Species is Sometimes of a creem colour'd white, but always much
lighter than the other parts. the fur of the infant otter is much
inferior in point of colour, and texture, to that of the full grown
otter, or even after it has been weened-. there is so great a
difference that I have for Some time Supposed it a different animal;
the Indians Call the infant otter Spuck, and the full grown or such as
had obtained a Coat of good fur, E luck'ko. this Still further
confirmed the opinion of their being distinct Species; but I have Since
lerned that the Spuck is the young otter. the Colour of the neck, body,
legs and tail is a dark lead brown. The Mink is found in the woody
Country on this Coast and does not differ in any particular from those
of the Atlantic Coasts.

The Seal or Phoca are found here in great numbers, and as far up the
Columbia as the great Falls, above which there are none. I have reasons
to believe from the information of the men that there are Several
Species of the Phoca on this Coast and in the river, but what the
difference is I am unable to State not haveing Seen them myself
Sufficiently near for manute inspection nor obtain the different kinds
to make a comparison. the Skins of Such as I have Seen are covered with
a Short thick Coarse Glossy hair of a redish bey brown Colour. tho the
animal while in the water, or as we saw them frequently in the river
appear to be black and Spoted with white sometimes. I am not much
acquainted with the Seal, but Suppose that they are the Same common
also to the atlantic Ocian in the Same parrelal of Latitude. the Skins,
or those which I have Seen are presisely Such as trunks are frequently
Covered with. the flesh of this animal is highly prised by the nativs
who Swinge the hair off and then roste the flesh on Sticks before the
fire.




[Lewis, February 24, 1806]
Monday February 24th 1806.
Our sick are still on the recovery. Shannon & Labuishe returned in the
forenoon; they had killed no Elk and reported that they beleived the
Elk have retired from their former haunts and gone further back in the
country to a considerable distance from this place. this is very
unwelcome information for poor and inferior as the flesh of this animal
is it is our principal dependance for subsistence.

This evening we were visited by Comowooll the Clatsop Chief and 12 men
women & children of his nation. Drewyer came a passenger in their
canoe, and brought with him two dogs. The chief and his party had
brought for sail a Sea Otter skin some hats, stergeon and a species of
small fish which now begin to run, and are taken in great quantities in
the Columbia R. about 40 miles above us by means of skiming or scooping
nets. on this page I have drawn the likeness of them as large as life;
it as perfect as I can make it with my pen and will serve to give a
general idea of the fish. the rays of the fins are boney but not sharp
tho somewhat pointed. the small fin on the back next to the tail has no
rays of bone being a thin membranous pellicle. the fins next to the
gills have eleven rays each. those of the abdomen have eight each,
those of the pinna-ani are 20 and 2 half formed in front. that of the
back has eleven rays. all the fins are of a white colour. the back is
of a bluish duskey colour and that of the lower part of the sides and
belley is of a silvery white. no spots on any part. the first bone of
the gills next behid the eye is of a bluis cast, and the second of a
light goald colour nearly white. the puple of the eye is black and the
iris of a silver white. the underjaw exceeds the uper; and the mouth
opens to great extent, folding like that of the herring. it has no
teeth. the abdomen is obtuse and smooth; in this differing from the
herring, shad anchovey &c of the Malacopterygious Order & Class Clupea,
to which however I think it more nearly allyed than to any other altho
it has not their accute and serrate abdomen and the under jaw exceeding
the upper. the scales of this little fish are so small and thin that
without minute inspection you would suppose they had none. they are
filled with roes of a pure white colour and have scarcely any
perceptable alimentary duct. I find them best when cooked in Indian
stile, which is by roasting a number of them together on a wooden spit
without any previous preperation whatever. they are so fat they require
no additional sauce, and I think them superior to any fish I ever
tasted, even more delicate and lussious than the white fish of the
lakes which have heretofore formed my standart of excellence among the
fishes. I have heard the fresh anchovey much extolled but I hope I
shall be pardoned for beleiving this quite as good. the bones are so
soft and fine that they form no obstruction in eating this fish. we
purchased all the articles which these people brought us; we suffered
these people to remain all night as it rained, the wind blew most
violently and they had their women and children with them; the latter
being a sure pledge of their pacific dispositions. the Sturgeon which
they brought us was also good of it's kind. we determine to send a
party up the river to procure some of those fish, and another in some
direction to hunt Elk as soon as the weather will permit.




[Clark, February 24, 1806]
Monday February 24th 1806
Our Sick are Still on the recovery. Shannon and Labiche returned in the
forenoon, they had killed no Elk, and reported that they believe the
Elk have returned from their former haunts and gorn further back in the
mountains to a considerable distance from this place. this is very
unwelcom information, for poore and inferior as the flesh of this
animale is, it is our principal dependance for Subsistance.

The Rackoon is found in the woody Country on the Coast in considerable
quantities. the nativs take a fiew of them in Snars, and deadfalls; tho
appear not to value their Skins much, and but Seldom prepare them for
robes. The large Grey Squirel appear to be a native of a narrow tract
of Country on the upper Side of the mountains below the Great falls of
Columbia which is pritty well covered in maney parts with a Species of
white oak. this animal is much larger than the Gray Squirel of our
Country, it resembles it much in form and colour. it is as large as the
Fox Squirel of the South Atlantic States. the tail is reather larger
than the whole of the body and head, the hair of which is long and tho
inserted on all Sides reispect the horozontal one. the eyes are black,
whiskers black and long. the back, Sides, head, tale and outer parts of
the legs are of a blue lead colour grey. the breast, belly, and inner
parts of the legs are of a pure white. the hair is Short as that of the
Fox Squirel but is much finer and intermixed with a propotion of fur.
the nativs make great use of those Skins in forming their robes. this
Squirel Subsists principally on the acorn and filburts, which last also
grow abundantly in the Oak Country-. The Small brown Squirel is a
butifull little animal about the size of the red Squirel of the E.
States or Something larger than the ground Squirel of the U States. the
tail is as long as the body and neck formed Somewhat Hat. the eyes
black, whiskers long and black but not abundant. the back, Sides, head,
neck and outer parts of the legs are of a redish dark brown. the
throat, breast, belly and inner parts of the legs are of a pale brick
red. the tail is a mixture of black and fox coloured red in which the
black prodomonates in the middle, and the other on the edges and
extremity. the hair of the body is about 1/2 inch long and So fine and
soft that it has the appearance of fur. the hair of the tail is coarser
and double as long. this animal Subsists principally on the Seeds of
various Species of pine and are always found in the piney Country. they
are common to the tract of woody country on this coast. they lodge in
Clefts of rocks, holes in the Ground, old Stumps of trees and the
hollow trunks of falling timber; in this respect resemble the rat
always haveing their habitation in or near the earth. The Small Grey
Squirel Common to every part of the Rocky Mountains which is timbered,
differ from the dark brown squirel just discribed only in its colour.

it's back, neck, Sides, head, tail and outer Sides of the legs are of
brown lead coloured Grey; the tail has a Slight touch of the fox colour
near the extremity of some of the hairs. the throat, belly, breast, and
inner part of the legs are of the Colour of tanners ooze and have a
narrow Stripe of black commencing behing each Sholder and extending
longitudinally for about 3 inches between the Colours of the Side &
belly. their habits are also the Same with the dark brown Squirel of
this neighbourhood, and like them are extreamly nimble and active. The
Ground Squirel is found in various parts of the Countrey as well the
Praries as wood lands, and is one of the fiew animals which we have
Seen in every part of our voy-age. it differs not at all from those of
the U, States.

The Barking Squirel and handsom Ground Squirel of the Plains on the
East Side of the Rocky Mountains are not found in the plains of the
Columbia.

This evening we were visited by Comowooll the Clatsop Chief and 14 men
women and Children of his nation. Drewyer came a pasinger in their
Canoe, and brought with him two dogs. the Chief and his party had
brought for Sale a Sea otter Skin, Some hats, Sturgeon and a Species of
fish which now begins to run and are taken in Great quantities in the
Columbia River about 40 miles above us by means of Skiming or scooping
nets. See likeness on the other Side of this leaf or page. Capt Lewis
gave an old Coat and Vest for a Sea otter Skin, we purchased Several
hads of the Indian manufactry and distributed them among the party. we
also purchased a fiew of the Small fish which we found deliciously fine.




[Lewis, February 25, 1806]
Tuesday February 25th 1806.
It continued to rain and blow so violently that there was no movement
of the party today. the Indians left us in the morning on their return
to their village. Willard somewhat worse the other Invalledes on the
ricovery. I am mortifyed at not having it in my power to make more
celestial observations since we have been at Fort Clatsop, but such has
been the state of the weather that I have found it utterly
impracticable.-

The Rackoon is found in the woody country on this coast in considerable
quantities. the natives take a few of them in snars and deadfalls; tho
appear not to vallue their skins much, and but seldom prepare them for
robes. The large grey squirrel appears to be a native of a narrow tract
of country on the upper side of the mountains just below the grand
falls of Columbia which is pretty well covered in many parts with a
species of white oak. in short I beleive this squirrel to be
coextensive with timber only, as we have not seen them in any part of
the country where pine forms the majority of the timber, or in which
the oak dose not appear. this animal is much larger than the grey
squirrel of our country it resembles it much in form and colours. it is
as large as the fox squirrel of the Southern Atlantic states. the tail
is reather longer than the whole length of the body and head. the hair
of which is long and tho inserted on all sides reispect the horizontal
ones only. the eyes are black. whiskers black and long. the back,
sides, head, tail and outer part of the legs are of a blue lead
coloured grey. the breast belley and inner part of the legs are of a
pure white. the hair is short as that of the fox-squirrel but is much
finer and intermixed with a proportion of fur. the natives make great
use of these skins in forming their robes. this squirrel subsists
principally on the acorn and filbird which last also grows abundantly
in the oak country.--The small brown squirrel is a beautifull little
animal about the size and form of the red squirrel of the Eastern
Atlantic states and western lakes. the tail is as long as the body and
neck, formed like that of the red squirrel or somewhat flat. the eyes
black. whiskers long and black but not abundant. the back, sides, head,
neck and outer part of the legs are of a redish dark brown. the throat,
breast, belley and inner part of the legs are of a pale brick red. the
tail is a mixture of black and fox coloured red in which the black
predominates in the midle and the other on the edges and extremity. the
hair of the body is about 1/2 an inch long and so fine and soft that it
has the appearance of fur. the hair of the tail is coarser and doubly
as long. this animal subsists principally on the seeds of various
species of pine, and are always found in the piny country they are
common to the tract of wooddy country on this coast. they lodge in
clifts of rocks, holes in the ground old stumps of trees and the hollow
trunks of fallen timber; in this rispect resembling the rat, always
having their habitatin in or near the earth. the small grey squirrel
common to every part of the rocky mountain which is timbered, difirs
from the dark brown squirrel just discribed only in it's colour. it's
back, sides, neck, head tail and outer side of the legs are of a brown
lead coloured grey; the tail has a slight touch of the fox colour near
the extremity of some of the hairs. the throat, breast, belley, and
inner parts of the legs are of the colour of tanner's ooze and have a
narrow stripe of black, commencing just behide each sholder and
extending longitudinaly for about 3 inches betwen the colours of the
sides and belley. their habids are also the same of the dark brown
squirrel of this neighbourhood and like them are extreemly nimble and
active. the ground squirrel is found in every part of the country, as
well the praries as woodlands, and is one of the few animals which we
have seen in every part of our voyage. it differs not at all from those
of the U States. the barking squirrel and handsome ground squirrel of
the plains on the East side of the rocky mountains are not found in the
plains of Columbia.




[Clark, February 25, 1806]
Tuesday February 25th 1806
It continued to rain and blow So violently that there was no movement
of the party to day. the Indians left us in the morning on their return
to their village. Willard Somewhat worse the others are on the
recovery. we are mortified at not haveing it in our power to make more
Celestial observations since we have been at Fort Clatsop, but Such has
been the State of the weather that we have found it utterly
impractiable-. I purchased of the Clatsops this morning about half a
bushel of Small fish which they had cought about 40 miles up the
Columbia in their scooping nets. as this is an uncommon fish to me and
one which no one of the party has ever Seen. on the next page I have
drawn the likeness of them as large as life; it's as perfect as I can
make it with my pen and will Serve to give a general idea of the fish.
the rays of the fins are boney but not Sharp tho Somewhat pointed. the
Small fin on the back next to the tail has no rays of bone being a thin
membranous pellicle. the fins next to the gills have eleven rays each.
those of the abdomen have Eight each, those of the pinna ani are 20 and
2 half formed in front. that of the back has eleven rays. all the fins
are of a white colour. the back is of a blueish duskey colour and that
of the lower part of the Sides and belly is of a Silvery White. no
Spots on any part. the first of the gills next behind the eye is of a
blueish cast, and the second of a light gold colour nearly white. the
puple of the eye is black and the iris of a silver white. the under jaw
exceeds the upper; and the mouth opens to great extent, folding like
that of the Herring. it has no teeth. the abdomen is obtuse and Smooth;
in this differing from the herring, Shad, anchovey &c. of the
Malacapterygious Order and Class Clupea, to which however I think it
more nearly allyed than to any other altho it has not their accute and
Serrate abdomen and the under jaw exceeding the upper. the scales of
this little fish are So small and thin that without manute inspection
you would Suppose they had none. they are filled with roes of a pure
white Colour and have Scercely any perceptable alimentary duct. I found
them best when cooked in Indian Stile, which is by rosting a number of
them together on a wooden spit without any previous preperation
whatever. they are so fat that they require no aditional sauce, and I
think them Superior to any fish I ever tasted, even more dilicate and
lussious than the white fish of the Lakes which have heretofore formed
my Standard of excellence among the fishes. I have herd the fresh
anchovey much extoll'd but I hope I shall be pardened for believeing
this quit as good. the bones are So Soft and fine that they form no
obstruction in eating this fish.




[Lewis, February 26, 1806]
Wednesday February 26th 1806.
This morning we dispatched Drewyer and two men in our Indian canoe up
the Columbia River to take sturgeon and Anchovey. or if they were
unsuccessfull in fishing we directed them to purchase fish from the
natives for which purpose we had furnished them with a few articles
such as the natives are pleased with. we also Sent Shields, Joseph
Fields and Shannon up the Netul to hunt Elk. and directed Reubin Fields
and some others to hunt in the point towards the praries of Point
Adams. thus we hope shortly to replenish our stock of provision which
is now reduced to a mere minnamum. we have three days provision only in
store and that of the most inferior dryed Elk a little tainted. a
comfortable prospect for good living. Sewelel is the Chinnook and
Clatsop name for a small animal found in the timbered country on this
coast. it is more abundant in the neighbourhood of the great falls and
rapids of the Columbia than immediately on the coast. the natives make
great use of the skins of this animal in forming their robes, which
they dress with the fur on them and attatch together with sinews of the
Elk or deer. I have never seen the animal and can therefore discribe it
only from the skin and a slight view which some of our hunters have
obtained of the living animal. the skin when dressed is from 14 to 18
inches in length and from 7 to 9 in width; the tail is always severed
from the skin in forming their robes I cannot therefore say what form
or length it is. one of the men informed me that he thought it reather
short and flat. that he saw one of them run up a tree like a squirrel
and that it returned and ran into a hole in the ground. the ears are
short thin pointed and covered with short fine hair. they are of a
uniform colour, a redish brown; tho the base of the long hairs, which
exceed the fur but little in length, as well as the fur itself is of a
dark colour for at least two thirds of it's length next to the skin.
the fur and hair are very fine, short, thickly set and silky. the ends
of the fur and tips of the hair being of the redish brown that colour
predominates in the ordinary appearance of the animal. I take this
animal to be about the size of the barking squirrel of the Missouri.
and beleive most probably that it is of the Mustela genus, or perhaps
the brown mungo itself. I have indeavoured in many instances to make
the indians sensible how anxious I was to obtain one of these animals
entire, without being skined, and offered them considerable rewards to
furnish me with one, but have not been able to make them comprehend me.
I have purchased several of the robes made of these skins to line a
coat which I have had made of the skins of the tiger cat. they make a
very pleasant light lining. the Braro so called by the French engages
is an animal of the civit genus and much resembles the common badger.
this is an inhabitant of the open plains of the Columbia as they are of
those of the Missouri but are sometimes also found in the woody
country. they burrow in the hard grounds of the plains with surprising
ease and dexterity an will cover themselves in the ground in a very few
minutes. they have five long fixed nails on each foot; those of the
forefeet are much the longest; and one of those on each hind foot is
double like those of the beaver. they weigh from 14 to 18 lbs. the body
is reather long in proportion to it's thickness. the forelegs
remarkably large and muscular and are formed like the ternspit dog.
they are short as are also the hind legs. they are broad across the
sholders and brest. the neck short. the head is formed much like the
common fist dog only that the skull is more convex. the mouth is wide
and furnished with sharp streight teeth both above and below, with four
sharp streight pointed tusks, two in the upper and two in the lower
jaw. the eyes are black and small. whiskers are plased in four points
on each side near the nose and on the jaws near the opening of the
mouth. the ears are very short wide and appressed as if they had ben
cut off. the apperture through them to the head is remarkably small.
the tail is about 4 inches long; the hair longest on it at it's
junction with the body and becoming shorter towards it's extremity
where it ends in an accute point. the hairs of the body are much longer
on the side and rump than any other part, which gives the body and
apparent flatness, particularly when the animal rests on it's belley.
this hair is upwards of 3 inches in length particularly on the rump
where it extends so far towards the point of the tail that it almost
conceals the shape of that part and gives to the whole of the hinder
part of the body the figure of an accute angled triangle of which the
point of the tail forms the accute angle. the small quantity of coarse
fur which is intermixed with the hair is of a redish pale yellow. the
hair of the back, sides, upper part of the neck and tail, are of a
redish light or pale yellow for about 2/3rds of their length from the
skin, next black, and then tiped with white; forming a curious mixture
of grey and fox coloured red with a yellowish hue. the belley flanks
and breast are of the foxcoloured redish yellow. the legs black. the
nails white the head on which the hair is short, is varia gated with
black and white. a narrow strip of white commences on the top of the
nose about 1/2 an inch from it's extremity and extends back along the
center of the forehead and neck nearly to the sholders--two stripes of
black succeed the white on either side imbracing the sides of the nose,
the eyes, and extends back as far as the ears. two other spots of black
of a ramboidal figure are placed on the side of the head near the ears
and between them and the opening of the mouth. two black spots also
immediately behind the ears. the other parts of the head white. this
animal feeds on flesh, roots, bugs, and wild fruits.--it is very clumsy
and runs very slow. I have in two instances out run this animal and
caught it. in this rispect they are not much more fleet than the
porcupine.




[Clark, February 26, 1806]
Wednesday February 26th 1806
This morning we dispatched Drewyer and two men in our indian canoe up
the Columbia River to take Sturgion and Anchovey. or if they were
unsucksessfull in fishing we directed them to purchase fish from the
nativs, for which purpose we had furnished them with a fiew articles
Such as the nativs are pleased with. we also Sent Shields Jo. Field and
Shannon up the Netul to hunt Elk. and directed Reubin Field and Some
other man to hunt in the point towards the Praries & point Adams. thus
we hope Shortly to replenish our Stock of provisions which is now
reduced to a mear minnamum. we have three days provisions only in Store
and that of the most inferior dried Elk a little tainted. what a
prospect for good liveing at Fort Clatsop at present.

Se we lel is the Clatsop and Chinnook name for a Small animal found in
the timbered Country on this Coast. it is more abundant in the
neighbourhood of the great falls and rapids of the Columbia than
imediately on the Coast. the nativs make great use of the Skins of this
animal in forming their robes, which they dress with the fur on them
and attached together with the sinears of the Elk or Deer. I have never
Seen the ammale and can therefore only discribe it from the Skin and a
Slight view which Some of our party have obtained of the liveing
animal. the Skin when dressed is from 14 to 18 inches in length, and
from 7 to 9 in width; the tail is always Severed from the body in
forming their robes, I cannot therefore Say in what form or length it
is. one of the men informed me that he thought it reather Short and
flat. that he saw one of them run up a tree like a squirel, and that it
returned and ran into a hole in the ground. the ears are Short, thin,
pointed and Covered with Short fine hair. they are of uniform Colour, a
redish brown; tho the base of the long hairs, exceed the fur but little
in length, as well as the fur itself is of a Dark colour for at least
2/3ds of it's length next to the Skin. the fur and hair are very fine,
Short, thickly Set, and Silky. the ends of the fur and tips of the hair
is of a redish brown, that colour prodominates in the ordinary
appearance of the Animate. I took this animal to be about the Size of
the barking Squirel of the Missouri. and believe most probably that it
is of the Mustela genus, or perhaps the brown mungo itself I have in
maney instances endeavured to make the nativs Sensiable how anxious I
was to obtain one of those animals entire, without being Skined, and
offered them rewards to furnish me with one, but have not been able to
make them Comprehend me. we have purchased Several of the roabs made of
those Skins to loin a westcoat of the Sea otter, which I have made and
Capt Lewis a Tiger Cat Skin Coat loined with them also, they make a
very pleasant light lighting.

The Rat in the rocky mountains on its west side are like those on the
upper part of the Missouri in and near those Mountains and have the
distingushing trait of possessing a tail covered with hair like other
parts of the body; one of these we caught at the white bear Islands in
the beginning of July last and then partially discribed.

There is rats in this neighbourhood but I have not seen them it is most
probable that they are like those of the Atlantic States, or at least
the native rat of our country which have no hair on their tail. this
Specis we found on the Missouri as far up it as the woody country
extended. it is as large as the Common European house rat or reather
larger is of a lighter Colour bordering more on the lead or drab
colour, the hair longer; and the female has only four tits which are
placed far back near the hinder legs. this rat I have Seen in the
Southern parts of the State of Kentucky & west of the Miami.

The Mouse and mole of this neighbourhood are the Same as those native
animals with us.

The Panther is found indifferently either in the great Plains of
Columbia the Western Side of the Rocky Mountains or on this coast in
the timbered country. it is precisily the Same animal common to the
Atlantic States, and most commonly met with on our frontiers or
unsettled parts of the Country. this animal is Scerce in the Country
where they exist and are So remarkable Shye and watchfull that it is
extreamly dificuelt to kill them.

The Polecat is found in every part of the Country. they are very
abundant on Some parts of the Columbia, particularly in the
neighbourhood of the Great falls & Narrows of that river, where they
live in the Clifts along the river & feed on the offal of the Indian
fishing Shores. they are the Same as those of other parts of North
America.




[Lewis, February 27, 1806]
Thursday February 27th 1806.
Reubin Fields returned this evening and had not killed anything. he
reports that there are no Elk towards point Adams. Collins who had
hunted up the Netul on this side returned in the evening having killed
a buck Elk. Willard still continues very unwell the other sick men have
nearly recovered. Gutridge and McNeal who have the pox are recovering
fast, the former nearly well.

The rat in the Rocky mountain on it's West side are like those on the
upper part of the Missouri in and near those mountains and have the
distinguishing trait of possessing a tail covered with hair like other
parts of the body; one of those we caught at the White bear Islands in
the beginning of July last and was then discribed. I have seen the
nests of those in this neighbourhood but not the animal. I think it
most probable that they are like those of the Atlantic states or at
least the native rat of our country which have no hair on the tail.
this species we found on the Missouri as far up it as the woody country
extended. it is as large as the common European house rat or reather
larger, is of a lighter colour bordering more on the lead or drab
colour, the hair longer; and the female has only four tits which are
placed far back near the hinder legs. this rat I have observed in the
Western parts of the State of Georgia and also in Madison's cave in the
state of Virginia the mouse and mole of this neighbourhood are the same
as those native animals with us. The Panther is found indifferently
either in the Great Plains of Columbia, the Western side of the rocky
mountains or on this coast in the timbered country. it is precisely the
same animal common to the Atlantic coast, and most commonly met with on
our frontiers or unsettled parts of the country. this animal is scarce
in the country where they exist and are so remarkable shye and
watchfull that it is extreemly difficult to kill them.




[Clark, February 27, 1806]
Thursday February 27th 1806
Reubin Field returned this evening and had not killed anything, he
reported that there were no Elk towards point Adams. Collins who had
hunted up the Netul on this Side returned in the evening haveing killed
a buck Elk. Willard Still Continue very unwell the other Sick men have
nearly recovered. Goodrich & McNeal who have the Pox are recovering
fast, the former nearly well. La Page complaining.

The Braro so called by the French engages is an animal of the Civit
genus and much resembles the common badger. this is an enhabitent of
the open plains of the Columbia as they are of those of the Missouri,
but are Sometimes also found in the woody country. they burrow in the
hard Grounds in the Plains with Surprising ease and dexterity and will
cover themselves in the Ground in a very fiew minits. they have five
long fixed nails on each foot; those of the fore feet are much the
longest; and one of those on each hind foot is double like those of the
beaver. they weigh from 14 to 20 lbs. the body is reather long in
perportion to its thickness. the fore legs remarkably large and
muscular and are formed like the turnspit dog. they are Short as also
the hind legs. they are broad across the Sholders and breast. the neck
Short, the head is formed much like the Common fist dog only that the
Skull is more Convex, the mouth is wide and furnishid with long Sharp
teeth, both above and below, and with four Sharp Streight Pointed
tushes, two in the upper and two in the lower jaw. the eyes are black
and Small. Whiskers are placed in four points on each Side near the
nose and on the jaws near the opening of the mouth. the ears are very
Short wide and appressed as if they had been cut off. the appertue
through them to the head is remarkably Small; the tail is about 4
inches long; the hair longest on it at it's junction, with the body and
becomeing Shorter towards it's extremity where it ends in an accute
point. the hairs of the body are much longer on the Sides and rump than
any other part, which givs the body an appearent flatness, particularly
when the animal rests on it's belly. this hair is upwards of 3 inches
in length, particularly on the rump where it extends so far towards the
point of the tail, that it almost conceals the Shape of that part and
givs to all the hinder part of the body an accute angled triangle, of
which the point of the tail forms the accute angle. the Small quantity
of fur which is intermixed with the hair is of a redish pale yellow.
the hair of the back, Sides upper part of the neck and tail, are of
redish light or pale yellow fox about two thirds of their length from
the Skin, next black, and then tiped with white; forming a curious
mixture of grey and fox colourd. red with a yellowish hue. the belly
flanks and breast are of the fox coloured redish yellow. the legs
black, the nails white. the head on which the hair is short is
varigated with black and white. a narrow Strip of white Commences on
the top of the nose about half an inch from its extremity and extends
back along the Center of the forehead and neck nearly to the Sholders-
two Stripes of black Suckceed the white on either Side, imbraceing the
Side of the nose, the eyes, and extends back as far as the ears. two
other Spots of black of a romboidal figure are placed on the Side of
the head near the ears and between them and the opening of the mouth.
two black Spots also imediately behind the ears. the other part of the
head white. this animal feeds on flesh, roots, bugs and wild fruits.-
it is very clumsy and runs very Slow, depending more on burring to
Secure it Self than running. I have in Several instances out run and
caught this animal. in this respect they are not much more fleet than
the porcupine.




[Lewis, February 28, 1806]
Friday February 28th 1806.
Reubin Fields and Collins set out this morning early on a hunting
excurtion. Kuskelar a Clatsop man and his wife visited us today. they
brought some Anchovies, Sturgeon, a beaver robe, and some roots for
sail tho they asked so high a price for every article that we purchased
nothing but a part of a Sturgeon for which we gave a few fishing hooks.
we suffered them to remain all night. Shields Jos. Fields and Shannon
returned late this evening having killed five Elk tho two of them ar on
a mountain at a considerable distance. we ordered these hunters to
return early in the morning and continue their hunt, and Sergt. Gass to
take a party and go in quest of the Elk which they had killed. the
hunters inform us that the Elk are tolerable plenty near the mountains
about 9 or ten miles distant. Kuskelar brought a dog which Cruzatte had
purchased.

The hare on this side of the Rocky mountains is exclusively the
inhabitant of the great Plains of Columbia, as they are of those of the
Missouri East of these mountains. they weigh from 7 to eleven pounds.
the measure of one which weighed ten lbs. was as follows. from the
extremity of the hinder, to that of the fore feet when extended 3 F.
length from nose to the extremity of the tail 2 F. 2 I. hight when
standing erect 1 F. 3 I. girth of the body 1 F. 4 I. length of tail
61/2 I. length of ear 51/2 I. width of do 3 1/8 I. from the hip to the
extremity of toe of the hind foot 1 F. 41/4 I.--the eye is large and
prominent. the pupil is circular, of a deep sea green and occupys one
third of the diameter of the eye, the iris is of a bright yellowish
silver colour. the ears are placed far back on the head and very near
each other, they are flexable and the animal moves them with great ease
and quickness, and can dilate and throw them forward, or contract and
fold them on his back at pleasure. the fold of the front of the ear is
of a redish brown colour, the inner folds or those which lie together
when the ears are thrown back, and which occupy 2/3ds of the width of
the ears are of a pure white except the tips of the ears for about an
inch. the hinder folds or those which lie on the back are of a light
grey. the head neck, back, sholders, sides, & outer part of the legs
and thyes are of a lead coloured grey; the sides as they approach the
belley become gradually more white. the belley, brest, and inner part
of the legs and thyes are white, with a slight shade of the lead
colour. the tail is round and blontly pointed, covered with fine soft
white fur not quite as long as on the other parts of the body. the body
is covered with a deep fine soft close fur. the colours here discribed
are those which the animal assumes from the middle of April to the
middle of November, the ballance of the year they are of a pure white,
except the black and redish brown of the ears which never changes. a
few redish brown spots are sometimes seen intermixed with the white, at
this season, on their heads and upper part of the neck and sholders.
the body of this animal is smaller and longer in proportion to it's
hight than the rabbit. when it runs it carrys it's tail streight behind
in the direction of it's body. they appear to run with more ease and
bound with greater agility than any animal I ever saw. they are
extreemly fleet and never burrow or take sheter in the ground when
pursued. it's teeth are like those of the rabbit as is also it's upper
lip which is divided as high as the nose. it's food is grass, herbs,
and in winter feeds much on the bark of several aromatic shrubs which
grow in the plains and the young willow along the rivers and other
wartercourses.--I have measured the leaps of this animal and find them
commonly from 18 to 21 feet. they are generally found seperate, and
never seen to asscociate in any number or more than two or three.--the
rabbit are the same of our country and are found indifferently either
in the praries or woodlands. they are not very abundant in this
country. The Pole-cat is also found in every part of the country. they
are very abundant on some parts of the columbia, particularly in the
neighbourhood of the great falls and narrows of that river, where they
live in the clifts along the river and feed on the offal of the Indian
fishing shores. these are the same as those of other parts of North
America.




[Clark, February 28, 1806]
Friday February 28th 1806
Reuben Field and Collins Set out this morning early on a hunting
excurtion up the Netul. Kus ke-lar a Clatsop man, his wife and a Small
boy (a Slave, who he informed me was his Cook, and offerd to Sell him
to me for beeds & a gun) visited us to day they brought Some anchovies,
Sturgeon, a beaver robe, and Some roots for Sale tho they asked Such
high prices for every article that we purchased nothing but a part of a
Sturgeon for which we gave a fiew fishing hooks. we Suffered them to
Stay all night. Shields Jos. Field and Shannon returned late this
evening haveing killed five Elk tho two of them are of a mountain at a
considerable distance. we ordered these hunters to return early in the
morning and continue the hunt, and Sergt. Gass to take a party and go
in quest of the Elk which they had killed. the hunters informed us that
the Elk is tolerable plenty near the mountains about nine or ten miles
distant. Kuskalaw brought a dog which Peter Crusat had purchased with
his Capo which this fellow had on.
