"Betty, your levity makes you an unfit comrade for such an expedition.
Advance, one of you, and reconnoiter the spot; draw swords!--rear rank,
close to the front!"

"Pshaw!" shouted Betty, "is it a big fool or a big coward that ye are?
Jist wheel from the road, boys, and I'll shove the mare down upon it in
the twinkling of an eye--and it's no ghost that I fear."

By this time one of the men had returned, and declared there was nothing
to prevent their advancing, and the party continued their march, but
with great deliberation and caution.

"Courage and prudence are the jewels of a soldier, Mrs. Flanagan," said
the sergeant; "without the one, the other may be said to be good
for nothing."

"Prudence without courage: is it _that_ you mane?--and it's so that I'm
thinking myself, sargeant. This baste pulls tight on the reins,
any way."

"Be patient, good woman; hark! what is that?" said Hollister, pricking
up his ears at the report of Wellmere's pistol. "I'll swear that was a
human pistol, and one from our regiment. Rear rank, close to the
front!--Mrs. Flanagan, I must leave you." So saying, having recovered
all his faculties, by hearing a sound that he understood, he placed
himself at the head of his men with an air of military pride, that the
darkness prevented the washerwoman from beholding. A volley of musketry
now rattled in the night wind, and the sergeant exclaimed,--

"March!--quick time!"

The next instant the trampling of a horse was heard coming up the road,
at a rate that announced a matter of life or death; and Hollister again
halted his party, riding a short distance in front himself, to meet
the rider.

"Stand!--who goes there?" shouted Hollister.

"Ha! Hollister, is it you?" cried Lawton, "ever ready and at your post;
but where is the guard?"

"At hand, sir, and ready to follow you through thick and thin," said the
veteran, relieved at once from responsibility, and as eager as a boy to
be led against his enemy.

"'Tis well!" said the trooper, riding up to his men; then, speaking a
few words of encouragement, he led them down the valley at a rate but
little less rapid than his approach. The miserable horse of the sutler
was soon distanced, and Betty, thus thrown out in the chase, turned to
the side of the road, and observed,--

"There--it's no difficult to tell that Captain Jack is wid 'em, anyway;
and away they go like so many nagur boys to a husking-frolic; well, I'll
jist hitch the mare to this bit of a fence, and walk down and see the
sport afoot--it's no r'asonable to expose the baste to be hurted."

Led on by Lawton, the men followed, destitute alike of fear and
reflection. Whether it was a party of the refugees, or a detachment from
the royal army, that they were to assail, they were profoundly ignorant;
but they knew that the officer in advance was distinguished for courage
and personal prowess; and these are virtues that are sure to captivate
the thoughtless soldiery. On arriving near the gates of the Locusts, the
trooper halted his party, and made his arrangements for the assault.
Dismounting, he ordered eight of his men to follow his example, and
turning to Hollister, said,--

"Stand you here, and guard the horses; if anything attempt to pass, stop
it, or cut it down, and--"

The flames at this moment burst through the dormer windows and cedar
roof of the cottage, and a bright light glared on the darkness of the
night. "On!" shouted the trooper "on!--give quarter when you have
done justice!"

There was a startling fierceness in the voice of the trooper that
reached to the heart, even amid the horrors of the cottage. The leader
of the Skinners dropped his plunder, and, for a moment, he stood in
nerveless dread; then rushing to a window, he threw up the sash; at this
instant Lawton entered, saber in hand, into the apartment.

"Die, miscreant!" cried the trooper, cleaving a marauder to the jaw; but
the leader sprang into the lawn, and escaped his vengeance. The shrieks
of the females restored Lawton to his presence of mind, and the earnest
entreaty of the divine induced him to attend to the safety of the
family. One more of the gang fell in with the dragoons, and met his
death; but the remainder had taken the alarm in season. Occupied with
Sarah, neither Miss Singleton, nor the ladies of the house, had
discovered the entrance of the Skinners, though the flames were raging
around them with a fury that threatened the building with rapid
destruction. The shrieks of Katy and the terrified consort of Caesar,
together with the noise and uproar in the adjacent apartment, first
roused Miss Peyton and Isabella to a sense of their danger.

"Merciful Providence!" exclaimed the alarmed aunt; "there is a dreadful
confusion in the house, and there will be blood shed in consequence of
this affair."

"There are none to fight," returned Isabella, with a face paler than
that of the other. "Dr. Sitgreaves is very peaceable in his disposition,
and surely Captain Lawton would not forget himself so far."

"The Southern temper is quick and fiery," continued Miss Peyton; "and
your brother, feeble and weak as he is, has looked the whole afternoon
flushed and angry."

"Good heaven!" cried Isabella, with difficulty supporting herself on the
couch of Sarah; "he is gentle as the lamb by nature, though the lion is
not his equal when roused."

"We must interfere: our presence will quell the tumult, and possibly
save the life of a fellow creature."

Miss Peyton, excited to attempt what she conceived a duty worthy of her
sex and nature, advanced with the dignity of injured female feeling, to
the door, followed by Isabella. The apartment to which Sarah had been
conveyed was in one of the wings of the building, and it communicated
with the principal hall of the cottage by a long and dark passage. This
was now light, and across its termination several figures were seen
rushing with an impetuosity that prevented an examination of their
employment.

"Let us advance," said Miss Peyton, with a firmness her face belied;
"they must respect our sex."

"They shall," cried Isabella, taking the lead in the enterprise. Frances
was left alone with her sister. A few minutes were passed in silence,
when a loud crash, in the upper apartments, was succeeded by a bright
light that glared through the open door, and made objects as distinct to
the eye as if they were placed under a noonday sun. Sarah raised herself
on her bed, and staring wildly around, pressed both her hands on her
forehead, endeavoring to recollect herself.

"This, then, is heaven--and you are one of its bright spirits. Oh! how
glorious is its radiance! I had thought the happiness I have lately
experienced was too much for earth. But we shall meet again;
yes--yes--we shall meet again."

"Sarah! Sarah!" cried Frances, in terror; "my sister--my only
sister--Oh! do not smile so horridly; know me, or you will break
my heart."

"Hush," said Sarah raising her hand for silence; "you may disturb his
rest--surely, he will follow me to the grave. Think you there can be two
wives in the grave? No--no--no; one--one--one--only one."

Frances dropped her head into the lap of her sister, and wept in agony.

"Do you shed tears, sweet angel?" continued Sarah, soothingly. "Then
heaven is not exempt from grief. But where is Henry? He was executed,
and he must be here too; perhaps they will come together. Oh! how joyful
will be the meeting!"

Frances sprang on her feet, and paced the apartment. The eye of Sarah
followed her in childish admiration of her beauty.

"You look like my sister; but all good and lovely spirits are alike.
Tell me, were you ever married? Did you ever let a stranger steal your
affections from father, and brother, and sister? If not, poor wretch, I
pity you, although you may be in heaven."

"Sarah--peace, peace--I implore you to be silent," shrieked Frances,
rushing to her bed, "or you will kill me at your feet."

Another dreadful crash shook the building to its center. It was the
falling of the roof, and the flames threw their light abroad, so as to
make objects visible around the cottage, through the windows of the
room. Frances flew to one of them, and saw the confused group that was
collected on the lawn. Among them were her aunt and Isabella, pointing
with distraction to the fiery edifice, and apparently urging the
dragoons to enter it. For the first time she comprehended their danger;
and uttering a wild shriek, she flew through the passage without
consideration, or object.

A dense and suffocating column of smoke opposed her progress. She paused
to breathe, when a man caught her in his arms, and bore her, in a state
of insensibility, through the falling embers and darkness, to the open
air. The instant that Frances recovered her recollection, she perceived
that she owed her life Lo Lawton, and throwing herself on her knees,
she cried,--

"Sarah! Sarah! Sarah! save my sister, and may the blessing of God await
you!"

Her strength failed, and she sank on the grass, in insensibility. The
trooper pointed to her figure, motioned to Katy for assistance, and
advanced once more to the building. The fire had already communicated to
the woodwork of the piazzas and windows, and the whole exterior of the
cottage was covered with smoke. The only entrance was through these
dangers, and even the hardy and impetuous Lawton paused to consider. It
was for a moment only, when he dashed into the heat and darkness, where,
missing the entrance, he wandered for a minute, and precipitated himself
back, again, upon the lawn. Drawing a single breath of pure air, he
renewed the effort, and was again unsuccessful. On a third trial, he met
a man staggering under the load of a human body. It was neither the
place, nor was there time, to question, or to make distinctions; seizing
both in his arms, with gigantic strength, he bore them through the
smoke. He soon perceived, to his astonishment, that it was the surgeon,
and the body of one of the Skinners, that he had saved.

"Archibald!" he exclaimed, "why, in the name of justice, did you bring
this miscreant to light again? His deeds are rank to heaven!"

The surgeon, who had been in imminent peril, was too much bewildered to
reply instantly, but wiping the moisture from his forehead, and clearing
his lungs from the vapor he had inhaled, he said piteously,--

"Ah! it is all over! Had I been in time to have stopped the effusion
from the jugular, he might have been saved; but the heat was conducive
to hemorrhage; life is extinct indeed. Well, are there any
more wounded?"

His question was put to the air, for Frances had been removed to the
opposite side of the building, where her friends were collected, and
Lawton had once more disappeared in the smoke.

By this time the flames had dispersed much of the suffocating vapor, so
that the trooper was able to find the door, and in its very entrance he
was met by a man supporting the insensible Sarah. There was but barely
time to reach the lawn again, before the fire broke through the windows,
and wrapped the whole building in a sheet of flame.

"God be praised!" ejaculated the preserver of Sarah. "It would have been
a dreadful death to die."

The trooper turned from gazing at the edifice, to the speaker, and to
his astonishment, instead of one of his own men, he beheld the peddler.

"Ha! the spy," he exclaimed; "by heavens, you cross me like a specter."

"Captain Lawton," said Birch, leaning in momentary exhaustion against
the fence, to which they had retired from the heat, "I am again in your
power, for I can neither flee, nor resist."

"The cause of America is dear to me as life," said the trooper, "but she
cannot require her children to forget gratitude and honor. Fly, unhappy
man, while yet you are unseen, or it will exceed my power to save you."

"May God prosper you, and make you victorious over your enemies," said
Birch, grasping the hand of the dragoon with an iron strength that his
meager figure did not indicate.

"Hold!" said Lawton. "But a word--are you what you seem?--can you--are
you--"

"A royal spy," interrupted Birch, averting his face, and endeavoring to
release his hand.

"Then go, miserable wretch," said the trooper, relinquishing his grasp.
"Either avarice or delusion has led a noble heart astray!"

The bright light from the flames reached a great distance around the
ruins, but the words were hardly past the lips of Lawton, before the
gaunt form of the peddler had glided over the visible space, and plunged
into the darkness beyond.

The eye of Lawton rested for a moment on the spot where he had last seen
this inexplicable man, and then turning to the yet insensible Sarah, he
lifted her in his arms, and bore her, like a sleeping infant, to the
care of her friends.




CHAPTER XXIII


     And now her charms are fading fast,
     Her spirits now no more are gay:
     Alas! that beauty cannot last!
     That flowers so sweet so soon decay!
              How sad appears
              The vale of years,
     How changed from youth's too flattering scene!
       Where are her fond admirers gone?
       Alas! and shall there then be none
     On whom her soul may lean?
                                 --_Cynthia's Grave_.

The walls of the cottage were all that was left of the building; and
these, blackened by smoke, and stripped of their piazzas and ornaments,
were but dreary memorials of the content and security that had so lately
reigned within. The roof, together with the rest of the woodwork, had
tumbled into the cellars, and a pale and flitting light, ascending from
their embers, shone faintly through the windows. The early flight of the
Skinners left the dragoons at liberty to exert themselves in saving much
of the furniture, which lay scattered in heaps on the lawn, giving the
finishing touch of desolation to the scene. Whenever a stronger ray of
light than common shot upwards, the composed figures of Sergeant
Hollister and his associates, sitting on their horses in rigid
discipline, were to be seen in the background of the picture, together
with the beast of Mrs. Flanagan, which, having slipped its bridle, was
quietly grazing by the highway. Betty herself had advanced to the spot
where the sergeant was posted, and, with an incredible degree of
composure, witnessed the whole of the events as they occurred. More than
once she suggested to her companion, that, as the fighting seemed to be
over, the proper time for plunder had arrived, but the veteran
acquainted her with his orders, and remained inflexible and immovable;
until the washerwoman, observing Lawton come round the wing of the
building with Sarah, ventured amongst the warriors. The captain, after
placing Sarah on a sofa that had been hurled from the building by two of
his men, retired, that the ladies might succeed him in his care. Miss
Peyton and her niece flew, with a rapture that was blessed with a
momentary forgetfulness of all but her preservation, to receive Sarah
from the trooper; but the vacant eye and flushed cheek restored them
instantly to their recollection.

"Sarah, my child, my beloved niece," said the former, folding the
unconscious bride in her arms, "you are saved, and may the blessing of
God await him who has been the instrument."

"See," said Sarah, gently pushing her aunt aside, and pointing to the
glimmering ruins, "the windows are illuminated in honor of my arrival.
They always receive a bride thus--he told me they would do no less.
Listen, and you will hear the bells."

"Here is no bride, no rejoicing, nothing but woe!" cried Frances, in a
manner but little less frantic than that of her sister. "Oh! may heaven
restore you to us--to yourself!"

"Peace, foolish young woman," said Sarah, with a smile of affected pity;
"all cannot be happy at the same moment; perhaps you have no brother, or
husband, to console you. You look beautiful, and you will yet find one;
but," she continued, dropping her voice to a whisper, "see that he has
no other wife--'tis dreadful to think what might happen, should he be
twice married."

"The shock has destroyed her mind," cried Miss Peyton; "my child, my
beauteous Sarah is a maniac!"

"No, no, no," cried Frances, "it is fever; she is lightheaded--she must
recover--she shall recover."

The aunt caught joyfully at the hope conveyed in this suggestion, and
dispatched Katy to request the immediate aid and advice of Dr.
Sitgreaves. The surgeon was found inquiring among the men for
professional employment, and inquisitively examining every bruise and
scratch that he could induce the sturdy warriors to acknowledge they had
received. A summons, of the sort conveyed by Katy, was instantly obeyed,
and not a minute elapsed before he was by the side of Miss Peyton.

"This is a melancholy termination to so joyful a commencement of the
night, madam," he observed, in a soothing manner. "But war must bring
its attendant miseries; though doubtless it often supports the cause of
liberty, and improves the knowledge of surgical science."

Miss Peyton could make no reply, but pointed to her niece.

"'Tis fever," answered Frances; "see how glassy is her eye, and look at
her cheek, how flushed."

The surgeon stood for a moment, deeply studying the outward symptoms of
his patient, and then he silently took her hand in his own. It was
seldom that the hard and abstracted features of Sitgreaves discovered
any violent emotion; all his passions seemed schooled, and his
countenance did not often betray what, indeed, his heart frequently
felt. In the present instance, however, the eager gaze of the aunt and
sister quickly detected his emotions. After laying his fingers for a
minute on the beautiful arm, which, bared to the elbow and glittering
with jewels, Sarah suffered him to retain, he dropped it, and dashing a
hand over his eyes, turned sorrowfully away.

"Here is no fever to excite--'tis a case, my dear madam, for time and
care only; these, with the blessing of God, may effect a cure."

"And where is the wretch who has caused this ruin?" exclaimed
Singleton, rejecting the support of his man, and making an effort to
rise from the chair to which he had been driven by debility. "It is in
vain that we overcome our enemies, if, conquered, they can inflict such
wounds as this."

"Dost think, foolish boy," said Lawton, with a bitter smile, "that
hearts can feel in a colony? What is America but a satellite of
England--to move as she moves, follow where she wists, and shine, that
the mother country may become more splendid by her radiance? Surely you
forget that it is honor enough for a colonist to receive ruin from the
hand of a child of Britain."

"I forget not that I wear a sword," said Singleton, falling back
exhausted; "but was there no willing arm ready to avenge that lovely
sufferer--to appease the wrongs of this hoary father?"

"Neither arms nor hearts are wanting, sir, in such a cause," said the
trooper, fiercely; "but chance oftentimes helps the wicked. By heavens,
I'd give Roanoke himself, for a clear field with the miscreant!"

"Nay! captain dear, no be parting with the horse, anyway," said Betty.
"It is no trifle that can be had by jist asking of the right person, if
ye're in need of silver; and the baste is sure of foot, and jumps like a
squirrel."

"Woman, fifty horses, aye, the best that were ever reared on the banks
of the Potomac, would be but a paltry price, for one blow at a villain."

"Come," said the surgeon, "the night air can do no service to George, or
these ladies, and it is incumbent on us to remove them where they can
find surgical attendance and refreshment. Here is nothing but smoking
ruins and the miasma of the swamps."

To this rational proposition no objection could be raised, and the
necessary orders were issued by Lawton to remove the whole party to the
Four Corners.

America furnished but few and very indifferent carriage-makers at the
period of which we write, and every vehicle, that in the least aspired
to that dignity, was the manufacture of a London mechanic. When Mr.
Wharton left the city, he was one of the very few who maintained the
state of a carriage; and, at the time Miss Peyton and his daughters
joined him in his retirement, they had been conveyed to the cottage in
the heavy chariot that had once so imposingly rolled through the
windings of Queen Street, or emerged, with somber dignity, into the more
spacious drive of Broadway. This vehicle stood, undisturbed, where it
had been placed on its arrival, and the age of the horses alone had
protected the favorites of Caesar from sequestration by the contending
forces in their neighborhood. With a heavy heart, the black, assisted by
a few of the dragoons, proceeded to prepare it for the reception of the
ladies. It was a cumbrous vehicle, whose faded linings and tarnished
hammer-cloth, together with its panels of changing color, denoted the
want of that art which had once given it luster and beauty. The "lion
couchant" of the Wharton arms was reposing on the reviving splendor of a
blazonry that told the armorial bearings of a prince of the church; and
the miter, that began to shine through its American mask, was a symbol
of the rank of its original owner. The chaise which conveyed Miss
Singleton was also safe, for the stable and outbuildings had entirely
escaped the flames; it certainly had been no part of the plan of the
marauders to leave so well-appointed a stud behind them, but the
suddenness of the attack by Lawton, not only disconcerted their
arrangements on this point, but on many others also. A guard was left on
the ground, under the command of Hollister, who, having discovered that
his enemy was of mortal mold, took his position with admirable coolness
and no little skill, to guard against surprise. He drew off his small
party to such a distance from the ruins, that it was effectually
concealed in the darkness, while at the same time the light continued
sufficiently power ful to discover anyone who might approach the lawn
with an intent to plunder.

Satisfied with this judicious arrangement, Captain Lawton made his
dispositions for the march. Miss Peyton, her two nieces, and Isabella
were placed in the chariot, while the cart of Mrs. Flanagan, amply
supplied with blankets and a bed, was honored with the person of Captain
Singleton. Dr. Sitgreaves took charge of the chaise and Mr. Wharton.
What became of the rest of the family during that eventful night is
unknown, for Caesar alone, of the domestics, was to be found, if we
except the housekeeper. Having disposed of the whole party in this
manner, Lawton gave the word to march. He remained himself, for a few
minutes, alone on the lawn, secreting various pieces of plate and other
valuables, that he was fearful might tempt the cupidity of his own men;
when, perceiving nothing more that he conceived likely to overcome their
honesty, he threw himself into the saddle with the soldierly intention
of bringing up the rear.

"Stop, stop," cried a female voice. "Will you leave me alone to be
murdered? The spoon is melted, I believe, and I'll have compensation, if
there's law or justice in this unhappy land."

Lawton turned an eye in the direction of the sound, and perceived a
female emerging from the ruins, loaded with a bundle that vied in size
with the renowned pack of the peddler.

"Whom have we here," said the trooper, "rising like a phoenix from the
flames? Oh! by the soul of Hippocrates, but it is the identical
she-doctor, of famous needle reputation. Well, good woman, what means
this outcry?"

"Outcry!" echoed Katy, panting for breath. "Is it not disparagement
enough to lose a silver spoon, but I must be left alone in this lonesome
place, to be robbed, and perhaps murdered? Harvey would not serve me so;
when I lived with Harvey, I was always treated with respect at least, if
he was a little close with his secrets, and wasteful of his money."

"Then, madam, you once formed part of the household of Mr. Harvey
Birch?"

"You may say I was the whole of his household," returned the other;
"there was nobody but I, and he, and the old gentleman. You didn't know
the old gentleman, perhaps?"

"That happiness was denied me. How long did you live in the family of
Mr. Birch?"

"I disremember the precise time, but it must have been hard on upon nine
years; and what better am I for it all?"

"Sure enough; I can see but little benefit that you have derived from
the association, truly. But is there not something unusual in the
movements and character of this Mr. Birch?"

"Unusual is an easy word for such unaccountables!" replied Katy,
lowering her voice and looking around her. "He was a wonderful
disregardful man, and minded a guinea no more than I do a kernel of
corn. But help me to some way of joining Miss Jinitt, and I will tell
you prodigies of what Harvey has done, first and last."

"You will!" exclaimed the trooper, musing. "Here, give me leave to feel
your arm above the elbow. There--you are not deficient in bone, let the
blood be as it may." So saying, he gave the spinster a sudden whirl,
that effectually confused all her faculties, until she found herself
safely, if not comfortably, seated on the crupper of Lawton's steed.

"Now, madam, you have the consolation of knowing that you are as well
mounted as Washington. The nag is sure of foot, and will leap like
a panther."

"Let me get down," cried Katy, struggling to release herself from his
iron grasp, and yet afraid of falling. "This is no way to put a woman on
a horse; besides, I can't ride without a pillion."

"Softly, good madam," said Lawton; "for although Roanoke never falls
before, he sometimes rises behind. He is far from being accustomed to a
pair of heels beating upon his flanks like a drum major on a field day;
a single touch of the spur will serve him for a fortnight, and it is by
no means wise to be kicking in this manner, for he is a horse that but
little likes to be outdone."

"Let me down, I say," screamed Katy; "I shall fall and be killed.
Besides, I have nothing to hold on with; my arms are full of valuables."

"True," returned the trooper, observing that he had brought bundle and
all from the ground. "I perceive that you belong to the baggage guard;
but my sword belt will encircle your little waist, as well as my own."

Katy was too much pleased with this compliment to make any resistance,
while he buckled her close to his own herculean frame, and, driving a
spur into his charger, they flew from the lawn with a rapidity that
defied further denial. After proceeding for some time, at a rate that a
good deal discomposed the spinster, they overtook the cart of the
washerwoman driving slowly over the stones, with a proper consideration
for the wounds of Captain Singleton. The occurrences of that eventful
night had produced an excitement in the young soldier, that was followed
by the ordinary lassitude of reaction and he lay carefully enveloped in
blankets, and supported by his man, but little able to converse, though
deeply brooding over the past. The dialogue between Lawton and his
companion ceased with the commencement of their motions, but a footpace
being more favorable to speech, the trooper began anew:

"Then, you have been an inmate in the same house with Harvey Birch?"

"For more than nine years," said Katy, drawing her breath, and rejoicing
greatly that their speed was abated.

The deep tones of the trooper's voice were no sooner conveyed to the
ears of the washerwoman, than, turning her head, where she sat directing
the movements of the mare, she put into the discourse at the
first pause.

"Belike, then, good woman, ye're knowing whether or no he's akin to
Beelzeboob," said Betty. "It's Sargeant Hollister who's saying the
same, and no fool is the sargeant, anyway."

"It's a scandalous disparagement" cried Katy, vehemently, "no kinder
soul than Harvey carries a pack; and for a gownd or a tidy apron, he
will never take a king's farthing from a friend. Beelzebub, indeed! For
what would he read the Bible, if he had dealings with the evil spirit?"

"He's an honest divil, anyway; as I was saying before, the guinea was
pure. But then the sargeant thinks him amiss, and it's no want of
l'arning that Mister Hollister has."

"He's a fool!" said Katy tartly. "Harvey might be a man of substance,
were he not so disregardful. How often have I told him, that if he did
nothing but peddle, and would put his gains to use, and get married, so
that things at home could be kept within doors, and leave off his
dealings with the rig'lars, and all incumberments, that he would soon
become an excellent liver. Sergeant Hollister would be glad to hold a
candle to him, indeed!"

"Pooh!" said Betty, in her philosophical way; "ye're no thinking that
Mister Hollister is an officer, and stands next the cornet, in the
troop. But this piddler gave warning of the brush the night, and it's no
sure that Captain Jack would have got the day, but for the
