splitting across."

Amos Green walked to the end of the funnel-shaped recess and found, as
his friend had said, that a green sinuous crack extended away backwards
into the iceberg, caused either by the tossing of the waves, or by the
terrific impact of their vessel.  He roused Captain Ephraim and pointed
out the danger to him.

"Well, if she springs a leak we are gone," said he.  "She's been thawing
pretty fast as it is."

They could see now that what had seemed in the moonlight to be smooth
walls of ice were really furrowed and wrinkled like an old man's face by
the streams of melted water which were continually running down them.
The whole huge mass was brittle and honeycombed and rotten.  Already
they could hear all round them the ominous drip, drip, and the splash
and tinkle of the little rivulets as  they fell into the ocean.

"Hullo!" cried Amos Green, "what's that?"

"What then?"

"Did you hear nothing?"

"No."

"I could have sworn that I heard a voice."

"Impossible.  We are all here."

"It must have been my fancy then."

Captain Ephraim walked to the seaward face of the cave and swept the
ocean with his eyes.  The wind had quite fallen away now, and the sea
stretched away to the eastward, smooth and unbroken save for a single
great black spar which floated near the spot where the _Golden  Rod_ had
foundered.

"We should lie in the track of some ships," said the captain
thoughtfully. "There's the codders and the herring-busses.  We're over
far south for them, I reckon.  But we can't be more'n two hundred mile
from Port Royal in Arcadia, and we're in the line of the St. Lawrence
trade.  If I had three white mountain pines, Amos, and a hundred yards
of stout canvas I'd get up on the top of this thing, d'ye see, and I'd
rig such a jury-mast as would send her humming into Boston Bay.  Then
I'd break her up and sell her for what she was worth, and turn a few
pieces over the business.  But she's a heavy old craft, and that's a
fact, though even now she might do a knot or two an hour if she had a
hurricane behind her.  But what is it, Amos?"

The young hunter was standing with his ear slanting, his head bent
forwards, and his eyes glancing sideways like a man who listens
intently.  He was about to answer when De Catinat gave a cry and pointed
to the back of the cave.

"Look at the crack now."

It had widened by a foot since they had noticed it last, until it was
now no longer a crack.  It was a pass.

"Let us go through," said the captain.

"It can but come out on the other side."

"Then let us see the other side."

He led the way and the other two followed him.  It was very dark as they
advanced, with high dripping ice walls on either side and one little
zigzagging slit of blue sky above their heads.  Tripping and groping
their way, they stumbled along until suddenly the passage grew wider and
opened out into a large square of flat ice.  The berg was level in the
centre and sloped upwards from that point to the high cliffs which
bounded it on each side.  In three directions this slope was very steep,
but in one it slanted up quite gradually, and the constant thawing had
grooved the surface with a thousand irregularities by which an active
man could ascend.  With one impulse they began all three to clamber up
until a minute later they were standing not far from the edge of the
summit, seventy feet above the sea, with a view which took in a good
fifty miles of water.  In all that fifty miles there was no sign of
life, nothing but the endless glint of the sun upon the waves.

Captain Ephraim whistled.  "We are out of luck," said he.

Amos Green looked about him with startled eyes.  "I cannot understand
it," said he.  "I could have sworn--By the eternal, listen to that!" The
clear call of a military bugle rang out in the morning air.  With a cry
of amazement they all three craned forward and peered over the edge.

A large ship was lying under the very shadow of the iceberg.  They
looked straight down upon her snow-white decks, fringed with shining
brass cannon, and dotted with seamen. A little clump of soldiers stood
upon the poop going through the manual exercise, and it was from them
that the call had come which had sounded so unexpectedly in the ears of
the castaways.  Standing back from the edge, they had not only looked
over the top-masts of this welcome neighbour, but they had themselves
been invisible from her decks.  Now the discovery was mutual, as was
shown by a chorus of shouts and cries from beneath them.

But the three did not wait an instant.  Sliding and  scrambling down the
wet, slippery incline, they rushed shouting through the crack and into
the cave where their comrades had just been startled by the bugle-call
while in the middle of their cheerless breakfast.  A few hurried words
and the leaky long-boat had been launched, their possessions had been
bundled in, and they were afloat once more.  Pulling round a promontory
of the berg, they found themselves under the stern of a fine corvette,
the sides of which were lined with friendly faces, while from the peak
there drooped a huge white banner mottled over with the golden lilies of
France.  In a very few minutes their boat had been hauled up and they
found themselves on board the _St. Christophe_ man-of-war, conveying
Marquis de Denonville, the new Governor-General of Canada, to take over
his duties.



CHAPTER XXVIII.


IN THE POOL OF QUEBEC.

A singular colony it was of which the shipwrecked party found themselves
now to be members.  The _St. Christophe_ had left Rochelle three weeks
before with four small consorts conveying five hundred soldiers to help
the struggling colony on the St. Lawrence.  The squadron had become
separated, however, and the governor was pursuing his way alone in the
hope of picking up the others in the river.  Aboard he had a company of
the regiment of Quercy, the staff of his own household, Saint Vallier,
the new Bishop of Canada, with several of his attendants, three Recollet
friars, and five Jesuits bound for the fatal Iroquois mission,
half-a-dozen ladies on their way out to join their husbands, two
Ursuline nuns, ten or twelve gallants whom love of adventure and the
hope of bettering their fortunes had drawn across the seas, and lastly
some twenty peasant maidens of Anjou who were secure of finding husbands
waiting for them upon the beach, if only for the sake of the sheets, the
pot, the tin plates and the kettle which the king would provide for each
of his humble wards.

To add a handful of New England Independents, a Puritan of Boston, and
three Huguenots to such a gathering, was indeed to bring fire-brand and
powder-barrel together.  And yet all aboard were so busy with their own
concerns that the castaways were left very much to themselves.  Thirty
of the soldiers were down with fever and scurvy, and both priests and
nuns were fully taken up in nursing them.  Denonville, the governor, a
pious-minded dragoon, walked the deck all day reading the Psalms of
David, and sat up half the night with maps and charts laid out before
him, planning out the destruction of the Iroquois who were ravaging his
dominions.  The gallants and the ladies flirted, the maidens of Anjou
made eyes at the soldiers of Quercy, and the bishop Saint Vallier read
his offices and lectured his clergy.  Ephraim Savage used to stand all
day glaring at the good man as he paced the deck with his red-edged
missal in his hand, and muttering about the "abomination of desolation,"
but his little ways were put down to his exposure upon the iceberg, and
to the fixed idea in the French mind that men of the Anglo-Saxon stock
are not to be held accountable for  their actions.

There was peace between England and France at present, though feeling
ran high between Canada and New York, the French believing, and with
some justice, that the English colonists were whooping on the demons who
attacked them.  Ephraim and his men were therefore received hospitably
on board, though the ship was so crowded that they had to sleep wherever
they could find cover and space for their bodies.  The Catinats, too,
had been treated in an even more kindly fashion, the weak old man and
the beauty of his daughter arousing the interest of the governor
himself.  De Catinat had, during the voyage, exchanged his uniform for a
plain sombre suit, so that, except for his military bearing, there was
nothing to show that he was a fugitive from the army.  Old Catinat was
now so weak that he was past the answering of questions, his daughter
was forever at his side, and the soldier was diplomatist enough, after a
training at Versailles, to say much without saying anything, and so
their secret was still preserved.  De Catinat had known what it was to
be a Huguenot in Canada before the law was altered.  He had no wish to
try it after.

On the day after the rescue they sighted Cape Breton in the south, and
soon running swiftly before an easterly wind, saw the loom of the east
end of Anticosti.  Then they sailed up the mighty river, though from
mid-channel the banks upon either side were hardly to be seen.  As the
shores narrowed in, they saw the wild gorge of the Saguenay River upon
the right, with the smoke from the little fishing and trading station of
Tadousac streaming up above the pine trees.  Naked Indians with their
faces daubed with red clay, Algonquins and Abenakis, clustered round the
ship in their birchen canoes with fruit and vegetables from the land,
which brought fresh life to the scurvy-stricken soldiers.  Thence the
ship tacked on up the river past Mal Bay, the Ravine of the Eboulements
and the Bay of St. Paul with its broad valley and wooded mountains all
in a blaze with their beautiful autumn dress, their scarlets, their
purples, and their golds, from the maple, the ash, the young oak, and
the saplings of the birch.  Amos Green, leaning on the bulwarks, stared
with longing eyes at these vast expanses of virgin woodland, hardly
traversed save by an occasional wandering savage or hardy
_coureur-de-bois_.  Then the bold outline of Cape Tourmente loomed up
in front of them; they passed the rich placid meadows of Laval's
seigneury of Beaupre, and, skirting the settlements of the Island of
Orleans, they saw the broad pool stretch out in front of them, the falls
of Montmorenci, the high palisades of Cape Levi, the cluster of vessels,
and upon the right that wonderful rock with its diadem of towers and its
township huddled round its base, the centre and stronghold of French
power in America.  Cannon thundered from the bastions above, and were
echoed back by the warship, while ensigns dipped, hats waved, and a
swarm of boats and canoes shot out to welcome the new governor, and to
convey the soldiers and passengers to shore.

The old merchant had pined away since he had left French soil, like a
plant which has been plucked from its roots.  The shock of the shipwreck
and the night spent in their bleak refuge upon the iceberg had been too
much for his years and strength.  Since they had been picked up he had
lain amid the scurvy-stricken soldiers with hardly a sign of life save
for his thin breathing and the twitching of his scraggy throat.  Now,
however, at the sound of the cannon and the shouting he opened his eyes,
and raised himself slowly and painfully upon his pillow.  "What is it,
father?  What can we do for you?" cried Adele.  "We are in America, and
here is Amory and here am I, your children."

But the old man shook his head.  "The Lord has brought me to the
promised land, but He has not willed that I should enter into it," said
he.  "May His will be done, and blessed be His name forever!  But at
least I should wish, like Moses, to gaze upon it, if I cannot set foot
upon it.  Think you, Amory, that you could lend me your arm and lead me
on to the deck?"

"If I have another to help me," said De Catinat, and ascending to the
deck, he brought Amos Green back with him.  "Now, father, if you will
lay a hand upon the shoulder of each, you need scarce put your feet to
the  boards."

A minute later the old merchant was on the deck, and the two young men
had seated him upon a coil of rope with his back against the mast, where
he should be away from the crush.  The soldiers were already crowding
down into the boats, and all were so busy over their own affairs that
they paid no heed to the little group of refugees who gathered round the
stricken man.  He turned his head painfully from side to side, but his
eyes brightened as they fell upon the broad blue stretch of water, the
flash of the distant falls, the high castle, and the long line of purple
mountains away to the north-west.

"It is not like France," said he.  "It is not green and peaceful and
smiling, but it is grand and strong and stern like Him who made it.
As I have weakened, Adele, my soul has been less clogged by my body, and
I have seen clearly much that has been dim to me.  And it has seemed to
me, my children, that all this country of America, not Canada alone, but
the land where you were born also, Amos Green, and all that stretches
away towards yonder setting sun, will be the best gift of God to man.
For this has He held it concealed through all the ages, that now His own
high purpose may be wrought upon it.  For here is a land which is
innocent, which has no past guilt to atone for, no feud, nor ill custom,
nor evil of any kind.  And as the years roll on all the weary and
homeless ones, all who are stricken and landless and wronged, will turn
their faces to it, even as we have done.  And hence will come a nation
which will surely take all that is good and leave all that is bad,
moulding and fashioning itself into the highest.  Do I not see such a
mighty people, a people who will care more to raise their lowest than to
exalt their richest--who will understand that there is more bravery in
peace than in war, who will see that all men are brothers, and whose
hearts will not narrow themselves down to their own frontiers, but will
warm in sympathy with every noble cause the whole world through?
That is what I see, Adele, as I lie here beside a shore upon which I
shall never set my feet, and I say to you that if you and Amory go to
the building of such a nation then indeed your lives are not misspent.
It will come, and when it comes, may God guard it, may God watch over it
and direct it!"  His head had sunk gradually lower upon his breast and
his lids had fallen slowly over his eyes which had been looking away out
past Point Levi at the rolling woods and the far-off mountains.  Adele
gave a quick cry of despair and threw her arms round the old man's neck.

"He is dying, Amory, he is dying!" she cried.

A stern Franciscan friar, who had been telling his beads within a few
paces of them, heard the cry and was beside them in an instant.

"He is indeed dying," he said, as he gazed down at the ashen face.
"Has the old man had the sacraments of the Church?"

"I do not think that he needs them," answered De Catinat evasively.

"Which of us do not need them, young man!" said the friar sternly.  "And
how can a man hope for salvation without them?  I shall myself
administer them without delay."

But the old Huguenot had opened his eyes, and with a last flicker of
strength he pushed away the gray-hooded figure which bent over him.

"I left all that I love rather than yield to you," he cried, "and think
you that you can overcome me now?"

The Franciscan started back at the words, and his hard suspicious eyes
shot from De Catinat to the weeping girl.

"So!" said he.  "You are Huguenots, then!"

"Hush! Do not wrangle before a man who is dying!" cried De Catinat in a
voice as fierce as his own.

"Before a man who is dead," said Amos Green solemnly.

As he spoke the old man's face had relaxed, his thousand wrinkles had
been smoothed suddenly out, as though an invisible hand had passed over
them, and his head fell back against the mast.  Adele remained
motionless with her arms still clasped round his neck and her cheek
pressed against his shoulder.  She had fainted.

De Catinat raised his wife and bore her down to the cabin of one of the
ladies who had already shown them some kindness.  Deaths were no new
thing aboard the ship, for they had lost ten soldiers upon the outward
passage, so that amid the joy and bustle of the disembarking there were
few who had a thought to spare upon the dead pilgrim, and the less so
when it was whispered abroad that he had been a Huguenot.  A brief order
was given that he should be buried in the river that very night, and
then, save for a sailmaker who fastened the canvas round him, mankind
had done its last for Theophile Catinat.  With the survivors, however,
it was different, and when the troops were all disembarked, they were
mustered in a little group upon the deck, and an officer of the
governor's suite decided upon what should be done with them.  He was a
portly, good-humoured, ruddy-cheeked man, but De Catinat saw with
apprehension that the friar walked by his side as he advanced along the
deck, and exchanged a few whispered remarks with him.  There was a
bitter smile upon the monk's dark face which boded little good for the
heretics.

"It shall be seen to, good father, it shall be seen to," said the
officer impatiently, in answer to one of these whispered injunctions.
"I am as zealous a servant of Holy Church as you are."

"I trust that you are, Monsieur de Bonneville.  With so devout a
governor as Monsieur de Denonville, it  might be an ill thing even in
this world for the officers of his household to be lax."

The soldier glanced angrily at his companion, for he saw the threat
which lurked under the words.

"I would have you remember, father," said he, "that if faith is a
virtue, charity is no less so."  Then, speaking in English: "Which is
Captain Savage?"

"Ephraim Savage of Boston."

"And Master Amos Green?"

"Amos Green of New York."

"And Master Tomlinson?"

"John Tomlinson of Salem."

"And master mariners Hiram Jefferson, Joseph Cooper, Seek-grace Spalding,
and Paul Cushing, all of Massachusetts Bay?"

"We are all here."

"It is the governor's order that all whom I have named shall be conveyed
at once to the trading brig _Hope_, which is yonder ship with the white
paint line.  She sails within the hour for the English provinces."

A buzz of joy broke from the castaway mariners at the prospect of being
so speedily restored to their homes, and they hurried away to gather
together the few possessions which they had saved from the wreck.
The officer put his list in his pocket and stepped across to where De
Catinat leaned moodily against the bulwarks.

"Surely you remember me," he said.  "I could not forget your face, even
though you have exchanged a blue coat for a black one."

De Catinat grasped the hand which was held out to him.

"I remember you well, De Bonneville, and the journey that we made
together to Fort Frontenac, but it was not for me to claim your
friendship, now that things have gone amiss with me."

"Tut, man; once my friend always my friend."

"I feared, too, that my acquaintance would do you little good with
yonder dark-cowled friar who is glowering behind you."

"Well, well, you know how it is with us here.  Frontenac could keep them
in their place, but De la Barre was as clay in their hands, and this new
one promises to follow in his steps.  What with the Sulpitians at
Montreal and the Jesuits here, we poor devils are between the upper and
the nether stones.  But I am grieved from my heart to give such a
welcome as this to an old comrade, and still more to his wife."

"What is to be done, then?"

"You are to be confined to the ship until she sails, which will be in a
week at the furthest."

"And then?"

"You are to be carried home in her and handed over to the Governor of
Rochelle to be sent back to Paris.  Those are Monsieur de Denonville's
orders, and if they be not carried out to the letter, then we shall have
the whole hornet's nest about our ears."

De Catinat groaned as he listened.  After all their strivings and trials
and efforts, to return to Paris, the scorn of his enemies, and an object
of pity to his friends, was too deep a humiliation.  He flushed with
shame at the very thought.  To be led back like the home-sick peasant
who has deserted from his regiment!  Better one spring into the broad
blue river beneath him, were it not for little pale-faced Adele who had
none but him to look to.  It was so tame!  So ignominious!  And yet in
this floating prison, with a woman whose fate was linked with his own,
what hope was there of escape?

De Bonneville had left him, with a few blunt words of sympathy, but the
friar still paced the deck with a furtive glance at him from time to
time, and two soldiers who were stationed upon the poop passed and
repassed within a few yards of him.  They had orders evidently to mark
his movements.  Heart-sick he leaned over the side watching the Indians
in their paint and feathers shooting backwards and forwards in their
canoes, and staring across at the town where the gaunt gable ends of
houses and charred walls marked the effect of the terrible fire which a
few years before had completely destroyed the lower part.

As he stood gazing, his attention was drawn away by the swish of oars,
and a large boat full of men passed immediately underneath where he
stood.

It held the New Englanders, who were being conveyed to the ship which
was to take them home.  There were the four seamen huddled together, and
there in the sheets were Captain Ephraim Savage and Amos Green,
conversing together and pointing to the shipping.  The grizzled face of
the old Puritan and the bold features of the woodsman were turned more
than once in his direction, but no word of farewell and no kindly wave
of the hand came back to the lonely exile.  They were so full of their
own future and their own happiness, that they had not a thought to spare
upon his misery.  He could have borne anything from his enemies, but
this sudden neglect from his friends came too heavily after his other
troubles.  He stooped his face to his arms and burst in an instant into
a passion of sobs.  Before he raised his eyes again the brig had hoisted
her anchor, and was tacking under full canvas out of the Quebec basin.



CHAPTER XXIX.


THE VOICE AT THE PORT-HOLE.

That night old Theophile Catinat was buried from the ship's side, his
sole mourners the two who bore his own blood in their veins.  The next
day De Catinat spent upon deck, amid the bustle and confusion of the
unlading, endeavouring to cheer Adele by light chatter which came from a
heavy heart.  He pointed out to her the places which he had known so
well, the citadel where he had been quartered, the college of the
Jesuits, the cathedral of Bishop Laval, the magazine of the old company,
dismantled by the great fire, and the house of Aubert de la Chesnaye,
the only private one which had remained standing in the lower part.
From where they lay they could see not only the places of interest, but
something also of that motley population which made the town so
different to all others save only its younger sister, Montreal.  Passing
and repassing along the steep path with the picket fence which connected
the two quarters, they saw the whole panorama of Canadian life moving
before their eyes, the soldiers with their slouched hats, their plumes,
and their bandoleers, habitants from the river _cotes_ in their rude
peasant dresses, little changed from their forefathers of Brittany or
Normandy, and young rufflers from France or from the seigneuries, who
cocked their hats and swaggered in what they thought to be the true
Versailles fashion.  There, too, might be seen little knots of the men
of the woods, _coureurs-de-bois_ or _voyageurs_, with leathern hunting
tunics, fringed leggings, and fur cap with eagle feather, who came back
once a year to the cities, leaving their Indian wives and children in
some up-country wigwam.  Redskins, too, were there, leather-faced
Algonquin fishers and hunters, wild Micmacs from the east, and savage
Abenakis from the south, while everywhere were the dark habits of the
Franciscans, and the black cassocks and broad hats of the Recollets, and
Jesuits, the moving spirits of the whole.

Such were the folk who crowded the streets of the capital of this
strange offshoot of France which had been planted along the line of the
great river, a thousand leagues from the parent country.  And it was a
singular settlement, the most singular perhaps that has ever been made.
For a long twelve hundred miles it extended,  from Tadousac in the east,
away to the trading stations upon the borders of the great lakes,
limiting itself for the  most part to narrow cultivated strips upon the
margins of the river, banked in behind by wild forests and unexplored
mountains, which forever tempted the peasant from his hoe and his plough
to the freer life of the paddle and the musket.  Thin scattered
clearings, alternating with little palisaded clumps of log-hewn houses,
marked the line where civilisation was forcing itself in upon the huge
continent, and barely holding its own against the rigour of a northern
climate and the ferocity of merciless enemies.  The whole white
population of this mighty district, including soldiers, priests, and
woodmen, with all women and children, was very far short of twenty
thousand souls, and yet so great was their energy, and such the
advantage of the central government under which they lived, that they
had left their trace upon the whole continent.  When the prosperous
English settlers were content to live upon their acres, and when no axe
had rung upon the further side of the Alleghanies, the French had pushed
their daring pioneers, some in the black robe of the missionary, and
some in the fringed tunic of the hunter, to the uttermost ends of the
