Isaack. And in requital of these tokens from the treasure-house of thy
bounty, behold we have sent thee a Nubian slave, named Zohauk, of whom
judge not by his complexion, according to the foolish ones of the earth,
in respect the dark-rinded fruit hath the most exquisite flavour.
Know that he is strong to execute the will of his master, as Rustan of
Zablestan; also he is wise to give counsel when thou shalt learn to hold
communication with him, for the Lord of Speech hath been stricken with
silence betwixt the ivory walls of his palace. We commend him to thy
care, hoping the hour may not be distant when he may render thee good
service. And herewith we bid thee farewell; trusting that our most
holy Prophet may yet call thee to a sight of the truth, failing which
illumination, our desire is for the speedy restoration of thy royal
health, that Allah may judge between thee and us in a plain field of
battle."

And the missive was sanctioned by the signature and seal of the Soldan.

Richard surveyed the Nubian in silence as he stood before him, his looks
bent upon the ground, his arms folded on his bosom, with the appearance
of a black marble statue of the most exquisite workmanship, waiting
life from the touch of a Prometheus. The King of England, who, as it was
emphatically said of his successor Henry the Eighth, loved to look upon
A MAN, was well pleased with the thews, sinews, and symmetry of him whom
he now surveyed, and questioned him in the lingua franca, "Art thou a
pagan?"

The slave shook his head, and raising his finger to his brow, crossed
himself in token of his Christianity, then resumed his posture of
motionless humility.

"A Nubian Christian, doubtless," said Richard, "and mutilated of the
organ of speech by these heathen dogs?"

The mute again slowly shook his head, in token of negative, pointed with
his forefinger to Heaven, and then laid it upon his own lips.

"I understand thee," said Richard; "thou dost suffer under the
infliction of God, not by the cruelty of man. Canst thou clean an armour
and belt, and buckle it in time of need?"

The mute nodded, and stepping towards the coat of mail, which hung with
the shield and helmet of the chivalrous monarch upon the pillar of the
tent, he handled it with such nicety of address as sufficiently to show
that he fully understood the business of an armour-bearer.

"Thou art an apt, and wilt doubtless be a useful knave. Thou shalt wait
in my chamber, and on my person," said the King, "to show how much I
value the gift of the royal Soldan. If thou hast no tongue, it follows
thou canst carry no tales, neither provoke me to be sudden by any unfit
reply."

The Nubian again prostrated himself till his brow touched the earth,
then stood erect, at some paces distant, as waiting for his new master's
commands.

"Nay, thou shalt commence thy office presently," said Richard, "for I
see a speck of rust darkening on that shield; and when I shake it in
the face of Saladin, it should be bright and unsullied as the Soldan's
honour and mine own."

A horn was winded without, and presently Sir Henry Neville entered
with a packet of dispatches. "From England, my lord," he said, as he
delivered it.

"From England--our own England!" repeated Richard, in a tone of
melancholy enthusiasm. "Alas! they little think how hard their Sovereign
has been beset by sickness and sorrow--faint friends and forward
enemies." Then opening the dispatches, he said hastily, "Ha! this comes
from no peaceful land--they too have their feuds. Neville, begone; I
must peruse these tidings alone, and at leisure."

Neville withdrew accordingly, and Richard was soon absorbed in the
melancholy details which had been conveyed to him from England,
concerning the factions that were tearing to pieces his native
dominions--the disunion of his brothers John and Geoffrey, and the
quarrels of both with the High Justiciary Longchamp, Bishop of Ely--the
oppressions practised by the nobles upon the peasantry, and rebellion of
the latter against their masters, which had produced everywhere scenes
of discord, and in some instances the effusion of blood. Details of
incidents mortifying to his pride, and derogatory from his authority,
were intermingled with the earnest advice of his wisest and most
attached counsellors that he should presently return to England, as
his presence offered the only hope of saving the Kingdom from all the
horrors of civil discord, of which France and Scotland were likely to
avail themselves. Filled with the most painful anxiety, Richard read,
and again read, the ill-omened letters; compared the intelligence which
some of them contained with the same facts as differently stated in
others; and soon became totally insensible to whatever was passing
around him, although seated, for the sake of coolness, close to the
entrance of his tent, and having the curtains withdrawn, so that he
could see and be seen by the guards and others who were stationed
without.

Deeper in the shadow of the pavilion, and busied with the task his new
master had imposed, sat the Nubian slave, with his back rather turned
towards the King. He had finished adjusting and cleaning the hauberk and
brigandine, and was now busily employed on a broad pavesse, or buckler,
of unusual size, and covered with steel-plating, which Richard often
used in reconnoitring, or actually storming fortified places, as a more
effectual protection against missile weapons than the narrow triangular
shield used on horseback. This pavesse bore neither the royal lions
of England, nor any other device, to attract the observation of
the defenders of the walls against which it was advanced; the care,
therefore, of the armourer was addressed to causing its surface to shine
as bright as crystal, in which he seemed to be peculiarly successful.
Beyond the Nubian, and scarce visible from without, lay the large dog,
which might be termed his brother slave, and which, as if he felt awed
by being transferred to a royal owner, was couched close to the side of
the mute, with head and ears on the ground, and his limbs and tail drawn
close around and under him.

While the Monarch and his new attendant were thus occupied, another
actor crept upon the scene, and mingled among the group of English
yeomen, about a score of whom, respecting the unusually pensive posture
and close occupation of their Sovereign, were, contrary to their wont,
keeping a silent guard in front of his tent. It was not, however, more
vigilant than usual. Some were playing at games of hazard with small
pebbles, others spoke together in whispers of the approaching day of
battle, and several lay asleep, their bulky limbs folded in their green
mantles.

Amid these careless warders glided the puny form of a little old Turk,
poorly dressed like a marabout or santon of the desert--a sort of
enthusiasts, who sometimes ventured into the camp of the Crusaders,
though treated always with contumely, and often with violence. Indeed,
the luxury and profligate indulgence of the Christian leaders had
occasioned a motley concourse in their tents of musicians, courtesans,
Jewish merchants, Copts, Turks, and all the varied refuse of the Eastern
nations; so that the caftan and turban, though to drive both from
the Holy Land was the professed object of the expedition, were,
nevertheless, neither an uncommon nor an alarming sight in the camp of
the Crusaders. When, however, the little insignificant figure we have
described approached so nigh as to receive some interruption from the
warders, he dashed his dusky green turban from his head, showed that his
beard and eyebrows were shaved like those of a professed buffoon, and
that the expression of his fantastic and writhen features, as well as
of his little black eyes, which glittered like jet, was that of a crazed
imagination.

"Dance, marabout," cried the soldiers, acquainted with the manners of
these wandering enthusiasts, "dance, or we will scourge thee with our
bow-strings till thou spin as never top did under schoolboy's lash."
Thus shouted the reckless warders, as much delighted at having a subject
to tease as a child when he catches a butterfly, or a schoolboy upon
discovering a bird's nest.

The marabout, as if happy to do their behests, bounded from the earth,
and spun his giddy round before them with singular agility, which, when
contrasted with his slight and wasted figure, and diminutive appearance,
made him resemble a withered leaf twirled round and round at the
pleasure of the winter's breeze. His single lock of hair streamed
upwards from his bald and shaven head, as if some genie upheld him by
it; and indeed it seemed as if supernatural art were necessary to the
execution of the wild, whirling dance, in which scarce the tiptoe of
the performer was seen to touch the ground. Amid the vagaries of his
performance he flew here and there, from one spot to another, still
approaching, however, though almost imperceptibly, to the entrance of
the royal tent; so that, when at length he sunk exhausted on the earth,
after two or three bounds still higher than those which he had yet
executed, he was not above thirty yards from the King's person.

"Give him water," said one yeoman; "they always crave a drink after
their merry-go-round."

"Aha, water, sayest thou, Long Allen?" exclaimed another archer, with a
most scornful emphasis on the despised element; "how wouldst like such
beverage thyself, after such a morrice dancing?"

"The devil a water-drop he gets here," said a third. "We will teach
the light-footed old infidel to be a good Christian, and drink wine of
Cyprus."

"Ay, ay," said a fourth; "and in case he be restive, fetch thou Dick
Hunter's horn, that he drenches his mare withal."

A circle was instantly formed around the prostrate and exhausted
dervise, and while one tall yeoman raised his feeble form from the
ground, another presented to him a huge flagon of wine. Incapable of
speech, the old man shook his head, and waved away from him with his
hand the liquor forbidden by the Prophet. But his tormentors were not
thus to be appeased.

"The horn, the horn!" exclaimed one. "Little difference between a Turk
and a Turkish horse, and we will use him conforming."

"By Saint George, you will choke him!" said Long Allen; "and besides, it
is a sin to throw away upon a heathen dog as much wine as would serve a
good Christian for a treble night-cap."

"Thou knowest not the nature of these Turks and pagans, Long Allen,"
replied Henry Woodstall. "I tell thee, man, that this flagon of Cyprus
will set his brains a-spinning, just in the opposite direction that they
went whirling in the dancing, and so bring him, as it were, to himself
again. Choke? He will no more choke on it than Ben's black bitch on the
pound of butter."

"And for grudging it," said Tomalin Blacklees, "why shouldst thou grudge
the poor paynim devil a drop of drink on earth, since thou knowest he
is not to have a drop to cool the tip of his tongue through a long
eternity?"

"That were hard laws, look ye," said Long Allen, "only for being a Turk,
as his father was before him. Had he been Christian turned heathen, I
grant you the hottest corner had been good winter quarters for him."

"Hold thy peace, Long Allen," said Henry Woodstall. "I tell thee that
tongue of thine is not the shortest limb about thee, and I prophesy that
it will bring thee into disgrace with Father Francis, as once about the
black-eyed Syrian wench. But here comes the horn. Be active a bit,
man, wilt thou, and just force open his teeth with the haft of thy
dudgeon-dagger."

"Hold, hold--he is conformable," said Tomalin; "see, see, he signs for
the goblet--give him room, boys! OOP SEY ES, quoth the Dutchman--down
it goes like lamb's-wool! Nay, they are true topers when once they
begin--your Turk never coughs in his cup, or stints in his liquoring."

In fact, the dervise, or whatever he was, drank--or at least seemed to
drink--the large flagon to the very bottom at a single pull; and when
he took it from his lips after the whole contents were exhausted, only
uttered, with a deep sigh, the words, ALLAH KERIM, or God is merciful.
There was a laugh among the yeomen who witnessed this pottle-deep
potation, so obstreperous as to rouse and disturb the King, who, raising
his finger, said angrily, "How, knaves, no respect, no observance?"

All were at once hushed into silence, well acquainted with the temper of
Richard, which at some times admitted of much military familiarity, and
at others exacted the most precise respect, although the latter humour
was of much more rare occurrence. Hastening to a more reverent distance
from the royal person, they attempted to drag along with them the
marabout, who, exhausted apparently by previous fatigue, or overpowered
by the potent draught he had just swallowed, resisted being moved from
the spot, both with struggles and groans.

"Leave him still, ye fools," whispered Long Allen to his mates; "by
Saint Christopher, you will make our Dickon go beside himself, and we
shall have his dagger presently fly at our costards. Leave him alone; in
less than a minute he will sleep like a dormouse."

At the same moment the Monarch darted another impatient glance to the
spot, and all retreated in haste, leaving the dervise on the ground,
unable, as it seemed, to stir a single limb or joint of his body. In a
moment afterward all was as still and quiet as it had been before the
intrusion.



CHAPTER XXI

     --and wither'd Murder,
     Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
     Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
     With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
     Moves like a ghost.
                MACBETH.

For the space of a quarter of an hour, or longer, after the incident
related, all remained perfectly quiet in the front of the royal
habitation. The King read and mused in the entrance of his pavilion;
behind, and with his back turned to the same entrance, the Nubian slave
still burnished the ample pavesse; in front of all, at a hundred paces
distant, the yeomen of the guard stood, sat, or lay extended on the
grass, attentive to their own sports, but pursuing them in silence,
while on the esplanade betwixt them and the front of the tent lay,
scarcely to be distinguished from a bundle of rags, the senseless form
of the marabout.

But the Nubian had the advantage of a mirror from the brilliant
reflection which the surface of the highly-polished shield now afforded,
by means of which he beheld, to his alarm and surprise, that the
marabout raised his head gently from the ground, so as to survey all
around him, moving with a well-adjusted precaution which seemed entirely
inconsistent with a state of ebriety. He couched his head instantly, as
if satisfied he was unobserved, and began, with the slightest possible
appearance of voluntary effort, to drag himself, as if by chance, ever
nearer and nearer to the King, but stopping and remaining fixed at
intervals, like the spider, which, moving towards her object, collapses
into apparent lifelessness when she thinks she is the subject of
observation. This species of movement appeared suspicious to the
Ethiopian, who, on his part, prepared himself, as quietly as possible,
to interfere, the instant that interference should seem to be necessary.

The marabout, meanwhile, glided on gradually and imperceptibly,
serpent-like, or rather snail-like, till he was about ten yards distant
from Richard's person, when, starting on his feet, he sprung forward
with the bound of a tiger, stood at the King's back in less than an
instant, and brandished aloft the cangiar, or poniard, which he had
hidden in his sleeve. Not the presence of his whole army could have
saved their heroic Monarch; but the motions of the Nubian had been as
well calculated as those of the enthusiast, and ere the latter could
strike, the former caught his uplifted arm. Turning his fanatical wrath
upon what thus unexpectedly interposed betwixt him and his object, the
Charegite, for such was the seeming marabout, dealt the Nubian a blow
with the dagger, which, however, only grazed his arm, while the far
superior strength of the Ethiopian easily dashed him to the ground.
Aware of what had passed, Richard had now arisen, and with little more
of surprise, anger, or interest of any kind in his countenance than an
ordinary man would show in brushing off and crushing an intrusive wasp,
caught up the stool on which he had been sitting, and exclaiming only,
"Ha, dog!" dashed almost to pieces the skull of the assassin, who
uttered twice, once in a loud, and once in a broken tone, the words
ALLAH ACKBAR!--God is victorious--and expired at the King's feet.

"Ye are careful warders," said Richard to his archers, in a tone of
scornful reproach, as, aroused by the bustle of what had passed, in
terror and tumult they now rushed into his tent; "watchful sentinels ye
are, to leave me to do such hangman's work with my own hand. Be silent,
all of you, and cease your senseless clamour!--saw ye never a dead Turk
before? Here, cast that carrion out of the camp, strike the head from
the trunk, and stick it on a lance, taking care to turn the face
to Mecca, that he may the easier tell the foul impostor on whose
inspiration he came hither how he has sped on his errand.--For thee, my
swart and silent friend," he added, turning to the Ethiopian--"but how's
this? Thou art wounded--and with a poisoned weapon, I warrant me, for
by force of stab so weak an animal as that could scarce hope to do
more than raze the lion's hide.--Suck the poison from his wound one of
you--the venom is harmless on the lips, though fatal when it mingles
with the blood."

The yeomen looked on each other confusedly and with hesitation, the
apprehension of so strange a danger prevailing with those who feared no
other.

"How now, sirrahs," continued the King, "are you dainty-lipped, or do
you fear death, that you daily thus?"

"Not the death of a man," said Long Allen, to whom the King looked as he
spoke; "but methinks I would not die like a poisoned rat for the sake
of a black chattel there, that is bought and sold in a market like a
Martlemas ox."

"His Grace speaks to men of sucking poison," muttered another yeoman,
"as if he said, 'Go to, swallow a gooseberry!'"

"Nay," said Richard, "I never bade man do that which I would not do
myself."

And without further ceremony, and in spite of the general expostulations
of those around, and the respectful opposition of the Nubian himself,
the King of England applied his lips to the wound of the black
slave, treating with ridicule all remonstrances, and overpowering all
resistance. He had no sooner intermitted his singular occupation, than
the Nubian started from him, and casting a scarf over his arm, intimated
by gestures, as firm in purpose as they were respectful in manner,
his determination not to permit the Monarch to renew so degrading
an employment. Long Allen also interposed, saying that, if it were
necessary to prevent the King engaging again in a treatment of this
kind, his own lips, tongue, and teeth were at the service of the negro
(as he called the Ethiopian), and that he would eat him up bodily,
rather than King Richard's mouth should again approach him.

Neville, who entered with other officers, added his remonstrances.

"Nay, nay, make not a needless halloo about a hart that the hounds have
lost, or a danger when it is over," said the King. "The wound will be a
trifle, for the blood is scarce drawn--an angry cat had dealt a deeper
scratch. And for me, I have but to take a drachm of orvietan by way of
precaution, though it is needless."

 Thus spoke Richard, a little ashamed, perhaps, of his own
condescension, though sanctioned both by humanity and gratitude. But
when Neville continued to make remonstrances on the peril to his royal
person, the King imposed silence on him.

"Peace, I prithee--make no more of it. I did it but to show these
ignorant, prejudiced knaves how they might help each other when these
cowardly caitiffs come against us with sarbacanes and poisoned shafts.
But," he added, "take thee this Nubian to thy quarters, Neville--I have
changed my mind touching him--let him be well cared for. But hark in
thine ear; see that he escapes thee not--there is more in him than
seems. Let him have all liberty, so that he leave not the camp.--And
you, ye beef-devouring, wine-swilling English mastiffs, get ye to your
guard again, and be sure you keep it more warily. Think not you are now
in your own land of fair play, where men speak before they strike, and
shake hands ere they cut throats. Danger in our land walks openly, and
with his blade drawn, and defies the foe whom he means to assault; but
here he challenges you with a silk glove instead of a steel gauntlet,
cuts your throat with the feather of a turtle-dove, stabs you with the
tongue of a priest's brooch, or throttles you with the lace of my lady's
boddice. Go to--keep your eyes open and your mouths shut--drink less,
and look sharper about you; or I will place your huge stomachs on such
short allowance as would pinch the stomach of a patient Scottish man."

The yeomen, abashed and mortified, withdrew to their post, and Neville
was beginning to remonstrate with his master upon the risk of passing
over thus slightly their negligence upon their duty, and the propriety
of an example in a case so peculiarly aggravated as the permitting one
so suspicious as the marabout to approach within dagger's length of
his person, when Richard interrupted him with, "Speak not of it,
Neville--wouldst thou have me avenge a petty risk to myself more
severely than the loss of England's banner? It has been stolen--stolen
by a thief, or delivered up by a traitor, and no blood has been shed
for it.--My sable friend, thou art an expounder of mysteries, saith the
illustrious Soldan--now would I give thee thine own weight in gold, if,
by raising one still blacker than thyself or by what other means thou
wilt, thou couldst show me the thief who did mine honour that wrong.
What sayest thou, ha?"

The mute seemed desirous to speak, but uttered only that imperfect sound
proper to his melancholy condition; then folded his arms, looked on the
King with an eye of intelligence, and nodded in answer to his question.

"How!" said Richard, with joyful impatience. "Wilt thou undertake to
make discovery in this matter?"

The Nubian slave repeated the same motion.

"But how shall we understand each other?" said the King. "Canst thou
write, good fellow?"

The slave again nodded in assent.

"Give him writing-tools," said the King. "They were readier in my
father's tent than mine; but they be somewhere about, if this scorching
climate have not dried up the ink.--Why, this fellow is a jewel--a black
diamond, Neville."

"So please you, my liege," said Neville, "if I might speak my poor mind,
it were ill dealing in this ware. This man must be a wizard, and wizards
deal with the Enemy, who hath most interest to sow tares among the
wheat, and bring dissension into our councils, and--"

"Peace, Neville," said Richard. "Hello to your northern hound when he is
close on the haunch of the deer, and hope to recall him, but seek not to
stop Plantagenet when he hath hope to retrieve his honour."

The slave, who during this discussion had been writing, in which art he
seemed skilful, now arose, and pressing what he had written to his brow,
prostrated himself as usual, ere he delivered it into the King's hands.
The scroll was in French, although their intercourse had hitherto been
conducted by Richard in the lingua franca.

"To Richard, the conquering and invincible King of England, this from
the humblest of his slaves. Mysteries are the sealed caskets of Heaven,
but wisdom may devise means to open the lock. Were your slave stationed
where the leaders of the Christian host were made to pass before him
in order, doubt nothing that if he who did the injury whereof my King
complains shall be among the number, he may be made manifest in his
iniquity, though it be hidden under seven veils."

"Now, by Saint George!" said King Richard, "thou hast spoken most
opportunely.--Neville, thou knowest that when we muster our troops
to-morrow the princes have agreed that, to expiate the affront offered
to England in the theft of her banner, the leaders should pass our new
standard as it floats on Saint George's Mount, and salute it with formal
regard. Believe me, the secret traitor will not dare to absent himself
from an expurgation so solemn, lest his very absence should be matter of
suspicion. There will we place our sable man of counsel, and if his art
can detect the villain, leave me to deal with him."

"My liege," said Neville, with the frankness of an English baron,
"beware what work you begin. Here is the concord of our holy league
unexpectedly renewed--will you, upon such suspicion as a negro slave can
instil, tear open wounds so lately closed? Or will you use the solemn
procession, adopted for the reparation of your honour and establishment
of unanimity amongst the discording princes, as the means of again
finding out new cause of offence, or reviving ancient quarrels? It were
scarce too strong to say this were a breach of the declaration your
Grace made to the assembled Council of the Crusade."

"Neville," said the King, sternly interrupting him, "thy zeal makes thee
presumptuous and unmannerly. Never did I promise to abstain from taking
