space before the inn. The gallop became a trot.

"He is riding to the door," said Wogan. "The light falls on your face;"
and he drew Clementina into the shadow of the wall. But at the same
moment the rider changed his mind. He swerved; it seemed too that he
used his spurs, for his horse bounded beneath him and galloped past the
inn. He disappeared into the darkness, and the sound of the horse
diminished. Wogan listened until they had died away.

"He rides into Austria!" said he. "He rides to Trent, to Brixen, to
Innspruck! And in haste. Let us go! I had even a fancy that I knew his
voice."

"From a single oath uttered in anger! Nay, you are all fears. For my
part, I was afraid that he had it in his mind to stay here at this inn
where my little woman lies. What if suspicion fall on her? What if those
troopers of the Emperor find her and guess the part she played!"

"You make her safe by seeking safety," returned Wogan. "You are the prey
the Emperor flies at. Once you are out of reach, his mere dignity must
hold him in from wreaking vengeance on your friends."

Wogan went into the inn, and calling Misset told him of his purpose. He
would drive her Highness to Peri, a little village ten miles from Ala,
but in Italy. At Peri, Mrs. Misset and her husband were to rejoin them
in the morning, and from Peri they could travel by slow stages to
Bologna. The tears flowed from Clementina's eyes when she took her
farewell of her little woman. Though her reason bowed to Wogan's
argument, she had a sense of cowardice in deserting so faithful a
friend. Mrs. Misset, however, joined in Wogan's prayer; and she mounted
into the trap and at Wogan's side drove out of the town by that street
along which the horseman had ridden.

Clementina was silent; her driver was no more talkative. They were alone
and together on the road to Italy. That embarrassment from which Wogan's
confession of fear had procured them some respite held them in a stiff
constraint. They were conscious of it as of a tide engulfing them.
Neither dared to speak, dreading what might come of speech. The most
careless question, the most indifferent comment, might, as it seemed to
both, be the spark to fire a mine. Neither had any confidence to say,
once they had begun to talk, whither the talk would lead; but they were
very much afraid, and they sat very still lest a movement of the one
should provoke a question in the other. She knew his secret, and he was
aware that she knew it. She could not have found it even then in her
heart to part willingly with her knowledge. She had thought over-much
upon it during the last day. She had withdrawn herself into it from the
company of her fellow-travellers, as into a private chamber; it was
familiar and near. Nor would Wogan have desired, now that she had the
knowledge, to deprive her of it, but he knew it instinctively for a
dangerous thing. He drove on in silence while the stars paled in the
heavens and a grey, pure light crept mistily up from the under edges of
the world, and the morning broke hard and empty and cheerless. Wogan
suddenly drew in the reins and stopped the cart.

"There is a high wall behind us. It stretches across the fields from
either side," said he. "It makes a gateway of the road."

Clementina turned. The wall was perhaps ten yards behind them.

"A gateway," said she, "through which we have passed."

"The gateway of Italy," answered Wogan; and he drew the lash once or
twice across the pony's back and so was silent. Clementina looked at his
set and cheerless face, cheerless as that chill morning, and she too was
silent. She looked back along the road which she had traversed through
snow and sunshine and clear nights of stars; she saw it winding out from
the gates of Innspruck over the mountains, above the foaming river, and
after a while she said very wistfully,--

"There are worse lives than a gipsy's."

"Are there any better?" answered Wogan.

So this was what Mr. Wogan's fine project had come to. He remembered
another morning when the light had welled over the hills, sunless and
clear and cold, on the road to Bologna,--the morning of the day when he
had first conceived the rescue of Clementina. And the rescue had been
effected, and here was Clementina safe out of Austria, and Wogan sure of
a deathless renown, of the accomplishment of an endeavour held absurd
and preposterous; and these two short sentences were their summary and
comment,--

"There are worse lives than a gipsy's."

"Are there any better?"

Both had at this supreme crisis of their fortunes but the one
thought,--that the only days through which they had really lived were
those last two days of flight, of hurry, of hope alternating with
despair, of light-hearted companionship, days never to be forgotten,
when each snatched meal was a picnic seasoned with laughter, days of
unharnessed freedom lived in the open air.

Clementina was the first to perceive that her behaviour fell below the
occasion. She was safe in Italy, journeying henceforward safely to her
betrothed. She spurred herself to understand it, she forced her lips to
sing aloud the Te Deum. Wogan looked at her in surprise as the first
notes were sung, and the woful appeal in her eyes compelled him to as
brave a show as he could make of joining in the hymn. But the words
faltered, the tune wavered, joyless and hollow in that empty morning.

"Drive on," said Clementina, suddenly; and she had a sense that she was
being driven into bondage,--she who had just been freed. Wogan drove on
towards Peri.

It was the morning of Sunday, the 30th of April; and as the little cart
drew near to this hamlet of thirty cottages, the travellers could hear
the single bell in the church belfry calling the villagers to Mass.
Wogan spoke but once to Clementina, and then only to point out a wooden
hut which stood picturesquely on a wooded bluff of Monte Lessini, high
up upon the left. A narrow gorge down which a torrent foamed led upwards
to the bluff, and the hut of which the windows were shuttered, and which
seemed at that distance to have been built with an unusual elegance, was
to Wogan's thinking a hunting-box. Clementina looked up at the bluff
indifferently and made no answer. She only spoke as Wogan drove past
the church-door, and the sound of the priest's voice came droning out to
them.

"Will you wait for me?" she asked. "I will not be long."

Wogan stopped the pony.

"You would give thanks?" said he. "I understand."

"I would pray for an honest heart wherewith to give honest thanks," said
Clementina, in a low voice; and she added hastily, "There is a life of
ceremonies, there is a life of cities before me. I have lived under the
skies these last two days."

She went into the church, shrouding her face in her hood, and kneeled
down before a rush chair close to the door. A sense of gratitude,
however, was not that morning to be got by any prayers, however earnest.
It was merely a distaste for ceremonies and observances, she strenuously
assured herself, that had grown upon her during these ten days. She
sought to get rid of that distaste, as she kneeled, by picturing in her
thoughts the Prince to whom she was betrothed. She recalled the
exploits, the virtues, which Wogan had ascribed to him; she stamped them
upon the picture. "It is the King," she said to herself; and the picture
answered her, "It is the King's servant." And, lo! the face of the
picture was the face of Charles Wogan. She covered her cheeks with her
hands in a burning rush of shame; she struck in her thoughts at the face
of that image with her clenched fists, to bruise, to annihilate it. "It
is the King! It is the King! It is the King!" she cried in her remorse,
but the image persisted. It still wore the likeness of Charles Wogan; it
still repeated, "No, it is the King's servant." There was more of the
primitive woman in this girl bred in the rugged country-side of Silesia
than even Wogan was aware of, and during the halts in their journey she
had learned from Mrs. Misset details which Wogan had been at pains to
conceal. It was Wogan who had conceived the idea of her rescue--in the
King's place. In the King's place, Wogan had come to Innspruck and
effected it. In the King's place, he had taken her by the hand and cleft
a way for her through her enemies. He was the man, the rescuer; she was
the woman, the rescued.

She became conscious of the futility of her attitude of prayer. She
raised her head and saw that a man kneeling close to the altar had
turned and was staring fixedly towards her. The man was the Prince of
Baden. Had he recognised her? She peered between her fingers; she
remarked that his gaze was puzzled; he was not then sure, though he
suspected. She waited until he turned his head again, and then she
silently rose to her feet and slipped out of the church. She found Wogan
waiting for her in some anxiety.

"Did he recognise you?" he asked.

"He was not sure," answered Clementina. "How did you know he was at
Mass?"

"A native I spoke with told me."

Clementina climbed up into the cart.

"The Prince is not a generous man," she said hesitatingly.

Wogan understood her. The Prince of Baden must not know that she had
come to Peri escorted by a single cavalier. He would talk bitterly, he
would make much of his good fortune in that he had not married the
Princess Clementina, he would pity the Chevalier de St. George,--there
was a fine tale there. Wogan could trace it across the tea-tables of
Europe, and hear the malicious inextinguishable laughter which winged it
on its way. He drove off quickly from the church door.

"He leaves Peri at nine," said Wogan. "He will have no time to make
inquiries. We have but to avoid the inn he stays at. There is a second
at the head of the village which we passed."

To this second inn Wogan drove, and was welcomed by a shrewish woman
whose sour face was warmed for once in a way into something like
enthusiasm.

"A lodging indeed you shall have," cried she, "and a better lodging than
the Prince of Baden can look back upon, though he pay never so dearly
for it. Poor man, he will have slept wakefully this night! Here, sir,
you will find honest board and an honest bed for yourself and your sweet
lady, and an honest bill to set you off in a sweet humour in the
morning."

"Nay, my good woman," interrupted Wogan, hastily. "This is no sweet lady
of mine, nor are we like to stay until the morrow. The truth is, we are
a party of four, but our carriage snapped its axle some miles back. The
young lady's uncle and aunt are following us, and we wait only for their
arrival."

Wogan examined the inn and thought the disposition of it very
convenient. It made three sides of a courtyard open to the road. On the
right and the bottom were farm-buildings and a stable; the inn was the
wing upon the left hand. The guest rooms, of which there were four, were
all situated upon the first floor and looked out upon a little thicket
of fir-trees at the back of the wing. They were approached by a
staircase, which ran up with a couple of turns from the courtyard itself
and on the outside of the house-wall. Wogan was very pleased with that
staircase; it was narrow. He was pleased, too, because there were no
other travellers in the inn. He went back to the landlady.

"It is very likely," said he, "that my friends when they come will,
after all, choose to stay here for the night. I will hire all the rooms
upon the first floor."

The landlady was no less pleased than Mr. Wogan. She had a thought that
they were a runaway couple and served them breakfast in a little parlour
up the stairs with many sly and confusing allusions. She became
confused, however, when after breakfast Clementina withdrew to bed, and
Wogan sauntered out into the high-road, where he sat himself down on a
bank to watch for Captain Misset. All day he sat resolutely with his
back towards the inn. The landlady inferred that here were lovers
quarrelling, and she was yet more convinced of it when she entered the
parlour in the afternoon to lay the table for dinner and saw Clementina
standing wistfully at the window with her eyes upon that unmoving back.
Wogan meanwhile for all his vigilance watched the road but ill.
Merchants, pedlars, friars, and gentlemen travelling for their pleasure
passed down the road into Italy. Mr. Wogan saw them not, or saw them
with unseeing eyes. His eyes were turned inwards, and he gazed at a
picture that his heart held of a room in that inn behind him, where
after all her dangers and fatigues a woman slept in peace. Towards
evening fewer travellers passed by, but there came one party of six
well-mounted men whose leader suddenly bowed his head down upon his
horse's neck as he rode past. Wogan had preached a sermon on the
carelessness which comes with danger's diminutions, but he was very
tired. The head was nodding; the blow might fall from nowhere, and he
not know.

At nightfall he returned and mounted to the parlour, where Clementina
awaited him.

"There is no sign of Captain Misset," said he.

Wogan was puzzled by the way in which Clementina received the news. For
a moment he thought that her eyes lightened, and that she was glad; then
it seemed to him that her eyes clouded and suddenly as if with pain. Nor
was her voice a guide to him, for she spoke her simple question without
significance,--

"Must we wait, then, till the morning?"

"There is a chance that they may come before the morning. I will watch
on the top stair, and if they come I will make bold to wake your
Highness."

Their hostess upon this brought their supper into the room, and Wogan
became at once aware of a change in her demeanour. She no longer
embarrassed them with her patronage, nor did she continue her sly
allusions to the escapades of lovers. On the contrary, she was of an
extreme deference. Under the deference, too, Wogan seemed to remark a
certain excitement.

"Have you other lodgers to-night?" he asked carelessly.

"No, sir," said she. "Travellers are taken by a big house and a bustle
of servants. They stay at the Vapore Inn when they stay at Peri, and to
their cost."

As soon as she had left the room Wogan asked of Clementina,--

"When did her manner change?"

"I had not remarked the change till now," replied Clementina.

Wogan became uneasy. He went down into the courtyard, and found it
empty. There was a light in the kitchen, and he entered the room. The
landlady was having her supper in company with her few servants, and
there were one or two peasants from the village. Wogan chatted with them
for a few minutes and came out again much relieved of his fears. He
thought, however, it might be as well to see that his pony was ready for
an emergency. He crossed silently to the stable, which he found dark as
the courtyard. The door was latched, but not locked. He opened it and
went in. The building was long, with many stalls ranged side by side.
Wogan's pony stood in the end stall opposite to the door. Wogan took
down the harness from the pegs and began to fix it ready on the pony. He
had just put the collar over its head when he heard a horse stamping in
one of the stalls at the other end of the stables. Now he had noticed in
the morning that there were only two horses in the building, and those
two were tied up in the stalls next to that which his pony occupied. He
walked along the range of stalls. The two horses were there, then came a
gap of empty stalls, and beyond the gap he counted six other horses.
Wogan became at once curious about those six other horses. They might of
course be farm-horses, but he wished to know. It was quite dark within
the building; he had only counted the horses by the noise of their
movements in their stalls, the rattle of their head-ropes, and the
pawing of their feet. He dared not light a lamp, but horses as a rule
knew him for a friend. He went into the stall of the first, petted it
for a moment and ran his hand down its legs. He repeated the process
with the second, and with so much investigation he was content. No
farm-horse that ever Wogan had seen had such a smooth sleek skin or
such fine legs as had those two over which he had passed his hands. "Now
where are the masters of those horses?" he asked himself. "Why do they
leave their cattle at this inn and not show themselves in the kitchen or
the courtyard? Why do they not ask for a couple of my rooms?" Wogan
stood in the dark and reflected. Then he stepped out of the door with
even more caution than he had used when entering by it. He stole
silently along to the shed where his trap was housed, and felt beneath
the seat. From beneath the seat he drew out a coil of rope, and a lamp.
The rope he wound about him under his coat. Then he went back to his
staircase and the parlour.

Clementina could read in his face that something was amiss, but she had
a great gift of silence. She waited for him to speak. Wogan unwound the
coil of rope from his body.

"Your Highness laughed at me for that I would not part with my rope. I
have a fear this night will prove my wisdom." And with that he began
deliberately to break up the chairs in the room. Clementina asked no
questions; she watched him take the rungs and bars of the chairs and
test their strength. Then he cut the coil of rope in half and tied loops
at intervals; into the loops he fitted the wooden rungs. Wogan worked
expeditiously for an hour without opening his mouth. In an hour he had
fashioned a rope-ladder. He went to the window which looked out on the
back of the wing, upon the little thicket of fir-trees. He opened the
window cautiously and dropped the ladder down the wall.

"Your Highness has courage," said he. "The ladder does not touch the
ground, but it will not be far to drop, should there be need."

The window of Clementina's bedroom was next to that of the parlour and
looked out in the same direction. Wogan fixed the rope-ladder securely
to the foot of the bed and drew the bed close to the window. He left the
lamp upon a chair and went back to the parlour and explained.

"Your Highness," he added, "there may be no cause for any alarm. On the
other hand, the Governor of Trent may have taken a leaf from my own
book. He may have it in mind to snatch your Highness out of Italy even
as I did out of Austria; and of a truth it would be the easier
undertaking. Here are we five miles from the border and in a small
tavern set apart from a small village, instead of in the thick of an
armed town."

"But we might start now," she said. "We might leave a message behind for
Mrs. Misset and wait for her in Verona."

"I had thought of that. But if my mere suspicion is the truth, the six
