over on the Welsh coast, waiting for the tide to enable them to
come down on us.

By that time a fire burned on the highest spur of the Quantocks to
tell us that Odda was there, and at once another was lit on the
Combwich fort to bring him to us, for it seemed certain that here
we must fight the first battle of Alfred's great struggle.

"Here you must meet this newcomer and drive him away, if it can be
done, or if not, hinder him from coming further; or if that is
impossible, do your best. I would have you remember that defeat
here is not loss of all hope, for beyond Selwood lies our real
gathering. But victory, even if dearly bought, will almost win the
day for us."

So Alfred said, and we, who began to see what his great plan was,
were cheered.

In the evening Odda came with eight hundred men of Devon. Alfred
had two hundred maybe, and my few men and the townsfolk made
another two hundred. But Hubba had twenty-three longships, whose
crews, if up to fighting strength, would not be less than a hundred
in each.

So we watched till the tide fell, when he could not come into the
Parret, and then I went back to Heregar's hall. It seemed very
bare, for all goods had been sent up to the great refuge camp of
Dowsborough, to which all day long the poor folk had been flying,
driving with them their sheep and cattle and swine, that they might
save what they could. But with Odda had come his daughter, the Lady
Etheldreda, who would not leave him; and she and the Lady Alswythe
and Thora were yet in the house, and Osmund the jarl sat in the
hall, listless and anxious of face. It was an ill time for him; but
there were none of us who did not like him well, and feel for him
in his helplessness.

"What news?" he said, when he saw me come into the hall.

"Hubba will be here on the next tide--with early morning," I said.

He sighed, and rising up went to the doorway and looked out to the
hills.

"I would that I could make these two noble ladies seek refuge
yonder," he said; "but one will not leave her father, nor the other
her husband."

Then I said:

"At least I think you should take Thora there. This is a difficult
place for you."

"I know Hubba," he said, "and if I abide here I may be of use. I
need not tell you that you are fighting the best warrior of our
time, and that with too small a force."

"Well," I said, "you and I can speak plainly, neither of us being
Saxons. We shall be beaten by numbers, and you mean that you will
be able to save these ladies by staying?"

"Ay," he said. "And if by any chance Alfred wins, I may be able to
ask for mercy for the conquered."

Then came in Thora, and her face was troubled. She had been trying
to make Etheldreda go to the hill fort, where all the women and
children of the countryside had been sent.

"It is of no use," she said; "they will bide here."

"Well," said Osmund, "then we will stay also. I and our friend have
spoken thereof, and it seems well that we do so."

I suppose they had talked of this before, for she made no answer,
but sat down wearily enough before the fire; and Osmund and I went
out to the courtyard, for we were both restless.

Then Heregar came in on his white horse, and saw Osmund, and called
to him, asking of the same business, for he had asked the jarl to
speak about it as a friend. So I went in again, and Thora sat by
herself yet, looking up to see who came now. I went and stood by
her, staring into the fire, and feeling as if I wanted to go out
again. Restlessness was in the very air while we waited for the
coming fight.

"King Ranald," she said, after a little silence, "I wonder if ever
a maiden was in such sad doubt as I. I cannot wish that these dear
ladies, who have made a friend of me, should see their folk beaten,
and maybe slain; and cannot wish that my own kin should be beaten
either. It seems that in either way I must find heavy sorrow."

That was true; but it was certain that her own people were the
cause of all the trouble, though I could not say so. I put it this
way:

"I think that if your people are driven off there will be peace the
sooner, and maybe they will not land when they find us waiting. I
know, too, that those who have loved ones in the battle that may be
are in a harder case than yours, dear lady."

Then she looked up at me once, and a flush came slowly over her
pale face, and she answered nothing. I thought that she felt some
shame that a warrior like her father should bide here, without
moving hand or foot, when the war horns were blowing. So I said:

"Harder yet would it be if the jarl were in the battle against our
friends. Then would the fear of his loss be a terror to you also."

Now came in Osmund, and straightway Thora rose up, turning away
from us both, and went from the hall. The jarl looked after her
curiously and sadly.

"This is a strange business for the girl," he said.

"She seems almost as troubled because you are not fighting as if
you were in danger by doing so," I answered, with that thought
still in my mind.

Thereat the jarl stared at me.

"What has put that into your head?" he asked.

I told him what she and I had said, adding that I feared I had
seemed to hint somewhat discomforting.

Then said Osmund, looking in my face with a half smile:

"She is glad I am honourably out of this business, and the trouble
is not that. There are one or two, maybe, whom she would like to
see as safe in the same way."

Then it flashed through my dull mind that perhaps I was one of
these, and the thought was pleasant to me.

"Well," I said, "there are the thane, and his young son, the king's
page, who is here. They have been very kind to her."

"Also a wandering king who took her out of danger," he said then.

"Ay; I shall be glad if she thinks of me."

There were a little laugh and a rustling behind us, and one said:

"Either you are the least conceited of men or the blindest, King
Ranald, or you would know what is amiss."

I turned, and saw the Lady Etheldreda herself, and I bowed to her
in much confusion.

"O you men!" she said. "Here you will let the poor girl break her
heart in silence, while you fight for glory, or somewhat you think
is glory, without a word to say that you care that she shall see
what you win. Of course she thinks of you, even night and day. How
else should it be, when you have been as a fairy prince to her?"

Then I knew for myself that among all the wild life of Athelney and
the troubles of the king the thought of Thora had been pleasant to
me; but now I was confused, having the matter brought home to me
suddenly, and, as it were, before I was ready to shape all my
thoughts towards her. So all that I could say was foolish enough.

"I am a poor sort of fairy prince, lady."

"Ay," she said; "I am as good a fairy godmother, maybe. And perhaps
I should have said nothing--at this time. But, Ranald, the maiden
weeps for your danger, for, at the very least, she owes you much."

Then I said, humbly as I felt:

"That is more honour to me than I deserve."

"That is for her to say," answered the fair lady, turning to where
Osmund had been.

But he was now in the doorway, looking out again to the hills. So
she was silent, and I thought of somewhat.

"There is none in this land or in any other--of whom I think as I
do of Thora," I said; "but my mind has been full of warfare and
trouble with the king. Now, if I may, I will ask for somewhat that
I may wear for her sake in the fight, and so she will know that I
think of her."

"Now that is well said," answered Etheldreda. "But you must ask it
for yourself."

Thereat I thought for a moment, and at last I said that I would not
do so.

"If I might, I would ask you to gain this favour for me," I said;
"for I think that a parting would be very hard, as things have come
about."

"You are a wiser man than I thought you, Ranald," she said; and so
she went from me, and I stayed by the fire, thinking thoughts that
were sweet and yet troublous, for beyond tomorrow's fight I could
not see.

Then the lady came back, and with her she brought a little glove,
worn and shapely from the hand that it belonged to.

"She bids me give this to her king and warrior," Etheldreda said.
"I did but tell her that you asked a token that she minded you."

"It was well," I answered. "What said she?"

"Nought at once. But her sadness went, and her face changed--ay,
but she is beyond any of us in beauty when her eyes light up in
that way--and she fetched this, and then said 'Say, if you think
that he will care to know it, that this is the glove wherein I rode
to Wareham.'

"Do you care to know it, Ranald?"

"Ay, with all my heart," I said.

And so I put it very carefully under the broad, golden-studded
baldric of Sigurd's sword. And it would not stay there, and
Etheldreda laughed at me, and took a little golden brooch like a
cross that she wore, and pinned it through glove and baldric,
making all safe.

"There," she said, "is a token from me also, though it was unasked.
Bear yourself well, Ranald, for our eyes are on you. If Hubba comes
indeed, we women folk will be in the fort."

Then I said, being at a loss for words enough:

"I would I had the tongue of Harek the scald, that I might thank
you for gift and words, my fairy princess."

"I have half a mind to take it back for that fine saying," she
answered.

And then she gave me her hand, and I kissed it; and she went from
me with her eyes full of tears for all the trouble that was on us,
though she had tried bravely to carry it off lightly.

Then I would stay in the house no longer, but went out to the fort,
and sat down by the great Dragon banner of Wessex, Heregar's
charge, that floated there, and ate and drank with the other
chiefs, and waited. But my mind was full of what I had heard, and
the war talk went on round me without reaching my ears.



Chapter XI. The Winning of "The Raven."


Now we none of us like much to speak of the fight that came next
morning, for it went ill enough. Yet we were outnumbered by twice
our force, for some more of the host beyond the fens made Alfred
send many of his men back to watch the crossing at Bridgwater.

Hubba brought his ships up on the tide, and when he saw that we
were waiting for him, he made as if to go on up the river; and we
began to move from our position, thinking that he would go and fall
on the town. Then, very suddenly, he turned his ships' bows to the
bank at the one place where he saw that the land was high almost to
the river's edge; and before we knew that we must be there to stay
him, his men were ashore, and had passed the strip of marsh, and
were on a long, gentle rise that ends in Cannington hill and the
Combwich fort, half a mile away.

We fought well for an hour, and then our men began to give on
either wing, for they were, as I would have it remembered, raw
levies that Odda had brought with him--valiant men and strong, but
with no knowledge of how to fight in line or how to hold together.
And when a force like that begins to go, it is ended.

Hard fought we in the centre after that. There were the Athelney
thanes, and my fifty men, and Odda's Exeter and Taunton townsfolk,
who had fought before; but when the wings broke, Hubba's great
force of veterans lapped round us, and we had nought left us but to
cut our way out, and make the best retreat we could. My men shouted
as they struck, in our Norse way; but a deadly silence fell on the
Saxons, and I thought that, as they grew quiet, their blows became
ever more stern and fell, until at last even Hubba's vikings gave
way before the hard-set faces and steadfast eyes of the
west-country spearmen, whom no numbers seemed to daunt, and they
drew back from us for a space.

Then we were clear of them, and at once Ethelnoth closed in on the
king, taking his horse's rein, and praying him to fly to
Bridgwater, where a stand could be made. And at last he persuaded
him, and they turned. Then fearing that this might set the example
for general flight, I spoke to Odda, and we shouted to the men to
stand fast and hold back pursuit; and so a guard of some fifty
thanes went with Alfred, and we faced the Danes even yet.

They saw what was done, and roared, and charged on us; and we began
to retreat slowly, fighting all the way, up the long slope of land
towards the fort. But I saw Heregar's horse rear and fall, and the
banner went down, and I thought him slain in that attack.

Presently they let us go. We won ever to better ground, and they
had to fight uphill; and then we gained the fort, and there they
durst not come.

Then rode towards me a man in silver armour that was dinted and
hacked--shieldless, and with a notched sword in his hand. It was
Heregar.

"I thought you slain, friend," I said gladly.

"Would that I were! for my charge is lost; they have my banner," he
answered.

"That may be won back yet," I said. "But there is no shame to you;
we were outnumbered by more than two to one."

"I have borne it through ten battles," he said, and that was all;
but he put his face in his hands and groaned.

Now I looked out over the field we had left, and saw the Danes
scattering in many ways. Some were going in a long line up the
