
Sec.33. _Veri et falsi_: these words Lamb. considered spurious in the first
clause, and Halm brackets; but surely their repetition is pointed and
appropriate. "You talk about a rule for distinguishing between the true and
the false while you do away with the notion of true and false altogether."
The discussion here really turns on the use of terms. If it is fair to use
the term "true" to denote the _probably true_, the Academics are not open
to the criticism here attempted; cf. 111 _tam vera quam falsa cernimus_.
_Ut inter rectum et pravum_: the sceptic would no more allow the absolute
certainty of this distinction than of the other. _Communis_: the [Greek:
aparallaktos] of Sextus; "in whose vision true and false are confused." Cf.
[Greek: koine phantasia alethous kai pseudous] Sext. _A.M._ VII. 164 (R.
and P. 410), also 175. _Notam_: the [Greek: semeion] of Sextus; cf. esp.
_P.H_. II. 97 sq. _Eodem modo falsum_: Sext. _A.M._ VII. 164 (R. and P.
410) [Greek: oudemia estin alethes phantasia hoia ouk an genoito pseudes].
_Ut si quis_: Madv. in an important n. on _D.F._ IV. 30 explains this thus;
_ista ratione si quis ... privaverit, possit dicere_. I do not think our
passage at all analogous to those he quotes, and still prefer to construe
_quem_ as a strong relative, making a pause between _quis_ and _quem_.
_Visionem_: Simply another trans. of [Greek: phantasia]. _Ut Carneades_:
see Sext. _A.M._ VII. 166 [Greek: ten te pithanen phantasian kai ten
pithanen hama kai aperispaston kai diexodeumenen] (R. and P. 411). As the
trans. of the latter phrase in Zeller 524 "probable undisputed and tested"
is imperfect, I will give Sextus' own explanation. The merely [Greek:
pithane] is that sensation which at first sight, without any further
inquiry, seems probably true (Sext. _A.M._ VII. 167--175). Now no sensation
is perceived _alone_; the percipient subject has always other synchronous
sensations which are able to turn him aside ([Greek: perispan, perielkein])
from the one which is the immediate object of his attention. This last is
only called [Greek: aperispastos] when examination has shown all the
concomitant sensations to be in harmony with it. (Sext. as above 175--181.)
The word "undisputed," therefore, is a misleading trans. of the term. The
[Greek: diexodeumene] ("thoroughly explored") requires more than a mere
apparent agreement of the concomitant sensations with the principal one.
Circumstances quite external to the sensations themselves must be examined;
the time at which they occur, or during which they continue; the condition
of the space within which they occur, and the apparent intervals between
the person and the objects; the state of the air; the disposition of the
person's mind, and the soundness or unsoundness of his eyes (Sext.
181--189).

Sec.34. _Communitas_: [Greek: aparallaxia] or [Greek: epimixia ton
phantasion]; Sext. _A.M._ VII. 403, _P.H._ I. 127. _Proprium_: so Sext.
often uses [Greek: idioma], e.g. _A. M._ IX. 410. _Signo notari_: _signo_
for _nota_, merely from love of variety. The _in_ before _communi_, though
bracketed by Halm after Manut., Lamb. is perfectly sound; it means "within
the limits of," and is so used after _notare_ in _De Or._, III. 186.
_Convicio_: so Madv. _Em._ 143 corrected the corrupt MSS. readings,
comparing _Orator_ 160, _Ad Fam._ XV. 18. A.W. Zumpt on _Pro Murena_ 13
rightly defines the Ciceronian use of the word, "_Non unum maledictum
appellatur convicium sed multorum verborum quasi vociferatio_." He is wrong
however in thinking that Cic. only uses the word _once_ in the plural (_Ad
Att._ II. 18, 1), for it occurs _N.D._ II. 20, and elsewhere. _Perspicua_:
[Greek: enarge], a term used with varying signification by all the later
Greek schools. _Verum illud quidem_: "which is indeed what _they_ call
'true'." _Impressum_: n. on 18. _Percipi atque comprehendi_: Halm retains
the barbarous _ac_ of the MSS. before the guttural. It is quite impossible
that Cic. could have written it. The two verbs are both trans. of [Greek:
katalambanesthai]; Cic. proceeds as usual on the principle thus described
in _D.F._ III. 14 _erit notius quale sit, pluribus notatum vocabulis idem
declarantibus_. _Subtiliter_: Cic.'s constant trans. of [Greek: akribos] or
[Greek: kat' akribeian] (_passim_ in Sext. e.g. _P.H._ II. 123).
_Inaniterne moveatur_: MSS. agree in _ve_ for _ne_, on which see _M.D.F._
IV. 76. _Inaniter_ = [Greek: kenos] = [Greek: pseudos]. Cf. n. on I. 35,
also II. 47, _D.F._ V. 3 (_inaniter moveri_), _T.D._ IV. 13, _De Div._ II.
120, 126, 140 (_per se moveri_), Greek [Greek: kenopathein] (Sext. _P.H._
II. 49), [Greek: kenopatheia] (= _inanis motus_, Sext. _A.M._ VIII. 184),
[Greek: kenopathemata kai anaplasmata tes dianoias] (_ib._ VIII. 354),
[Greek: diakenos helkysmos] (_ib._ VII. 241), [Greek: diakenos phantasia]
(_ib._ VIII. 67), and the frequent phrase [Greek: kinema tes dianoias]. For
the meaning see n. on 47. _Relinquitur_: so in Sext. [Greek: apoleipein] is
constantly used as the opposite of [Greek: anairein] (_tollere_).

Sec.35. _Neminem_ etc.: they are content to make strong statements without any
mark of certainty. _Primo quasi adspectu_: the _merely_ [Greek: pithane
phantasia] is here meant; see 33.

Sec.36. _Ex circumspectione_, etc.: the [Greek: diexodeumene]; see n. on 33.
_Primum quia ... deinde_: for the slight anacoluthia, cf. _M.D.F_ ed. II.
p. 796. _Iis visis_, etc.: i.e. if you have a number of _things_, emitting
a number of _appearances_, and you cannot be sure of uniting each
_appearance_ to the _thing_ from which it proceeds, then you can have no
faith in any _appearance_ even if you have gone through the process
required by Carneades' rules. _Ad verum ipsum_: cf. 40. _Quam proxime_: cf.
47, and also 7. _Insigne_: [Greek: semeion], the same as _nota_ and
_signum_ above. _Quo obscurato_: so Lamb. for MSS. _obscuro_ which Halm
keeps. Cf. _quam obscurari volunt_ in 42 and _quo sublato_ in 33.
_Argumentum_: Cic. seems to be thinking of the word [Greek: tekmerion],
which, however, the Stoics hardly use. _Id quod significatur_: [Greek: to
semeionton] in Sext.

    Sec.Sec.37--40. Summary The distinction of an animal is to act. You must
    either therefore deprive it of sensation, or allow it to assent to
    phenomena (37). Mind, memory, the arts and virtue itself, require a
    firm assent to be given to some phenomena, he therefore who does away
    with assent does away with all action in life (38, 39).

Sec.37. _Explicabamus_: 19--21 and 30 (_quae vis esset in sensibus_).
_Inanimum_: not _inanimatum_, cf. _M.D.F_. IV. 36. _Agit aliquid_: I. 23.
_Quae est in nostra_: Walker's insertion of _non_ before _est_ is needless,
cf. n. on I. 40. It is the impact of the sensation from without, not the
assent given to it, that is involuntary (Sext. _A.M._ VIII. 397 [Greek: to
men gar phantasiothenai abouleton en]). For _in potestate_ cf. _De Fato_ 9,
_N.D._ I. 69

Sec.38. _Eripitur_: cf. 30. _Neque sentire_: Christ om. _neque_; but the
sceptics throughout are supposed to rob people of their senses. _Cedere_:
cf. [Greek: eikein, eixis] in Sext. _P.H._ I. 193, 230, Diog. VII. 51,
[Greek: ton de aisthetikon meta eixeos kai synkatatheseos ginontai [hai
phantasia]]; also 66 of this book. [Greek: Oikeion]: cf. 34. _Adsentitur
statim_: this really contradicts a good deal that has gone before, esp. 20.
_Memoriam_: cf. 22. _In nostra potestate_: this may throw light on fragm.
15 of the _Ac. Post._, which see.

Sec.39. _Virtus_: even the Stoics, who were fatalists as a rule, made moral
action depend on the freedom of the will; see n. on I. 40. _Ante videri
aliquid_ for the doctrine cf. 25, for the passive use of _videri_, n. on
25. _Adsentiatur_: the passive use is illustrated by Madv. _Em._ 131, the
change of construction from infin. to subj. after _necesse est_ on _D.F._
V. 25. _Tollit e vita_: so _De Fato_ 29.

    Sec.Sec.40--42. Summary. The Academics have a regular method. They first give
    a general definition of sensation, and then lay down the different
    classes of sensations. Then they put forward their two strong
    arguments, (1) _things_ which produce _sensations_ such as might have
    been produced in the same form by other _things_, cannot be partly
    capable of being perceived, partly not capable, (2) _sensations_ must
    be assumed to be of the same form if our faculties do not enable us to
    distinguish between them. Then they proceed. Sensations are partly
    true, partly false, the false cannot of course be real _perceptions_,
    while the true are always of a form which the false _may_ assume. Now
    sensations which are indistinguishable from false cannot be partly
    perceptions, partly not. There is therefore no sensation which is also
    a perception (40). Two admissions, they say, are universally made, (1)
    false sensations cannot be perceptions, (2) sensations which are
    indistinguishable from false, cannot be partly perceptions, partly not.
    The following two assertions they strive to prove, (1) sensations are
    partly true, partly false, (2) every sensation which proceeds from a
    reality, has a form which it might have if it proceeded from an
    unreality (41). To prove these propositions, they divide perceptions
    into those which are sensations, and those which are deduced from
    sensations; after which they show that credit cannot be given to either
    class (42). [The word "perception" is used to mean "a certainly known
    sensation."]

Sec.40. _Quasi fundamenta_: a trans. probably of [Greek: themelios] or the
like; cf. [Greek: hosper themelios] in Sext. _A.M._ V. 50. _Artem_: method,
like [Greek: techne], cf. _M.D.F._ III. 4, Mayor on Iuv. VII. 177. _Vim_:
the general character which attaches to all [Greek: phantasiai]; _genera_
the different classes of [Greek: phantasiai]. _Totidem verbis_: of course
with a view to showing that nothing really corresponded to the definition.
Carneades largely used the _reductio ad absurdum_ method. _Contineant ...
quaestionem_: cf. 22 and _T.D._ IV. 65 _una res videtur causam continere_.
_Quae ita_: it is essential throughout this passage to distinguish clearly
the _sensation_ (_visum_) from the _thing_ which causes it. Here the
_things_ are meant; two _things_ are supposed to cause two _sensations_ so
similar that the person who has one of the _sensations_ cannot tell from
which of the two _things_ it comes. Under these circumstances the sceptics
urge that it is absurd to divide _things_ into those which can be perceived
(known with certainty) and those which cannot. _Nihil interesse autem_: the
sceptic is not concerned to prove the absolute similarity of the two
sensations which come from the two dissimilar things, it is enough if he
can show that human faculties are not perfect enough to discern whatever
difference may exist, cf. 85. _Alia vera sunt_: Numenius in Euseb. _Pr.
Ev._ XIV. 8, 4 says Carneades allowed that truth and falsehood (or reality
and unreality) could be affirmed of _things_, though not of _sensations_.
If we could only pierce _through_ a sensation and arrive at its source, we
should be able to tell whether to believe the sensation or not. As we
cannot do this, it is wrong to assume that _sensation_ and _thing_
correspond. Cf. Sext. _P.H._ I. 22 [Greek: peri men tou phaisthai toion e
toion to hypokeimenon] (i.e. the thing from which the appearance proceeds)
[Greek: oudeis isos amphisbetei, peri de tou ei toiouton estin hopoion
phainetai zeteitai]. Neither Carneades nor Arcesilas ever denied, as some
modern sceptics have done, the actual existence of things which cause
sensations, they simply maintained that, granting the existence of the
things, our sensations do not give us correct information about them.
_Eiusdem modi_: cf. 33 _eodem modo_. _Non posse accidere_: this is a very
remarkable, and, as Madv. (_D.F._ I. 30) thinks, impossible, change from
_recta oratio to obliqua_. Halm with Manut. reads _potest_. Cf. 101.

Sec.41. _Neque enim_: a remark of Lucullus' merely. _Quod sit a vero_: cf.
Munio on Lucr. II. 51 _fulgor ab auro_. _Possit_: for the om. of _esse_ cf.
n. on I. 29.

Sec.42. _Proposita_: cf. [Greek: protaseis] _passim_ in Sext. _In sensus_: =
_in ea, quae ad sensus pertinent_ cf. I. 20. _Omni consuetudine_: "general
experience" [Greek: empeiria], cf. _N.D._ I. 83. _Quam obscurari volunt_:
cf. I. 33. _quod explanari volebant_; the em. of Dav. _obscurare_ is
against Cic.'s usage, that of Christ _quam observari nolunt_ is wanton
without being ingenious. _De reliquis_: i.e. _iis quae a sensibus
ducuntur_. _In singulisque rebus_: the word _rebus_ must mean _subjects_,
not _things_, to which the words _in minima dispertiunt_ would hardly
apply. _Adiuncta_: Sext. _A.M._ VII. 164 (R. and P. 410) [Greek: pasei te
dokousei alethei kathestanai eurisketai tis aparallaktos pseudes], also
VII. 438, etc.

    Sec.Sec.43--45. Summary. The sceptics ought not to _define_, for (1) a
    definition cannot be a definition of two things, (2) if the definition
    is applicable only to one thing, that thing must be capable of being
    thoroughly known and distinguished from others (43). For the purposes
    of reasoning their _probabile_ is not enough. Reasoning can only
    proceed upon _certain_ premisses. Again to say that there are false
    sensations is to say that there are true ones; you acknowledge
    therefore a difference, then you contradict yourselves and say there is
    none (44). Let us discuss the matter farther. The innate clearness of
    _visa_, aided by reason, can lead to knowledge (45).

Sec.43. _Horum_: Lamb. _harum_; the text however is quite right, cf. Madv.
_Gram._ 214 b. _Luminibus_: cf. 101. _Nihilo magis_: = [Greek: ouden
mallon], which was constantly in the mouths of sceptics, see e.g. Sext.
_P.H._ I. 14. _Num illa definitio ... transferri_: I need hardly point out
that the [Greek: horos] of the Academics was merely founded on probability,
just as their "truth" was (cf. n. on 29). An Academic would say in reply to
the question, "probably it cannot, but I will not affirm it." _Vel illa
vera_: these words seem to me genuine, though nearly all editors attack
them. _Vel_ = "even" i.e. if _even_ the definition is firmly known, the
thing, which is more important, must also be known. In _illa vera_ we have
a pointed mocking repetition like that of _veri et falsi_ in 33. _In
falsum_: note that _falsum_ = _aliam rem_ above. For the sense cf. Sext.
_P.H._ II. 209 [Greek: mochtherous horous einai tous periechontas ti ton me
prosonton tois horistois], and the schoolmen's maxim _definitio non debet
latior esse definito suo_. _Minime volunt_: cf. 18. _Partibus_: Orelli
after Goer. ejected this, but _omnibus_ hardly ever stands for _omn.
rebus_, therefore C.F. Hermann reads _pariter rebus_ for _partibus_. A
little closer attention to the subject matter would have shown emendation
to be unnecessary, cf. 42 _dividunt in partis_, _T.D._ III. 24, where
_genus_ = division, _pars_ = subdivision.

Sec.44. _Impediri ... fatebuntur_: essentially the same argument as in 33 at
the end. _Occurretur_: not an imitation of [Greek: enantiousthai] as Goer.
says, but of [Greek: apantan], which occurs very frequently in Sext.
_Sumpta_: the two premisses are in Gk. called together [Greek: lemmata],
separately [Greek: lemma] and [Greek: proslepsis] (_sumptio et adsumptio_
_De Div_ II. 108). _Orationis_: as Faber points out, Cic. does sometimes
use this word like _ratio_ ([Greek: syllogismos]), cf. _De Leg._ I. 48
_conclusa oratio_. Fab. refers to Gell. XV. 26. _Profiteatur_: so [Greek:
hypischneisthai] is often used by Sext. e.g. _A.M._ VIII. 283.
_Patefacturum_: n. on 26, [Greek: ekkalyptein, ekkalyptikos, delotikos]
(the last in Sext. _A.M._ VIII. 277) often recur in Greek. _Primum esse ...
nihil interesse_: there is no inconsistency. Carneades allowed that _visa_,
_in themselves_, might be true or false, but affirmed that human faculties
were incapable of distinguishing those _visa_ which proceed from real
things and give a correct representation of the things, from those which
either are mere phantoms or, having a real source, do not correctly
represent it. Lucullus confuses _essential_ with _apparent_ difference.
_Non iungitur_: a supposed case of [Greek: diartesis], which is opposed to
[Greek: synartesis] and explained in Sext. _A.M._ VIII. 430.

Sec.45. _Assentati_: here simply = _assensi_. _Praeteritis_: here used in the
strong participial sense, "in the class of things passed over," cf. _in
remissis_ _Orat._ 59. _Primum igitur ... sed tamen_: for the slight
anacoluthia cf. Madv. _Gram._ 480. _Iis qui videntur_: Goer. _is qui
videtur_, which is severely criticised by Madv. _Em._ 150. For Epicurus'
view of sensation see n. on 79, 80.

    Sec.Sec.46--48. Summary. The refusal of people to assent to the innate
    clearness of some phenomena ([Greek: enargeia]) is due to two causes,
    (1) they do not make a serious endeavour to see the light by which
    these phenomena are surrounded, (2) their faith is shaken by sceptic
    paradoxes (46). The sceptics argue thus: you allow that mere phantom
    sensations are often seen in dreams, why then do you not allow what is
    easier, that two sensations caused by two really existing things may be
    mistaken the one for the other? (47). Further, they urge that a phantom
    sensation produces very often the same effect as a real one. The
    dogmatists say they admit that mere phantom sensations _do_ command
    assent. Why should they not admit that they command assent when they so
    closely resemble real ones as to be indistinguishable from them? (48)

Sec.46. _Circumfusa sint_: Goer. retains the MSS. _sunt_ on the ground that
the clause _quanta sint_ is inserted [Greek: parenthetikos]! Orelli
actually follows him. For the phrase cf. 122 _circumfusa tenebris_.
_Interrogationibus_: cf. I. 5 where I showed that the words _interrogatio_
and _conclusio_ are convertible. I may add that in Sextus pure syllogisms
are very frequently called [Greek: eroteseis], and that he often introduces
a new argument by [Greek: erotatai kai touto], when there is nothing
interrogatory about the argument at all. _Dissolvere_: [Greek: apolyesthai]
in Sext. _Occurrere_: cf. 44.

Sec.47. _Confuse loqui_: the mark of a bad dialectician, affirmed of Epicurus
in _D.F._ II. 27. _Nulla sunt_: on the use of _nullus_ for _non_ in Cic.
cf. Madv. _Gram._ 455 obs. 5. The usage is mostly colloquial and is very
common in Plaut. and Terence, while in Cic. it occurs mostly in the
Letters. _Inaniter_: cf. 34. There are two ways in which a sensation may be
false, (1) it may come from one really existent thing, but be supposed by
the person who feels it to be caused by a totally different thing, (2) it
may be a mere [Greek: phantasma] or [Greek: anaplasma tes dianoias], a
phantom behind which there is no reality at all. _Quae in somnis
videantur_: for the support given by Stoics to all forms of divination see
Zeller 166, _De Div._ I. 7, etc. _Quaerunt_: a slight anacoluthon from
_dicatis_ above. _Quonam modo ... nihil sit omnino_: this difficult passage
can only be properly explained in connection with 50 and with the general
plan of the Academics expounded in 41. After long consideration I elucidate
it as follows. The whole is an attempt to prove the proposition announced
in 41 and 42 viz. _omnibus veris visis adiuncta esse falsa_. The criticism
in 50 shows that the argument is meant to be based on the assumption known
to be Stoic, _omnia deum posse_. If the god can manufacture (_efficere_)
sensations which are false, but probable (as the Stoics say he does in
dreams), why can he not manufacture false sensations which are so probable
as to closely resemble true ones, or to be only with difficulty
distinguishable from the true, or finally to be utterly indistinguishable
from the true (this meaning of _inter quae nihil sit omnino_ is fixed by
40, where see n.)? _Probabilia_, then, denotes false sensations such as
have only a slight degree of resemblance to the true, by the three
succeeding stages the resemblance is made complete. The word _probabilia_
is a sort of tertiary predicate after _efficere_ ("to manufacture so as to
be probable"). It _must not be repeated_ after the second _efficere_, or
the whole sense will be inverted and this section placed out of harmony
with 50. _Plane proxime_: = _quam proxime_ of 36.

Sec.48. _Ipsa per sese_: simply = _inaniter_ as in 34, 47, i.e. without the
approach of any external object. _Cogitatione_: the only word in Latin, as
[Greek: dianoia] is in Greek, to express our "imagination." _Non numquam_:
so Madv. for MSS. _non inquam_. Goer. after Manut. wrote _non inquiunt_
with an interrogation at _omnino_. _Veri simile est_: so Madv. _D.F._ III.
58 for _sit_. The argument has the same purpose as that in the last
section, viz to show that phantom sensations may produce the same effect on
the mind as those which proceed from realities. _Ut si qui_: the _ut_ here
is merely "as," "for instance," cf. n. on 33. _Nihil ut esset_: the _ut_
here is a repetition of the _ut_ used several times in the early part of
the sentence, all of them alike depend on _sic_. Lamb. expunged _ut_ before
_esset_ and before _quicquam_. _Intestinum et oblatum_: cf. Sext. _A.M._
VII. 241 [Greek: etoi ton ektos e ton en hemin pathon], and the two classes
of _falsa visa_ mentioned in n. on 47. _Sin autem sunt_, etc.: if there
_are_ false sensations which are probable (as the Stoics allow), why should
there not be false sensations so probable as to be with difficulty
distinguishable from the true? The rest exactly as in 47.

    Sec.Sec.49--53. Antiochus attacked these arguments as _soritae_, and
    therefore faulty (49). The admission of a certain amount of similarity
    between true and false sensations does not logically lead to the
    impossibility of distinguishing between the true and the false (50). We
    contend that these phantom sensations lack that self evidence which we
    require before giving assent. When we have wakened from the dream, we
    make light of the sensations we had while in it (51). But, say our
