the Captain of Clan Ranald, with the Stewarts of Appin, the Clan Gregor,
the Clan M'Nab, and other tribes of inferior distinction. By these
means, Montrose's army was so formidably increased, that Argyle cared no
longer to remain in the command of that opposed to him, but returned to
Edinburgh, and there threw up his commission, under pretence that his
army was not supplied with reinforcements and provisions in the manner
in which they ought to have been. From thence the Marquis returned to
Inverary, there, in full security, to govern his feudal vassals, and
patriarchal followers, and to repose himself in safety on the faith of
the Clan proverb already quoted--"It is a far cry to Lochow."



CHAPTER XVI.

     Such mountains steep, such craggy hills,
     His army on one side enclose:
     The other side, great griesly gills
     Did fence with fenny mire and moss.

     Which when the Earl understood,
     He council craved of captains all,
     Who bade set forth with mournful mood,
     And take such fortune as would fall.
     --FLODDEN FIELD, AN ANCIENT POEM.

Montrose had now a splendid career in his view, provided he could obtain
the consent of his gallant, but desultory troops, and their independent
chieftains. The Lowlands lay open before him without an army adequate to
check his career; for Argyle's followers had left the Covenanters' host
when their master threw up his commission, and many other troops, tired
of the war, had taken the same opportunity to disband themselves. By
descending Strath-Tay, therefore, one of the most convenient passes from
the Highlands, Montrose had only to present himself in the Lowlands, in
order to rouse the slumbering spirit of chivalry and of loyalty which
animated the gentlemen to the north of the Forth. The possession of
these districts, with or without a victory, would give him the command
of a wealthy and fertile part of the kingdom, and would enable him, by
regular pay, to place his army on a permanent footing, to penetrate as
far as the capital, perhaps from thence to the Border, where he deemed
it possible to communicate with the yet unsubdued forces of King
Charles.

Such was the plan of operations by which the truest glory was to be
acquired, and the most important success insured for the royal cause.
Accordingly it did not escape the ambitious and daring spirit of him
whose services had already acquired him the title of the Great Marquis.
But other motives actuated many of his followers, and perhaps were not
without their secret and unacknowledged influence upon his own feelings.

The Western Chiefs in Montrose's army, almost to a man, regarded the
Marquis of Argyle as the most direct and proper object of hostilities.
Almost all of them had felt his power; almost all, in withdrawing their
fencible men from their own glens, left their families and property
exposed to his vengeance; all, without exception, were desirous
of diminishing his sovereignty; and most of them lay so near his
territories, that they might reasonably hope to be gratified by a share
of his spoil. To these Chiefs the possession of Inverary and its castle
was an event infinitely more important and desirable than the capture
of Edinburgh. The latter event could only afford their clansmen a little
transitory pay or plunder; the former insured to the Chiefs themselves
indemnity for the past, and security for the future. Besides these
personal reasons, the leaders, who favoured this opinion, plausibly
urged, that though, at his first descent into the Lowlands, Montrose
might be superior to the enemy, yet every day's march he made from the
hills must diminish his own forces, and expose him to the accumulated
superiority of any army which the Covenanters could collect from the
Lowland levies and garrisons. On the other hand, by crushing Argyle
effectually, he would not only permit his present western friends to
bring out that proportion of their forces which they must otherwise
leave at home for protection of their families; but farther, he would
draw to his standard several tribes already friendly to his cause, but
who were prevented from joining him by fear of M'Callum More.

These arguments, as we have already hinted, found something responsive
in Montrose's own bosom, not quite consonant with the general heroism
of his character. The houses of Argyle and Montrose had been in former
times, repeatedly opposed to each other in war and in politics, and the
superior advantages acquired by the former, had made them the subject
of envy and dislike to the neighbouring family, who, conscious of equal
desert, had not been so richly rewarded. This was not all. The existing
heads of these rival families had stood in the most marked opposition to
each other since the commencement of the present troubles.

Montrose, conscious of the superiority of his talents, and of having
rendered great service to the Covenanters at the beginning of the war,
had expected from that party the supereminence of council and command,
which they judged it safer to intrust to the more limited faculties,
and more extensive power, of his rival Argyle. The having awarded this
preference, was an injury which Montrose never forgave the Covenanters;
and he was still less likely to extend his pardon to Argyle, to whom
he had been postponed. He was therefore stimulated by every feeling of
hatred which could animate a fiery temper in a fierce age, to seek for
revenge upon the enemy of his house and person; and it is probable that
these private motives operated not a little upon his mind, when he found
the principal part of his followers determined rather to undertake an
expedition against the territories of Argyle, than to take the far more
decisive step of descending at once into the Lowlands.

Yet whatever temptation Montrose found to carry into effect his attack
upon Argyleshire, he could not easily bring himself to renounce the
splendid achievement of a descent upon the Lowlands. He held more than
one council with the principal Chiefs, combating, perhaps, his own
secret inclination as well as theirs. He laid before them the extreme
difficulty of marching even a Highland army from the eastward into
Argyleshire, through passes scarcely practicable for shepherds and
deer-stalkers, and over mountains, with which even the clans lying
nearest to them did not pretend to be thoroughly acquainted. These
difficulties were greatly enhanced by the season of the year, which was
now advancing towards December, when the mountain-passes, in themselves
so difficult, might be expected to be rendered utterly impassable by
snowstorms. These objections neither satisfied nor silenced the Chiefs,
who insisted upon their ancient mode of making war, by driving the
cattle, which, according to the Gaelic phrase, "fed upon the grass
of their enemy." The council was dismissed late at night, and without
coming to any decision, excepting that the Chiefs, who supported the
opinion that Argyle should be invaded, promised to seek out among their
followers those who might be most capable of undertaking the office of
guides upon the expedition.

Montrose had retired to the cabin which served him for a tent, and
stretched himself upon a bed of dry fern, the only place of repose which
it afforded. But he courted sleep in vain, for the visions of ambition
excluded those of Morpheus. In one moment he imagined himself displaying
the royal banner from the reconquered Castle of Edinburgh, detaching
assistance to a monarch whose crown depended upon his success, and
receiving in requital all the advantages and preferments which could be
heaped upon him whom a king delighteth to honour. At another time
this dream, splendid as it was, faded before the vision of gratified
vengeance, and personal triumph over a personal enemy. To surprise
Argyle in his stronghold of Inverary--to crush in him at once the rival
of his own house and the chief support of the Presbyterians--to show
the Covenanters the difference between the preferred Argyle and the
postponed Montrose, was a picture too flattering to feudal vengeance to
be easily relinquished.

While he lay thus busied with contradictory thoughts and feelings, the
soldier who stood sentinel upon his quarters announced to the Marquis
that two persons desired to speak with his Excellency.

"Their names?" answered Montrose, "and the cause of their urgency at
such a late hour?"

On these points, the sentinel, who was one of Colkitto's Irishmen, could
afford his General little information; so that Montrose, who at such a
period durst refuse access to no one, lest he might have been neglecting
some important intelligence, gave directions, as a necessary precaution,
to put the guard under arms, and then prepared to receive his untimely
visitors. His groom of the chambers had scarce lighted a pair of
torches, and Montrose himself had scarce risen from his couch, when two
men entered, one wearing a Lowland dress, of shamoy leather worn almost
to tatters; the other a tall upright old Highlander, of a complexion
which might be termed iron-grey, wasted and worn by frost and tempest.

"What may be your commands with me, my friends?" said the Marquis, his
hand almost unconsciously seeking the but of one of his pistols; for
the period, as well as the time of night, warranted suspicions which the
good mien of his visitors was not by any means calculated to remove.

"I pray leave to congratulate you," said the Lowlander, "my most noble
General, and right honourable lord, upon the great battles which you
have achieved since I had the fortune to be detached from you, It was
a pretty affair that tuilzie at Tippermuir; nevertheless, if I might be
permitted to counsel--"

"Before doing so," said the Marquis, "will you be pleased to let me know
who is so kind as to favour me with his opinion?"

"Truly, my lord," replied the man, "I should have hoped that was
unnecessary, seeing it is not so long since I took on in your service,
under promise of a commission as Major, with half a dollar of daily pay
and half a dollar of arrears; and I am to trust your lordship has nut
forgotten my pay as well as my person?"

"My good friend, Major Dalgetty," said Montrose, who by this time
perfectly recollected his man, "you must consider what important things
have happened to put my friends' faces out of my memory, besides this
imperfect light; but all conditions shall be kept.--And what news from
Argyleshire, my good Major? We have long given you up for lost, and I
was now preparing to take the most signal vengeance upon the old fox who
infringed the law of arms in your person."

"Truly, my noble lord," said Dalgetty, "I have no desire that my return
should put any stop to so proper and becoming an intention; verily it
is in no shape in the Earl of Argyle's favour or mercy that I now stand
before you, and I shall be no intercessor for him. But my escape
is, under Heaven, and the excellent dexterity which, as an old and
accomplished cavalier, I displayed in effecting the same,--I say, under
these, it is owing to the assistance of this old Highlander, whom
I venture to recommend to your lordship's special favour, as the
instrument of saving your lordship's to command, Dugald Dalgetty of
Drumthwacket."

"A thankworthy service," said the Marquis, gravely, "which shall
certainly be requited in the manner it deserves."

"Kneel down, Ranald," said Major Dalgetty (as we must now call him),
"kneel down, and kiss his Excellency's hand."

The prescribed form of acknowledgment not being according to the custom
of Ranald's country, he contented himself with folding his arms on his
bosom, and making a low inclination of his head.

"This poor man, my lord," said Major Dalgetty, continuing his speech
with a dignified air of protection towards Ranald M'Eagh, "has strained
all his slender means to defend my person from mine enemies, although
having no better weapons of a missile sort than bows and arrows, whilk
your lordship will hardly believe."

"You will see a great many such weapons in my camp," said Montrose, "and
we find them serviceable." [In fact, for the admirers of archery it may
be stated, not only that many of the Highlanders in Montrose's army used
these antique missiles, but even in England the bow and quiver, once the
glory of the bold yeomen of that land, were occasionally used during the
great civil wars.]

"Serviceable, my lord!" said Dalgetty; "I trust your lordship will
permit me to be surprised--bows and arrows!--I trust you will forgive
my recommending the substitution of muskets, the first convenient
opportunity. But besides defending me, this honest Highlander also was
at the pains of curing me, in respect that I had got a touch of the
wars in my retreat, which merits my best requital in this special
introduction of him to your lordship's notice and protection."

"What is your name, my friend?" said Montrose, turning to the
Highlander.

"It may not be spoken," answered the mountaineer.

"That is to say," interpreted Major Dalgetty, "he desires to have his
name concealed, in respect he hath in former days taken a castle, slain
certain children, and done other things, whilk, as your good lordship
knows, are often practised in war time, but excite no benevolence
towards the perpetrator in the friends of those who sustain injury. I
have known, in my military experience, many brave cavaliers put to death
by the boors, simply for having used military license upon the country."

"I understand," said Montrose: "This person is at feud with some of our
followers. Let him retire to the court of guard, and we will think of
the best mode of protecting him."

"You hear, Ranald," said Major Dalgetty, with an air of superiority,
"his Excellency wishes to hold privy council with me, you must go to the
court of guard.--He does not know where that is, poor fellow!--he is
a young soldier for so old a man; I will put him under the charge of
a sentinel, and return to your lordship incontinent." He did so, and
returned accordingly.

Montrose's first enquiry respected the embassy to Inverary; and he
listened with attention to Dalgetty's reply, notwithstanding the
prolixity of the Major's narrative. It required an effort from the
Marquis to maintain his attention; but no one better knew, that where
information is to be derived from the report of such agents as Dalgetty,
it can only be obtained by suffering them to tell their story in their
own way. Accordingly the Marquis's patience was at length rewarded.
Among other spoils which the Captain thought himself at liberty to take,
was a packet of Argyle's private papers. These he consigned to the hands
of his General; a humour of accounting, however, which went no farther,
for I do not understand that he made any mention of the purse of gold
which he had appropriated at the same time that he made seizure of the
papers aforesaid. Snatching a torch from the wall, Montrose was in an
instant deeply engaged in the perusal of these documents, in which it is
probable he found something to animate his personal resentment against
his rival Argyle.

"Does he not fear me?" said he; "then he shall feel me. Will he fire my
castle of Murdoch?--Inverary shall raise the first smoke.--O for a guide
through the skirts of Strath-Fillan!"

Whatever might be Dalgetty's personal conceit, he understood his
business sufficiently to guess at Montrose's meaning. He instantly
interrupted his own prolix narration of the skirmish which had taken
place, and the wound he had received in his retreat, and began to speak
to the point which he saw interested his General.

"If," said he, "your Excellency wishes to make an infall into
Argyleshire, this poor man, Ranald, of whom I told you, together with
his children and companions, know every pass into that land, both
leading from the east and from the north."

"Indeed!" said Montrose; "what reason have you to believe their
knowledge so extensive?"

"So please your Excellency," answered Dalgetty, "during the weeks that I
remained with them for cure of my wound, they were repeatedly obliged
to shift their quarters, in respect of Argyle's repeated attempts to
repossess himself of the person of an officer who was honoured with Your
Excellency's confidence; so that I had occasion to admire the singular
dexterity and knowledge of the face of the country with which they
alternately achieved their retreat and their advance; and when, at
length, I was able to repair to your Excellency's standard, this honest
simple creature, Ranald MacEagh, guided me by paths which my steed
Gustavus (which your lordship may remember) trode with perfect safety,
so that I said to myself, that where guides, spies, or intelligencers,
were required in a Highland campaign in that western country, more
expert persons than he and his attendants could not possibly be
desired."

"And can you answer for this man's fidelity?" said Montrose; "what is
his name and condition?"

"He is an outlaw and robber by profession, something also of a homicide
or murderer," answered Dalgetty; "and by name, called Ranald MacEagh;
whilk signifies, Ranald, the Son of the Mist."

"I should remember something of that name," said Montrose, pausing: "Did
not these Children of the Mist perpetrate some act of cruelty upon the
M'Aulays?"

Major Dalgetty mentioned the circumstance of the murder of the forester,
and Montrose's active memory at once recalled all the circumstances of
the feud.

"It is most unlucky," said Montrose, "this inexpiable quarrel between
these men and the M'Aulays. Allan has borne himself bravely in these
wars, and possesses, by the wild mystery of his behaviour and
language, so much influence over the minds of his countrymen, that the
consequences of disobliging him might be serious. At the same time,
these men being so capable of rendering useful service, and being as you
say, Major Dalgetty, perfectly trustworthy--"

"I will pledge my pay and arrears, my horse and arms, my head and neck,
upon their fidelity," said the Major; "and your Excellency knows, that a
soldado could say no more for his own father."
