
Olinthus remained silent--the Egyptian laughed contemptuously.

'Dost thou claim the body of a priest of Isis as one of the Nazarene or
Christian sect?'

'I do.'

'Swear then by yon fane, yon statue of Cybele, by yon most ancient
sacellum in Pompeii, that the dead man embraced your faith!'

'Vain man!  I disown your idols!  I abhor your temples!  How can I swear
by Cybele then?'

'Away, away with the Atheist! away! the earth will swallow us, if we
suffer these blasphemers in a sacred grove--away with him to death!'

'To the beasts!' added a female voice in the centre of the crowd; 'we
shall have one a-piece now for the lion and tiger!'

'If, O Nazarene, thou disbelievest in Cybele, which of our gods dost
thou own?' resumed the soldier, unmoved by the cries around.

'None!'

'Hark to him! hark!' cried the crowd.

'O vain and blind!' continued the Christian, raising his voice: 'can you
believe in images of wood and stone?  Do you imagine that they have eyes
to see, or ears to hear, or hands to help ye?  Is yon mute thing carved
by man's art a goddess!--hath it made mankind?--alas! by mankind was it
made. Lo! convince yourself of its nothingness--of your folly.'

And as he spoke he strode across to the fane, and ere any of the
bystanders were aware of his purpose, he, in his compassion or his zeal,
struck the statue of wood from its pedestal.

'See!' cried he, 'your goddess cannot avenge herself.  Is this a thing
to worship?'

Further words were denied to him: so gross and daring a sacrilege--of
one, too, of the most sacred of their places of worship--filled even the
most lukewarm with rage and horror.  With one accord the crowd rushed
upon him, seized, and but for the interference of the centurion, they
would have torn him to pieces.

'Peace!' said the soldier, authoritatively--'refer we this insolent
blasphemer to the proper tribunal--time has been already wasted.  Bear
we both the culprits to the magistrates; place the body of the priest on
the litter--carry it to his own home.'

At this moment a priest of Isis stepped forward.  'I claim these
remains, according to the custom of the priesthood.'

'The flamen be obeyed,' said the centurion.  'How is the murderer?'

'Insensible or asleep.'

'Were his crimes less, I could pity him.  On!'

Arbaces, as he turned, met the eye of that priest of Isis--it was
Calenus; and something there was in that glance, so significant and
sinister, that the Egyptian muttered to himself:

'Could he have witnessed the deed?'

A girl darted from the crowd, and gazed hard on the face of Olinthus.
'By Jupiter, a stout knave!  I say, we shall have a man for the tiger
now; one for each beast!'

'Ho!' shouted the mob; 'a man for the lion, and another for the tiger!
What luck!  Io Paean!'



Chapter VII

IN WHICH THE READER LEARNS THE CONDITION OF GLAUCUS.  FRIENDSHIP TESTED.
ENMITY SOFTENED.  LOVE THE SAME, BECAUSE THE ONE LOVING IS BLIND.

THE night was somewhat advanced, and the gay lounging places of the
Pompeians were still crowded.  You might observe in the countenances of
the various idlers a more earnest expression than usual.  They talked in
large knots and groups, as if they sought by numbers to divide the
half-painful, half-pleasurable anxiety which belonged to the subject
on which they conversed: it was a subject of life and death.

A young man passed briskly by the graceful portico of the Temple of
Fortune--so briskly, indeed, that he came with no slight force full
against the rotund and comely form of that respectable citizen Diomed,
who was retiring homeward to his suburban villa.

'Holloa!' groaned the merchant, recovering with some difficulty his
equilibrium; 'have you no eyes? or do you think I have no feeling? By
Jupiter! you have well nigh driven out the divine particle; such another
shock, and my soul will be in Hades!'

'Ah, Diomed! is it you?  forgive my inadvertence.  I was absorbed in
thinking of the reverses of life.  Our poor friend, Glaucus, eh! who
could have guessed it?'

'Well, but tell me, Clodius, is he really to be tried by the senate?'

'Yes; they say the crime is of so extraordinary a nature that the senate
itself must adjudge it; and so the lictors are to induct him formally.'

'He has been accused publicly, then?'

'To be sure; where have you been not to hear that?'

'Why, I have only just returned from Neapolis, whither I went on
business the very morning after his crime--so shocking, and at my house
the same night that it happened!'

'There is no doubt of his guilt,' said Clodius, shrugging his shoulders;
'and as these crimes take precedence of all little undignified
peccadilloes, they will hasten to finish the sentence previous to the
games.'

'The games!  Good gods!' replied Diomed, with a slight shudder: 'can
they adjudge him to the beasts?--so young, so rich!'

'True; but then he is a Greek.  Had he been a Roman, it would have been
a thousand pities.  These foreigners can be borne with in their
prosperity; but in adversity we must not forget that they are in reality
slaves. However, we of the upper classes are always tender-hearted; and
he would certainly get off tolerably well if he were left to us: for,
between ourselves, what is a paltry priest of Isis!--what Isis herself?
But the common people are superstitious; they clamor for the blood of
the sacrilegious one.  It is dangerous not to give way to public
opinion.'

'And the blasphemer--the Christian, or Nazarene, or whatever else he be
called?'

'Oh, poor dog! if he will sacrifice to Cybele or Isis, he will be
pardoned--if not, the tiger has him.  At least, so I suppose; but the
trial will decide.  We talk while the urn's still empty.  And the Greek
may yet escape the deadly Theta of his own alphabet.  But enough of this
gloomy subject.  How is the fair Julia?'

'Well, I fancy.'

'Commend me to her.  But hark! the door yonder creaks on its hinges; it
is the house of the praetor.  Who comes forth?  By Pollux! it is the
Egyptian! What can he want with our official friend!'

'Some conference touching the murder, doubtless,' replied Diomed; 'but
what was supposed to be the inducement to the crime? Glaucus was to have
married the priest's sister.'

'Yes: some say Apaecides refused the alliance.  It might have been a
sudden quarrel.  Glaucus was evidently drunk--nay, so much so as to
have been quite insensible when taken up, and I hear is still
delirious--whether with wine, terror, remorse, the Furies, or the
Bacchanals, I cannot say.'

'Poor fellow!--he has good counsel?'

'The best--Caius Pollio, an eloquent fellow enough.  Pollio has been
hiring all the poor gentlemen and well-born spendthrifts of Pompeii to
dress shabbily and sneak about, swearing their friendship to Glaucus
(who would not have spoken to them to be made emperor!--I will do him
justice, he was a gentleman in his choice of acquaintance), and trying
to melt the stony citizens into pity.  But it will not do; Isis is
mightily popular just at this moment.'

'And, by-the-by, I have some merchandise at Alexandria.  Yes, Isis ought
to be protected.'

'True; so farewell, old gentleman: we shall meet soon; if not, we must
have a friendly bet at the Amphitheatre.  All my calculations are
confounded by this cursed misfortune of Glaucus!  He had bet on Lydon
the gladiator; I must make up my tablets elsewhere.  Vale!'

Leaving the less active Diomed to regain his villa, Clodius strode on,
humming a Greek air, and perfuming the night with the odorous that
steamed from his snowy garments and flowing locks.

'If,' thought he, 'Glaucus feed the lion, Julia will no longer have a
person to love better than me; she will certainly doat on me--and so, I
suppose, I must marry.  By the gods! the twelve lines begin to fail--men
look suspiciously at my hand when it rattles the dice. That infernal
Sallust insinuates cheating; and if it be discovered that the ivory is
clogged, why farewell to the merry supper and the perfumed
billet--Clodius is undone! Better marry, then, while I may, renounce
gaming, and push my fortune (or rather the gentle Julia's) at the
imperial court.'

Thus muttering the schemes of his ambition, if by that high name the
projects of Clodius may be called, the gamester found himself suddenly
accosted; he turned and beheld the dark brow of Arbaces.

'Hail, noble Clodius! pardon my interruption; and inform me, I pray you,
which is the house of Sallust?'

'It is but a few yards hence, wise Arbaces.  But does Sallust entertain
to-night?'

'I know not,' answered the Egyptian; 'nor am I, perhaps, one of those
whom he would seek as a boon companion.  But thou knowest that his house
holds the person of Glaucus, the murderer.'

'Ay! he, good-hearted epicure, believes in the Greek's innocence!  You
remind me that he has become his surety; and, therefore, till the trial,
is responsible for his appearance.' Well, Sallust's house is better than
a prison, especially that wretched hole in the forum.  But for what can
you seek Glaucus?'

'Why, noble Clodius, if we could save him from execution it would be
well. The condemnation of the rich is a blow upon society itself.  I
should like to confer with him--for I hear he has recovered his
senses--and ascertain the motives of his crime; they may be so
extenuating as to plead in his defence.'

'You are benevolent, Arbaces.'

'Benevolence is the duty of one who aspires to wisdom,' replied the
Egyptian, modestly.  'Which way lies Sallust's mansion?'

'I will show you,' said Clodius, 'if you will suffer me to accompany you
a few steps.  But, pray what has become of the poor girl who was to have
wed the Athenian--the sister of the murdered priest?'

'Alas! well-nigh insane!  Sometimes she utters imprecations on the
murderer--then suddenly stops short--then cries, "But why curse? Oh, my
brother! Glaucus was not thy murderer--never will I believe it!" Then
she begins again, and again stops short, and mutters awfully to herself,
"Yet if it were indeed he?"'

'Unfortunate Ione!'

'But it is well for her that those solemn cares to the dead which
religion enjoins have hitherto greatly absorbed her attention from
Glaucus and herself: and, in the dimness of her senses, she scarcely
seems aware that Glaucus is apprehended and on the eve of trial.  When
the funeral rites due to Apaecides are performed, her apprehension will
return; and then I fear me much that her friends will be revolted by
seeing her run to succour and aid the murderer of her brother!'

'Such scandal should be prevented.'

'I trust I have taken precautions to that effect.  I am her lawful
guardian, and have just succeeded in obtaining permission to escort her,
after the funeral of Apaecides, to my own house; there, please the gods!
she will be secure.'

'You have done well, sage Arbaces.  And, now, yonder is the house of
Sallust.  The gods keep you!  Yet, hark you, Arbaces--why so gloomy and
unsocial?  Men say you can be gay--why not let me initiate you into the
pleasures of Pompeii?--I flatter myself no one knows them better.'

'I thank you, noble Clodius: under your auspices I might venture, I
think, to wear the philyra: but, at my age, I should be an awkward
pupil.'

'Oh, never fear; I have made converts of fellows of seventy.  The rich,
too, are never old.'

'You flatter me.  At some future time I will remind you of your
promise.'

'You may command Marcus Clodius at all times--and so, vale!'

'Now,' said the Egyptian, soliloquising, 'I am not wantonly a man of
blood; I would willingly save this Greek, if, by confessing the crime,
he will lose himself for ever to Ione, and for ever free me from the
chance of discovery; and I can save him by persuading Julia to own the
philtre, which will be held his excuse.  But if he do not confess the
crime, why, Julia must be shamed from the confession, and he must
die!--die, lest he prove my rival with the living--die, that he may be
my proxy with the dead!  Will he confess?--can he not be persuaded that
in his delirium he struck the blow? To me it would give far greater
safety than even his death.  Hem! we must hazard the experiment.'

Sweeping along the narrow street, Arbaces now approached the house of
Sallust, when he beheld a dark form wrapped in a cloak, and stretched at
length across the threshold of the door.

So still lay the figure, and so dim was its outline, that any other than
Arbaces might have felt a superstitious fear, lest he beheld one of
those grim lemures, who, above all other spots, haunted the threshold of
the homes they formerly possessed.  But not for Arbaces were such
dreams.

'Rise!' said he, touching the figure with his foot; 'thou obstructest
the way!'

'Ha! who art thou cried the form, in a sharp tone, and as she raised
herself from the ground, the starlight fell full on the pale face and
fixed but sightless eyes of Nydia the Thessalian.  'Who art thou?  I
know the burden of thy voice.'

'Blind girl! what dost thou here at this late hour?  Fie!--is this
seeming thy sex or years?  Home, girl!'

'I know thee,' said Nydia, in a low voice, 'thou art Arbaces the
Egyptian': then, as if inspired by some sudden impulse, she flung
herself at his feet, and clasping his knees, exclaimed, in a wild and
passionate tone, 'Oh dread and potent man! save him--save him! He is not
guilty--it is I!  He lies within, ill-dying, and I--I am the hateful
cause!  And they will not admit me to him--they spurn the blind girl
from the hall.  Oh, heal him! thou knowest some herb--some spell--some
countercharm, for it is a potion that hath wrought this frenzy!

'Hush, child!  I know all!--thou forgettest that I accompanied Julia to
the saga's home.  Doubtless her hand administered the draught; but her
reputation demands thy silence.  Reproach not thyself--what must be,
must: meanwhile, I seek the criminal--he may yet be saved. Away!'

Thus saying, Arbaces extricated himself from the clasp of the despairing
Thessalian, and knocked loudly at the door.

In a few moments the heavy bars were heard suddenly to yield, and the
porter, half opening the door, demanded who was there.

'Arbaces--important business to Sallust relative to Glaucus.  I come
from the praetor.'

The porter, half yawning, half groaning, admitted the tall form of the
Egyptian.  Nydia sprang forward.  'How is he?' she cried; 'tell me--tell
me!'

'Ho, mad girl! is it thou still?--for shame!  Why, they say he is
sensible.'

'The gods be praised!--and you will not admit me?  Ah! I beseech
thee...'

'Admit thee!--no.  A pretty salute I should prepare for these shoulders
were I to admit such things as thou!  Go home!'

The door closed, and Nydia, with a deep sigh, laid herself down once
more on the cold stones; and, wrapping her cloak round her face, resumed
her weary vigil.

Meanwhile Arbaces had already gained the triclinium, where Sallust, with
his favorite freedman, sat late at supper.

'What!  Arbaces! and at this hour!--Accept this cup.'

'Nay, gentle Sallust; it is on business, not pleasure, that I venture to
disturb thee.  How doth thy charge?--they say in the town that he has
recovered sense.'

'Alas! and truly,' replied the good-natured but thoughtless Sallust,
wiping the tear from his eyes; 'but so shattered are his nerves and
frame that I scarcely recognize the brilliant and gay carouser I was
wont to know.  Yet, strange to say, he cannot account for the cause of
the sudden frenzy that seized him--he retains but a dim consciousness of
what hath passed; and, despite thy witness, wise Egyptian, solemnly
upholds his innocence of the death of Apaecides.'

'Sallust,' said Arbaces, gravely, 'there is much in thy friend's case
that merits a peculiar indulgence; and could we learn from his lips the
confession and the cause of his crime, much might be yet hoped from the
mercy of the senate; for the senate, thou knowest, hath the power either
to mitigate or to sharpen the law.  Therefore it is that I have
conferred with the highest authority of the city, and obtained his
permission to hold a private conference this night with the Athenian.
Tomorrow, thou knowest, the trial comes on.'

'Well,' said Sallust, 'thou wilt be worthy of thy Eastern name and fame
if thou canst learn aught from him; but thou mayst try.  Poor
Glaucus!--and he had such an excellent appetite!  He eats nothing now!'

The benevolent epicure was moved sensibly at this thought.  He sighed,
and ordered his slaves to refill his cup.

'Night wanes,' said the Egyptian; 'suffer me to see thy ward now.'

Sallust nodded assent, and led the way to a small chamber, guarded
without by two dozing slaves.  The door opened; at the request of
Arbaces, Sallust withdrew--the Egyptian was alone with Glaucus.

One of those tall and graceful candelabra common to that day, supporting
a single lamp, burned beside the narrow bed.  Its rays fell palely over
the face of the Athenian, and Arbaces was moved to see how sensibly that
countenance had changed.  The rich color was gone, the cheek was sunk,
the lips were convulsed and pallid; fierce had been the struggle between
reason and madness, life and death. The youth, the strength of Glaucus
had conquered; but the freshness of blood and soul--the life of
life--its glory and its zest, were gone for ever.

The Egyptian seated himself quietly beside the bed; Glaucus still lay
mute and unconscious of his presence.  At length, after a considerable
pause, Arbaces thus spoke:

'Glaucus, we have been enemies.  I come to thee alone and in the dead of
night--thy friend, perhaps thy saviour.'

As the steed starts from the path of the tiger, Glaucus sprang up
breathless--alarmed, panting at the abrupt voice, the sudden apparition
of his foe.  Their eyes met, and neither, for some moments, had power to
withdraw his gaze.  The flush went and came over the face of the
Athenian, and the bronzed cheek of the Egyptian grew a shade more pale.
At length, with an inward groan, Glaucus turned away, drew his hand
across his brow, sunk back, and muttered:

'Am I still dreaming?'

'No, Glaucus thou art awake.  By this right hand and my father's head,
thou seest one who may save thy life.  Hark! I know what thou hast done,
but I know also its excuse, of which thou thyself art ignorant.  Thou
hast committed murder, it is true--a sacrilegious murder--frown
not--start not--these eyes saw it.  But I can save thee--I can prove how
thou wert bereaved of sense, and made not a free-thinking and
free-acting man.  But in order to save thee, thou must confess thy crime.
Sign but this paper, acknowledging thy hand in the death of Apaecides,
and thou shalt avoid the fatal urn.'

'What words are these?--Murder and Apaecides!--Did I not see him
stretched on the ground bleeding and a corpse? and wouldst thou persuade
me that I did the deed?  Man, thou liest!  Away!'

'Be not rash--Glaucus, be not hasty; the deed is proved.  Come, come,
thou mayst well be excused for not recalling the act of thy delirium,
and which thy sober senses would have shunned even to contemplate.  But
let me try to refresh thy exhausted and weary memory. Thou knowest thou
wert walking with the priest, disputing about his sister; thou knowest
he was intolerant, and half a Nazarene, and he sought to convert thee,
and ye had hot words; and he calumniated thy mode of life, and swore he
would not marry Ione to thee--and then, in thy wrath and thy frenzy,
thou didst strike the sudden blow. Come, come; you can recollect
this!--read this papyrus, it runs to that effect--sign it, and thou
art saved.'

'Barbarian, give me the written lie, that I may tear it!  I the murderer
of Ione's brother: I confess to have injured one hair of the head of him
she loved!  Let me rather perish a thousand times!'

'Beware!' said Arbaces, in a low and hissing tone; 'there is but one
choice--thy confession and thy signature, or the amphitheatre and the
lion's maw!'

As the Egyptian fixed his eyes upon the sufferer, he hailed with joy the
signs of evident emotion that seized the latter at these words.  A
slight shudder passed over the Athenian's frame--his lip fell--an
expression of sudden fear and wonder betrayed itself in his brow and
eye.

'Great gods!' he said, in a low voice, 'what reverse is this?  It seems
but a little day since life laughed out from amidst roses--Ione
mine--youth, health, love, lavishing on me their treasures; and
now--pain, madness, shame, death!  And for what?  What have I done?
Oh, I am mad still?'

'Sign, and be saved!' said the soft, sweet voice of the Egyptian.

'Tempter, never!' cried Glaucus, in the reaction of rage.  'Thou knowest
me not: thou knowest not the haughty soul of an Athenian! The sudden
face of death might appal me for a moment, but the fear is over.
Dishonour appals for ever!  Who will debase his name to save his life?
who exchange clear thoughts for sullen days? who will belie himself to
shame, and stand blackened in the eyes of love?  If to earn a few years
of polluted life there be so base a coward, dream not, dull barbarian of
Egypt! to find him in one who has trod the same sod as Harmodius, and
breathed the same air as Socrates.  Go! leave me to live without
self-reproach--or to perish without fear!'

'Bethink thee well! the lion's fangs: the hoots of the brutal mob: the
vulgar gaze on thy dying agony and mutilated limbs: thy name degraded;
thy corpse unburied; the shame thou wouldst avoid clinging to thee for
aye and ever!'

'Thou ravest; thou art the madman! shame is not in the loss of other
men's esteem--it is in the loss of our own.  Wilt thou go?--my eyes
loathe the sight of thee! hating ever, I despise thee now!'

'I go,' said Arbaces, stung and exasperated, but not without some
pitying admiration of his victim, 'I go; we meet twice again--once at
the Trial, once at the Death!  Farewell!'

The Egyptian rose slowly, gathered his robes about him, and left the
chamber.  He sought Sallust for a moment, whose eyes began to reel with
the vigils of the cup: 'He is still unconscious, or still obstinate;
there is no hope for him.'

'Say not so,' replied Sallust, who felt but little resentment against
the Athenian's accuser, for he possessed no great austerity of virtue,
and was rather moved by his friend's reverses than persuaded of his
innocence--'say not so, my Egyptian! so good a drinker shall be saved if
possible.  Bacchus against Isis!'

'We shall see,' said the Egyptian.

Suddenly the bolts were again withdrawn--the door unclosed; Arbaces was
in the open street; and poor Nydia once more started from her long
watch.

'Wilt thou save him?' she cried, clasping her hands.

'Child, follow me home; I would speak to thee--it is for his sake I ask
it.'

'And thou wilt save him?'

No answer came forth to the thirsting ear of the blind girl: Arbaces had
already proceeded far up the street; she hesitated a moment, and then
followed his steps in silence.

'I must secure this girl,' said he, musingly, 'lest she give evidence of
the philtre; as to the vain Julia, she will not betray herself.'



Chapter VIII

A CLASSIC FUNERAL.

WHILE Arbaces had been thus employed, Sorrow and Death were in the house
of Ione.  It was the night preceding the morn in which the solemn
funeral rites were to be decreed to the remains of the murdered
Apaecides.  The corpse had been removed from the temple of Isis to the
house of the nearest surviving relative, and Ione had heard, in the same
breath, the death of her brother and the accusation against her
betrothed.  That first violent anguish which blunts the sense to all but
itself, and the forbearing silence of her slaves, had prevented her
learning minutely the circumstances attendant on the fate of her lover.
His illness, his frenzy, and his approaching trial, were unknown to her.
She learned only the accusation against him, and at once indignantly
rejected it; nay, on hearing that Arbaces was the accuser, she required
no more to induce her firmly and solemnly to believe that the Egyptian
himself was the criminal.  But the vast and absorbing importance
attached by the ancients to the performance of every ceremonial
connected with the death of a relation, had, as yet, confined her woe
and her convictions to the chamber of the deceased.  Alas! it was not
for her to perform that tender and touching office, which obliged the
nearest relative to endeavor to catch the last breath--the parting
soul--of the beloved one: but it was hers to close the straining eyes,
the distorted lips: to watch by the consecrated clay, as, fresh bathed
and anointed, it lay in festive robes upon the ivory bed; to strew the
couch with leaves and flowers, and to renew the solemn cypress-branch at
the threshold of the door.  And in these sad offices, in lamentation and
in prayer, Ione forgot herself.  It was among the loveliest customs of
the ancients to bury the young at the morning twilight; for, as they
strove to give the softest interpretation to death, so they poetically
imagined that Aurora, who loved the young, had stolen them to her
embrace; and though in the instance of the murdered priest this fable
could not appropriately cheat the fancy, the general custom was still
preserved.

The stars were fading one by one from the grey heavens, and night slowly
receding before the approach of morn, when a dark group stood motionless
before Ione's door.  High and slender torches, made paler by the
unmellowed dawn, cast their light over various countenances, hushed for
the moment in one solemn and intent expression.  And now there arose a
slow and dismal music, which accorded sadly with the rite, and floated
far along the desolate and breathless streets; while a chorus of female
voices (the Praeficae so often cited by the Roman poets), accompanying
the Tibicen and the Mysian flute, woke the following strain:

               THE FUNERAL DIRGE

      O'er the sad threshold, where the cypress bough
         Supplants the rose that should adorn thy home,
       On the last pilgrimage on earth that now
         Awaits thee, wanderer to Cocytus, come!
       Darkly we woo, and weeping we invite--
        Death is thy host--his banquet asks thy soul,
       Thy garlands hang within the House of Night,
         And the black stream alone shall fill thy bowl.

      No more for thee the laughter and the song,
         The jocund night--the glory of the day!
       The Argive daughters' at their labours long;
         The hell-bird swooping on its Titan prey--

      The false AEolides upheaving slow,
         O'er the eternal hill, the eternal stone;
       The crowned Lydian, in his parching woe,
         And green Callirrhoe's monster-headed son--

      These shalt thou see, dim shadowed through the dark,
         Which makes the sky of Pluto's dreary shore;
       Lo! where thou stand'st, pale-gazing on the bark,
          That waits our rite to bear thee trembling o'er!
       Come, then! no more delay!--the phantom pines
         Amidst the Unburied for its latest home;
       O'er the grey sky the torch impatient shines--
        Come, mourner, forth!--the lost one bids thee come.

As the hymn died away, the group parted in twain; and placed upon a
couch, spread with a purple pall, the corpse of Apaecides was carried
forth, with the feet foremost.  The designator, or marshal of the sombre
