Kate started and drew her hand away, moving a pace farther off, and
regarding her father with wide open, dilated eyes.

"A secret!" she faltered, and grew very pale.

Sir Richard smiled, and would have taken her hand once more, but
that she glided from his reach, still watching him with an
expression he found it hard to read. Her mother laid down her
embroidery, and studied her face with a look of aroused uneasiness;
but the father was utterly without suspicion of approaching any
hidden peril, and continued in the same kindly tones.

"Nay, now, my girl, thou needest not fear!" he said. "All young
maidens give their hearts away in time; and so as thou givest thine
worthily, neither thy father nor thy mother will chide."

Kate gave one or two gasps, and then spoke with impassioned
earnestness.

"O father, I could not help it! I strove against it as long as I
might. I feared it was a thing that must not be. But love was too
strong. I could not fight for ever."

"Tut--tut, child! why shouldest thou fight? Why didst thou not
speak to thy mother? Girls may breathe a secret into a mother's ear
that is not to be spoke elsewhere. Thou shouldest have told her,
child, and have spared thyself much weary misery."

Kate's head was hung very low; neither parent could see her face.

"I did not dare," she answered softly; "I knew that I was wrong. I
feared to speak."

"Thou art a strange mixture of courage and fear, my saucy Kate. I
would once have vowed that thou wouldst fear not to speak aloud
every thought of thy heart. But love changes all, I ween, and makes
sad cowards of the boldest of us. And so thou didst wait till he
declared his love, and fretted out thy heart in silence the while?"

Kate lifted her head and looked at her father, a faint perplexity
in her eyes.

"Nay, I ever knew he loved me. It was that I feared thy
displeasure, my father. I had heard thee say--"

"Nothing against Sir Robert, I warrant me," cried Sir Richard
heartily; whilst Kate took one backward step and exclaimed:

"Methought Sir Robert was Cecilia's lover! Why speak you to me of
him, my father?"

Sir Richard rose to his feet in great perplexity, looking at his
wife, who was pale and agitated.

"Cecilia's lover--what meanest thou, child?" he asked quickly. "I
was speaking to thee of thine own lover. Sir Robert would fain wed
with thee, and methought thou hadst already given him thy heart."

"No--no--no!" cried Kate, shrinking yet further away. "I had no
thoughts of him. O father, how couldst thou think it? He is a kind
friend; but I have thought him Cecilia's knight, and I trow she
thinks of him thus herself."

Lady Frances now spoke to her daughter for the first time, fixing
her eyes upon her, and addressing her with composure, although
visibly struggling against inward agitation.

"Listen to me, daughter Kate. Thou hast spoken words which, if they
refer not to Sir Robert, as thy father and I believed, have need to
be explained. Thou hast spoken of loving and of being beloved; what
dost thou mean by that? Who is he that has dared--"

"O mother, thou knowest that; thou hast heard it a hundred times.
It is Culverhouse, my cousin, who--"

But Sir Richard's face had clouded suddenly over. He had set his
heart on marrying Kate to his friend Sir Robert, who would, he
believed, make her an excellent husband; and he had long ago given
a half pledge to Lord Andover to thwart and oppose the youthful
attachment which was showing itself between Kate and Culverhouse.
The Earl wished a grand match for his son, and the Trevlyn pride
was strong in Sir Richard, who would never have had a daughter of
his wed where she was not welcome. He also disliked marriages
between first cousins, and made of that a pretext for setting his
face against the match, whilst remaining on perfectly friendly
terms with the Viscount and all his family. He had hoped and quite
made up his mind that that boy-and-girl fancy had been laid at rest
for ever, and was not a little annoyed at hearing the name of her
cousin fall so glibly from Kate's lips.

"Silence, foolish girl!" he said sternly. "Hast thou not been told
a hundred times to think no more of him? How dost thou dare to
answer thy mother thus? Culverhouse! thou knewest well that he is
no match for thee. It is wanton folly to let thy wayward fancy
dwell still on him. Methought thou hadst been cured of that
childish liking long since. But if it has not been so, thou shalt
soon be cured now!"

Kate shrank back, for her father had seldom looked so stern, and
there was an inflexibility about his aspect that was decidedly
formidable. No one knew better than his favourite daughter that
when once the limit of his forbearance was reached, there was no
hope of any further yielding, and that he could be hard as flint or
adamant; so it was with a look of terror in her eyes that she
shrank yet further away as she asked:

"What dost thou mean, my father? what dost thou mean?"

"I mean, Kate," answered Sir Richard, not unkindly, but so
resolutely that his words fell upon her ear like a knell, "that the
best and safest plan of curing thee of thy fond and foolish fancy,
which can never come to good, is to wed thee with a man who will
make thee a kind and loving husband, and will maintain thee in the
state to which thou hast been born. Wherefore, prepare to wed with
Sir Robert Fortescue without delay, for to him I will give thy hand
in wedlock so soon as we can have thee ready to be his bride."

Kate stood for a moment as if transfixed and turned to stone, and
then she suddenly sank upon her knees at her father's feet.

"Father," she said, in a strange, choked voice, that indicated an
intense emotion and agitation, "thou canst not make me the wife of
another; for methinks I am well nigh, if not altogether, the wife
of my cousin Culverhouse."

"What?" almost shouted Sir Richard, making one step forward and
seizing his daughter by the arm. "Wretched girl, what is this that
thou sayest? The wife of thy cousin Culverhouse! Shame upon thee
for so base a falsehood! How dost thou dare to frame thy lips to
it?"

"It is no falsehood!" answered Kate, with flashing eyes, springing
to her feet and confronting her parents with all her old courage,
and with a touch of defiance. "I would have kneeled to ask your
pardon for my rashness, for my disobedience, for the long
concealment; but I am no liar, I speak but the truth. Listen, and I
will tell all. It was on May Day, and I rode forth into the forest
and distanced pursuit, and joined my cousin Culverhouse, as we had
vowed to do. We thought then of naught but the joy of a day
together in the forest, and had not dreamed of such a matter as
wedlock. But then to the church porch came one calling himself a
priest. They say he comes every year, and weds all who will come to
him. And many did. And Culverhouse and I stood before him, and he
joined our hands, and we made our vows, and he pronounced us man
and wife before all assembled there. And whether it be binding
wedlock or no, it is to us a solemn betrothal made before God and
man; and not all the commands thou couldst lay upon me, my father,
could make me stand up and vow myself to another as I have vowed
myself to Culverhouse. I should hold myself forsworn; I should be
guilty of the vilest crime in the world. Thou wilt not ask it of
me. Thou canst not know, even as I do not know, whether that
wedlock is not valid before man, as it is before God."

A thunderbolt falling between them could scarcely have produced
more astonishment and dismay. Lady Frances sank back in her seat
white with horror and bewilderment, whilst Sir Richard stood as if
turned to stone; and when at last he was able to speak, it was to
order Kate to her room in accents of the sternest anger, bidding
her not to dare to leave it until he brought her forth himself.

Kate fled away gladly enough, her mind rent in twain betwixt
remorse at her own disobedience and deceit, triumph in having
stopped Sir Robert's suit by so immovable an obstacle, and relief
that the truth was out at last, even though her own dire disgrace
was the result. The secret had preyed terribly on her mind of late,
and had been undermining her health and spirits. Terrible as the
anger of her parents might be, anything to her open nature seemed
better than concealment; and she dashed up to her own room in a
whirl of conflicting emotions, sinking down upon the floor when she
reached it to try to get into order her chaotic thoughts.

Meantime husband and wife, left alone to their astonishment, stood
gazing at each other in blank amaze.

"Husband," said Lady Frances at last, "surely such wedlock is not
lawful?"

"I cannot tell," he answered gloomily; "belike it is not. Yet a
troth plight made in so solemn a fashion, and before so many
witnesses, is no light thing; and the child may not be wedded to
another whilst the smallest shadow of doubt remains. Doubtless
Culverhouse foresaw this, the bold knave, and persuaded the child
into it. Well it has served his purpose. Sir Robert must be content
with Cecilia. But the artfulness of the little jade! I never
thought Kate would so deceive us--"

"It is that that breaks my heart!" cried the mother--"that, and the
thought that she should be willing to go before some Popish priest
and take her vows to him. Oh, it cannot be binding on the child--it
cannot be binding! And Sir Robert is stanch in the Reformed faith;
he is just the husband that wild girl needs. Husband, can nothing
be done?"

Sir Richard looked very grave.

"That would be hard to tell without strict inquiries. I doubt me if
we could learn all before next May Day, when we might get hold of
the man himself and find out who and what he is. Such wedlock as
his cannot be without flaw, and might be made invalid by law; but,
wife, there is no getting over this, that the child took her vows
in the name of God, and I dare not act as though such vows were
unspoken. Her youth and ignorance may plead in part for her. She
scarce knew the solemnity of the step she was taking. Culverhouse
won upon her and over persuaded her, I do not doubt. I do not seek
to excuse her. I am grievously displeased and disappointed. But I
cannot and I will not give her to Sir Robert; Cecilia must be his
wife."

"Then Kate must be sent away," said Lady Frances, gravely and
severely; "I cannot and will not have her here, mixing as before
with her sisters with this cloud hanging upon her, with this secret
still shadowing her life. She has proved unworthy of our
confidence. I am more pained and displeased than I can say. She
must go. She must not be able to tell Cecilia that she might have
been Lady Fortescue but for her marriage with Culverhouse. She is
no longer to be trusted. She must go forth from home as a
punishment for her wrongdoing. I feel that I cannot bear to see her
about the house, knowing how she has deceived us. She shall go
forth this very day."

Sir Richard stood considering. He too was deeply displeased with
his daughter, though he had some sympathy with the ardent and
impulsive lovers, who had got themselves into a queer plight, and
had thrown much perplexity upon others. But he decidedly agreed
with his wife that it would be better for Kate to go--and to go in
disgrace, that she might feel herself punished by being severed
from her sisters when the first wedding of the family was taking
place (save her own woodland nuptials). And it would doubtless save
some natural embarrassment to Sir Robert himself to have one of the
sisters out of the way before he formally espoused the other;
though, to be sure, such a proposition as his had been was a common
enough thing in those days.

"It would be good to send her away; but whither can she go?"

"Where better than to Lady Humbert and Mistress Dowsabel, who have
ofttimes asked us to send a daughter to enliven their dull
solitude? We have ever excused them on account of their youth and
high spirits, fearing they would be moped to death in that dismal
place; but it will be the very house for our wayward Kate to go to
repent of her ill deeds. If you will write a letter to them, we
will send it forthwith by a mounted messenger, and the answer will
be back before dark. If she is to go, she can start with the first
light of tomorrow morning, and we can get her mails packed ready
tonight; for she must not disgrace her state, but must be furnished
with all things fitting to her condition."

Sir Richard thought that no other plan better than this could be
devised for his erring daughter; and though he could not but feel
some compassion for the girl, condemned to be the companion of a
pair of aged and feeble gentlewomen such as his aunts had long
been, was nevertheless of opinion that the captivity and dullness
would be salutary, and despatched his letter without delay.

That same night Kate, who had passed the long hours in weeping and
rejoicing, and in all those conflicting phases of feeling common to
the young, heard with a mixture of' pleasure and dismay that she
was to be sent in disgrace to the keeping of her great aunts, and
that without delay; also that she was not even to say goodbye to
her sisters, or to see them again until something had been decided
as to her future and the validity of her wilful espousals. She was
made to feel that she had committed a terrible sin, and one that
her parents would find it hard to forgive; yet she could not help
exulting slightly in the thought that they had been obliged to take
the matter so seriously; and she had a dim hope that her aged
relatives, when she did come to them, might not prove altogether so
crabbed and cross as she had always been led to suppose. Perhaps
she might find a warm corner even in their old hearts.



Chapter 19: The Cross Way House.


With the first light of day the start was to be made. Kate, who had
slept little, was ready betimes, had dressed herself in her riding
suit long before she was sent for, and was employing herself in
wondering if she would after all be permitted to say farewell to
her sisters, and whether she should have an opportunity of asking
her mother's pardon for her wrongdoing in this matter of her secret
espousals.

The girl had suffered a good deal during these past months. She had
not realized when yielding to Culverhouse's persuasions how hard it
would be to live beneath her parents' roof with this secret preying
on her mind. She had not realized what a weight it would become in
time, and she had looked for a speedy meeting with her cousin and
betrothed in London, whither Sir Richard had intended taking his
family for a while before the autumn set in. Kate had looked
forward then to making her confession to her parents and his, and
winning pardon for them both, as she felt sure of doing when she
had his support in the telling of the tale. But the change of her
father's plans, and the absence from England of Lord Culverhouse,
who had been sent on a mission to France by his father, put an end
to all these hopes, and she had felt the burden of her secret heavy
indeed. Moreover, she was fearful lest Culverhouse should in some
sort repent him of the step he had taken and wish it undone. Kate
had but a small share of vanity, and only a very modest
appreciation of her own attractions, and it seemed to her as though
her cousin, moving as he did in the gay world of fashion, must
surely see many other maidens tenfold more beautiful and graceful.
Suppose he were to repent of his secret betrothal; suppose his
troth plight weighed heavy on his spirit? what misery that would be
for both! And during these long months of silence such thoughts and
fears had preyed upon the girl's spirit, and had produced in her
the change that both her parents had observed.

Wherefore now that the confession had been made, and the burdensome
secret was a secret no longer, a reaction set in that was almost
like relief. She felt certain, since all was known, that
Culverhouse would come forward and stand boldly beside her and lay
claim to her hand before the world as he had talked of doing when
he had led her to the troth plight on that May Day that seemed so
long ago now.

Even the thought of the journey and the visit to her father's great
aunts was not altogether distasteful. She was more afraid of
meeting her mother's sorrowful glances than stern ones from
strangers. Kate had no lack of courage, and the love of variety and
change was implanted in her as strongly as it is in most young
things; so that when Philip knocked at her door as the first rays
of the October sun were gilding the trees and fields, it was with a
smiling face that she opened to him, whilst he looked at her with
something of smiling surprise in his glance.

"Art ready, my sister? the horses will be at the door in a few
short minutes. I am glad to see thee so bright and happy. I had
feared to discover thee bathed in tears of woe."

"Perchance I ought to be heavier hearted than I am," answered Kate,
with a swift glance at Philip through her long lashes. "I do repent
me that I have angered our father and mother. I know that I have
been wrong to keep the secret; perchance I was wrong to let
Culverhouse persuade me. But that the thing is done I cannot truly
repent; the only thing which would make me wish that vow unsaid
would be if Culverhouse were to wish to be free of his troth
plight."

"Which I trow he never will be," answered Philip warmly, as he laid
his hand on Kate's shoulder.

Those two were very near akin in spirit and in sympathy. Kate knew
all his love for Petronella, and his anxiety for her since her
flight (though he fully believed her to be in hiding with Cuthbert
in the forest, albeit he had not been able to discover them), and
he had strong fellow feeling with the impulsive lovers.

"He has never loved any but thee, my sister, since the days we
played together as children. Save that concealment ever leads to
trouble, and that wedlock vows are too sacred to be made playthings
of, I could find it in my heart to wish that Petronella and I were
wed in like fashion. But our mother is sorely grieved at what thou
hast done--going before a tonsured priest, with none of thine own
kindred by, to take vows which should have had the sanction of thy
parents before they passed thy lips, and should have been made in
different fashion and in a different place. Howbeit no doubt time
will soften her anger, and she will grow reconciled to the thought.
When we have made all inquiries anent this priest and his ways, my
father and I will to London to speak with Lord Andover of this
business. I trust all will end well for thee, sister. But thou must
learn in thy captivity to be a patient and discreet maiden, that
they do not fear to give thee to Culverhouse at last, since it must
needs be so."

Kate looked up gratefully, comforted by the kind tone of her
brother's words.

"In very sooth I will try, Philip. I thank thee for thy good
counsel. I will be patient and discreet towards my great aunts. I
will strive to show them all due reverence, that they may satisfy
my mother when she makes inquiry of them."

Kate long remembered the ride with her father and brother through
the forest and across the heath that day. Her father was stern and
grave, and scarcely addressed a single word to her. Philip and she
talked a little, but were affected by this silence of displeasure,
and observed a befitting decorum and quietness. Sir Richard made
his daughter take him to the spot of her troth plight, and show him
exactly how and where it had taken place. As they stopped to bait
the horses at the little hostelry, he made various inquiries
concerning the priest and his annual visitation to the wake on May
Day, and his face looked none the less severe as he heard the
replies.

"Methinks the knot hath been something tightly tied--too tight for
it to be easily unloosed," whispered Philip to his sister as he
lifted her to the saddle after the noontide halt; and she could not
but answer by a bright smile, which she saw reflected in his face.

The day, which had been bright and fine, turned dull and lowering
as the riders neared the Cross Way House, as the residence of Lady
Humbert was called; and Kate looked curiously at the house as they
approached it, wondering what sort of a life its inmates led.

To her eyes, accustomed to the seclusion of park and grounds, the
most striking feature of this house was that it stood actually upon
the road itself. It occupied an angle of the cross formed by the
junction of four roads, and its north and east windows looked out
straight upon these two highways, with nothing intervening between
them but some twenty feet of paved walk enclosed behind walls ten
feet high, and guarded by strong gates of wrought iron.

Doubtless to the south and west there were gardens and grounds. The
walls seemed to run a long way along the road, and Kate felt
certain that she should find seclusion and privacy there. She could
see tall trees rearing their heads above the wall, and was certain
from the aspect of the house, which was sufficiently imposing, that
she should find within the ease and luxury to which she was
accustomed.

On the whole, she rather liked the prospect of looking out upon the
roads. If Culverhouse were to ride by, she could signal to him from
the windows. She could watch the fine folk passing to and fro on
their way to London. Possibly a belated traveller might ask shelter
at the house, and amuse them with tales of adventure and peril.
Kate had time to think of many things as their horses stood at the
gates awaiting admittance; and when these were thrown back at last,
and they rode through an archway and into a centre courtyard round
which the house was built, the girl was delighted with everything;
for the quadrangular structure was a novelty to her, and a novelty
which took her fancy not a little. There were servants to look
after the horses; and it was plain the travellers were expected,
for they were quickly ushered into the house by one of the great
doors which opened on a wide flight of steps leading down into the
court, and were there met by an aged majordomo, who greeted them
with ceremonious solemnity.

"My lady is looking for you, sir," he said to Sir Richard; and
turning to Kate, he added, in the same mechanical fashion, "Your
maid will show you to your room, madam. My lady will see you after
you have recovered from the fatigues of the journey."

Kate was not in the least fatigued, but she was too well brought up
to remonstrate in any way. The maid was hovering in the background;
an elderly woman with a capable face and slightly repellent manner.
It was plain to Kate that her relatives would not receive her till
they had learned more of the details of her banishment from home
from her father, and had made up their minds how to treat her. She
felt that even the serving woman regarded her somewhat in the light
of a culprit, and it was with a mind divided betwixt amusement and
girlish shame that she followed the attendant into the bed chamber
that had been prepared for her.

This was a more sumptuous apartment than her room at home, and
looked comfortable enough in the glow of the great fire of logs.
The hangings of the bed were dark and heavy, and the carved oak
furniture was also sombre in its polished blackness; but there was
a thick square carpet on the floor, which was a luxury Kate had
never possessed in her bed chamber before, and the mirrors and
silver sconces for the candles all bespoke an ease and luxury that
reminded Kate of what life would be like when she lived as a
Countess or Viscountess in her own house, with Lord Culverhouse as
lord and master.

"This is your room," said the woman. "Your mails arrived earlier in
the day, and your things have been put away in the cupboard there
and in the bureau yonder. My lady gave orders you were to be served
with something to eat and drink in your own room, and that she
would visit you later. There is another young lady visiting in the
house; she will come and see you if you will permit her."

"Very willingly," answered Kate, who was always ready for company,
and very curious to know something about these great aunts of hers,
whom she had never seen as yet. "I shall be glad of food, as I
liked not what they served us with at the inn in the forest. As for
the young lady, albeit I know not who she can be, I should gladly
welcome her. I have no love for too much of my own company;
wherefore the sooner she comes the better shall I be pleased."

The woman withdrew, and Kate removed her hat and gloves, and looked
about her with quick, searching glances.

"A good room in sooth, and no bad prison, if prisoner I am to be.
And since I may have company, I can scarce be in such dire disgrace
as that. I wonder who this visitor may be? Some Wyvern, belike; but
doubtless we shall learn to take pleasure in each other.

"Soft! are those steps without? Yes; and some one knocks at the
door.

"Enter, enter, I pray. I am right glad--What! do my eyes deceive
me? Sure I am in some strange dream! Petronella! Surely it cannot
be Petronella! The features are the same; but the Petronella I once
knew was wan and frail as a fair wood lily, and thou--nay, but it
cannot be!"

"But it is--it is!" cried the girl, making a bound forward and
flinging her arms round Kate's neck in an ecstasy of happiness;
"and, O Kate, I have seen him again! I saw him ride to the door by
thy side! Perchance I shall even have words with him ere he journey
forth again! Ah, how rejoiced was I when I heard that thou wert
coming! O Kate, I have such news for thee--such news, such news!"

The two girls were folded in each other's arms. Between every few
words they paused to kiss and laugh in the very exuberance of their
happiness. It seemed like a dream to Kate; she could scarce believe
her eyes.

"Petronella--but how earnest thou here?"

"I came when the weather grew so inclement that Cuthbert would no
longer let me share his forest life. He brought me to this house,
and our aunts, when they heard our story, opened their doors to me;
and I have been here three whole weeks--ever since the summer's
heats broke in storms of rain. But here I go by the name of Ellen
Wyvern, lest haply it should come to my father's ears that I am
here, and he should fetch me away. But I have almost ceased to
quake at that thought; I have had my freedom so long."

"I scarce know thee, thou art so changed--so full of sunshine and
courage," cried Kate. "Erstwhile thou wert like a creature of
moonlight and vapour; a breath seemed as though it would blow thee
away. What has befallen to change thee so? What hast thou been
doing all this while? And where is Cuthbert?"

"Cuthbert is yet in the forest," answered Petronella, sinking her
voice to the merest whisper, as if afraid that even the walls would
have ears. "His task is not yet finished. It is one that takes
great skill and patience and watchfulness. But it is being
accomplished by slow and sure degrees. Ah, Kate! what news thinkest
thou that I have for thee? The time has not yet come when the world
may know all; but I trow that thou mayest know, for thou hast ever
been with us in the secret of the quest."

Kate's face flushed and paled; her heart beat fast with hope and
wonder. She well knew what difference to her future would be made
by the restoration to the house of Trevlyn of that lost treasure.
She could scarce frame the words she longed to speak, but her eyes
asked the question for her; and Petronella, putting her lips close
to her cousin's ear, whispered the wondrous news that the lost
treasure was found.

"Found--really found!" and Kate gave a great gasp. "Nay, but,
Petronella, tell me how."

Petronella laid a warning hand upon Kate's lips.
