love with sleep.  When the sky first grew grey, so that we could dimly
see shapes of things, we heard a light noise of marching men on the road.

"The English!" whispered he that lay next me.  "Hush!" breathed Randal,
and so the footsteps went by, none of us daring to stir, for fear of the
rustle in the leaves.

The sound soon ceased; belike they had struck off into these very fields
wherethrough we had just marched.

"Now, Robin Lindsay, climb into yonder ash-tree, and keep your eyes on
the mill and the beacon-fires," said Randal.

Robin scrambled up, not easily, because of his armour, and we waited, as
it seemed, for an endless time.

"What is that sound," whispered one, "so heavy and so hoarse?"

It was my own heart beating, as if it would burst my side, but I said
nought, and even then Robin slid from the tree, as lightly as he might.
He held up two fingers, without a word, for a sign that the beacons were
lighted, and nodded.

"Down all," whispered Randal.

"Give them time, give them time."

So there we lay, as we must, but that was the hardest part of the
waiting, and no sound but of the fowls and wild things arousing, and the
cry of sentinels from Paris walls, came to our ears.

At length Randal said, "Up all, and onwards!"

We arose, loosened our swords in their sheaths, and so crossed to the
road.  We could now see Paris plainly, and were close by the farm of the
Mathurins, while beyond was the level land they call "Les Porcherons,"
with slopes above it, and many trees.

"Now, Norman," said Randal, "when we come within clear sight of the gate,
two of us shall seize you by the arms as prisoner; then we all cry 'St.
George!' and set off running towards Paris.  The quicker, the less time
for discovery."

So, having marched orderly and speedily, while the banks of the roadway
hid us, we set off to run, Randal and Robin gripping me when we were full
in sight of the moat, of the drawbridge (which was down), and the gate.

Then our men all cried, "St. George for England!  The witch is taken!"
And so running disorderly and fast we made for the Port, while English
men-at-arms might be plainly seen and heard, gazing, waving their hands,
and shouting from the battlements of the two gate-towers.  Down the road
we ran, past certain small houses of peasants, and past a gibbet with a
marauder hanging from it, just over the dry ditch.

Our feet, we three leading, with some twenty in a clump hard behind us,
rang loud on the drawbridge over the dry fosse.  The bridge planks
quivered strangely; we were now within the gateway, when down fell the
portcullis behind us, the drawbridge, creaking, flew up, a crowd of angry
faces and red crosses were pressing on us, and a blow fell on my salade,
making me reel.  I was held in strong arms, swords shone out above me, I
stumbled on a body--it was Robin Lindsay's--I heard Randal give a curse
as his blade broke on a helmet, and cry, "I yield me, rescue or no
rescue."  Then burst forth a blast of shouts, and words of command and
yells, and English curses.  Cannon-shot roared overhead, and my mouth was
full of sulphur smoke and dust.  They were firing on those of our men who
had not set foot on the drawbridge when it flew up.  Soon the portcullis
rose again, and the bridge fell, to let in a band of English archers,
through whom our Scots were cutting their way back towards St. Denis.

Of all this I got glimpses, rather than clear sight, as the throng within
the gateway reeled and shifted, crushing me sorely.  Presently the
English from without trooped in, laughing and cursing, welcomed by their
fellows, and every man of them prying into my face, and gibing.  It had
been a settled plan: we were betrayed, it was over clear, and now a harsh
voice behind making me turn, I saw the wolf's face of Father Thomas under
his hood, and his yellow fangs.

"Ha! fair clerk, they that be no clerks themselves may yet hire clerks to
work for them.  How like you my brother, the Carmelite?"

Then I knew too well how this stratagem had all been laid by that devil,
and my heart turned to water within me.

Randal was led away, but round me the crowd gathered in the open space,
for I was haled into the greater gate tower beyond the wet fosse, and
from all quarters ran soldiers, and men, women, and children of the town
to mock me.

"Behold her," cried Father Thomas, climbing on a mounting-stone, as one
who would preach to the people, while the soldiers that held me laughed.

"Behold this wonderful wonder of all wonders, the miraculous Maid of the
Armagnacs!  She boasted that, by help of the Saints, she would be the
first within the city, and lo! she is the first, but she has come without
her army.  She is every way a miracle, mark you, for she hath a down on
her chin, such as no common maidens wear; and if she would but speak a
few words of counsel, methinks her tongue would sound strangely Scottish
for a Lorrainer."

"Speak, speak!" shouted the throng.

"Dogs," I cried, in French, "dogs and cowards!  You shall see the Maid
closer before nightfall, and fly from her as you have fled before."

"Said I not so?" asked Brother Thomas.

"A miracle, a miracle, the Maid hath a Scots tongue in her head."

Therewith stones began to fall, but the father, holding up his hand, bade
the multitude refrain.

"Harm her not, good brethren, for to-morrow this Maid shall be tried by
the ordeal of fire if that be the will of our governors.  Then shall we
see if she can work miracles or not," and so he went on gibing, while
they grinned horribly upon me.  Never saw I so many vile faces of the
basest people come together, from their filthy dens in Paris.  But as my
eyes ran over them with loathing, I beheld a face I knew; the face of
that violer woman who had been in our company before we came to Chinon,
and lo! perched on her shoulder, chained with a chain fastened round her
wrist, was Elliot's jackanapes!  To see the poor beast that my lady loved
in such ill company, seemed as if it would break my heart, and my head
fell on my breast.

"Ye mark, brethren and sisters, she likes not the name of the ordeal by
fire," cried Brother Thomas, whereon I lifted my face again to defy him,
and I saw the violer woman bend her brows, and place her finger, as it
were by peradventure, on her lips; wherefore I was silent, only gazing on
that devil, but then rang out a trumpet-note, blowing the call to arms,
and from afar came an answering call, from the quarter of St. Denis.

"Carry him, or her, or whatever the spy is, into the outer gate tower,"
said a Captain; "put him in fetters and manacles; lock the door and leave
him; and then to quarters.  And you, friar, hold your gibing tongue; lad
or lass, he has borne him bravely."

Six men-at-arms he chose out to do his bidding; and while the gates were
cleared of the throng, and trumpets were sounding, and church bells were
rung backwards, for an alarm, I was dragged, with many a kick and blow,
over the drawbridge, up the stairs of the tower, and so was thrown into a
strong room beneath the battlements.  There they put me in bonds, gave me
of their courtesy a jug of water and a loaf of black bread by me, and
then, taking my dagger, my sword, and all that was in my pouch, they left
me with curses.

"You shall hear how the onfall goes, belike," they said, "and to-morrow
shall be your judgment."

With that the door grated and rang, the key was turned in the lock, and
their iron tread sounded on the stone stairs, going upwards.  The room
was high, narrow, and lit by a barred and stanchioned window, far above
my reach, even if I had been unbound.  I shame to say it, but I rolled
over on my face and wept.  This was the end of my hopes and proud heart.
That they would burn me, despite their threats I scarce believed, for I
had in nowise offended Holy Church, or in matters of the Faith, and only
for such heretics, or wicked dealers in art-magic, is lawfully ordained
the death by fire.  But here was I prisoner, all that I had won at
Orleans would do little more than pay my own ransom; from the end of my
risk and travail I was now further away than ever.

So I mused, weeping for very rage, but then came a heavy rolling sound
overhead, as of moving wheeled pieces of ordnance.  Thereon (so near is
Hope to us in our despair) I plucked up some heart.  Ere nightfall, Paris
might be in the hands of the King, and all might be well.  The roar and
rebound of cannon overhead told me that the fighting had begun, and now I
prayed with all my heart, that the Maid, as ever, might again be
victorious.  So I lay there, listening, and heard the great artillery
bellow, and the roar of guns in answer, the shouting of men, and clang of
church bells.  Now and again the walls of the tower rang with the shock
of a cannon-ball, once an arrow flew through the casement and shattered
itself on the wall above my head.  I scarce know why, but I dragged me to
the place where it fell, and, put the arrow-point in my bosom.  Smoke of
wood and pitch darkened the light; they had come, then, to close
quarters.  But once more rang the rattle of guns; the whizzing rush of
stones, the smiting with axe or sword on wooden barrier and steel
harness, the cries of war, "Mont joye St. Denis!"  "St. George for
England!" and slogans too, I heard, as "Bellenden," "A Home! a Home!" and
then I knew the Scots were there, fighting in the front.  But alas, how
different was the day when first I heard our own battle-cries under
Orleans walls!  Then I had my life and my sword in my hands, to spend and
to strike; but now I lay a lonely prisoner, helpless and all but
hopeless; yet even so I clashed my chains and shouted, when I heard the
slogan.

Thus with noise and smoke, and trumpets blowing the charge or the recall,
and our pipes shrieking the pibroch high above the din, with dust
floating and plaster dropping from the walls of my cell till I was
wellnigh stifled, the day wore on, nor could I tell, in anywise, how the
battle went.  The main onslaught, I knew, was not on the gate behind the
tower in which I lay, though that tower also was smitten of cannon-balls.

At length, well past mid-day, as I deemed by the light, came a hush, and
then a thicker smoke, and taste of burning pitch-wood, and a roar as if
all Paris had been blown into mid-air, so that my tower shook, while
heavy beams fell crashing to earth.

Again came a hush, and then one voice, clear as a clarion call, even the
voice of the Maid, "Tirez en avant, en avant!"  How my blood thrilled at
the sound of it!

It must be now, I thought, or never, but the guns only roared the louder,
the din grew fierce and fiercer, till I heard a mighty roar, the English
shouting aloud as one man for joy, for so their manner is.  Thrice they
shouted, and my heart sank within me.  Had they slain the Maid?  I knew
not, but for torment of soul there is scarce any greater than so to lie,
bound and alone, seeing nought, but guessing at what is befalling.

After these shouts it was easy to know that the fighting waned, and was
less fierce.  The day, moreover, turned to thunder, and waxed lowering
and of a stifling heat.  Yet my worst fears were ended, for I heard, now
and again, the clear voice of the Maid, bidding her men "fight on, for
all was theirs."  But the voice was weaker now, and other than it had
been.  So the day darkened, only once and again a shot was fired, and in
the dusk the shouts of the English told me over clearly that for to-day
our chance and hope were lost.  Then the darkness grew deeper, and a star
shone through my casement, and feet went up and down upon the stairs, but
no man came near me.  Below there was some faint cackle of mirth and
laughter, and at last the silence fell.

Once more came a swift step on the stairs, as of one stumbling up in
haste.  The key rattled in the wards, a yellow light shone in, a man-at-
arms entered; he held a torch to my face, looked to my bonds, and then
gave me a kick, while one cried from below, "Come on, Dickon, your meat
is cooling!"  So he turned and went out, the door clanging behind him,
and the key rattling in the wards.

In pain and fierce wrath I gnawed my black bread, drank some of the
water, and at last I bethought me of that which should have been first in
the thoughts of a Christian man, and I prayed.

Remembering the story of Michael Hamilton, which I have already told, and
other noble and virtuous miracles of Madame St. Catherine of Fierbois, I
commanded me to her, that, by God's grace, she would be pleased to
release me from bonds and prison.  And I promised that, if she would so
favour me, I would go on pilgrimage to her chapel of Fierbois.  I looked
that my chains should now fall from my limbs, but, finding no such
matter, and being very weary (for all the last night I had slept none), I
fell on slumber and forgot my sorrow.

Belike I had not lain long in that blessed land where trouble seldom
comes when I was wakened, as it were, by a tugging at my clothes.  I sat
up, but the room was dark, save for a faint light in the casement, high
overhead, and I thought I had dreamed.  Howbeit, as I lay down again,
heavy at heart, my clothes were again twitched, and now I remembered what
I had heard, but never believed, concerning "lutins" or "brownies," as we
call them, which, being spirits invisible, and reckoned to have no part
in our salvation, are wont in certain houses to sport with men.  Curious
rather than affrighted, I sat up once more, and looked around, when I saw
two bright spots of light in the dark.  Then deeming that, for some
reason unknown to me, the prison door had been opened while I slept, and
a cat let in, I stretched out my hands towards the lights, thence came a
sharp, faint cry, and something soft and furry leaped on to my breast,
stroking me with little hands.

It was Elliot's jackanapes, very meagre, as I could feel, and all his
ribs standing out, but he made much of me, fondling me after his manner;
and indeed, for my lady's sake, I kissed him, wondering much how he came
there.  Then he put something into my hands, almost as if he had been a
Christian, for it was a wise beast and a kind.  Even then there shone
into my memory the thought of how my lady had prayed for her little
friend when he was stolen (which I had thought strange, and scarcely
warranted by our Faith), and with that, hope wakened within me.  My eyes
being now more accustomed to the darkness, I saw that the thing which the
jackanapes gave me was a little wallet, for he had been taught to fetch
and carry, and never was such a marvel at climbing.  But as I was
caressing him, I found a string about his neck, to which there seemed to
be no end.  Now, at length, I comprehended what was toward, and pulling
gently at the string, I found, after some time, that it was attached to
something heavy, on the outside of the casement.  Therefore I set about
drawing in string from above, and more string, and more, and then
appeared a knot and a splice, and the end of a thick rope.  So I drew and
drew, till it stopped, and I could see a stout bar across the stanchions
of the casement.  Thereon I ceased drawing, and opening the little
wallet, I found two files, one very fine, the other of sturdier fashion.

Verily then I blessed the violer woman, who at great peril of her own
life, and by such witty device as doubtless Madame St. Catherine put into
her heart, had sent the jackanapes up from below, and put me in the way
of safety.  I wasted no time, but began filing, not at the thick circlet
on my wrist, but at a link of the chain whereto it was made fast.  And
such was the temper of the file, that soon I got the stouter weapon into
the cut, and snapped the link; and so with the others, working long
hours, and often looking fearfully for the first glimmer of dawn.  This
had not come in, when I was now free of bonds, but there was yet the
casement to be scaled.  With all my strength I dragged and jerked at the
rope, whereby I meant to climb, lest the stanchions should be rusted
through, and unable to bear my weight, but they stood the strain bravely.
Then I cast off my woman's kirtle, and took from my pouch the
arrow-point, and therewith scratched hastily on the plastered wall, in
great letters: "Norman Leslie of Pitcullo leaves his malison on the
English."

Next I bound the jackanapes within the bosom of my doublet, with a piece
of the cord whereto the rope had been knotted, for I could not leave the
little beast to die the death of a traitor, and bring suspicion,
moreover, on the poor violer woman.  Then, commanding myself to the
Saints, and especially thanking Madame St. Catherine, I began to climb,
hauling myself up by the rope, whereon I had made knots to this end; nor
was the climbing more difficult than to scale a branchless beech trunk
for a bird's nest, which, like other boys, I had often done.  So behold
me, at last, with my legs hanging in free air, seated on the sill of the
casement.  Happily, of the three iron stanchions, though together they
bore my weight, one was loose in the lower socket, for lack of lead, and
this one I displaced easily enough, and so passed through.  Then I put
the wooden bar at the rope's end, within the room, behind the two other
stanchions, considering that they, by themselves, would bear my weight,
but if not, rather choosing to trust my soul to the Saints than my body
to the English.

The deep below me was very terrible to look upon, and the casement being
above the dry ditch, I had no water to break my fall, if fall I must.
Howbeit, I hardened my heart, and turning my face to the wall, holding
first the wooden bar, and then shifting my grasp to the rope, I let
myself down, clinging to the rope with my legs, and at first not a little
helped by the knots I had made to climb to the casement.  When I had
passed these, methought my hands were on fire; nevertheless, I slid down
slowly and with caution, till my feet touched ground.

I was now in the dry ditch, above my head creaked and swung the dead body
of the hanged marauder, but he did no whit affray me.  I ran, stooping,
along the bed of the dry ditch, for many yards, stumbling over the bodies
of men slain in yesterday's fight, and then, creeping out, I found a
hollow way between two slopes, and thence crawled into a wood, where I
lay some little space hidden by the boughs.  The smell of trees and grass
and the keen air were like wine to me; I cooled my bleeding hands in the
deep dew; and presently, in the dawn, I was stealing towards St. Denis,
taking such cover of ditches and hedges as we had sought in our unhappy
march of yesterday.  And I so sped, by favour of the Saints, that I fell
in with no marauders; but reaching the windmill right early, at first
trumpet-call, I was hailed by our sentinels for the only man that had won
in and out of Paris, and had carried off, moreover, a prisoner, the
jackanapes.  To see me, scarred, with manacles on my wrists and gyves on
my ankles, weaponless, with an ape on my shoulder, was such a sight as
the Scots Guard had never beheld before, and carrying me to the smith's,
they first knocked off my irons, and gave me wine, ere they either asked
me for my tale, or told me their own, which was a heartbreak to bear.

For no man could unfold the manner of that which had come to pass, if, at
least, there were not strong treason at the root of all.  For our part of
the onfall, the English had made but a feigned attack on the mill,
wherefore the bale-fires were lit, to our undoing.  This was the ruse de
guerre of the accursed cordelier, Brother Thomas.  For the rest, the Maid
had led on a band to attack the gate St. Honore, with Gaucourt in her
company, a knight that had no great love either of her or of a desperate
onslaught.  But D'Alencon, whom she loved as a brother, was commanded to
take another band, and wait behind a butte or knowe, out of danger of
arrow-shot.  The Maid had stormed all day at her gate, had taken the
boulevard without, and burst open and burned the outer port, and crossed
the dry ditch.  But when she had led up her men, now few, over the slope
and to the edge of the wet fosse, behold no faggots and bundles of wood
were brought up, whereby, as is manner of war, to fill up the fosse, and
so cross over.  As she then stood under the wall, shouting for faggots
and scaling-ladders, her standard-bearer was shot to death, and she was
sorely wounded by an arbalest bolt.  Natheless she lay by the wall, still
