have habitually over-estimated the strength of the enemy and
under-estimated his own. With this habit of mind, it was certain that he
would never suffer a great defeat; but it was also probable that he
would never win a great victory, and a great victory was just what the
North hungered for to wipe out the disgrace of Bull Run. Not for eight
months was he ready to begin the campaign against Richmond, and it ended
in heavy loss and final retreat, partly because of McClellan's
incapacity and partly because of ignorant interference with his plans on
the part of politicians at Washington. For it must be remembered that
McClellan was a Democrat, and soon became the natural leader of that
party at the North--a fact which seemed little less than treason to many
of the political managers at the Capital.

One great and successful battle he fought, however, at Antietam,
checking Lee's attempt to invade the North and sending him in full
retreat back to Virginia, but his failure to pursue the retreating army
exasperated the President, and he was removed from command of the army
on November 7, 1862. This closed his career as a soldier. In the light
of succeeding events, it cannot be doubted that his removal was a
serious mistake. All in all, he was the ablest commander the Army of the
Potomac ever had; he was a growing man; a little more experience in the
field would probably have cured him of over-timidity, and made him a
great soldier. General Grant summed the matter up admirably when he
said, "The test applied to him would be terrible to any man, being made
a major-general at the beginning of the war. If he did not succeed, it
was because the conditions of success were so trying. If he had fought
his way along and up, I have no reason to suppose that he would not have
won as high distinction as any of us." In 1864, McClellan was the
nominee of the Democratic party for the presidency, but received only
twenty-one electoral votes.

The command of the Army of the Potomac passed to Ambrose E. Burnside,
who had won some successes early in the war, but who had protested his
unfitness for a great command, and who was soon to prove it. He led the
army after Lee, found him entrenched on the heights back of
Fredericksburg, and hurled division after division against an
impregnable position, until twelve thousand men lay dead and wounded on
the field. Burnside, half-crazed with anguish at his fatal mistake,
offered his resignation, which was at once accepted.

"Fighting Joe" Hooker succeeded him, and was soon to demonstrate that
he, too, was unfitted for the great task. Early in May, believing Lee's
army to be in retreat, he attacked it at Chancellorsville, only to be
defeated with a loss of seventeen thousand men. At the beginning of the
battle, Hooker had enjoyed every advantage of position, and his army
outnumbered Lee's; but he sacrificed his position, with unaccountable
stupidity, moving from a high position to a lower one, provoking the
protest from Meade that, if the army could not hold the top of a hill,
it certainly could not hold the bottom of it; and he seemed unable to
use his men to advantage, holding one division in idleness while another
was being cut to pieces.

It is, perhaps, sufficient comment upon the folly of dismissing
McClellan to point out that within seven months of his retirement, the
Army of the Potomac, which had been the finest fighting-machine in
existence on the continent, had lost thirty thousand men on the field
and thousands more by desertion, and had been converted from a confident
and well-disciplined force into a discouraged and disorganized rabble.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile a new star had arisen in the West in the person of U.S.
Grant--"Unconditional Surrender" Grant, as he was called, after his
capture of Fort Donelson--the event which riveted the eyes of the Nation
upon him and which marked the beginning of his meteor-like advancement.
We have already spoken of Grant as President, and of his unfitness
for that high office. There are also many who dispute his ability as
a commander, who point out that his army always outnumbered that opposed
to him, and who claim that his victories were won by brute force and not
by military skill. That there is some truth in this nobody can deny, and
yet his campaign against Vicksburg was one of the most brilliant in this
or any other war. It might be added, too, that it takes something more
than preponderance of numbers to win a battle--as Hooker showed at
Chancellorsville--and that Grant did win a great many.

[Illustration: GRANT]

The truth about Grant is that he was utterly lacking in that personal
magnetism which made McClellan, Sheridan and "Stonewall" Jackson
idolized by their men, and which is essential to a great commander. He
was cold, reserved, and silent, repelled rather than attracted. He
succeeded mainly because he was determined to succeed, and hung on with
bull-dog tenacity until he had worn his opponent out. Not till then did
he stop to take stock of his own injuries. "I propose to fight it out on
this line, if it takes all summer," was a characteristic utterance.

The honors of Union victories were fairly divided with Grant by William
Tecumseh Sherman, a man who, as a general, was greater in some respects
than his chief. Sherman was an Ohioan, and, after graduating from West
Point and serving in California during the war with Mexico, resigned
from the army to seek more lucrative employment. He was given a
regiment when the war opened, and his advance was rapid. He first showed
his real worth at the battle of Shiloh, where he commanded a division
and by superb fighting, saved Grant's reputation.

Grant had collected an army of forty thousand men at Pittsburg Landing,
an obscure stopping-place in southern Tennessee for Mississippi boats,
and though he knew that the Confederates were gathering at Corinth,
twenty miles away, he left his army entirely exposed, throwing up not a
single breastwork, never dreaming that the enemy would dare attack him.
Nevertheless, they did attack, while Grant himself was miles away from
his army, and by the end of the first day's fighting, had succeeded in
pushing the Union forces back upon the river, in a cramped and dangerous
position. The action was resumed next day, and the Confederates forced
to retire, which they did in good order. That the Union army was not
disastrously defeated was due largely to the superb leadership of
Sherman, who had three horses shot under him and was twice wounded, but
whose demeanor was so cool and inspiring that his raw troops, not
realizing their peril, were filled with confidence and fought like
veterans.

Sherman's fame increased rapidly after that. When Grant departed for the
East to take command of the Army of the Potomac, he planned for Sherman
a campaign against Atlanta, Georgia--a campaign which Sherman carried
out in the most masterly manner, marching into Atlanta in triumph on
September 2, 1864. The campaign had cost him thirty-two thousand men,
but the Confederate loss had been much heavier, and in Atlanta the
Confederacy lost one of its citadels. It was especially valuable because
of the great machine shops located there, and these Sherman proceeded to
destroy before starting on his famous "march to the sea."

This, the most spectacular movement of the whole war, was planned by
Sherman, who secured Grant's permission to carry it out, and the start
was made on the fifteenth of November. The army marched by four roads,
as nearly parallel as could be found, starting at seven o'clock every
morning and covering fifteen miles every day. All railroads and other
property that might aid the Confederates were destroyed, the soldiers
were allowed to forage freely, and in consequence a swath of destruction
sixty miles wide and three hundred miles long was cut right across the
Confederacy. A locust would have had difficulty in finding anything to
eat after the army had passed. It encountered no effective resistance,
and by the middle of December, came within sight of the sea.

On December 21, Sherman entered Savannah, and wired Lincoln that he
presented him the city as a Christmas gift. Then he turned northward to
join Grant, taking Columbia, Fayetteville, Goldsboro and Raleigh, and
destroying Confederate arsenals, foundries, railroads and public works
of all descriptions. Lee had surrendered four days before Sherman
marched into Raleigh, and the next day a flag of truce from General
Joseph E. Johnston opened negotiations for the surrender of his army.

This, the virtual close of the Civil War, ended Sherman's career in the
field. In 1866, he was made lieutenant-general, and three years later
succeeded Grant as commander-in-chief of the army, retiring from the
service in 1884, at the age of sixty-four.

Whatever may have been the relative merits of Grant and Sherman as
commanders, there can be no question as to the greatest cavalry leader
in the Union armies, and one of the greatest in any army, Philip Henry
Sheridan. Above any cavalry leader, North or South, except "Stonewall"
Jackson, Sheridan possessed the power of rousing his men to the utmost
pitch of enthusiastic devotion; young, dashing and intrepid himself, his
men were ready to follow him anywhere--and it was usually to victory
that he led them.

Sheridan was a West Pointer, graduating in 1853, and was appointed
captain at the outbreak of the war. It was not until May of 1862 that he
found his real place as colonel of cavalry, and not until the first days
of the following year that he had the opportunity to distinguish
himself. Then, at the battle of Murfreesboro, he broke through the
advancing Confederate line which was crumpling up the right of the Union
army, and turned the tide of battle from defeat to victory. As a reward,
he was appointed major-general of volunteers. In April, 1864, he became
commander of the cavalry corps of the Army of the Potomac, and three
months later made his famous raid along the valley of the Shenandoah.

Entering the valley with an army of forty thousand men, Sheridan swept
Early and a Confederate force out of it, and then, to render impossible
any Confederate raids thereafter with the valley as a base, rode from
end to end of it, destroying everything that would support an army.
Early, meanwhile, had been reinforced, and, one misty morning, fell upon
the Federals while they lay encamped at Cedar Creek. The surprise was
complete, and in a short time the Union army was in full flight.
Sheridan had been called to Washington, and on the morning of the battle
was at Winchester, some twenty miles away. In the early dawn, he heard
the rumble of the cannonade, and, springing to horse, galloped to the
battlefield, to meet his men retreating.

"Face about, boys! face about!" he shouted, riding up and down the
lines; and his men saw him, and burst into a cheer, and reformed their
lines, and, catching his spirit of victory, led by their loved
commander, fell upon Early, routed him and practically destroyed his
army. Perhaps nowhere else in history is there an instance such as
this--of a general meeting his army in full retreat, stopping the panic,
facing them about, and leading them to victory.

In the last campaign against Richmond, Sheridan's services were of
inestimable value; it was he who defeated a great Confederate force at
the brilliant battle of Five Forks; it was he who got in front of Lee's
retreating army and cornered it at Appomattox. He had his full share of
honors, succeeding Sherman as general-in-chief of the army in 1883, and
receiving the rank of general from Congress, just before his death five
years later. Grant, Sherman and Sheridan are the only men in the
country's history who have held this highest of military titles.

       *       *       *       *       *

After these three men, George H. Thomas was the most prominent commander
on the Union side; notable, too, from the fact that he was a Virginian,
and was considered a traitor by his native state for his adherence to
the Union cause, just as poor old Winfield Scott had been. He had made
something of a name for himself before the Civil War opened,
distinguishing himself in the war with Mexico and winning brevets for
gallantry at the battles of Monterey and Buena Vista. He won a decisive
victory at Mill Springs early in 1862, and saved the army from rout at
Murfreesboro by his heroic holding of the centre. But his most famous
exploit was the defence of Horseshoe ridge, against overwhelming odds,
at the battle of Chickamauga.

The Union right wing had been routed, and the Confederates, certain of a
great victory, turned against the left wing, twenty-five thousand
strong, under command of Thomas. They swarmed up the slope on which
Thomas had taken his position, only to be hurled back with heavy loss.
Again and again they charged, sixty thousand of them, but Thomas stood
like a rock against which the Confederates dashed themselves in vain.
For six hours that terrific fighting continued, until nearly half of
Thomas's men lay dead or wounded, but night found him still master of
the position, saving the Union army from destruction. Ever afterwards
Thomas was known as "The Rock of Chickamauga."

In the following year, he again distinguished himself by defeating Hood
at Nashville, in one of the most brilliant battles of the war. The
defeat was the most decisive by either side in a general engagement, the
Confederate army losing half its numbers, and being so routed and
demoralized that it could not rally and was practically destroyed.
Thomas's plan of battle is studied to this day in the military schools
of Europe, and has been compared with that of Napoleon at Austerlitz.

After Grant, Sherman, Sheridan and Thomas, there is a wide gap. No other
commanders on the Union side measured up to them, although there were
many of great ability. McPherson, Buell, Sumner, Hancock, Meade,
Rosecrans, Kilpatrick, Pope--all had their hours of triumph, but none of
them developed into what could be called a great commander. Whether from
inherent weakness, or from lack of opportunity for development, all
stopped short of greatness. It is worth noting that every famous
general, Union or Confederate, and most of the merely prominent ones,
were graduates of West Point and had received their baptism of fire in
Mexico, the only exception being Sheridan, who did not graduate from
West Point until after the war with Mexico was over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Turning now to the Confederate side, we find here, too, four supremely
able commanders, the first of whom, Robert E. Lee, is believed by many
to be the greatest in our country's history. No doubt some of the renown
which attaches to Lee's name is due to his desperate championship of a
lost cause, and to the love which the people of the South bore, and
still bear, him because of his singularly sweet and unselfish character.
But, sentiment aside, and looking at him only as a soldier, he must be
given a place in the front rank of our greatest captains. There are not
more than two or three to rank with him--certainly there is none to rank
ahead of him.

Robert Edward Lee was a son of that famous "Light Horse Harry" Lee to
whose exploits during the Revolution we have already referred. He was
born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, in 1807, entered West Point at
the age of eighteen, and graduated four years later, second in his
class. His father had died ten years before, and his mother lived only
long enough to welcome him home from the Academy. He was at once
assigned to the engineer corps of the army, distinguished himself in the
war with Mexico and served as superintendent of West Point from 1852 to
1855.

Meanwhile, at the age of twenty-four, he had married Mary Randolph,
daughter of Washington Parke Custis, of Arlington, and
great-grand-daughter of George Washington's wife. Miss Custis was a
great heiress, and in time the estate of Arlington, situated on the
heights across the Potomac from Washington, became hers and her
husband's, but he nevertheless continued in the service. The marriage
was a happy and fortunate one in every way, and Lee's home life was
throughout a source of help and inspiration to him.

In the autumn of 1859, while home on leave, he was ordered to assist in
capturing John Brown, who had taken Harper's Ferry. At the head of a
company of marines, he took Brown prisoner and, protecting him from a
mob which would have lynched him, handed him over to the authorities.
Two years later came the great trial of his life, when he was called
upon to decide between North and South, between Virginia and the Union.

Lee was not a believer in slavery; he had never owned slaves, and when
Custis died in 1859, Lee had carried out the dead man's desire that all
the slaves at Arlington should be freed. Neither was he a believer in
secession; but, on the other hand, he questioned the North's right to
invade and coerce the seceding states, and when Virginia joined them,
and made him commander-in-chief of her army, he accepted the trust.
Shortly before, at the instance of his fellow-Virginian, General Scott,
he had been offered command of the Union army, but declined it, stating
that, though opposed to secession and deprecating war, he could take no
part in an invasion of the southern states.

Curiously enough, the southern press, which was to end by idolizing him,
began by abusing him. His first campaign was in western Virginia and was
a woeful failure, due partly to the splendid way in which McClellan, on
the Union side, managed it, and partly to blunders on the Confederate
side for which Lee was in no way responsible; but the result was that
that section of the state was lost to the Confederacy forever, and Lee
got the blame. Even his friends feared that he had been over-rated, and
he was sent away from the field of active hostilities to the far South,
where he was assigned to command Florida, Georgia and South Carolina. He
accepted the assignment without comment, and went to work immediately
fortifying the coast, to such good purpose that his reputation was soon
again firmly established. Early in 1862, he was recalled to Richmond to
assist in its defense. He found his beautiful estate on the heights
opposite Washington confiscated, his family exiled, his fortune gone.

General Joseph E. Johnston was in command of the forces at Richmond, and
was preparing to meet McClellan, who was slowly advancing up the
peninsula. But Johnston was wounded at the battle of Seven Pines, on May
31, and on the following day, Lee assumed command of the army. He got it
well in hand at once, sent Stuart on a raid around McClellan's lines,
and gradually forced the Union army away from Richmond, until the
capital of the Confederacy was no longer in danger. Flushed with
success, Lee threw his army to the northeast against Pope, routed him,
crossed the Potomac into Maryland, threatened Washington, and carried
the war with a vengeance into the enemy's country. A more complete
reversal of conditions could not be imagined; a month before, he had
been engaged in a seemingly desperate effort to save Richmond; now he
had started upon an invasion of the North which promised serious
results.

But things did not turn out as he expected. The inhabitants of Maryland
did not rally to him, McClellan was soon after him with a great army,
and on September 17, overtook him at Antietam, and fought a desperate
battle; from which Lee, overwhelmed by an army half again as large as
his own, was forced to withdraw defeated, though in good order, and
recross the Potomac into Virginia. Three months later, he got his
revenge in full measure at Fredericksburg, routing Burnside with fearful
loss, and early in May of the following year scored heavily again by
defeating Hooker at Chancellorsville. The last victory was a
dearly-bought one, for it cost the life of that most famous of all
American cavalry leaders, "Stonewall" Jackson, of whom we shall speak
hereafter.

That was the culmination of Lee's career, for two months after
Chancellorsville, having started on another great invasion of the North,
on the fourth day of July, 1863, he was forced to retire from the fierce
battle of Gettysburg with his army seriously crippled and with all hope
of invading the North at an end. He was on the defensive, after that,
with Grant's great army gradually closing in upon him and drawing nearer
and nearer to Richmond. That he was able to prolong this struggle for
nearly two years, especially considering the exhausted state of the
South, was remarkable to the last degree, eloquent testimony to the high
order of his leadership. Toward the last, his men were in rags and
practically starving, but there was no murmuring so long as their
beloved "Marse Robert" was with them.

On the ninth day of April, 1865, six days after the fall of Richmond,
Lee found himself surrounded at Appomattox Courthouse by a vastly
superior force under General Grant. To have fought would have meant a
useless waste of human life. Lee chose the braver and harder course, and
surrendered. He knew that there could be but one end to the struggle,
