"I have done nothing to be ashamed of," Rupert said. "Besides, I
was ordered to leave at one o'clock, and it is not one o'clock
yet."

"Oh, we are all angry with you, Monsieur l'Anglais, for you have
been deceiving us all for the last three months. But, now mind, we
bear no malice; but pray ride off."

As she spoke she made a sign to Rupert to alight and come to the
window, so that the coachman might not overhear what was said.

"Do you know," she said, earnestly, "that you are trifling with
your safety; and, if la belle Anglaise loves you, with her
happiness? You have already done more than harm enough. The king
has today, when he joined the hunt, presented to her formally
before all the court the Duc de Carolan as her future husband.
Remember, if you are found here you will not only be sent straight
to some fortress, where you may remain till you are an old man, but
you will do her harm by compromising her still further, in which
case the king might be so enraged, that he might order her to marry
the duke tomorrow."

"You are right. Thank you," Rupert said, quietly; "and I have
indeed, although most unwittingly, done harm. Why you should all
make up your minds I love Mademoiselle de Pignerolles I know not. I
have never thought of the matter myself. I am but just twenty, and
at twenty in England we are still little more than boys. I only
know that I liked her very much, just as I did when she was a
little girl."

"Oh, monsieur, but you are sly, you and l'Anglaise. So it was you
that she owned was her hero; and monsieur the marquis introduced
you as a stranger. Oh, what innocence!

"But there," she went on kindly, "you know your secret is safe with
us. And monsieur," and she leant forward, "although you would not
make love to me, I bear no malice, and will act as your deputy. A
very strict watch is certain to be kept over her. If you want to
write to her, enclose a note to me. Trust me, she shall have it.

"There, do not stop to thank me. I hear horses' hoofs. Gallop away,
please; it would ruin all were you caught here."

Rupert pressed the hands the two ladies held out to him to his
lips, mounted his horse, and rode furiously back to Versailles,
where he arrived just in time to leave again for Paris at the hour
beyond which their stay was not to be delayed.



Chapter 19: The Evasion.

Upon the ride from Versailles to Paris Rupert told the marquis what
he had done and heard.

"It is bad news, Rupert. I will ride back this afternoon, when I
have lodged you in Paris, and see Adele. If she objects--as I know
she will object to this marriage--I shall respectfully protest.
That any good will come of the protest I have no thought, but my
protest may strengthen Adele's refusal, by showing that she has her
father's approval.

"Adele will of course be treated coldly at first, then she will
have pressure put upon her, then be ordered to choose between a
convent and marriage. She will choose a convent. Now in some
convents she could live quietly and happily, in others she would be
persecuted. If she is sent to a convent chosen for her, it will be
worse than a prison. Her life will be made a burden to her until
she consents to obey the king's command. Therefore, my object will
be to secure her retreat to a convent where she will be well
treated and happy. But we will talk of this again."

It was not until the following afternoon that the marquis returned
from Versailles.

"I am off to the front again," he said. "I had an audience with his
Majesty this morning, and respectfully informed him of my
daughter's incurable repugnance to the Duc de Carolan, and of her
desire to remain single until at least she reached the age of
twenty. His Majesty was pleased to say that girls' whims were
matters to which it behoved not to pay any attention. He said,
however, that for the present he would allow it to remain in
abeyance, and that he begged me to see Adele, and to urge upon her
the necessity for making up her mind to accept his Majesty's
choice. He also said that the news from the army was bad, that good
officers were urgently required there, and that it would be
therefore advisable for me to repair at once to the front and again
take the command of my regiment. He said that he wished me to take
you with me as far as Lille, and that you should there take up your
residence."

"Of course I will accompany you, sir," Rupert said; "but I will
withdraw my parole as soon as you hand me over, and take my chance
of escaping."

"Yes, I should do that, Rupert, indeed, as you gave your parole to
me, you can give it back to me now, if you choose. I will run the
risk of some little anger on the part of the king, if you quit me
on your way to Lille and make the best of your way to the
frontier."

"No, I thank you," Rupert said. "There can't be much difficulty in
escaping from a town when one wants to do so; and it would do you
an evil turn indeed to incense the king against you at the present
time."

The next morning, just as they were setting out, a lackey placed a
note in Rupert's hands.

"I hear you are sent off to Lille. I have a cousin there, and have
written to recommend you to his care. I will keep my promise, and
let you know, if needs be, of what is happening to the young person
we spoke of--Diana."

Rupert wrote a few words of earnest thanks, and imitating the
example set him, gave it unaddressed and unsigned to the lackey,
with a handsome present to himself.

On the way to Lille, the marquis told Rupert his plans for the
withdrawal of Adele from court, and her concealment, should Louis
insist on the marriage being pressed on.

Arriving at Lille, Rupert was handed over to the governor, and
having formally withdrawn his parole to make no effort to escape,
he was assigned quarters in barracks, whence he was allowed to go
into the town during daylight; being obliged, however, to attend at
roll call at midday. The fortifications of the town were so strong
and well guarded that it was supposed that the chance of escape was
small.

The following day the Marquis de Pignerolles took an affectionate
leave of Rupert, and went on to join the army; and an hour or two
later Captain Louis d'Etamps, the cousin of whom Diana had written,
called upon him, and placed himself at his service. His cousin had
told him of the supposed crime for which Rupert had been sent away
from court, and felt much sympathy with what she considered his
hard treatment. Not only Louis d'Etamps, but the French officers of
the garrison, showed great kindness and attention to the English
prisoner, for the Duke of Marlborough had treated the French
officers who fell into his hands at Ramilies with such kindness and
courtesy, that the French were glad to have an opportunity of
reciprocating the treatment when the chance fell in their way. Late
in the autumn, the Marquis de Pignerolles was brought back to Lille
seriously wounded in one of the last skirmishes of the campaign.
Rupert spent all the time he was allowed to be out of barracks at
his friend's quarters. The wound was not considered dangerous, but
it would keep the marquis a prisoner to his room for weeks.

A few days after the marquis was brought in, Louis d'Etamps came
into Rupert's room early in the morning.

"I have a note for you from my fair cousin," he said. "It must be
something particular, for she has sent a special messenger with a
letter to me, and on opening it I find only a line asking me to
give you the enclosed instantly."

Rupert opened the latter from Diana d'Etamps; it was as follows:

"Adele has been ordered to marry the Duc de Carolan on the 15th.
Unless she consents, she is on the 14th to be sent to the nunnery
of Saint Marie, the strictest in France, where they will somehow or
other wring consent from her before many weeks are over. They have
done so in scores of cases like hers. I promised to tell you, and I
have done so. But I don't see that anything can be done. I hear
Monsieur le Marquis is badly wounded, but even were he here, he
could do nothing. The king is resolute. The Duc de Carolan has just
given 200,000 crowns towards the expenses of the war."

"May I see?" Louis d'Etamps said, for the young men were now fast
friends.

Rupert handed him the note.

"What can you do, my poor boy?" he said.

"I will go and see the marquis, and let you know afterwards,"
Rupert said. "I shall do something, you may be sure."

"If you do, you will want to escape from Lille. I will see about
the arrangements for that. There is no time to be lost. It is the
10th today."

Rupert's conversation with the Marquis de Pignerolles was long and
interesting. The marquis chafed at being confined to a sick bed and
permitting Rupert to run the risk, which was immense, of the
attempt alone. However, as he could not move, and as Rupert was
determined to do something, the marquis entered into all the plans
he had drawn up, and intended to follow when such an emergency
occurred. He gave him a letter for Adele, and then they parted.

At his room Rupert found Louis.

"Quick," he said, "there is no time to lose. At ten o'clock a
convoy of wounded leave for Paris. The doctor in charge is a friend
of mine and a capital fellow. I have just seen him. All is
arranged. Come along to my quarters, they are on the line that the
convoy goes to the gate. Jump in bed, then I will bandage up your
head with plaisters so that not more than space to see and breathe
out of will be left. When the convoy arrives at the door, he will
have an empty litter ready, will bring up four men who will lift
you in, supposing you to be a wounded French officer, carry you
down, and off you go with the convoy, not a soul save the doctor,
you, and I, the wiser. He has got a pass to leave the city with
forty-eight sick and ten soldiers, and he has only to tell one of
those marked to go that he is not well enough to be moved, and will
go with the next convoy. The messenger who brought the letter has
started again, and has taken with him a led horse of mine. He will
be at the hostelry of Henri the 4th, at the place where you will
stop tonight. He will not know who you are, I have told him that a
friend of mine will call for the horse, which I had promised to
send him.

"When you halt for the night, the doctor will order you to be
carried into his own room. You will find two or three suits of
clothes in the litter, a lackey's suit of our livery which may be
useful, a country gentleman's, and one of mine. When you are alone
with the doctor and all is safe, get up, put on the country
gentleman's suit, say goodbye to him and go straight to the stables
at the Henri the 4th. You are the Sire de Nadar. I have written a
note here, telling you the horse will be there and you are to fetch
it--here it is. The messenger will know my seal."

"I am indeed obliged to you," Rupert said, "you have thought of
everything; but how will the doctor explain my not being
forthcoming in the morning?"

"Oh, he will arrange that easily enough. The soldiers will all
sleep soundly enough after this march; besides, they will not, in
all probability, be near his quarters, so he will only have to say
that he found you were too ill to continue the journey, and had
therefore had you carried to a confrere of his. You must be under
no fear, Rupert, of any evil consequences to anyone, for no one
will ever connect you with the convoy. You will be missed at roll
call, but that will go for nothing. When you are absent again at
six o'clock, you will be reported as missing. Then it will be
supposed that you are hid in the city, and a sharp watch will be
set at the gates; but after a few days it will be supposed that you
have either got over the walls, or that you have gone out disguised
as a peasant. A prisoner of war more or less makes but little
difference, and there will never be any fuss about it."

Soon after dusk on the evening of the 13th of October, Adele de
Pignerolles was sitting alone in a large room in the house of
Madame de Soissons. A wood fire was blazing, and even in that
doubtful light it might have been seen that the girl's eyes were
swollen with crying. She was not crying now, but was looking into
the fire with a set, determined look in her face.

"I don't care," she said; "they may kill me at Saint Marie, but I
will never say yes. Oh, if papa were but here."

At that moment there was a knock at the door, and a bright-looking
waiting maid entered.

"A note, mademoiselle, from Mademoiselle d'Etamps--and
mademoiselle," and she put her finger mysteriously to her lips, "it
is a new lackey has brought it. I told him to come again in ten
minutes for an answer; for I thought it better he should not come
in to be looked at by Francois and Jules."

"Why not, Margot?" Adele asked in great surprise.

"Because, mademoiselle, he seemed to me--I may be wrong, you
know--but he seemed to me very, very like--"

"Like whom, Margot? How mysterious you are."

"Like the English officer," Margot said, with an arch nod.

Adele leapt to her feet.

"You must be mad, Margot. There, light a candle."

But without waiting, Adele knelt down close to the fire, and broke
open the letter.

A flush, even ruddier than that given by the fire, mounted over her
face.

"It is him, Margot. He has come from my father. Now we are to do
what I told you about. We are to go off tonight under his charge,
to your mother's, my dear old nurse, and there I am to live with
you, and be as your cousin, till papa can get me out of the
country."

"And is the young officer to live there till the marquis comes?"
Margot asked, slyly. "He might pass as another cousin, mademoiselle."

"How foolish you are, Margot, and this is no time for folly. But
listen. My father says, 'Rupert will be in the street round the
corner, with three horses, at eleven o'clock. You and Margot are to
be dressed in the boys' clothes that I bade you prepare. Take in
bundles two of Margot's dresses. Do not be afraid to trust yourself
with Rupert Holliday. Regard him as a brother; he has all my
confidence and trust.'"

"We must remember that," Margot said.

"Remember what, Margot?"

"Only that you are to regard him as a brother, mademoiselle."

"Margot, Margot, I am surprised at you, joking like a child when we
have a terrible business before us. But indeed I feel so happy at
the thought of escape from that terrible convent, that I could joke
like a child also."

"You had better write a line for him, mademoiselle. It was from
chance that I happened to be in the hall when he rang; and we don't
want him to come in to be stared at by Francois while you write an
answer."

Quickly Adele sat down at a table, and wrote:

"At the hour and place named, expect us--Yours, trustfully, Adele."

As the clock struck eleven two slight figures stole noiselessly out
of the garden gate of Madame de Soissons' house at Versailles. The
town was hushed in sleep, and not a sound was moving in the street.
They carried bundles with them, and walked with rapid steps to a
small lane which led off the street by the side of the garden wall.
It was quite dark, and they could see nothing, but a voice said:

"Adele!"

"Rupert!" one of the figures answered, in shy, trembling tones.

"Please stay where you are," Rupert said. "It is lighter in the
street."

The horses were led forth noiselessly, for Rupert had fastened
cloths round their feet, to prevent the iron shoes sounding on the
round pebbles which paved the streets.

Not a word was said. There was a warm clasp of the hand, and Rupert
lifted Adele into the saddle. Margot climbed into another, and the
three rode rapidly down the streets. Not a word was spoken until
they were in the open country.

"Thank God, you are safe thus far, Adele. The last time I helped
you on to a horse was the day you went out to see my hawk kill a
heron."

"Oh, Rupert," the girl said, "it seems like a dream. But please do
not let us talk yet about ourselves. Tell me about Papa. How is
he?"

Rupert told her; and gradually as they talked the excitement and
agitation passed off.

"And where did you get the horses, Rupert?"

"The one I am riding is Louis d'Etamps'," he said, "the others are
your father's. I brought orders from him to his steward in Paris,
that two of his best horses were to be sent this morning to a
stable in Versailles, and left there, and that a person with an
order from him would call for them."

"I cannot see you in the least. Are you dressed as Monsieur
d'Etamps' lackey still?"

"No, I am now a quiet country gentleman, riding down from Paris
with my two sons, who have been up with me to see their aunt who
lives in the Rue du Tempe."

"Talk French, please, Rupert. Margot will understand then; and she
is so brave and good, and shares my danger, so she ought to be as
one of us."

Adele's spirits rose as they got farther from Versailles, and they
talked and laughed cheerfully, but in low tones.

Three miles from Versailles, as they rode past a crossroad, two
mounted men dashed out suddenly.

"Stand, in the king's name! Who are you?"

"We are travellers," Rupert said, quietly, "and go where we will.
Who are you?"

"We are guards of the court, and we must know who you are before we
suffer you to pass. None ride at night near Versailles but with a
pass."

"I am an exception then," Rupert said, "and I advise you not to
interfere with us;" and he urged his horse a few feet in advance of
his companions.

One of the horsemen seized his bridle, while another drew a pistol.

Rupert's sword leaped from its scabbard and cut down the man who
held the rein. The other fired, but Rupert threw himself forward on
the horse's neck and the bullet whizzed over his head. He rode at
the garde, and with a heavy blow with the pommel of the sword
struck him senseless from his horse.

"Now," he said to Adele, "we can ride on again. You are not
frightened, I hope?"

"Not so frightened as I was the first time you drew sword in my
behalf," the girl said; "but it is very dreadful. Are they killed,
Rupert?"

"Not a bit of it," Rupert said; "one has got a gash on the head
which will cost him a crown in plaister, the other may have lost
some teeth. It would have been wise to have killed them, for their
tale in the morning is likely to be regarded as throwing some light
upon your disappearance; but I could not kill men who were only
doing their duty. At any rate we have twelve hours' start, even if
they take up the clue and pursue us on this line tomorrow.
