loaded with fetters and thrown into a dungeon. The emperor then
issued an order, declaring that Cacama had forfeited his
sovereignty by his rebellion, and that he therefore deposed him,
and appointed a younger brother named Cuicuitzca in his place. The
other leaders of the confederacy were all seized by the orders of
Montezuma in their own cities, and brought in chains to the
capital, where they were imprisoned with Cacama.

Upon Roger, the news of Cacama's arrest and imprisonment came like
a thunderclap. He was in the habit of frequently seeing Malinche,
who still retained the warm feeling of friendship for him that had
originated at Tabasco, and with whom he often had long talks of
their life in those days; but she had let no word drop as to the
doings of Cacama. She had questioned him somewhat closely as to his
relations with that prince; and he had made no secret to her of the
fact that Cacama had promised him his sister's hand in marriage. As
many of the Spaniards had already married the daughters of great
caziques, this appeared to her natural; and she had congratulated
him upon the prospect of an alliance which would bring him wealth
and land, but had said that, for the present, it would not do to
think of marriage, as it would be unsafe for him to leave the
capital.

When therefore Roger heard of the misfortune that had befallen
Cacama, he was filled alike with surprise and consternation, and
hurrying to Malinche, begged her to use her influence with Cortez
to spare the young prince's life.

"I have already done so," she said; "and he has promised that no
blood shall be shed, though the chiefs who have leagued themselves
with Cacama must all be imprisoned. The safety of the army requires
it. No harm, however, shall befall Cacama, of that be assured. I
may tell you, now, that it has been settled that his brother
Cuicuitzca shall be appointed Lord of Tezcuco in his place. This
will be done by a decree, tomorrow."

"Malinche, I must go at whatever hazard to warn Cacama's wife and
sister, in order to give them the opportunity of leaving the palace
before this young prince arrives. Pray obtain for me leave from
Cortez to go away for twenty-four hours. You can tell him of the
interest I have in the matter."

"I will manage it for you," Malinche said; "but as your princess is
also sister to the new king, I see no reason for uneasiness."

"She is devoted to Cacama," Roger replied; "and would not, I feel
sure, consent to remain in the palace with the usurper."

"You had best advise her," Malinche said, with a little nod of the
head, "to disguise her sentiments, and make the best of the matter.
It may make, you know, a good deal of difference in the amount of
dowry you will get with her."

"I am not greedy, Malinche," Roger said; "but the present is, at
any rate, no time for talking of marriage."

"Most of the officers have married," Malinche said.

"They may have done so, but they are officers, and can maintain
their wives in all honor and respect, and have apartments allotted
to them here. I have neither rank nor station, and shall certainly
not ask my princess to share my rough quarters as a soldier. There
is no hurry. As I told you but a year ago, Malinche, I am scarcely
out of my boyhood; and there will be plenty of time when matters
settle down, and we see what is going to happen, to think of
marrying."

"I will go and speak to Cortez at once, and get leave for you. But
you had best disguise yourself well--Tezcuco will be in an uproar
tonight; for the capture of Cacama will be known there ere many
hours, if it is not known already."

She soon returned with the required permission. This time Roger
dressed himself in the attire of a trader, as being less likely to
attract attention. Malinche again secured a boat for him, and
having dyed his face and hands, he started at once, as it would be
dark before he reached Tezcuco. Since Montezuma had been captive in
their hands, there was no longer any fear of an attack being made
upon the Spaniards; and the soldiers were now able to come and go
through the town, at pleasure.

Upon landing, Roger at once made his way to the palace. There was
great excitement in the town. The people were assembled in crowds,
discussing the news that had reached them; and even at the palace
gate the guards were careless of their duty, and Roger entered
without question.

He hurried direct to the royal apartments. An official who would
have barred his way allowed him to pass at once, when he recognized
his identity.

When he entered, he found a scene of grief and confusion. The queen
was extended upon a couch, weeping bitterly; while Amenche and some
of her ladies, although themselves weeping, were trying to console
her.

The princess gave a cry of joy when she saw him and, running
forward, threw herself into his arms.

"You have heard the news?" she exclaimed. "Cacama is lost. These
monsters will put him to death."

"I can reassure you as to that," Roger said. "He is a captive, but
his life is not in danger. Malinche has interceded for him, and
Cortez has promised that his life shall be spared."

A cry of gladness burst from all present.

"I have other and less pleasant news to give you, Amenche," Roger
whispered in her ear. "Get rid of all these ladies. My news must be
for you, only."

A minute or two later, the queen dismissed her ladies.

"The news I have to tell you," Roger went on, "is that tomorrow
Montezuma will issue a decree deposing Cacama, and appointing
Cuicuitzca Lord of Tezcuco."

An exclamation of anger and indignation broke from the queen and
Amenche.

"He cannot do it," the latter exclaimed, passionately. "It is
beyond his power. The emperor has a voice in the council, but
beyond that he has no power to make or unmake the Lords of
Tezcuco."

"At the present moment," Roger said gravely; "he has got the
Spanish power at his back; or rather, he is but the mouthpiece of
the Spaniards. They are the masters, and care nothing for the law
or usages of your country."

"The Tezcucans will not receive Cuicuitzca," Amenche said.
"Everyone knows that he is weak and cowardly, and of late he has
been at Mexico, dancing attendance on the Spaniards. They will
never receive him."

The queen raised her head from the couch.

"We must not build on that, Amenche. He comes, sent here by the
whites; and when Mexico dares not rise against them, you may be
sure that the people here will not dare to provoke their anger.
Besides, who have they to lead them? Was not Cacama betrayed by his
own nobles? Let us send for Cuitcatl, and hear what he advises us."

Cuitcatl, on his arrival, was so thunderstruck on hearing that
Montezuma had so debased himself, to the Spaniards, as to depose
his own nephew, whose only fault was patriotism, and who had been
endeavoring to effect his rescue, that he was for a minute or two
speechless with indignation.

"The gods have, indeed, deserted us," he said; "when they have
turned a monarch who was considered brave and honorable into a base
slave. May their vengeance fall upon him! May the curse of our
ruined country descend upon the man who is the real author of our
misfortunes!"

"Do you think, Cuitcatl," Amenche asked, "that the people will
receive this usurper?"

"I fear, indeed, that they will do so," he replied. "Montezuma has
appointed him, and Montezuma's name still has power. At any rate,
it will afford them an excuse for submission. Besides, how could
they fight when so many of our own nobles are treacherous?
Doubtless Cacama will not be the only victim, and Montezuma will,
at the orders of the Spaniards, disgrace all who have acted with
him."

"Then what would you advise us to do? We are both resolved that we
will not await the coming of this usurper."

"My house is at your service," Cuitcatl said. "It lies, as you
know, near the foot of the hills; and whatever strife may go on
here, its quiet is little likely to be invaded. Cuicuitzca will not
concern himself at present with you, nor would he venture to take
any hostile steps against you; for did he do so, it would excite a
storm of indignation.

"As to you, Princess, as his own sister, and of the royal blood,
you could if you liked stay here, as at present; and indeed, were
it not that I am sure you would not leave the queen, I should
advise you to do so; for you might then act in the interests of
Cacama, should you see an opportunity."

Amenche shook her head.

"No," she said, "brother though he is, I would not bend my head
before a usurper, while Cacama lives. When do you think we had
better leave here?"

"I should say it were best to leave at once," Cuitcatl replied. "I
will order three or four litters to be prepared; for yourselves
and, say, two of your most trusted attendants. Bathalda will find,
in the town, men on whom he can rely to take you. In this way none
here will know where you have gone. I will have the litters in
readiness at a short distance from the palace, and you can then
issue out by the garden gate, unobserved. I shall, of course,
myself escort you."

"What shall we take with us, Cuitcatl?"

"I will get, in addition to those who carry the litters, five or
six porters. These I will bring up through the gardens to the
private door, and Roger and I will carry down to them such parcels
of your clothes as you may make up. I should then make up two large
caskets with your own jewels, those of Cacama, and some of the most
valuable stones and jewels from the royal treasury--leaving all the
royal ornaments worn on state occasions, so that the usurper will
not know that any have been abstracted."

"I would rather take nothing but my own and Cacama's personal
jewels," the queen said.

"The contents of the whole treasury are his, by rights; and you
must remember, Madam, that jewels may be very useful to you. You
will have to work for Cacama, and unhappily there are many who are
not insensible to bribes; and the possession of valuable jewels may
enable you to be of great assistance to the king."

"I did not think of that," the queen said. "Yes, you are right.
There is a hoard stowed away by the late king, and by his father
before him. Its existence is only known to my husband and myself. I
have never seen it, but Cacama tells me that it is of immense
value; and was to be used only in case of an extreme emergency, and
danger to the state. We can take what we choose from this separate
hoard, and Cuicuitzca will find, from the list in the hands of the
chief of the treasury, that the royal store is untouched."

"That will be vastly better, indeed," Cuitcatl said. "It is well
that he should have no possible cause of complaint against you.
Where is this hidden receptacle?"

"Before I show it you, I will send all our attendants to bed, save
the two we will take with us--my own maid, and Amenche's."

"I will be going. Roger Hawkshaw will help you," Cuitcatl said. "It
will take some time for Bathalda to get the litters and the men.

"It is now ten o'clock. In three hours the litters shall be outside
the little gate of the garden, and I will bring six porters to the
private door at the foot of the stairs."

"That will be enough," the queen said. "Two will be ample for our
garments, and you and Roger Hawkshaw can take the jewels; which,
when we start, can go in the litters with us."

Cuitcatl left. The two ladies who were to accompany the party were
then called in, and informed of what had taken place, and that they
had been chosen to accompany the queen and princess in their
flight.

"Tell all the others," the queen said, "that we are overcome with
the news we have received, and will dispense with all further
attendance, except your own, for the night. When all is quiet, make
up your jewels and such clothes as you may wish to bring in
bundles. Then go to the wardrobe room and make up two bundles, each
as much as a man can carry, of my garments; and two of the same
size, of those of the princess. Take all our jewels out of the
caskets, and put them in with our clothes."

When the two waiting ladies had retired, the queen said to Roger:

"Now come with me, and we will open the treasure closet."

The palace was by this time hushed and quiet, the greater part of
the courtiers had long since left, having hurried away to their
homes when the news came of Cacama's arrest; and the remainder had
gone to friends in the town or neighborhood, as it was thought
probable that the Spaniards might, at once, send a force to take
possession of the palace, and arrest all found there.

Taking some keys from a strong coffer in Cacama's room, and bidding
Roger take a torch from the wall, the queen led the way to the
royal treasury. A massive door was first unlocked, and in a large
room were seen ranged vessels of gold and silver; strong boxes
containing gold necklaces, armlets, and other ornaments; while on
lower shelves were bars of gold and silver, ready to be worked up.

They passed through this room into another the same size. Around it
ran deep shelves, in which were piled the treasury papers; with the
accounts of the royal revenues, and the tributes paid by the
various cities and villages and land owners of the kingdom. In one
corner stood a small cupboard of about four feet high, also filled
with papers. The queen put her hand inside, and touched a small
spring at the back.

"Now," she said to Roger; "pull at that corner of the cupboard."

He obeyed her instructions, and at a vigorous pull the cupboard,
which had appeared solidly embedded in the wall, swung round on one
of its angles. Nothing, however, was to be seen save a bare wall
behind it.

"Now, Roger Hawkshaw, take your dagger and cut away that
plaster--for it is but plaster, though it looks like stone."

Roger obeyed. The task was an easy one, for the plaster was but
half an inch thick, and came off in flakes; showing a massive
copper door, three feet six in height, and three feet in width,
behind it. No keyhole was visible.

"Press upwards against the lintel," the queen said. "That will
release the catch of the door."

Roger did so, and at the same moment pushed with his shoulder
against the door, and it swung round with ease.

"Do you enter first, with the torch, and we will follow," the queen
said.

Roger found himself in a room about twelve feet square. At the
farther end was a pile of gold bars, four feet deep and as much
high, extending right across the room. On the floor, along the
other two sides, were ranged a number of large chests.

"Open these," the queen said. "The gold is of no use to us."

The chests were full of manufactured gold ornaments, many of them
studded with jewels. Roger was astounded at the amount of wealth
thus stored away.

"Cacama told me," the queen said, "that even the treasure houses of
Montezuma are poor, in comparison to the treasure his grandfather
and father stowed away here; and I can well believe it. You have
not opened that small chest, yet."

This was opened, and was found to contain a number of bags which
were full of pearls, turquoise, and other precious stones, of large
size and immense value.

"We will take this chest away, as it stands," the queen said.

"It would be awkward to carry," Roger objected. "It is very heavy,
and its shape would tell at once that it contained valuables. The
contents do not weigh many pounds, and could easily be wrapped up
in a cloth and put into one of the litters, without exciting
observation. If you will allow me, I will go back to one of the
sleeping rooms and fetch two or three thick rugs."

He hurried away, and in a few minutes returned. The bags were
transferred from the chest to one of the rugs he had brought, which
was then wrapped round and tied into a bundle. On two other rugs
were placed heaps of necklaces and other ornaments from the larger
chests, until each contained, as nearly as Roger could guess by
lifting them, some sixty pounds' weight of gold ornaments. These
were similarly tied up, and the three bundles were then carried out
from the hidden room, and conveyed to the apartment they had before
left.

Roger then went back to the treasury, closed the copper door, swept
up and placed in a rug every particle of plaster, and then swung
the cabinet back into its position, where it fastened with a loud
click. So firmly was it fixed that, although Roger tried with his
whole strength, it did not shake in the slightest; and the work was
so admirably done that, from the closest inspection, he was unable
to discern aught that would have shown that the cabinet was not
built into the wall. He then returned to where the ladies were
waiting him.

The queen urged him to take two or three of the bags of jewels, but
this he absolutely refused to do.

"I am acting as Cacama's friend," he said; "and as the promised
husband of his sister; and I should feel myself degraded, indeed,
were I to receive even one of those jewels."

"But there is no saying when we shall meet again," the queen said.
"There is no knowing what terrible events may occur."

"Whatever occurs, lady, I shall see you again, if I live," Roger
said. "If not, of what use are the jewels to me?"

At the appointed hour, Cuitcatl returned.

"All is in readiness," he said.

The two attendants were summoned from the apartments where they had
been waiting. Roger and his friend first carried down the bundles
of clothing, and then took up the rugs containing the heavy gold
ornaments; Roger taking, in addition, the small parcel with the
jewels. The attendants then took up their own bundles, and the
whole party proceeded downstairs, and out into the garden.

Cuitcatl led the way with the queen. Roger followed with Amenche,
the two ladies with the porters came behind.

"How strange," Roger said. "Last time I came at night through this
garden I was a fugitive, and you came down to bid me farewell. Now
it is you who have to fly!"

"When shall we meet again?" the girl sobbed.

"I cannot tell you, dear; but if I live, we will meet again. Things
may right themselves, yet; and at least, whatever happens to this
unfortunate country, we may be happy together. I have a good friend
in Malinche, and if the Spaniards conquer, Cortez will certainly
give me leave to marry you. It is his policy to marry his soldiers
to the daughters of Mexicans. If Cortez fails, and the Spaniards
are finally driven out, Cacama will recover his own again, and can
then proclaim that I am not of Spanish birth, and can give you to
me. So you see that, whatever comes, there is hope that things will
go happily with us."

"I am afraid, Roger. I fear there is to be no happiness in this
unfortunate country."

"Then we must leave it together," Roger said cheerfully. "You are
naturally depressed now, and see things in their darkest light; but
you will grow more hopeful again, when you are once established in
Cuitcatl's home. Arrange with him for Bathalda to act as messenger
between us. He is faithful and brave, and will manage to reach me,
whatever comes of it."

A few minutes later they were beyond the gardens. The four litters
stood ready. The queen and princess and the two ladies took their
seats in them, and the three bundles of valuables were also placed
inside.

"I shall love you--I shall love you until death," Amenche sobbed
out, and then the procession moved away, leaving Roger standing by
himself.

Skirting the outside wall of the garden, he made his way to the
shore of the lake. He found the boatmen asleep in their canoe. As
soon as he aroused them, they seized their paddles and, on his
taking his seat, pushed off.

"There is no occasion for speed," he said. "It is but two o'clock
now, and it is of no use our reaching Mexico until daybreak; for
the gates of the palace will be closed, and there will be no
getting in, dressed as I am, until sunrise."

They therefore paddled quietly across the lake, often resting for a
considerable time, and so arranging that they approached the city
at the same time as a number of market boats, from the villages on
the lake.

"Well," Malinche asked with a smile, as he met her in one of the
courts, as he entered, "and where is your lady love?"

"I have not brought her here," he said, rather indignantly. "You
did not suppose that I was going to bring her back to a barrack
room? I am not an officer, to have a suite of apartments to myself.
Besides, if I could have had the whole palace to myself, I should
not have asked her to forsake her sister-in-law, in her distress.
The two have fled together, and when the usurper arrives there
today, he will find that no one knows where they have gone.

"However, I hope he will not trouble himself about them. After
having taken Cacama's place, he could hardly wish to have Cacama's
wife there; and I think he will be very glad when he hears that she
has left.

"Can I see Cacama? I should like to tell him that his wife is in
safety."

"I will take you with me," Malinche said. "I saw him yesterday,
when he was brought before Montezuma. He is a gallant prince, and I
grieve that misfortune has befallen him."

Malinche led the way to the prison room where Cacama was confined.
The sentries at the door passed her and her companion without
hesitation, for they knew that her influence was supreme with
Cortez, and that orders did not apply to her.

"I will come again for you, in half an hour," she said, as the
sentry unbolted the door.

Cacama was lying on a couch, covered with rough mats. He sat up as
the door opened; and leaped to his feet, with an exclamation of
satisfaction, when he saw who his visitor was.

"I have been longing to see you, Roger," he said. "I knew that you
would come to me, as soon as you could. Have you heard that
Montezuma has deposed me, and appointed Cuicuitzca Lord of
Tezcuco?"

"I heard it yesterday afternoon, Cacama; and crossed at nightfall
to Tezcuco, with the news."

"You saw my wife?" Cacama asked eagerly. "How is she? How does she
bear the blow?"

"She was lost in grief when I first arrived there, but the
necessity for action aroused her. She and Amenche agreed that they
would not await the coming of the usurper today. They left the
palace secretly, under the charge of Cuitcatl, who had litters in
readiness for them; and started for his house, which he placed at
their disposal. None save two attendants, whom they took with them,
knew that they had left; and should the usurper seek for
them--which, Cuitcatl agreed with me, is not likely to be the case,
as he will have enough to occupy his time and thoughts--it will be
long before he can find whither they have gone.

"I must tell you, Prince, that the queen last night opened the
secret treasury, and took with her a considerable amount of the
gold ornaments and the precious stones; so that she should have the
means, if opportunity occur, of offering bribes either to the
nobles of Tezcuco, or to your guards here."

"I would I were free but for an hour," Cacama said passionately. "I
would make an example of the treacherous nobles who betrayed us.
The queen has done well, in going to the secret chamber. It was to
be kept for an emergency, and never was there a greater emergency
for Tezcuco than now. Still, there were a large number of jewels in
the public treasury, which she might have taken without breaking in
upon the hoard."

"She thought that Cuicuitzca would, on his arrival, inquire from
the chief of the treasury if everything was untouched. If he had
found that a large number of valuables had been taken, he would
connect it with the flight, and would at once send in all
directions to overtake them; whereas, if he found that everything
were untouched, he would think no more of her."

"Quite right," Cacama agreed. "Yes, it was certainly better to open
the secret chamber. It was closed up again, I hope; for I would not
that all the treasure which my father and grandfather stored away
should be wasted by Cuicuitzca, or fall into the hands of his
greedy friends, the Spaniards."

Roger informed him of the steps that had been taken; and that, with
the exception of the fact that the plaster had been removed, all
was exactly as before; and that the entrance could never be
discovered, unless the cupboard was torn from its place.

"There is little fear of that being done. All the shelves and
fittings of the treasury are of the plainest wood, and offer no
inducement to anyone to take the trouble to break them down. The
treasury might be sacked a dozen times, without its occurring to
anyone to break down that small cupboard in the corner."

Roger now told Cacama of the arrangement that had been made, that
Bathalda should act as messenger between himself and Amenche; and
