against starlings and other birds.

This answer made Aster so angry that he went over to the enemy and
enlisted in their ranks. Philip soon came to besiege the city where
Aster was stationed; and as soon as the archer heard of it, he got an
arrow upon which he wrote, "To Philip's left eye."

Aster then went up on the wall, took careful aim, and actually put out
the king's left eye. Philip was so angry when he heard of the writing on
the arrow, that he ordered another shot into the city. On this arrow was
written, "If Philip takes the city, he will hang Aster."

The city was taken, and the archer hung; for Philip always prided
himself upon keeping promises of this kind. The Olynthians, finding that
they would not be able to resist long, now wrote a letter to the
Athenians, begging them to come to their rescue.

The Athenians read the letter in the public square, so that every one
could hear it, and then began to discuss whether they should send any
help. As was always the case, some were for, and others against, the
plan, and there was much talking. Among the best speakers of the city
was the orator De-mos'the-nes, a very clear-sighted man, who suspected
Philip's designs. He therefore warmly advised the Athenians to do all
they could to oppose the Macedonian king, so as to prevent his ever
getting a foothold in Greece. Indeed, he spoke so eloquently and
severely against Philip, and told the people so plainly that the king
was already plotting to harm them, that violent speeches directed
against any one have ever since been called "Philippics," like these
orations against the King of Macedon.




LXXXIX. THE ORATOR DEMOSTHENES.


As you have seen in the last chapter, Philip had one great enemy in
Greece, the orator Demosthenes. He had distrusted Philip from the very
first, and had kept warning the Athenians that the King of Macedon was
very ambitious, and would soon try to become master of all Greece. When
the Olynthians asked for aid, he had warmly urged the Athenians to give
it, saying that they ought to bring on the conflict with Philip as soon
as possible, so that the fighting might be done outside of Greece. In
spite of his good arguments, however, Demosthenes failed.

[Illustration: Demosthenes.]

Philip took not only O-lyn'thus, but all the towns which formed the
Olynthian union, and destroyed them so completely that a few years later
one could not even find out where these once prosperous cities had been.

Demosthenes made three very fine speeches in favor of the Olynthians,
and several against Philip. These were written down, and have been
translated time and again. You may some day read and admire them for
yourselves.

Of course, when Philip heard of Demosthenes' speeches, he was very
angry; but he thought that his gold could do wonders, so he sent a
beautiful cup of that precious metal to the orator. The gift was
accepted; still Demosthenes, instead of remaining silent as Philip had
expected, went on talking against him as openly as before.

As Demosthenes was such a great man, you will like to hear how he
learned to speak so well. He was an orphan, but very ambitious indeed.
He saw how eagerly the Athenians listened to the best speakers, and he
thought that he too would like to become an orator.

Unfortunately, he could not talk very plainly, and instead of listening
to him, even his playmates made fun of him. But instead of crying,
sulking, or getting angry, Demosthenes sensibly made up his mind to
learn how to speak so well that they could no longer laugh at him. He
therefore learned a great deal of poetry, which he recited daily as
distinctly as possible. To be able to do this without attracting any
attention, he used to go down to a lonely spot on the seashore, where he
would put some pebbles in his mouth, and then try to recite so loud that
his voice could be heard above the noise of the waves.

To make his lungs strong, he used to walk and run up hill, reciting as
he went; and, in order to form a pleasant style, he copied nine times
the works of the great Greek historian Thu-cyd'i-des.

When a young man, he shut himself up in the house to study hard. Then,
as he was afraid of being tempted to go out and amuse himself, he shaved
one side of his head, and let the hair grow long on the other.

You see, he was bound to succeed, and his constant trying was duly
rewarded, as it always is. He became learned, eloquent, and energetic;
and whenever he rose to speak in the public places of Athens, he was
surrounded by an admiring crowd, who listened open-mouthed to all he
said.

The Athenians were too lazy at this time, however, to bestir themselves
very much, even for their own good. So, in spite of all that Demosthenes
could say, they did not offer any great resistance to Philip, who little
by little became a very powerful king.




XC. PHILIP MASTERS GREECE.


When Philip had entirely subdued the Thracians and Olynthians, he helped
the Thessalians to get rid of their tyrant; and, adding their cavalry to
his infantry, he boasted of as fine an army as the Greeks had ever been
able to muster. He was very anxious to find a pretext to march into
Greece at the head of this force, because he thought that, once there,
he would soon manage to become master of all the towns. And the excuse
for which he longed so much soon came.

A contest known as the Sacred War was going on in Greece at that time.
It had arisen because the Pho'cians had taken possession of lands that
were left waste in honor of the god Apollo. The Amphictyonic Council
said they should pay a fine for this offense; and the Phocians, angry at
being thus publicly reproved, defied the council.

To show how little they intended to obey, they not only kept the land
they had taken, but robbed the temple at Delphi. Then they used the
money thus obtained to win over some allies, and soon began to make war
against the people who obeyed the council.

The loyal Greeks fought against the Phocians for a long time, but were
unable to conquer them: so Philip proposed to come and help the council.
In their anxiety to win in this war, the Greeks gladly allowed him to
bring his army into their country, and he soon completely subdued the
rebels.

In reward for his help, Philip was made president of the council,--a
position he had long coveted,--and leader of the Pyth'i-an games held in
honor of Apollo.

When the war was ended, Philip quietly went back to Macedon. He was,
however, merely waiting for a favorable opportunity to reenter Greece,
and punish the Athenians for listening to Demosthenes' speeches against
him.

In the mean while, Philip's gold had been very busy, and he was buying
up as many friends and allies as he could. Many of his gifts had the
desired effect, and were not like the gold cup which he sent to
Demosthenes. This, you know, had wholly failed in its purpose, for the
orator went on talking more eloquently than ever against the Macedonian
king.

He finally roused the Athenians to the point of arming to meet Philip,
when they heard that he was really coming at last to make himself master
of Greece. Their allies, the Thebans, joined them; and the two armies
met at Chaer-o-ne'a, in Boeotia, where a terrible battle was fought.

Demosthenes had joined the army; but as he was no soldier, and was not
very brave, he fled at the very first onset. Dashing through the bushes,
he was suddenly stopped by some spiky branches that caught in his cloak
and held him fast. The orator was so frightened that he thought the
enemy had captured him, and, falling upon his knees, he began to beg
that his life might be spared.

While Demosthenes was thus flying madly, his friends and fellow-citizens
were bravely meeting the Macedonians; but, in spite of all their
courage, they were soon forced to yield to the Macedonian phalanx, and
the battlefield was left strewn with their dead.

Alexander, Philip's son, who was then only eighteen years of age,
commanded one wing of his father's army, and had the glory of completely
crushing the Sacred Battalion of the Thebans, which had never before
been beaten.

This brilliant victory at Chaeronea made Philip really master of all
Greece; but he generously refrained from making the Athenians recognize
him openly as their lord, although he made their government do whatever
he pleased.

As Greece was now obedient to him, the ambitious Philip began to plan
the conquest of Asia and the downfall of the Persian Empire. To get as
large an army as possible, he invited all the Greeks to join him,
artfully reminding them of all they had suffered at the hands of the
Persians in the past.

His preparations were nearly finished, and he was on the point of
starting for Asia, when he was murdered by Pausanias, one of his
subjects, whom he had treated very unkindly.




XCI. BIRTH OF ALEXANDER.


When Philip died, he was succeeded by his son Alexander, a young man of
twenty, who had already earned a good name by leading part of the army
at the battle of Chaeronea. His efforts, as you know, had defeated the
Sacred Battalion of the Thebans, and helped much to secure the victory.

Through his mother, O-lym'pi-as, Alexander was a descendant of Achilles,
the well-known hero of the Trojan War. He was born at Pel'la, a city of
Macedon, three hundred and fifty-six years before Christ. His father was
so pleased to have a son, that he said that all the boys born in his
kingdom on the same day should be brought up with Alexander in the
palace, and become his bodyguard.

Thus you see the young prince had plenty of playmates; and, as there
was nothing he liked better than fighting, he soon began to play
soldiers, and to train his little regiment.

From the very first, the Macedonians had declared that Alexander was
born to greatness, and several noted events that took place on the day
of his birth served to confirm this belief.

In the first place, Par-me'ni-o, Philip's general, won a grand victory
on that day; then Philip's horses, which had been sent to Olympia, got
the prize at the chariot races; and, lastly, the famous temple at
Ephesus, dedicated to Diana, was burned to the ground.

The first two events were joyful in the extreme; but the burning of
this temple, which was among the wonders of the world, was a great
calamity. Every one was anxious to know how it had happened; and all
were very angry when they found out that it was not an accident, but had
been done on purpose.

The man who had set fire to it was crazy. His name was E-ros'tra-tus;
and when he was asked why he had done such a wicked thing, he said that
it was only to make his name immortal. The people were so indignant,
that they not only condemned him to die, but forbade all mention of his
name, hoping that it would be forgotten.

In spite of this care, Erostratus' name has come down to us. It is
immortal indeed, but who except a crazy man would wish to win such fame,
and could bear to think that all who ever heard of him would condemn his
action, and consider him as wicked as he was insane?

Alexander was first given over to the care of a nurse. He loved her
dearly as long as he lived, and her son Cly'tus was always one of his
best friends and most faithful comrades.

As soon as he was old enough, Alexander began to learn the Iliad and
Odyssey by heart; and he loved to hear about the principal heroes, and
especially about his own ancestor, Achilles.

He admired these poems so much that he carried a copy of them with him
wherever he went, and always slept with it under his pillow. Both the
Iliad and the Odyssey were kept in a box of the finest gold, because
Alexander thought nothing was too good for them.




XCII. THE STEED BUCEPHALUS.


When only thirteen years of age, Alexander once saw some horsedealers
bringing a beautiful steed before the king. The animal had a white spot
on his nose shaped somewhat like the head of an ox, and on this account
was named Bu-ceph'a-lus, which means "ox-head."

Philip admired the horse greatly, and bade the grooms try him, to see if
his gait was good. One after another mounted, only to be thrown a few
minutes later by the fiery, restless steed, which was becoming very much
excited.

The horse seemed so skittish that Philip finally told the men to lead
him away, adding that a man would be foolish to purchase such a useless
animal. Alexander then stepped forward and begged permission to try him.

His father first made fun of him for asking to mount a horse which none
of the grooms could manage; but, as Alexander persisted in his wish, he
was finally allowed to make the attempt.

The young prince then quietly walked up to the excited horse, took the
bridle, held it firmly, and began to speak gently and pat the steed's
arched neck. After a moment, Alexander led Bucephalus forward a few
steps, and then turned him around, for he had noticed that the horse was
frightened by his shadow.

Then, when the shadow lay where he could not see it, and where it could
no longer frighten him, the young man dropped his cloak quietly, and
vaulted upon the horse's back. Once more Bucephalus reared, pranced,
kicked, and ran; but Alexander sat firmly on his back, spoke to him
gently, and, making no effort to hold him in, let him speed across the
plain.

[Illustration: Alexander and Bucephalus.]

In a few moments the horse's wildness was over, and Alexander could ride
back to his proud father, sitting upon a steed which obeyed his
slightest touch.

Philip was so delighted with the coolness, courage, and good
horsemanship that Alexander had shown on this occasion, that he made him
a present of the steed. Bucephalus became Alexander's favorite mount,
and, while he would allow no one else to ride him, he obeyed his master
perfectly.

Although most young men began the study of philosophy only at sixteen,
Alexander was placed under the tuition of Ar'is-totle soon after his
first ride on Bucephalus. This philosopher was a pupil of Plato. He was
so learned and well known, that Philip, in writing to him to tell him of
Alexander's birth, expressed his pleasure that the gods had allowed his
son to live in the same age with so great a teacher.

Alexander loved Aristotle dearly, and willingly learned all that was
required of him. He often said that he was very grateful, for this
philosopher had taught him all the good he knew. Alexander's remarkable
coolness, judgment, and perseverance were largely owing to his teacher,
and, had he always followed Aristotle's advice, he would have been truly
great.

But although Alexander did not always practice the virtues which
Aristotle had tried to teach him, he never forgot his old tutor. He gave
him large sums of money, so that the philosopher could continue his
