occupied a deep channel between Ile d'Aix and the Boyart Shoal, and it
was supposed would prove effectual against the passage of fire-ships.
The French fleet was drawn up in two lines inside the boom, with three
frigates in line ahead of them.  The ships thus placed, aided by the
batteries on shore, would have been sufficient to sink the British fleet
had it attempted to force a passage.  Besides the fire-ships, Lord
Cochrane had constructed two explosion vessels.  The largest contained
1500 barrels of powder, formed into a solid mass by wedges and wet sand
rammed hard between the casks.  On the top of this mass of gunpowder
were 400 live shells with short fusees, together with as many hundreds
of hand grenades and rockets.

The night of the 11th of April was fixed on for the enterprise.  The
fire-ships were ready, but one mortar-vessel, the _Etna_, alone had
arrived.  The _Imperieuse_, from whence operations were to be directed,
anchored close to the inner end of the Boyart Shoal.  The _Aigle,
Unicorn_, and _Pallas_ frigates, brought up in a line to the northward
of her, in order to receive the crews of the fire-ships and support the
boats of the fleet, while the _Etna_ anchored off the north-east point
of Ile d'Aix, covered by the _Emerald_ frigate and four gun brigs.  Two
others, with screened lights hoisted, were to act as pointers for the
guidance of the fire-ships.  They were to pass between the two light
vessels, and then shape a course for the boom.  A strong wind from the
north-west enabled the fire-ships to run about two points free for the
boom.  At 8:30 p.m. Lord Cochrane, accompanied by Lieutenant Bissell,
embarked on board the largest of the explosion vessels, on the perilous
undertaking, the other fire-ships followed.  He was accompanied by a
boat's crew of four volunteers only, in addition to the lieutenant.
Having nearly reached the boom, he ordered the lieutenant and his men to
get into the boat while he ignited the port-fires.  It was supposed that
the fusees would burn fifteen minutes, by the end of which time the boat
might be well out of the range of the grenades; but scarcely five
minutes had elapsed ere a terrific explosion occurred, throwing up a
huge wave which nearly swamped the boat, while grenades and rockets were
darting round them on all sides, shells and missiles of every
description rising in the air.  The escape of Lord Cochrane and his
companions was almost miraculous, for not one of them was hit.  The
fire-ship, too, had performed her destined work, if not as completely as
had been desired, sufficiently so to enable the _Mediator_ fire-ship,
Commander Woolridge, to force her way.  In his eagerness to direct her
against the enemy, he remained till the explosion actually occurred,
when he, with two lieutenants, a seaman, and the gunner, who was killed,
were blown out of the ship.  So well directed were the six other
fire-ships that two fell on board the _Ocean_, of 120 guns, and the
_Regulus_, a 74, the former being compelled to cut her cables, and she
soon afterwards, narrowly escaping the Pallas Shoal, ran on shore, where
she again had a narrow escape from another fire-ship.  So panic-stricken
were the French crews that every effort to escape was made.  The scene
was indeed truly terror-inspiring, the darkness rendering the effect of
the burning ships, the flight of shells and rockets, and the flashes of
the guns awful in the extreme.

The danger in which the French ships were placed will best be understood
from an account written by one of the officers of the _Ocean_, the
French admiral's flag-ship.  After the _Ocean_, narrowly escaping being
blown up, had grounded, a burning fire-ship grappled her athwart her
stern.  Every effort was made to prevent the fire from catching the
ship; the engine playing, completely wetted the poop, while spars were
used to heave off the fire-ship, and axes to cut the lashings of her
grapnels fastened to the end of her yards; but the _chevaux-de-frise_ on
her sides held her firm.  The flames from the fire-ship covering the
whole of the poop, it seemed impossible that the _Ocean_ could escape.
At this juncture two other line-of-battle ships, the _Tonnerre_ and
_Patriote_, fell on board her.  The first broke her own bowsprit and
destroyed the _Ocean's_ main-channels.  As the fire-ship athwart the
stern was now about to drive forward along the starboard side, the
_Tonnerre_ was got free.  Unless this had happened the fire-ship would
have fallen into the angle formed by the two ships, and would inevitably
have burnt them.  The fire-vessel having now drifted under the bowsprit
of the _Ocean_, was there held for some time.  In order to afford the
_Tonnerre_ and _Patriote_ an opportunity to get out of her reach, an
attempt had been made to drown the magazine, but the flow of water was
too slow for the purpose.  In the efforts to clear the fire-ships
upwards of fifty men fell into the sea and were drowned, the boats
saving others.

Shortly afterwards another fire-vessel approached on the
starboard-quarter, but the _Ocean's_ guns cut away her main-mast, and
wearing, she passed close alongside.  For the remainder of the night
vessels were seen burning on all sides.  Daylight revealed the French
fleet in a deplorable condition; the _Ocean_ on the mud at a distance of
half-a-mile to the south-east of the anchorage in Aix Road; to the
south-east of her, about fifteen hundred yards off, on a rocky bed, lay
the _Varsovie_ and _Aquilon_, and close to them on somewhat better
ground the _Regulus_ and _Jemappes_.  The _Tonnerre_, already bilged,
and her main-mast cut away, and most of her guns hove overboard, lay at
the entrance of the Charente, and at some distance off the _Calcutta_,
close to the wreck of the _Jean Bart_.  The _Patriote_ and _Tourville_
also lay not far from the channel of the Charente.  Four frigates were
also on shore in the same direction.  All the grounded ships were more
or less on the heel--those on the Pallas Shoal in a very desperate
condition.  Thus, although the fire-vessels had not caused the immediate
destruction of any of the French fleet, they had been the means of
reducing nearly the whole of them to a comparatively defenceless state.
Lord Cochrane, in the _Imperieuse_, being the nearest English ship, was
the first to perceive their condition, and immediately telegraphed, "The
fleet can destroy the enemy--seven on shore;" at 6:40, "Eleven on
shore;" and at 9:30, "Enemy preparing to heave off."  At first it was
hoped that Lord Gambier would immediately stand in and complete the
destruction of the helpless enemy; and there can be little doubt, had
such men as Sir Sidney Smith or Lord Cochrane himself been in command,
such would have been accomplished; but Lord Gambier, afraid of risking
the loss of the whole fleet by venturing among the shoals, called his
captains on board, held a council of war, and allowed the favourable
time to pass by.  The tide rising enabled several of the ships to get
afloat, and run up the Charente out of the way of danger.  The
_Imperieuse_, without waiting for orders, after signalling for
assistance, stood towards three of the French ships, the _Calcutta,
Varsovie_, and _Aquilon_.  After some time she was joined by some gun
brigs and bomb-vessels, and later by the _Indefatigable_, and other
frigates.  She had, in the meantime, compelled the _Calcutta_ to cease
firing, and the Frenchmen to abandon her.  Lord Cochrane then sent a
midshipman and boat's crew to take possession, when, without orders, the
midshipman set her on fire, and in the evening she blew up with a
tremendous explosion.  The _Tonnerre_ was also set on fire by her own
officers and crew, and blew up.  The fire from the English ships
compelled the _Varsovie_ and _Aquilon_ to submit at 5:30 p.m.  Five
other French ships lying on shore at the mouth of the Charente might
also have been destroyed had there been any reserve of fire-vessels, but
these were wanting, and though efforts were made to prepare three more,
by the time they were ready the wind had shifted and they could not be
used.  The French lost the _Varsovie_, of 84 guns, the _Aquilon_ and
_Tonnerre_, of 74 guns, and the _Calcutta_, of 50 guns.  The
_Imperieuse_ during the action had three seamen killed, and Mr Gilbert,
an assistant-surgeon, Mr Marsden, purser, seven seamen, and two marines
wounded, while the _Revenge_ had three men killed and Lieutenant Garland
and fourteen men wounded, she also receiving considerable damage in her
hull from the batteries on Ile d'Aix.  The French loss was much more
considerable; the _Varsovie_ especially, having 100 killed and wounded,
while the captain of the _Aquilon_ was killed in a boat of the
_Imperieuse_, when seated by the side of Lord Cochrane, by a shot from
the burning _Tonnerre_.  The burning _Varsovie_ and _Aquilon_, being
supposed by the French to be fire-ships, created a further panic among
them.  The captain and crew of the _Tourville_, believing that the
fire-vessel was bearing down upon them, deserted their ship, and
hastened in their boats on shore.  A gallant French quartermaster,
however, of the name of Bourgeois, managed to get on board again before
the boat shoved off, resolved to stand by his ship to the last.  To
secure his safety should the fire-ships grapple the _Tourville_, he at
once began constructing a raft.  He had just completed it when an
English boat approached, the crew of which were ignorant that the ship
was abandoned.  Bourgeois hailed her twice, but receiving no reply,
fired a musket which he found at the gangway.  This was returned, but
the intrepid fellow, hastening to the captain's cabin, where he found
twenty loaded muskets, discharged them in quick succession, when,
greatly to his satisfaction, the boat pulled away.  After he had been on
board an hour, he discovered three of his shipmates insensible from
drink on the lower-deck.  A short time after this three of the
_Tourville's_ boats, with a young midshipman, who now took the command,
returned on board the _Ocean_, and he and the brave quartermaster
prepared to defend their ship to the last.  Fortunately for them, the
English, not aware of what had happened, did not attack her, or she
would undoubtedly have been added to the list of the French ships
destroyed on the occasion Lord Cochrane still remained with the gun
brigs, and the _Pallas_, Captain Seymour, her commander, having
gallantly decided on rendering him assistance.  At 8 a.m. on the 13th of
April he despatched the brigs and mortar-vessel to attack the ships
still aground.  The _Etna_ unfortunately split her mortar, and the other
vessels could do the enemy but little harm.  A strong wind and tide
prevented the _Imperieuse_ and _Pallas_ from taking a part in the
attack.  At noon five other small vessels were sent in by Lord Gambier,
who wrote to Lord Cochrane giving him leave to attack the _Ocean_, but
observing that there was little prospect of success, and desiring to see
him as soon as possible.  Lord Cochrane replied, "We can destroy the
ships which are on shore, which I hope your lordship will approve of."
The _Imperieuse_, therefore, remained until the next day, when Lord
Gambier, finding that Lord Cochrane would not quit his post as long as
he had a shadow of discretionary authority, superseded him in the
command of the fire-ships by Captain Wolfe, observing, "I wish you to
join me as soon as possible, that you may convey Sir Harry Neale to
England, who will be charged with my despatches."  The _Imperieuse_,
therefore, proceeded to Basque Roads, where Lord Cochrane had a
disagreeable interview with the admiral, who insinuated that he desired
to take all the merit of the service to himself.  On his arrival in
England Lord Cochrane, who had now a seat in Parliament, gave notice
that he should oppose the vote of thanks about to be proposed to Lord
Gambier.  On hearing this Lord Gambier, on his arrival, demanded a
court-martial.  The evidence of Captain Pulteney Malcolm was much in
favour of Lord Cochrane, but the other witnesses supported Lord Gambier,
and sentence was pronounced, honourably acquitting him of all blame.
From that day Lord Cochrane's prospect of success in the navy was
destroyed.  Though attempts were made by Lord Mulgrave to bribe him
over, he refused to abandon what he considered his duty to his
constituents and the country.  The vote of thanks to Lord Gambier was
carried by a majority of 161 to 39.

The following year, when Crocker, secretary to the Admiralty, brought
forward the navy estimates, Lord Cochrane moved an address for certain
returns relating to pensions on the civil list, contrasting them with
pensions to naval officers; remarking in the course of his speech, "An
admiral, when superannuated, has 410 pounds a-year, a captain 210
pounds, while a clerk of the ticket-office retires on 700 pounds a-year.
Four daughters of the gallant Captain Courtenay, who was killed in
action with the enemy when commanding the _Boston_, have 12 pounds, 10
shillings each; the daughters of Admiral Sir A. Mitchel and Admiral
Hepworth have each 25 pounds; Admiral Keppel's daughter, 24 pounds; the
daughter of Captain Mann, who was killed in action, 25 pounds; and four
children of Admiral Moriarty, 25 pounds each.  Thus thirteen daughters
of admirals and captains, several of whose fathers fell in the service
of their country, receive from the gratitude of the nation a sum in the
aggregate less than Dame Mary Sexton, the widow of a commissioner."

Remarking on the pension list, he observed, "Captain Johnstone receives
45 pounds 12 shillings for the loss of an arm; Lieutenants Harding and
Lawson, 91 pounds, 5 shillings each for a similar loss; Lieutenant
Campbell, 40 pounds for the loss of a leg; and Lieutenant Chambers, RM,
80 pounds for the loss of both legs--while Sir Andrew Hammond retires on
a pension of 1500 pounds per annum."

Amongst the most renowned exploits of the navy is that of the capture of
Curacoa.  It having been reported to Vice-Admiral Dacres, then
commander-in-chief on the Jamaica station, that the inhabitants of the
island of Curacoa wished to ally themselves to Great Britain, he
despatched the _Arethusa_, 38-gun frigate, commanded by Captain Charles
Brisbane, accompanied by the _Latona_, also of 38 guns, Captain Wood,
and the _Anson_, 44 guns, Captain Lydiard.  These, when close to the
island, were joined by the _Fisgard_, of 38 guns, Captain Bolton.
Captain Brisbane, suspecting that the governor and the troops
garrisoning the strong forts would not be willing to yield them up as
the inhabitants might desire, without waiting to enter into diplomatic
negotiations, determined at once to run into the harbour of Saint Anne,
the capital of the island, and to invite the authorities to yield under
the muzzles of his guns.  A favourable wind, which sprang up on the last
day of the year 1806, gave him hopes of being able to carry out his
project.  On New-Year's Eve it was known that every true Dutchman would
indulge in extra potations, and that by getting in at daylight, before
the garrison had regained their senses, there would be every probability
of catching them unprepared.  Excellent arrangements were made; each
frigate had her allotted station, and the larger portion of her crew was
divided into storming parties, under their respective officers.  The
master, with the remainder of the hands, being left in charge of the
ship.  Each was to wear a distinctive badge, so that they might know
each other during the fighting.  The difficulties to be encountered were
of no light description.  The harbour, only fifty fathoms wide, was
defended by regular fortifications; one, Fort Amsterdam, on the right of
the entrance, mounting sixty guns in two tiers.  On the opposite side
was a chain of forts, and at the farther end an almost impregnable
fortress, called Fort Republique, enfilading it almost within grape-shot
distance.  Besides these defences, a 36-gun frigate, a 20-gun corvette,
and two large armed schooners lay athwart the harbour, which nowhere
exceeds a quarter-of-a-mile in width.

At daylight the _Arethusa_ leading, with a flag of truce at the fore,
followed by the other three frigates, entered the port, receiving as she
did so a warm fire from the Dutch, who, however, only at that instant
aroused out of their beds, took but bad aim.  In a few minutes the wind
beaded the frigates, but shifting again, they stood on, and took up
their stations in favourable positions, with their broadsides bearing on
the Dutch forts and ships.  So close in were the frigates that the
_Arethusa's_ jib-boom was over the wall of the town.  Captain Brisbane
now sent a summons to the governor, to the effect that the British
squadron had come to protect, not to conquer the inhabitants, but that
if a shot was fired, he should immediately storm the batteries.  He
wisely gave the governor but five minutes to make up his mind.
Receiving no answer, Captain Brisbane ordered the ships to open their
broadside, when each having fired three, he and Captain Lydiard boarded
and carried the frigate and corvette.  This done, they proceeded to
storm Fort Amsterdam, which, though strongly garrisoned, was carried in
about ten minutes, one party breaking open the sea-gate with crowbars,
while another escaladed the walls.  The citadel of the town, and several
other forts, were carried with equal celerity.  A fire was next opened
upon Fort Republique, and preparations were made to attack it in the
rear with a body of 300 seamen and marines, but so completely confounded
were the garrison by the suddenness of the assault that, though they
might have effectually resisted, and possibly blown the British ships
out of the water, they yielded without firing a shot, and a little after
10 a.m. the British flag was hoisted on their walls.  Two hours later
the island of Curacoa capitulated, and was taken possession of by the
victors.

During this brilliant morning's work the total loss of the English
amounted to only 3 killed and 14 wounded, chiefly in the capture of the
ships; and the Dutch lost 5 killed and 8 wounded, besides nearly 200 men
killed and wounded on shore.

Many other gallant actions were fought between light squadrons and
single ships, and numerous cutting-out expeditions in boats were
successfully undertaken.  During these years the British line-of-battle
ships attained a size far greater than had existed at any preceding
period.  The _Caledonia_, though ordered as far back as the year 1794,
did not begin building till January, 1805, and was launched on the 25th
of June, 1808.  Though originally intended to carry only 100 guns, she
was altered to a 120-gun ship, her draught being prepared by Sir William
Rule, one of the surveyors of the navy.  Her length on the lower
gun-deck from the rabbet of the stem to the rabbet of the stern-post was
205 feet; her extreme breadth 53 feet 8 inches; her depth of hold 23
feet 2 inches; and she was of 2615 tons burden.  Her net complement,
including marines and boys, was 891.  She was, and continued to be, the
finest three-decker in the service.  She excelled in all essential
qualities, rode easy at her anchors, carried her lee-ports well, rolled
and pitched quite easy, steered, worked, and stayed remarkably well, was
a weatherly ship, and lay to very close, close-hauled under whole or
single reefed top-sails.  She went nine knots, and under all large sail
eleven knots.

She was followed by the _Nelson_, of the same size, the _Britannia_,
built at Plymouth, and the _Prince Regent_ at Chatham.  Two others of a
somewhat similar size were subsequently added, the _London_, built at
Plymouth, and the _Princess Charlotte_ at Portsmouth, in the year 1813.

The prizes captured during the year 1807 nearly doubled that of any
other period.  At the same time, the losses sustained by the navy were
greater than had ever before occurred, amounting to no less than 38
ships.  Of these, no fewer than 29 foundered at sea or were wrecked, a
large proportion of their crews perishing with them.  The navy of
England had, however, greatly increased.  At the commencement of 1815
she possessed 124 line-of-battle ships, averaging each 1830 tons;
whereas at the end of the previous century, they averaged only 1645
tons.  If we take a glance back to a still more distant period, we shall
judge better of the enormous progress made during the last two
centuries.  In the year 1641 the navy of England consisted of 42 ships,
the aggregate tonnage of which was 22,411 tons.  At the period of which
we are writing it amounted to 966,000 tons, and within fifty years of
that period, Scott Russell launched in the Thames one vessel of 22,500
tons, being in excess by 89 tons of the whole British fleet at the time
of Charles the First.  At that period about 8000 men were considered
sufficient to man the navy, while in 1814, 146,000 men were voted; the
navy estimates amounted to 18,786,509 pounds, and the burden of 901
ships amounted to 966,000 tons.

England, taught by the loss of several frigates captured by American
ships of the same class, though vastly superior in size, began to
construct frigates to compete with her foes.  Three small-class
seventy-fours, the _Majestic, Goliath_, and _Saturn_, were cut-down so
as to retain their main-deck batteries, on which they were armed with 28
long 32-pounders, while on their lower-decks they received an equal
number of 42-pounder carronades, besides two long 12-pounders as
chase-guns; making 58 guns on two flush-decks, with a net complement of
495 men and boys.  They thus, though denominated frigates, possessed a
slightly increased weight of metal in broadsides to that which they
before carried.  It was hoped that with the aid of black hammock-cloths
thrown over the waist of the barricade, they would be so disguised as to
tempt any large American frigates they might fall in with to come down
and engage.  Such ships would have been more than a match for the
heaviest of the American 44-gun frigates.  They were in reality
two-decked ships, but, as it turned out, they had no opportunity of
proving their powers with any of the vessels with which they were
intended to cope.

Several other fine 50-gun frigates were built; the _Endymion, Glasgow_,
and _Liverpool, Forth, Liffey_, and _Severn_ the three latter of fir,
and the two before-mentioned of pitch-pine; the chief complaint made of
them being that their quarters were rather confined.  They had a
complement of 350 men and boys.  Other smaller frigates were constructed
for economy's sake of yellow pine, most of them carrying medium
24-pounders, with a complement of 330 men and boys.  To the British Navy
were also added two classes of sloops of war; the largest, of about 430
tons, mounted 18 32-pounder carronades on the main-deck, and 6, 12, or
18-pounder carronades on the quarter-deck and forecastle, with two long
sixes, making a total of 26 guns, with 121 men and boys.  The
second-class was the 18-gun brig-sloop.  Another class of ship-sloops or
corvettes were fitted out for sea while Sir Joseph Yorke was First Lord
of the Admiralty, having a flush-deck, and carrying 18 32-pounder
carronades and two long nines.  They were fitted with stern chase-ports,
but from the narrowness of their sterns there was no room to work the
tiller, while the guns were pointed from the ports.  They were defective
also in having their masts too slight, while they were in other respects
heavily rigged.  The worst vessels, however, constructed at a later
period, were the 10-gun brigs of war, small, narrow craft, so low
between decks that the unfortunate commander, if a tall man, had to
stand up, with his head through the skylight, and his looking-glass on
deck, to shave himself.  For many years commanders were appointed to
them with a crew of upwards of 100 men, two lieutenants, and other
gun-room officers, as well as midshipmen, whose berth measured seven
feet by five.  Being excessively crank, the greater number foundered,
and gained for the class the unenviable title of "sea-coffins."  They
and frigates carrying 28 guns, generally known in the service by the
name of "jackass-frigates," were the worst class of vessels belonging of
late years to the British Navy.  They existed, however, till steam power
and the screw propeller caused those that had escaped destruction to be
broken up or sold out of the service.  For some years previously,
however, the 10-gun brigs were commanded by lieutenants, with, of
course, reduced crews.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

WAR WITH UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TO WAR IN SYRIA--FROM A.D. 1811 TO
A.D. 1840.

Much indignation had long been felt by the people of the United States
in consequence of Great Britain claiming the right of searching neutral
vessels for deserters from our ships.  There existed, also, among them
another cause of annoyance.  It was this, that while the rest of the
world were at war, the Americans had enjoyed the advantage of being the
carriers for other powers, and that Napoleon, in the hope of crippling
England, had declared all neutral vessels that had touched at any of her
home or colonial ports liable to confiscation, thus virtually putting a
stop to the commerce of the United States.  Instead of complaining of
France, the Americans put the blame on England, and hoped by going to
war with her to regain the carrying trade they had lost.  England had,
besides, given great provocation as far back as the year 1807, when a
small squadron of British ships was stationed off the American coast.
Several men having deserted from the different ships, some of them were
received on board the United States frigate _Chesapeake_.  Hearing of
the occurrence, the admiral at Halifax despatched the 50-gun frigate
_Leopard_, commanded by Captain Humphries, with orders to the captains
of any of the ships should they fall in with the _Chesapeake_ without
the limits of the United States to insist on searching her for
deserters.  Having delivered her despatches, the _Leopard_ was lying
with the rest of the squadron, when the _Chesapeake_, which was at
anchor in Hampton Roads, put to sea on her way to the Mediterranean.  On
this, the _Leopard_ received orders from the British commodore, to make
sail in chase of her.  Captain Humphries, shortly afterwards, falling in
with the _Chesapeake_, hailed to say that he had a message from the
British commander-in-chief.  To this the American commodore, Barron,
replied, "Send it on board--I will heave to."  On the arrival of the
_Leopard's_ lieutenant on board the _Chesapeake_, Commodore Barron
declared that he had no such men on board as were described.  On the
lieutenant's return, Captain Humphries again hailed the _Chesapeake_,
and receiving unsatisfactory answers, observing also indications of
intended resistance on board the American frigate, he ordered a shot to
be fired across her forefoot.  At intervals of two minutes he fired
others, but evasive answers only being returned, and it being evident
that the object of Commodore Barron was only to gain time, the _Leopard_
opened her fire in earnest.  After she had discharged three broadsides
at the American frigate the latter hauled down her colours, having only
returned a few guns.  On this a lieutenant from the _Chesapeake_ came on
board the _Leopard_ with a verbal message from Commodore Barron
signifying that he considered his ship to be the _Leopard's_ prize.
Without undertaking to receive her as such, Captain Humphries sent two
of his lieutenants, with several petty officers and men, on board the
_Chesapeake_ to search for the deserters, and the crew being mustered,
one of them, who was dragged out of the coal-hole, Jenkin Ratford, was
recognised as a deserter from the _Halifax_.  Three others were found,
who had deserted from the _Melampus_, and about twelve more from various
British ships of war.  The first four, however, alone were carried on
board the _Leopard_, when Commodore Barron again offered to deliver up
his frigate as a prize; to this Captain Humphries replied that, having
fulfilled his instructions, he had nothing more to desire, but must
proceed to his destination.  He, however, expressed his regret at having
been compelled to attack him, and offered all the assistance in his
power.  The _Chesapeake_ had indeed suffered severely from the
broadsides of the _Leopard_, twenty-two shot being lodged in her hull,
while her masts and rigging were greatly damaged.  She had lost three
seamen killed, while the commodore, one midshipman, and sixteen seamen
and marines were wounded.  Though nearly a hundred tons larger than the
_Leopard_, and carrying a greater weight of shot, while her crew
numbered fifty men more, she was almost unprepared for battle, so that
no imputation could be cast on Commodore Barron for not continuing the
engagement.

On arriving at Halifax the unfortunate Jenkin Ratford was found guilty
of mutiny and desertion, and was hanged at the foreyard-arm of the ship
from which he had deserted.  The other men, though found guilty of
desertion, were pardoned.

This untoward event was the cause of protracted diplomatic negotiations.
Every apology was offered to the United States; and England gave up all
claim to the right of searching men-of-war of other nations for
deserters.  About three years afterwards the British frigate _Guerrier_
impressed out of an American merchant-vessel a man named Deguyo, said to
be a citizen of the United States, and shortly afterwards two other
native Americans in the belief that they all three were English
subjects.  At this time the 44-gun frigate _President_, belonging to the
United States, lay moored in the Chesapeake.  On receiving directions
from his government, Commodore Rogers, who took the command, put to sea
in search of the _Guerrier_ on the 12th of May, 1811.  Soon after noon
of the 16th, from the mast-head of the _President_, a ship was descried
standing towards her under a press of sail, which Commodore Rogers at
once concluded was the frigate _Guerrier_.  The stranger was, however,
the British ship-sloop _Little Belt_, mounting 18 32-pounder carronades,
and 2 long nines, with a crew of 120 men and boys, commanded by Captain
Bingham, who at the same time made out the _President_.  Captain
Bingham, finding her signals unanswered, felt assured that the stranger
was an American frigate, and continued his course round Cape Hatteras.
By the time the evening was closing in, the _President_ was up to her
Captain Bingham hailed, asking, "What ship is that?"  Commodore Rogers
merely repeated the question.  At that instant a gun was fired from the
_President_, as was afterwards alleged, by chance.  On this the _Little
Belt_ fired, and a furious action commenced, which lasted upwards of
half-an-hour, with a short intermission.  The after-sail of the _Little
Belt_ being shot away, and her rigging much damaged, she fell off, so
that, being unable to bring her guns to bear on her antagonist, she
ceased firing.  Commodore Rogers again hailed, when he received answer
that the vessel he had attacked was a British ship of war, but, owing to
the freshness of the breeze, he did not hear her name.  During this
short engagement her masts and yards were badly wounded, and her rigging
cut to pieces, while her hull was severely injured.  She had lost a
midshipman and 10 men killed or mortally wounded, and 21 wounded; while
the _President_ had only one boy wounded, and her rigging and masts but
slightly injured.  The _President_ now hove to to leeward during the
night, while the _Little Belt_ was employed in stopping her leaks and
repairing damages.  Next morning the first lieutenant of the _President_
came on board, expressing Commodore Rogers' regret at the unfortunate
affair, and stating that had he known the size of the British ship he
would not have fired into her.  Captain Bingham inquired why he had
fired at all; on which the lieutenant replied that the _Little Belt_ had
fired first.  Captain Bingham denied this, and the subject was long a
matter of dispute--though there can be no doubt that one of the
_President's_ guns went off, possibly by chance, and that Captain
Bingham lost no time in replying to it.  That Captain Bingham's conduct
was considered most gallant was proved by his being immediately promoted
to post-rank.

The following year the United States unhappily declared war against
Great Britain.  The American government had previously laid an embargo
upon all their national ships and vessels during a space of ninety days,
so that when war broke out on the 18th of June a large number of
fast-sailing-vessels of all sizes were ready to issue forth as
privateers; while Commodore Rogers, in command of the squadron,
consisting of the _President_, _United States_, and _Congress_ frigates,
and two brigs of war, sailed in hopes of capturing a fleet of above 100
homeward-bound Jamaica men, known to be off the coast, under the convoy
of a single frigate and brig.  Fortunately for the merchant-vessels,
Commodore Rogers discovered the British frigate _Belvidera_, of 36 guns,
18-pounders, commanded by Captain Byron, standing towards him.  Captain
Byron, having ascertained the character of the American squadron, tacked
and made sail, not so much to escape as to lead the enemy to a distance
from their expected prey.  By consummate seamanship and gallantry, he
kept them employed, carrying on a spirited action with his two long
18-pounders run through his stern-ports, and the two 32-pounder
carronades on his quarter-deck, greatly galling the _President_, and
afterwards the _Congress_, when that frigate got near enough to open her
fire.  So successfully did he manoeuvre, that after leading his pursuers
a long chase, he escaped from them and got into Halifax.  The
_Belvidera_ lost altogether 3 killed and 22 wounded.  The _President_,
which was cut up in her rigging, lost 2 midshipmen and a marine killed,
and 22 officers and men wounded; while the Jamaica convoy reached
England in safety.

The war between England and her former dependencies had now commenced in
earnest.  Since their independence, the United States had taken pains to
construct an efficient, though small navy.  Aware that it would be
useless to attempt building line-of-battle ships to compete with the
fleets of Europe, they had turned their attention to the construction of
