"I don't think Miss Keeldar likes him."

"She doesn't know him--she doesn't know him; otherwise she has sense
enough to do justice to his merits."

"Well, I suppose she doesn't know him," mused Caroline to herself, and
by this hypothesis she endeavoured to account for what seemed else
unaccountable. But such simple solution of the difficulty was not left
her long. She was obliged to refuse Miss Keeldar even this negative
excuse for her prejudice.

One day she chanced to be in the schoolroom with Henry Sympson, whose
amiable and affectionate disposition had quickly recommended him to her
regard. The boy was busied about some mechanical contrivance; his
lameness made him fond of sedentary occupation. He began to ransack his
tutor's desk for a piece of wax or twine necessary to his work. Moore
happened to be absent. Mr. Hall, indeed, had called for him to take a
long walk. Henry could not immediately find the object of his search. He
rummaged compartment after compartment; and at last, opening an inner
drawer, he came upon--not a ball of cord or a lump of beeswax, but a
little bundle of small marble-coloured cahiers, tied with tape. Henry
looked at them. "What rubbish Mr. Moore stores up in his desk!" he
said. "I hope he won't keep my old exercises so carefully."

"What is it?"

"Old copy-books."

He threw the bundle to Caroline. The packet looked so neat externally
her curiosity was excited to see its contents.

"If they are only copy-books, I suppose I may open them?"

"Oh yes, quite freely. Mr. Moore's desk is half mine--for he lets me
keep all sorts of things in it--and I give you leave."

On scrutiny they proved to be French compositions, written in a hand
peculiar but compact, and exquisitely clean and clear. The writing was
recognizable. She scarcely needed the further evidence of the name
signed at the close of each theme to tell her whose they were. Yet that
name astonished her--"Shirley Keeldar, Sympson Grove, ----shire" (a
southern county), and a date four years back.

She tied up the packet, and held it in her hand, meditating over it. She
half felt as if, in opening it, she had violated a confidence.

"They are Shirley's, you see," said Henry carelessly.

"Did _you_ give them to Mr. Moore? She wrote them with Mrs. Pryor, I
suppose?"

"She wrote them in my schoolroom at Sympson Grove, when she lived with
us there. Mr. Moore taught her French; it is his native language."

"I know. Was she a good pupil, Henry?"

"She was a wild, laughing thing, but pleasant to have in the room. She
made lesson-time charming. She learned fast--you could hardly tell when
or how. French was nothing to her. She spoke it quick, quick--as quick
as Mr. Moore himself."

"Was she obedient? Did she give trouble?"

"She gave plenty of trouble, in a way. She was giddy, but I liked her.
I'm desperately fond of Shirley."

"_Desperately_ fond--you small simpleton! You don't know what you say."

"I _am desperately_ fond of her. She is the light of my eyes. I said so
to Mr. Moore last night."

"He would reprove you for speaking with exaggeration."

"He didn't. He never reproves and reproves, as girls' governesses do. He
was reading, and he only smiled into his book, and said that if Miss
Keeldar was no more than that, she was less than he took her to be; for
I was but a dim-eyed, short-sighted little chap. I'm afraid I am a poor
unfortunate, Miss Caroline Helstone. I am a cripple, you know."

"Never mind, Henry, you are a very nice little fellow; and if God has
not given you health and strength, He has given you a good disposition
and an excellent heart and brain."

"I shall be despised. I sometimes think both Shirley and you despise
me."

"Listen, Henry. Generally, I don't like schoolboys. I have a great
horror of them. They seem to me little ruffians, who take an unnatural
delight in killing and tormenting birds, and insects, and kittens, and
whatever is weaker than themselves. But you are so different I am quite
fond of you. You have almost as much sense as a man (far more, God wot,"
she muttered to herself, "than many men); you are fond of reading, and
you can talk sensibly about what you read."

"I _am_ fond of reading. I know I have sense, and I know I have
feeling."

Miss Keeldar here entered.

"Henry," she said, "I have brought your lunch here. I shall prepare it
for you myself."

She placed on the table a glass of new milk, a plate of something which
looked not unlike leather, and a utensil which resembled a
toasting-fork.

"What are you two about," she continued, "ransacking Mr. Moore's desk?"

"Looking at your old copy-books," returned Caroline.

"My old copy-books?"

"French exercise-books. Look here! They must be held precious; they are
kept carefully."

She showed the bundle. Shirley snatched it up. "Did not know one was in
existence," she said. "I thought the whole lot had long since lit the
kitchen fire, or curled the maid's hair at Sympson Grove.--What made you
keep them, Henry?"

"It is not my doing. I should not have thought of it. It never entered
my head to suppose copy-books of value. Mr. Moore put them by in the
inner drawer of his desk. Perhaps he forgot them."

"C'est cela. He forgot them, no doubt," echoed Shirley. "They are
extremely well written," she observed complacently.

"What a giddy girl you were, Shirley, in those days! I remember you so
well. A slim, light creature whom, though you were so tall, I could lift
off the floor. I see you with your long, countless curls on your
shoulders, and your streaming sash. You used to make Mr. Moore
lively--that is, at first. I believe you grieved him after a while."

Shirley turned the closely-written pages and said nothing. Presently she
observed, "That was written one winter afternoon. It was a description
of a snow scene."

"I remember," said Henry. "Mr. Moore, when he read it, cried, 'Voila le
Francais gagne!' He said it was well done. Afterwards you made him draw,
in sepia, the landscape you described."

"You have not forgotten, then, Hal?"

"Not at all. We were all scolded that day for not coming down to tea
when called. I can remember my tutor sitting at his easel, and you
standing behind him, holding the candle, and watching him draw the snowy
cliff, the pine, the deer couched under it, and the half-moon hung
above."

"Where are his drawings, Harry? Caroline should see them."

"In his portfolio. But it is padlocked; he has the key."

"Ask him for it when he comes in."

"You should ask him, Shirley. You are shy of him now. You are grown a
proud lady to him; I notice that."

"Shirley, you are a real enigma," whispered Caroline in her ear. "What
queer discoveries I make day by day now!--I who thought I had your
confidence. Inexplicable creature! even this boy reproves you."

"I have forgotten 'auld lang syne,' you see, Harry," said Miss Keeldar,
answering young Sympson, and not heeding Caroline.

"Which you never should have done. You don't deserve to be a man's
morning star if you have so short a memory."

"A man's morning star, indeed! and by 'a man' is meant your worshipful
self, I suppose? Come, drink your new milk while it is warm."

The young cripple rose and limped towards the fire; he had left his
crutch near the mantelpiece.

"My poor lame darling!" murmured Shirley, in her softest voice, aiding
him.

"Whether do you like me or Mr. Sam Wynne best, Shirley?" inquired the
boy, as she settled him in an arm-chair.

"O Harry, Sam Wynne is my aversion; you are my pet."

"Me or Mr. Malone?"

"You again, a thousand times."

"Yet they are great whiskered fellows, six feet high each."

"Whereas, as long as you live, Harry, you will never be anything more
than a little pale lameter."

"Yes, I know."

"You need not be sorrowful. Have I not often told you who was almost as
little, as pale, as suffering as you, and yet potent as a giant and
brave as a lion?"

"Admiral Horatio?"

"Admiral Horatio, Viscount Nelson, and Duke of Bronte; great at heart as
a Titan; gallant and heroic as all the world and age of chivalry; leader
of the might of England; commander of her strength on the deep; hurler
of her thunder over the flood."

"A great man. But I am not warlike, Shirley; and yet my mind is so
restless I burn day and night--for what I can hardly tell--to be--to
do--to suffer, I think."

"Harry, it is your mind, which is stronger and older than your frame,
that troubles you. It is a captive; it lies in physical bondage. But it
will work its own redemption yet. Study carefully not only books but the
world. You love nature; love her without fear. Be patient--wait the
course of time. You will not be a soldier or a sailor, Henry; but if you
live you will be--listen to my prophecy--you will be an author, perhaps
a poet."

"An author! It is a flash--a flash of light to me! I will--I _will_!
I'll write a book that I may dedicate it to you."

"You will write it that you may give your soul its natural release.
Bless me! what am I saying? more than I understand, I believe, or can
make good. Here, Hal--here is your toasted oatcake; eat and live!"

"Willingly!" here cried a voice outside the open window. "I know that
fragrance of meal bread. Miss Keeldar, may I come in and partake?"

"Mr. Hall"--it was Mr. Hall, and with him was Louis Moore, returned from
their walk--"there is a proper luncheon laid out in the dining-room and
there are proper people seated round it. You may join that society and
share that fare if you please; but if your ill-regulated tastes lead you
to prefer ill-regulated proceedings, step in here, and do as we do."

"I approve the perfume, and therefore shall suffer myself to be led by
the nose," returned Mr. Hall, who presently entered, accompanied by
Louis Moore. That gentleman's eye fell on his desk, pillaged.

"Burglars!" said he.--"Henry, you merit the ferule."

"Give it to Shirley and Caroline; they did it," was alleged, with more
attention to effect than truth.

"Traitor and false witness!" cried both the girls. "We never laid hands
on a thing, except in the spirit of laudable inquiry!"

"Exactly so," said Moore, with his rare smile. "And what have you
ferreted out, in your 'spirit of laudable inquiry'?"

He perceived the inner drawer open.

"This is empty," said he. "Who has taken----"

"Here, here!" Caroline hastened to say, and she restored the little
packet to its place. He shut it up; he locked it in with a small key
attached to his watch-guard; he restored the other papers to order,
closed the repository, and sat down without further remark.

"I thought you would have scolded much more, sir," said Henry. "The
girls deserve reprimand."

"I leave them to their own consciences."

"It accuses them of crimes intended as well as perpetrated, sir. If I
had not been here, they would have treated your portfolio as they have
done your desk; but I told them it was padlocked."

"And will you have lunch with us?" here interposed Shirley, addressing
Moore, and desirous, as it seemed, to turn the conversation.

"Certainly, if I may."

"You will be restricted to new milk and Yorkshire oatcake."

"Va--pour le lait frais!" said Louis. "But for your oatcake!" and he
made a grimace.

"He cannot eat it," said Henry. "He thinks it is like bran, raised with
sour yeast."

"Come, then; by special dispensation we will allow him a few cracknels,
but nothing less homely."

The hostess rang the bell and gave her frugal orders, which were
presently executed. She herself measured out the milk, and distributed
the bread round the cosy circle now enclosing the bright little
schoolroom fire. She then took the post of toaster-general; and kneeling
on the rug, fork in hand, fulfilled her office with dexterity. Mr. Hall,
who relished any homely innovation on ordinary usages, and to whom the
husky oatcake was from custom suave as manna, seemed in his best
spirits. He talked and laughed gleefully--now with Caroline, whom he had
fixed by his side, now with Shirley, and again with Louis Moore. And
Louis met him in congenial spirit. He did not laugh much, but he uttered
in the quietest tone the wittiest things. Gravely spoken sentences,
marked by unexpected turns and a quite fresh flavour and poignancy, fell
easily from his lips. He proved himself to be--what Mr. Hall had said he
was--excellent company. Caroline marvelled at his humour, but still more
at his entire self-possession. Nobody there present seemed to impose on
him a sensation of unpleasant restraint. Nobody seemed a bore--a
check--a chill to him; and yet there was the cool and lofty Miss Keeldar
kneeling before the fire, almost at his feet.

But Shirley was cool and lofty no longer, at least not at this moment.
She appeared unconscious of the humility of her present position; or if
conscious, it was only to taste a charm in its lowliness. It did not
revolt her pride that the group to whom she voluntarily officiated as
handmaid should include her cousin's tutor. It did not scare her that
while she handed the bread and milk to the rest, she had to offer it to
him also; and Moore took his portion from her hand as calmly as if he
had been her equal.

"You are overheated now," he said, when she had retained the fork for
some time; "let me relieve you."

And he took it from her with a sort of quiet authority, to which she
submitted passively, neither resisting him nor thanking him.

"I should like to see your pictures, Louis," said Caroline, when the
sumptuous luncheon was discussed.--"Would not you, Mr. Hall?"

"To please you, I should; but, for my own part, I have cut him as an
artist. I had enough of him in that capacity in Cumberland and
Westmoreland. Many a wetting we got amongst the mountains because he
would persist in sitting on a camp-stool, catching effects of
rain-clouds, gathering mists, fitful sunbeams, and what not."

"Here is the portfolio," said Henry, bringing it in one hand and leaning
on his crutch with the other.

Louis took it, but he still sat as if he wanted another to speak. It
seemed as if he would not open it unless the proud Shirley deigned to
show herself interested in the exhibition.

"He makes us wait to whet our curiosity," she said.

"You understand opening it," observed Louis, giving her the key. "You
spoiled the lock for me once; try now."

He held it. She opened it, and, monopolizing the contents, had the first
view of every sketch herself. She enjoyed the treat--if treat it
were--in silence, without a single comment. Moore stood behind her chair
and looked over her shoulder, and when she had done and the others were
still gazing, he left his post and paced through the room.

A carriage was heard in the lane--the gate-bell rang. Shirley started.

"There are callers," she said, "and I shall be summoned to the room. A
pretty figure--as they say--I am to receive company. I and Henry have
been in the garden gathering fruit half the morning. Oh for rest under
my own vine and my own fig-tree! Happy is the slave-wife of the Indian
chief, in that she has no drawing-room duty to perform, but can sit at
ease weaving mats, and stringing beads, and peacefully flattening her
pickaninny's head in an unmolested corner of her wigwam. I'll emigrate
to the western woods."

Louis Moore laughed.

"To marry a White Cloud or a Big Buffalo, and after wedlock to devote
yourself to the tender task of digging your lord's maize-field while he
smokes his pipe or drinks fire-water."

Shirley seemed about to reply, but here the schoolroom door unclosed,
admitting Mr. Sympson. That personage stood aghast when he saw the group
around the fire.

"I thought you alone, Miss Keeldar," he said. "I find quite a party."

And evidently from his shocked, scandalized air, had he not recognized
in one of the party a clergyman, he would have delivered an extempore
philippic on the extraordinary habits of his niece: respect for the
cloth arrested him.

"I merely wished to announce," he proceeded coldly, "that the family
from De Walden Hall, Mr., Mrs., the Misses, and Mr. Sam Wynne, are in
the drawing-room." And he bowed and withdrew.

"The family from De Walden Hall! Couldn't be a worse set," murmured
Shirley.

She sat still, looking a little contumacious, and very much indisposed
to stir. She was flushed with the fire. Her dark hair had been more than
once dishevelled by the morning wind that day. Her attire was a light,
neatly fitting, but amply flowing dress of muslin; the shawl she had
worn in the garden was still draped in a careless fold round her.
Indolent, wilful, picturesque, and singularly pretty was her
aspect--prettier than usual, as if some soft inward emotion, stirred who
knows how, had given new bloom and expression to her features.

"Shirley, Shirley, you ought to go," whispered Caroline.

"I wonder why?"

She lifted her eyes, and saw in the glass over the fireplace both Mr.
Hall and Louis Moore gazing at her gravely.

"If," she said, with a yielding smile--"if a majority of the present
company maintain that the De Walden Hall people have claims on my
civility, I will subdue my inclinations to my duty. Let those who think
I ought to go hold up their hands."

Again consulting the mirror, it reflected an unanimous vote against her.

"You must go," said Mr. Hall, "and behave courteously too. You owe many
duties to society. It is not permitted you to please only yourself."

Louis Moore assented with a low "Hear, hear!"

Caroline, approaching her, smoothed her wavy curls, gave to her attire a
less artistic and more domestic grace, and Shirley was put out of the
room, protesting still, by a pouting lip, against her dismissal.

"There is a curious charm about her," observed Mr. Hall, when she was
gone. "And now," he added, "I must away; for Sweeting is off to see his
mother, and there are two funerals."

"Henry, get your books; it is lesson-time," said Moore, sitting down to
his desk.

"A curious charm!" repeated the pupil, when he and his master were left
alone. "True. Is she not a kind of white witch?" he asked.

"Of whom are you speaking, sir?"

"Of my cousin Shirley."

"No irrelevant questions; study in silence."

Mr. Moore looked and spoke sternly--sourly. Henry knew this mood. It was
a rare one with his tutor; but when it came he had an awe of it. He
obeyed.




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE FIRST BLUESTOCKING.


Miss Keeldar and her uncle had characters that would not harmonize, that
never had harmonized. He was irritable, and she was spirited. He was
despotic, and she liked freedom. He was worldly, and she, perhaps,
romantic.

Not without purpose had he come down to Yorkshire. His mission was
clear, and he intended to discharge it conscientiously. He anxiously
desired to have his niece married, to make for her a suitable match,
give her in charge to a proper husband, and wash his hands of her for
ever.

The misfortune was, from infancy upwards, Shirley and he had disagreed
on the meaning of the words "suitable" and "proper." She never yet had
accepted his definition; and it was doubtful whether, in the most
important step of her life, she would consent to accept it.

The trial soon came.

Mr. Wynne proposed in form for his son, Samuel Fawthrop Wynne.

"Decidedly suitable! most proper!" pronounced Mr. Sympson. "A fine
unencumbered estate, real substance, good connections. _It must be
done!_"

He sent for his niece to the oak parlour; he shut himself up there with
her alone; he communicated the offer; he gave his opinion; he claimed
her consent.

It was withheld.

"No; I shall not marry Samuel Fawthrop Wynne."

"I ask why. I must have a reason. In all respects he is more than worthy
of you."

She stood on the hearth. She was pale as the white marble slab and
cornice behind her; her eyes flashed large, dilated, unsmiling.

"And _I_ ask in what sense that young man is worthy of _me_?"

"He has twice your money, twice your common sense, equal connections,
equal respectability."

"Had he my money counted fivescore times I would take no vow to love
him."

"Please to state your objections."

"He has run a course of despicable, commonplace profligacy. Accept that
as the first reason why I spurn him."

"Miss Keeldar, you shock me!"

"That conduct alone sinks him in a gulf of immeasurable inferiority. His
intellect reaches no standard I can esteem: there is a second
stumbling-block. His views are narrow, his feelings are blunt, his
tastes are coarse, his manners vulgar."

"The man is a respectable, wealthy man! To refuse him is presumption on
your part."

"I refuse point-blank! Cease to annoy me with the subject; I forbid it!"

"Is it your intention ever to marry; or do you prefer celibacy?"

"I deny your right to claim an answer to that question."

"May I ask if you expect some man of title--some peer of the realm--to
demand your hand?"

"I doubt if the peer breathes on whom I would confer it."

"Were there insanity in the family, I should believe you mad. Your
eccentricity and conceit touch the verge of frenzy."

"Perhaps, ere I have finished, you will see me over-leap it."

"I anticipate no less. Frantic and impracticable girl! Take warning! I
dare you to sully our name by a _mesalliance_!"

"_Our_ name! Am _I_ called Sympson?"

"God be thanked that you are not! But be on your guard; I will not be
trifled with!"

"What, in the name of common law and common sense, would you or could
you do if my pleasure led me to a choice you disapproved?"

"Take care! take care!" warning her with voice and hand that trembled
alike.

"Why? What shadow of power have _you_ over me? Why should I fear you?"

"Take care, madam!"

"Scrupulous care I will take, Mr. Sympson. Before I marry I am resolved
to esteem--to admire--to _love_."

"Preposterous stuff! indecorous, unwomanly!"

"To love with my whole heart. I know I speak in an unknown tongue; but I
feel indifferent whether I am comprehended or not."

"And if this love of yours should fall on a beggar?"

"On a beggar it will never fall. Mendicancy is not estimable."

"On a low clerk, a play-actor, a play-writer, or--or----"

"Take courage, Mr. Sympson! Or what?"

"Any literary scrub, or shabby, whining artist."

"For the scrubby, shabby, whining I have no taste; for literature and
the arts I have. And there I wonder how your Fawthrop Wynne would suit
me. He cannot write a note without orthographical errors; he reads only
a sporting paper; he was the booby of Stilbro' grammar school!"

"Unladylike language! Great God! to what will she come?" He lifted hands
and eyes.

"Never to the altar of Hymen with Sam Wynne."

"To what will she come? Why are not the laws more stringent, that I
might compel her to hear reason?"

"Console yourself, uncle. Were Britain a serfdom and you the Czar, you
could not _compel_ me to this step. _I_ will write to Mr. Wynne. Give
yourself no further trouble on the subject."

       *       *       *       *       *

Fortune is proverbially called changeful, yet her caprice often takes
the form of repeating again and again a similar stroke of luck in the
same quarter. It appeared that Miss Keeldar--or her fortune--had by this
time made a sensation in the district, and produced an impression in
quarters by her unthought of. No less than three offers followed Mr.
Wynne's, all more or less eligible. All were in succession pressed on
her by her uncle, and all in succession she refused. Yet amongst them
was more than one gentleman of unexceptionable character as well as
ample wealth. Many besides her uncle asked what she meant, and whom she
expected to entrap, that she was so insolently fastidious.

At last the gossips thought they had found the key to her conduct, and
her uncle was sure of it; and what is more, the discovery showed his
niece to him in quite a new light, and he changed his whole deportment
to her accordingly.

Fieldhead had of late been fast growing too hot to hold them both. The
suave aunt could not reconcile them; the daughters froze at the view of
their quarrels. Gertrude and Isabella whispered by the hour together in
their dressing-room, and became chilled with decorous dread if they
chanced to be left alone with their audacious cousin. But, as I have
said, a change supervened. Mr. Sympson was appeased and his family
tranquillized.

The village of Nunnely has been alluded to--its old church, its forest,
its monastic ruins. It had also its hall, called the priory--an older, a
larger, a more lordly abode than any Briarfield or Whinbury owned; and
what is more, it had its man of title--its baronet, which neither
Briarfield nor Whinbury could boast. This possession--its proudest and
most prized--had for years been nominal only. The present baronet, a
young man hitherto resident in a distant province, was unknown on his
Yorkshire estate.

During Miss Keeldar's stay at the fashionable watering-place of
Cliffbridge, she and her friends had met with and been introduced to Sir
Philip Nunnely. They encountered him again and again on the sands, the
cliffs, in the various walks, sometimes at the public balls of the
place. He seemed solitary. His manner was very unpretending--too simple
to be termed affable; rather timid than proud. He did not _condescend_
to their society; he seemed _glad_ of it.

With any unaffected individual Shirley could easily and quickly cement
an acquaintance. She walked and talked with Sir Philip; she, her aunt,
and cousins sometimes took a sail in his yacht. She liked him because
she found him kind and modest, and was charmed to feel she had the power
to amuse him.

One slight drawback there was--where is the friendship without it?--Sir
Philip had a literary turn. He wrote poetry--sonnets, stanzas, ballads.
Perhaps Miss Keeldar thought him a little too fond of reading and
reciting these compositions; perhaps she wished the rhyme had possessed
more accuracy, the measure more music, the tropes more freshness, the
inspiration more fire. At any rate, she always winced when he recurred
to the subject of his poems, and usually did her best to divert the
conversation into another channel.

He would beguile her to take moonlight walks with him on the bridge, for
the sole purpose, as it seemed, of pouring into her ear the longest of
his ballads. He would lead her away to sequestered rustic seats, whence
the rush of the surf to the sands was heard soft and soothing; and when
he had her all to himself, and the sea lay before them, and the scented
shade of gardens spread round, and the tall shelter of cliffs rose
behind them, he would pull out his last batch of sonnets, and read them
in a voice tremulous with emotion. He did not seem to know that though
they might be rhyme they were not poetry. It appeared, by Shirley's
downcast eye and disturbed face, that she knew it, and felt heartily
mortified by the single foible of this good and amiable gentleman.

Often she tried, as gently as might be, to wean him from this fanatic
worship of the Muses. It was his monomania; on all ordinary subjects he
was sensible enough, and fain was she to engage him in ordinary topics.
He questioned her sometimes about his place at Nunnely; she was but too
happy to answer his interrogatories at length. She never wearied of
describing the antique priory, the wild silvan park, the hoary church
and hamlet; nor did she fail to counsel him to come down and gather his
tenantry about him in his ancestral halls.

Somewhat to her surprise, Sir Philip followed her advice to the letter,
and actually, towards the close of September, arrived at the priory.

He soon made a call at Fieldhead, and his first visit was not his last.
He said--when he had achieved the round of the neighbourhood--that under
no roof had he found such pleasant shelter as beneath the massive oak
beams of the gray manor-house of Briarfield; a cramped, modest dwelling
enough compared with his own, but he liked it.

Presently it did not suffice to sit with Shirley in her panelled
parlour, where others came and went, and where he could rarely find a
quiet moment to show her the latest production of his fertile muse; he
must have her out amongst the pleasant pastures, and lead her by the
still waters. _Tete-a-tete_ ramblings she shunned, so he made parties
for her to his own grounds, his glorious forest; to remoter
scenes--woods severed by the Wharfe, vales watered by the Aire.

Such assiduity covered Miss Keeldar with distinction. Her uncle's
prophetic soul anticipated a splendid future. He already scented the
time afar off when, with nonchalant air, and left foot nursed on his
right knee, he should be able to make dashingly-familiar allusion to his
"nephew the baronet." Now his niece dawned upon him no longer "a mad
girl," but a "most sensible woman." He termed her, in confidential
dialogues with Mrs. Sympson, "a truly superior person; peculiar, but
very clever." He treated her with exceeding deference; rose reverently
to open and shut doors for her; reddened his face and gave himself
headaches with stooping to pick up gloves, handkerchiefs, and other
loose property, whereof Shirley usually held but insecure tenure. He
would cut mysterious jokes about the superiority of woman's wit over
man's wisdom; commence obscure apologies for the blundering mistake he
had committed respecting the generalship, the tactics, of "a personage
not a hundred miles from Fieldhead." In short, he seemed elate as any
"midden-cock on pattens."

His niece viewed his manoeuvres and received his innuendoes with phlegm;
apparently she did not above half comprehend to what aim they tended.
When plainly charged with being the preferred of the baronet, she said
she believed he did like her, and for her part she liked him. She had
never thought a man of rank--the only son of a proud, fond mother, the
only brother of doting sisters--could have so much goodness, and, on the
whole, so much sense.

Time proved, indeed, that Sir Philip liked her. Perhaps he had found in
her that "curious charm" noticed by Mr. Hall. He sought her presence
more and more, and at last with a frequency that attested it had become
to him an indispensable stimulus. About this time strange feelings
hovered round Fieldhead; restless hopes and haggard anxieties haunted
some of its rooms. There was an unquiet wandering of some of the inmates
among the still fields round the mansion; there was a sense of
expectancy that kept the nerves strained.

One thing seemed clear: Sir Philip was not a man to be despised. He was
amiable; if not highly intellectual, he was intelligent. Miss Keeldar
could not affirm of him, what she had so bitterly affirmed of Sam Wynne,
that his feelings were blunt, his tastes coarse, and his manners vulgar.
There was sensibility in his nature; there was a very real, if not a
very discriminating, love of the arts; there was the English gentleman
in all his deportment. As to his lineage and wealth, both were, of
course, far beyond her claims.

His appearance had at first elicited some laughing though not
ill-natured remarks from the merry Shirley. It was boyish. His features
were plain and slight, his hair sandy, his stature insignificant. But
she soon checked her sarcasm on this point; she would even fire up if
any one else made uncomplimentary allusion thereto. He had "a pleasing
countenance," she affirmed; "and there was that in his heart which was
better than three Roman noses, than the locks of Absalom or the
proportions of Saul." A spare and rare shaft she still reserved for his
unfortunate poetic propensity; but even here she would tolerate no irony
save her own.

In short, matters had reached a point which seemed fully to warrant an
observation made about this time by Mr. Yorke to the tutor, Louis.

"Yond' brother Robert of yours seems to me to be either a fool or a
madman. Two months ago I could have sworn he had the game all in his own
hands; and there he runs the country, and quarters himself up in London
for weeks together, and by the time he comes back he'll find himself
checkmated. Louis, 'there is a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken
at the flood, leads on to fortune, but, once let slip, never returns
again.' I'd write to Robert, if I were you, and remind him of that."

"Robert had views on Miss Keeldar?" inquired Louis, as if the idea was
new to him.

"Views I suggested to him myself, and views he might have realized, for
she liked him."

"As a neighbour?"

"As more than that. I have seen her change countenance and colour at the
mere mention of his name. Write to the lad, I say, and tell him to come
home. He is a finer gentleman than this bit of a baronet, after all."

"Does it not strike you, Mr. Yorke, that for a mere penniless adventurer
to aspire to a rich woman's hand is presumptuous--contemptible?"

"Oh, if you are for high notions and double-refined sentiment, I've
naught to say. I'm a plain, practical man myself, and if Robert is
willing to give up that royal prize to a lad-rival--a puling slip of
aristocracy--I am quite agreeable. At _his_ age, in _his_ place, with
_his_ inducements, I would have acted differently. Neither baronet, nor
duke, nor prince should have snatched my sweetheart from me without a
struggle. But you tutors are such solemn chaps; it is almost like
speaking to a parson to consult with you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Flattered and fawned upon as Shirley was just now, it appeared she was
not absolutely spoiled--that her better nature did not quite leave her.
Universal report had indeed ceased to couple her name with that of
Moore, and this silence seemed sanctioned by her own apparent oblivion
of the absentee; but that she had not _quite_ forgotten him--that she
still regarded him, if not with love, yet with interest--seemed proved
by the increased attention which at this juncture of affairs a sudden
attack of illness induced her to show that tutor-brother of Robert's, to
whom she habitually bore herself with strange alternations of cool
reserve and docile respect--now sweeping past him in all the dignity of
the moneyed heiress and prospective Lady Nunnely, and anon accosting him
as abashed school-girls are wont to accost their stern professors;
bridling her neck of ivory and curling her lip of carmine, if he
encountered her glance, one minute, and the next submitting to the grave
rebuke of his eye with as much contrition as if he had the power to
inflict penalties in case of contumacy.

Louis Moore had perhaps caught the fever, which for a few days laid him
low, in one of the poor cottages of the district, which he, his lame
pupil, and Mr. Hall were in the habit of visiting together. At any rate
he sickened, and after opposing to the malady a taciturn resistance for
a day or two, was obliged to keep his chamber.

He lay tossing on his thorny bed one evening, Henry, who would not quit
him, watching faithfully beside him, when a tap--too light to be that of
Mrs. Gill or the housemaid--summoned young Sympson to the door.

"How is Mr. Moore to-night?" asked a low voice from the dark gallery.

"Come in and see him yourself."

"Is he asleep?"

"I wish he could sleep. Come and speak to him, Shirley."

"He would not like it."

But the speaker stepped in, and Henry, seeing her hesitate on the
threshold, took her hand and drew her to the couch.

The shaded light showed Miss Keeldar's form but imperfectly; yet it
revealed her in elegant attire. There was a party assembled below,
including Sir Philip Nunnely; the ladies were now in the drawing-room,
and their hostess had stolen from them to visit Henry's tutor. Her pure
white dress, her fair arms and neck, the trembling chainlet of gold
circling her throat and quivering on her breast, glistened strangely
amid the obscurity of the sickroom. Her mien was chastened and pensive.
She spoke gently.

"Mr. Moore, how are you to-night?"

"I have not been very ill, and am now better."

"I heard that you complained of thirst. I have brought you some grapes;
can you taste one?"

"No; but I thank you for remembering me."

"Just one."

From the rich cluster that filled a small basket held in her hand she
severed a berry and offered it to his lips. He shook his head, and
turned aside his flushed face.

"But what, then, can I bring you instead? You have no wish for fruit;
yet I see that your lips are parched. What beverage do you prefer?"

"Mrs. Gill supplies me with toast-and-water. I like it best."

Silence fell for some minutes.

"Do you suffer?--have you pain?"

"Very little."

"What made you ill?"

Silence.

"I wonder what caused this fever? To what do you attribute it?"

"Miasma, perhaps--malaria. This is autumn, a season fertile in fevers."

"I hear you often visit the sick in Briarfield, and Nunnely too, with
Mr. Hall. You should be on your guard; temerity is not wise."

"That reminds me, Miss Keeldar, that perhaps you had better not enter
this chamber or come near this couch. I do not believe my illness is
infectious. I scarcely fear"--with a sort of smile--"_you_ will take it;
but why should you run even the shadow of a risk? Leave me."

"Patience, I will go soon; but I should like to do something for you
before I depart--any little service----"

"They will miss you below."

"No; the gentlemen are still at table."

"They will not linger long. Sir Philip Nunnely is no wine-bibber, and I
hear him just now pass from the dining-room to the drawing-room."

"It is a servant."

"It is Sir Philip; I know his step."

"Your hearing is acute."

"It is never dull, and the sense seems sharpened at present. Sir Philip
was here to tea last night. I heard you sing to him some song which he
had brought you. I heard him, when he took his departure at eleven
