page alone remained with the dying man. A minute later three Austrian
cuirassiers rode up, and demanded the name of the dying man. The page
Leubelfing refused to give it, and firing their pistols at him they
stretched him mortally wounded beside the dying king. Gustavus then, but
with difficulty, said who he was. The troopers leapt from their horses
and stripped his rich armour from him, and then, as they saw Steinboch's
dragoons returning from their charge, they placed their pistols close to
the king's head and fired, and then leaping on their horses fled.

Great was the grief when Malcolm, happening to ride near the body,
recognized it as that of the king. An instant later a regiment of
Imperialist cavalry charged down, and a furious fight took place for
some minutes over the king's body. It was, however, at last carried
off by the Swedes, so disfigured by wounds and by the trampling of the
horses in the fray as to be unrecognizable.

The news of the fall of their king, which spread rapidly through
the ranks, so far from discouraging the Swedes, inspired them with a
desperate determination to avenge his death, and burning with fury they
advanced against the enemy, yet preserving the most perfect steadiness
and order in their ranks.

In vain did Wallenstein and his officers strive to stem the attack of
the left wing, their bravery and skill availed nothing to arrest that
furious charge. Regiment after regiment who strove to bar their way
were swept aside, the guns near the windmills were captured and turned
against the enemy. Step by step the Imperial right wing was forced back,
and the centre was assailed in flank by the guns from the rising ground,
while Stalhaus with the right wing of the Swedes attacked them on their
left.

Hopeless of victory the Imperialist centre was giving way, when the
explosion of one of their powder wagons still further shook them.
Attacked on both flanks and in front the Imperialist centre wavered,
and in a few minutes would have been in full flight. The Swedish victory
seemed assured, when a mighty trampling of horse was heard, and emerging
from the smoke Pappenheim with eight regiments of Imperial cavalry
dashed into the fray.

Pappenheim had already captured the citadel of Halle when Wallenstein's
messenger reached him. To wait until his infantry, who were engaged in
plundering, could be collected, and then to proceed at their pace to
the field of battle, would be to arrive too late to be of service, and
Pappenheim instantly placed himself at the head of his eight regiments
of magnificent cavalry, and galloped at full speed to the battlefield
eighteen miles distant. On the way he met large numbers of flying Poles
and Croats, the remnants of the Austrian left, who had been driven from
the field by Gustavus; these he rallied, and with them dashed upon the
troops of Stalhaus who were pursuing them, and forced them backward.
The relief afforded to the Imperialists by this opportune arrival
was immense, and leaving Pappenheim to deal with the Swedish right,
Wallenstein rallied his own right on the centre, and opposed a
fresh front to the advancing troops of Duke Bernhard and Kniphausen.
Inspirited by the arrival of the reinforcements, and burning to turn
what had just appeared a defeat into a victory, the Imperialists
advanced with such ardour that the Swedes were driven back, the guns on
the hills recaptured, and it seemed that in this terrible battle victory
was at last to declare itself in favour of the Imperialists.

It needed only the return of Pappenheim from the pursuit of the Swedish
right to decide the day, but Pappenheim was not to come. Though driven
back by the first impetuous charge of the Imperial cavalry, the Swedes
under Stalhaus, reinforced by the Scottish regiments under Henderson,
stubbornly opposed their further attacks.

While leading his men forward Pappenheim fell with two musketballs
through his body. While lying there the rumour for the first time
reached him that Gustavus had been killed. When upon inquiry the truth
of the rumour was confirmed, the eyes of the dying man lighted up.

"Tell Wallenstein," he said to the officer nearest to him, "that I am
lying here without hope of life, but I die gladly, knowing, as I now
know, that the irreconcilable enemy of my faith has fallen on the same
day."

The Imperialists, discouraged by the fall of their general, could
not withstand the ardour with which the Swedes and Scottish infantry
attacked them, and the cavalry rode from the field. Elsewhere the
battle was still raging. Wallenstein's right and centre had driven Count
Bernhard, the Duke of Brahe, and Kniphausen across that desperately
contested road, but beyond this they could not force them, so stubbornly
and desperately did they fight. But Stalhaus and his men, refreshed and
invigorated by their victory over Pappenheim's force, again came up
and took their part in the fight. Wallenstein had no longer a hope of
victory, he fought now only to avoid defeat. The sun had already set,
and if he could but maintain his position for another half hour darkness
would save his army.

He fell back across the road again, fighting stubbornly and in good
order, and extending his line to the left to prevent Stalhaus from
turning his flank; and in this order the terrible struggle continued
till nightfall. Both sides fought with splendid bravery. The Swedes,
eager for the victory once again apparently within their grasp, pressed
on with fury, while the Imperialists opposed them with the most stubborn
obstinacy.

Seven times did Piccolomini charge with his cavalry upon the advancing
Swedes. Seven times was his horse shot under him, but remounting each
time, he drew off his men in good order, and in readiness to dash
forward again at the first opportunity. The other Imperialist generals
fought with equal courage and coolness, while Wallenstein, present
wherever the danger was thickest, animated all by his courage and
coolness. Though forced step by step to retire, the Imperialists never
lost their formation, never turned their backs to the foe; and thus
the fight went on till the darkness gathered thicker and thicker, the
combatants could no longer see each other, and the desperate battle came
to an end.

In the darkness, Wallenstein drew off his army and fell back to Leipzig,
leaving behind him his colours and all his guns. In thus doing he threw
away the opportunity of turning what his retreat acknowledged to be a
defeat into a victory on the following morning, for scarcely had he left
the field when the six regiments of Pappenheim's infantry arrived from
Halle. Had he held his ground he could have renewed the battle in the
morning, with the best prospects of success, for the struggle of
the preceding day had been little more than a drawn battle, and the
accessions of fresh troops should have given him a decided advantage
over the weary Swedes. The newcomers, finding the field deserted, and
learning from the wounded lying thickly over it that Wallenstein had
retreated, at once marched away.

In the Swedish camp there was no assurance whatever that a victory had
been gained, for nightfall had fallen on the Imperialists fighting as
stubbornly as ever. The loss of the king, the master spirit of the war,
dispirited and discouraged them, and Duke Bernhard and Kniphausen held
in the darkness an anxious consultation as to whether the army should
not at once retreat to Weissenburg. The plan was not carried out, only
because it was considered that it was impracticable--as the army would
be exposed to destruction should the Imperialists fall upon them while
crossing the terrible morass in their rear.

The morning showed them that the Imperialists had disappeared, and that
the mighty struggle had indeed been a victory for them--a victory won
rather by the superior stubbornness with which the Swedish generals held
their ground during the night, while Wallenstein fell back, than to the
splendid courage with which the troops had fought on the preceding
day. But better far would it have been for the cause which the Swedes
championed, that they should have been driven a defeated host from the
field of Lutzen, than that they should have gained a barren victory at
the cost of the life of their gallant monarch--the soul of the struggle,
the hope of Protestantism, the guiding spirit of the coalition against
Catholicism as represented by Ferdinand of Austria.

The losses in the battle were about equal, no less than 9000 having
fallen upon each side--a proportion without precedent in any battle of
modern times, and testifying to the obstinacy and valour with which on
both sides the struggle was maintained from early morning until night
alone terminated it.

It is said, indeed, that every man, both of the yellow regiments of
Swedish guards and of the blue regiments, composed entirely of English
and Scotchmen, lay dead on the field. On both sides many men of high
rank were killed. On the Swedish side, besides Gustavus himself, fell
Count Milo, the Count of Brahe, General Uslar, Ernest Prince of
Anhalt, and Colonels Gersdorf and Wildessein. On the Imperialist
side Pappenheim, Schenk, Prince and Abbot of Fulda, Count Berthold
Wallenstein, General Brenner, Issolani, general of the Croats, and six
colonels were killed. Piccolomini received ten wounds, but none of them
were mortal.

Holk was severely wounded, and, indeed, so close and desperate was the
conflict, that it is said there was scarcely a man in the Imperial army
who escaped altogether without a wound.



CHAPTER XVIII WOUNDED


A controversy, which has never been cleared up, has long raged as to the
death of Gustavus of Sweden; but the weight of evidence is strongly in
favour of those who affirm that he received his fatal wound, that in
the back, at the hand of Franz Albert of Lauenburg. The circumstantial
evidence is, indeed, almost overwhelming. By birth the duke was the
youngest of four sons of Franz II, Duke of Lauenburg. On his mother's
side he was related to the Swedish royal family, and in his youth lived
for some time at the court of Stockholm.

Owing to some impertinent remarks in reference to Gustavus he fell into
disfavour with the queen, and had to leave Sweden. On attaining manhood
he professed the Catholic faith, entered the Imperial army, obtained
the command of a regiment, attached himself with much devotion to
Wallenstein, and gained the confidence of that general. While the
negotiations between the emperor and Wallenstein were pending Franz
Albert was employed by the latter in endeavouring to bring about a
secret understanding with the court of Dresden.

When Gustavus was blockaded in Nuremberg by Wallenstein Franz Albert
left the camp of the latter and presented himself in that of Gustavus as
a convert to the Reformed Religion and anxious to serve as a volunteer
under him. No quarrel or disagreement had, so far as is known, taken
place between him and Wallenstein, nor has any explanation ever been
given for such an extraordinary change of sides, made, too, at a moment
when it seemed that Gustavus was in a position almost desperate. By his
profession of religious zeal he managed to win the king's heart, but
Oxenstiern, when he saw him, entertained a profound distrust of him, and
even warned the king against putting confidence in this sudden convert.

Gustavus, however, naturally frank and open in disposition, could not
believe that treachery was intended, and continued to treat him with
kindness. After the assault made by Gustavus upon Wallenstein's position
Franz Albert quitted his camp, saying that he was desirous of raising
some troops for his service in his father's territory. He rejoined him,
however, with only his personal followers, on the very day before the
battle of Lutzen, and was received by Gustavus with great cordiality,
although the absence of his retainers increased the general doubts as to
his sincerity.

He was by the king's side when Gustavus received his first wound. He
was riding close behind him when the king received his second and fatal
wound in the back, and the moment the king had fallen he rode away from
the field, and it is asserted that it was he who brought the news of the
king's death to Wallenstein.

Very soon after the battle he exchanged the Swedish service for the
Saxon, and some eighteen months later he re-embraced the Roman Catholic
faith and re-entered the Imperial army.

A stronger case of circumstantial evidence could hardly be put together,
and it would certainly seem as if Lauenburg had entered the Swedish
service with the intention of murdering the king. That he did not carry
out his purpose during the attack on the Altenburg was perhaps due to
the fact that Gustavus may not have been in such a position as to afford
him an opportunity of doing so with safety to himself.

It is certainly curious that after that fight he should have absented
himself, and only rejoined on the eve of the battle of Lutzen. The only
piece of evidence in his favour is that of Truchsess, a chamberlain of
the king, who, affirmed that he saw the fatal shot fired at a distance
of ten paces from the king by an Imperial officer, Lieutenant General
Falkenberg, who at once turned and fled, but was pursued and cut down by
Luckau, master of horse of Franz Albert.

The general opinion of contemporary writers is certainly to the effect
that the King of Sweden was murdered by Franz Albert; but the absolute
facts must ever remain in doubt.

On the morning after the battle Wallenstein, having been joined by
Pappenheim's infantry, sent a division of Croats back to the battlefield
to take possession of it should they find that the Swedes had retired;
but on their report that they still held the ground he retired at once
from Leipzig, and, evacuating Saxony, marched into Bohemia, leaving the
Swedes free to accomplish their junction with the army of the Elector,
thus gaining the object for which they had fought at Lutzen.

After the death of the king, Malcolm Graheme, full of grief and rage at
the loss of the monarch who was loved by all his troops, and had treated
him with special kindness, joined the soldiers of Duke Bernhard, and
took part in the charge which swept back the Imperialists and captured
the cannon on the hill. At the very commencement of the struggle his
horse fell dead under him, and he fought on foot among the Swedish
infantry; but when the arrival of Pappenheim on the field enabled the
Imperialists again to assume the offensive, Malcolm, having picked up
a pike from the hands of a dead soldier, fought shoulder to shoulder in
the ranks as the Swedes, contesting stubbornly every foot of the ground,
were gradually driven back towards the road.

Suddenly a shot struck him; he reeled backwards a few feet, strove to
steady himself and to level his pike, and then all consciousness left
him, and he fell prostrate. Again and again, as the fortune of the
desperate fray wavered one way or the other, did friend and foe pass
over the place where he lay.

So thickly strewn was the field with dead that the combatants in their
desperate struggle had long ceased to pick their way over the fallen,
but trampled ruthlessly upon and over them as, hoarsely shouting their
battle cry, they either pressed forward after the slowly retreating foe
or with obstinate bravery strove to resist the charges of the enemy.
When Malcolm recovered his consciousness all was still, save that
here and there a faint moan was heard from others who like himself lay
wounded on the battlefield. The night was intensely dark, and Malcolm's
first sensation was that of bitter cold.

It was indeed freezing severely, and great numbers of the wounded who
might otherwise have survived were frozen to death before morning; but
a few, and among these were Malcolm, were saved by the frost. Although
unconscious of the fact, he had been wounded in two places. The first
ball had penetrated his breastpiece and had entered his body, and a few
seconds later another ball had struck him in the arm. It was the first
wound which had caused his insensibility; but from the second, which
had severed one of the principal veins in the arm, he would have bled to
death had it not been for the effects of the cold. For a time the life
blood had flowed steadily away; but as the cold increased it froze and
stiffened on his jerkin, and at last the wound was staunched.

It was none too soon, for before it ceased to flow Malcolm had lost a
vast quantity of blood. It was hours before nature recovered from the
drain. Gradually and slowly he awoke from his swoon. It was some time
before he realized where he was and what had happened, then gradually
his recollection of the fight returned to him.

"I remember now," he murmured to himself, "I was fighting with the
Swedish infantry when a shot struck me in the body, I think, for I
seemed to feel a sudden pain like a red hot iron. Who won the day, I
wonder? How bitterly cold it is! I feel as if I were freezing to death."

So faint and stiff was he, partly from loss of blood, partly from being
bruised from head to foot by being trampled on again and again as the
ranks of the combatants swept over him, that it was some time before
he was capable of making the slightest movement. His left arm was, he
found, entirely useless; it was indeed firmly frozen to the ground; but
after some difficulty he succeeded in moving his right, and felt for the
flask which had hung from his girdle.

So frozen and stiff were his fingers that he was unable to unbuckle the
strap which fastened it; but, drawing his dagger, he at last cut through
this, and removing the stopper of the flask, took a long draught of
the wine with which it was filled. The relief which it afforded him was
almost instantaneous, and he seemed to feel life again coursing in his
veins.

After a while he was sufficiently restored to be enabled to get from his
havresack some bread and meat which he had placed there after finishing
his breakfast on the previous morning. He ate a few mouthfuls, took
another long draught of wine, and then felt that he could hope to hold
on until morning. He was unable to rise even into a sitting position,
nor would it have availed him had he been able to walk, for he knew not
where the armies were lying, nor could he have proceeded a yard in any
direction without falling over the bodies which so thickly strewed the
ground around him.

Though in fact it wanted but two hours of daylight when he recovered
consciousness, the time appeared interminable; but at last, to his
delight, a faint gleam of light spread across the sky. Stronger and
stronger did it become until the day was fairly broken. It was another
hour before he heard voices approaching. Almost holding his breath he
listened as they approached, and his heart gave a throb of delight as he
heard that they were speaking in Swedish. A victory had been won, then,
for had it not been so, it would have been the Imperialists, not the
Swedes, who would have been searching the field of battle.

"There are but few alive," one voice said, "the cold has finished the
work which the enemy began."

Malcolm, unable to rise, lifted his arm and held it erect to call the
attention of the searchers; it was quickly observed.

"There is some one still alive," the soldier exclaimed, "an officer,
too; by his scarf and feathers he belongs to the Green Brigade."

"These Scotchmen are as hard as iron," another voice said; "come, bring
a stretcher along."

They were soon by the side of Malcolm.

"Drink this, sir," one said, kneeling beside him and placing a flask of
spirits to his lips; "that will warm your blood, I warrant, and you must
be well nigh frozen."

Malcolm took a few gulps at the potent liquor, then he had strength to
say:

"There is something the matter with my left arm, I can't move it, and I
think I am hit in the body."

"You are hit in the body, sure enough," the man said, "for there is
a bullet hole through your cuirass, and your jerkin below it is all
stained with blood. You have been hit in the left arm too, and the blood
is frozen to the ground; but we will soon free that for you. But before
trying to do that we will cut open the sleeve of your jerkin and bandage
your arm, or the movement may set it off bleeding again, and you have
lost a pool of blood already."

Very carefully the soldiers did their work, and then placing Malcolm on
the stretcher carried him away to the camp. Here the surgeons were all
hard at work attending to the wounded who were brought in. They had
already been busy all night, as those whose hurts had not actually
disabled them found their way into the camp. As he was a Scotch officer
he was carried to the lines occupied by Colonel Henderson with his
Scotch brigade. He was known to many of the officers personally, and no
