
"But, perhaps you have never seen her?" added the queen.

Wallace replied, neither denying nor affirming her question: "I have
heard many praise her beauty, but more her virtues."

"Well, I am sorry," continued her majesty, "since you sing so sweetly
of female charms, that you have not seen this wonder of Scottish
ladies.  You have now little chance of that good fortune, for Earl de
Valence has taken her abroad, intending to marry her amidst all the
state with which my lord has invested him."

"Is it to Guienne he has taken her?" inquired Wallace.

"Yes," replied the queen, rather pleased than offended at the
minstrel's ignorance of court ceremony in thus familiarly presuming to
put a question to her.  She continued to answer: "While so near
Scotland he could not win her to forget her native country and her
father's danger, who it seems was dying when De Valence carried her
away.  And, to prevent bloodshed between the earl and Soulis, who is
also madly in love with her, my ever-gracious Edward gave the English
lord a high post in Guienne, and thither they are gone."

Before Wallace could reply to some remark which the queen laughingly
added to her information, the countess thought it proper to give her
gay mother-in-law a more decisive reminder of decorum, and, rising, she
whispered something which covered the youthful Margaret in blushes.
Her majesty rose directly, and pushing away the harp, hurryingly said:
"You may leave the room;" and turning her back to Wallace, walked away
through an opposite door.




Chapter LIX.

The Round Tower.


Wallace was yet recounting the particulars of his royal visit to Bruce
(who had anxiously watched his return), when one of the queen's
attendants appeared; and presenting him with a silk handkerchief
curiously coiled up, said, that he brought it from her majesty; who
supposed it must be his, as she found it in the room where he had been
playing the harp.  Wallace was going to say that it did not belong to
him, when Bruce gave him a look which directed him to take the
handkerchief.  He obeyed, without a word, and the boy withdrew.

Bruce smiled.  "There is more in that handkerchief than silk, my
friend!  Queens send not these embassies on trifling errands."  While
Bruce spoke, Wallace unwrapped it.  "I told you so!" cried the prince,
with a frank archness playing over his before pensive features, and
pointing to a slip of emblazoned vellum, which became unfolded.  "Shall
I look aside while you peruse it?"

"Look on it, my dear prince," replied Wallace; "for in trifles, as well
as in things of moment, I would hold no reserves with you."

The vellum was then opened, and these words presented themselves:

"Presume not on condescension.  This injunction may be necessary for
the noble lady who was present at our interview tells me the men of
this island are very presuming.  Redeem the character of your
countrymen, and transgress not on a courtesy that only means to say, I
did not leave you this morning so abruptly out of unkindness.  I write
this, because having the countess ever with me, I shall not even dare
to whisper it in her presence.  Be always faithful, and respectful,
minstrel, and you shall ever find an indulgent mistress.

"A page will call you when your attendance is desired."

Wallace and Bruce looked on each other.  Bruce first spoke.

"Had you vanity, my friend, this letter, from so lovely and innocent a
creature, might be a gratification; but in your case, the sentiment it
breathes is full of danger.  She knows not the secret power that
impelled her to write this, but we do; and I fear it will point an
attention to you which may produce effects ruinous to our projects."

"Then," answered Wallace, "our alternative is to escape it by getting
away this very night.  And, as you persevere in your resolution not to
enter Scotland unaccompanied by me, and will share my attempt to rescue
Lady Helen Mar, we must direct our course immediately to the Continent."

"Yes, instantly, and securely, too, under the disguise of priests!"
returned Bruce.  "I have in my possession the wardrobe of the confessor
who followed my father's fortunes, and who, on his death, retired into
the abbey which contains his remains."

It was then settled between the friends, that when it became dark they
should dress themselves in the confessor's robes, and by means of the
queen's signet, which she had given to Wallace at the banquet, pass the
guard as priests who had entered by some other gate, and were returned
from shriving her majesty.  Once without the city, they could make a
swift progress southward to the nearest seaport, and there safely
embark for France; for they were well aware that the moment they were
missed suspicion would direct pursuit toward the Scottish border.

In these arrangements, and planning their future movements relative to
the rescue of Lady Helen, they passed several hours, and were only
interrupted by the arrival of a lute from the queen for her minstrel to
tune.  Wallace obeyed; and returning it by the page who brought it,
congratulated himself that it was not accompanied by any new summons.
Then continuing his discourse with Bruce on the past, present, and to
come, their souls grew more closely entwined as they more intimately
recognized their kindred natures; and time moved on, unmarked, till the
shadows of evening deepened into night.

"Now is our hour," cried Bruce, starting on his feet; "go you into that
room, and array yourself in the confessor's robes, while I call my
servants to dispense with their usual nightly attendance."

With determination and hope, Wallace gladly obeyed.  In that very same
instant the Earl of Gloucester suddenly entered; and, looking round the
room with a disturbed countenance, abruptly said:

"Where is the minstrel?"

"Why?" answered Bruce, with an alarm which he vainly tried to prevent
appearing on his face.  Gloucester advanced close to him.

"Is any one within hearing?"

"No one."

"Then," replied the earl, "his life is in danger.  He is suspected to
be not what he seems; and I am sorry to add, to stand in favor with the
queen, of a nature to incur his mortal punishment."

Bruce was so confounded with this stoppage of all their plans, and at
the imminent peril of Wallace, that he could not speak.  Gloucester
proceeded:

"My dear Bruce, from the circumstance of his being with you, I cannot
but suppose that you know more than you think proper to disclose.
Whoever he may be, whether he came from France, or really from
Scotland, as he says, his life is now forfeited.  And that, by
attempting to screen him, you may not seem to share his imputed guilt,
I come to warn you of this discovery.  A double guard is set around the
keep; so no visible means are left for his escape."

"Then what will become of him?" exclaimed Bruce, forgetting all caution
in dismay for his friend.  "Am I to see the bravest of men, the savior
of my country, butchered before my eyes by a tyrant?  I may die,
Gloucester, in his defense, but I will never surrender him to his
enemy!"

Gloucester stood aghast at this disclosure.  He came to accuse the
friend of Bruce, that Bruce might be prepared to clear himself of
connivance with so treasonable a crime; but now that he found this
friend to be Wallace, the preserver of his own life, the restorer of
his honor at Berwick, he immediately resolved to give him freedom.

"Bruce," cried he, "when I recollect the figure and deportment of this
minstrel, I am surprised that, in despite of his disguise, I did not
recognize the invincible Regent of Scotland; but now I know him, he
shall find that generosity is not confined to his own breast.  Give me
your word that you will not stimulate suspicion by remonstrating with
Edward against your own arrest till the court leaves Durham, and I will
instantly find a way to conduct your friend in safety from the castle."

"I pledge you my word of honor," cried Bruce; "release but him, and, if
you demand it of me, I would die in chains."

"He saved me at Berwick," replied Gloucester, "and I am anxious to
repay the debt.  If he be near, explain what has happened in as few
words as possible, for we must not delay a moment.  I left a council
with the enraged king, settling what horrible death was to be his
punishment."

"When he is safe," answered Bruce, "I will attest his innocence to you;
meanwhile, rely on my faith, that you are giving liberty to a guiltless
man."

Bruce hastened to Wallace, who had just completed his disguise.  He
briefly related what had passed, and received for answer, that he would
not leave his prince to the revenge of the tyrant.  But Bruce, urging
that the escape of the one could alone secure that of the other,
implored him not to persist in refusing his offered safety, but to make
direct for Normandy.

"I will join you at Rouen; and thence we can proceed to Guienne," added
he.  "The hour the court leaves Durham is that of my escape; and when
free, what shall divide me from you and our enterprise!"

Wallace had hardly assented, when a tumultuous noise broke the silence
of the courtyard; the great iron doors of the keep were thrown back on
their hinges, and the clangor of arms, with many voices, resounded in
the hall.  Thinking all was lost, with a cry of despair, Bruce drew his
sword, and threw himself before his friend.  At that instant Gloucester
entered the room.  "They are quicker than I thought!" cried he; "but
follow me.  Bruce, remain where you are: sheathe your sword--be bold;
deny you know anything of the minstrel, and all will be well."  As he
spoke, the feet of them who were come to seize Wallace already sounded
in the adjoining apartment.  Gloucester grasped the Scottish hero by
the hand, turned into a short gallery, and, plucking the broad shaft of
a cedar pilaster from under its capital, let himself and his companion
into a passage within the wall of the building.  The ponderous beam
closed after them into its former situation; and the silent pair
descended, by a long flight of stone steps, to a square dungeon without
any visible outlet; but the earl found one, by raising a flat stone
marked by an elevated cross; and again they penetrated lower into the
bosom of the earth by a gradually declining path till they stopped on a
subterranean level ground.  "This vaulted passage," said Gloucester,
"reaches, in a direct line, to Fincklay Abbey.**  A particular
circumstance constrained my uncle, the then abbot of that monastery, to
discover it to me, ten years ago.  He told me, that to none but the
bishops of Durham and the abbots of Fincklay was the secret of its
existence revealed.  Since my coming hither this time (which was to
escort the young queen--not to bear arms against Scotland), I one day
took it into my head to revisit this recess; and, happily for the
gratitude I owe to you, I found all as I had left it in my uncle's
lifetime.  But, for the sake of my honor with Edward, whose wrath would
fall upon me in most fearful shapes should he ever know that I
delivered his vanquisher out of his hands, I must enjoin you to
secrecy.  Though the enemy of my king's ambition, you are the friend of
mankind.  You were my benefactor, noble Wallace; and I should deserve
the rack, could I suffer one hair of your head to fall with violence to
the ground."

**The remains of this curious subterranean passage are yet to be seen;
but parts of them are now broken in upon by water, and therefore the
communication between Durham and Fincklay is now cut off.

With answering frankness, Wallace declared his sense of the earl's
generosity; and earnestly commended the young Bruce to his watchful
friendship.  "The brave impetuosity of his mind," continued he, "at
times may overthrow his prudence, and leave him exposed to dangers
which a little virtuous caution might avoid.  Dissimulation is a
baseness I should shudder at seeing him practice; but when the flood of
indignation swells his bosom, then tell him, that I conjure him, on the
life of his dearest wishes, to be silent!  The storm which threatens
must blow over, and the power which guides through perils those who
trust in it, will ordain that we shall meet again!"

Gloucester replied, "What you say I will repeat to Bruce.  I am too
sensible that my royal father-in-law has trampled on his rights; and
should I ever see him restored to the throne of his ancestors, I could
not but acknowledge the hand of Heaven in the event.  Far would it have
been from me to have bound him to remain a prisoner during Edward's
sojourn at Durham, had I not been certain that your escape and his
together would now give birth to a plausible argument in the minds of
my enemies; and, grounding their suspicions on my acknowledged
attachment to Bruce, the king might have been persuaded to believe me
unfaithful to his interests.  The result would be my disgrace, and a
broken heart to her who has raised me by her generous love from the
humbler ranks of nobility to that of a prince, and her husband."

Gloucester then informed Wallace that about two hours before he came to
alarm Bruce for his safety on this occasion, he was summoned by Edward
to attend him immediately.  When he obeyed, he found Soulis standing by
the royal couch, and his majesty talking with vehemence.  At sight of
Gloucester he beckoned him to advance, and striking his hand fiercely
on a letter he held, he exclaimed:

"Here, my son, behold the record of your father's shame!--of a King of
England dishonored by a slave!"

As he spoke he dashed it from him.  Soulis answered, smiling:

"Not a slave, my lord and king! can you not see, through the ill
adapted disguise, the figure and mien of nobility?  He is some foreign
lover of your bride, come--"

"Enough!" interrupted the king; "I know I am dishonored; but the
villain shall die.  Read the letter, Gloucester, and say what tortures
shall stamp my vengeance!"

Gloucester opened the vellum, and read, in the queen's hand:

"Gentle minstrel! my lady countess tells me I must not see you again.
Were you old or ugly, as most bards are, I might, she says; but being
young, it is not for a queen to smile upon one of your calling.  She
bade me remember, that when I smiled, you smiled too; and that you
asked me questions unbecoming your degree.  Pray do not do this any
more; though I see no harm in it; alas! I used to smile as I liked when
I was in France.  Oh, if it were not for those I love best, who are now
in England, I wish I were there again! and you would go with me, gentle
minstrel, would you not?  And you would teach me to sing so sweetly!  I
would then never talk with you, but would always speak in song; how
pretty that would be! and then we should be from under the eyes of this
harsh countess.  My ladies in France would let you come in and stay as
long with me as I pleased.  But as I cannot go back again, I will make
myself happy here in spite of the countess, who rules me more as if she
were my stepmother than I hers; but then to be sure she is a few years
older.

"I will see you this evening, and your sweet harp shall sing all my
heart-aches to sleep.  My French lady of honor will conduct you
secretly to my apartments.  I am sure you are too honest even to guess
at what the countess thinks you might fancy when I smile on you.  But,
gentle minstrel, presume not, and you shall ever find an indulgent
mistress in M--

"P.S.  At the last vespers to-night, my page shall come for you."

Gloucester knew the queen's handwriting; and not being able to
contradict that this letter was hers, he inquired how it came into his
majesty's hands.

"I found it," replied Soulis, "in crossing the courtyard; it lay on the
ground, where, doubtless, it had been accidentally dropped by the
queen's messenger."

Gloucester, wishing to extenuate for the queen's sake, whose youth and
inexperience he pitied, affirmed that, from the simplicity with which
the note was written, from her innocent references to the minstrel's
profession, he could not suppose that she addressed him in any other
character.

"If he be only a base itinerant harper," replied the king, "the deeper
is my disgrace; for, if a passion of another king than music be not
portrayed in every word of this artful letter, I never read a woman's
heart!"

The king continued to comment on the fatal scroll with the lynx-eye of
jealousy, loading her name with every opprobrium.  Gloucester inwardly
thanked Heaven that none other than Soulis and himself were present to
hear Edward fasten such foul dishonor on his queen.  The generous earl
could not find other arguments to assuage the mountain ire of her
husband.  She might be innocent of actual guilt, or indeed of being
aware of more than a queen's usual interest in a poor wandering
minstrel was, as the king said, in every line.  Gloucester remaining
silent, Edward believed him convinced of the queen's crime; and being
too wrathful to think of caution, he sent for the bishop and others of
his lords, and when they entered, vented to them also his injury and
indignation.  Many were not inclined to be of the same opinion with
their sovereign; some thought with Gloucester, others deemed the letter
altogether a forgery; and a few adopted the severer inferences of her
husband; but all united (even those determined to spare the queen) in
recommending an immediate apprehension and private execution of the
minstrel.

"It is not fit," cried Soulis, "that a man who has ever been suspected
of invading our monarch's honor, should live another hour."

This sanguinary sentence was acceded to, and with as little remorse by
the whole assembly as if they had merely condemned a tree to the ax.
Such is the carelessness with which the generality of arbitrary
assemblies decide on the fate of a fellow mortal!  Earl Percy, who gave
his vote for the death of the minstrel more from this culpable
inconsideration than that thirst of blood which stimulated the voices
of Soulis and the Cummins, proposed--as he believed the queen
innocent--that honor should be examined relative to the circumstances
mentioned in the letter.

The king immediately ordered their attendance.

The royal Jane of Acre appeared at the first summons, and spoke with an
air of truth and freedom from alarm which convinced every candid ear of
the innocence of the queen.  Her testimony was, that she believed the
minstrel to be other than he seemed; but she was certain, from the
conversations which the queen had held with her after the bishop's
feast, that it was at this very feast she had first seen him, and that
she was ignorant of his real rank.  On being questioned by the bishop,
the countess acknowledged that her majesty had praised his figure as
well as his singing; "yet not more," added she, "than she afterward did
to the king when she awakened his curiosity to send for him."  Her
highness continued to reply to the interrogatories put to her, by
saying, that it was in the king's presence she herself first saw the
minstrel; and then she thought his demeanor much above his situation;
but, when he accompanied the queen and herself into her majesty's
apartments, she had then an opportunity to observe him narrowly, as the
queen engaged him in conversation; and by his answers, questions, and
easy, yet respectful deportment, she became convinced he was not what
he appeared.

"And why, Jane," asked the king, "did you not impart these suspicions
to your husband or to me?"

"Because," replied she, "remembering that my interference on a certain
public occasion brought my late husband, Clare, under your majesty's
displeasure; on my marriage with Monthermer, I made a solemn vow before
my confessor never to offend in the like manner.  And besides, the
countenance of this stranger was so ingenious, and his sentiments so
natural and honorable, I could not suspect he came on any disloyal
errand."

"Lady," observed one of the elder lords, "if you thought so well of the
queen and of this man, why did you caution her against his smiles, and
deem it necessary to persuade her not to see him again?"

The countess blushed at this question, but replied, "Because I saw the
minstrel was a gentleman.  He possessed a noble figure, and a handsome
face in spite of his Egyptian skin.  Like most young gentlemen, he
might be conscious of these advantages, and attribute the artless
approbation, the innocent smiles of my gracious queen, to a source more
flattering to his vanity.  I have known many lords, not far from your
majesty, make similar mistakes on as little grounds," added she,
looking disdainfully toward some of the younger nobles; "and,
therefore, to prevent such insolence, I desired his final dismission."

"Thank you, my dear Jane," replied the king; "you almost persuade me of
Margaret's innocence."

"Believe it, sire!" cried she with animation; "whatever romantic
thoughtlessness her youth and inexperience may have led her into, I
pledge my life on her purity."

"First, let us hear what that French woman has to say to the
assignation," exclaimed Soulis, whose polluted heart could not suppose
the existence of true purity, and whose cruel disposition exulted in
torturing and death; "question her, and then her majesty may have full
acquittal."

Again the brow of Edward was overcast.  The fiends of jealously once
more tugged at his heart; and ordering the Countess of Gloucester to
withdraw he commanded the Baroness de Pontoise to be brought into his
presence.

When she saw the king's threatening looks, and beheld the fearful
expression which shot from every surrounding countenance, she shrunk
with terror.  Long backneyed in secret gallantries, the same inward
whisper which had proclaimed to Soulis that the queen was guilty,
induced her to believe that she had been the confidante of an illicit
passion; and therefore, though she knew nothing really bad of her
unhappy mistress, yet, fancying that she did, she stood before the
royal tribunal with the air and aspect of a culprit.

"Repeat to me," demanded the king, "or answer it with your head, all
that you know of Queen Margaret's intimacy with the man who calls
himself a minstrel."

At these words, which were delivered in a tone that seemed the sentence
of death, the French woman fell on her knees, and in a burst of terror
exclaimed, "Sire, I will reveal all if your majesty will grant me
pardon for having too faithfully served my mistress!"

"Speak! speak!" cried the king, with desperate impatience.  "I swear to
pardon you, even if you have joined in a conspiracy against my life;
but speak the truth, and all the truth, that judgment, without mercy,
may fall on the guilty heads!"

"Then I obey," answered the baroness.

"Foul betrayer!" half-exclaimed Gloucester, turning disappointed away.
"O! what it is to be vile, and to trust the vile!  But virtue will not
be auxiliary to vice--and so wickedness falls by its own agents."

The baroness, raised from her kneeling position by Soulis, began:

"The only time I ever heard of, or saw this man, to my knowledge, was
when he was brought to play before my lady at the bishop's banquet.  I
did not much observe him, being engaged in conversation at the other
end of the room; so I cannot say, whether I might not have seen him in
France; for many noble lords adored the Princess Margaret, though she
appeared to frown upon them all.  But I must confess, when I attended
her majesty's disrobing after the feast, she put to me so many
questions about what I thought of the minstrel who had sung so
divinely, that I began to think her admiration too great to have been
awakened by a mere song.  And then she asked me, if a king could have a
nobler air than he had; and she laughed, and said she would send your
majesty to school to learn of him."

"Damnable traitress!" exclaimed the king.

The baroness paused, and retreated before the sudden fury which flashed
from his eyes.

"Go on!" cried he; "hide neither word nor circumstance, that my
vengeance may lose nothing of its aim!"

She proceeded:

"Her majesty then talked of his beautiful eyes; so blue, she said, so
tender, yet proud in their looks; and only a minstrel!  'De Pontoise,'
added she, 'can you explain that?'  I being rather, perhaps, too well
learned in the idle tales of our troubadours, heedlessly answered:
'Perhaps he is some king in disguise, just come to look at your
majesty's charms, and go away again!'  She laughed much at this
conceit; said he must be one of Pharaoh's race then, and that had he
not such white teeth, his complexion would be intolerable.  Being
pleased to see her majesty in such spirits, and thinking no ill, I
sportively answered, 'I read once of a certain Spanish lover, who went
to the court of Tunis to carry off the king's daughter; and he had so
black a face, that none suspected him to be other than the Moorish
Prince of Granada; when lo! one day in a pleasure-party on the sea, he
fell overboard, and came up with the fairest face in the world, and
presently acknowledged himself to be the Christian King of Castile.'
The queen laughed at this story, but not answering me, went to bed.
Next morning, when I entered her chamber, she received me with even
more gayety, and putting aside my coiffure, said, 'Let me see if I can
find the devil's mark here!'  'What do you mean?' I asked, 'does your
majesty take me for a witch?'  'Exactly so,' she replied; 'for a little
sprite told me last night that all you told me was true.'  And then she
began to tell me with many smiles, that she had dreamed the minstrel
was the very Prince of Portugal, whom, unseen, she had refused for the
King of England; and that he gave her a harp set with jewels.  She then
went to your majesty, and I saw no more of her till she sent for me
late in the evening.  She seemed very angry.  'You are faithful,' said
she to me, 'and you know me.  De Pontoise; you know me too proud to
degrade myself, and too highminded to submit to tyranny.  The Countess
of Gloucester, with persuasions too like commands, will not allow me to
see the minstrel any more.'  She then declared her determination that
she would see him; that she would feign herself sick, and he should
come and sing to her when she was alone; and that she was sure he was
too modest to presume on her condescension.  I said something to
dissuade her, but she overruled me; and, shame to myself, I consented
to assist her.  She embraced me, and gave me a letter to convey to him,
which I did, by slipping it beneath the ornaments of the handle of her
lute, which I sent as an excuse for the minstrel to tune.  It was to
acquaint him with her intentions, and this night he was to have visited
her apartment!"

During this recital the king sat with compressed lips listening, but
with a countenance proclaiming the collecting tempest within--changing
to livid paleness or portentous fire, at almost every sentence.  On
mentioning the letter, he clinched his hand, as if then he grasped the
thunderbolt.  The lords immediately apprehended that this was the
letter which Soulis found.

"And is this all you know of the affair?" inquired Percy, seeing that
she made a pause.  "And enough, too?" cried Soulis, "to blast the most
vaunted chastity in Christendom."

"Take the woman hence," cried the king, in a burst of wrath, that gave
his voice a preternatural force, which yet resounded from the vaulted
roof, while he added--"Never let me see her traitor face again!"  The
baroness withdrew in terror; and Edward, calling Sir Piers Gaveston,
commanded him to place himself at the head of a double guard, and go in
person to bring the object of his officious introduction to meet the
punishment due to his crime.  "For," cried the king, "be he prince or
peasant, I will see him hanged before my eyes, and then return his
wanton paramour, branded with infamy, to her disgraced family!"

Soulis now suggested that, as the delinquent was to be found with
Bruce, most likely that young nobleman was privy to his designs.  "We
shall see to him hereafter," replied the king; "meanwhile, look that I
am obeyed."

The moment this order passed the king's lips, Gloucester, now not
doubting the queen's guilt, hastened to warn Bruce of what had
occurred, that he might separate himself from the crime of a man who
appeared to have been under his protection.  But when he found that the
accused was no other than the universally feared, universally beloved,
and generous Wallace, all other considerations were lost in the desire
of delivering him from the impending danger.  He knew the means, and he
did not hesitate to employ them.

During the recital of this narrative, Gloucester narrowly observed the
auditor, and the ingenuous bursts of his indignation, and the horror he
evinced at the crime he was suspected of having committed, the earl,
while more fully convinced of his innocence, easily conceived how the
queen's sentiments for him might have gone no further than a childish
admiration, very pardonable in a guileless creature hardly more than
sixteen.

"See," cried Wallace, "the power which lies with the describer of
actions!  The chaste mind of your countess saw nothing in the conduct
of the queen but thoughtless simplicity.  The contaminated heart of the
Baroness de Pontoise descried passion in every word, wantonness in
every movement; and, judging of her mistress by herself, she has
wrought this mighty ruin.  How, then, does it behove virtue to admit
the virtuous only to her intimacy: association with the vicious makes
her to be seen in their colors!  Impress your king with this
self-evident conclusion; and were it not for endangering the safety of
Bruce, the hope of my country, I myself would return and stake my life
on proving the innocence of the Queen of England.  But if a letter,
with my word of honor, could convince the king--"

"I accept the offer," interrupted Gloucester, "I am too warmly the
friend of Bruce--too truly grateful to you--to betray either into
danger; but from Sunderland, whither I recommend you to go, and there
embark for France, write the declaration you mention, and inclose it to
me.  I can contrive that the king shall have your letter without
suspecting by what channel; and then, I trust, all will be well."

During this discourse, they passed on through the vaulted passage,
till, arriving at a wooden crucifix which marked the boundary of the
domain of Durham, Gloucester stopped.

"I must not go further.  Should I prolong my stay from the castle
during the search for you, suspicion may be awakened.  You must
therefore proceed alone.  Go straight forward, and at the extremity of
the vault you will find a flag stone, surmounted like the one by which
we descended; raise it, and it will let you into the cemetery of the
Abbey of Fincklay.  One end of that burying-place is always open to the
east.  Thence you will emerge to the open world; and may it in future,
noble Wallace, ever treat you according to your unequaled merits.
Farewell!"

The earl turned to retrace his steps, and Wallace pursued his way
through the rayless darkness toward the Fincklay extremity of the
vault.




Chapter LX.

Gallic Seas.


Wallace having issued from his subterranean journey, made direct to
Sunderland, where he arrived about sunrise.  A vessel belonging to
France (which, since the marriage of Margaret with Edward, had been in
amity with England as well as Scotland) rode there, waiting a favorable
wind.  Wallace secured a passage in her; and, going on board, wrote his
promised letter to Edward.  It ran thus:

"This testament is to assure Edward, King of England, upon the word of
a knight, that Queen Margaret, his wife, is in every respect guiltless
of the crimes alleged against her by the Lord Soulis, and sworn to by
the Baroness de Pontoise.  I came to the court of Durham on an errand
connected with my country; and that I might be unknown, I assumed the
disguise of a minstrel.  By accident I encountered Sir Piers Gaveston,
and, ignorant that I was other than I seemed, he introduced me at the
royal banquet.  It was there I first saw her majesty.  And I never had
that honor but three times; and the third and last in her apartments,
to which your majesty's self saw me withdraw.  The Countess of
Gloucester was present the whole time, and to her highness I appeal.
The queen saw in me only a minstrel; on my art alone as a musician was
her favor bestowed; and by expressing it with an ingenuous warmth which
none other than an innocent heart would have dared to display, she has
thus exposed herself to the animadversions of libertinism, and to the
false representations of a terror-struck, because worthless, friend.

"I have escaped the snare which the queen's enemies laid for me; and
for her sake, for the sake of truth, and your own peace, King Edward, I
declare before the Searcher of all hearts, and before the world, in
whose esteem I hope to live and die--that your wife is innocent!  And
should I ever meet the man, who, after this declaration, dares to unite
her name with mine in a tale of infamy--by the power of truth, I swear
that I will make him write a recantation with his blood.  Pure as a
virgin's chastity is, and shall ever be, the honor of William Wallace."

This letter was inclosed in one to the Earl of Gloucester, and having
dispatched his packet to Durham, the Scottish chief gladly saw a brisk
wind blow up from the north-west.  The ship weighed anchor, cleared the
harbor, and, under a fair sky, swiftly cut the waves toward the Gallic
shores.  But ere she reached them, the warlike star of Wallace directed
to his little bark the terrific sails of the Red Reaver, a formidable
pirate who then infested the Gallic seas, swept their commerce, and
insulted their navy.  He attacked the French vessel, but it carried a
greater than Caesar and his fortunes; Wallace and his destiny were
there, and the enemy struck to the Scottish chief.  The Red Reaver (so
surnamed because of his red sails and sanguinary deeds) was killed in
the action; but his younger brother, Thomas de Longueville, was found
alive with in the captive ship, and a yet greater prize!  Prince Louis,
of France, who having been out the day before on a sailing-party, had
been descried, and seized as an invaluable booty by the Red Reaver.

Adverse winds for some time prevented Wallace from reaching port with
his capture; but on the fourth day after the victory, he cast anchor in
the harbor of Havre.  The indisposition of the prince from a wound he
had received in his own conflict with the Reaver, made it necessary to
apprise King Philip of the accident.  In answer to Wallace's dispatches
on this subject, the grateful monarch added to the proffers of personal
friendship, which had been the substance of his majesty's embassy to
Scotland, a pressing invitation that the Scottish chief would accompany
the prince to Paris, and there receive a public mark of royal
gratitude, which, with due honor, should record this service done to
France to future ages.  Meanwhile Philip sent the chief a suit of
armor, with a request that he would wear it in remembrance of France
and his own heroism.  But nothing could tempt Wallace to turn aside
from his duty.  Impatient to pursue his journey toward the spot where
he hoped to meet Bruce, he wrote a respectful excuse to the king; but
arraying himself in the monarch's martial present (to assure his
majesty by the evidence of his son that his royal wish had been so far
obeyed), he went to the prince to bid him farewell.  Louis was
preparing for their departure, all three together, with young De
Longueville (whose pardon Wallace had obtained from the king on account
of the youth's abhorrence of the service which his brother had
compelled him to adopt), and the two young men, from different
feelings, expressed their disappointment when they found that their
benefactor was going to leave them.  Wallace gave his highness a packet
for the king, containing a brief statement of his vow to Lord Mar, and
a promise, that when he had fulfilled it, Philip should see him at
Paris.  The royal cavalcade then separated from the deliverer of its
prince; and Wallace, mounting a richly-barbed Arabian, which had
accompanied his splendid armor, took the road to Rouen.

Meanwhile, events not less momentous took place at Durham.  The instant
Wallace had followed the Earl of Gloucester from the apartment in the
castle, it was entered by Sir Piers Gaveston.  He demanded the
minstrel.  Bruce replied, he knew not where he was.  Gaveston, eager to
convince the king that he was no accomplice with the suspected person,
put the question a second time, and in a tone which he meant should
intimidate the Scottish prince--"Where is the minstrel?"

"I know not," replied Bruce.

"And will you dare to tell me, earl," asked his interrogator, "that
within this quarter of an hour he has not been in this tower?--nay, in
this very room?  The guards in your antechamber have told me that he
was; and can Lord Carrick stoop to utter a falsehood to screen an
wandering beggar?"

While he was speaking, Bruce stood eying him with increasing scorn.
Gaveston paused.

"You expect me to answer you!" said the prince.  "Out of respect to
myself I will, for such is the unsullied honor of Robert Bruce, that
even the air shall not be tainted with slander against his truth,
without being repurified by its confutation.  Gaveston, you have known
me five years; two of them we passed together in the jousts of
Flanders, and yet you believe me capable of falsehood!  Know then,
unworthy of the esteem I have bestowed on you, that neither to save
mean or great, would I deviate from the strict line of truth.  The man
you seek may have been in this tower, in this room, as you present are,
and as little am I bound to know where he now is, as whither you go
when you relieve me from an inquisition which I hold myself accountable
to no man to answer."

"'Tis well," cried Gaveston; "and I am to carry this haughty message to
the king?"

"If you deliver it as a message," answered Bruce, "you will prove that
they who are ready to suspect falsehood, find its utterance easy.  My
reply is to you.  When King Edward speaks to me, I shall find the
answer that is due to him."

"These attempts to provoke me into a private quarrel," cried Gaveston,
"will not succeed.  I am not to be so foiled in my duty.  I must seek
the man through your apartments."

"By whose authority?" demanded Bruce.

"By my own, as the loyal subject of my outraged monarch.  He bade me
bring the traitor before him; and thus I obey."

While speaking, Gaveston beckoned to his attendants to follow him to
the door whence Wallace had disappeared.  Bruce threw himself before it.

"I must forget the duty I owe to myself, before I allow you, or any
other man, to invade my privacy.  I have already given you the answer
that becomes Robert Bruce; and in respect to your knighthood, instead
of compelling I request you to withdraw."

Gaveston hesitated; but he knew the determined character of his
opponent, and therefore, with no very good grace, muttering that he
should hear of it from a more powerful quarter, he left the room.

And certainly his threats were not in this instance vain; for prompt
was the arrival of a marshal and his officers to force Bruce before the
king.

"Robert Bruce, Earl of Cleveland, Carrick and Annandale, I come to
summon you into the presence of your liege lord, Edward of England."

"The Earl of Cleveland obeys," replied Bruce; and, with a fearless
step, he walked out before the marshal.

When he entered the presence-chamber, Sir Piers Gaveston stood beside
the royal couch, as if prepared to be his accuser.  The king sat
supported by pillows, paler with the mortifications of jealousy and
baffled authority than from the effects of his wounds.

"Robert Bruce!" cried he, the moment his eyes fell on him; but the
sight of his mourning habit made a stroke upon his heart that sent out
evidence of remorse in large globules on his forehead; he paused, wiped
his face with his handkerchief, and resumed: "Are you not afraid,
presumptuous young man, thus to provoke your sovereign?  Are you not
afraid that I shall make that audacious head answer for the man whom
you thus dare to screen from my just revenge?"

Bruce felt all the injuries he had suffered from this proud king rush
at once upon his memory; and, without changing his position or lowering
the lofty expression of his looks, he firmly answered: "The judgment of
a just king I cannot fear; the sentence of an unjust one I despise."

"This to his majesty's face!" exclaimed Soulis.

"Insolence--rebellion--chastisement--even death!" were the words which
murmured round the room at the honest reply.

Edward had too much good sense to echo any one of them; but turning to
Bruce, with a sensation of shame he would gladly have repressed, he
said that, in consideration of his youth, he would pardon him what had
passed, and reinstate him in all the late Earl of Carrick's honors, if
he would immediately declare where he had hidden the offending minstrel.

"I have not hidden him," cried Bruce; "nor do I know where he is; but
had that been confided to me, as I know him to be an innocent man, no
power on earth should have wrenched him from me!"

"Self-sufficient boy!" exclaimed Earl Buchan, with a laugh of contempt;
"do you flatter yourself that he would trust such a novice as you are
with secrets of this nature?"

Bruce turned on him an eye of fire.

"Buchan," replied he, "I will answer you on other ground.  Meanwhile,
remember that the secrets of good men are open to every virtuous heart;
those of the wicked they would be glad to conceal from themselves."

"Robert Bruce," cried the king, "before I came this northern journey I
ever found you one of the most devoted of my servants, the gentlest
youth in my court; and how do I see you at this moment?  Braving my
nobles to my face!  How is it that until now this spirit never broke
forth?"

"Because," answered the prince, "until now I have never seen the
virtuous friend whom you call upon me to betray."

"Then you confess," cried the king, "that he was an instigator to
rebellion?"

"I avow," answered Bruce, "that I never knew what true loyalty was till
he taught it me; I never knew the nature of real chastity till he
explained it to me; nor comprehended what virtue might be till he
allowed me to see in himself incorruptible fidelity, bravery undaunted,
and a purity of heart not to be contaminated!  And this is the man on
whom these lords would fasten a charge of treason and adultery!  But
out of the filthy depths of their own breast arise the streams from
which they would blacked his fairness."

"Your vindication," cried the king, "confirms his guilt.  You admit
that he is not a minstrel in reality.  Wherefore, then, did he steal in
ambuscade into my palace, but to betray either my honor or my
life--perhaps both?"

"His errand here was to see me."

"Rash boy!" cried Edward; "then you acknowledge yourself a premeditated
conspirator against me?"

Soulis now whispered in the king's ear, but so low that Bruce did not
hear him.

"Penetrate further, my liege; this may be only a false confession to
shield the queen's character.  She who has once betrayed her duty,
finds it easy to reward such handsome advocates."

The scarlet of inextinguishable wrath now burned on the face of Edward.
"I will confront them," returned he; "surprise them into betraying
each other."

By his immediate orders the queen was brought in.  She leaned on the
Countess of Gloucester.

"Jane," cried the king, "leave that woman; let her impudence sustain
her."

"Rather her innocence, my lord," said the countess, bowing, and
hesitating to go.

"Leave her to that," returned the incensed husband, "and she would
grovel on the earth like her own base passions.  But stand before me
she shall, and without other support than the devils within her."

"For pity!" cried the queen, extending her clasped hands toward Edward,
and bursting into tears; "have mercy on me, for I am innocent!"

"Prove it then," cried the king, "by agreeing with this confidant of
your minstrel, and at once tell me by what name you addressed him when
you allured him to my court?  Is he French, Spanish, or English?"

"By the Virgin's holy purity, I swear!" cried the queen, sinking on her
knees, "that I never allured him to this court; I never beheld him till
I saw him at the bishop's banquet; and for his name, I know it not."

"Oh, vilest of the vile!" cried the king, fiercely grasping his couch;
"and didst thou become a wanton at a glance?  From my sight this
moment, or I shall blast thee!"

The queen dropped senseless into the arms of the Earl of Gloucester,
who at that moment entered from seeing Wallace through the cavern.  At
sight of him, Bruce knew that his friend was safe; and fearless for
himself when the cause of outraged innocence was at stake, he suddenly
exclaimed:

"By one word, King Edward, I will confirm the blamelessness of this
injured queen.  Listen to me, not as a monarch and an enemy, but with
the unbiased judgment of man with man; and then ask your own brave
heart if it would be possible for Sir William Wallace to be a seducer."

Every mouth was dumb at the enunciation of that name.  None dared open
a lip in accusation; and the king himself, thunderstruck alike with the
boldness of the conqueror venturing within the grasp of his revenge and
at the daringness of Bruce in thus declaring his connection with him,
for a few minutes he knew not what to answer; only he had received
conviction of his wife's innocence!  He was too well acquainted with
the history and uniform conduct of Wallace to doubt his honor in this
transaction; and though a transient fancy of the queen's might have had
existence, yet he had now no suspicion of her actions.  "Bruce," said
he, "your honesty has saved the Queen of England.  Though Wallace is my
enemy, I know him to be of an integrity which neither man nor woman can
shake; and therefore," added he, turning to the lords, "I declare
before all who have heard me so fiercely arraign my injured wife, that
I believe her innocent of every offense against me.  And whoever, after
this, mentions one word of what has passed in these investigations, or
even whispers that they have been held, shall be punished as guilty of
high treason."

Bruce was then ordered to be reconducted to the round-tower; and the
rest of the lords withdrawing by command, the king was left with
Gloucester, his daughter Jane, and the now reviving queen to make his
peace with her, even on his knees.

Burce was more closely immured than ever.  Not even his senachie was
allowed to approach him; and double guards were kept constantly around
his prison.  On the fourth day of his seclusion an extra row of iron
bars was put across his windows.  He asked the captain of the party the
reason for this new rivet on his captivity; but he received no answer.
His own recollection, however, solved the doubt; for he could not but
see that his own declaration respecting his friendship with Wallace had
increased the alarm of Edward respecting their political views.  One of
the warders, on having the same inquiry put to him which Bruce had
addressed to his superior, in a rough tone replied:

"He had best not ask questions, lest he should hear that his majesty
had determined to keep him under Bishop Beck's padlock for life."

Bruce was not to be deprived of hope by a single evidence, and smiling,
said:

"There are more ways of getting out of a tyrant's prison, than by the
doors and windows!"

"Why, you would not eat through the walls?" cried the man.

"Certainly," replied Bruce, "if I have no other way, and through the
guards too."

"We'll see to that," answered the man.

"And feel it too, my sturdy jailer," returned the prince; "so look to
yourself."

Bruce threw himself recklessly into a chair as he spoke; while the man,
eying him askance, and remembering how strangely the minstrel had
disappeared, began to think that some people born in Scotland inherited
from nature a necromantic power of executing whatever they determined.

Though careless in his manner of treating the warder's information,
Bruce thought of it with anxiety; and lost in reflections, checkered
with hope and doubt of his ever effecting an escape, he remained
immovable on the spot where the man had left him, till another sentinel
brought in a lamp.  He set it down in silence, and withdrew; Bruce then
heard the bolts on the outside of his chamber pushed into their guards.
"There they go," said he to himself; "and those are to be the morning
and evening sounds to which I am to listen all my days!  At least
Edward would have it so.  Such is the gratitude he shows to the man who
restored to him his wife; who restored to him the consciousness of
possessing that honor unsullied which is so dear to every married man!
Well, Edward, kindness might bind generous minds even to forget their
rights; but thanks to you, neither in my own person, nor for any of my
name, do I owe you aught, but to behold me King of Scotland; and please
God, that you shall, if the prayers of faith may burst these
double-steeled gates, and set me free!"

While invocations to the Power in which he confided, and resolutions
respecting the consequences of his hoped-for liberty, by turns occupied
his mind, he heard the tread of a foot in the adjoining passage.  He
listened breathless; for no living creature, he thought, could be in
that quarter of the building, as he had suffered none to enter it since
Wallace had disappeared by that way.  He half rose from his couch, as
the door at which he had seen him last gently opened.  He started up,
and Gloucester, with a lantern in his hand, stood before him.  The earl
put his finger on his lip, and taking Bruce by the hand, led him, as he
had done Wallace, down into the vault which leads to Fincklay Abbey.

When safe in that subterraneous cloister, the earl replied to the
impatient gratitude of Bruce (who saw that the generous Gloucester
meant he should follow the steps of his friend) by giving him a
succinct account of his motives for changing his first determination,
and now giving him liberty.  He had not visited Bruce since the escape
of Wallace, that he might not excite any new suspicion in Edward; and
the tower being fast locked at every usual avenue, he had now entered
it from the Fincklay side.  He then proceeded to inform Bruce, that
after his magnanimous forgetfulness of his own safety to insure that of
the queen had produced a reconciliation between her and her husband,
Buchan, Soulis, and Athol, with one or two English lords, joined the
next day to persuade the king that Bruce's avowal respecting Wallace
had been merely an invention of his own to screen some baser friend and
royal mistress.  They succeeded in reawakening doubts in Edward, who,
sending for Gloucester, said to him, "Unless I could hear from
Wallace's own lips (and in my case the thing is impossible), that he
has been here, and that my wife is guiltless of this foul stain, I must
ever remain in horrible suspense.  These base Scots, ever fertile in
maddening suggestions, have made me even more suspect that Bruce had
other reasons for his apparently generous risk of himself, than a love
of justice."

While these ideas floated in the mind of Edward, Bruce had been more
closely immured.  And Gloucester having received the promised letter
from Wallace, determined to lay it before the king.  Accordingly, one
morning the earl, gliding unobserved into the presence-chamber before
Edward was brought in, laid the letter under his majesty's cushion.  As
Gloucester expected, the moment the king saw the superscription, he
knew the hand; and hastily breaking the seal, read the letter twice
over to himself without speaking a word.  But the clouds which had hung
on his countenance all passed away; and with a smile reaching the
packet to Gloucester, he commanded him to read aloud "that silencer of
all doubts respecting the honor of Margaret of France and England."
Gloucester obeyed; and the astonished nobles, looking on each other,
one and all assented to the credit that ought to be given to Wallace's
word, and deeply regretted having ever joined in a suspicion against
her majesty.  Thus, then, all appeared amicably settled.  But the
embers of discord still glowed.  The three Scottish lords, afraid lest
Bruce might be again taken into favor, labored to show that his
friendship with Wallace, pointed to his throwing off the English yoke,
and independently assuming the Scottish crown.  Edward required no
