
The Hare on this Side of the Rocky Mountains is exclusively the
inhabitents of the Great Plains of Columbia, as they are of those of
the Missouri East of the mountains. they weigh from 7 to 12 pounds. the
measure of one which weighed 10 pounds, was as follows. from the
extremity of the hinder, to that of the fore feet when extended 3 Feet.
length from nose to the extremity of the tail 2 feet, 2 inches. Hight
when Standing erect 1 foot, 3 inches-. Girth of the body 1 foot, 4
inches-. length of tail 61/2 inches-. length of ear 51/2 inches-. width
of ear 3 inches and 1/8-. from the hip to the extremity of toe of the
hind foot 1 foot 41/4 inches-. The eye is large and prominent. the
pupil is circular, of a deep Sea Green and Occupies one third of the
diamiter of the eye, the iris is of a bright yellowish silver colour.
The ears are placed far back on the head and very near each other, they
are flexable and the animal moves them with great ease and quickness
and can dilate and throw them foward, or contract and fold them on his
back at pleasure. the fold of the front of the ear is of a redish brown
colour, the inner folds are those which lie together when the ears are
thrown back, and which occupies 2/3ds of the width of the ears of a
pure white except the tips of the ears for about an inch. the hinder
folds or those which lie on the back are of a light grey; the Sides as
they approach the belly become gradually more white, the belly brest,
and inner part of the legs and thyes are white, with a Slight Shade of
a lead Colour. The Head, neck, back Sholders, Sides, outer part of the
legs and thyes are of a Lead Coloured Grey. the tail is bluntly pointed
and round, covered with fine Soft white fur not quite as long as on the
other parts of the body. the body is covered with a deep fine Soft
close fur. the colours here discribed are those which the Animale
assumes from the middle of April to the middle of November, the
ballance of the year they are of a pure white, except the black and
redish brown of the ears which never changes. a fiew redish brown spots
are Sometimes Seen intermixed with the white, at this Season on the
heads and upper parts of the neck an Sholders. The body of this animal
is Smaller and longer in purpotion to it's hight than the Rabbit. when
it runs it carrys its tail Streight behind in the direction of it's
body. they appear to run with more ease and bound with greater agility
than any animal I ever saw. they are extreemly fleet and never burrow
or take Shelter in the grounds when pursued. it's teeth are like those
of the rabit, as is also its upper lip which is divided as high as the
nose. it's food is Grass, herbs, and in winter feeds much on the bark
of Several arematic Shrubs which grow in the plains and the young
willows along the rivers and other water courses.--I have measured the
leaps of this animal and find them commonly from 18 to 22 feet. they
are Generally found Seperate, and never Seen to associate in any number
or more than two or three.




[Lewis, March 1, 1806]
Saturday March 1st 1806.
This morning Sergt. Gass and a party set out in quest of the Elk which
had been killed by the hunters the day before yesterday. they returned
with the flesh of three of them late in the evening. Thompson was left
with the hunters in order to jurk and take care of the flesh of the
remaining two. Kuskelar and wife left us about noon. he had a good
looking boy of about 10 years of age with him who he informed us was
his slave. this boy had been taken prisoner by the Killamucks from some
nation on the Coast to the S. East of them at a great distance. like
other Indian nations they adopt their slaves in their families and
treat them very much as their own children. Reubin Fields and Collins
who have been absent since yesterday morning returned without having
killed any game. The birds of the Western side of the Rocky Mountain to
the Pacific Ocean, for convenience I shall divide into two classes,
which I shal designate from the habits of the birds, Terrestrial and
Aquatic.

The Grouse or Prarie hen is peculiarly the inhabitant of the Grait
Plains of Columbia they do not differ from those of the upper portion
of the Missouri, the tail of which is pointed or the feathers in it's
center much longer than those on the sides. this Species differs
essentially in the construction of this part of their plumage from
those of the Illinois which have their tails composed of fathers of
equal length. in the winter season this bird is booted even to the
first joint of it's toes. the toes are also curiously bordered on their
lower edges with narrow hard scales which are placed very close to each
other and extend horizontally about 1/8 of an inch on each side of the
toes thus adding to the width of the tread which nature seems
bountifully to have furnished them at this season for passing over the
snow with more ease. in the summer season those scales fall off. They
have four toes on each foot. Their colour is a mixture of dark brown
redish and yellowish brown and white confusedly mixed in which the
redish brown prevails most on the upper parts of the body wings and
tail and the white underneath the belley and lower parts of the breast
and tail. they associate in large flocks in autumn & winter and are
frequently found in flocks of from five to six even in summer. They
feed on grass, insects, the leaves of various shrubs in the plains and
on the seeds of several species of spelts and wild rye which grow in
the richer parts of the plains. in winter their food is the buds of the
willow & Cottonwood also the most of the native berries furnish them
with food.The Indians of this neighbourhood eat the root of the Cattail
or Cooper's flag. it is pleasantly taisted and appears to be very
nutricious. the inner part of the root which is eaten without any
previous preperation is composed of a number of capillary white
flexable strong fibers among which is a mealy or starch like substance
which readily desolves in the mouth and separate from the fibers which
are then rejected. it appears to me that this substance would make
excellent starch; nothing can be of a purer white than it is.-




[Clark, March 1, 1806]
Saturday March the 1st 1806
This morning we despatched Sergt. Gass with 12 men in two Canoes in
quest of the Elk which had been killed by the hunters the day before
yesterday. they returned with the flesh of three of them late in the
evening. Thompson was left with the hunters in order to jurk and take
care of the flesh of the remaining two. Kuskalar &c. left us about
noon. The boy which this Indian offered to Sell to me is about 10 years
of age. this boy had been taken prisoner by the Kit a mox from Some
Nation on the Coast to the S. East of them at a great distance. like
other Indian nations they adopt their Slaves in their famelies and
treat them very much like their own Children. Reuben Field and Collins
who had been absent Since yesterday morning returned without killing
any thing.

The birds on the western Side of the Rocky Mountain's to the Pacific
Ocian for Convenience I Shall devide into from the habit of the birds,
Terrestrial and Aquatic. i e Fowls of the air, and fowls of the water.

The Prarie Hen sometimes called the Grouse is peculiarly the inhabitent
of the Great Plains of Columbia. they do not differ from those of the
upper portion of the Missouri, the tails of which is pointed or the
feathers in its center much longer than those on the Sides. this
Species differ assentially in the construction of this part of their
plumage from those of the Illinois which have their tail composed of
feathers of equal length. in the winter Season this berd is booted even
to the first joint of it's toes. the toes are also curiously bordered
on their lower edges with narrow hard scales which are placed very
close to each other and extend horizontally about 1/8 of an inch on
each Side of the toe, thus adding to the width of the tread which
nature Seams bountifully to have furnished them with at this Season for
passing over the Snow with more ease. in the Summer Season those Scales
fall off. they have four toes on each foot. their colour is a mixture
of dark brown redish and yellowish brown and white confusedly mixed in
which the redish brown prevails most on the upper parts of the body
wings and tail. and the white underneath the belley and lower parts of
the breast and tail. they associate in large flocks in autumn & winter
and are frequently found in flocks of from five to Six even in Summer.
They feed on grass, insects, the leaves of various Shrubs in the
Praries, and on the Seeds of Several Species of Spelts and wild rye
which grow in the richer parts of the Plains. in the winter their food
is the buds of the willow and Cottonwood also the most of the native
berries furnish them with food. they cohabit in flock & the Cocks fight
verry much at those Seasons.




[Lewis, March 2, 1806]
Sunday March 2cd
The diet of the sick is so inferior that they recover their strength
but slowly. none of them are now sick but all in a state of
convalessence with keen appetites and nothing to eat except lean Elk
meat. late this evening Drewyer arrived with a most acceptable supply
of fat Sturgeon, fresh Anchovies and a bag containing about a bushel of
Wappetoe. we feasted on Anchovies and Wappetoe.

The Cock of the Plains is found in the plains of Columbia and are in
Great abundance from the entrance of the S. E. fork of the Columbia to
that of Clark's river. this bird is about 2/3rds the size of a turkey.
the beak is large short curved and convex. the upper exceeding the
lower chap. the nostrils are large and the beak black. the colour is an
uniform mixture of dark brown reather bordeing on a dove colour, redish
and yellowish brown with some small black specks. in this mixture the
dark brown prevails and has a slight cast of the dove colour at a
little distance. the wider side of the large feathers of the wings are
of a dark brown only. the tail is composed of 19 feathers of which that
in the center is the longest, and the remaining 9 on each side deminish
by pairs as they receede from the center; that is any one feather is
equal in length to one equa distant from the center of the tail on the
oposite side. the tail when foalded comes to a very sharp point and
appears long in proportion to the body. in the act of flying the tail
resembles that of a wild pigeon. tho the motion of the wings is much
that of the pheasant and Grouse. they have four toes on each foot of
which the hinder one is short. the leg is covered with feathers about
half the distance between the knee and foot. when the wing is expanded
there are wide opening between it's feathers the plumeage being so
narrow that it dose not extend from one quill to the other. the wings
are also proportionably short, reather more so than those of the
pheasant or grouse. the habits of this bird are much the same as those
of the grouse. only that the food of this fowl is almost entirely that
of the leaf and buds of the pulpy leafed thorn; nor do I ever recollect
seeing this bird but in the neighbourhood of that shrub. they sometimes
feed on the prickley pear. the gizzard of it is large and much less
compressed and muscular than in most fowls; in short it resembles a maw
quite as much as a gizzard. when they fly they make a cackling noise
something like the dunghill fowl. the following is a likeness of the
head and beak. the flesh of the cock of the Plains is dark, and only
tolerable in point of flavor. I do not think it as good as either the
Pheasant or Grouse.--it is invariably found in the plains.The feathers
about it's head are pointed and stif some hairs about the base of the
beak. feathers short fine and stif about the ears.




[Clark, March 2, 1806]
Sunday March 2nd 1806
The diet of the Sick is So inferior that they recover their Strength
but Slowly. none of them are now Sick but all in a State of
Covelessence with keen appetites and nothing to eate except lean Elk
meat.

The nativs of this neighbourhood eate the root of the Cattail or
Cooper's flag. it is pleasantly tasted and appears to be very
nutrecious. the inner part of the root which is eaten without any
previous preperation is Composed of a number of capellary white
flexable Strong fibers among which is a mealy or Starch like Substance
which readily disolves in the mouth and Seperates from the fibers which
are then rejected. it appears to me that this Substance would make
excellent Starch; nothing Can be of a pureer white than it is

This evening late Drewyer, Crusat & Wiser returned with a most
acceptable Supply of fat Sturgen, fresh anchoves and a bag Containing
about a bushel of Wappato. we feasted on the Anchovies and wappatoe.-.

The Heath Cock or cock of the Plains is found in the Plains of Columbia
and are in great abundance from the enterance of Lewis's river to the
mountains which pass the Columbia between the Great falls and Rapids of
that river. this fowl is about 3/4ths the Size of a turkey. the beak is
large Short Curved and convex. the upper exceeding the lower chap. the
nostrils are large and the back black. the Colour is a uniform mixture
of dark brown reather bordering on a dove colour, redish and yellowish
brown with Some Small black Specks. in this mixture the dark brown
provails and has a Slight cast of the dove colour at a little distance.
the wider side of the larger feathers of the wings are of a dark brown
only. the tail is composed of 19 feathers of which that in the center
is the longest, and the remaining 9 on each Side deminish by pairs as
they receede from the Center; that is any one feather is equal in
length to one of an equal distance from the Center of the tail on the
opposit Side. the tail when folded Comes to a very Sharp point and
appears long in perpotion to the body in the act of flying the tail
resembles that of a wild pigeon. tho the motion of the wings is much
that of the Pheasant and Grouse. they have four toes on each foot of
which the hinder one is Short. the leg is covered with feathers about
half the distance between the knee and foot. when the wings is expanded
there are wide opening between it's feathers, the plumage being So
narrow that it does not extend from one quill to another. the wings are
also propotionably Short, reather more So than those of the Pheasant or
Grouse. the habits of this bird is much the Same as those of the Prarie
hen or Grouse. only that the food of this fowl is almost entirely that
of the leaf and buds of the pulpy leafed thorn, nor do I ever recollect
Seeing this bird but in the neighbourhood of that Shrub. The gizzard of
it is large and much less compressed and muscular than in most fowls,
in Short it resembles a maw quite as much as a gizzard. When they fly
they make a cackling noise Something like the dunghill fowl. the flesh
of this fowl is dark and only tolerable in point of flavour. I do not
think it as good as wth the Pheasant or Prarie hen, or Grouse. the
feathers above it's head are pointed and Stiff Some hairs about the
base of the beak. feathers Short fine and Stiff about the ears, and
eye. This is a faint likeness of the Cock of the plains or Heath Cock
the first of those fowls which we met with was on the Missouri below
and in the neighbourhood of the Rocky Mountains and from to the
mountain which passes the Columbia between the Great falls and Rapids
they go in large gangues or Singularly and hide remarkably close when
pursued, make Short flights, &c.

The large Black & White Pheasant is peculiar to that portion of the
Rocky Mountains watered by the Columbia River. at least we did not See
them untill we reached the waters of that river, nor Since we have left
those mountains. they are about the Size of a well grown hen. the
contour of the bird is much that of the redish brown Pheasant common to
our country. the tail is proportionably as long and is composed of 18
feathers of equal length, of a uniform dark brown tiped with black. the
feathers of the body are of a dark brown black and white. the black is
that which most prodomonates, and white feathers are irregularly
intermixed with those of the black and dark brown on every part but in
greater perpotion about the neck breast and belly. this mixture gives
it very much the appearance of that kind of dunghill fowl, which the
henwives of our Countrey Call dommanicker. in the brest of Some of
those birds the white prodominates most. they are not furnished with
tufts of long feathers on the neck as other Pheasants are, but have a
Space on each Side of the neck about 21/2 inches long and one inch in
width on which no feathers grow, tho it is consealed by the feathers
which are inserted on the hinder and front part of the neck, this Space
Seams to Serve them to dilate or contract the feathers of the neck with
more ease. the eye is dark, the beak black, uncovered Somewhat pointed
and the upper exceeds the under chap. they have a narrow Strip of
vermillion colour above each eye which consists of a fleshey Substance
not protuberant but uneaven, with a number of minute rounded dots. it
has four toes on each foot of which three are in front, it is booted to
the toes. it feeds on wild fruits, particularly the berry of the
Sac-a-com-mis, and much also on the Seed of the pine & fir. this fowl
is usially found in Small numbers two and three & 4 together on the
ground. when Supprised flies up & lights on a tree and is easily Shot
their flesh is Superior to most of the Pheasant Species which we have
met with. they have a gizzard as other Pheasants &c. feed also on the
buds of the Small Huckleberry bushes




[Lewis, March 3, 1806]
Monday March 3rd 1806.
Two of our perogues have been lately injured very much in consequence
of the tide leaving them partially on shore. they split by this means
with their own weight. we had them drawn out on shore. our
convalessents are slowly on the recovery. Lapage is taken sick, gave
him a doze of Scots pills which did not operate. no movement of the
party today worthy of notice. every thing moves on in the old way and
we are counting the days which seperate us from the 1st of April and
which bind us to fort Clatsop.--The large black and white pheasant is
peculiar to that portion of the Rocky Mountain watered by the Columbia
river. at least we did not see them in these mountains until I we
reached the waters of that river nor since we have left those
mountains. they are about the size of a well grown hen. the contour of
the bird is much that of the redish brown pheasant common to our
country. the tail is proportionably as long and is composed of eighteen
feathers of equal length, of an uniform dark brown tiped with black.
the feathers of the body are of a dark brown black and white. the black
is that which most predominates, and white feathers are irregularly
intermixed with those of the black and dark brown on every part, but in
greater proportion about the neck breast and belley. this mixture gives
it very much the appearance of that kind of dunghill fowl which the
hen-wives of our country call dom-manicker. in the brest of some of
these birds the white predominates most. they are not furnished with
tufts of long feathers on the neck as our pheasants are, but have a
space on each side of the neck about 21/2 inches long and 1 In. in
width on which no feathers grow, tho tis concealed by the feathers
which are inserted on the hinder and front part of the neck; this space
seems to surve them to dilate or contract the feathers of the neck with
more ease. the eye is dark, the beak black, curved somewhat pointed and
the upper exceeds the under chap. they have a narrow stripe of
vermillion colour above each eye which consists of a fleshey substance
not protuberant but uneven with a number of minute rounded dots. it has
four toes on each foot of which three are in front. it is booted to the
toes. it feeds on wild fruits, particularly the berry of the
sac-a-commis, and much also on the seed of the pine and fir.

The small speckled pheasant found in the same country with that above
discribed, differs from it only in point of size and somewhat in
colour. it is scarcely half the size of the other; ascociates in much
larger flocks and is very gentle. the black is more predominant and the
dark bron feathers less frequent in this than the larger species. the
mixture of white is also more general on every part of this bird. it is
considerably smaller than our pheasant and the body reather more round.
in other particulars they differ not at all from the large black and
white pheasant. this by way of distinction I have called the speckled
pheasant. the flesh of both these species of party coloured phesants is
of a dark colour and with the means we had of cooking them not very
well flavored.

The small brown pheasant is an inhabitant of the same country and is of
the size and shape of the specled pheasant which it also resembles in
it's economy and habits. the stripe above the eye in this species is
scarcely perceptable, and is when closely examined of a yellow or
orrange colour instead of the vermillion of the outhers. it's colour is
an uniform mixture of dark and yellowish brown with a slight mixture of
brownish white on the breast belley and the feathers underneath the
tail. the whol compound is not unlike that of the common quail only
darker. this is also booted to the toes. the flesh of this is
preferable to either of the others and that of the breast is as white
as the pheasant of the Atlantic coast.the redish brown pheasant has
been previously discribed.--The Crow raven and Large Blackbird are the
same as those of our country only that the crow is here much smaller
yet it's note is the same. I observe no difference either between the
hawks of this coast and those of the Atlantic. I have observed the
large brown hawk, the small or sparrow hawk, and the hawk of an
intermediate size with a long tail and blewish coloured wings
remarkably swift in flight and very firce. sometimes called in the U
States the hen hawk. these birds seem to be common to every part of
this country, and the hawks crows & ravens build their nests in great
numbers along the high and inaccessable clifts of the Columbia river
and it's S. E. branch where we passed along them.--we also met with the
large hooting Owl under the Rocky mountain on the Kooskoskee river. it
did not appear to differ materially from those of our country. I think
it's colours reather deeper and brighter than with us, particularly the
redish brown. it is the same size and form.




[Clark, March 3, 1806]
Monday March 3rd 1806
Two of our Canoes have been lately injured very much in consequence of
the tide leaveing them partially on Shore. they Split by this means
with their own weight. we had them drawn out on Shore. our
convalessents are Slowly on the recovery. La page is taken Sick. gave
him Some of Scotts Pills which did not opperate. no movement of the
party to day worthey of notice. every thing moves on in the old way and
we are Counting the days which Seperate us from the 1st of April, &
which bind us to Fort Clatsop.-.-.

The Small Speckled Pheasant found in the Rocky Mountains, and differ
from the large black and white pheasant only in point of Size, and
Somewhat in colour. it is scercely half the Size of the other;
assosiates in much larger flocks and is also very gentle. the black is
more predominate and the dark brown feathers less frequent in this than
the larger Species. the mixture of white is also more general on every
part of this bird. it is considerably Smaller than our Pheasant and the
body reather more round. in other particulars they differ not at all,
from the large black and white Pheasant. this by way of distinction I
have called the Speckled Pheasant. the flesh of both these Species of
party coloured Pheasant is of a dark colour, and with the means we had
of cooking them were only tolerably flavoured tho these birds would be
fine well cooked.

The small Brown Pheasant is an inhabitant of the Same Country and is of
the Size and Shape of the Speckled Pheasant, which it also resembles in
it's economy and habits, the Stripe above the eye in this Species is
scercely preceptable and is when closely examined of a yellow or
orrange colour in Sted of the vermillion of the others. it's colour is
of a uniform mixture of dark and yellowish brown with a Slight mixture
of brownish white on the breast belley and the feathers under the tail.
the whole Compound is not unlike that of the Common quaile only darker.
this is also booted to the toes. the flesh is tolerable and that of the
breast is as white as the Pheasant of the atlantic coast. the redish
brown Pheasant has been previously discribed.-.

The Crow Ravin and large Blackbird are the Same as those of our
Country, only that the Crow here is much Smaller, yet its note is the
Same. I observe no difference between the Hawk of this Coast and those
of the Atlantic. I have observed the large brown Hawk, the Small or
Sparrow hawk, and a hawk of an intermediate Size with a long tail and
blewish coloured wings, remarkably Swift in flight and very ferce.
Sometimes called in the Un. States the hen Hawk. those birds Seam to be
common to every part of this Country in greater or smaller numbers, and
the Hawks, Crows, and ravins build their nests in great numbers along
the high & inaxcessable clifts of the Columbia, and Lewis's rivers when
we passd along them. we also met with the large hooting Owl under the
Rocky mountains on the Kooskooske R. it's Colour reather deeper than
with us, but differ in no other respect from those of the U States.




[Lewis, March 4, 1806]
Tuesday March 4th 1806.
Not any occurrence today worthy of notice. we live sumptuously on our
wappetoe and Sturgeon. the Anchovey is so delicate that they soon
become tainted unless pickled or smoked. the natives run a small stick
through their gills and hang them in the smoke of their lodges, or
kindle a small fire under them for the purpose of drying them. they
need no previous preperation of guting &c and will cure in 24 hours.
the natives do not appear to be very scrupelous about eating them when
a little feated.--the fresh sturgeon they keep for many days by
immersing it in water. they coock their sturgeon by means of vapor or
steam. the process is as follows. a brisk fire is kindled on which a
parcel of stones are lad. when the fire birns down and the stones are
sufficiently heated, the stones are so arranged as to form a tolerable
level surface, the sturgeon which had been previously cut into large
fletches is now laid on the hot stones; a parsel of small boughs of
bushes is next laid on and a second course of the sturgeon thus
repating alternate layers of sturgeon and boughs untill the whole is
put on which they design to cook. it is next covered closely with matts
and water is poared in such manner as to run in among the hot stones
and the vapor arrising being confined by the mats, cooks the fish. the
whole process is performed in an hour, and the sturgeon thus cooked is
much better than either boiled or roasted.

The turtle dove and robbin are the same of our country and are found as
well in the plain as open country. the Columbian robbin heretofore
discribed seems to be the inhabitant of the woody country exclusively.
the Magpy is most commonly found in the open country and are the same
with those formerly discribed on the Missouri. the large woodpecker or
log cock, the lark woodpeckers and the small white woodpecker with a
read head are the same with those of the Atlantic states and are found
exclusively in the timbered country. The blue crested Corvus and the
small white breasted do have been previously discribed and are the
natives of a piney country invariably, being found as well on the rocky
mountains as on this coast.--the lark is found in the plains only and
are the same with those before mentioned on the Missouri, and not very
unlike what is called in Virginia the old field lark.--The large
bluefish brown or sandhill Crain are found in the valley of the Rocky
mountains in Summer and Autumn where they raise their young, and in the
winter and begining of spring on this river below tidewater and on this
coast. they are the same as those common to the Southern and Western
States where they are most generally known by the name of the Sandhill
crain. The vulture has also been discribed. there are two species of
the flycatch, a small redish brown species with a short tail, round
body, short neck and short pointed beak. they have some fine black
specks intermixed with the uniform redish brown. this the same with
that which remains all winter in Virginia where it is sometimes called
the wren. the second species has lately returned and dose not remain
here all winter. it's colours are a yellowish brown on the back head
neck wings and tail the breast and belley of a yellowish white; the
tail is in proportion as the wren but it is a size smaller than that
bird. it's beak is streight pointed convex reather lage at the base and
the chaps of equal length. the first species is the smallest, in short
it is the smalest bird that I have ever seen in America except the
humming bird. both these species are found in the woody country only or
at least I have never seen them elsewhere.




[Clark, March 4, 1806]
Tuesday March 4th 1806
Not any accurrance to day worthy of notice. we live Sumptiously on our
wappatoe and Sturgeon. the Anchovey is so delicate that they Soon
become tainted unless pickled or Smoked. the nativs run a Small Stick
through their gills and hang them in the Smoke of their Lodges, or
Kindle Small fires under them for the purpose of drying them. they need
no previous preperation of gutting &c. and will Cure in 24 hours. the
nativs do not appear to be very Scrupilous about eating them a little
feated.

the fresh sturgeon they Keep maney days by immersing it in water. they
Cook their Sturgeon by means of vapor or Steam. the process is as
follows. a brisk fire is kindled on which a parcel of Stones are
Sufficiently heated, the Stones are So arranged as to form a tolerable
leavel Surface, the Sturgeon which had been previously cut into large
flaetches is now laid on the hot Stones; a parcel of Small boughs of
bushes is next laid on, and a Second course of the Sturgeon thus
repeating alternate layers of Sturgeon & boughs untill the whole is put
on which they design to Cook. it is next covered closely with mats and
water is poared in Such manner as to run in among the hot Stones, and
the vapor arriseing being confind by the mats, cooks the fish. the
whole process is performd in an hour and the Sturgeon thus Cooked is
much better than either boiled or roasted. in their usial way of
bolting of other fish in baskets with hot Stones is not so good.

The turtle doves and robin are the Same of those of our countrey and
are found as well as the plains as open countrey. the Columbia robin
heretofore discribed Seams to be the inhabitent of the woody Country
exclusively. the magpye is most commonly found in the open Country and
are the Same with those formerly discribed on the Missouri.

The large wood pecker or log cock the lark woodpecker and the common
wood pecker with a red head are the Same with those of the Atlantic
States, and are found exclusively in the timbered Country. The Blue
crested Corvus and the Small white brested corvus are the nativs of a
piney country invariably, being found as well on the Rocky Mountains as
on this coast-. The lark is found in the plains only and are the Same
with those on the Missouri and the Illinois and not unlike what is
Called in Virginia the old field Lark.

The large bluish brown or Sandhill Crain are found in the Vally's of
the Rocky Mountain in Summer and autumn when they raise their young and
in the winter and beginning of Spring on this river below tide water
and on this coast. they are the Same as those Common to the Southern
and Western States where they are most generally known by the name of
the Sand hill Crain. The Vulture has already been discribed.

There are two Species of fly Catch, a Small redish brown with a Short
tail, round body, Short neck, and Short pointed beak, and the Same as
that with us sometimes called the Wren. the 2d Species does not remain
all winter they have just returned and are of a Yellowish brown Colour.




[Lewis, March 5, 1806]
Wednesday March 5th 1806.
This morning we were visited by two parties of Clatsops. they brought
some fish a hat and some skins for sale most of which we purchased.
they returned to their village in the evening. late in the evening the
hunters returned from the kil-haw-a-nack-kle River which discharges
itself into the head of the bay. They had neither killed nor seen any
Elk. they informed us that the Elk had all gone off to the mountains a
considerable distance from us. this is unwelcome information and
reather allarming we have only 2 days provision on hand, and that
nearly spoiled. we made up a small assortment of articles to trade with
the Indians and directed Sergt. Pryor to set out early in the morning
in a canoe with 2 men, to ascend the Columbia to the resort of the
Indian fishermen and purchase some fish; we also directed two parties
of hunters to renew the Chase tomorrow early. the one up the Netul and
the other towards Point Adams. if we find that the Elk have left us, we
have determined to ascend the river slowly and indeavour to procure
subsistence on the way, consuming the Month of March in the woody
country. earlyer than April we conceive it a folly to attempt the open
plains where we know there is no fuel except a few small dry shrubs. we
shall not leave our quarters at fort Clatsop untill the first of April,
as we intended unless the want of subsistence compels us to that
measure. The common snipe of the marshes and the small sand snipe are
the same of those common to the Atlantic Coast tho the former are by no
means as abundant here. the prarrow of the woody country is also
similar to ours but not abundant. those of the plains of Columbia are
the same with those of the Missouri, tho they are by no means so
abundant. I have not seen the little singing lark or the large brown
Curloo so common to the plains of the Missouri, but I beleive that the
latter is an inhabitant of this country during summer from Indian
information. I have no doubt but what many species of birds found here
in Autumn and Summer had departed before our arrival.




[Clark, March 5, 1806]
Wednesday March 5th 1806.
This morning we were visited by two parties of Clatsops they brought
Some fish, a hat and Some Skins for Sale most of which we purchased,
they returned to their Village in the evening with the returning tide.
late in the evening the Hunters returned from the Kil-haw-d nack-kle
River which discharges itself into the head of the Bay. They had
neither killed nor Seen any Elk. they informed us that the Elk had all
gorn off to the mountains a considerable distance from us. this is
unwelcom information and reather alarming. we have only two days
provisions on hand and that nearly Spoiled. we made up a Small
assortment of Articles to trade with the Indians, and directed Sergt
Natl. Pryor to Set out early in the morning in a canoe with two men, to
assend the Columbia to the resort of the Indians fishermen and purchase
Some fish; we also derected two parties of hunters to renew the chase
tomorrow early. the one up the Netul, and the other towards point
Adams. If we find that the Elk have left us, we have determined to
assend the river slowly and endeaver to precure Subsistance on the way,
Consumeing the month of March in the woody Country, earlyer than april
we conceive it a folly to attempt the Open plains where we know there
is no fuel except a fiew Small dry Shrubs. we Shall not leave our
quarters at Fort Clatsop untill the 1st of April as we intended, unless
the want of Subsistance compels us to that measure.

The common Snipe of the marshes and the Small sand snipe are the same
of those Common to the atlantic coast tho the former are by no means as
abundant here.

The Sparrow of the woody country is also Similar to ours but not
abundant. those of the plains of Columbia are the Same with those of
the Missouri. tho they are by no means So Abundant. I have not Seen the
little Singing lark or the large brown Curloe So Common to the Plains
of the Missouri. but believe the Curloe is an inhabitent of this
Countrey dureing Summer from Indian information and their attemps to
mimick the notes of this fowl. I have no doubt but what maney Species
of birds found here in autumn and Summer had departed before our
arrival.

The Aquatic Birds of this country or such as obtain their Subsistence
from the water, are the large blue and brown heron, fishing Hawk, blue
crested fisher, Gulls of Several Species of the Coast, the large grey
Gull of the Columbia, Comorant, loons of two Species, white and the
brown brant, Small and large Geese, small and large Swans, the
Duckinmallard, canvis back Duck, red headed fishing Duck, black and
white duck, little brown Duck, Black Duck, two Species of Divers, blue
winged teal, 14 and Some other Species of Ducks, two Species of Plevers.

The hunters who were out last informed me that they discovered a very
Considerable fall in the Kit-haw-a-nack-kle River on its main western
fork at which place it falls abt. 100 feet from the Side of a mountain
S. E. about 6 miles from Fort Clatsop and nearly 15 from its enterance
into the bay by the Meanderings of this river a high mountain is
Situated S 60 deg. W. about 18 miles from Fort Clatsop on which there has
been Snow Since Nov.




[Lewis, March 6, 1806]
Thursday March 6th 1806.
This morning the fishing and hunting parties set out agreeably to their
instructions given them last evening. at 11 A.M. we were visited by
Comowoll and two of his children. he presented us with some Anchovies
which had been well cured in their manner. we foud them excellent. they
were very acceptable particularly at this moment. we gave the old man
some small articles in return. this we have found much the most
friendly and decent savage that we have met with in this neighbourhood.
Hall had his foot and ankle much injured yesterday by the fall of a
large stick of timber; the bones were fortunately not broken and I
expect he will be able to walk again shortly. Bratton is now weaker
than any of the convalessants, all of whom recover slowly in
consequence of the want of proper diet, which we have it not in our
power to procure.-

The Aquatic birds of this country, or such as obtain their subsistence
from the water, are the large blue and brown heron, fishing hawk, blue
crested fisher, gulls of several species of the Coast, the large grey
gull of the Columbia, Cormorant, loons of two species, white, and the
brown brant, small and large geese, small and large Swan, the
Duckinmallard, canvis back duck, red headed fishing duck, black and
white duck, little brown duck, black duck, two speceis of divers, blue
winged teal, and some other speceis of ducks.




[Clark, March 6, 1806]
Thursday March 6th 1806
This morning, the fishing and hunting party's Set out agreeably to
their instructions given them last evening. At 11 a.m. we were visited
by Commowoll and two boys Sons of his. he presented us with Some
Anchovies which had been well Cured in their manner, we found them
excellent. they were very acceptable perticularly at this moment. we
gave the old mans Sones a twisted wire to ware about his neck, and I
gave him a par of old glovs which he was much pleased with. this we
have found much the most friendly and decent Indian that we have met
with in this neighbourhood.

Hall had his foot and ankle much injured yesterday by the fall of a log
which he had on his Sholder; the bones are fortunately not broken, I
expect he will be able to walk again Shortly. Bratten is now weaker
than any of the convalessants, and complains verry much of his back,
all of them recovering Slowly in consequence of the want of proper
diet, which we have it not in our power to precure.

The large Blue and brown Herons or crains as they are usialy called in
the U States are found below tide water. they are the Same of those of
the U, States. The Fishing Hawk with the Crown of the head white, and
back of a milkey white, and the blue crested or king fisher are found
on every part of the Columbia and its water Along which we passed and
are the Same with those of the U, States. the fishing hawk is not
abundant, particularly in the mountains. There are 4 Species of the
larus or gull on this coast and river. 1st a Small Species the Size of
a Pegion; white except some black spots about the head and the little
bone on the but of the wing. 2d a Species Somewhat larger of a light
brown colour, with a mealy coloured back. 3rd the large Grey Gull, or
white larus with a greyish brown back, and light grey belly and breast,
about the Size of a well grown pullet, the wings are remarkably long in
perpotion to the Size of the body and it's under chap towards the
extremity is gibbous and protuberant than in either of the other
Species. a White Gull about the Size of the Second with a remarkable
beak; adjoining the head and on the base of the upper Chap there is an
elivated orning of the Same Substance with the beak which forms the
nostriels at A; it is Somewhat in this form. the feet are webed and the
legs and feet of a yellow colour. the form of the wings body &c are
much that of the 2d Species this bird was Seen on Haleys bay.

The large Grey Gull is found on the Columbian waters as high as the
enterence of the Koos koos ke and in common with the other Species on
the coast; the others appear confined to the tidewater, and the 4th
Species not So common as either of the others. The Comorant is a large
black duck which feeds on fish; I proceive no difference between it &
these found in the rivers of the Atlantic Coasts. we met with as high
up the river as the enterance of the Chopunnish into the Kooskooske
river. they increased in numbers as we decended, and formed much the
Greatest portion of waterfowls which we saw on the Columbia untill we
reached tidewater, where they also abound but do not bear a Similar
proportion to the fowls found in this quarter. we found this bird fat
and tolerably flavoured as we decended the Columbia.




[Lewis, March 7, 1806]
Friday March 7th 1806.
The wind was so high that Comowol did not leave us untill late this
evening. Labuish and Drewyer returned at sunset having killed one Elk
only. they report that there are some scattering male Elk in the
neighbourhood of the place they killed this one or about 5 miles up the
Netul on this side.--Bratton is much wose today, he complains of a
violent pain in the small of his back and is unable in consequence to
set up. we gave him one of our flanel shirts, applyed a bandage of
flannel to the part and bathed and rubed it well with some vollatile
linniment which I prepared with sperits of wine, camphor, castile soap
and a little laudinum. he felt himself better in the evening.--the
large blue and brown herons, or Crams as they are usually called in the
U States are found on this river below tidewater. they are the same
with those of the U States. the fishing hawk with the crown of the head
White and back of a mealy white, and the blue crested or King fisher
are found on every part of the Columbia and it's waters and are the
same with those of the U States. the fishing hawk is not abundant
particularly in the mountains. there are four speceis of larus or gull
on this coast and river, 1st a small speceis about the size of a
pigeon; white except some black spots about the head and a little brown
on the but of the wings, 2nd a speceis somewhat larger of a light brown
colour with a whitish or mealy coloured back. 3rd the large grey gull,
or white larus with a greyish brown back and a light grey belley and
breast, about the size of a well grown pullet or reather larger. the
wings are remarkably long in proportion to the size of the body and
it's under chap towards the extremity is more gibbous and protuberant
than in either of the other speceis. 4th a white gull about the size of
the second with a remarkable beak; adjoining the head and at the base
of the uper Chap there is an elivated orning of the same substance with
the beak which forms the nostrils; it is some what in this forma the
feet are webbed and the legs and feet of a yellow colour. the form of
the wings body &c are much that of the second species. the large grey
gull is found on the river as high as the entrance of the Kooskooske
and in common with the other speceis on the coast; the others appear to
be confined to tidewater; and the fourth speceis not so common as
either of the others. the cormorant is a large black duck which feeds
on fish; I perceive no difference between it and those found in the
Potomac and other rivers on the Atlantic Coast. tho I do not recollect
seeing those on the atlantic so high up the rivers as those are found
here. we first met with them on the Kooskooske at the entrance of
Chopunnish river. they increased in quantity as we decended, and formed
much the greatest portion of the waterfowl which we saw on the Columbia
untill we reached tidewater where they also abound but do not bear a
similar proportion to the other fowls found in this quarter.

There are two speceis of loons. 1st the Speckled loon found on every
part of the rivers of this country. they are the same size colours and
form with those of the Atlantic coast. the second speceis we first met
with at the great falls of the Columbia and from thence down. this bird
is not more than half the size of the speckled loon, it's neck is long,
slender and white in front. the Colour of the body and back of the neck
and head are of a dun or ash colour, the breast and belley are white.
the beak is like that of the speckled loon and like them it cannot fly
but flutters along on the top of the warter or dives for security when
pursued.




[Clark, March 7, 1806]
Friday March 7th 1806
The wind was So high that Comowol did not leave us untill late this
evening. Drewyer & Labiesh returned at Sunset haveing killed one Elk
only. they report that there are Some Scattering mail Elk in the
neighbourhood of the place they killed this one or about 5 miles up the
Netul river on the west Side-. Bratten is much worst to day he
complains of a violent pain in the Small of his back, and is unable in
consequence of it to Set up. we gave him one of our flanel Shirts. I
applied a bandage of flanel to the part and rubed it well with Some
volatile linniment which was prepared with Sperits of wine, camphire,
Sastile Soap, and a little laudinum. he felt himself better in the
evening at which time I repeated the linnement and bathed his feet to
restore circulation which he complaind of in that part.

There are two Species of Loons. 1st the Speckled loon found on every
part of the rivers of this quarter, they are the Same Size Colour and
form with those of the Ohio, and atlantic coasts. the 2d Species we
first met with at the great falls of the Columbia and from thence down.
this bird is not more than half the Size of the Speckled loon, it's
neck is long, Slender and white in front. the colour of the body and
back of the neck and head are of a dun or ash Colour, the breast and
belly are white. the back is like that of the Speckled loon, and like
them it cannot fly, but flutters along on the top of the water or Dives
for Security when pursued.

John Shields Reubin Fields & Robert frasure measured 2 trees of the fur
kind one 37 feet around, appears sound, has but fiew limbs for 200 feet
it is East of the Netul abt 280 feet high.




[Lewis, March 8, 1806]
Saturday March 8th 1806.
Bratton is much better today, his back gives him but little pain.
Collins returned early in the morning and informed us that he had
killed three Elk about five miles distant on the edge of the prarie in
Point Adams. one of them fell in a deep pond of water and could not get
it, the other two he butcherd and secured. he saw two large herds of
Elk in that quarter. we sent Drewyer and Joseph Fields to hunt those
Elk. a party were also sent with Labuish for the flesh of the Elk which
Drewyer and himself had killed up the netul, they returned with it in
the evening. Shields, R. Fields and Frazier returned this evening from
the Kilhawanackkle unsuccessfull having seen no Elk. McNeal and
Goodrich having recovered from the Louis veneri I directed them to
desist from the uce of mercury. The white brant is very common in this
country particularly below tidewater where they remain in vast
quantities during the winter. they feed like the swan gees &c on the
grass roots and seeds which they find in the marshes. this bird is
about the size of the brown brant or a third less than the common
Canadian or wild goose. the head is proportionably with the goose
reather large; the beak also thicker shorter and of much the same form,
being of a yellowish white colour except the edges of the chaps, which
are frequently of a dark brown. the legs and feet are of the same form
of the goose and are of a redish white or pale flesh colour. the tail
is composed of sixteen feathers of equal length as those of the geese
and brown brant are and bears about the same proportion in point of
length. the eye is of a dark colour and nothing remarkable as to size.
the wings are rether longer compared with those of the goose but not as
much so as in the brown or pided brant. the colour of the plumage of
this bird is unifomly a pure white except the large feathers of the
extremities of the wings which are black. the large feathers of the 1st
joint of the wing next to the body are white. the note of this bird
differs essentially from that of the goose; it more resembles that of
the brown brant but is somewhat different. it is like the note of young
domestic goose which has not perfectly attained it's full note. the
flesh of this bird is exceedingly fine, preferable to either the goose
or pided brant.--The Brown or pided brant are much the same size and
form of the white only that their wings are considerably longer and
more pointed. the plumage of the upper part of the body neck head and
tail is much the colour of the canadian goose but reather darker in
consequence of som dark brown feathers which are distributed and
irregularly scattered throughout. they have not the white on the neck
and sides of the head as the goose has nor is the neck darker than the
body. like the goose there are some white feathers on the rump at the
joining of the tail. the beak is dark and the legs and feet also dark
with a greenish cast; the breast and belley are of a lighter colour
than the back and is also irregularly intermixed with dark brown and
black feathers which give it a pided appearance. the flesh of this bird
is dark and in my estimation reather better than that of the goose. the
habits of this bird are the same nearly with the goose and white brant
with this difference that they do not remain in this climate in such
numbers during the winter as the others, and that it sets out earlier
in the fall season on it's return to the south and arrives later in the
spring than the goose. I see no difference between this bird and that
called simply the brant, common to the lakes the Ohio and Mississippi
&c. The small goose of this country is reather less than the brant;
it's head and neck like the brant are reather larger than that of the
goose in proportion; their beak is also thicker and shorter. their
notes are more like those of our tame gees; in all other rispects they
are the same with the large goose with which, they so frequently
ascociate that it was some time after I first observed this goose
before I could determine whether it was a distinct speceis or not. I
have now no hesitation in declaring them a distinct speceis. the large
goose is the same of that common on the Atlantic coast, and known by
the appellation of the wild, or Canadian goose.




[Clark, March 8, 1806]
Saturday March 8th 1806
Bratten is much better this morning, his back givs him but little pain.
Collins returned early in the morning, and informed us that he had
killed three Elk about five miles distance on the edge of the prarie in
point Adams. one of them fell in a deep pond of water and he could not
git to it. the other two he butchered and Saved. he saw two large herds
of Elk in that quarter. we Sent Drewyer & Jos. Field to hunt these Elk,
a party was also Sent with Labiesh for the flesh of the Elk which
Drewyer and himself had killd up the Netul, they returned with it in
the evening. Shields, R. Field and Frasure returned this evening from
the Kilhawanackkle unsuccessfull haveing Seen no Elk. McNeal and
Goodrich haveing recovered from the Louis veneri I detected them to
desist from takeing the murcury or useing in future. willard is yet
complaining and is low Spirited.

The White Brant is very common in this country particularly below tide
water where they remain in vast quantities dureing the winter. they
feed like the Swan Goose &c. on the grass and roots & Seeds which they
find in the marshes this bird is a little larger than the brown brant
and a fourth less than the common wild or Canadian goose. the head is
proportionably with the goose reather large; the beak thicker Shorter
and of the Same form, being of a yellowish white colour except the
edges of the Chaps, which are frequently of a dark brown. the legs and
feet are of the Same form of the goose and are of a redish white or
pail flesh colour. the tail is composed of Sixteen feathers of equal
length as those of the geese and brown brant are, and bears about the
Same perpotion in point of length. the Eye is of a dark colour and
nothing remarkable as to Size. the wings are reather longer compared
with those of the goose, but not as much So as is the brown or pieded
brant. the colour of the plumage of this bird is uniformly a pure white
except the large feathers of the extremities of the wings which are
black. The large feathers of the 1st joint of the wing next to the body
are white. the note of this bird differs essentially from that of the
goose; it more resembles that of the brown brant but is Somewhat
different. it is like the note of a young domestic goose which has not
perfectly attained its full note. the flesh of this bird is exceedingly
fine, prefferable to either the goose or pieded brant. the neck is
Shorter in prpotion than that of the goose.

The Brown or pieded brant are nearly the Size and much the Same form of
the white brante only that their wings are considerably longer and more
pointed. the plumage of the upper part of the body, neck, head and tail
is much the Colour of the Common or Canadian Goose but rather darker in
consequence of Some dark brown feathers which are distributed and
irregularly scattered throughout. they have not the white on the neck
and Sides of the head as the goose has nor is the neck darker than the
body. like the goose there are Some white feathers on the rump at the
junction of the tail. the beak, legs and feet are dark, with a greenish
cast; the breast and belly are of a lighter colour than the back and is
also intermixed, irregularly, with dark brown and black feathers which
gives it a pieded appearance. the flesh of this bird is dark, and in my
estimation reather better than that of the goose. the habits of this
bird is nearly the same with the goose and white brant, with this
difference that they do not remain in this Climate in Such numbers
dureing the winter as the others. I See no difference between this bird
and that Called Simpilly the Brant Common to the Lakes and frequently
Seen on the Ohio and Mississippi in large flocks &c.

The Small Goose of this country is reather less than the Brant; it's
head and neck like the brant are reather larger than that of the goose
in purpotion; their beak is also thicker and Shorter. their notes are
more like those of our taim geese, in all other respect they are the
Same with the large Goose with which, they So frequently ascoiete, that
it was Some time after I first observed this goose before I could
whether it was a distinct Speces or not. I have no hesitation now in
declareing them a distinct Species. the large Goose is the Same as that
common to the Ohio, and atlantic coast, and known by the appellation of
the wild, or Canadian Goose.




[Lewis, March 9, 1806]
Sunday March 9th 1806. This morning the men set out at daylight to go
in gust of the Elk which Collins had killed, they returned with it at
eleven A.M. Bratton complains of his back being very painfull to him
today; I conceive this pain to be something of the rheumatism. we still
apply the linniment and flannel; in the evening he was much better.
Drewyer and Joseph Fields returned not having found any Elk. Sergt.
Pryor and the fishing party not yet arrived, suppose they are detained
by the winds. visited by 3 Clatsop men who brought a dog some fish and
a Sea Otter skin for sale. we suffered them to remain all night. we set
Shields at work to make some sacks of Elk skin to contain various
articles. The large Swan is precisely the same common to the Atlantic
States. the small swan differs only from the larger one in size and
it's note. it is about one fourth less and it's note entirely
different. the latter cannot be justly immetated by the sound of
letters nor do I know any sounds with which a comparison would be
pertinent. it begins with a kind of whistleing sound and terminates in
a round full note which is reather louder than the whistleing, or
former part; this note is as loud as that of the large swan. from the
peculiar whistleing of the note of this bird I have called it the
whistleing swan it's habits colour and contour appear to be precisely
those of the large Swan. we first saw them below the great narrows of
the Columbia near the Chilluckkittequaw nation. They are very abundant
in this neighbourhood and have remained with us all winter. in number
they are fully five for one of the large speceis. The duckinmallard or
common large duck wich resembles the domestic duck are the same here
with those of the U Sts. they are abundant and are found on every part
of the river below the mountains. they remain here all winter but I
beleive they do not continue during winter far above tidewater. a
beautifull duck and one of the most delicious in the world is found in
considerable quantities in this neighbourhood during the Autumn and
winter. this is the same with that known in the Delliware,
Susquehannah, and Potomac by the name of the Canvisback and in James
River by that of shell-Drake; in the latter river; however I am
informed that they have latterly almost entirely disappeared. to the
epicure of those parts of the union where this duck abounds nothing
need be added in praise of the exqusite flavor of this duck. I have
frequently eaten of them in several parts of the Union and I think
those of the Columbia equally as delicious. this duck is never found
above tide-water; we did not meet with them untill after we reached the
marshey Islands; and I beleive that they have already left this
neighbourhood, but whether they have gone northwardly or Southwardly I
am unable to determin; nor do I know in what part of the Continent they
raise their young.--The read headed fishing duck is common to every
part of the river and are found as well in the Rocky Mountains as
elsewhere; in short this was the only duck we saw on the waters of the
Columbia within the mountains. they feed principally on crawfish and
are the same in every rispect as those on the rivers in the mountains
of the Atlantic Ocean.




[Clark, March 9, 1806]
Sunday Mach 9th 1806
This morning the men Set out at day light to go in quest of the Elk
which Collins had killed, they returned at 11 A.M. Bratten complains of
his backs being very painfull to him to day. we Still apply the
linnement & flannel; in the evening he was much better. Jos. Field &
Drewyer returned not haveing found any Elk. Sergt. Pryor and the
fishing party not yet returned, Suppose they are detained by the winds.
we are visited by 3 Clatsop men who brought a Dog, Some fish and a Sea
otter Skin for Sale. we Suffered them to remain all night. we Set
Shields at work to make Some Sacks of Elk Skin to contain my papers,
and various articles which we wish kept Dry.

The large Swan is precisely the Same Common to the Missouri,
Mississippi and the Atlantic States &c. The Small Swan differ only from
the large one in Size and it's note. it is about 1/4th less, and its
notes entirely different. the latter cannot be justly immetated by the
Sound of letters nor do I know any Sound with which a comparison would
be perti-nent. it begins with a kind of whistling Sound and terminates
in a round full note which is reather louder than the whistling, or
former part; this note is as loud as that of the large Swan. from the
peculiar whistling of the note of this bird I have Called it the
Whistleing Swan. it's habits colour and contour appear to be precisely
those of the large swan. we first saw them below the great narrows of
the Columbia near the Chilluckkittequaw Nation. they are very abundant
in this neighbourhood and have remained with us all winter. in number
they are fully five for one of the large Species of the Swan's.

The Duckinmallard are the Same here with those of the U, States. they
are abundant and are found on every part of the river below the
mountains. they remain here all winter, but I believe they do not
remain all winter above tide water.--a butifull Duck and one of the
most delicious in the world is found in Considerable quantities in this
neighbourhood dureing the Autumn and winter. this is the Same as that
known in the Dilliwar, Susquehannah and Potomac by the name of the
Canvisback and James River by that of Shell-Drake; in the latter river
I am informed that they have latterly almost entirely disapeared. the
epicures of those parts of the Union where those Ducks abound nothing
need be added in prais of the exquisit flavor of this duck. I have
eaten of them in Several parts of the Union and I think those of the
Columbia equally as delicious. this duck is never found above tide
water; we did not meat with them untill after we reached the marshey
Islands; and I believe that they have already left this neighbourhood;
but whether they are gorn Northerly or Southerly, I am unable to
deturmine; nor do I know in what part of the Country they rais their
young

The red headed fishing duck is common to every part of the river and
are found as well in the Rocky Mountains as elsewhere; in short this
was the only duck we Saw within the Mountain on the Columbian waters.
they feed principally on Crawfish; and are the Same in every respects
as those on the Ohio and rivers in the mountains of the atlantic Ocian.

The black and white Duck are Small about the Size of the blue-winged
teal, or reather larger. the mail is butifully varigated with black and
white. the white occupies the Side of the head, breast and back. black
the tail, large feathers of the wing, two tufts of feathers which cover
the upper part of the wings when folded, the neck and head. the female
is darker or has much less white about her. I take this to be the Same
Species of duck common to the ohio, as also the atlantic Coast, and
Sometimes called the butter box. the back is wide and Short, and as
well as the legs of a dark Colour. the flesh of this duck is verry well
flavored I think Superior to the Duckinmallard.




[Lewis, March 10, 1806]
Monday March 10th 1806.
About 1 P.M. it became fair and we sent out two parties of hunters on
this side of the Netul the one below and the other above. we also
directed a party to set out early in the morning and pass the bay and
hunt beyond the Kilhowanackkle. from the last we have considerable hope
as we have as yet hunted but little in that quarter. it blew hard all
day. in the evening the Indians departed. The hunters who were over the
Netull the other day informed us that they measured a pine tree, (or
fir No 1) which at the hight of a man's breast was 42 feet in the girth
about three feet higher, or as high as a tall man could reach, it was
40 feet in the girth which was about the circumpherence for at least
200 feet without a limb, and that it was very lofty above the
commencement of the limbs. from the appearance of other trees of this
speceis of fir and their account of this tree, I think it may be safely
estimated at 300 feet. it had every appearance of being perfectly
sound. The black and white duck are small abut the size of the
blue-winged teal, or reather larger. the male is beautifully variagated
with black and white. the white occupys the sides of the head, breast
and back, black, the tail feathers of the wings two tufts of feathers
which cover the upper part of the wings when foalded, the neck and
head. the female is darker or has much less white about her. I take
this to be the same speceis of duck common to the Atlantic coast, and
frequently called the butterbox. the beak is wide and short, and as
well as the legs, of a dark colour. the flesh of this duck is very well
flavored. the brown duck is much in form like the duckinmallard, tho
not much more than half it's size. the colour is an uniform mixture of
yellowish and dark brown. there is nothing remarkable in the appearance
of this duck it generally resorts the same kind of grassey marshes with
the duckinmallard and feeds in a similar manner, on grass seed, and
roots. both these ducks are common to the river for some distance above
tide water as well as below. The black duck is about the size of the
bluewinged teal. their colour is a duskey black the breast and belley
somewhat lighter than the other parts, or a dark brown. the legs stand
longitudinally with the body, and the bird when on shore stands of
cours very erect. the legs and feet are of a dark brown, the toes are
four on each foot, a short one at the heel and three long toes in
front, which are unconnected with a web. the webs are attatched to each
sides of the several joints of the toe, and divided by deep sinuses at
each joint. the web assuming in the intermediate part an eliptical
figure. the beak is about two inches long, streight, flated on the
sides, and tapering to a sharp point. the upper chap somewhat longest,
and bears on it's base at the joining of the head, a little conic
protuberance of a cartelagenous substace, being redish brown at the
point. the beak is of an ivory white colour. the eye dark. these ducks
usually associate in large flocks, and are very noisey; their note
being a sharp shrill whistle. they are usually fat and agreeably
flavored; and feed principally on moss, and other vegitable productions
of the water. we did not meet with them untill we reached tide-water,
but I beleive them not exclusively confined to that district at all
seasons, as I have noticed the same duck on many parts of the Rivers
Ohio and Mississippi. the gizzard and liver are also remarkably large
in this fowl. the divers are the same with those of the Atlantic
States. the smaller species has some white feathers about the rump with
no perceptable tail and is very active and cluck in it's motion; the
body is of a redish brown. the beak sharp and somewhat curved like that
of the pheasant. the toes are not connected but webed like those
discribed of the black duck. the larger speceis are about the size of
the teal and can flye a short distance which the small one scarcely
ever attapts. they have a short tail. their colour is also an uniform
brickredish brown, the beak is streight and pointed. the feet are of
the same form of the other speceis and the legs are remarkably thin and
flat one edge being in front. the food of both speceis is fish, and the
flesh unfit for uce. the bluewinged teal are a very excellent duck, and
are the same with those of the Atlantic coast.--There are some other
speceis of ducks which shall be hereafter discribed as I may hereafter
have an opportunity to examine them.




[Clark, March 10, 1806]
Monday March 10th 1806
about 1 P.M. it became fair and we Sent out two parties of hunters on
this Side of the Netul, one above and the other below, we also derected
a party to Set out early in the morning and pass Meriwethers Bay and
hunt beyond the Kilhow anak kle. from the last we have considerable
hope, as we have as yet hunted but little in that quarter. it blew hard
all day, in the evening the Indians departed. The Hunters, S. R. F. &
F. who were over the netul the other day informed us that they measured
a 2d tree of the fir Speces (No. i) as high as a man Could reach, was
39 feet in the girth; it tapered but very little for about 200 feet
without any Considerable limbs, and that it was a very lofty above the
Commmencement of the limbs. from the appearance of other Species of
fir, and their account of this tree, I think it might safely estimated
at 300 feet. it had every appearance of being perfectly Sound in every
part

The brown Duck is much in form like the Duckinmallard, tho not much
more than half it's Size. the colour is one uniform mixture of
yellowish and dark brown. there is nothing remarkable in the colour of
this duck; it resorts the Same kind of grassy marshes with the
Duckinmallard, and feeds in a Similar manner, on grass, Seeds & roots.
both these ducks are common to the river for Some distance above tide
water as well as below. The black Duck is about the Size of the
bluewinged teel. their colour is a duskey black the breast and belly
Somewhat lighter than the other parts, or a dark brown. the legs Stand
longitudianally with the body, and the Bird when on Shore Stands very
erect. the legs and feet are of a dark brown, the toes are four on each
foot, a short one on the heel and three long toes in front which are
unconnected with a web. the web is atached to each Side of the Several
joints of the toes, and devided by deep Sinuses at each joint. the web
assumeing in the intermediate part an elipticle figure. the beak is
about two inches long, Streight, flated on the Sides, and tapering to a
Sharp point. the upper chap Somewhat longest and bears on its base at
the joining of the head, a little conic protuberance of a cartelagenous
Substance, being redish brown. the beak is of a ivery white colour. the
eye dark. these ducks usially associate in large flocks, and are very
noisey; their note being a Sharp shrill whistle. they are usially fat
and tolerably flavoured; and feed on moss and other vegitable
productions of the water. we did not meet with them untill we reached
tide water, I have noticed the Same duck on maney parts of the ohio an
Mississippi. the Gizzard and liver are also remarkably large in this
fowl-. The Divers are the Same with those of the atlantic States. the
Smaller Species has some white feathers about the rump and no
perceptable tail and is very active and quick in its motion; the body
is of a redish brown. the beak sharp and Somewhat curved like that of
the Pheasant the toes are not connected but webd. like those discribed
of the black duck. The large Species are about the Size of the teal &c.
the food of both those Species is fish. and their flesh is unfit for
use.

The bluewinged teal are a very excellent duck, and are the Same with
those of the atlantic coast.--There are some other Species of ducks
which Shall be hereafter discribd. as I may hereafter have an
oppertunity of exameneing them.




[Lewis, March 11, 1806]
Tuesday March 11th 1806.
Early this morning Sergt. Pryor arrived with a small canoe loaded with
fish which he had obtained from the Cathlahmah's for a very small part
of the articles he had taken with him. the wind had prevented his going
to the fisery on the opposite side of the river above the Wackiacums,
and also as we had suspected, prevented his return as early as he would
otherwise have been back.--The dogs at the Cathlahmahs had bitten the
trong assunder which confined his canoe and she had gone a drift. he
borrowed a canoe from the Indians in which he has returned. he found
his canoe on the way and secured her, untill we return the Indians
their canoe, when she can be brought back. Sent Sergt. Gass and a party
in surch of a canoe which was reported to have been sunk in a small
creek on the opposite side of the Netul a few miles below us, where she
had been left by Shields R. Fields and Frazier when they were lately
sent out to hunt over the Netul. They returned and reported that they
could not find the canoe she had broken the cord by which she was
attatched, and had been carried off by the tide. Drewyer Joseph Fields
and Frazier set out by light this morning to pass the bay in order to
hunt as they had been directed the last evening. we once more live in
clover; Anchovies fresh Sturgeon and Wappetoe. the latter Sergt. Pryor
had also procured and brought with him. The reptiles of this country
are the rattlesnake garter snake and the common brown Lizzard. The
season was so far advanced when we arrived on this side of the rocky
mountains that but few rattlesnakes were seen I did not remark one
particularly myself, nor do I know whether they are of either of the
four speceis found in the different parts of the United states, or of
that species before mentioned peculiar to the upper parts of the
Missouri and it's branches. The garter snake so called in the United
States is very common in this country; they are found in great numbers
on the open and sometimes marshey grounds in this neighbourhood. they
differ not at all from those of the U States. the black or dark brown
lizzard we saw at the rock fort Camp at the commencement of the woody
country below the great narrows and falls of the Columbia; they are
also the same with those of the United States. The snail is numerous in
the woody country on this coast; they are in shape like those of the
United States, but are at least five times their bulk. There is a
speceis of water lizzard of which I saw one only just above the grand
rapids of the Columbia. it is about 9 inches long the body is reather
flat and about the size of a mans finger covered with a soft skin of a
dark brown colour with an uneven surface covered with little pimples
the neck and head are short, the latter terminating in an accute
angular point and flat. the fore feet each four toes, the hinder ones
five unconnected with a web and destitute of tallons. it's tail was
reather longer than the body and in form like that of the Musk-rat,
first rising in an arch higher than the back and decending lower than
the body at the extremity, and flated perpendicularly. the belley and
under part of the neck and head were of a brick red every other part of
the colour of the upper part of the body a dark brown. the mouth was
smooth, without teeth.




[Clark, March 11, 1806]
Tuesday March 11th 1806
Early this morning Sergt. Pryor arrived with a Small Canoe loaded with
fish which he had obtained from the Cath-lah-mah's for a very Small
part of the articles he had taken with him. the wind had prevented his
going to the fishery on the opposit Side of the river above the
Waukiecum's, and also as we had suspected, prevented his return as
early as he otherwise would have been back. The dogs of the
Cathlahmah's had bitten the throng assunder which confined his canoe
and she had gorn adrift. he borrowed a Canoe from the Indians in which
he has returned. he found his canoe on the way and Secured her, untill
we return the Indians their Canoe--Sent Sergt. Gass and a party in
Serch of one of our Canoes which was reported to have been lost from a
hunting party of Shields R. Field & Frazier when they were last out on
the opposit Side of the Netul. they returned and reported that they
Could not find the Canoe which had broken the Cord with which it was
attached, and was caried off by the tide. Drewyer Jo. Field & Frazier
Set out by light this morning to pass the bay in order to hunt as they
had been directed last evening. we once more live in Clover; Anchovies
fresh Sturgeon and Wappatoe. the latter Sergt. Pryor had also procured
a fiew and brought with him. The Deer of this Coust differ from the
Common Deer, fallow Deer or Mule Deer as has beformentiond.

The Mule Deer we have never found except in rough Country; they prefer
the Open Grounds and are Seldom found in the wood lands near the river;
when they are met with in the wood lands or river bottoms and pursued,
they imediately run to the hills or open country as the Elk do, the
Contrary happens with the common Deer. there are Several differences
between the mule and common deer as well as in form as in habits. they
are fully a third larger in general, and the male is particularly
large; think there is Somewhat greater disparity of Size between the
Male and the female of this Species than there is between the male and
female fallow Deer; I am Convinced I have Seen a Buck of this Species
twice the volume a Buck of the Common Deer. the Ears are peculiarly
large, I measured those of a large Buck which I found to be eleven
inches long and 31/2 in width at the widest part; they are not so
delicately formed, their hair in winter is thicker longer and of a much
darker grey, in Summer the hair is Still coarser longer and of a paler
red, more like that of the Elk; in winter they also have a Considerable
quantity of very fine wool intermixed with the hair and lying next to
the Skin as the Antelope has. the long hair which grows on the outer
Side of the first joint of the hind legs, and which in the Common Deer
do not usially occupy more than 2 inches in them occupy from 6 to 8;
their horns also differ, those in the Common deer consist of two main
beams gradually deminishing as the points proceed from it, with the
mule deer the horns consist of two beams which at the distance of 4 or
6 inches from the head divide themselves into two equal branches which
again either divide into two other equal branches or terminate in a
Smaller, and two equal ones; haveing either 2, 4 or 6 points on a beam;
the horn is not so rough about the base as the common deer, and are
invariably of a much darker Colour. the most Strikeing difference of
all, is the white rump and tail. from the root of the tail as a center
there is a circular Spot perfectly white of about 31/2 inches radius,
which occupy a part of the rump and the extremities of buttocks and
joins the white of the belley underneath; the tail which is usially
from 8 to 9 inches long for the first 4 or 5 inches from its upper
extremity is covered with Short white hairs, much Shorter indeed than
those hairs of the body; from hence for about one inch further, the
hair is Still white but gradually becoms longer; the tail then
termonates in a tissue of Black hair of about 3 inches long. from this
black hair of the tail they have obtained among the French engages the
appelation of the black tailed Deer, but this I conceive by no means
Characteristic of the Animal as much the larger portion of the tail is
white. the Ears and the tail of this Animale when Compared with those
of the Common Deer, So well Comported with those of the Mule when
compared with the Horse, that we have by way of distinction adapted the
appellation of the mule Deer which I think much more appropriate. on
the inner corner of each eye there is a drane (like the Elk) or large
recepticle which Seams to Answer as a drane to the eye which givs it
the appearance of weeping, this in the Common Deer of the Atlantic
States is scercely proceptable but becoms more Conspicious in the
fallow Deer, and Still more So in the Elk; this recepticle in the Elk
is larger than any of the Pecora order with which I am acquainted.

I have Some reasons to believe that the Calumet Eagle is Sometimes
found on this Side of the Rocky mountains from the information of the
Indians in whose possession I have Seen their plumage. those are the
Same with those of the Missouri, and are the most butifull of all the
family of the Eagle of America it's colours are black and white with
which it is butifully varigated. the feathers of the tail which is so
highly prized by the Indians is composed of twelve broad feathers of
equal length those are white except about two inches at the extremity
which is of a jut black. their wings have each a large circular white
Spot in the middle when extended. the body is variously marked with
white and black. the form is much that of the Common bald Eagle, but
they are reather Smaller and much more fleet. this Eagle is feared by
all carnivarous birds, and on his approach all leave the carcase
instantly on which they were feeding. it breads in the inaccessable
parts of the Mountains where it Spends the Summer, and decends to the
plains and low country in the fall and winter when it is usially Sought
and taken by the nativs. two tails of this bird is esteemed by Mandans,
Minnetares, Ricaras, &c. as the full value of a good horse, or Gun and
accoutrements. with the Osage & Kanzas and those nations enhabiting
Countrys where this bird is more rare, the price is even double of that
mentioned. with these feathers the nativs deckerate the Stems of their
Sacred pipes or Calumets; whence the name of Calumet Eagle, which has
Generally obtained among the Engages. The Ricaras have domesticated
this bird in many instances for the purpose of obtaining its plumage.
the nativs in every part of the Continent who can precure those
feathers attach them to their own hair and the mains and tail of their
favorite horses by way of orniment. they also deckerate their own caps
or bonnets with those feathers. The Leather winged bat is found &c.




[Lewis, March 12, 1806]
Wednesday March 12th 1806
We sent a party again in surch of the perogue but they returned
unsuccessful) as yesterday. Sent one hunter out on this side of the
Netul, he did not return this evening. I beleive the Callamet Eagle is
sometimes found on this side of the rocky mountains from the
information of the Indians in whose possession I have seen their
plumage. these are the same with those of the Missouri, and are the
most beautiful) of all the family of the Eagles of America. it's
colours are black and white with which it is beautifully variagated.
the feathers of the tail which are so highly prized by the Indians is
composed of twelve broad feathers of equal length. these are white
except about 2 inches at the extremity which is of a jut black. there
wings have each a large circular white spot in the middle when
extended. the body is variously marked with white and black. the form
is much that of the common bald Eagle, but they are reather smaller and
much more fleet. this eagle is feared by all carnivorous birds, and on
his approach all leave the carcase instantly on which they were
feeding. it breads in the inaccessable parts of the mountains where it
spends the summer, and decends to the plains and low country in the
fall and winter when it is usually sought and taken by the natives. two
tails of this bird is esteemed by the Mandans Minetares Ricares, &c as
the full value of a good horse, or gun and accoutrements. with the
Great and little Osages and those nations inhabiting countries where
this bird is more rare the price is even double of that mentioned. with
these feathers the natives decorate the stems of their sacred pipes or
callamets; whence the name, of Callamet Eagle, which has generally
obtained among the Engages. the Ricares have domesticated this bird in
many instancies for the purpose of obtaining it's plumage. the natives
in every part of the con tinent who can procure these feathers attatch
them to their own hair and the mains and tails of their favorite horses
by way of ornament. they also decorate their war caps or bonnets with
those feathers.--The leather winged batt common to the United States is
also found on this side of the Rocky mountains.--Beside the fish of
this coast and river already mentioned we have met with the following
speceis viz. the Whale, Porpus, Skaite, flounder, Salmon, red charr,
two speceis of Salmon trout, mountain or speckled trout, and a speceis
similar to one of those noticed on the Missouri within the mountains,
called in the Eastern states, bottle-nose. I have no doubt but there
are many other speceis of fish, which also exist in this quarter at
different seasons of the year, which we have not had an oportunity of
seeing. the shell fish are the Clam, perrewinkle, common mussle,
cockle, and a speceis with a circular flat shell. The Whale is
sometimes pursued harpooned and taken by the Indians of this coast; tho
I beleive it is much more frequently killed by runing fowl on the rocks
of the coast in violent storms and thrown on shore by the wind and
tide. in either case the Indians preseve and eat the blubber and oil as
has been before mentioned. the whalebone they also carefully preserve
for sale.--Our party are now furnished with 358 pair of Mockersons
exclusive of a good portion of dressed leather.-




[Clark, March 12, 1806]
Wednesday March 12th 1806
We Sent a party again in Serch of the Canoe but they returned
unsucksessfull as yesterday Sent one hunter out on this Side of the
Netul he did not return this evening. Our party are now furnished with
358 par of Mockersons exclusive of a good portion of Dressed leather,
they are also previded with Shirts Overalls Capoes of dressed Elk Skins
for the homeward journey.

Besides the fish of this Coast and river already mentioned we have met
with the following Species. viz. the Whale, Porpus, Skaite, flounder,
Salmon, red-carr, two Specis of Salmon trout, mountain or Speckled
trout, and a Speceis Similar to one of those noticed on the Missouri
within the mountains, called in the Eastern States, bottle nose. I have
no doubt but there are many other Species of fish which also exist in
this quarter at different Seasons of the year, which we have not had an
oppertunity of seeing. the Shell fish are the Clam, perriwinkle, common
Muscle, cockle, and a Species with a circular flat Shell.

The Whale is Sometimes pursued harpooned and taken by the Indians of
this Coast; tho I believe it is much more frequently killed by running
on the rocks of the Coast to S. S. W. in violent Storms, and thrown on
different parts of the Coast by the winds and tide-. in either case the
Indians preserve and eat the blubber and Oil as has been before
mentioned. the whale bone they also carefully preserve for Sale.

The Reptiles of this Country are the rattle snake, garter Snake a
common brown Lizzard. The Season was so far advanced on this side of
the Rocky Mountains that but fiew rattle Snakes were Seen, I did not
remark one particularly my Self, nor do I know if they are of either of
the four Species found in different parts of the United States, or of
that Species before observed only on the upper parts of the Missouri &
its branches.

The Garter Snake So Called in the U States is very common in this
country, they are found in great numbers on the open and Sometimes
marshy grounds in this neighbourhood. they differ not at all from those
of the United States. the Black or Dark brown Lizzard we Saw at the
long narrows or Commencement of the woody country on the Columbia; they
are also the Same with those of the U, States. The Snail is noumerous
in the woodey Country on this Coast, they are in Shape like those of
the U, States, but are at least five times their bulk. there is a
Specis of water Lizzard of which I only Saw one just above the grand
rapid of the Columbia. it is about 9 inches long the body is reather
flat and about the Size of a mans finger, covered with a Soft Skin of
dark brown Colour with an uneaven sufice covered with little pimples,
the neck and head are Short, the latter termonateing in an accute
angular point and flat. the fore feet each have four toes, the hinder
ones five unconnected with a web and destitute of tallons. it's tail
was reather longer than the body, and in form like that of the muskrat,
first riseing in an arch higher than the back, and decending lower than
the body at the extremety, and flated perpindicularly. the belly and
under part of the neck and head were of a Brick red every other part of
the colour of the upper part of the body are dark brown. the mouth was
Smooth without teeth.

The horns of Some of the Elk have not yet fallen off and those of
others have Grown to the length of Six inches. the latter are in the
best order, from which it would Seem that the pore Elk retain their
horns longer.




[Lewis, March 13, 1806]
Thursday March 13th 1806.
This morning Drewyer Jos Feilds and Frazier returned; they had killed
two Elk and two deer. visited by two Cathlahmahs who left us in the
evening. we sent Drewyer down to the Clatsop village to purchase a
couple of their canoes if possible. Sergt. Pryor and a party made
another surch for the lost peroge but was unsuccessfull; while engaged
in surching for the perogue Collins one of his party killed two Elk
near the Netul below us. we sent Sergt. Ordway and a party for the
flesh of one of the Elk beyond the bay with which they returned in the
evening. the other Elk and two deer were at some distance. R. Fields
and Thompson who set out yesterday morning on a hunting excurtion
towards point Adams have not yet returned. The horns of some of the Elk
have not yet fallen off, and those of others have shotten out to the
length of six inches. the latter are in the best order, from which it
would seem that the poor Elk retain their horns longest.

The Porpus is common on this coast and as far up the river as the water
is brackish. the Indians sometimes gig them and always eat the flesh of
this fish when they can procure it; to me the flavor is disagreeable.
the Skaite is also common to the salt water, we have seen several of
them that had perished and were thrown out on the beach by the tide.
The flounder is also an inhabitant of the salt water, we have seen them
also on the beach where they had been left by the tide. the Indians eat
the latter and esteem it very fine. these several speceis are the same
with those of the Atlantic coast. the common Salmon and red Charr are
the inhabitants of both the sea and rivers. the former is usually
largest and weighs from 5 to 15 lbs. it is this speceis that extends
itself into all the rivers and little creeks on this side of the
Continent, and to which the natives are so much indebted for their
subsistence. the body of this fish is from 21/2 to 3 feet long and
proportionably broad. it is covered with imbricated scales of a
moderate size and is variegated with irregular black spots on it's
sides and gills. the eye is large and the iris of a silvery colour the
pupil black. the rostrum or nose extends beyond the under jaw, and both
the upper and lower jaws are armed with a single series of long teeth
which are subulate and infleted near the extremities of the jaws where
they are also more closely arranged. they have some sharp teeth of
smaller size and same shape placed on the tongue which is thick and
fleshey. the fins of the back are two; the first is plaised nearer the
head than the ventral fins and has ____ rays, the second is placed far
back near the tail is small and has no rays. the flesh of this fish is
when in order of a deep flesh coloured red and every shade from that to
an orrange yellow, and when very meager almost white. the roes of this
fish are much esteemed by the natives who dry them in the sun and
preserve them for a great length of time. they are about the size of a
small pea nearly transparent and of a redish yellow colour. they
resemble very much at a little distance the common currants of our
gardens but are more yellow. this fish is sometimes red along the sides
and belley near the gills particularly the male. The red Charr are
reather broader in proportion to their length than the common salmon,
the skales are also imbricated but reather large. the nostrum exceeds
the lower jaw more and the teeth are neither as large nor so numerous
as those of the salmon. some of them are almost entirely red on the
belley and sides; others are much more white than the salmon and none
of them are variagated with the dark spots which make the body of the
other. their flesh roes and every other particular with rispect to
their form is that of the Salmon. this fish we did not see untill we
decended below the grat falls of the Columbia; but whether they are
exclusively confined to this portion of the river or not at all
seasons, I am unable to determine.




[Clark, March 13, 1806]
Thursday March 13th 1806.
This morning Drewyer Jos. Fields and Frazer returned; they had killed
two Elk and two deer. Visited by two Cath-lah-mars who left us in the
evening. we Sent Drewyer down to the Clatsop Village to purchase a
couple of their canoes if possible. Sergt. Pryor and a party made
another Serch for the lost Canoe but was unsucksessfull; while engaged
in Serching for the Canoe, Collins one of his party killed two Elk near
the Netul below us. we Sent Sergt. Ordway and a party for the flesh of
one of the Elk beyond the Bay with which they returned in the evening;
the other Elk and 2 Deer were at Some distance--R. Field and Thompson
who Set out on a hunting excursion yesterday morning towards point
Adams have not yet returned. took equal altitudes to day this being the
only fair day for Sometime past.

The Porpus is common on this coast and as far up the river as the water
is brackish. the Indians Sometimes gig them and always eat the flesh of
this fish when they Can precure it; to me the flavour is disagreeable.
the Skaite is also common to the Salt water, I have Seen Several of
them that had perished and were thrown out on the beach by the tide.
The flounder is also an enhabitent of the Salt water. we have Seen them
also on the beach where they had been left by the tide. the nativs eate
the latter and esteem it very fine. these Several Species are the Same
of those of the atlantic Coasts. The Common Salmon and red charr are
the inhabitents of both the Sea and river. the former is usially
largest and weighs from 5 to 15 lbs. it is this Species that extends
itself into all the rivers and little creek on this Side of the
Continent, and to which the nativs are So much indebted for their
Subsistence. the body of this fish is from 21/2 to 3 feet long and
perpotionably broad. it is covered with imbricated scales of a moderate
Size and is varigated with errigular black Spots on its Side and gills.
the eye is large and the iris of a Silvery colour the pupil black. the
rostrum or nose extend beyond the under jaws, and both the upper and
the lower jaw are armed with a Single Series of long teeth which are
Subulate and infleted near the extremities of the jaws where they are
more closely arranged. they have Some Sharp teeth of Smaller Size and
Same Shape on the tongue which is thick and fleshey. the fins of the
back are two; the first is placed nearer the head than the Venteral
fins and has ____ rays, the Second is placed far back near the tail is
small and has no rays. The flesh of this fish when in order of a deep
flesh coloured red and every Shade from that to an orrange yellow, and
when very meager almost white. the Roe of this fish are much esteemed
by the nativs, who dry them in the Sun and preserve them for a great
length of time. they are about the Size of a Small pea nearly
transparrent and of a redish yellow colour. they resemble very much at
a little distance the Common Current of our gardens but are more
yellow. this fish is Sometimes red along the Sides and belly near the
gills; particularly the male of this Species.

The Red Charr are reather broader in proportion to their length than
the Common Salmon, the Skales are also embricated but reather large.
the nostrum exceeds the lower jaw more and the teeth are neither So
noumerous or large as those of the Salmon. Some of them are almost
entirely red on the belly and Sides; others are much more white than
the Salmon, and none of them are varigated with the dark Spots which
mark the body of the other. their flesh roe and every other particular
with respect to their is that of the Salmon. this fish we did not See
untill we had decended below the Great falls of the Columbia; but
whether they are exclusively confined to this portion of the river or
not at all Seasons, I am unable to determine.

The Salmon Trout are Seldom more than two feet in length, they are
narrow in purportion to their length, at least much more So than the
Salmon & red charr. their jaws are nearly of the Same length, and are
furnished with a Single Series of Subulate Streight teeth, not so long
or so large as those of the Salmon, the mouth is wide, and the tongue
is also furnished with Some teeth. the fins are placed much like those
of the Salmon. at the Great Falls are met with this fish of a Silvery
white colour on the belly and Sides, and a blueish light brown on the
back and head. in this neighbourhood we have met with another Species
which does not differ from the other in any particular except in point
of Colour. this last is of a dark colour on the back, and its Sides and
belley are yellow with transverse Stripes of dark brown. Sometimes a
little red is intermixed with these Colours on the belly and Sides
towards the head. the flesh & roe is like those described of the
Salmon. the white Species which we found below the falls were in
excellent order when the Salmon were entirely out of Season and not fit
for use. The Species which we found here early in november on our
arival in this quarter had declined considerably, reather more so than
the Red charr with which we found them asociated in the little
riverlets and creeks. I think it may be Safely asserted that the Red
Charr and both Species of the Salmon trout remain in Season longer in
the fall of the year than the common Salmon; but I have my doubt
whether of the Species of the Salmon trout ever pass the Great falls of
the Columbia. The Indians tell us that the Salmon begin to run early in
the next month; it will be unfortunate for us if they do not, for they
must form our principal dependance for food in assending the Columbia
above the Falls and it's S. E. branch Lewis's river to the Mountains.

The Speckled or Mountain Trout are found in the waters of the Columbia
within the Rocky mountains. they are the Same of those found in the
upper part of the Missouri, but are not So abundent in the Columbian
Waters as in that river. The bottle nose is also found on the waters of
the Columbia within the mountains.




[Lewis, March 14, 1806]
Friday March 14th 1806.
This morning we sent a party after the two Elk which Collins killed
last evening, they returned with them about noon. Collins, Jos. Fends
and Shannon went in quest of the flock of Elk of which Collins had
killed those two. this evening we heared upwards of twenty shot, and
expect that they have fallen in with and killed a number of them.
Reubin Fields and Thompson returned this evening unsuccessfull having
killed one brant only. late in the evening Drewyer arrived with a party
of the Clatsops who brought an indifferent canoe some hats and roots
for sale. the hats and roots we purchased, but could not obtain the
canoe without giving more than our stock of merchandize would lisence
us. I offered him my laced uniform coat but he would not exchange. The
Salmon Trout are seldom more than two feet in length they are narrow in
proportion to their length, at least much more so than the Salmon or
red charr. the jaws are nearly of the same length, and are furnished
with a single series of small subulate streight teeth, not so long or
as large as those of the Salmon. the mouth is wide, and the tongue is
also furnished with some teeth. the fins are placed much like those of
the salmon. at the great falls we met with this fish of a silvery white
colour on the belley and sides, and a bluish light brown on the back
and head. in this neighbourhood we have met with another speceis which
dose not differ from the other in any particular except in point of
colour. this last is of a dark colour on the back, and it's sides and
belley are yellow with transverse stripes of dark brown. sometimes a
little red is intermixed with these colours on the belley and sides
towards the head. the eye, flesh, and roes are like those discribed of
the Salmon. the white speceis which we found below the falls was in
excellent order when the salmon were entirely out of season and not fit
for uce. the speceis which we found here on our arrival early in
November had declined considerably, reather more so inded than the red
Charr with which we found them ascociated in the little rivulets and
creeks. I think it may be safely asserted that the red Charr and both
speceis of the salmon trout remain in season longer in the fall of the
year than the common Salmon; but I have my doubts whether either of
them ever pass the great falls of the Columbia. The Indians tell us
that the Salmon begin to run early in the next month; it will be
unfortunate for us if they do not, for they must form our principal
dependence for food in ascending the Columbia, above the falls and it's
S. E. branch to the mountains. The mountain or speckled trout are found
in the waters of the Columbia within the mountains. they are the same
of those found in the upper part of the Missouri, but are not so
abundant in the Columbia as on that river. we never saw this fish below
the mountains but from the transparency and coldness of the Kooskooske
I should not doubt it's existing in that stream as low as it's junction
with the S E. branch of the Columbia.--The bottle nose is the same with
that before mentioned on the Missouri and is found exclusively within
the mountains.




[Clark, March 14, 1806]
Friday March 14th 1806
This morning we dispatched a party after two Elk which Collins killed
last evening, they returned with them about noon. Jos. Field, Collins,
Go. Shannon & Labiesh went in quest of the Gang of Elk out of which
Collins had killed the 2 yesterday. this evening we herd upwards of
twenty Shot and expect they have fallen in with and killed Several of
them. Reuben Field and Thompson returned this evening unsuksessfull
haveing killed only one Brant. late in the evening Geo. Drewyer arrived
with a party of the Clatsops who brought an indifferent Canoe, three
hats and Some roots for Sale we could not purchase the Canoe without
giveing more than our Stock of merchandize would lisence us. Capt Lewis
offered his laced uniform Coat for a verry indiferent Canoe, agreeable
to their usial way of tradeing his price was double. we are informed by
the Clatsops that they have latterly Seen an Indian from the
Quin-na-chart Nation who reside Six days march to the N. W and that
four vessles were there and the owners Mr. Haley, Moore, Callamon &
Swipeton were tradeing with that noumerous nation, whale bone Oile and
Skins of various discription.




[Lewis, March 15, 1806]
Saturday March 15th 1806.
This morning at 11 OCk. the hunters arrived, having killed four Elk
only. Labuish it seems was the only hunter who fell in with the Elk and
having by some accedent lost the fore sight of his gun shot a great
number of times but killed only the number mentioned. as the elk were
scattered we sent two parties for them, they returned in the evening
with four skins and the flesh of three Elk, that of one of them having
become putrid from the liver and pluck having been carelessly left in
the animal all night. we were visited this afternoon by Delashshelwilt
a Chinnook Chief his wife and six women of his nation which the old
baud his wife had brought for market. this was the same party that had
communicated the venerial to so many of our party in November last, and
of which they have finally recovered. I therefore gave the men a
particular charge with rispect to them which they promised me to
observe. late this evening we were also visited by Catel a Clatsop man
and his family. he brought a canoe and a Sea Otter Skin for sale
neither of which we purchased this evening. The Clatsops who had
brought a canoe for sale last evening left us early this morning.-
Bratton still sick.

There is a third speceis of brant in the neighbourhood of this place
which is about the size and much the form of the pided brant. they
weigh about 81/2 lbs. the wings are not as long nor so pointed as those
of the common pided brant. the following is a likeness of it's head and
beak. a little distance around the base of the beak is white and is
suddonly succeeded by a narrow line of dark brown. the ballance of the
neck, head, back, wings, and tail all except the tips of the feathers
are of the bluish brown of the common wild goose. the breast and belly
are white with an irregular mixture of black feathers which give that
part a pided appearance. from the legs back underneath the tail, and
arond the junction of the same with the body above, the feathers are
white. the tail is composed of 18 feathers; the longest of which are in
the center and measure 6 Inches with the barrel of the quill; those
sides of the tail are something shorter and bend with their extremeties
inwards towards the center of the tail. the extremities of these
feathers are white. the beak is of a light flesh colour. the legs and
feet which do not differ in structure from those of the goose or brant
of the other speceis, are of an orrange yellow colour. the eye is
small; the iris is a dark yellowish brown, and pupil black. the note of
this brant is much that of the common pided brant from which in fact
they are not to be distinguished at a distance, but they certainly are
a distinct speis of brant. the flesh of this fowl is as good as that of
the common pided brant. they not remain here during the winter in such
numbers as the white brant do, tho they have now returned in
considerable quantities. first saw them below tide-water.




[Clark, March 15, 1806]
Saturday March 15th 1806
This morning at 11 oClock the hunters arived, haveing Killed four Elk
only. Labiesh it Seams was the only Hunter who fell in with the Elk and
haveing by some accident lost the foresight of his gun Shot a great
number of times and only killed four. as the Elk were scattered we Sent
two parties for them, they return in the evening with four Skins, and
the flesh of three Elk, that of one of them haveing become putred from
the liver and pluck haveing been carelessly left in the Animal all
night. We were visited this Afternoon in a Canoe 4 feet 2 I. wide by
De-lash-hel-wilt a Chinnook Chief his wife and Six women of his Nation,
which the Old Boud his wife had brought for Market. this was the Same
party which had communicated the venereal to Several of our party in
November last, and of which.they have finally recovered. I therefore
gave the men a particular Charge with respect to them which they
promised me to observe. late this evening we were also visited by
Ca-tel a Clatsop man and his family. he brought a Canoe and a Sea Otter
Skin for Sale neither of which we could purchase of him. the Clatsops
which had brought a Canoe for Sale last evening left us this morning.
Bratten is still very weak and unwell.

There is a third Species of Brant in the neighbourhood of this place
which is about the Size and much the form of the bided brant. they
weigh about 81/2 lbs. the wings are not as long nor So pointed as the
Common pided brant. the following is a likeness of its head and beak. a
little distance arround the base of the beak is white and is Suddenly
Succeeded by a narrow line of dark brown. the ballance of the neck,
head, back, wings and tail all except the tips of the feathers are of
the blueish brown of the Common wild goose, the breast and belly are
white with an irregular mixture of black feathers which give that part
a pided appearance. from the legs back underneath the tail, and around
the junction of the Same with the body above, the feathers are white.
the tail is composed of 18 feathers; the longest of which are in the
center and measure 6 inches with the barrel of the quill; those on the
Side of the tail are Something Shorter and bend with their extremities
inwards towards the center of the tail. the extremities of these
feathers are white. the beak is of a light flesh colour. the legs and
feet which do not differ in Structure from those of the Goose or brant
of the other Species, are of an orrange yellow Colour. the eye is
Small; the iris is of a dark yellowish brown, and puple black. the note
of this brant is much that of the common pided brant from which in fact
they are not to be distinguished at a distance, but they Certainly are
a distinct Species of brant. the flesh of this fowl is as good as that
of the Common pided brant. they do not remain here dureing the winter
in Such numbers as the white brant do, tho they have now returned in
Considerable quantities. we first met with this brant on tide water.

The Clams of this coast are very Small. the Shells consist of two
valves which open with a hinge, the Shell is Smooth thin and of an oval
form or like that of the Common Muscle and of a Skye blue colour; it is
of every Size under a Inch & 3/4 in length, and hangs in clusters to
the moss of the rocks, the nativs Sometimes eate them.--The Periwinkle
both of the river and Ocian are Similar to those found in the Same
Situation on the Atlantic.--there is also an Animal which inhabits a
Shell perfectly circular about 3 inches in diameetor, thin and entire
on the marjin, convex and Smooth on the upper Side, plain on the under
part and covered with a number of minute Capillary fibers by means of
which it attaches itself to the Sides of the rocks. the Shell is thin
and Consists of one valve. a Small circular opperture is formed in the
Center of the under Shell the Animal is Soft and boneless &c.-.




[Lewis, March 16, 1806]
Sunday March 16th 1806.
Not any occurrence worthy of relation took place today. Drewyer and
party did not return from the Cathlahmahs this evening as we expected.
we suppose he was detained by the hard winds of today. the Indians
remained with us all day, but would not dispose of their canoes at a
price which it was in our power to give consistently with the state of
our Stock of Merchandize. two handkercheifs would now contain all the
small articles of merchandize which we possess; the ballance of the
stock consists of 6 blue robes one scarlet do. one uniform
artillerist's coat and hat, five robes made of our large flag, and a
few old cloaths trimed with ribbon. on this stock we have wholy to
depend for the purchase of horses and such portion of our subsistence
from the Indians as it will be in our powers to obtain. a scant
dependence indeed, for a tour of the distance of that before us. the
Clam of this coast are very small. the shell consists of two valves
which open with a hinge. the shell is smooth thin of an oval form or
like that of the common mussle, and sky blue colour. it is about 11/2
inches in length, and hangs in clusters to the moss of the rocks. the
natives sometimes eat them. the perewinkle both of the river and Ocean
are similar to those found in the same situations on the Atlantic
coast. the common mussle of the river are also the same with those in
the rivers of the atlantic coast. the cockle is small and also much the
same of the Atlantic. there is also an animal which inhabits a shell
perfectly circular about 3 Inches in diameter, thin and entire on the
margin, convex and smooth on the upper side, plain on the under part
and covered with a number minute capillary fibers by means of which it
attatches itself to the sides of the rocks. the shell is thin and
consists of one valve. a small circular apperture is formed in the
center of the under shell. the animal is soft & boneless.

The white Salmon Trout which we had previously seen only at the great
falls of the Columbia has now made it's appearance in the creeks near
this place. one of them was brought us today by an Indian who had just
taken it with his gig. this is a likness of it; it was 2 feet 8 Inches
long, and weighed 10 lbs. the eye is moderately large, the puple black
and iris of a silvery white with a small addmixture of yellow, and is a
little terbid near it's border with a yellowish brown. the position of
the fins may be seen from the drawing, they are small in proportion to
the fish. the fins are boney but not pointed except the tail and back
fins which are a little so, the prime back fin and ventral ones,
contain each ten rays; those of the gills thirteen, that of the tail
twelve, and the small fin placed near the tail above has no bony rays,
but is a tough flexable substance covered with smooth skin. it is
thicker in proportion to it's width than the salmon. the tongu is thick
and firm beset on each border with small subulate teeth in a single
series. the teeth of the mouth are as before discribed. neither this
fish nor the salmon are caught with the hook, nor do I know on what
they feed.




[Clark, March 16, 1806]
Sunday March 16th 1806
Not any occurrence worthy of relation took place today. Drewyer and
party did not return from the Cath lah mah's this evening as we
expected. we Suppose he was detained by the hard winds today. the
Indians remain with us all day, but would not dispose of their Canoe at
a price which it was in our power to give consistently with the State
of our Stock of Merchandize. One handkerchief would contain all the
Small articles of merchandize which we possess, the ballance of the
Stock Consists of 6 Small blue robes or Blankets one of Scarlet. one
uniform Artillerist's Coat and hat, 5 robes made of our larg flag, and
a fiew our old Clothes trimed with ribon. on this Stock we have wholy
to depend for the purchase of horses and Such portion of our
Subsistence from the Indians as it will be in our power to obtain. a
scant dependence indeed for the tour of the distance of that before us.

The pellucid jelly like Substance, called the Sea nettle I found in
great abundance along the Strand where it has been thrown up by the
waves and tide, and adheres to the Sand.

There are two Species of the Fuci, or (Seawead) Seawreck which we also
found thrown up by the waves. the 1st Specie at one extremity consists
of a large sesicle or hollow vessale which would contain from one to 2
gallons, of a conic form, the base of which forms the extreem End and
is convex and Globelar bearing on its center Some Short broad and
irregular fibers. the Substance is about the consistancy of the rind of
a citron Mellon and 3/4 of an inch thick, yellow celindrick, and
regularly tapering the tube extends to 20 or 30 feet and is then
termonated with a number of branches which are flat 1/2 inch in width,
rough particularly on the edges, where they are furnished with a number
of little oval vesicles or bags of the Size of a Pigions egg. this
plant Seams to be calculated to float at each extremity, while the
little end of the tube from whence the branches proceed, lies deepest
in the water.

The white Salmon Trout which we had previously seen only at the Great
Falls of the Columbia, or a little below the Great Falls, has now made
its appearance in the creeks near this place. one of them was brought
us to day by an indian who had just taken it with his gig. This is a
likeness of it; it was 2 feet 8 inches long, and weighed ten pounds.
the eye is moderately large, the puple black with a Small admixture of
yellow and the iris of a Silvery white with a Small admixture of yellow
and a little tirbed near its border with a yellowish brown. the
position of the fins may be seen from the drawing, they are small in
perpotion to the fish. the fins are honey but not pointed except the
tail and back fins which are a little So, the prime back fin and
venteral ones, contain each ten rays; those of the gills twelve, and
the Small Finn placed near the tail above has no long rays, but is a
tough flexable Substance covered with Smooth Skin. it is thicker in
perpotion to it's width than the Salmons. the tongue is thick and firm
beset on each border with small subulate teeth in a Single Series. the
Teeth of the mouth are as before discribed. neither this fish nor the
Salmon are cought with the hook, nor do I know on what they feed.-now
begin to run &c. &c.




[Lewis, March 17, 1806]
Monday March 17th 1806.
Catel and his family left us this morning. Old Delashelwilt and his
women still remain they have formed a camp near the fort and seem to be
determined to lay close sege to us but I beleive notwithstanding every
effort of their wining graces, the men have preserved their constancy
to the vow of celibacy which they made on this occasion to Capt C. and
myself. we have had our perogues prepared for our departer, and shal
set out as soon as the weather will permit. the weather is so
precarious that we fear by waiting untill the first of April that we
might be detained several days longer before we could get from this to
the Cathlahmahs as it must be calm or we cannot accomplish that part of
our rout. Drewyer returned late this evening from the Cathlahmahs with
our canoe which Sergt. Pryor had left some days since, and also a canoe
which he had purchased from those people. for this canoe he gave my
uniform laced coat and nearly half a carrot of tobacco. it seems that
nothing excep this coat would induce them to dispose of a canoe which
in their mode of traffic is an article of the greatest value except a
wife, with whom it is equal, and is generally given in exchange to the
father for his daughter. I think the U States are indebted to me
another Uniform coat, for that of which I have disposed on this
occasion was but little woarn.--we yet want another canoe, and as the
Clatsops will not sell us one at a price which we can afford to give we
will take one from them in lue of the six Elk which they stole from us
in the winter.-

The pellucid jellylike substance, called the sea-nettle is found in
great abundance along the strad where it has been thrown up by the
waves and tide.

There are two speceis of the Fuci or seawreckwhich we also find thrown
up by the waves. the 1st speceis at one extremity consists of a large
vesicle or hollow vessell which would contain from one to two gallons,
of a conic form, the base of which forms the extreem end and is convex
and globelar bearing on it's center some short broad and irregular
fibers. the substance is about the consistence of the rind of a citron
mellon and 3/4 of an inch thick. the rihind is smooth. from the small
extremity of the cone a long, hollow, celindrick, and regularly
tapering tube extends to 20 or thirty feet and is then terminated with
a number of branches which are flat 1/2 an inch in width rough
particular on the edges where they are furnished with a number of
little ovate vesicles or bags of the size of a pigeon's egg. this plant
seems to be calculated to float at each extremity while the little end
of the tube from whence the branches proceed, lies deepest in the water.

The other speceis I have never seen but Capt. Clark who saw it on the
coast towards the Killamucks informed me that it resembled a large
pumpkin, it is solid and it's specific gravity reather greater than the
water, tho it is sometimes thrown out by the waves. it is of a yellowis
brown colour. the rhind smooth and consistence harder than that of a
pumpkin tho easily cut with a knife. there are some dark brown fibers
reather harder than any other part which pass longitudinally through
the pulp or fleshey substance wich forms the interior of this marine
production.The following is a list of the names of the commanders of
vessels who visit the entrance of the Columbia river in the spring and
autumn fror the purpose of trading with the natives or hunting Elk.
these names are spelt as the Indians pronounce them.

Mr. Haley, their favorite trader visits them in a vessel with three
masts, and continues some time

Youens,
visits in a
3
masted vessel-
Trader
Tallamon
do.
3
do.
no trader
Callallamet
do.
3
do.
Trader. has a wooden leg.
Swipton
do.
3
do.
Trader.
Moore
do.
4
do.
do.
Mackey
do.
3
do.
do.
Washington
do.
3
do.
do.
Mesship
do.
3
do.
do.
Davidson
do.
2

no trader hunts Elk
Jackson
do.
3
masted vessel
Trader
Bolch
do.
3
do.
do.
Skelley
do.
3
do.
do. tho he has been gone some years. he has one eye.




[Clark, March 17, 1806]
Monday March 17th 1806
Catel and his family left us this morning. Old Delashelwill and his
women still remain, they have formed a Camp near the fort and Seam
determined to lay Close Sege to us, but I believe notwithstanding every
effort of their wining graces, the men have preserved their constancy
to the vow of celibacy which they made on this Occasion to Capt L. and
my self. we have had our Canoes prepared for our departure, and Shall
Set out as Soon as the weather will permit. the weather is So
precarious that we fear by waiting untill the first of April that we
might be detained Several days longer before we could get from this to
the Cath-lah-mahs, as it must be Calm or we cannot accomplish that part
of the rout in our Canoes. Drewyer returned late this evening from the
Cath-lah-mahs with our Indian Canoe which Sergt. Pryor had left Some
days since, and also a Canoe, which he had purchased from those people.
for this canoe he gave Captn. Lewis's uniform laced coat and nearly
half a Carrot of to-bacco. it Seams that nothing except this Coat would
induce them to dispose of a Canoe which in their mode of traffic is an
article of the greatest value except a wife, with whome it is nearly
equal, and is generally given in exchange to the father for his
Daughter. I think that the United States are injustice indebted to
Captn Lewis another uniform Coat for that of which he has disposed of
on this ocasion, it was but little worn.

We yet want another Canoe as the Clatsops will not Sell us one, a
proposition has been made by one of our interpt and Several of the
