you are welcome to take as much as you require. Which way do you propose
marching?"

"I am waiting to see which way the French go after leaving Chaves. Whether
they go down the valley or across the mountains to Braga, I shall
endeavour to get ahead of them; and as my men are splendid marchers, I
have no doubt that I shall succeed in doing so, even if the French have a
few hours' start. If I can do nothing else, I can at least make their
cavalry keep together instead of riding in small parties all over the
country to sweep in food."

Fires were soon lighted, some bullocks killed and cut up, and a hearty
meal eaten. They had already made a very long march, and were ordered to
lie down until nightfall. Silveira marched away with his men, and Terence
and Herrara sat and watched the road, down which bodies of French troops
could already be seen advancing from Monterey towards Chaves. As they
approached the town, gun after gun was fired. The advance-guard halted and
waited until the whole division had come up.


CHAPTER XVI

IN THE PASSES

On the following day the French cavalry, with a division of infantry, took
up their position beyond the town, so as to cut off the retreat of the
garrison, who were then summoned to surrender. No reply was made, but for
the next twenty-four hours the defenders, although in no way attacked,
kept up a random fire from the guns on the walls, and with musketry, to
which no reply whatever was made by the French.

On the following day, the whole army having now come up, the town was
again summoned, and at once surrendered, when Soult, who did not wish to
be hampered with a mob of prisoners, contemptuously allowed them to depart
to their homes.

After bringing up his sick from Chaves, and discovering that the passes
through the mountains were unoccupied, and that the Portuguese army was at
Braga, Soult, on the 14th, began to move in that direction, both for the
purpose of crushing Friere and getting into communication with Tuy, and
being joined by his artillery from there. As soon as this movement was
seen from the hill where Terence's regiments had been for three days
resting, preparations were made for marching, and with haversacks well
filled with bread and meat, the troops started in good spirits. Terence
procured the services of a peasant well acquainted with the mountains, and
was led by paths used by shepherds across the hills, and after a twelve
hours' toilsome journey came down into the defiles that the French were
following. There he learned from peasants, that, with the exception of a
small scouting party two days before, there were no signs of any hostile
force.

The men were at once set to work to destroy a bridge across a torrent at
the mouth of a defile. It was built of stone, but was old and in bad
repair, and the men had little difficulty in prising the stones of the
side walls from their places, and throwing them down into the stream.
Another party made a hole over the key of an arch. A barrel of powder was
placed here, and a train having been laid, was covered up by a pile of
rocks. A third party formed a barricade six feet high, across the end of
the bridge, and also two breastworks, each fifty yards away on either
side, so as to flank the approaches to the other end and the bridge. The
troops were extended along the hillsides, one battalion on each side of
the defile, under the shelter of the rocks and brush.

While these preparations were being made, the horses were taken up to the
top of the hills by some paths known to the peasants of a little village
near the mouth of the defile, the women and children following them.
Terence and Herrara had a consultation, and then the former called Bull
and Macwitty to him.

"Now," he said, "you understand that while we will defend this defile as
long as we can, we will run no risk of a defeat that might end in a rout.
We shall inflict heavy loss upon them before they can repair the bridge,
and can certainly force their cavalry to remain quiet until they bring up
their infantry. Colonel Herrara, you, with one company of the second
battalion, will hold the village, and we shall sweep the column advancing
along the bottom of the defile with a fire from each flank, while they
will also be exposed to your fire in front. When they succeed in making
their way up to within charging distance you will evacuate the village and
join Macwitty on the hill.

"They must attack us there on both sides, for no troops could march
through until the hillsides are cleared. It is probable that they may do
this before they attempt to attack the village, but in any case you must
keep up a steady fire until they get within fifty yards of you, then
retire up the hill, but leave a party to keep them in check until the rest
have gained the crest and formed up in good order. By the time you do this
they will have driven in your rear-guard. The French will be breathless
with their exertions when they reach you. Wait till a considerable number
have gained the crest, then, before they have time to form, pour a heavy
volley into them and charge, and then sweep them with your fire until they
reach the bottom. The next time they will no doubt attack in much greater
force; in that case we will move quietly off without waiting for them, and
will reunite at the village of Romar, five miles in the rear. If we find,
as we near it, that the French are in possession, we will halt, and I will
send orders to the second regiment as to what is to be done. If the force
is not too great we will attack them at night."

"How will you know where we shall be, sir?" Macwitty said.

"I have arranged with Colonel Herrara that when you halt you shall light
two fires a short distance from each other. I will reply by lighting one,
and the fires are then to be extinguished."

This being arranged, Terence went down and applied a match to the train,
and then retired at a run. Three minutes later there was a heavy
explosion, rocks flew high in the air, and when the smoke cleared away, a
cheer from the hillside told that the explosion had been successful.
Terence returned to the bridge; a considerable portion of the arch had
been blown away, and putting fifty men to work, the gap was soon carried
across the road and widened, so that there was a chasm twelve feet across.
The parties who were to man the breastworks were now posted. Terence
himself took the command here. The defenders consisted of a company of
Bull's battalion.

Half an hour later a deep sound was heard, and as it grew louder the head
of a column of cavalry was seen approaching. The whole of the force on the
hillsides were hidden behind rocks or brushwood; not a head was shown
above the breastworks. The cavalry, however, halted, and an officer with
four men rode forward. When within fifty yards of the bridge a volley of
twenty muskets flashed out from the work behind it. The officer and three
men fell, the other galloped back to the main body. He had seen nothing
beyond the fact that there was a breastwork across the road, and
Franceschi, thinking that he had but a small force of peasants in front of
him, ordered a squadron to charge, and clear the obstacle.

As before, they were allowed to approach to within fifty yards of the
bridge, when from the breastwork in front, and the two side redoubts a
storm of musketry was poured into them. The effect was terrible; the head
of the squadron was swept away, but a few men charged forward until close
to the break in the bridge. Most of these fell, but a few galloped back,
and the remains of the squadron then trotted off in good order.

No further movement took place for an hour, and then a body of infantry,
some two thousand strong, appeared. As they passed the cavalry, the first
two companies were thrown out in skirmishing order, and were soon swarming
down towards the stream. The banks of this, although very steep, were not
impassable by infantry, and the defenders of the two side redoubts spread
themselves out along the bank, and, as the skirmishers approached, opened
fire.

For a time the rattle of firearms was incessant. When the main body of
French infantry had, as their commander thought, ascertained the strength
of the defenders, they advanced in solid order until near the bridge, and
then wheeled off on either flank and advanced with loud shouts. A horn was
sounded, and from the hillsides near a scattering fire of musketry opened
at once. The French, however, pushed forward without a pause. Terence's
horn sounded again, the men fell back from the bank, and the whole company
ran at full speed across the narrow valley, and took their place with
their comrades on the hillside.

The French crossed the stream under a heavy fire, and, dividing into two
portions, prepared to assault both hills simultaneously. The combat was
obstinate, the French suffered heavily, but pushed their way up
unflinchingly. The Portuguese, encouraged by the shouts of their officers,
held their ground obstinately, retreating only at the sound of their
horns, and renewing the combat a short distance higher up. Being sheltered
by the rocks behind which they lay, their loss was but trifling in
comparison to that of the French, who were forced to expose themselves as
they advanced, and whose numbers dwindled so rapidly that when half-way up
they were on both sides brought to a stand-still, and then, taking shelter
behind the rocks, they maintained the contest on more equal terms.

But by this time a column of 4,000 men was marching down to the stream,
and, dividing like the first, climbed the hills. The Portuguese now fell
back more rapidly, their fire slackened, and the French, with loud shouts,
pressed up the hill. Presently the resistance ceased altogether, and,
firing as they advanced at the flying figures, of whom they caught an
occasional glimpse, the French pressed forward as rapidly as the nature of
the ground would permit, cheering loudly. At last they reached the top of
the hill, and the leaders paused in doubt as they saw before them some
eleven or twelve hundred men drawn up in line four deep at a distance of
fifty yards. Every moment added to the number of the French, and as they
arrived their officers tried to form them into order. When their numbers
about equalled those of the Portuguese, two heavy volleys were poured into
them, and then, with loud shouts, the Portuguese rushed at them with
levelled bayonets.

The charge was irresistible. The French were hurled over the crest and
went down the hill, carrying confusion and dismay among those climbing up.
The Portuguese pressed them hotly, giving them no time to rally, and
forcing them down to the bottom of the hill without a check. Then at the
signal they fell back to the post that they had held at the beginning of
the fight. The success was equal on both hillsides, and the regiments
cheered each other's victory with shouts which rose high above the roar of
musketry. With their usual discipline, the French speedily rallied, in
spite of the heavy fire that from both sides swept their ranks, and they
prepared, when joined by another regiment which was approaching at the
double to their assistance, to renew the assault.

Terence saw that, this time, the odds would be too great to withstand. His
horn sounded the retreat, and the Portuguese turned to make their way up
the hill just as a French battery opened fire. Sheltered among the rocks,
the infantry below were unconscious of the movement, for on either side a
company had been left to continue their fire until the main body gained
the top of the hill, when they too were summoned by the horns to fall
back. The wounded had been all taken up the hill, and were laid in
blankets and carried off by their comrades. As the two regiments marched
away from the crest of the defile the soldiers were in the highest
spirits. They had repulsed with heavy loss a French force of three times
their own strength, and they greeted Terence and Bull, as they rode
together along the column, with enthusiastic cheers.

The wounded, which in the first battalion numbered forty-three, were
despatched with a party a hundred strong to a village four miles away
among the mountains, and the regiment marched on until it reached the
point agreed upon.

Two men were sent forward to reconnoitre the village, and returned with
the report that it had already been occupied by a very strong force of
French cavalry. Half an hour later two wreaths of smoke rose on the
opposite hill. Sticks had been gathered in readiness, and the answering
signal was at once made. Two minutes later the smoke ceased to rise on
either side. Terence now received the reports of the captains of the six
companies, and found that fifteen men had been killed, and that his
strength was thus reduced by fifty-eight. The men were now told that they
could lie down, the companies keeping together so as to be ready for
instant action.

Trifling wounds, of which there were some two or three and twenty, were
then attended to and bandaged. Some of these were quite serious enough to
have warranted the men falling out, but the delight and pride they felt at
their success had been so great that they had refused to be taken off with
their disabled comrades. Terence made a round of the troops and addressed
a few words to each company, praising their conduct, and thanking them for
the readiness and quickness with which they had obeyed his orders.

"You see, my lads," he said, "what can be done by discipline. Had it not
been for the steady drill you have had ever since we marched, we could not
have hoped to oppose the French, and I should not have ventured to have
done so. Now, you see, you have proved that you are as brave as the enemy,
and not only have you beaten them with heavy loss, but the effect of this
fight will be to render them more cautious in future and slower in their
movements, and the news of the blow you have struck will inspirit your
countrymen everywhere."

Having nothing else to do until after darkness fell, Terence, after
finishing his round, sat down and added an account of the fight to the
report he had written up at their last halting-place. This was written in
duplicate, one copy being intended for General Cradock, and the other for
the Portuguese authorities at Oporto. Outposts had been thrown out towards
the village as soon as they halted, and after opening their haversacks,
eating a meal, and quenching their thirst at a little rivulet that ran
down to the village, the men lay down to sleep, tired with their long
night's march and the excitement of the battle.

Terence was no exception to the general rule, for although he had had his
horse, yet for the greater part of the distance he had marched on foot, as
the ruggedness of the ground traversed had in most places been too great
to travel in safety on horseback in the dark. When night fell all were on
their feet again, refreshed by a long sleep. Two men were now sent down to
reconnoitre the village again. They reported that it was still occupied by
the cavalry. The infantry, as they could see by the fires along the road,
had bivouacked there, and one regiment at least had passed through the
village and had occupied the road ahead.

Terence had already written out his instructions to Herrara in triplicate,
and three men were despatched with these. They were warned to be extremely
careful, for the men who had first been sent, had reported that the French
had posted sentries out on their flanks. One of the messengers was to make
a long detour to cross the road half a mile ahead of the French, and then
to make his way along on the opposite hillside to the spot where Herrara
was posted. The other two were to make their way as best they could
through the village. The pieces of paper they carried were rolled up into
little balls, and they were ordered that, if noticed and an alarm given,
these were at once to be swallowed.

Soon after ten o'clock the regiment formed up. Terence had given detailed
orders to the captain of each company. These were instructed to call up
their men twenty at a time, and to explain their orders to them, so that
every man should know exactly what to do. No sound had been heard in the
village, and Terence felt sure that Herrara must have received his orders,
and at a quarter past ten he with one company moved slowly down towards
the village; Bull, with the main body of the force, marching westward
along the hills. Six men had volunteered for the service of silencing the
French outposts, and these, leaving their muskets behind, stole forward in
advance of the company, which halted at some little distance from the
French centre.

In a quarter of an hour they returned. Eight French sentries had been
surprised and killed, the Portuguese crawling up to them until near enough
to spring upon and stab them without the slightest alarm being given. The
company now moved silently forward again until within a hundred yards of
the village, when they halted until the church clock struck eleven. Then
they rushed down into the village. As they entered it shots were fired,
and an outcry rose from the other side, showing that Herrara had managed
matters as well as they had. The surprise was complete; the street was
full of horses, while the soldiers had taken shelter in the houses. A
scene of the wildest confusion ensued. The horses were shot, for it was
most important to cripple this most formidable arm of the French service,
and the men were attacked as they poured out of the houses.

Bull, with a hundred men, made his way straight to the upper end of the
village and repelled the desperate attempts of a squadron of horse that
were posted beyond it in readiness for action, to break through to the
assistance of their comrades, while Terence and Herrara, each with a
hundred men, held the road at the lower end of the village to check an
infantry attack there. It was not long before it was delivered. The French
infantry, disciplined veterans, accustomed to surprises, had sprung to
their feet when the first shot was fired, and forming instantly into
column, came on at a run, led by their officers. Terence, with fifty men,
four deep, barred the way across the road; the rest of his men were
stationed along the high ground flanking it on one side, while Herrara
with his hundred flanked the opposite side.

As the French came on the Portuguese on the high ground remained silent
and unnoticed, but when a flash of fire ran across the road and a deadly
volley was poured in upon the enemy, those on the flanks at once opened
fire. For a moment the column paused in surprise, and then opened fire at
their unseen assailants, whose fire was causing such gaps in the ranks.
The colonel and several other officers who had been at its head had
fallen; in the din no orders could be heard, and for some minutes the head
of the column wasted away under the rain of bullets. Then a general
officer dashed up, and another body of Frenchmen came along at a run.
Terence's horn rang out loudly; the signal was repeated in the village,
the fire instantly ceased, and when the French column rushed into the
place not a foe was to be seen, but the street was choked up by dead
horses and men.

These reinforcements did not pause, but making their way over the
obstacles pressed on to where a roar of fire in front showed how hotly the
advance-guard was engaged. Here the surprise had been rather less
complete. Some of the outposts had given the alarm, and the French were on
their feet before, after pouring terrible volleys into them, a thousand
men fell upon them on either side. Great numbers of the French fell under
the fire, and the long line was broken up into sections by the impetuous
rush of the Portuguese. Nevertheless, the French soldiers hung together,
and the combat raged desperately until the head of the relieving column
came up. Then, as suddenly as before, the attack ceased. Not a gun was
fired, and, as if by magic, their assailants stole away into the darkness,
while the French opened a random fire after them.

An hour later the two Portuguese regiments united on the road two miles in
advance of the village. Their loss had been eighty-four killed and a
hundred and fifty wounded, of which seventy were serious cases. These
were, as before, sent off to be cared for in the mountain villages. The
French loss, as Terence afterward heard, had been very heavy; three
hundred of the cavalry had been killed, and upwards of four hundred
infantry. Great was the enthusiasm when the two regiments met, and after a
short halt marched away together into the hills and encamped in a wood two
miles from the road.

"What next, Generalissimo?" Herrara, whose left arm had been broken by a
bullet, asked.

"I think that we have done enough for the present," Terence said. "We will
leave it to the rest of the army to do a little fighting now. We have
lost, in killed and wounded, some two hundred men, and I don't wish to see
the whole force dwindle away. I propose that we do not go near Braga. I
have no idea of putting myself under the command of Friere; I have seen
enough of him already. So we will travel by by-roads till we get near
Oporto, then we will find out how matters stand there. My own idea is that
when the French army approaches, the Junta's courage will ooze out of its
finger ends, and that the 50,000 peasants, which it calls an army, will
bolt at the first attack of the French. So, as I don't mean to be trapped
there, we will rest on our laurels until we see how matters go."

It was well for the corps that Terence abstained from joining the army at
Braga. As the French entered the pass of Benda Nova, the peasants rushed
furiously down upon them. Many broke into the French columns, and fighting
desperately, were slain. The survivors made their way up the hillside, and
then making a detour, fell upon the rear of the column, killed fifty
stragglers and plundered the baggage. This spontaneous action of the
peasants was the only attempt made to bar the advance of the French, and
Friere permitted them to pass through defile after defile without firing a
shot. His conduct aroused the fury of his troops, and the feeling was
fanned by agents of the bishop, who had now become jealous of him, and his
men rushing upon him dragged him from a house in which he had taken
refuge, and slew him--a fit end to the career of a man who had proved
himself as unpatriotic as he was incapable.

On the 18th Soult arrived near Braga, and the Portuguese, who were now
commanded by Eben, a German officer in the British service, drew up to
meet him. The French began their advance on the 20th, and half an hour
later the Portuguese army was a mob of fugitives. The vanquished army lost
4,000 men and all their guns, 400 only being taken prisoners; the rest
dispersed in all directions, carrying tales of the invincibility of the
French. Had it not been for the stout resistance offered by 3,000 men,
placed on a position in the rear commanding the road, which checked the
pursuit of the cavalry and enabled the fugitives to make off, scarce a man
of the Portuguese would have escaped to tell the tale.

Terence had approached Oporto, and encamped in a large wood, when the
fugitives brought him news of the crushing defeat that they had suffered.
The soldiers were so furious when they heard of the disgraceful rout, that
Terence and Herrara had difficulty in preventing them from killing the
fugitives. The result strengthened his position. The troops on arriving at
their present camping-place were eager to be led into Oporto. Terence and
Herrara had talked the matter over several times, and agreed that such a
step might be fatal. Standing, as this town did, on the north side of the
river, the only means of leaving it was the bridge of boats, and if
anything happened to this all retreat would be cut off.

The defeat at Braga at once confirmed their opinion that the army of
peasants that the bishop had gathered round Oporto would be able to make
but little resistance to the French attack.

"It would be terrible," Herrara said; "50,000 fugitives, and a great
portion of the inhabitants of the town, all struggling to cross the
bridge, with the French cavalry pressing on their rear, and the French
artillery playing upon them. It is not to be thought of."

The troops, however, had been full of confidence in the valour of their
countrymen, and from their own success against the French believed that
the army at Braga would certainly defeat Soult, and there had been some
dissatisfaction that they had not been permitted to take part in the
victory. The news brought by the fugitives at once dissipated the hopes
that they had entertained. They saw that their commander had acted wisely
in refusing to join the army there, and their feeling of contempt for the
undisciplined ordenancas and peasants equalled the confidence they had
before reposed in them. Terence ordered the two regiments to form into a
hollow square and addressed them.

"Soldiers," he said, "I know that it was a disappointment to you that I
did not take you to Braga. Had I done so, not one of you would have
escaped, for when the rest fled like a flock of sheep you could not alone
have withstood the attack of the whole French army. I know that you wish
to enter Oporto. I have withstood that wish, and now you must see that I
was right in doing so. The peasants gathered in its defence are even less
disciplined than those at Braga, and Soult will, after two or three
minutes' fighting, capture the place. Were you there you could not prevent
such a result. You might hold the spot at which you were stationed, but if
the French broke in at any other point you would be surrounded and killed
to a man. What use would that be to Portugal? You can do more good by
living and fighting another day.

"Even if you should fall back with the other fugitives, what chance of
safety would there be? You know that there is but one bridge of boats
across the river, and that will soon be blocked by a panic-stricken crowd,
and your chance of crossing would be slight indeed. The men who fought at
Braga, those men who will fight before Oporto, are no more cowards than
you are, and had they gained as much discipline as you have, I would march
down with you at once and join in the defence. But a mob cannot withstand
disciplined troops. When the Portuguese have learned to be soldiers, they
may fight with a hope of success; until then it is taking them to
slaughter to set them in line of battle against the French. Soult may be
here in twenty-four hours, therefore I propose to march you down to the
river above Oporto. We are sure to find boats there, and we will cross at
once to the other side and encamp near the suburb at the south end of the
bridge, and when the fugitives pour over we will take our station there,
cover their retreat, and prevent the French from crossing in pursuit."

A murmur of satisfaction broke from the soldiers and swelled into a shout.
Soon after evening fell the corps marched from the wood, and two hours
later came down on the bank of the Douro. As Terence anticipated, there
were plenty of fishermen's boats hauled up, and the regiments passed over
by companies. By three in the morning all were across, and by five they
encamped in a wood beyond the steep hill rising behind the Villa Nova
suburb, on the left bank of the river. As soon as he had seen the soldiers
settled Terence borrowed the clothes of one of the men, and putting these
on instead of his uniform, he sent for Bull and Macwitty, and the two
soldiers soon arrived. They looked in astonishment at their officer.

"I am going into the town," he said, "partly to judge for myself of the
state of things there, and partly on a little private business of my own.
It is possible that I may get into trouble. I hope that I shall not do so,
but it is as well to be prepared for any emergency that might happen. If,
