King Hakon the Good gained him immediate favour, and his personal
strength and prowess might have been in itself sufficient to warrant
his being chosen as a successor to Earl Hakon. But in addition to this
there was the undoubted fact that he was a direct descendant of Harald
Fairhair, and had therefore the greatest of all claims to the kingdom
in which his fathers had reigned. So, very soon after the death of
Hakon, a general Thing, or gathering of the people, was held in
Trondelag, and Olaf was formally proclaimed the king of all Norway, and
the rule given to him according to ancient laws.

The district of Thrandheim was at that time the most populous and
important in the land, and the Thranders had exercised the right (a
right which they reserve to this day) of proclaiming a new monarch in
the name of the whole nation. Nevertheless it was necessary for King
Olaf to travel throughout the country to lay personal claim to his
dominion, and to receive the allegiance of his subjects remote and
near. The news of his coming into Norway was not long in reaching the
farthest extremities of the realm. Everywhere it was told how, having
by help of his mother's bravery escaped the wrath of the wicked Queen
Gunnhild, he had lived as a slave in Esthonia, how he had been rescued
by Sigurd Erikson and educated at the court of King Valdemar, how he
had roved as a viking on the Baltic, and, after invading England, had
at last come back to his native land to claim his own. So that wherever
he journeyed he found that his fame had gone before him to prepare the
way. He was greeted everywhere with enthusiastic homage. His natural
kindliness, his manly bearing, and his winning manners attracted
everyone with whom he came in contact, and he was recognized as a king
of whom the nation might well be proud. In token of the glory that he
had won in foreign lands the people gave him the name of Olaf the
Glorious.



CHAPTER XVI: THE CHRISTENING OF NORWAY.


King Olaf's first thought on ascending the throne of Norway was that he
would make it his mission to convert the country to Christianity. This
had been once before attempted by his own uncle, King Hakon the Good,
the foster son of Athelstane of England; but Hakon the Good was a weak
man, who, instead of winning his people to the true faith, had allowed
himself to drift back into paganism. Olaf was by nature better fitted
for the task, being zealous in the faith and strong in the conviction
of the sanctity of his cause. He resolved to stand firm against all
opposition, and if gentle persuasion should not avail he would have no
scruple in employing physical force. To abolish the custom of blood
sacrifice, to destroy all heathen temples, and to supplant the worship
of the pagan gods by preaching the gospel of Christ--this was to be his
life work.

He was, however, wise enough to recognize that in order to succeed in
his mission it was necessary for him first to make his own position as
monarch perfectly secure and unassailable. So rapidly did he establish
himself in the hearts of the people that even at the end of the first
summer he found that he might with safety begin his task. His one
possible rival and natural enemy, Earl Erik Hakonson, with some few
others of the kin of the late earl, had fled in fear from the land,
leaving him in absolute possession; and the lords of Viken and other
districts of the south, who had hitherto held their lands of the King
of Denmark, now became King Olaf's men, and paid him homage and tribute.

At this time Olaf could only depend upon his priest Thangbrand for
practical help. Thangbrand was a Saxon who had formerly been attached
to the see of Canterbury. He was a man of very violent temper, and his
readiness to enter a quarrel and to draw his sword must have made him a
very singular exponent of the gospel of peace. Olaf saw very soon that
he would require further help than this pugnacious priest could give;
so he sent Thangbrand over to England, bidding him fare to Canterbury
and bring back with him as many holy men as might be willing to serve
him as missionaries.

Meanwhile King Olaf, with some of his chosen companions, journeyed
south into Viken, where his mother lived with her husband Lodin--the
same who had bought her out of her bondage. There he abode throughout
the winter among his own kindred as well as many who had been great
friends with his father. They welcomed him with very great love.

And now, while the king was living with his friends in quiet comfort
and homeliness, he laid his plans most earnestly before them, craving
that they should help him with all their might. He said that he
intended to have the Christian faith set forth throughout all his
realm, and that he would bring about the christening of Norway or else
die in the endeavour. Accordingly he began by going about in Viken,
bidding the peasants take baptism, so it came to pass that the district
which his father, Triggvi, had formerly ruled over was the first part
of Norway to receive the true faith.

He was still in Viken when at the end of the winter Thangbrand returned
from England with a company of priests. Among them was a certain Bishop
Sigurd, a man of grave and gentle spirit, most learned and eloquent,
who stood at Olaf's right hand during the whole five years of his reign.

Now Bishop Sine, of Canterbury, had presented Thangbrand with a very
costly and curiously wrought shield. It was made of burnished bronze,
inlaid with gold and precious stones, and it bore the image of the
crucified Christ. Olaf admired this shield and desired to buy it.
Thangbrand loved money more than ornament, and he sold the shield to
the king for a very large sum. Finding himself suddenly rich, the
priest went off to enjoy himself. He fell into a drunken brawl with a
certain viking, who challenged him to fight. A desperate duel was
fought and the viking was killed. Great ill feeling was aroused against
Thangbrand by this unpriestly incident, and he went back full of
penitence to King Olaf.

Olaf foresaw that he would have trouble with this man, and he would no
longer bear to have him about his house; so, to get rid of him, he sent
him on a mission to Iceland, to convert the heathen there. Thangbrand
was absent in Iceland for three winters, and although he had great
success and brought the country to the true faith, yet he was not well
liked, and the people vexed him by making songs about him. Here, as in
Norway, he was boisterous and boastful and over fond of the drinking
horn. It is told that in a quarrel with the islanders he slew three
men. Howbeit, he was obliged to return to Norway with his mission only
half fulfilled.

King Olaf met with no opposition in his endeavour to convert the people
of Viken and Agder. In the district of Ringarike he christened a
certain little boy, the son of Harald Groenske, who was of the race of
Harald Fairhair. The king named the boy Olaf, and in giving him his
blessing said that he would one day be a very great man. This same Olaf
Haraldson afterwards became the King of Norway and a very great
evangelist. He is known in history by the title of Olaf the Saint, and
he is to this day regarded as the patron saint of Norway. He fought
many battles in England, and, for this reason perhaps, he is often
wrongly confused with his godfather, Olaf Triggvison.

To tell of all the good and ill happenings that King Olaf met with in
his progress through the land would make a long story. In many
districts he had but to announce his mission, and the people at once
yielded. In other places the people were very slow to understand that
there could be any advantage in changing their religion; but Olaf never
left them before every man and woman had been christened. Often,
however, he was met by bands of armed men who declared that they would
sooner die than consent to give up their old faith in Odin and Thor,
and then the king enforced his doctrines at the point of the sword, or
even by torture. When moved to anger he was guilty of committing
cruelties which in his calmer moments he sorely regretted, but it is to
be supposed that he never took to violent measures unless when very
severely provoked. For the most part he generally found that wise words
were a better argument than either the sword or fire.

Always when he came to a place where the people were still pagan it was
his custom to summon a great meeting, and then he would tell of how the
folk of another district had accepted Christianity and torn down their
sacrificing houses, and now believed in the true God, who shaped heaven
and earth and knew all things. Then perhaps he would fall into argument
with one of the leading men of the place and show how the God of
christened men was almighty, and how Thor and Odin must therefore be
rejected.

On one such occasion a chief named Gudbrand answered him thus:

"We do not know about whom you are talking, O king. Do you call him God
whom neither you nor any other man can see? We have a god whom we may
see every day, but he is not out today because the weather is so wet.
He will look terrible and great to you, and fear will creep into your
breast if he comes to the gathering of our people."

The king then asked how their god was made, and Gudbrand answered that
he was made in the image of Thor, that he had a hammer in his hand, was
of large size and hollow inside, and that there was a platform made
under him on which he stood when outside the temple.

Olaf said, "I would very much like to see that god. But for my own part
I have made up my mind never to believe in logs and stones, though they
be in the shape of fiend or man, whose power I do not understand; and
although I have been told that they have great power, yet it seems to
me very unlikely, for I find that those images which are called gods
are in every way uglier and less powerful than myself. How much less
powerful are they therefore than the great God who rules over the whole
universe, who makes the rain to fall and the sun shine!"

"If, as you say, your God is so powerful, then let him send sunshine
tomorrow and not rain as we have today," said Gudbrand.

On the next day, as it chanced, there was no rain, and when the people
were all gathered together in the early dawn Bishop Sigurd rose in his
gown, with a mitre on his head and a crozier in his hand, and preached
to the peasants and told them many tokens which God had shown. And
presently King Olaf saw a crowd of men approaching, carrying a large
image, ornamented all over with gold and silver. The people all stood
up and bowed to the monster, which was placed in the middle of the
meeting place.

"Where is your God now, O king?" cried Gudbrand, rising and addressing
Olaf. "It seems to me that your boasting, and that of the horned man,
whom you call your bishop, is far less than yesterday. It is because
our god, who rules all, has come, and looks on you with keen eyes. And
I see that you are full of terror at sight of him! Now throw off this
new superstition of yours--this belief in a God who cannot be seen--and
acknowledge the greatness of Thor!"

King Olaf whispered to Kolbiorn, who was at his side: "If during my
speech it happens that the people look away from this idol of theirs,"
said he, "then go you forward and strike the thing a lusty blow with
your club."

And aloud he said: "The god with whom you have threatened us is blind
and deaf and can help neither himself nor others; nor can he move
anywhere from his place unless he be carried. Of what use is such a
god? Now look into the east!" he added, pointing to the rising sun.
"Behold! There comes the messenger of our God, bringing light and
warmth into the world!"

The people all turned with their faces to the sun. At the same moment
Kolbiorn raised his club and struck their god so that the image fell to
pieces; and it is said that vipers and rats and mice ran out of it and
that the peasants were afraid.

"You see what has become of your god!" cried King Olaf. "What folly it
is to believe in such things! One blow has shattered your Thor into
fragments. Now I demand that you shall never again make images of wood
or stone, nor worship any but the one true God. And I offer you two
choices. Either you accept Christianity here on this spot, or you fight
a battle with me today."

So the people, unwilling to take to arms and seeing that the king had a
great host of warriors at his back, agreed to listen to the teachings
of the bishop, and finally to have themselves baptized. Olaf left a
priest among them to keep them steadfast in the faith, and to keep them
from lapsing into paganism.

King Olaf stood north along the land, christening all folk wheresoever
he came. But in the wintertime he went back into Trondelag. He built a
town on the bank of the river Nid, and a great hall for himself up
above Ship Creek. He called the town Nidaros, and it is to this day the
capital of Norway, although its name has been changed to Trondhjem, or
Drontheim.

Now on a certain winter's night the king had been feasting in his hall.
His guests had been drinking deeply, and the gray haired scalds had
been singing and reciting until a late hour. But at last Olaf was left
alone beside the fire, with the doors locked. He sat in his oaken chair
gazing into the glowing wood upon the hearth. Suddenly the door swung
wide open, and a blast of cold night air came in. He looked round and
saw upon the threshold a very old man whose cloak was sprinkled with
snow. Olaf saw that the stranger had but one eye.

"Oh, pale and shivering graybeard!" cried the king. "Come, warm your
vitals with this cup of spiced ale. Be not afraid. Sit here at my side
in the light of the flames."

The aged guest obeyed, quaffed the foaming draught, and then stretched
out his withered hands before the fire. Then he began to speak to the
king and to tell him of things that had happened many hundreds of years
before and of many lands whose very names were strange to the king. And
it seemed that he would never bring his tale to an end.

At last Bishop Sigurd entered and reminded Olaf that the night was far
spent and that it was time for him to go to sleep. But still the guest
spoke on, and the king listened enthralled until sleep came over him
and his head fell back. Yet even in his sleep he fancied that he still
heard the old graybeard's voice telling him of the gods of Asgard and
the glories of Valhalla.

When King Olaf awoke he was alone before the black hearth, and it was
full morning. He asked after the guest and bade his men call him; but
nowhere could the guest be found, nor had any man seen him. They found
the doors securely locked, the watchdog was asleep in the yard, and the
snow bore no trace of footprints. All declared that no such stranger
had ever entered the hall, and that the king had but been dreaming.

Then Olaf called the bishop to his side and, crossing himself, said:

"It is no dream that I have had. I know that my guest will never
return, and yet I know that he was here. The triumph of our faith is
sure. Odin the Great is dead, for the one eyed stranger was his ghost!"

So certain was King Olaf that the power of Odin was broken that after
this time he was less eager to follow up his mission, for he believed
that he had already established the Christian faith. He said to his
bishop that all the old gods were no more and that Christ alone was
supreme.

"Not yet is it so," answered the bishop, "for Thor still reigns among
the sea rovers of the far north. I have heard that there lives a great
viking in Salten fiord who is skilled in sorcery. A wizard he is, for
he has power over the wind and the sea, and he and his great horde of
heathens still worship Odin and Thor and offer them blood sacrifice.
Rand is his name, and he is chief over all the Godoe Isles."

Roused from his apathy, Olaf declared that he would conquer this bold
viking and bring him to christening or himself be conquered. So he got
together his ships and sailed into the north.

At the mouth of Salten fiord he encountered foul weather, and was
forced to lie there storm stayed for many days. So long did the storm
continue that at length he questioned the bishop, asking if he knew any
remedy.

Bishop Sigurd answered that it was surely Rand the Wizard who, by his
sorcery, had caused the winds to blow, and he ascended to the ship's
forecastle and raised a large crucifix, lighting tapers around it and
sprinkling holy water about the decks. It is told that the storm abated
near to the ships while it still roared wildly some distance away from
them. The lashed waves stood like a wall on either side, leaving a
track of calm water, through which the vessels sailed.

When at last King Olaf came abreast of Rand's stronghold he saw the
viking's dragonship lying at anchor in the bay. It was the largest and
most splendid ship that he had ever seen. The king landed with his
priests and fighting men, and went straightway up to the wizard's
homestead and broke open the door. Rand was taken prisoner and bound
hand and foot, as were also a great many of his men.

King Olaf had the viking brought before him, and bade him take
christening.
