his countenance, relaxed his contorted upper lip, and, stroking down his
beard with his left hand, rested the forefinger of the right upon his
eyebrow, in sign of profound attention. After Everard had ceased
speaking, the old man signed as at the end of a strain of sweet music.
He then spoke in a gentler manner than formerly.

"Cousin Markham," he said, "these verses flow sweetly, and sound in my
ears like the well-touched warbling of a lute. But thou knowest I am
somewhat slow of apprehending the full meaning of that which I hear for
the first time. Repeat me these verses again, slowly and deliberately;
for I always love to hear poetry twice, the first time for sound, and
the latter time for sense."

Thus encouraged, Everard recited again the lines with more hardihood and
better effect; the knight distinctly understanding, and from his looks
and motions, highly applauding them.

"Yes!" he broke out, when Everard was again silent--"Yes, I do call that
poetry--though it were even written by a Presbyterian, or an Anabaptist
either. Ay, there were good and righteous people to be found even
amongst the offending towns which were destroyed by fire. And certainly
I have heard, though with little credence (begging your pardon, cousin.
Everard,) that there are men among you who have seen the error of their
ways in rebelling against the best and kindest of masters, and bringing
it to that pass that he was murdered by a gang yet fiercer than
themselves. Ay, doubtless, the gentleness of spirit, and the purity of
mind, which dictated those beautiful lines, has long ago taught a man so
amiable to say, I have sinned, I have sinned. Yes, I doubt not so sweet
a harp has been broken, even in remorse, for the crimes he was witness
to; and now he sits drooping for the shame and sorrow of England,--all
his noble rhymes, as Will says,

  'Like sweet bells jangled out of tune and harsh.'

Dost thou not think so, Master Kerneguy?"

"Not I, Sir Henry," answered the page, somewhat maliciously.

"What, dost not believe the author of these lines must needs be of the
better file, and leaning to our persuasion?"

"I think, Sir Henry, that the poetry qualifies the author to write a
play on the subject of Dame Potiphar and her recusant lover; and as for
his calling--that last metaphor of the cloud in a black coat or cloak,
with silver lining, would have dubbed him a tailor with me, only that I
happen to know that he is a schoolmaster by profession, and by political
opinions qualified to be Poet Laureate to Cromwell; for what Colonel
Everard has repeated with such unction, is the production of no less
celebrated a person than John Milton."

"John Milton!" exclaimed Sir Henry in astonishment--"What! John Milton,
the blasphemous and bloody-minded author of the _Defensio Populi
Anglicani_!--the advocate of the infernal High Court of Fiends; the
creature and parasite of that grand impostor, that loathsome hypocrite,
that detestable monster, that prodigy of the universe, that disgrace of
mankind, that landscape of iniquity, that sink of sin, and that
compendium of baseness, Oliver Cromwell!"

"Even the same John Milton," answered Charles; "schoolmaster to little
boys, and tailor to the clouds, which he furnishes with suits of black,
lined with silver, at no other expense than that of common sense."

"Markham Everard," said the old knight, "I will never forgive thee--
never, never. Thou hast made me speak words of praise respecting one
whose offal should fatten the region-kites. Speak not to me, sir, but
begone! Am I, your kinsman and benefactor, a fit person to be juggled
out of my commendation and eulogy, and brought to bedaub such a whitened
sepulchre as the sophist Milton?"

"I profess," said Everard, "this is hard measure, Sir Henry. You pressed
me--you defied me, to produce poetry as good as Shakspeare's. I only
thought of the verses, not of the politics of Milton."

"Oh yes, sir," replied Sir Henry; "we well know your power of making
distinctions; you could make war against the King's prerogative, without
having the least design against his person. Oh Heaven forbid! But Heaven
will hear and judge you. Set down the beverage, Phoebe"--(this was added
by way of parenthesis to Phoebe, who entered with refreshment)--"Colonel
Everard is not thirsty--You have wiped your mouths, and said you have
done no evil. But though you have deceived man, yet God you cannot
deceive. And you shall wipe no lips in Woodstock, either after meat or
drink, I promise you."

Charged thus at once with the faults imputed to his whole religious sect
and political party, Everard felt too late of what imprudence he had
been guilty in giving the opening, by disputing his uncle's taste in
dramatic poetry. He endeavoured to explain--to apologise.

"I mistook your purpose, honoured sir, and thought you really desired to
know something of our literature; and in repeating what you deemed not
unworthy your hearing, I profess I thought I was doing you pleasure,
instead of stirring your indignation."

"O ay!" returned the knight, with unmitigated rigour of resentment--
"profess--profess--Ay, that is the new phrase of asseveration, instead
of the profane adjuration of courtiers and cavaliers--Oh, sir, _profess_
less and _practise_ more--and so good day to you. Master Kerneguy, you
will find beverage in my apartment."

While Phoebe stood gaping in admiration at the sudden quarrel which had
arisen, Colonel Everard's vexation and resentment was not a little
increased by the nonchalance of the young Scotsman, who, with his hands
thrust into his pockets, (with a courtly affectation of the time,) had
thrown himself into one of the antique chairs, and, though habitually
too polite to laugh aloud, and possessing that art of internal laughter
by which men of the world learn to indulge their mirth without incurring
quarrels, or giving direct offence, was at no particular pains to
conceal that he was exceedingly amused by the result of the Colonel's
visit to Woodstock. Colonel Everard's patience, however, had reached
bounds which it was very likely to surpass; for, though differing widely
in politics, there was a resemblance betwixt the temper of the uncle and
nephew.

"Damnation" exclaimed the Colonel, in a tone which became a puritan as
little as did the exclamation itself.

"Amen!" said Louis Kerneguy, but in a tone so soft and gentle, that the
ejaculation seemed rather to escape him than to be designedly uttered.
"Sir!" said Everard, striding towards him in that sort of humour, when a
man, full of resentment, would not unwillingly find an object on which
to discharge it.

"_Plait-il?_" said the page, in the most equable tone, looking up in his
face with the most unconscious innocence.

"I wish to know, sir," retorted Everard, "the meaning of that which you
said just now?"

"Only a pouring out of the spirit, worthy sir," returned Kerneguy--"a
small skiff dispatched to Heaven on my own account, to keep company with
your holy petition just now expressed."

"Sir, I have known a merry gentleman's bones broke for such a smile as
you wear just now," replied Everard.

"There, look you now" answered the malicious page, who could not weigh
even the thoughts of his safety against the enjoyment of his jest--"If
you had stuck to your professions, worthy sir, you must have choked by
this time; but your round execration bolted like a cork from a bottle of
cider, and now allows your wrath to come foaming out after it, in the
honest unbaptized language of common ruffians."

"For Heaven's sake, Master Girnegy," said Phoebe, "forbear giving the
Colonel these bitter words! And do you, good Colonel Markham, scorn to
take offence at his hands--he is but a boy."

"If the Colonel or you choose, Mistress Phoebe, you shall find me a
man--I think the gentleman can say something to the purpose already.--
Probably he may recommend to you the part of the Lady in Comus; and I
only hope his own admiration of John Milton will not induce him to
undertake the part of Samson Agonistes, and blow up this old house with
execration, or pull it down in wrath about our ears."

"Young man," said the Colonel, still in towering passion, "if you
respect my principles for nothing else, be grateful to the protection
which, but for them, you would not easily attain."

"Nay, then," said the attendant, "I must fetch those who have more
influence with you than I have," and away tripped Phoebe; while Kerneguy
answered Everard in the same provoking tone of calm indifference,--
"Before you menace me with a thing so formidable as your resentment, you
ought to be certain whether I may not be compelled by circumstances to
deny you the opportunity you seem to point at."

At this moment Alice, summoned no doubt by her attendant, entered the
hall hastily.

"Master Kerneguy," she said, "my father requests to see you in Victor
Lee's apartment."

Kerneguy arose and bowed, but seemed determined to remain till Everard's
departure, so as to prevent any explanation betwixt the cousins.
"Markham," said Alice, hurriedly--"Cousin Everard--I have but a moment
to remain here--for God's sake, do you instantly begone!--be cautious
and patient--but do not tarry here--my father is fearfully incensed."

"I have had my uncle's word for that, madam," replied Everard, "as well
as his injunction to depart, which I will obey without delay. I was not
aware that you would have seconded so harsh an order quite so willingly;
but I go, madam, sensible I leave those behind whose company is more
agreeable."

"Unjust--ungenerous--ungrateful!" said Alice; but fearful her words
might reach ears for which they were not designed, she spoke them in a
voice so feeble, that her cousin, for whom they were intended, lost the
consolation they were calculated to convey.

He bowed coldly to Alice, as taking leave, and said, with an air of that
constrained courtesy which sometimes covers, among men of condition, the
most deadly hatred, "I believe, Master Kerneguy, that I must make it
convenient at present to suppress my own peculiar opinions on the matter
which we have hinted at in our conversation, in which case I will send a
gentleman, who, I hope, may be able to conquer yours."

The supposed Scotsman made him a stately, and at the same time a
condescending bow, said he should expect the honour of his commands,
offered his hand to Mistress Alice, to conduct her back to her father's
apartment, and took a triumphant leave of his rival.

Everard, on the other hand, stung beyond his patience, and, from the
grace and composed assurance of the youth's carriage, still conceiving
him to be either Wilmot, or some of his compeers in rank and profligacy,
returned to the town of Woodstock, determined not to be outbearded, even
though he should seek redress by means which his principles forbade him
to consider as justifiable.

       *       *        *       *        *

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SIXTH.


       Boundless intemperance
  In nature is a tyranny--it hath been
  The untimely emptying of many a throne,
  And fall of many kings.
   MACBETH.

While Colonel Everard retreated in high indignation from the little
refection, which Sir Henry Lee had in his good-humour offered, and
withdrawn under the circumstances of provocation which we have detailed,
the good old knight, scarce recovered from his fit of passion, partook
of it with his daughter and guest, and shortly after, recollecting some
silvan task, (for, though to little efficient purpose, he still
regularly attended to his duties as Ranger,) he called Bevis, and went
out, leaving the two young people together.

"Now," said the amorous Prince to himself, "that Alice is left without
her lion, it remains to see whether she is herself of a tigress breed.--
So, Sir Bevis has left his charge," he said loud; "I thought the knights
of old, those stern guardians of which he is so fit a representative,
were more rigorous in maintaining a vigilant guard."

"Bevis," said Alice, "knows that his attendance on me is totally
needless; and, moreover, he has other duties to perform, which every
true knight prefers to dangling the whole morning by a lady's sleeve."

"You speak treason against all true affection," said the gallant; "a
lady's lightest wish should to a true knight be more binding than aught
excepting the summons of his sovereign. I wish, Mistress Alice, you
would but intimate your slightest desire to me, and you should see how I
have practised obedience."

"You never brought me word what o'clock it was this morning," replied
the young lady, "and there I sate questioning of the wings of Time, when
I should have remembered that gentlemen's gallantry can be quite as
fugitive as Time himself. How do you know what your disobedience may
have cost me and others? Pudding and pasty may have been burned to a
cinder, for, sir, I practise the old domestic rule of visiting the
kitchen; or I may have missed prayers, or I may have been too late for
an appointment, simply by the negligence of Master Louis Kerneguy
failing to let me know the hour of the day."

"O," replied Kerneguy, "I am one of those lovers who cannot endure
absence--I must be eternally at the feet of my fair enemy--such, I
think, is the title with which romances teach us to grace the fair and
cruel to whom we devote our hearts and lives.--Speak for me, good
lute," he added, taking up the instrument, "and show whether I know not
my duty."

He sung, but with more taste than execution, the air of a French
rondelai, to which some of the wits or sonnetteers, in his gay and
roving train, had adapted English verses.

  An hour with thee!--When earliest day
  Dapples with gold the eastern grey,
  Oh, what, can frame my mind to bear
  The toil and turmoil, cark and care.
  New griefs, which coming hours unfold,
  And sad remembrance of the old?--
  One hour with thee!

  One hour with thee!--When burning June
  Waves his red flag at pitch of noon;
  What shall repay the faithful swain,
  His labour on the sultry plain,
  And more than cave or sheltering bough,
  Cool feverish blood, and throbbing brow?--
  One hour with thee!

  One hour with thee!--When sun is set,
  O, what can teach me to forget
  The thankless labours of the day;
  The hopes, the wishes, flung away:
  The increasing wants, and lessening gains,
  The master's pride, who scorns my pains?--
  One hour with thee!

"Truly, there is another verse," said the songster; "but I sing it not
to you, Mistress Alice, because some of the prudes of the court liked it
not." "I thank you, Master Louis," answered the young lady, "both for
your discretion in singing what has given me pleasure, and in forbearing
what might offend me. Though a country girl, I pretend to be so far of
the court mode, as to receive nothing which does not pass current among
the better class there."

"I would," answered Louis, "that you were so well confirmed in their
creed, as to let all pass with you, to which court ladies would give
currency."

"And what would be the consequence?" said Alice, with perfect composure.

"In that case," said Louis, embarrassed like a general who finds that
his preparations for attack do not seem to strike either fear or
confusion into the enemy--"in that case you would forgive me, fair
Alice, if I spoke to you in a warmer language than that of mere
gallantry--if I told you how much my heart was interested in what you
consider as idle jesting--if I seriously owned it was in your power to
make me the happiest or the most miserable of human beings."

"Master Kerneguy," said Alice, with the same unshaken nonchalance, "let
us understand each other. I am little acquainted with high-bred manners,
and I am unwilling, I tell you plainly, to be accounted a silly country
girl, who, either from ignorance or conceit, is startled at every word
of gallantry addressed to her by a young man, who, for the present, has
nothing better to do than coin and circulate such false compliments. But
I must not let this fear of seeming rustic and awkwardly timorous carry
me too far; and being ignorant of the exact limits, I will take care to
stop within them."

"I trust, madam," said Kerneguy, "that however severely you may be
disposed to judge of me, your justice will not punish me too severely
for an offence, of which your charms are alone the occasion?"

"Hear me out, sir, if you please," resumed Alice. "I have listened to
you when you spoke _en berger_--nay, my complaisance has been so great,
as to answer you _en bergere_--for I do not think any thing except
ridicule can come of dialogues between Lindor and Jeanneton; and the
principal fault of the style is its extreme and tiresome silliness and
affectation. But when you begin to kneel, offer to take my hand, and
speak with a more serious tone, I must remind you of our real
characters. I am the daughter of Sir Henry Lee, sir; you are, or profess
to be, Master Louis Kerneguy, my brother's page, and a fugitive for
shelter under my father's roof, who incurs danger by the harbour he
affords you, and whose household, therefore, ought not to be disturbed
by your unpleasing importunities."

"I would to Heaven, fair Alice," said the King, "that your objections to
the suit which I am urging, not in jest, but most seriously, as that on
which my happiness depends, rested only on the low and precarious
station of Louis Kerneguy!--Alice, thou hast the soul of thy family, and
must needs love honour. I am no more the needy Scottish page, whom I
have, for my own purposes, personated, than I am the awkward lout, whose
manners I adopted on the first night of our acquaintance. This hand,
poor as I seem, can confer a coronet."

"Keep it," said Alice, "for some more ambitious damsel, my lord,--for
such I conclude is your title, if this romance be true,--I would not
accept your hand, could you confer a duchy."

"In one sense, lovely Alice, you have neither overrated my power nor my
affection. It is your King--it is Charles Stewart who speaks to you!--he
can confer duchies, and if beauty can merit them, it is that of Alice
Lee. Nay, nay--rise--do not kneel--it is for your sovereign to kneel to
thee, Alice, to whom he is a thousand times more devoted than the
wanderer Louis dared venture to profess himself. My Alice has, I know,
been trained up in those principles of love and obedience to her
sovereign, that she cannot, in conscience or in mercy, inflict on him
such a wound as would be implied in the rejection of his suit."

In spite of all Charles's attempts to prevent her, Alice had persevered
in kneeling on one knee, until she had touched with her lip the hand
with which he attempted to raise her. But this salutation ended, she
stood upright, with her arms folded on her bosom--her looks humble, but
composed, keen, and watchful, and so possessed of herself, so little
flattered by the communication which the King had supposed would have
been overpowering, that he scarce knew in what terms next to urge his
solicitation.

"Thou art silent--thou art silent," he said, "my pretty Alice. Has the
King no more influence with thee than the poor Scottish page?"

"In one sense, every influence," said Alice; "for he commands my best
thoughts, my best wishes, my earnest prayers, my devoted loyalty, which,
as the men of the House of Lee have been ever ready to testify with the
sword, so are the women bound to seal, if necessary, with their blood.
But beyond the duties of a true and devoted subject, the King is even
less to Alice Lee than poor Louis Kerneguy. The Page could have tendered
an honourable union--the Monarch can but offer a contaminated coronet."

"You mistake, Alice--you mistake," said the King, eagerly. "Sit down and
let me speak to you--sit down--What is't you fear?"

"I fear nothing, my liege," answered Alice. "What _can_ I fear from the
King of Britain--I, the daughter of his loyal subject, and under my
father's roof? But I remember the distance betwixt us; and though I
might trifle and jest with mine equal, to my King I must only appear in
the dutiful posture of a subject, unless where his safety may seem to
require that I do not acknowledge his dignity."

Charles, though young, being no novice in such scenes, was surprised to
encounter resistance of a kind which had not been opposed to him in
similar pursuits, even in cases where he had been unsuccessful. There
was neither anger, nor injured pride, nor disorder, nor disdain, real or
affected, in the manners and conduct of Alice. She stood, as it seemed,
calmly prepared to argue on the subject, which is generally decided by
passion--showed no inclination to escape from the apartment, but
appeared determined to hear with patience the suit of the lover--while
her countenance and manner intimated that she had this complaisance only
in deference to the commands of the King.

"She is ambitious," thought Charles; "it is by dazzling her love of
glory, not by mere passionate entreaties, that I must hope to be
successful.--I pray you be seated, my fair Alice," he said; "the lover
entreats--the King commands you."

"The King," said Alice, "may permit the relaxation of the ceremonies due
to royalty, but he cannot abrogate the subject's duty, even by express
command. I stand here while it is your Majesty's pleasure to address--a
patient listener, as in duty bound."

"Know then, simple girl," said the King, "that in accepting my proffered
affection and protection, you break through no law either of virtue or
morality. Those who are born to royalty are deprived of many of the
comforts of private life--chiefly that which is, perhaps, the dearest
and most precious, the power of choosing their own mates for life. Their
formal weddings are guided upon principles of political expedience only,
and those to whom they are wedded are frequently, in temper, person, and
disposition, the most unlikely to make them happy. Society has
commiseration, therefore, towards us, and binds our unwilling and often
unhappy wedlocks with chains of a lighter and more easy character than
those which fetter other men, whose marriage ties, as more voluntarily
assumed, ought, in proportion, to be more strictly binding. And
therefore, ever since the time that old Henry built these walls, priests
and prelates, as well as nobles and statesmen, have been accustomed to
see a fair Rosamond rule the heart of an affectionate monarch, and
console him for the few hours of constraint and state which he must
bestow upon some angry and jealous Eleanor. To such a connection the
world attaches no blame; they rush to the festival to admire the beauty
of the lovely Esther, while the imperious Vashti is left to queen it in
solitude; they throng the palace to ask her protection, whose influence
is more in the state an hundred times than that of the proud consort;
her offspring rank with the nobles of the land, and vindicate by their
courage, like the celebrated Longsword, Earl of Salisbury, their descent
from royalty and from love. From such connections our richest ranks of
nobles are recruited; and the mother lives, in the greatness of her
posterity honoured and blest, as she died lamented and wept in the arms
of love and friendship."

"Did Rosamond so die, my lord?" said Alice. "Our records say she was
poisoned by the injured Queen--poisoned, without time allowed to call to
God for the pardon of her many faults. Did her memory so live? I have
heard that, when the Bishop purified the church at Godstowe, her
monument was broken open by his orders, and her bones thrown out into
unconsecrated ground."

"Those were rude old days, sweet Alice," answered Charles; "queens are
not now so jealous, nor bishops so rigorous. And know, besides, that in
the lands to which I would lead the loveliest of her sex, other laws
obtain, which remove from such ties even the slightest show of scandal.
There is a mode of matrimony, which, fulfilling all the rites of the
Church, leaves no stain on the conscience; yet investing the bride with
none of the privileges peculiar to her husband's condition, infringes
not upon the duties which the King owes to his subjects. So that Alice
Lee may, in all respects, become the real and lawful wife of Charles
Stewart, except that their private union gives her no title to be Queen
of England."

"My ambition," said Alice, "will be sufficiently gratified to see
Charles king, without aiming to share either his dignity in public, or
his wealth and regal luxury in private."

"I understand thee, Alice," said the King, hurt but not displeased. "You
ridicule me, being a fugitive, for speaking like a king. It is a habit,
I admit, which I have learned, and of which even misfortune cannot cure
me. But my case is not so desperate as you may suppose. My friends are
still many in these kingdoms; my allies abroad are bound, by regard to
their own interest, to espouse my cause. I have hopes given me from
Spain, from France, and from other nations; and I have confidence that
my father's blood has not been poured forth in vain, nor is doomed to
dry up without due vengeance. My trust is in Him from whom princes
derive their title, and, think what thou wilt of my present condition, I
have perfect confidence that I shall one day sit on the throne of
England."

"May God grant it!" said Alice; "and that he _may_ grant it, noble
Prince, deign to consider--whether you now pursue a conduct likely to
conciliate his favour. Think of the course you recommend to a motherless
maiden, who has no better defence against your sophistry, than what a
sense of morality, together with the natural feeling of female dignity
inspires. Whether the death of her father, which would be the
consequence of her imprudence;--whether the despair of her brother,
whose life has been so often in peril to save that of your Majesty;--
whether the dishonour of the roof which has sheltered you, will read
well in your annals, or are events likely to propitiate God, whose
controversy with your House has been but too visible, or recover the
affections of the people of England, in whose eyes such actions are an
abomination, I leave to your own royal mind to consider."

Charles paused, struck with a turn to the conversation which placed his
own interests more in collision with the gratification of his present
passion than he had supposed.

"If your Majesty," said Alice, curtsying deeply, "has no farther
commands for my attendance, may I be permitted to withdraw?"

"Stay yet a little, strange and impracticable girl," said the King; "and
answer me but one question:--Is it the lowness of my present fortunes
that makes my suit contemptible?"

"I have nothing to conceal, my liege," she said, "and my answer shall be
as plain and direct as the question you have asked. If I could have been
moved to an act of ignominious, insane, and ungrateful folly, it could
only arise from my being blinded by that passion, which I believe is
pleaded as an excuse for folly and for crime much more often than it has
a real existence. I must, in short, have been in love, as it is
called--and that might have been--with my equal, but surely never with
my sovereign, whether such only in title, or in possession of his
kingdom."

"Yet loyalty was ever the pride, almost the ruling passion, of your
family, Alice," said the King.

"And could I reconcile that loyalty," said Alice, "with indulging my
sovereign, by permitting him to prosecute a suit dishonourable to
himself as to me? Ought I, as a faithful subject, to join him in a
folly, which might throw yet another stumbling-block in the path to his
restoration, and could only serve to diminish his security, even if he
were seated upon his throne?"

"At this rate," said Charles, discontentedly, "I had better have
retained my character of the page, than assumed that of a sovereign,
which it seems is still more irreconcilable with my wishes."

"My candour shall go still farther," said Alice. "I could have felt as
little for Louis Kerneguy as for the heir of Britain; for such love as I
have to bestow, (and it is not such as I read of in romance, or hear
poured forth in song,) has been already conferred on another object.
This gives your Majesty pain--I am sorry for it--but the wholesomest
medicines are often bitter."

"Yes," answered the King, with some asperity, "and physicians are
reasonable enough to expect their patients to swallow them, as if they
were honeycomb. It is true, then, that whispered tale of the cousin
Colonel, and the daughter of the loyal Lee has set her heart upon a
rebellious fanatic?"

"My love was given ere I knew what these words fanatic and rebel meant.
I recalled it not, for I am satisfied, that amidst the great
distractions which divide the kingdom, the person to whom you allude has
chosen his part, erroneously, perhaps, but conscientiously--he,
therefore, has still the highest place in my affection and esteem. More
he cannot have, and will not ask, until some happy turn shall reconcile
these public differences, and my father be once more reconciled to him.
Devoutly do I pray that such an event may occur by your Majesty's speedy
and unanimous restoration!"

"You have found out a reason," said the King, pettishly, "to make me
detest the thought of such a change--nor have you, Alice, any sincere
interest to pray for it. On the contrary, do you not see that your
lover, walking side by side with Cromwell, may, or rather must, share
his power? nay, if Lambert does not anticipate him, he may trip up
Oliver's heels, and reign in his stead. And think you not he will find
means to overcome the pride of the loyal Lees, and achieve an union, for
which things are better prepared than that which Cromwell is said to
meditate betwixt one of his brats and the no less loyal heir of
Fauconberg?"

"Your Majesty," said Alice, "has found a way at length to avenge
yourself--if what I have said deserves vengeance."

"I could point out a yet shorter road to your union," said Charles,
without minding her distress, or perhaps enjoying the pleasure of
retaliation. "Suppose that you sent your Colonel word that there was one
Charles Stewart here, who had come to disturb the Saints in their
peaceful government, which they had acquired by prayer and preaching,
pike and gun,--and suppose he had the art to bring down a half-score of
troopers, quite enough, as times go, to decide the fate of this heir of
royalty--think you not the possession of such a prize as this might
obtain from the Rumpers, or from Cromwell, such a reward as might
overcome your father's objections to a roundhead's alliance, and place
the fair Alice and her cousin Colonel in full possession of their
wishes?"

"My liege," said Alice, her cheeks glowing, and her eyes sparkling--for
she too had her share of the hereditary temperament of her family,--
"this passes my patience. I have heard, without expressing anger, the
most ignominious persuasions addressed to myself, and I have vindicated
myself for refusing to be the paramour of a fugitive Prince, as if I had
been excusing myself from accepting a share of an actual crown. But do
you think I can hear all who are dear to me slandered without emotion or
reply? I will not, sir; and were you seated with all the terrors of your
father's Star-chamber around you, you should hear me defend the absent
and the innocent. Of my father I will say nothing, but that if he is now
without wealth--without state, almost without a sheltering home and
needful food--it is because he spent all in the service of the King. He
needed not to commit any act of treachery or villany to obtain wealth--
he had an ample competence in his own possessions. For Markham Everard--
he knows no such thing as selfishness--he would not, for broad England,
had she the treasures of Peru in her bosom, and a paradise on her
surface, do a deed that would disgrace his own name, or injure the
feelings of another--Kings, my liege, may take a lesson from him. My
liege, for the present I take my leave."

"Alice, Alice--stay!" exclaimed the King. "She is gone.--This must be
virtue--real, disinterested, overawing virtue--or there is no such thing
on earth. Yet Wilmot and Villiers will not believe a word of it, but add
the tale to the other wonders of Woodstock. 'Tis a rare wench! and I
profess, to use the Colonel's obtestation, that I know not whether to
forgive and be friends with her, or study a dire revenge. If it were not
for that accursed cousin--that puritan Colonel--I could forgive every
thing else to so noble a wench. But a roundheaded rebel preferred to
me--the preference avowed to my face, and justified with the assertion,
that a king might take a lesson from him--it is gall and wormwood. If
the old man had not come up this morning as he did, the King should have
taken or given a lesson, and a severe one. It was a mad rencontre to
venture upon with my rank and responsibility--and yet this wench has
made me so angry with her, and so envious of him, that if an opportunity
offered, I should scarce be able to forbear him.--Ha! whom have we
here?"

The interjection at the conclusion of this royal soliloquy, was
occasioned by the unexpected entrance of another personage of the drama.

       *       *        *       *        *

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SEVENTH.


  _Benedict_. Shall I speak a word in your ear?
  _Claudio_. God bless me from a challenge.
    MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.

As Charles was about to leave the apartment, he was prevented by the
appearance of Wildrake, who entered with an unusual degree of swagger in
his gait, and of fantastic importance on his brow. "I crave your pardon,
fair sir," he said; "but, as they say in my country, when doors are open
dogs enter. I have knocked and called in the hall to no purpose; so,
knowing the way to this parlour, sir,--for I am a light partisan, and
the road I once travel I never forget,--I ventured to present myself
unannounced."

"Sir Henry Lee is abroad, sir, I believe, in the Chase," said Charles,
coldly, for the appearance of this somewhat vulgar debauchee was not
agreeable to him at the moment, "and Master Albert Lee has left the
Lodge for two or three days."

"I am aware of it, sir," said Wildrake; "but I have no business at
present with either."

"And with whom is your business?" said Charles; "that is, if I may be
permitted to ask--since I think it cannot in possibility be with me."

"Pardon me in turn, sir," answered the cavalier; "in no possibility can
it be imparted to any other but yourself, if you be, as I think you are,
though in something better habit, Master Louis Girnigo, the Scottish
gentleman who waits upon Master Albert Lee."

"I am all you are like to find for him," answered Charles.

"In truth," said the cavalier, "I do perceive a difference, but rest,
and better clothing, will do much; and I am glad of it, since I would be
sorry to have brought a message, such as I am charged with, to a
tatterdemalion."

"Let us get to the business, sir, if you please," said the King--"you
have a message for me, you say?"

"True, sir," replied Wildrake; "I am the friend of Colonel Markham
Everard, sir, a tall man, and a worthy person in the field, although I
could wish him a better cause--A message I have to you, it is certain,
in a slight note, which I take the liberty of presenting with the usual
formalities." So saying, he drew his sword, put the billet he mentioned
upon the point, and making a profound bow, presented it to Charles.

The disguised Monarch accepted of it, with a grave return of the salute,
and said, as he was about to open the letter, "I am not, I presume, to
expect friendly contents in an epistle presented in so hostile a
manner?"

"A-hem, sir," replied the ambassador, clearing his voice, while he
arranged a suitable answer, in which the mild strain of diplomacy might
be properly maintained; "not utterly hostile, I suppose, sir, is the
invitation, though it be such as must be construed in the commencement
rather bellicose and pugnacious. I trust, sir, we shall find that a few
thrusts will make a handsome conclusion of the business; and so, as my
old master used to say, _Pax mascitur ex bello_. For my own poor share,
I am truly glad to have been graced by my friend, Markham Everard, in
this matter--the rather as I feared the puritan principles with which he
is imbued, (I will confess the truth to you, worthy sir,) might have
rendered him unwilling, from certain scruples, to have taken the
gentlemanlike and honourable mode of righting himself in such a case as
the present. And as I render a friend's duty to my friend, so I humbly
hope, Master Louis Girnigo, that I do no injustice to you, in preparing
the way for the proposed meeting, where, give me leave to say, I trust,
that if no fatal accident occur, we shall be all better friends when the
skirmish is over than we were before it began."

"I should suppose so, sir, in any case," said Charles, looking at the
letter; "worse than mortal enemies we can scarce be, and it is that
footing upon which this billet places us."

"You say true, sir," said Wildrake; "it is, sir, a cartel, introducing
to a single combat, for the pacific object of restoring a perfect good
understanding betwixt the survivors--in case that fortunately that word
can be used in the plural after the event of the meeting."

"In short, we only fight, I suppose," replied the King, "that we may
come to a perfectly good and amicable understanding?"
