
Helen dried her tears, and forced, a smile to greet her wounded child,
who was now being lifted from the bottom of the boat, and gently
carried on shore by two of the men. His pallid countenance, and blood-
stained garments, struck a chill to her heart; but she concealed her
grief, and silenced the sobs and exclamations of the warm-hearted
little Edith and her terrified brother; and then, having affectionately
welcomed the almost fainting boy, she hurried away with the children to
prepare for his reception in the comfortless log-hut.

Assisted by Janet--the faithful servant who had nursed her children,
and followed her from England to Holland, and from Holland to America--
she soon arranged a bed for their patient; and Henrich smiled
cheerfully, though languidly, when he found himself again beneath the
humble roof that was now his home, and surrounded by all whom he loved.
His wound proved to be a severe one--more so than his father had
imagined; and the loss of blood had been so considerable that he was
reduced to extreme weakness. Now it was that Helen felt the absence of
all the comforts, and even luxuries, to which she had been accustomed
from  childhood, but of whose loss she had hitherto never complained.
Henrich's illness proved a very long and painful one; and
notwithstanding the kindness of all her friends, and the attentions
paid by the rest of the settlers to the young patient--who was a
general favorite--it was difficult to procure for him either the food
or the medical attendance that his case required: and frequently his
parents feared that a foreign grave would soon be all that would remain
to them of their dearly-loved child.

To add to their anxiety and distress, an epidemic disease, of which
some signs had appeared in the settlement before the exploring party
set out, now increased to a fearful degree. The stores which had been
brought out in the crowded Mayflower were nearly expended, except such
a stock as Captain Jones considered necessary for the voyage back to
England: and a great scarcity of bread began to be felt. The animals,
which they procured by the gun and the chase, were not sufficient to
supply the wants of the settlers, and famine--actual famine--stared
them in the face, and increased the violence of the pestilence. Many
sank beneath the accumulated evils of hardship, privation, and
sickness, and the number of the little settlement was sadly reduced
during the inclement months of January and February.

The constant care which was bestowed on Henrich at length proved
effectual in healing his wound, and partially restoring his strength;
and his parents had, eventually, the happiness of seeing that the a
anger was past, and their son was restored to them. They also had cause
to acknowledge, with gratitude, that the affliction had been blessed to
him as well as to themselves. The elders of the community, who acted as
the pastors of the infant colony, were unwearied in their attentions to
their weaker and more distressed brethren.  They were, indeed, the
physicians both of their bodies and souls; and Henrich was not
neglected by them. The excellent and venerable William Brewster was the
intimate and valued friend of Rodolph Maitland and his wife. He had
been both their friend and adviser for many years of comparative peace
and prosperity; and now that he shared their troubles and adversities,
his ready sympathy, and active kindness, rendered him dearer to them
than ever.

Brewster was a man whose character and position in life naturally gave
him great influence with the Pilgrim Fathers. He had received a liberal
education, and possessed a far greater knowledge of the world than the
generality of his companions in exile, having been brought up as a
diplomatist under Davison, when he was Secretary of State to Queen
Elisabeth. He was devoted to the cause of religious liberty; and it was
he who had assisted his friend, John Robinson, in withdrawing his
congregation from the persecution that threatened them in England, to a
peaceful asylum in Holland.  At the time of the emigration to America,
he was already in the decline of life; but his energies were in no
degree weakened, and his zeal for the glory of God, and the good of his
fellow Christians, was unabated.

He desired to spend all his remaining years in promoting the welfare of
the colony, and in proclaiming the Gospel to the heathen; and while he
was ever mindful of the wants, both spiritual and temporal, of the
flock ever whom he was appointed to preside, until their pastor
Robinson could join them, he never forgot the grand object of his
voluntary exile, or ceased to pray that the Lord would be pleased to
open 'a great door and effectual,' before him, and enable him to bring
many of the savage and ignorant natives into the fold of Christ.  In
all these plans he was warmly seconded by Edward Winslow, but hitherto
no such opening had appeared and the sickness and distress which
prevailed in the settlement gave full occupation to them and to their
brother elders. During all the period of Henrich's tedious illness, not
a day passed in which Brewster did not visit the suffering boy  to
cheer him, to soothe him, and, above all, to prepare him for that
better world to which he then believed he was surely hastening. To
these visits Henrich looked forward with delight; and often, when
domestic business called away his mother and Janet, the minister would
remain with him for hours, seated on a low stool by of his bed, and
read to him, or talk to him, in a strain so holy and yet so cheerful,
that Edith would leave her work and softly seat herself on Henrich's
couch, that she might catch his every word, while little Ludovico would
cease from his noisy sports, and creep up on the good man's knee, and
fix his large soft eyes on his sweet and noble countenance.

These hours were not unimproved by Henrich.  His character was formed,
and his principles were fixed, and his mind and spirit grew strong and
ripe beyond his years. Never were these hours of peaceful happiness
forgotten; and often amid the strange and stirring scenes which it was
his lot in after-life to witness and to share, did he bless the over-
ruling providence of God, which had laid him on a bed of pain and
weakness, that he might learn lessons of piety and of usefulness, which
otherwise he would never have acquired.

It was while they were thus happily engaged one afternoon, when Henrich
was slowly recovering his strength, that the elder and his young
audience were startled by wild and discordant sounds, mingled with
cries of fear, which proceeded from the outskirts of the straggling
village, and seemed to be approaching. Henrich raised himself on his
bed, and a look of terror overspread his countenance, as he exclaimed:
'It is the war cry of the savages! O! I know it well!  Go, Mr.
Brewster, fly! save my mother. I will follow you.'

And the brave boy tried to leap from the couch, and reach his father's
sword, which hung against the wooden walls of his chamber. But it was
in vain; the wounded leg refused to bear his weight, and he was forced
to relinquish his design.  Brewster, however, snatched the sword, and
drawing it, rushed from the hut, leaving Edith and Ludovico clinging
with trembling hands around their brother.

Henrich's fears proved but too true. No sooner had the elder traversed
the enclosure that surrounded Maitland's dwelling, than he beheld
Helen, and several of the other women who had gone out to assist their
husbands in the lighter parts of their agricultural labors, flying in
terror and confusion to their huts, while the men were engaged in close
combat with a party of native Indians.  The same war-cry which had rung
on their ears in the first encounter told Rodolph and his comrades that
these savages were of the same tribe, and probably the same individuals
from whom they had escaped with such difficulty on that occasion. They
were right; for it was indeed a band of the Nausetts, who, headed by
their Chief, had come to seek revenge for the loss they had sustained
at their former meeting.  The warrior whom Rodolph's musket had laid
low was Tekoa, the only son of the Nausett chief; and he was resolved
that the white man's blood should flow, to expiate the deed.  He knew
that the son of the stranger who had slain his young warrior had been
wounded, and, as he hoped, mortally; but that did not suffice for his
revenge, and he had either suddenly attacked the settlement, in the
hope of securing either Rudolph himself or some of his comrades, that
he might shed the white man's blood on the grave of his son, and tear
off their scalps as trophies of victory.

The settlers who now contended with the savages were but few in number,
for many of the men lay sick, and many had died; and they were mostly
unarmed, except with their agricultural implements.  Rudolph and a few
others had short swords, or dirks, attached to their girdles, and with
these they dealt blows that told with deadly effect on the half-naked
bodies of their foes; and the good broad-sword that Brewster quickly
placed in Maitland's hand, was not long in discomfiting several of the
Indians, who had singled him out, at the command of their Chief, as the
special object of their attack. Meanwhile, many of the women, and such
of the invalids as had power to rise, had again left the huts, and
borne to their husbands and friends the arms which had been left in
their dwellings; and in spite of the arrows and darts of the Indians,
by which several of them were wounded, they continued to load the guns
for the combatants while the conflict lasted. Happily this was not
long.  The _fire-breathing_ muskets struck terror into the ignorant
savages; and when two or three of their number had fallen, they turned
to fly; first, however, catching up the bodies of their comrades, which
they carried off to ensure their honorable burial, and to save them
from the indignities which they supposed the pale-faces would heap on
the dead.

In vain their Chief endeavored to rally them, and compel them   to
return to the conflict.  In vain he waved his battle-axe on high, and
shouted his war-whoop, Woach! woach! ha, ha, hach, woach!' A panic had
seized his followers, and they fled precipitately into the forest from
they had issued, so suddenly and so fiercely, to the attack. One
warrior stood alone by the Chief.  He was young and handsome, but his
countenance was dark and sinister and an expression of cunning was
strongly marked in his glittering deep-set eyes and overhanging brows.
He saw that it was hopeless to contend any longer with the powerful
strangers, and, by words and actions, he was evidently persuading the
Chief to retire. The settlers had ceased to fire the moment that their
enemies fled; and there was a deep silence, while every eye was fixed
on the striking figure of the enraged Chief, whose every feature was
distorted by excited passions.  He stood with his tomahawk uplifted,
and his tall and muscular figure in an attitude of command and
defiance; while, in a loud and distinct voice, he uttered a vow of
vengeance, the words of which were unintelligible to the settlers,
though the meaning could easily be guessed from his looks and gestures.
Then he hung his battle-axe to his gaudy belt, and pointing his hand at
Rodolph, he retired slowly and majestically like a lion discomfited but
not subdued, to seek his people and to upbraid them with their
cowardice.

This attack of the Indians effectually destroyed all feelings of
security in the minds of the settlers.  Henceforth they were obliged,
like the Jews of old, to go to their labor every man with his sword
girded to his side, and continually to hold themselves in readiness for
a sudden assault. The pestilence continued to rage, and the scarcity of
food increased to such a degree, that for several weeks no bread was to
be been in the settlement.  The governor, Mr. Carver, exerted himself
with zeal and benevolence to lesser the misery of his people; but with
so little effect, that when the spring at length set in, and the
captain of the Mayflower prepared to return to England, the little band
of settlers was found to be reduced to one half the original number;
and these were weakened by illness, and by want of proper nourishment.

But great as were their difficulties and sufferings, their faith and
resolution never failed; and when the Mayflower again set sail for
England, not one of the fifty emigrants who remained expressed a desire
to return.



CHAPTER  III.

'What men were they? Of dark-brown color,
With sunny redness; wild of eye; their tinged brows
So smooth, as never yet anxiety
Nor busy thought had made a furrow there.
.  .  .  .  .  .  .   Soon the courteous guise
Of men, not purporting nor fearing ill,
Won confidence: their wild distrustful looks
Assumed a milder meaning.   MADOC.

We have said that the band of the exiles was reduced to half the number
that had, six months before, left the shores of Europe, so full of hope
and of holy resolution; and still, in spite of all their outward trials
and difficulties, the hope and the resolution of the survivors were as
high and as firm as ever. They trusted in the God whom they had served
so faithfully; and they knew that, in his own good time, he would give
them deliverance.  But their days of darkness were not yet over.  The
inclemency of the winter had indeed passed away, and the face of nature
began to smile upon them; yet sickness still prevailed, and the many
graves that rose on the spot which they had chosen for a burial ground,
daily reminded them of the losses that almost every family had already
sustained.  The grief that had thus been brought upon them by death was
also greatly aggravated by the harassing attacks of the Indians, who
Were evidently still lurking in the neighboring woods; and who now
frequently came in small parties, and committed depredations of every
kind that lay in their power. Their real but concealed object was to
capture Rodolph, either alive or dead; for nothing short of his
destruction, or at least that of some member of his family, could
satisfy the bereaved Chief for the loss of his son.  He, therefore,
left a party of his bravest and most subtle warriors in an encampment
about a day's journey from the Christian village, with orders to make
frequent visits to the settlement, and leave no means untried which
either force or cunning could suggest, that might lead to the full
gratification of his revenge.

The old Chief himself returned to his wigwams, which lay some distance
from New Plymouth, near the burial ground where the 'first encounter
'had taken place. The detachment was left under the command end
guidance of Coubitant, the young warrior who had stood by him to the
last in the conflict at the village; and who was, since the death of
Tisquantum's son, regarded as the most distinguished of the young
braves of that part of the tribe over which the Sachem ruled. His
cunning, and his ferocious courage, well fitted him for the task
assigned to him; and as the young warrior who fell at 'the first
encounter' had been his chosen friend and companion in arms, his own
desire for vengeance was only second to that of the Chief; and the
malignant gaze which he had fixed on Rodolph when he led Tisquantum
from the field, well expressed the feelings and the determination of
his heart.

That glance had been seen by Janet; who, on that occasion, had
displayed a courage and resolution hardly to be expected at her
advanced age. She had easily induced her trembling mistress to remain
in the house, whither they had both fled at the first attack of the
Indians; but she had herself returned to the place of conflict, bearing
Rodolph's musket and ammunition, and she bad remained by the side of
Brewster, to whose ready hand she transferred it, until all danger was
over. Then she had fixed her attention on the Chief and his companion;
and the fine form and handsome features of the young Indian warrior
appeared like a statue of bronze, while he stood motionless by
Tisquantum. But when he turned to follow his Chief, the expression
with which he looked at Rodolph transformed his countenance into that
of a demoniac.  Janet never forgot that look.

The state of continual watchfulness and suspense in which the emigrants
were kept by their wary and active foes, was extremely harassing to
their weakened force; so much so, that the President resolved to make
another attempt to establish a friendly intercourse with some other
native tribe, who might, possibly, assist them in driving of' the
Nausetts; and whose friendship would also be useful to them in various
ways. An opportunity for this attempt soon presented itself; for a
party of the settlers, in following the windings of a brook that flowed
through their new town into the sea, in pursuit of wild fowl, came upon
two large and beautiful lakes, about three miles inland. The shores of
these lakes were adorned with clumps of lofty and majestic trees, and
the grass was spangled with wild flowers, and studded with graceful
shrubs and underwood. Among the bushes they descried several fallow
deer, and the surface of the water was animated by flocks of water
fowl, among which the brilliant and graceful wood duck was conspicuous.

But the objects that chiefly attracted the notice of the sportsmen,
were several wigwams that stood on the further side of the lake,
beneath the shade of some overhanging trees. In front of these huts the
hall-naked children were playing, while the women were pursuing their
domestic occupations. Some were weaving baskets and mats, and others
washing their fishing nets in the lake. But no men were to be seen; and
Rodolph, who, as usual, led the hunting party, determined to approach
the wigwams. In order to show his peaceful intentions, be gave his
musket to one of his companions; and inviting his friend Winslow to do
the same, and to accompany him, he proceeded round the lake. As soon as
the women perceived them, they uttered wild cries of fear; and,
snatching up their children, attempted to escape into the thicket
behind their huts. Rodolph and Winslow then started in pursuit, and
succeeded in capturing one little copper-colored fellow, who was
endeavoring to keep pace with his mother. She could not carry him, for
she had already an infant in her arms, and she knew not that he was in
the power of their dreaded pursuers until she reached the thicket, and
looked back for her boy.  He was struggling violently in Maitland's
hands, but not a cry escaped his lips; and when he found all his
efforts to free himself were vain, he gave up the attempt, and stood
motionless, with a look of proud endurance that was highly
characteristic of his race. His mother had less fortitude.  She uttered
a shriek that pierced the heart of Rodolph; and laying her infant on
the grass, she almost forgot her own fears, and, in an imploring
attitude, crept forward towards her imaginary foes while her eloquent
eyes pleaded for her child's release more than any words could have
done. Maitland could not resist that appeal. He only detained the boy
until he had hung round his neck several strings of gaily-colored
beads, with which the hunters were always provided, and then he set him
at liberty.

In an instant the child was in his mother's arms; and when her
passionate caresses had expressed her joy, she waved with a graceful
salutation to the Englishman, and bent to the ground in token of
gratitude. Then she looked at the beads, and her white teeth glittered
as she smiled a sunny smile of delight and admiration at what seemed to
her such priceless treasures. Rodolph drew from the pouch which hung at
his leathern belt a string of beads more brilliant still, and held them
towards the woman. She gazed at them, and then at the frank and open
countenance of the stranger; and fear gave way to the desire of
possessing the offered gift. She slowly approached, holding her child
by the hand, and suffered Rodolph to suspend the gaudy necklace round
her graceful and slender throat. Then she motioned to him to remain,
and ran swiftly to the thicket to bring back her companions, who had
paused in their flight, and were now watching with eager eyes the
actions of the white man.

Her persuasions, and the sight of her newly-acquired ornament, soon
overcame the remaining fears of her auditors, and all returned in a
body, smiling, and extending their hands, in the hope of receiving
similar gifts. Maitland and Winslow, who had now joined him, divided
all their store of trinkets among the eager applicants; and then, in
return, made signs requesting to be permitted to enter the wigwams.
This request was acceded to; and Apannow--for that was the name of the
female who had first approached the strangers--led the way to the hut
in the center of the village, which was larger and better appointed
than any one of the rest. It was evidently the dwelling of the chief of
the tribe; and the beautifully carved implements which hung to the
walls, and the skulls and scalps that adorned the roof, showed that its
possessor was a distinguished warrior.

Apannow brought forth the best refreshment that her hut afforded, and
placed it with a native grace before her guests, inviting them to
partake of it, and first tasting of each article herself, to show that
it was harmless.  Her gentle and intelligent manners greatly interested
Rudolph and his companion; and by degrees they succeeded in obtaining
from her, and the other women who crowded the wigwam, such information
as they chiefly desired.  By expressive signs and gestures, they were
made to understand that all the red men were gone on a fishing
expedition to the head of the further lake, and would not return until
the morrow. They afterwards learnt, also, that the village had only been
occupied for a few days, as it was merely the summer residence of a part
of the tribe of the Wampanoge Indians, who, with their chief, annually
repaired to that beautiful station for the purpose of fishing in the
extensive lakes. The rest of the tribe were located in various places to
the west, occupying the district since known as the state of Rhode
Island.

Maitland and Winslow took leave of their new friends, intimating that
they would return and seek an interview with the Chief in two days, and
bearing with them a supply of fish and dried maize, which they received
from Apannow as a pledge of amity, and which they knew would be most
welcome to the invalids who were still suffering from disease at the
settlement. They quickly rejoined the rest of their comrades, who had
remained at a distance, for fear of alarming the timid Indian females;
and all returned to New Plymouth. The intelligence they brought, and
the seasonable refreshment they bore to the sick, were joyfully
welcomed by the whole community; and the spirits of the settlers rose
at the prospect of securing Indian friends and allies, who might, under
their present distressing circumstances, afford them such essential
help and security. The necessity for such aid had lately become more
urgent than ever, for a party of their untiring enemies, the Nausetts,
had very recently invaded the enclosure within which lay the loved
remains of all who bad perished since their arrival in America.  The
graves were sadly numerous; and the sorrowing survivors had reverently
decked the mounds that covered them with shrubs, and green boughs from
the evergreens that abounded in the neighboring woods, as emblems of
their abiding grief, and also of their immortal hopes. These marks of
affectionate regard the savages had rudely torn away; and not content
with this, they had even, in some instances, removed the fresh-laid
turf, and dug up the earth, so as to expose the coffins that lay
beneath. No other injury or outrage could have so deeply wounded the
feelings, or aroused the indignation, of the emigrants, as this
desecration of the homes of the dead and they earnestly desired to form
some alliance with another tribe, which might enable them to punish and
to prevent such gross and wanton indignities.  In the meantime, in the
hope of avoiding a recurrence of so distressing a calamity, the
colonists ploughed over the whole surface of their cemetery, and sowed
it with corn; thus concealing what was to them so sacred from the eyes
of their wild and ruthless foes.

The day after Maitland's visit to the wigwams, the emigrants were
astonished at the appearance of a fine athletic Indian, armed with a
bow and arrows, who walked up to the common hall, near the center of
the village, and saluted the Governor and those who were with him, in
the words 'Welcome Englishmen!' In reply to their eager inquiries, he
informed them that his name was Samoset, and that he was 'a Sagamore of
a northern tribe of Indians dwelling near the coast of Maine, where he
