centurion; and again, that they should not make war upon the Iazyges, the
Buri, or the Vandili. On these terms a reconciliation was effected and all
the garrisons in their country beyond the detached border territory were
abandoned [Lacuna]]

[Sidenote: A.D. 181(?)] [Sidenote:--3--] [Commodus also granted peace to
an embassy from the Buri. Previously he would not have it, though often
asked, because they were strong and because it was not peace they wanted,
but the securing of a respite for further preparations. Now, however,
since they were exhausted, he made terms with them and accepted hostages.
From the Buri he received back many captives and from the others
[Footnote: The MS. is here very possibly corrupt.] fifteen thousand, and
he compelled the others [Footnote: The MS. is here very possibly corrupt.]
to take oath that they would never dwell in nor use as pasture forty
stadia of their territory, nearest to Dacia. The same (?) Sabinianus also
reduced twelve thousand of the neighboring Dacians who had been driven out
of their own country and were on the point of aiding the rest. [Footnote:
The MS. is here very possibly corrupt.] He promised these that some land
in our Dacia should be given them.]

[Sidenote:--4--] Frequent plots were formed by various persons against
Commodus [for he did many reprehensible deeds] and he murdered great
numbers both of men and of women, some openly and some by secret
poison,--in a word, practically all those who had attained eminence during
his father's lifetime and his own. Exceptions were Pompeianus and Pertinax
and Victorinus: these for some reason unknown to me he did not kill. THIS
AND WHAT FOLLOWS I STATE NOT ON THE AUTHORITY OF ANOTHER'S TRADITION, BUT
FROM MY OWN OBSERVATION. On coming to Rome he had a conference with the
senate, at which he talked a great deal of nonsense, one thing that he
said in praise of himself being that he had once on horseback saved the
life of his father, who had fallen into a deep mire. Of such a nature were
his lofty pratings. [Sidenote: A.D. 182 (a.u. 935)]As he was entering the
hunting theatre, Claudius Pompeianus laid a snare for him. He held up a
sword in the narrow passage which served as an entrance and said: "See,
this is what the senate has sent you."

This man had taken as his spouse the daughter of Lucilla, but had intimate
relations both with the daughter herself and with the girl's mother; in
this way he had become friendly with Commodus, so that he was his
companion at banquets and in the diversions of youth. Lucilla, who was
neither more respectable nor more continent than her brother Commodus,
detested the girl's husband, Pompeianus. It was for this reason that she
persuaded the aforementioned to undertake the attack upon Commodus, and
she not only caused his destruction, but was herself detected and put out
of the way. Commodus killed also Crispina, because he was angry with her
for some act of adultery. Previous to their execution both women had keen
banished to the island of Capreae.

There was a certain Marcia, mistress of Quadratus (one of the men murdered
at this time) and Eclectus, his cubicularius: the latter became also the
cubicularius of Commodus, and the former, first, the emperor's mistress
and later the wife of Eclectus; and she beheld them also perish by
violence. The tradition is that she very much favored the Christians and
did them many kindnesses, as she was enabled to do through possessing all
influence with Commodus.

Commodus killed also Julianus [Salvius, [Footnote: _P. Salvius
Julianus._] and Tarrutenius Paternus, who was numbered among the
exconsuls, and others with them; he furthermore put to death some woman of
the nobility. [Footnote: Vitrasia Faustina by name.] Yet Julianus after
the death of Marcus could at once have done anything at all that he
pleased against him, since he possessed great renown, was in charge of a
large army, and enjoyed the devotion of his soldiers: and he refused to
make any rebellious move, both because of his own uprightness and because
of the good will that he bore to Marcus, though dead. And Paternus, if he
had plotted against Commodus, as he was accused of doing, could easily
have murdered him while he himself still commanded the Pretorians; but he
had not done it.]

The emperor murdered likewise Condianus and Maximus Quintilius; for they
had a great reputation on account of education and military ability and
fraternal harmony and wealth. Their notable talents led to the suspicion
that, even if they were not planning any hostile movement, still they were
not pleased with the state of affairs. Thus, even as they had lived
together, so they died together, and one child as well. They had exhibited
the most striking example ever seen of affection for each other, and at no
time had they been divided, even in their political offices. They had
grown prosperous and exceedingly wealthy and were wont to govern together
and to assist each other in trying cases at law.

Sextus Condianus, son of Maximus, who surpassed the generality of men in
character and education, when be heard that sentence of death had been
passed upon him, too, drank hare's blood (he was at that time located in
Syria); and after this he mounted a horse and purposely fell from it.
Then, as he vomited the blood (which was supposed to be his own), he was
taken up in the expectation of his immediate demise and conveyed into a
dwelling. The man himself now disappeared from view, but a ram's body was
placed in a coffin, in his place and burned. Thereafter, by constantly
changing his appearance and clothing, he wandered about, now here, now
there. And when this story was reported (for it is impossible to conceal
for a long time so weighty a matter), there was hue and cry after him in
every place, bar none. Many were punished in his stead on account of their
resemblance, and many, too, who were alleged to have shared his
confidences or to have received and hidden him. Several, moreover, who had
perhaps never even seen him, were deprived of their property. But no one
knows whether he was really killed (though a great number of heads
purporting to be his were carried to Rome) or whether he made good his
escape.

Some other person, after the death of Commodus, dared to assert that
_he_ was Sextus and to undertake the recovery of his wealth and
dignities. And he played the part well while many persons asked him
numbers of questions: when, however, Pertinax enquired of him something
about Grecian affairs, with which the real Sextus had been well
acquainted, he suffered the greatest embarrassment, not being able even to
understand what was said. [So it was that nature had made him like
Condianus in form and practice like him in other ways, but he did not
share in his education.]

[Sidenote:--7--] This matter came to my own ears, and another thing that I
saw I shall now describe. There is in the city of Mallus, in Cilicia, an
oracle of Amphilochus, that gives responses by means of dreams. It had
given warning also to Sextus, in a way that he indicated by a drawing. The
picture that he put on a board represented a boy strangling two serpents
and a lion pursuing a fawn. I was with my father, then governor of
Cilicia, and could not comprehend what they meant until I learned that
Sextus's brothers had been, as it were, strangled by Commodus (who later
emulated Hercules), just as Hercules, when an infant, is related to have
strangled the serpents sent against him by Juno: similarly, the Quintilii
were hanged; I learned also that Sextus was a fugitive and was being
pursued by a more powerful adversary.

I should render my narrative unduly irksome, were I to set down carefully
every single man put to death by this ruler,--all that he despatched
because of false information, because of unjustified suspicions, because
of notable wealth, because of distinguished family, because of unusual
education, or for any other excellence.

[Commodus displayed in Rome itself many marks of wealth and very many
more, even, of love for the beautiful. Indeed, he performed one or two
acts of public benefit. Manilius, a kinsman of Cassius, who had been
secretary of his Latin letters and had possessed the greatest influence
with him, was caught after a flight, but the emperor would not listen to a
word of his, though he promised to lay a great deal of information, and
burned all the conspirator's documents without reading them.]

[Sidenote: A.D. 184 a.u. 937] [Sidenote:--8--] He had also some wars with
the barbarians beyond Dacia, in which Albinus and Niger, who later fought
the emperor Severus, won fame, but the greatest conflict was the one in
Britain. When the tribes in the island, passing beyond the wall that
separated them from the Roman legions, proceeded to commit many outrages
and cut down a general, together with the soldiers that he had, Commodus
was seized with fear and sent Marcellus Ulpius against them. This man, who
was temperate and frugal and always followed strict military rules in
regard to food and all other details when he was at war, became in course
of time haughty and arrogant. He was conspicuously incorruptible in the
matter of bribes, but was not of a pleasant or kindly nature. He showed
himself more wakeful than any other general, and, as he desired his
associates also to be alert, he wrote orders on twelve tablets (such as
are made out of linden wood) [almost] every evening, and bade a man carry
them to various persons at various hours, that they, believing the general
to be always awake, might not themselves take their fill of sleep. Nature
had made him able in the first place to go without sleep and he had
developed this faculty a great deal more by abstinence from food. [Of
scarcely anything did he eat his fill and] in order to avoid satisfying
his hunger even with bread he sent to Rome for the loaves: [this was not
because he could not eat what was prepared in that region, but] it was
done with the purpose that the age of the article might prevent him eating
ever so little more than what was absolutely necessary. [His gums, which
were sore, were easily made to bleed by the dryness of the bread. And he
made it his practice to affect sleeplessness even more than was the case,
that he might have a reputation for being always awake.] This was the kind
of man Marcellus was, who inflicted great damage upon the barbarians in
Britain. Later he narrowly escaped being destroyed by Commodus on account
of his peculiar excellence, but was, nevertheless, released.

[Sidenote: A.D. 185 (a.u. 938)] [Sidenote:--9--] Perennis, commander of
the Pretorians after Paternus, met destruction on account of a rebellion
of the soldiers. For, since Commodus had devoted himself to chariot-racing
and licentiousness and paid scarcely any attention to matters pertaining
to the empire, Perennis was compelled to manage not only military affairs,
but everything else, and to preside over the government. The soldiers,
accordingly, when anything did not go to suit them, laid the blame upon
Perennis and cherished anger against him.

The soldiers in Britain chose Priscus, a lieutenant, emperor. But he
deprecated their action, saying "I am as little suited for emperor as you
are for soldiers."

The lieutenants in Britain had been rebuked for their turbulence (indeed,
they had not become quiet until Pertinax put a stop to their discord), and
now they chose of their number fifteen hundred javelin-slingers, whom they
sent into Italy. They had approached Rome without meeting any hindrance,
when Commodus met them and enquired: "Why is this, fellow-soldiers? What
does your presence signify?" Their answer was: "We are here because
Perennis is plotting against you, and intends to make his son emperor."
Commodus believed them, especially since Cleander dwelt at length upon the
point. (The latter was often prevented by Perennis from doing all that he
desired, and consequently entertained a bitter hatred for him). Therefore
he delivered the prefect to the soldiers of whom he was commander, and did
not venture to despise fifteen hundred men, though he had many times that
number of Pretorians. So Perennis was abused and struck down, and his wife
and sister and two sons were also killed.

[Sidenote:--10--] Thus was he slain though he deserved a far different
fate both on his own account and for the interest of the entire Roman
domain. Only, it may be remarked that his fondness for office had been the
chief cause of the ruin of his colleague Paternus. Privately he was never
remotely concerned about either fame or wealth, but lived a most
incorruptible and temperate life, and for Commodus he preserved his empire
in entire safety. [For the emperor wholly followed his amusements and gave
himself over to chariot-driving and cared not a whit for any political
interests; nor, indeed, had he given his mind to the matter ever so
zealously, could he have accomplished aught by reason of his luxurious
living and inexperience.]

And the Caesarians, having got rid of this man, with Cleander at their
head entered upon every form of outrage, selling all privileges, doing
violence, plunging into licentiousness.

Commodus during most of his life was given to idleness and horses and
battles of beasts and of men. Aside from his performances at home he
despatched many beasts in public and many men on many occasions. With his
own hands and without assistance he gave the finishing stroke to five
hippopotami at one time and to two elephants on separate days. Moreover,
he killed rhinoceroses and a camelopard. This is what I have to say in
general with reference to his whole career.

[Sidenote:--11--] To Victorinus, prefect of the city, a statue was
granted. [He died not as the victim of a plot. At one time what might be
called a loud rumor and many reports were circulating in regard to his
destruction] and, though Commodus frequently wished to get him out of the
way, he still kept putting it off and shrinking from the deed until the
man grew very bold, and one day approaching Perennis said: "I hear that
you wish to kill me. Why then do you delay? Why do you put it off, when
you might do it this very day?" [But not even this caused him to suffer
any harm at the hands of any one else; it was a self-sought death that he
suffered, and the fact seems strange, inasmuch as he had been honored
among the foremost men by Marcus and in mental excellence and forensic
eloquence stood second to none of his contemporaries. Indeed, by
mentioning two incidents in his history I shall reveal his whole
character.]

Once, when he was governor of Germany, he at first attempted by private
persuasion indoors to induce his lieutenant not to accept bribes. As the
latter would not listen to him, he mounted the tribunal and [after bidding
the herald proclaim him] took oath that he had never received bribes and
never would receive any. Next he bade his under-officer also take oath;
and when this person refused to perjure himself, he ordered him to be
dismissed from office. [And later as commandant of Africa he had an
associate of similar character to the man just mentioned. He did not, to
be sure, treat him in the same way, but put him aboard a boat and sent him
back to Rome.] This is the kind of man Victorinus was.

[Sidenote:--12--] As for Cleander, who after Perennis possessed greatest
influence, he had been sold along with his fellow-slaves and had been
brought to Rome along with them for the purpose of carrying burdens. As
time went on he attained such prominence that he slept before the chamber
of Commodus, married the emperor's concubine Damostratia, and put to death
Saoterus of Nicomedea (who had held the position before him) besides many
others. Yet this victim had possessed very great influence, so that the
Nicomedeans obtained from the senate the right of holding a series of
games and of building a temple to Commodus. At any rate, Cleander, raised
to greatness by the power of Fortune, granted and sold senatorships.
praetorships, procuratorships, leaderships,--in a word everything. Some by
expending all that they possessed had finally become senators. It came to
be said of Julius Solon (an exceedingly obscure man) that he had been
deprived of his property and banished to the senate. [Sidenote: A.D. 189
(a.u. 942)] Not only did Cleander do this, but he appointed twenty-five
consuls for one year,--something which never occurred before or after. One
of those consuls was Severus, who later became emperor. The man obtained
money, therefore, from every quarter and amassed more wealth than had ever
yet belonged to those nominated cubicularii. A great deal of it he gave to
Commodus and his concubines and a great deal of it he spent on houses,
baths, and other works useful to individuals and to cities.

[Sidenote:--13--] This Cleander, who had soared to so exalted a height,
himself fell suddenly and perished in dishonor. It was not the soldiers
that killed him, as they had Perennis, but the populace. There occurred a
real and pressing famine, which was increased to the utmost severity by
Papirius Dionysius, the grain commissioner, in order that Cleander, whose
thefts would seem as much responsible for it as any cause, might both
incur hatred and suffer destruction at the hands of the Romans. So it fell
out. There was a horse-race on, and as the horses were about to contend
for the seventh time a crowd of children ran into the race course, at
their head a tall and sturdy maiden. As a result of what subsequently
happened she was deemed by people to have been a divinity. The children
shouted many wild words of complaint, which the people took up again and
began to bawl anything that came into their heads. Finally, the throng
jumped down and started to find Commodus (who was then in the Quintilian
suburb), invoking many blessings on his head but many curses upon
Cleander. The latter sent some soldiers against them, who wounded and
killed a few, but encouraged by their numbers and the strength of the
Pretorians they became still more urgent. They drew near to Commodus
before information reached him from any source of what was going on. Then
the famous Marcia, wife of Quadratus, brought him the news. And Commodus
was so terrified,--he was always the veriest coward,--that he at once
ordered Cleander to be slain and also his child, who was in Commodus's
hands to be reared. The child was dashed to the earth and perished, and
the Romans, taking the body of Cleander, dragged it away and abused it and
carried his head all about the city on a pole. They also wounded some
other men who had possessed great power during his ascendancy.

[Sidenote:--14--] Commodus, taking a respite from his lusts and sports,
developed a taste for blood and proceeded to compass the death of
distinguished men. Among these was Julianus the prefect, whom he used to
embrace and caress in public and saluted as "father." Another was Julius
Alexander, who was executed for having brought down a lion by a lucky cast
of his javelin while on horseback. [Footnote: Boissevain suggests that the
"Roman Hercules" perhaps feared that Alexander might diminish his glory.]
This victim, on becoming aware of the presence of his assassins, murdered
them by night and likewise put out of the way all his own enemies at
Emesa, his native town. After doing this he mounted a horse and started
toward the barbarians; and he would have escaped, had he not carried a
favorite along with him. He was himself a most excellent horseman, but he
would not think of abandoning the lad, who was tired out, and so when he
was being overtaken he killed both the boy and himself. Dionysius, too,
the grain commissioner, met his death by the orders of Commodus.

Moreover, a pestilence, as great as any I know, took place, for it should
be noted that two thousand persons several times died in Rome on a single
day. Many more, not merely in the capital but throughout almost the entire
empire, perished by the hands of scoundrels, who smeared some deadly drugs
on tiny needles, and, for pay, infected men with the poison by means of
these instruments. The same thing had happened before in the reign of
Domitian. [Footnote: See Book Sixty-seven, chapter 11.] But the death of
these unfortunates was not regarded as of any importance.

[Sidenote: A.D. 190 (a.u. 943)] [Sidenote:--15--] Still, the effect of
Commodus upon the Romans was worse than that of all pestilences and all
villanies. One feature was that whatever honors they were wont to vote to
his father out of pure regard they were compelled by fear and by strict
injunction to assign also to the son. He gave orders that Rome itself be
called Commodiana, the legions "Commodian," and the day on which this
