continent.  They had mapped out the lakes and had bartered with the
fierce Sioux on the great plains where the wooden wigwam gave place to
the hide tee-pee.  Marquette had followed the Illinois down to the
Mississippi, and had traced the course of the great river until, first
of all white men, he looked upon the turbid flood of the rushing
Missouri.  La Salle had ventured even further, and had passed the Ohio,
and had made his way to the Mexican Gulf, raising the French arms where
the city of New Orleans was afterwards to stand.  Others had pushed on
to the Rocky Mountains, and to the huge wilderness of the north-west,
preaching, bartering, cheating, baptising, swayed by many motives and
holding only in common a courage which never faltered and a fertility of
resource which took them in safety past every danger.  Frenchmen were to
the north of the British settlements, Frenchmen were to the west of
them, and Frenchmen were to the south of them, and if all the continent
is not now French, the fault assuredly did not rest with that iron race
of early Canadians.

All this De Catinat explained to Adele during the autumn day, trying to
draw her thoughts away from the troubles of the past, and from the long
dreary voyage which lay before her.  She, fresh from the staid life of
the Parisian street and from the tame scenery of the Seine, gazed with
amazement at the river, the woods and the mountains, and clutched her
husband's arm in horror when a canoeful of wild skin-clad Algonquins,
their faces striped with white and red paint, came flying past with
the foam dashing from their paddles.  Again the river turned from blue
to pink, again the old citadel was bathed in the evening glow, and again
the two exiles descended to their cabins with cheering words for each
other and heavy thoughts in their own hearts.

De Catinat's bunk was next to a port-hole, and it was his custom to keep
this open, as the caboose was close to him in which the cooking was done
for the crew, and the air was hot and heavy.  That night he found it
impossible to sleep, and he lay tossing under his blanket, thinking over
every possible means by which they might be able to get away from this
cursed ship.  But even if they got away, where could they go to then?
All Canada was sealed to them.  The woods to the south were full of
ferocious Indians.  The English settlements would, it was true, grant
them freedom to use their own religion, but what would his wife and he
do, without a friend, strangers among folk who spoke another tongue?
Had Amos Green remained true to them, then, indeed, all would have been
well.  But he had deserted them.  Of course there was no reason why he
should not.  He was no blood relation of theirs.  He had already
benefited them many times.  His own people and the life that he loved
were waiting for him at home.  Why should he linger here for the sake of
folk whom he had known but a few months?  It was not to be expected, and
yet De Catinat could not realise it, could not understand it.

But what was that?  Above the gentle lapping of the river he had
suddenly heard a sharp clear "Hist!"  Perhaps it was some passing
boatman or Indian.  Then it came again, that eager, urgent summons.
He sat up and stared about him.  It certainly must have come from the
open port-hole.  He looked out, but only to see the broad basin, with
the loom of the shipping, and the distant twinkle from the lights on
Point Levi.  As his head dropped back upon the pillow something fell
upon his chest with a little tap, and rolling off, rattled along the
boards.  He sprang up, caught a lantern from a hook, and flashed it upon
the floor.  There was the missile which had struck him--a little golden
brooch.  As he lifted it up and looked closer at it, a thrill passed
through him.  It had been his own, and he had given it to Amos Green
upon the second day that he had met him, when they were starting
together for Versailles.

This was a signal then, and Amos Green had not deserted them after all.
He dressed himself, all in a tremble with excitement, and went upon
deck.  It was pitch dark, and he could see no one, but the sound of
regular footfalls somewhere in the fore part of the ship showed that the
sentinels were still there.  The guardsman walked over to the side and
peered down into the darkness.  He could see the loom of a boat.

"Who is there?" he whispered.

"Is that you, De Catinat?

"Yes."

"We have come for you."

"God bless you, Amos."

"Is your wife there?"

"No, but I can rouse her."

"Good!  But first catch this cord.  Now pull up the ladder!"

De Catinat gripped the line which was thrown to him, and on drawing it
up found that it was attached to a rope ladder furnished at the top with
two steel hooks to catch on to the bulwarks.  He placed them in
position, and then made his way very softly to the cabin amidships in
the ladies' quarters which had been allotted to his wife.  She was the
only woman aboard the ship now, so that he was able to tap at her door
in safety, and to explain in a few words the need for haste and for
secrecy.  In ten minutes Adele had dressed, and with her valuables in a
little bundle, had slipped out from her cabin.  Together they made their
way upon deck once more, and crept aft under the shadow of the bulwarks.
They were almost there when De Catinat stopped suddenly and ground out
an oath through his clenched teeth.  Between them and the rope ladder
there was standing in a dim patch of murky light the grim figure of a
Franciscan friar.  He was peering through the darkness, his heavy cowl
shadowing his face, and he advanced slowly as if he had caught a glimpse
of them.  A lantern hung from the mizzen shrouds above him.
He unfastened it and held it up to cast its light upon them.

But De Catinat was not a man with whom it was safe to trifle.  His life
had been one of quick resolve and prompt action.  Was this vindictive
friar at the last moment to stand between him and freedom?  It was a
dangerous position to take.  The guardsman pulled Adele into the shadow
of the mast, and then, as the monk advanced, he sprang out upon him and
seized him by the gown.  As he did so the other's cowl was pushed back,
and instead of the harsh features of the ecclesiastic, De Catinat saw
with amazement in the glimmer of the lantern the shrewd gray eyes and
strong tern face of Ephraim Savage.  At the same instant another figure
appeared over the side, and the warm-hearted Frenchman threw himself
into the arms of Amos Green.

"It's all right," said the young hunter, disengaging himself with some
embarrassment from the other's embrace.

"We've got him in the boat with a buckskin glove jammed into his
gullet!"

"Who then?"

"The man whose cloak Captain Ephraim there has put round him.  He came
on us when you were away rousing your lady, but we got him to be quiet
between us.  Is the lady there?"

"Here she is."

"As quick as you can, then, for some one may come along."

Adele was helped over the side, and seated in the stern of a birch-bark
canoe.  The three men unhooked the ladder, and swung themselves down by
a rope, while two Indians, who held the paddles, pushed silently off
from the ship's side, and shot swiftly up the stream.  A minute later a
dim loom behind them, and the glimmer of two yellow lights, was all that
they could see of the _St. Christophe_.

"Take a paddle, Amos, and I'll take one," said Captain Savage, stripping
off his monk's gown.  "I felt safer in this on the deck of yon ship, but
it don't help in a boat.  I believe we might have fastened the hatches
and taken her, brass guns and all, had we been so minded."

"And been hanged as pirates at the yard-arm next morning," said Amos.
"I think we have done better to take the honey and leave the tree.
I hope, madame, that all is well with you."

"Nay, I can hardly understand what has happened, or where we are."

"Nor can I, Amos."

"Did you not expect us to come back for you, then?"

"I did not know what to expect."

"Well, now, but surely you could not think that we would leave you
without a word."

"I confess that I was cut to the heart by it."

"I feared that you were when I looked at you with the tail of my eye,
and saw you staring so blackly over the bulwarks at us.  But if we had
been seen talking or planning they would have been upon our trail at
once.  As it was they had not a thought of suspicion, save only this
fellow whom we have in the bottom of the boat here."

"And what did you do?"

"We left the brig last night, got ashore on the Beaupre side, arranged
for this canoe, and lay dark all day.  Then to-night we got alongside
and I roused you easily, for I knew where you slept.  The friar nearly
spoiled all when you were below, but we gagged him and passed him over
the side.  Ephraim popped on his gown so that he might go forward to
help you without danger, for we were scared at the delay."

"Ah! it is glorious to be free once more.  What do I not owe you, Amos?"

"Well, you looked after me when I was in your country, and I am going to
look after you now."

"And where are we going?"

"Ah! there you have me.  It is this way or none, for we can't get down
to the sea.  We must make our way over land as best we can, and we must
leave a good stretch between Quebec citadel and us before the day
breaks, for from what I hear they would rather have a Huguenot prisoner
than an Iroquois sagamore.  By the eternal, I cannot see why they should
make such a fuss over how a man chooses to save his own soul, though
here is old Ephraim just as fierce upon the other side, so all the folly
is not one way."

"What are you saying about me?" asked the seaman, pricking up his ears
at the mention of his own name.

"Only that you are a good stiff old Protestant."

"Yes, thank God.  My motto is freedom to conscience, d'ye see, except
just for Quakers, and Papists, and--and I wouldn't stand Anne
Hutchinsons and women testifying, and suchlike foolishness."

Amos Green laughed.  "The Almighty seems to pass it over, so why should
you take it to heart?" said he.

"Ah, you're young and callow yet.  You'll live to know better.  Why, I
shall hear you saying a good word soon even for such unclean spawn as
this," prodding the prostrate friar with the handle of his paddle.

"I daresay he's a good man, accordin' to his lights."

"And I daresay a shark is a good fish accordin' to its lights.  No, lad,
you won't mix up light and dark for me in that sort of fashion.  You may
talk until you unship your jaw, d'ye see, but you will never talk a foul
wind into a fair one.  Pass over the pouch and the tinder-box, and maybe
our friend here will take a turn at my paddle."

All night they toiled up the great river, straining every nerve to place
themselves beyond the reach of pursuit.  By keeping well into the
southern bank, and so avoiding the force of the current, they sped
swiftly along, for both Amos and De Catinat were practised hands with
the paddle, and the two Indians worked as though they were wire and
whipcord instead of flesh and blood.  An utter silence reigned over all
the broad stream, broken only by the lap-lap of the water against their
curving bow, the whirring of the night hawk above them, and the sharp
high barking of foxes away in the woods.  When at last morning broke,
and the black shaded imperceptibly into gray, they were far out of sight
of the citadel and of all trace of man's handiwork.  Virgin woods in
their wonderful many-coloured autumn dress flowed right down to the
river edge on either side, and in the centre was a little island with a
rim of yellow sand and an out-flame of scarlet tupelo and sumach in one
bright tangle of colour in the centre.

"I've passed here before," said De Catinat.  "I remember marking that
great maple with the blaze on its trunk, when last I went with the
governor to Montreal.  That was in Frontenac's day, when the king was
first and the bishop second."

The Redskins, who had sat like terra-cotta figures, without a trace of
expression upon their set hard faces, pricked up their ears at the sound
of that name.

"My brother has spoken of the great Onontio," said one of them, glancing
round.  "We have listened to the whistling of evil birds who tell us
that he will never come back to his children across the seas."

"He is with the great white father," answered De Catinat.  "I have
myself seen him in his council, and he will assuredly come across the
great water if his people have need of him."

The Indian shook his shaven head.

"The rutting month is past, my brother," said he, speaking in broken
French, "but ere the month of the bird-laying has come there will be no
white man upon this river save only behind stone walls."

"What, then?  We have heard little!  Have the Iroquois broken out so
fiercely?"

"My brother, they said they would eat up the Hurons, and where are the
Hurons now?  They turned their faces upon the Eries, and where are the
Eries now?  They went westward against the Illinois, and who can find an
Illinois village?  They raised the hatchet against the Andastes, and
their name is blotted from the earth.  And now they have danced a dance
and sung a song which will bring little good to my white brothers."

"Where are they, then?"

The Indian waved his hand along the whole southern and western horizon.

"Where are they not?  The woods are rustling with them.  They are like a
fire among dry grass, so swift and so terrible!"

"On my life," said De Catinat, "if these devils are indeed unchained,
they will need old Frontenac back if they are not to be swept into the
river."

"Ay," said Amos, "I saw him once, when I was brought before him with the
others for trading on what he called French ground.  His mouth set like
a skunk trap and he looked at us as if he would have liked our scalps
for his leggings.  But I could see that he was a chief and a brave man."

"He was an enemy of the Church, and the right hand of the foul fiend in
this country," said a voice from the bottom of the canoe.

It was the friar who had succeeded in getting rid of the buckskin glove
and belt with which the two Americans had gagged him.  He was lying
huddled up now glaring savagely at the party with his fiery dark eyes.

"His jaw-tackle has come adrift," said the seaman.  "Let me brace it up
again."

"Nay, why should we take him farther?" asked Amos.  "He is but weight
for us to carry, and I cannot see that we profit by his company.  Let us
put him out."

"Ay, sink or swim," cried old Ephraim with enthusiasm.

"Nay, upon the bank."

"And have him maybe in front of us warning the black jackets."

"On that island, then."

"Very good.  He can hail the first of his folk who pass."

They shot over to the island and landed the friar, who said nothing, but
cursed them with his eye.  They left with him a small supply of biscuit
and of flour to last him until he should be picked up.  Then, having
passed a bend in the river, they ran their canoe ashore in a little cove
where the whortleberry and cranberry bushes grew right down to the
water's edge, and the sward was bright with the white euphorbia, the
blue gentian, and the purple balm.  There they laid out their small
stock of provisions, and ate a hearty breakfast while discussing what
their plans should be for the future.



CHAPTER XXX.


THE INLAND WATERS.

They were not badly provided for their journey.  The captain of the
Gloucester brig in which the Americans had started from Quebec knew
Ephraim Savage well, as who did not upon the New England coast?  He had
accepted his bill therefore at three months' date, at as high a rate of
interest as he could screw out of him, and he had let him have in return
three excellent guns, a good supply of ammunition, and enough money to
provide for all his wants.  In this way he had hired the canoe and the
Indians, and had fitted her with meat and biscuit to last them for ten
days at the least.

"It's like the breath of life to me to feel the heft of a gun and to
smell the trees round me," said Amos.  "Why, it cannot be more than a
hundred leagues from here to Albany or Schenectady, right through the
forest."

"Ay, lad, but how is the gal to walk a hundred leagues through a forest?
No, no, let us keep water under our keel, and lean on the Lord."

"Then there is only one way for it.  We must make the Richelieu River,
and keep right along to Lake Champlain and Lake St. Sacrament.  There we
should be close by the headwaters of the Hudson."

"It is a dangerous road," said De Catinat, who understood the
conversation of his companions, even when he was unable to join in it.
"We should need to skirt the country of the Mohawks."

"It's the only way, I guess.  It's that or nothing."

"And I have a friend upon the Richelieu River who, I am sure, would help
us on our way," said De Catinat with a smile.  "Adele, you have heard me
talk of Charles de la Noue, seigneur de Sainte Marie?"

"He whom you used to call the Canadian duke, Amory?"

"Precisely.  His seigneury lies on the Richelieu, a little south of Fort
St. Louis, and I am sure that he would speed us upon our way."

"Good!" cried Amos.  "If we have a friend there we shall do well.
That clenches it then, and we shall hold fast by the river.  Let's get
to our paddles then, for that friar will make mischief for us if he
can."

And so for a long week the little party toiled up the great waterway,
keeping ever to the southern bank, where there were fewer clearings.
On both sides of the stream the woods were thick, but every here and
there they would curve away, and a narrow strip of cultivated land would
skirt the bank, with the yellow stubble to mark where the wheat had
grown.  Adele looked with interest at the wooden houses with their
jutting stories and quaint gable-ends, at the solid, stone-built
manor-houses of the seigneurs, and at the mills in every hamlet, which
served the double purpose of grinding flour and of a loop-holed place of
retreat in case of attack.  Horrible experience had taught the Canadians
what the English settlers had yet to learn, that in a land of savages it
is a folly to place isolated farmhouses in the centre of their own
fields.  The clearings then radiated out from the villages, and every
cottage was built with an eye to the military necessities of the whole,
so that the defence might make a stand at all points, and might finally
centre upon the stone manor-house and the mill.  Now at every bluff and
hill near the villages might be seen the gleam of the muskets of the
watchers, for it was known that the scalping parties of the Five Nations
were out, and none could tell where the blow would fall, save that it
must come where they were least prepared to meet it.

Indeed, at every step in this country, whether the traveller were on the
St. Lawrence, or west upon the lakes, or down upon the banks of the
Mississippi, or south in the country of the Cherokees and of the Creeks,
he would still find the inhabitants in the same state of dreadful
expectancy, and from the same cause.  The Iroquois, as they were named
by the French, or the Five Nations as they called themselves, hung like
a cloud over the whole great continent.  Their confederation was a
natural one, for they were of the same stock and spoke the same
language, and all attempts to separate them had been in vain.  Mohawks,
Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas, and Senecas were each proud of their own
totems and their own chiefs, but in war they were Iroquois, and the
enemy of one was the enemy of all.  Their numbers were small, for they
were never able to put two thousand warriors in the field, and their
country was limited, for their villages were scattered over the tract
which lies between Lake Champlain and Lake Ontario.  But they were
united, they were cunning, they were desperately brave, and they were
fiercely aggressive and energetic.  Holding a central position, they
struck out upon each side in turn, never content with simply defeating
an adversary, but absolutely annihilating and destroying him, while
holding all the others in check by their diplomacy.  War was their
business, and cruelty their amusement.  One by one they had turned their
arms against the various nations, until, for a space of over a thousand
square miles, none existed save by sufferance.  They had swept away
Hurons and Huron missions in one fearful massacre.  They had destroyed
the tribes of the north-west, until even the distant Sacs and Foxes
trembled at their name.  They had scoured the whole country to westward
until their scalping parties had come into touch with their kinsmen the
Sioux, who were lords of the great plains, even as they were of the
great forests.  The New England Indians in the east, and the Shawnees
and Delawares farther south, paid tribute to them, and the terror of
their arms had extended over the borders of Maryland and Virginia.
Never, perhaps, in the world's history has so small a body of men
dominated so large a district and for so long a time.

For half a century these tribes had nursed a grudge wards the French
since Champlain and some of his followers had taken part with their
enemies against them.  During all these years they had brooded in their
forest villages, flashing out now and again in some border outrage, but
waiting for the most part until their chance should come.  And now it
seemed to them that it had come.  They had destroyed all the tribes who
might have allied themselves with the white men.  They had isolated
them.  They had supplied themselves with good guns and plenty of
ammunition from the Dutch and English of New York.  The long thin line
of French settlements lay naked before them.  They were gathered in the
woods, like hounds in leash, waiting for the orders of their chiefs,
which should precipitate them with torch and with tomahawk upon the belt
of villages.

Such was the situation as the little party of refugees paddled along the
bank of the river, seeking the only path which could lead them to peace
and to freedom.  Yet it was, as they well knew, a dangerous road to
follow.  All down the Richelieu River were the outposts and blockhouses
of the French, for when the feudal system was grafted upon Canada the
various seigneurs or native _noblesse_ were assigned their estates in
the positions which would be of most benefit to the settlement.  Each
seigneur with his tenants under him, trained as they were in the use of
arms, formed a military force exactly as they had done in the middle
ages, the farmer holding his fief upon condition that he mustered when
called upon to do so.  Hence the old officers of the regiment of
Carignan, and the more hardy of the settlers, had been placed along the
line of the Richelieu, which runs at right angles to the St. Lawrence
towards the Mohawk country.  The blockhouses themselves might hold their
own, but to the little party who had to travel down from one to the
other the situation was full of deadly peril.  It was true that the
Iroquois were not at war with the English, but they would discriminate
little when on the warpath, and the Americans, even had they wished to
do so, could not separate their fate from that of their two French
companions.

As they ascended the St. Lawrence they met many canoes coming down.
Sometimes it was an officer or an official on his way to the capital
from Three Rivers or Montreal, sometimes it was a load of skins, with
Indians or _coureurs-de-bois_ conveying them down to be shipped to
Europe, and sometimes it was a small canoe which bore a sunburned
grizzly-haired man, with rusty weather-stained black cassock, who
zigzagged from bank to bank, stopping at every Indian hut upon his way.
If aught were amiss with the Church in Canada the fault lay not with men
like these village priests, who toiled and worked and spent their very
lives in bearing comfort and hope, and a little touch of refinement too,
through all those wilds.  More than once these wayfarers wished to have
speech with the fugitives, but they pushed onwards, disregarding their
signs and hails.  From below nothing overtook them, for they paddled
from early morning until late at night, drawing up the canoe when they
halted, and building a fire of dry wood, for already the nip of the
coming winter was in the air.

It was not only the people and their dwellings which were stretched out
before the wondering eyes of the French girl as she sat day after day in
the stern of the canoe.  Her husband and Amos Green taught her also to
take notice of the sights of the woodlands, and as they skirted the
bank, they pointed out a thousand things which her own senses would
never have discerned.  Sometimes it was the furry face of a raccoon
peeping out from some tree-cleft, or an otter swimming under the
overhanging brushwood with the gleam of a white fish in its mouth.
Or, perhaps, it was the wild cat crouching along a branch with its
wicked yellow eyes fixed upon the squirrels which played at the farther
end, or else with a scuttle and rush the Canadian porcupine would thrust
its way among the yellow blossoms of the resin weed and the tangle of
the whortleberry bushes.  She learned, too, to recognise the pert sharp
cry of the tiny chick-a-dee, the call of the blue-bird, and the flash of
its wings amid the foliage, the sweet chirpy note of the black and white
bobolink, and the long-drawn mewing of the cat-bird.  On the breast of
the broad blue river, with Nature's sweet concert ever sounding from the
